













MC5 - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "MC5";
		var wgTitle = "MC5";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "146045";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 276945861;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); MC5

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2007)




MC5


Origin
Detroit, Michigan, USA


Genre(s)
Hard rock, protopunk, garage rock, rock & roll, blues-rock


Years active
1964—1972
2003—present


Label(s)
Elektra, Rhino, Atlantic


Associated acts
Destroy All Monsters, Sonic's Rendezvous Band


Members


Wayne Kramer
Dennis Thompson
Michael Davis
Handsome Dick Manitoba


Former members


Rob Tyner
Fred "Sonic" Smith
Patrick Burrows
Steve Moorhouse
Bob Gaspar
Ray Craig


The MC5 was an American rock band formed in Lincoln Park, Michigan in 1964 and active until 1972. They played hard rock music that also included blues-rock, psychedelic rock, rock & roll and garage rock. "Crystallizing the counterculture movement at its most volatile and threatening",[1] their far left political ties and anti-establishment lyrics and music would serve as a prototype for later punk rock musicians. The band consisted of Wayne Kramer and Fred "Sonic" Smith (guitars) Michael Davis (bass), Rob Tyner (vocals), and Dennis Thompson (drums).
MC5 had a promising beginning which earned them a cover appearance on Rolling Stone magazine in 1969[2] even before their debut album was recorded. They developed a reputation for energetic live performances, one of which was recorded as the critically acclaimed Kick Out The Jams. Their career was ultimately short-lived, though within just a few years of their dissolution, the MC5 were often cited as one of the most important American hard rock groups of their era[3]: their three albums are regarded as classics. Their song "Kick Out the Jams" is widely covered.




Contents


1 Band History

1.1 Early years
1.2 Success in Detroit


2 Radical political affiliations
3 Recordings

3.1 Kick out the Jams
3.2 Back in the USA
3.3 High Time


4 Record label controversy
5 Late career and disbandment

5.1 Post-break up
5.2 Reunion


6 Covers and Tributes
7 Discography
8 Filmography
9 See also
10 References
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Band History

[edit] Early years
The origins of the MC5 can be traced to the friendship between guitarists Wayne Kramer and Fred Smith. Friends since their teen years, they were both fans of R&B music, blues, Chuck Berry, Dick Dale, the Ventures, and what would later be called garage rock: they adored any music with speed, energy and a rebellious attitude. Each guitarist/singer formed and led a rock group (Smith's Vibratones and Kramer's Bounty Hunters). As members of both groups left for college or straight jobs, the most committed members eventually united (under Kramer's leadership and the Headhunters name) with Michael Fraser on vocals/bass and Grant Palmer on drums, and were popular and successful enough in and around Detroit that the musicians were able to quit their day jobs and make a living from the group.
Kramer felt they needed a manager, which led him to Rob Derminer, a few years older than the others, and deeply involved in Detroit's hipster and left-wing political scenes. Derminer originally auditioned as a bass guitarist, though they quickly realized that his talents could be better used as a lead singer: though not conventionally attractive and rather paunchy by traditional frontman standards, he nonetheless had a commanding stage presence, and a booming baritone voice that evidenced his abiding love of American soul and gospel music. Derminer renamed himself Rob Tyner (after Coltrane's pianist McCoy Tyner). Tyner also invented their new name, The MC5: it reflected their Detroit roots (it was short for "Motor City Five'), was vaguely reminiscent of a sports car name (like the GTO), and echoed the Dave Clark Five, at the peak of their popularity in 1964–1965. In some ways the group was similar to other garage bands of the period, composing soon-to-be historic workouts such as "Black To Comm" during their mid-teens in the basement of the home of Kramer's mother.
The music also reflected Smith and Kramer's increasing interest in free jazz -- the guitarists were inspired by the likes of Albert Ayler, Archie Shepp, Sun Ra and late period John Coltrane, and tried to imitate the ecstatic sounds of the squealing, high-pitched saxophonists they adored. The MC5 even later opened for a few U.S. midwest shows for Sun Ra, whose influence is obvious in "Starship". Kramer and Smith were also deeply inspired by Sonny Sharrock, one of the few electric guitarists working in free jazz, and they eventually developed a unique interlocking style that was like little heard before: Kramer's solos often used a heavy, irregular vibrato, while Smith's rhythms contained an uncommon explosive energy, including patterns that conveyed great excitement, as evidenced in "Black To Comm" and many other songs.

[edit] Success in Detroit
Playing almost nightly any place they could in and around Detroit, the MC5 quickly earned a reputation for their high-energy live performances and had a sizeable local following, regularly selling out to audiences of 1000 or more. Contemporary rock writer Robert Bixby stated that the sound of the MC5 was like "a catastrophic force of nature the band was barely able to control," while Don McLeese notes that fans compared the aftermath of an MC5 performance to the delirious exhaustion experienced after "a street rumble or an orgy." (McLeese, 57)
Their debut single was released by Trans-Love Energies in early 1968, comprising two original songs: "Borderline" and "Looking at You." The first pressing sold out in a few weeks, and by the year's end, had gone through more pressings totaling several thousand copies.
That summer, MC5 toured the U.S. east coast, which generated an enormous response, with the group often overshadowing the more famous acts they opened up for: McLeese writes notes that when opening for Big Brother and the Holding Company audiences regularly demanded multiple encores of the MC5, and at a memorable series of concerts, Cream — one of the leading hard rock groups of the era — "left the stage vanquished" by the Detroit upstarts. (McLeese, 65) This same east coast tour led to the rapturous aforementioned Rolling Stone cover story that praised the MC5 with nearly evangelistic zeal, and also to an association with the radical group Up Against the Wall Motherfuckers.
The MC5 became the leading band in a burgeoning hard rock scene, serving as mentors to fellow South-Eastern Michigan bands The Stooges and Up, and major record labels expressed an interest in the group. As related in the notes for reissued editions of the Stooges' debut album, Danny Fields of Elektra Records came to Detroit to see the MC5. At Kramer's recommendation, he went to see the Stooges. Fields was so impressed that he ended up offering contracts to both bands in September 1968. They were the first hard rock groups signed to the fledgling Elektra.

[edit] Radical political affiliations
According to Kramer, the MC5 of this period was politically influenced by the Marxism/Maoism of the Black Panther Party and Fred Hampton.[4] Black Panther Party founder Huey P. Newton prompted John Sinclair to found the White Panthers, a militant leftist organization of white people working to assist the Black Panthers. Shortly after, Sinclair was arrested for possession of illegal narcotics.
Under the "guidance" of John Sinclair (who dubbed his enterprise "Trans-Love Energies" and refused to be categorized as a traditional manager), the MC5 were soon involved in left-wing politics: Sinclair was active with the White Panther Party and Fifth Estate. In their early career, the MC5 had a politically provocative stage show: they would appear onstage toting unloaded rifles, and at the climax of the performance, an unseen "sniper" would shoot down Tyner. The band members were also all using the drugs LSD and marijuana, though not all group members agreed with Sinclair's politics, as Thompson would later reveal in a 2000 interview for an article published in Goldmine magazine.[citation needed]
The band generated political controversy by performing before the outbreak of violent protests at the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago. The group's appearance at the convention is also notable for their lengthy performance: in an interview featured in the documentary Get Up, Stand Up, Kramer reported that while many musicians were scheduled to perform at a day-long concert, only the MC5 initially appeared. The MC5 played for over eight hours straight; of the other scheduled performers, Kramer stated in Get Up, Stand Up that only Neil Young actually arrived, though due to the chaos at the convention, Young didn't perform. Dennis Thompson asserted years later that "Country Joe" McDonald (Country Joe and the Fish) was also present at the scene (Thompson, 2000). Other performers at the convention included the protest folk singer Phil Ochs.[5]

[edit] Recordings

[edit] Kick out the Jams
The MC5 earned national attention with their first album, Kick Out the Jams, recorded live on October 30 and 31, 1968 at Detroit's Grande Ballroom. A live debut was all but unheard of in 1968 (and is still rare today), but Elektra executives Jac Holzman and Bruce Botnick recognized that the MC5 were at their best when playing for a receptive audience. The first song, a version of the R&B standard "Ramblin' Rose," featured a ragged falsetto lead vocal from Kramer before Tyner joined the group onstage. Containing such songs as the proto-punk classics "Kick Out the Jams" and "Rama Lama Fa Fa Fa", the spaced-out "Starship" (co-credited to Sun Ra because the lyrics were partly cribbed from one of Ra's poems), and an extended cover of John Lee Hooker's "Motor City is Burning" wherein Tyner praises the role of Black Panther snipers during the Detroit Insurrection of 1967. The album is generally regarded as one of the best live rock and roll records: critic Mark Deming writes that the gleefully lusty Kick "is one of the most powerfully energetic live albums ever made ... this is an album that refuses to be played quietly.[6]
The album caused some controversy due to the title track's rallying cry of "Kick out the jams, motherfuckers!" (according to Kramer, the band recorded this as "Kick out the jams, brothers and sisters!" for the single released for radio play; Tyner claimed this was done without group consensus (Thompson, 2000) ) and Sinclair's inflammatory liner notes. The edited version also appeared in some LP copies, which also withdrew Sinclair's excitable comments. The album was released in January, 1969; reviews were mixed, but the album was successful, quickly selling over 100,000 copies, and appearing for several weeks on the Billboard Hot 100.

[edit] Back in the USA
Their second album, Back in the USA, produced by future Bruce Springsteen mentor Jon Landau, virtually provided a prototype for punk rock with its short, fast, hard-edged angry guitar rock. The band sounded radically different from Kick, and McLeese writes that except for Tyner's vocals, they were "barely recognizable as the same band." (McLeese, 96) The second album also featured very different production from the first — the MC5 now sounded compressed and somewhat limited in their sonic palate compared to their earlier era — band members later said that Landau was overbearing and heavy-handed in production, trying to shape the group to his own liking.
Reviews were again mixed, sales were mediocre (It peaked at 137 in March 1970) and the MC5's tours were not as well-received as before. Exhaustion was partly to blame, from the band's heavy touring schedule and increasingly heavy drug use.
They had fallen out with Sinclair, as well, and were conspicuous by their absence at the December, 1971 "Free John Sinclair" rally to protest his incarceration on marijuana possession.

[edit] High Time
Their third album, High Time would also prove influential on 1970s hard rock bands.[citation needed] The album was poorly promoted, and sales were worse than ever, but High Time was the best-reviewed of the band's original records upon its initial release. The group had much more creative control, and were very satisfied with the results. This release saw the band stretch out with longer, more experimental pieces like Future/Now and the Sun Ra-influenced Skunk (Sonically Speaking).

[edit] Record label controversy
When Hudson's, a Detroit-based department store chain, refused to stock Kick Out The Jams due to the obscenity, the MC5 responded with a full page advertisement in the Fifth Estate saying "Fuck Hudson's!" and prominently including the logo of MC5's label, Elektra Records, in the ad.
Hudson's pulled all Elektra records from their stores, and in the ensuing controversy, Jac Holzman, the head of Elektra, dropped the band from their contract, though there were later allegations of strong company support of the controversial content of the LP. Uncommonly, Elektra's classical division (Nonesuch) was operated on a nearly pro bono basis due to profits generated by popular music releases, and the removal of Nonesuch records from Hudson's represented a significant loss for the corporation.
The MC5 then signed with Atlantic Records, ironically now part of the same company as Elektra.

[edit] Late career and disbandment
Both Back in the USA and High Time lost money for Atlantic Records, which dropped the band.
On February 13, 1972, Michael Davis left the band (he was using heroin and was all but forced out by the others). The remaining members recorded three new songs — "Gold," "Train Music," and "Inside Out" — in London shortly afterwards for the soundtrack of a film called Gold. This would be the band's final recording session.
The group limped along a while longer, eventually reduced to Kramer and Smith touring and playing with local pick-up groups, playing R&B covers as much as their original material.
The MC5 reunited for a farewell show on New Year's Eve, 1972-73 at the Grande Ballroom. The venue that had only a few years before hosted over a thousand eager fans now had a few dozen people, and, distraught, Kramer left the stage after a few songs.
The band broke up shortly afterwards.

[edit] Post-break up
Fred "Sonic" Smith formed a new group called Sonic's Rendezvous Band, married singer Patti Smith, retired from music to raise a family, and died in 1994. Sonic's Rendezvous Band released only the "City Slang" single during their initial time as a group, though later recordings were released post-mortem, and a reconstituted Rendezvous Band (including original member Scott Morgan, of The Rationals and newly-added Deniz Tek of Radio Birdman) reunited in tribute years afterward.
Wayne Kramer made scattered appearances on other people's records before being incarcerated for drug offenses (in prison in Kentucky, Kramer was unexpectedly reunited with MC5 bassist Michael Davis, also behind bars on a drug charge). After his parole, Kramer worked straight jobs for several years and focused on kicking drugs; in the early 1990s, he returned to the music industry, and has released several well-received albums.
Tyner became a successful producer, manager and promoter in Detroit; he released the warmly-reviewed Blood Brothers in 1990, and died in 1991. For many years, Tyner had been performing using his own moniker, but had also used the MC5 name for some live gigs for a brief period, though he was the only active original member involved. During the mid-1980s, Tyner produced a single for Detroit band Vertical Pillows, and occasionally made brief guest appearances during some of their live shows, singing MC5 covers. A tribute concert to Tyner in 1992 resulted in the first MC5 concert in twenty years.

[edit] Reunion
2003 saw the three surviving members of MC5—Kramer, bassist Michael Davis, and drummer Dennis Thompson—performing as MC5 at the 100 Club in London with Fred 'Sonic' Smith's place being taken by Nicke Andersson of The Hellacopters (also known as Nicke Royale / Nick Royale), vocal chores being filled by David Vanian of The Damned, Lemmy of Motörhead, Ian Astbury of The Cult, and singer Kate O'Brien, as well as seeing Charles Moore and Buzzy Jones reprise their roles in the brass section from the High Time album. The first real public reunion of the band after their recording years as a group was as a four-piece, at a performance celebrating the life of the late Tyner, a concert event at the State Theater in Detroit MI on February 22, 1992. The event was heavily attended, and included The Rationals, Scot Richardson (SRC), The Romantics, Dee Dee Ramone, The Cult, and other musicians. The band on this evening was unbilled, but their appearance had been rumored--Kramer was the only group member advertised--and the set lasted about thirty minutes. The recording of this show remains unreleased.
In 2004, the band set out on an extensive world tour using the name DKT/MC5. As with the 100 Club concert, a host of special guests joined them on tour such as Mark Arm of Mudhoney, Nicke Royale of The Hellacopters, Evan Dando of The Lemonheads, Marshall Crenshaw, Lisa Kekuala of the Bellrays, and others. Since February 2005, Handsome Dick Manitoba has been singing lead for the band.
In May 2006, bass player for DKT/MC5 Michael Davis injured his back in a motorcycle accident.
August 2007 bass player for DKT/MC5 Michael Davis joins band The Lords Of Altamont on bass.
Michael Davis also founded and leads the Michael H. Davis MUSIC IS REVOLUTION FOUNDATION, dedicated to supporting music education programs in public schools. www.musicisrevolution.org

[edit] Covers and Tributes
The Damned covered "Looking at You" on their third album, 1979's "Machine Gun Ettiquette." On their 2000 album Renegades, Rage Against the Machine performed a cover of "Kick Out the Jams". Singer Zack de la Rocha had already left the band, but their version still featured his vocals. Poison Idea's version of the song appears on their Pajama Party covers album as well as the live album Dutch Courage. The song was also covered by Jeff Buckley on the DVD Live in Chicago, as well as on the 1994 debut album by The Presidents of the United States of America, and by Blue Öyster Cult on their 1978 live album Some Enchanted Evening. A version of the song performed by Bad Brains with Henry Rollins also appeared on the soundtrack to the film, Pump Up the Volume. More recently, Monster Magnet contributed yet another version of "Kick Out the Jams" to the Varsity Blues soundtrack (it had already appeared as a bonus track on the Japanese edition of their 1998 album, Powertrip). Pearl Jam also covers the song live in concert. Rocket from the Crypt recorded an infamous cover of Gold. The song What Time Is Love? by the KLF started with the beginning "kick out the jams", although "motherfuckers" was censored in the UK. Interestingly, this led to an MC5 sample being heard in an attraction at a major family theme park.
Spacemen 3 covered 'Starship' on their 1987 album "The Perfect Prescription," crediting it to both MC5 and Sun Ra.
The Australian band Radio Birdman recorded a Stooges' "TV Eye" cover which also includes several lyrics and the characteristic guitar solo from "Looking at You". The Michigan band The Gories did an authentic-sounding cover version of "I Just Don't Know," and the song "Sister Ann" may also be found on their House Rockin' LP. The Vertical Pillows, a 1980s Michigan band with strong MC5 influences, had their debut single ("Jump Back"/"R.U.N.") produced by Tyner, who also did live guest sets with the VPs of MC5 songs. The band The Didjits recorded "Call Me Animal" on their 1990 LP "Hornet Pinata".
The band Corrosion of Conformity released a version of "Future/Now" as a b-side to their "Vote With A Bullet" single.
In 1999, on their album No.4, Stone Temple Pilots wrote a song entitled "MC5" in honor of the band.
The Norwegian Band Motorpsycho covered "Black To Comm" on their live album "Roadwork Vol.1" released in 1999.
Swedish rock band The Hellacopters has performed Kick out the Jams live on several occasions,[7], released a cover version of "American Ruse" on the split-EP "Respect The Rock USA" (together with Gluecifer) in 1999 and guitarist Robert Dahlqvist named his sideproject Thunder Express after the MC5 song as a tribute.[8]
The band Young Heart Attack covered "Over and Over" as a 2003 single and on their 2004 album Mouthful of Love.
In December 2003, Michael Davis entered a studio in Eagle Rock, Los Angeles, to produce Swedish rock band Dollhouse's debut-album "The Rock and Soul Circus" (Released 2004 on Dim Mak Records). Michael Davis himself appears on backing vocals on the MC5 cover song "The Human Being Lawnmower".
"Kick Out The Jams" is included in the 2008 video game Guitar Hero World Tour. The guitar tracks were rerecorded but the original vocal track from Rob Tyner remains.
The Melvins did cover "Rocket Reducer #62" which was released on the 1994 promo single of "Lizzy". The song can also be found on the bootleg compilation "Leech" from 1996. Additionally, the MC5's own recording of "High School" appeared in the Ramones film Rock 'n' Roll High School.
In 2008, Wendy & Lisa released a single "Salt & Cherries [MC5]" (from the forthcoming album White Flags of Winter Chimneys) which name checks the MC5. "I put the music of the MC5 on / while I'm knocking at your door."

[edit] Discography

Albums


Kick Out the Jams (1969)
Back in the USA (1970)
High Time (1971)


Compilations


Babes in Arms (1983)
Black to Comm (1994)
Power Trip (1994)
Looking At You (1995)
The American Ruse (1995)
Ice Pick Slim (1997)
66 Breakout (1999)
The Big Bang!: Best of the MC5 (2000)
Thunder Express (1999) (Recorded in 1972)


Live


Teen Age Lust (recorded 1970, released 1996)
Phun City, UK (recorded 1970, released 1996)
Live At The Sturgis Armoury (recorded 1968, released 1998)
Are You Ready To Testify?: The Live Bootleg Anthology (2005)
Live At The Grande Ballroom 68 (2006)


Box Sets


Purity Accuracy (2004)


Singles


I Can Only Give You Everything (1966)
One of the Guys (1967)
Looking at You (1968)
Kick Out the Jams (1969)
Ramblin' Rose (1969)
Tonight (1969)
Shakin' Street (1970)
Over and Over / Sister Anne (1971) (Never officially released, only test pressings exist)


[edit] Filmography

MC5: Kick Out the Jams 1999
MC5*: A True Testimonial 2002


[edit] See also

1960s counterculture
Fifth Estate
List of forerunners of punk music
Music and politics
Music of Detroit
New Left
John Sinclair
Up Against the Wall Motherfuckers
White Panther Party


[edit] References

^ http://allmusic.com/cg/amg.dll?p=amg&sql=11:hifyxqe5ldfe~T1
^ http://www.rollingstone.com/photos/gallery/5392211/1969_rolling_stone_covers/photo/1
^ http://www.rockonthenet.com/archive/2000/vh1hardrock.htm
^ [1]
^ Michael Schumacher, There But for Fortune: The Life of Phil Ochs, pp. 200–201.
^ "[2]
^ http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aAX6XWfGoK8
^ http://www.cuttingedgerocks.com/Thunder.html

McLeese, Don, The MC5's Kick Out the Jams (33 1/3); Continuum International Publishing Group, 2005; ISBN-10: 0826416608; ISBN-13: 978-0826416605 Thompson, James H. MC5: Kickin' Out The Jams; Goldmine magazine, issue #512 (March 10, 2000 cover date), Krause Publications. Online version at http://makemyday.free.fr/goldmine1 as part of MC5 Gateway.

[edit] External links

The Official Website of John Sinclair
MC5 GATEWAY - Detailed site on the MC5
MC5 Lyrics "provided by MC5 members"
All-MC5 Webguide
Band Timeline
MC5 2005, a Head Heritage article by Dorian Cope




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MC5"
Categories: Hard rock musical groups | Pre-punk groups | Blues-rock groups | Garage rock groups | Psychedelic rock | American rock music groups | Musical groups from Michigan | Musical groups established in 1964 | Musical groups disestablished in 1972 | 1960s music groups | 1970s music groups | Reachout International Records recording artists | Atlantic Records artistsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2007 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Français
Hrvatski
Italiano
עברית
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Українська









 This page was last modified on 13 March 2009, at 10:34.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
