













Sin City - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Sin_City";
		var wgTitle = "Sin City";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "65434";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280118921;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Sin City

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the series of comics by Frank Miller.  For the film, see Sin City (film). For other uses, see Sin City (disambiguation).


Sin City



Cover of The Hard Goodbye showing Marv walking through the rain


First appearance
"Dark Horse's Fifth Anniversary Special" (April 1991)


Created by
Frank Miller


Publication information


Publisher
Dark Horse Comics








Title(s)


Dark Horse Presents #51-62
"Dark Horse's Fifth Anniversary Special"
The Big Fat Kill #1-5
A Dame to Kill For #1-6
Family Values
Hell and Back (A Sin City Love Story) #1-9
That Yellow Bastard #1-6





Formats
Original material for the series has been published as a strip in the comics anthology(s) Dark Horse Presents and a set of limited series, graphic novels, and one-shot comics.


Genre
Crime


Publication date
1991 — present


Main character(s)
Marv
Dwight McCarthy
Nancy Callahan
Gail
Miho
John Hartigan
Wallace
Roark Junior


Creative team


Writer(s)
Frank Miller


Artist(s)
Frank Miller


Creator(s)
Frank Miller


Reprints


Collected editions


The Hard Goodbye
ISBN 1593072937


A Dame to Kill For
ISBN 1593072945


The Big Fat Kill
ISBN 1593072953


The Yellow Bastard
ISBN 1593072961


Family Values
ISBN 159307297X


Booze, Broads, & Bullets
ISBN 1593072996


Hell and Back
ISBN 1593072988


Sin City is the title for a series of comics by Frank Miller, told in a film noir-like style (now known as Neo noir). The first story originally appeared in "Dark Horse's Fifth Anniversary Special" (April, 1991), and continued in Dark Horse Presents #51-62 from May 1991 to June 1992, under the title of Sin City, serialized in thirteen parts. Several other stories of variable lengths have followed. All stories take place in Basin City, with frequent recurring characters and intertwining stories.
A movie adaptation of Sin City, co-directed by Robert Rodriguez and Frank Miller with "special guest director" Quentin Tarantino, was released on April 1, 2005. The Sin City volumes were reprinted with new covers and in a reduced size to coincide with the motion picture's theatrical release. A planned sequel to the 2005 hit has been moved around the release schedule for years, with current plans having pre-production start in 2010.




Contents


1 Setting
2 Characters

2.1 Individuals
2.2 Organizations


3 Sin City yarns

3.1 Collected editions
3.2 Chronology


4 Awards
5 Style
6 See also
7 Reference
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Setting
Basin City, almost universally referred to by the nickname Sin City, is a fictional town in the American west. The climate is hot and arid, although Sacred Oaks is characterized as being heavily wooded. A major river runs through the city, which has an extensive waterfront. Usually twice a year, a major downpour comes, and (in That Yellow Bastard) the city gets heavy snowfall in the winter. In the comics, Basin City has a surreal, pan-American feel. Desert lizards and palm trees are common, while tar pits, desert areas, mountain ranges and flat farmland make up the landscape around the city.
The Basin City Police are more or less along the lines of paramilitary or SWAT, as they have to deal with incredibly high crime rates among criminals and civilians alike, which is why they have access to what most would consider "heavy weaponry" and full body armor. Those who make up the force have been described as commonly being lazy, cowardly and/or corrupt. Only a handful of the cops are honest, though frequently the wealthy of the city bribe the corrupt members of the police into performing their duty (usually as a result of some crime being committed against a member of their family).
During the California Gold Rush, the Roark family "imported" a large number of attractive women to keep the miners happy, making a fortune and turning a struggling mining camp into a thriving, bustling city. Over the years, as the Roark family migrated into other areas of business and power, these women ended up forming the district of Old Town, the prostitute quarter of the city where they rule with absolute authority. In addition, the people charged with governing the city, most of them from the Roark line, remained in power for generations, running it as they saw fit.
As the various yarns progress, the audience gradually becomes familiar with key locations in and around Basin City.

The Projects, the run-down and poor side of Sin City, is a tangle of high-rise apartments where crime runs rampant. Its inhabitants have apparently evolved their own independent society with almost no legal contact with the outside world. Marv was born in the Projects and they make Dwight sick.
The Docks, a collection of wharfs and warehouses that are local to the Projects. Hartigan and Roark Junior have their first confrontation here in That Yellow Bastard, and Marv drives a stolen police car off one of the piers at the beginning of The Hard Goodbye.
Kadie's Club Pecos, a strip club/bar where Nancy Callahan and Shellie work, and Dwight McCarthy and Marv hang out. Though filled almost solely with drunk and violent men, Kadie's bar is one of the safest areas in Sin City. Marv, who possesses an extraordinarily high sense of chivalry, protects the female employees of Kadie's from any violence that makes its way inside.
Roark Family Farm (a.k.a. "The Farm") is located at North Cross and Lennox and shows up in several stories, including The Hard Goodbye, That Yellow Bastard, The Babe Wore Red and Hell and Back. It was also home to Kevin, a serial killer with ties to the Roark family. Marv burns down one of the buildings, and the Farm is abandoned sometime after the initial Sin City storyline.
Old Town is the red-light district and is off limits to the police, unless they're 'shopping'. This is where the city's population of prostitutes reside; it recently came under the control of the twins Goldie and Wendy. Though perfectly willing to engage in almost any sexual act for the right price, the women of Old Town show no mercy to those who "break the rules" and back up their independence with lethal force. The mob and pimps were thrown out after a period of fighting.
Sacred Oaks, home to the rich and powerful of Basin City. This suburb lies without the city proper, a half an hour drive uphill. A university of some sort is also located there, and the entire area is patrolled by armed employees of its wealthy inhabitants.
Basin City Central Train Station, which has a direct connection to Phoenix.
The Santa Yolanda Tar Pits, an abandoned amusement park of sorts outside the city, where several tar pits are located and dinosaur bones were excavated at some time. After a 'big-budget dinosaur movie' (probably a reference to Jurassic Park) caused a sensation, the county put up concrete statues of dinosaurs there to draw crowds. However, after an old lady fell through a railing into one of the pits and had a heart attack, the place was shut down indefinitely. They are frequently used as a place to dump things that people don't want found; high-schoolers also tend to sneak in there a lot. This is where Delia tells Phil to drive in Wrong Turn and where Dwight takes the corpses of Jackie Boy and his friends in The Big Fat Kill. Frank Miller has admitted the main reason the Tar Pits exist is as an excuse to draw the dinosaur statues.


[edit] Characters
Main article: List of characters from Sin City

[edit] Individuals

Marv
Dwight McCarthy
Nancy Callahan
Gail
Miho
John Hartigan
Wallace
Roark Junior (aka. The Yellow Bastard)


[edit] Organizations
Because a large majority of the residents of Basin City are criminals, there are several organizations and cartels central to the stories who are vying for monopoly over the various criminal enterprises in the city. Listed below are crime syndicates, gangs and other low-lifes who figure heavily in the Sin City mythos.

The Basin City Police Department
So deep do corruption and criminality run in Basin City that even their police officers qualify as a gang of paid thugs, turning a blind eye to the affairs of those too poor to pay them off. Few among them are considered incorruptible; even the honest officers are unable (or unwilling) to curtail the criminal actions of the dishonest ones. Notable characters in the series who are police include Detective John Hartigan, his partner Bob, Lieutenants Jack Rafferty and Mort, Commissioner Liebowitz, and Officers Manson and Bundy from Hell and Back.
The Roark family
A dynasty of corrupt landowners and politicians whose influence over Basin City has stretched as far back as the days of the Old West. Famous Roarks of this generation include a Senator, a Cardinal, an Attorney General, and Roark Junior, 'That Yellow Bastard'.
The Girls of Old Town
Populating the region of Basin City known as Old Town are a group of women in the world's oldest profession, having made a truce with the cops to allow them to govern and police themselves. As of A Dame To Kill For, they were led by the twins, Goldie and Wendy.
Wallenquist Organization
A powerful crime syndicate led by Herr Wallenquist, a mysterious crimelord with a broad range of criminal enterprises to his name. Interestingly, though one of the city's two "normal" criminal organizations, the Wallenquist management seems to be the most peaceful and forgiving of the various leaders.
The Magliozzi Crime Family
The undisputed heads of the local Cosa Nostra, the Magliozzi family seems to be the purest example of "true" Mafia lifestyle. While they appear in only one story, it is hinted that the Mafia influence in Basin City's underworld is a lot larger than just their family.

Other groups that have been seen or mentioned in the comics include:

Tong gangsters
Mentioned, but not seen as of A Dame To Kill For. Miho's life was saved by Dwight when he secretly protected her during a fight with several Tong gangsters in a dark alleyway.
White slavers
Mentioned, but not seen as of A Dame To Kill For. Led by a man named Manuel, whose brothers were also involved. Were "taken care of" by Dwight prior to the events of A Dame To Kill For.
Irish mercenaries
Seen during The Big Fat Kill, most of them are evidently former I.R.A. members, as implied by one of the mercenaries referring to his glee at blowing up a public house (British pubs were targeted by the I.R.A.). All are killed by Dwight and Miho.


[edit] Sin City yarns
These are the individual stories, usually referred to as "yarns," set in Frank Miller's Sin City universe. For more info see List of Sin City yarns.

[edit] Collected editions
The stories have been collected into trade paperbacks:


Name
Contents
ISBN


The Hard Goodbye
Episodes #1-13 of 13
ISBN 1593072937


A Dame to Kill For
Issues #1-6 of 6
ISBN 1593072945


The Big Fat Kill
Issues #1-5 of 5
ISBN 1593072953


That Yellow Bastard
Issues #1-6 of 6
ISBN 1593072961


Family Values
The 128-page original graphic novel
ISBN 159307297X


Booze, Broads, & Bullets
A number of one-shots
ISBN 1593072988


Hell and Back (A Sin City Love Story)
Issues #1-9 of 9
ISBN 1593072996



[edit] Chronology
While it was the first story written, The Hard Goodbye was not the first story chronologically, with the first section of That Yellow Bastard as the first. The Dwight-related stories fall in between these, with the short stories fleshing out the time between the main stories. Here is a rough chronology of the "Yarns":

The first section of That Yellow Bastard, wherein Detective John Hartigan rescues Nancy Callahan from Roark Jr., resulting in Hartigan and Junior winding up in the hospital, occurs at least twelve years before the events of The Hard Goodbye. Hartigan is framed as a child molester and charged with raping Nancy Callahan. He is placed into solitary confinement for eight years. Interesting note, Liebowitz, of Hell and Back beats Hartigan, trying to gain a confession.
Ava leaves Dwight and marries Damien Lord some time during this, referred to in A Dame To Kill For.
Hartigan finds the nineteen-year-old Nancy Callahan when he is out on parole. It is also on this night that Dwight goes home with Shellie, and sleeps with her (he is seen whining to Shellie when Hartigan enters ‘Kadie’s’). Marv witnesses the reunion of Nancy and Hartigan, as shown in the beginning of Just Another Saturday Night.
The remaining events of That Yellow Bastard play out within the next few hours or so.
About a year later, Dwight secretly saves Miho from Tong gangsters; revealing this saves him during A Dame to Kill For.
Three years later, the twins, Goldie and Wendy, take over Old Town. A few weeks later, Ava Lord contacts Dwight and asks to meet him. Ava mentions that it has been about four years since they last saw each other and Dwight agrees. Manute interrupts their meeting. Fearing for her safety, Dwight goes to ‘Kadie’s’ and recruits the help of Marv. Shellie lectures Dwight at having not seen nor heard from him in six months.
Marv and Dwight attack the home of Damien and Ava Lord. Marv fights Manute, and Manute loses his eye in the process. After Damien is killed, Dwight is taken to Old Town by Marv, badly wounded. Dwight begins to be rehabilitated at this point.
Gail, Dwight, Miho and Shellie develop a plan to get revenge on Ava Lord. Gail and the others tell Shellie that Dwight is still alive, and brief her on what she should tell the cops. On this same night, Delia (A.K.A. Blue Eyes) is inducted into the service of Wallenquist, placing her in league with the Colonel. Marv is at the bar when Delia sweeps off with her prey, happily resuming his nocturnal drinking habits.
One night, possibly the same one as Blue Eyes, Marv meets Goldie at Kadie's. The Hard Goodbye begins with Marv waking and finding Goldie dead.
In the beginning of Marv’s rampage, he goes to “Kadie’s” to try and draw attention to himself. On the same night, Mort and Bob arrive at 'Kadie’s' (mere seconds after Marv’s arrival) and interview Shellie about Dwight's location following the murder of Damien Lord. She tells them all that briefed her on in Blue Eyes and sends them on their way. Manute is also briefly seen interacting with the Colonel, sporting a neck-brace.
A few days into Marv’s rampage, Bob (Hartigan's former partner in That Yellow Bastard) is shot dead by his partner Mort, who takes his own life (A Dame to Kill For).
Less than three months later, Ava and Wallenquist unite their criminal empires. Dwight McCarthy (with a new face), Miho, and Gail raid Ava Lord’s estate, with Manute being gravely injured by both Miho and Dwight. Dwight kills Ava.
The Babe Wore Red occurs, and in the story, Dwight states that Marv is on death row.
Fat Man and Little Boy occurs, if we assume the witness they failed to silence is Mary.
Eighteen months after the beginning of The Hard Goodbye, Wendy visits Marv on death row. A day later, he is executed by electric chair, dying on the second attempt as those "pansies" (as he insults them) didn't have enough juice on the first go.
Wrong Turn occurs and Delia kills the wrong target. Delia, the Colonel and Gordo dispose of the dead men. Wrong Turn features the first mention of Mariah, who makes her first appearance in Hell and Back.
Wrong Track occurs shortly after Wrong Turn, as Delia tries to kill the real target (on his way back from a delivery).
Following this, Hell and Back occurs. Wallace saves Esther, but she is captivated by the Colonel’s men. During Wallace’s search, he comes in contact with Manute and Delia. Manute, now an enforcer for Wallenquist, helps Delia to manipulate Wallace. Wallace kills Delia and Gordo in this story. Commissioner Liebowitz kills the Colonel. Mariah (leopard skin chick) is inducted into the service of Wallenquist. Wallace and Esther leave Sin City.
The Big Fat Kill occurs. Miho slaughters Jackie Boy and his friends. Dwight, in an attempt to prevent a mob war, tries to dispose of Jackie Boy. The young Old Town girl known as Becky betrays them -- sells them to the mob (Wallenquist) in an attempt to make money and get out of the prostitution game. Manute, embittered by the death of Ava Lord, captivates Gail and encourages a trade: Jackie Boy’s head for Gail. Dwight and Miho arrange the trade, but the Old Town girls kill Becky and all of the other mob men. Manute is finally killed during a shoot-out. Wendy is also notably absent from this story, implying she was either still in hiding or otherwise preoccupied at the time, forcing Gail to take command of the girls.
Family Values takes place not long after, indicated by Dwight making reference to Miho’s previous killing of a cop (“The Big Fat Kill”), as well as his acknowledgement of Fat Man and Little Boy, who he says he shot in the legs last time he saw them (The Babe Wore Red).
Behind Door Number Three... occurs at some point after Marv's capture, most likely after he was visited in prison by Wendy on the night of his execution; this is suggested by the fact she is seen wearing either Marv's crucifix neck-lace or one very similar, perhaps as a gift from him or as a way of honoring his sacrifice.

It was previously assumed that Wrong Turn and Hell and Back could not be placed within the continuity. Wrong Turn and Wrong Track occur immediately after each other, because Delia is still after the same target. Hell and Back occurs after A Dame to Kill For but before The Big Fat Kill, because Manute is sporting a fake eye (golden in the film) and is still alive.
The short stories Rats, The Customer is Always Right, Daddy's Little Girl, and Silent Night are the hardest to place in the chronology, as some of them do not contain any of the series' regular characters, are not connected to the other stories, or do not give an idea of when the stories occur. We can assume that Silent Night is before The Hard Goodbye during the winter, as Marv is still quite alive and seen lumbering through one of Basin City's rare snow-storms. We can also assume that The Customer is Always Right occurs in between "That Yellow Bastard" and "The Hard Goodbye", as Robert Rodriguez himself stated this on the Sin City: Recut and Extended D.V.D. Edition. There is also some debate as to whether or not the old man's killer in Rats is a young Wallenquist. While never explicitly stated whether they are one and the same, both characters are balding, tall, fat, and wear identical glasses. It is implied that the narrator of Rats is a fugitive Nazi war criminal.

[edit] Awards
Sin City: The Big Fat Kill won the Comics Buyer's Guide Fan Award for Favorite Limited Series for 1996. Sin City: Family Values won the 1997 Eisner Awards.[citation needed]

1993:

The Hard Goodbye won the "Best Graphic Album: Reprint (Modern Material)" Eisner Award[1]
Frank Miller won the "Best Penciller/Inker, Black & White Publication" Eisner Award, for The Hard Goodbye[1]
Frank Miller won the "Best Writer/Artist" Eisner Award, for The Hard Goodbye[1]




1995:

A Dame to Kill For won "Best Limited Series" Eisner Award[2]
"The Babe Wore Red," won "Best Short Story" Eisner Award[2]




1996:

The Big Fat Kill won the "Best Limited Series" Eisner Award[3]
Sin City won the "Best Continuing or Limited Series" Harvey Award[4]




1998:

That Yellow Bastard won the "Best Graphic Album-Reprint" Eisner Award[5]
Family Values won the "Best Graphic Album of Original Work" Harvey Award[6]




2008:

Sin City won the "Best Black & White Title" Project Fanboy Award[7]




[edit] Style




Frank Miller using high contrasts in Sin City







This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)


Sin City is famous for its artwork, which draws heavily from film noir, including its use of shadow and stark backgrounds. Miller's artistic style transitions between reality and graphic design. He uses notan - areas of light and dark purely for design where they have no logic in regards to light and shadow. Black and white are the sole colors most of the time with exception of red, yellow and blue in some stories. Partial color usage is designed to draw attention to a certain character in the story.
The writing style also draws heavily on detective/crime pulp fiction. Strange metaphors and similies are often used. This gives the narration a very "pulpy" feel

[edit] See also

Sin City 2


[edit] Reference


^ a b c 1993 Will Eisner Comic Industry Award Nominees and Winners
^ a b 1995 Will Eisner Comic Industry Award Nominees and Winners
^ 1996 Will Eisner Comic Industry Award Nominees and Winners
^ 1996 Harvey Award Nominees and Winners
^ 1998 Will Eisner Comic Industry Award Nominees
^ 1998 Harvey Award Nominees and Winners
^ 2008 Project Fanboy Award Winners



[edit] External links

Sin City at Dark Horse Comics
Frank Miller`s Sin City & 300 & Spirit - Database articles, images and other files about Frank Millers and his comics.
Sin City Introduction - Fan site containing detailed information about characters and locations
Sin City Timeline, from the personal website of a Hero System game player
Sin City Overview and Art From The Graphic Novel
Sin City, from an ad-supported website "devoted to the sophisticated study of comic books"
Frank Miller: The Complete Works, The most comprehensive listing of all of Frank Miller's works. Includes very detailed information on each book as well as a discussion forum.
IFILM explore Rats: A Sin City Yarn, The Short Story out of Lost, Lonely, & Lethal.
SuperheroHype! Sin City Messageboard, Forums dedicated to both the comics and film.
Sin City Effect Tutorial Achieve the "Sin City Look" in your videos with Sony Vegas (Video Tutorial).








v • d • e

Sin City





Yarns

The Hard Goodbye · A Dame to Kill For · The Babe Wore Red and Other Stories · The Big Fat Kill · Silent Night · That Yellow Bastard · Daddy's Little Girl · Lost, Lonely, & Lethal · Sex & Violence · Just Another Saturday Night · Family Values · Hell and Back






Films

Sin City (soundtrack) · Sin City 2 · Sin City 3






Characters

Marv · Jack Rafferty · Nancy Callahan · John Hartigan · Dwight McCarthy · Wallace · Miho · Kevin · Cardinal Roark · Ava Lord · Junior/That Yellow Bastard · Senator Roark · The Girls of Old Town · Wallenquist Organisation · Magliozzi Crime Family · List of characters from Sin City






People

Frank Miller · Robert Rodriguez













v • d • e

Frank Miller





Batman comics

All Star Batman and Robin the Boy Wonder · Batman: The Dark Knight Returns · Batman: The Dark Knight Strikes Again · Batman: Year One · Holy Terror, Batman! · Spawn/Batman






Other comics
(written)

Big Guy and Rusty the Boy Robot · Daredevil · Daredevil: Born Again · Elektra: Assassin · Give Me Liberty · Hard Boiled · RoboCop · RoboCop versus The Terminator · The Twilight Zone · Wolverine






Other comics
(written and drawn)

300 · Ronin · Sin City






Other comics
(drawn)

Wolverine






Film

300 · RoboCop 2 · RoboCop 3 · Ronin · Sin City · Sin City 2 · The Spirit









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sin_City"
Categories: Sin City | Dark Horse Comics limited series | One-shot comic titles | 1991 comic debuts | Fictional cities and towns in Washington (U.S. state) | Film noir | Neo-noirHidden categories: Metatitle pop | Title pop | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles needing additional references from March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Български
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Français
Italiano
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Suomi
Svenska









 This page was last modified on 28 March 2009, at 00:34.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
