











President of the United States - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "President_of_the_United_States";
		var wgTitle = "President of the United States";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "24113";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281905482;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 


wgOggPlayer.msg = {"ogg-play": "Play", "ogg-pause": "Pause", "ogg-stop": "Stop", "ogg-no-player": "Sorry, your system does not appear to have any supported player software.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload a player\x3c/a\x3e.", "ogg-player-videoElement": "Native browser support", "ogg-player-oggPlugin": "Browser plugin", "ogg-player-cortado": "Cortado (Java)", "ogg-player-vlc-mozilla": "VLC", "ogg-player-vlc-activex": "VLC (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-quicktime-mozilla": "QuickTime", "ogg-player-quicktime-activex": "QuickTime (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-totem": "Totem", "ogg-player-kaffeine": "Kaffeine", "ogg-player-kmplayer": "KMPlayer", "ogg-player-mplayerplug-in": "mplayerplug-in", "ogg-player-thumbnail": "Still image only", "ogg-player-selected": "(selected)", "ogg-use-player": "Use player:", "ogg-more": "More…", "ogg-download": "Download file", "ogg-desc-link": "About this file", "ogg-dismiss": "Close", "ogg-player-soundthumb": "No player", "ogg-no-xiphqt": "You do not appear to have the XiphQT component for QuickTime.\nQuickTime cannot play Ogg files without this component.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload XiphQT\x3c/a\x3e or choose another player."};
wgOggPlayer.cortadoUrl = "http://upload.wikimedia.org/jars/cortado.jar";
wgOggPlayer.extPathUrl = "/w/extensions/OggHandler";


.ogg-player-options {
	border: solid 1px #ccc;
	padding: 2pt;
	text-align: left;
	font-size: 10pt;
}
 <!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); President of the United States

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 








This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2008)


For other uses, see President of the United States (disambiguation).


President of the
United States of America



Official seal









Incumbent
Barack Obama
since January 20, 2009



Residence
White House


Term length
Four years, renewable once


Inaugural holder
George Washington
April 30, 1789


Formation
U.S. Constitution
March 4, 1789


Website
whitehouse.gov/president


The President of the United States is the head of state and head of government of the United States and is the highest political official in the United States by influence and recognition. The President leads the executive branch of the federal government and is one of only two elected members of the executive branch (the other being the Vice President of the United States).[1]
Among other powers and responsibilities, Article II of the U.S. Constitution charges the President to "faithfully execute" federal law, makes the President commander-in-chief of the armed forces, allows the President to nominate executive and judicial officers with the advice and consent of the Senate, and allows the President to grant pardons or reprieves.
The President is elected by the people indirectly through the Electoral College to a four-year term, with a limit of two terms imposed by the Twenty-second Amendment to the Constitution, ratified in 1951. Under this system, each state is allocated a number of electoral votes equal to the size of the state's combined delegation in both houses of the Congress. The District of Columbia is also granted electoral votes, per the Twenty-third Amendment to the Constitution. Voters in nearly all states choose, through a plurality voting system, a Presidential candidate who receives all of that state's electoral votes. An absolute majority of electoral votes is needed to become President; if no candidate receives a majority, the choice is given to the House of Representatives, which votes by state delegation.
Since the adoption of the Constitution, forty-three individuals have been elected or succeeded to the office of President, serving a total of fifty-six four-year terms. Grover Cleveland served two non-consecutive terms and is counted as both the 22nd and the 24th President.[2] Because of this, all presidents after the 23rd have their official listing increased by one. As of January 20, 2009, Barack Obama is the forty-fourth President. The president's annual salary is $400,000.[3]




Contents


1 Origin
2 Qualification, disqualification and common practice

2.1 Religious affiliations


3 Election

3.1 History
3.2 Campaign
3.3 Electoral College
3.4 Rationale


4 Oath of office
5 Term of office and the Twenty-second Amendment
6 Vacancies and disabilities
7 Powers and duties
8 Models of Presidential Power
9 Privileges of office

9.1 Salary
9.2 Secret Service
9.3 Presidential libraries


10 After the presidency
11 See also
12 References
13 Further reading
14 External links

14.1 Official
14.2 Presidential histories
14.3 Miscellaneous







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Origin


United States



This article is part of the series:
Politics and government of
the United States









Federal government


Constitution
Taxation




Legislature


Congress

House

Speaker
Party Leaders
Congressional districts


Senate

President pro tempore
Party Leaders








Presidency


President
Vice President
Cabinet
Federal agencies




Judiciary


Federal courts

Supreme Court
Circuit Courts of Appeal
District Courts






Elections


Presidential elections
Midterm elections




Political Parties


Democratic
Republican
Third parties




Subdivisions


State government

Governors
Legislatures (List)
State Courts


Local Government








Other countries · Atlas
 US Government Portal
view • talk • edit







The Standard of the President of the United States


The Treaty of Paris in 1783 left the United States independent and at peace but with an unsettled governmental structure. The Second Continental Congress had drawn up Articles of Confederation in 1777, describing a permanent confederation, but granting to the Congress—the only federal institution—little power to finance itself or to ensure that its resolutions were enforced. In part, this reflected the anti-monarchy view of the Revolutionary period, and the new American system was explicitly designed to prevent the rise of an American tyrant to replace the British King.
However, during the economic depression due to the collapse of the continental dollar following the American Revolution, the viability of the American government was threatened by political unrest in several states, efforts by debtors to use popular government to erase their debts, and the apparent inability of the Continental Congress to redeem the public obligations incurred during the war. The Congress also appeared unable to become a forum for productive cooperation among the States encouraging commerce and economic development. In response a Constitutional Convention was convened, ostensibly to reform the Articles of Confederation, but that subsequently began to draft a new system of government that would include greater executive power while retaining the checks and balances thought to be essential restraints on any imperial tendency in the office of the President.
Individuals who presided over the Continental Congress during the Revolutionary period and under the Articles of Confederation had the title "President of the United States in Congress Assembled," often shortened to "President of the United States". The office had little distinct executive power. With the 1788 ratification of the Constitution, a separate executive branch was created, headed by the President of the United States.
The President's executive authority under the Constitution, tempered by the checks and balances of the judicial and legislative branches of the federal government, was designed to solve several political problems faced by the young nation and to anticipate future challenges, while still preventing the rise of an autocrat over a nation wary of royal authority.
The official Presidential anthem is "Hail to the Chief," preceded by "Ruffles and Flourishes" and is primarily played to announce the arrival of the president at state functions.[4]

Qualification, disqualification and common practice
Article II, Section 1, Clause 5 of the Constitution sets the principal qualifications to be eligible for election as President. A Presidential candidate must:

be a natural born citizen of the United States;
be at least thirty-five years old;
have been a permanent resident in the United States for at least fourteen years.





George Washington, the first President of the United States of America


Additionally, the Constitution disqualifies some people from the Presidency. Under Article I, Section 3, Clause 7, the Senate has the option, upon conviction, of disqualifying impeached individuals from holding other federal offices, including the Presidency.[5] Under the Twenty-second Amendment, no one can be elected President more than twice. The Twenty-second Amendment also specifies that anyone who serves more than two years as President or Acting President, of a term for which someone else was elected President, can only be elected President once. Scholars disagree whether a person no longer eligible to be elected President could be elected Vice President, pursuant to the qualifications set out under the Twelfth Amendment.[6]
Foreign-born Americans at the time the Constitution was adopted were also eligible to become President, provided they met the age and residency requirements.
The United States government was non-partisan before 1792, so the Constitution says nothing about political parties. From 1796 to the Civil War, it was common for political parties to fracture and put forward more than one candidate. The classic example is the 1824 election, in which political parties officially played no role because all of the candidates were from the same party. This also was the only election in which the recipient of the most Electoral College votes (Andrew Jackson) did not become President (as he did not have a majority). The election was then decided by the House of Representatives, which elected John Quincy Adams instead.




Abraham Lincoln, the 16th and first Republican President of the United States of America


The Civil War showed how dangerous political fracture could be for the nation, with the result that the two largest parties at the time – Democratic and Republican – remade themselves into broad coalitions of liberals and conservatives. Consequently, all Presidents since the Civil War have been nominees of one of these two major political parties.
Finally, while they are not in any way requirements:

Of the forty-three[7] persons to have been President, thirty-one had prior military service; of those thirty-one, all but one—James Buchanan—served as an officer.
Every President has had prior experience as a Representative, Senator, Cabinet Secretary, Governor, General in the United States Army or as Vice President of the United States.

Although the Presidency entails numerous foreign obligations and policy issues, many Presidents have had limited or no understanding of a language other than English. Early 19th century Presidents such as John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, James Monroe and John Quincy Adams were fluent in French, the diplomatic language of the time (John Quincy Adams spoke Dutch and German as well). However, since the 1840 defeat of Martin Van Buren (whose first language was actually Dutch), few Presidents have had the ability to speak a second language fluently; one notable exception, Theodore Roosevelt, spoke French and German. Written Latin and Greek were once commonly known to Presidents as hallmarks of a classical education, but their influence has declined over time.

Religious affiliations
Main article: Religious affiliations of United States Presidents
The religious affiliations and beliefs of United States Presidents have been subject to considerable speculation and controversy. Most Presidents have been Trinitarian Christians; of these, all but one have been Protestant: John F. Kennedy has been the only Catholic President. More than one quarter of Presidents have been affiliated with the Episcopal Church, the most common denomination for U.S. Presidents.
The list of Presidents has included four Unitarians (John Adams, John Quincy Adams, Millard Fillmore and William Howard Taft) and two Quakers (Herbert Hoover and Richard Nixon). Dwight D. Eisenhower was raised in a household of Jehovah's Witnesses and was baptized Presbyterian twelve days after his inauguration as President in 1953.

Election




A map of the United States showing the number of electoral votes allocated to each state; 270 electoral votes are required for a majority out of 538 overall


Main article: United States presidential election
Unlike most other countries using the presidential system, Presidents are elected indirectly in the United States. A number of electors, collectively known as the Electoral College, officially select the President. Each state is allocated a number of electors, equal to the size of its delegation in both Houses of Congress combined. Additionally, the Twenty-third Amendment grants electors to the District of Columbia as if it were a state, with the restriction that it may not have more representation than the least populated state. Electoral apportionment is adjusted every ten years, in alignment with the census. State legislatures are constitutionally empowered to appoint electors; however, all of the fifty states have established their popular selection.

History




Mount Rushmore depicting the faces of presidents George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Theodore Roosevelt and Abraham Lincoln.


Article II, Section 1, Clause 3 of the Constitution established the original method used by which the Electoral College elected the President. Each elector cast two votes for President. Originally, both votes were to be for people that elector would like to be the President; in 1796 and 1800, each elector voted for his party's presidential and vice presidential candidates. The candidate with the highest number of votes would become the President, with the second-place candidate becoming the Vice President.
However, the 1796 and 1800 elections highlighted flaws in the electoral system in use at the time. In particular, the tie in the electoral vote which resulted from the lack of separation between Presidential and Vice Presidential votes in the latter election was an issue. The Democratic-Republican Party's candidates, who won the election, were tied with each other, and as a result, the election was thrown to the House of Representatives in the outgoing Federalist Party-controlled 6th Congress. Federalist Representatives attempted to elect Aaron Burr, the Democratic-Republican vice presidential candidate, over Thomas Jefferson, the Presidential candidate. Jefferson eventually won after Alexander Hamilton managed to swing Delaware's state delegation's vote to him. As a result, the Congress proposed the Twelfth Amendment in 1803 and it was ratified in 1804. This amendment provides the current method by which the Electoral College elects the President and Vice President.
Since the adoption of the Constitution, there have been forty-three individuals sworn into office as President, including those who succeeded to the office of President, serving fifty-five four-year terms altogether. Grover Cleveland served two non-consecutive terms and is officially counted as both the 22nd and the 24th President. Because of this, all Presidents after the 23rd have their official listing increased by one; i.e., sitting President Barack Obama is the forty-fourth president of the United States, but the forty-third person to hold the office.
The White House in Washington, D.C. serves as the official place of residence for the President; he is entitled to use its staff and facilities, including medical care, recreation, housekeeping, and security services. One of two Boeing VC-25 aircraft, which are extensively modified versions of Boeing 747-200B airliners, serve as long distance travel for the President, and are referred to as Air Force One while the president is on board.[8] A salary of $400,000, along with other benefits, is paid to the President annually.[9]
After World War II, the United States' status as a superpower transformed the President into one of the world's most well-known and influential public figures. The appellation "Leader of the Free World", frequently used in reference to Presidents since the Cold War, symbolizes the President's elevated role in world affairs.

Campaign
Main articles: United States presidential primary, United States presidential nominating convention, and United States presidential election debates
The modern Presidential campaign begins before the primary elections, which the two major political parties use to clear the field of candidates in advance of their national nominating conventions, where the most successful candidate is made the party's nominee for President. The party's Presidential candidate chooses a Vice Presidential nominee and this choice is rubber-stamped by the convention. In addition, the party establishes a platform on which to base its campaign. Although nominating conventions have a long history in the United States, their substantive importance in the political process has greatly diminished; however, they remain important as a way of energizing the parties for the general election and focusing public attention on the nominees.[citation needed]
Nominees participate in nationally televised debates, and while the debates are usually restricted to the Democratic and Republican nominees, third party candidates may be invited, such as Ross Perot in the 1992 debates. Nominees campaign across the country to explain their views, convince voters and solicit contributions. Much of the modern electoral process is concerned with winning swing states through frequent visits and mass media advertising drives.

Electoral College
Main article: Electoral College (United States)
Voters in each of the states elect the President on Election Day, set by law as the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, once every four years. Each state holds a number of electoral votes that correspond to electors in the Electoral College. Tickets of presidential and vice presidential candidates are shown on the ballot; each vote for a ticket actually corresponds to a vote for a slate of electors chosen by that ticket’s political party. In most states, the ticket that wins the most votes in a state wins all of that state's electoral votes and thus has its slate of electors chosen to vote in the Electoral College. Maine and Nebraska do not use this method, opting instead to give two electoral votes to the statewide winner and one electoral vote to the winner of each Congressional district. Neither state had split electoral votes between candidates as a result of this system in modern elections until 2008, when Barack Obama received one electoral vote by winning Nebraska's 2nd congressional district. In any case, the winning slate of electors meet at its state's capital on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December, a few weeks after the election, to vote and sends a vote count to Congress.
The President is elected by the people indirectly through the Electoral College to a four-year term, with a limit of two terms imposed by the Twenty-second Amendment to the Constitution, ratified in 1951. Under this system, each state is allocated a number of electoral votes equal to the size of the state's combined delegation in both houses of the Congress. The District of Columbia is also granted electoral votes, per the Twenty-third Amendment to the Constitution. Voters in nearly all states choose, through a plurality voting system, a presidential candidate who receives all of that state's electoral votes. An absolute majority of electoral votes is needed to become President; if no candidate receives a majority, the choice is given to the House of Representatives, which votes by state delegation.
The vote count is opened by the sitting Vice President, acting in his capacity as President of the Senate and read aloud to a joint session of the incoming Congress, which was elected at the same time as the President. Members of Congress can object to any state's vote count, provided that the objection is supported by at least one member of each house of Congress. A successful objection will be followed by debate; however, objections to the electoral vote count are rarely raised.
In the event that no candidate receives a majority of the electoral vote, the House of Representatives chooses the President from among the top three contenders. However, the House does not vote normally; instead, each state delegation is given only one vote, marginalizing the importance of more populous states. The Vice President is chosen through normal voting in the Senate, where each state delegation is already of equal size.

Rationale
When the Constitution was written, the framers disagreed on the selection of the President: some favored national popular vote, while others wanted Congress to choose the President. The Electoral College was created as a compromise between the two proposals. It gave rural areas and smaller states a slightly larger role in determining the outcome of the election and it continues to do so today; for example, the largest state by population, California, only has about one electoral vote for every 660,000 residents, while the smallest, Wyoming, has an electoral vote for about every 170,000.
Today, most of the electoral process after the popular vote is a formality in the public eye, as the choice of electors normally determines the result of the election (however see faithless elector). However, the Constitution was written in a time when voters at large had little knowledge of candidates outside their state. As a result, the amendment accommodated this; the electors that voters had chosen were supposed to learn about the other candidates and make an informed decision that represented the wishes of their constituents. Modern communication has rendered this unnecessary and, as a result, voters now choose between electors who are already pledged to a Presidential candidate.

Oath of office
Further information: Oath of office of the President of the United States‎




From left: 41st President George H. W. Bush, 44th President Barack Obama, 43rd President George W. Bush, 42nd President Bill Clinton and 39th President Jimmy Carter.


Pursuant to the Twentieth Amendment, the President's term of office begins at noon on January 20 of the year following the election. This date, known as Inauguration Day, marks the beginning of the four-year terms of both the President and Vice President. Before executing the powers of the office, the President is constitutionally required to take the presidential oath:


“
I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the Office of President of the United States, and will to the best of my Ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States.[10]
”


Although not required, Presidents have traditionally used a Bible to take oath of office (some exceptions: Franklin Pierce in 1853, Chester A. Arthur in 1881, and Theodore Roosevelt in 1901 did not use a Bible, while Lyndon B. Johnson in 1963 used a Roman Catholic missal, because there were no Bibles aboard Air Force One). George Washington began this practice, borrowing a Bible from St. John's Lodge No. 1.
In addition, no law requires that the oath of office be administered by any specific person; however, Presidents are traditionally sworn in by the Chief Justice of the United States. Washington was sworn in by Chancellor of New York Robert Livingston, there being no federal judges before Washington took office. The oath of office was administered upon John Tyler, Millard Fillmore, Chester A. Arthur, Theodore Roosevelt, and Lyndon B. Johnson by lesser-capacity judges and Calvin Coolidge was sworn by his father, a notary public.
Another tradition is to finish the oath of office with the words "So help me God." It is commonly believed that George Washington began this practice at his first inauguration, though evidence for this is circumstantial at best. While this phrase is not part of the oath, many presidents have said it immediately after the oath.

Term of office and the Twenty-second Amendment
The term of office for President and Vice President is four years. George Washington, the first president, set an unofficial term limit of two terms, a precedent that subsequent presidents followed until 1940. Before Franklin D. Roosevelt, several presidents had unsuccessfully campaigned for a third term. However, Roosevelt was elected four times, but died shortly after beginning his fourth term. In response, the Twenty-second Amendment was ratified, barring anyone from being elected president more than twice, or once if that person served more than half of another president's term. Harry S. Truman, who was President at the time of the amendment's ratification, and by the amendment's provisions exempt from its limitation, also briefly sought a third term before withdrawing from the 1952 election.
Since the amendment's ratification, four presidents have served two full terms: Dwight D. Eisenhower, Ronald Reagan, Bill Clinton and George W. Bush. Jimmy Carter and George H. W. Bush sought a second term, but were defeated. Richard Nixon was elected to a second term, but resigned before completing it. Lyndon B. Johnson was the only president under the amendment to be eligible to serve more than two terms in total, having served for only fourteen months following John F. Kennedy's assassination. However, he chose not to run in the 1968 election.
Gerald Ford sought a full term after serving out the last two years and five months of Nixon's second term, but was not elected. He therefore became the fifth person to have served as President, but never been elected President. In addition, because Ford was not elected as Vice President (he became Vice President via Section 2 of the Twenty-fifth Amendment), Ford is also the only person to have served as President and Vice President, but never have been elected to either office.

Vacancies and disabilities
See also: Impeachment in the United States and United States presidential line of succession




Presidents Gerald Ford, Richard Nixon, George H. W. Bush, Ronald Reagan and Jimmy Carter dedicate the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in 1991.


Vacancies in the office of President may arise because of death, resignation or removal from office. Article II, Section 4 of the Constitution allows the House of Representatives to impeach high federal officials, including the President, for "treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors." Article I, Section 3, Clause 6 gives the Senate the power to remove impeached officials from office, given a two-thirds vote to convict. Two Presidents have thus far been impeached by the House, Andrew Johnson in 1868 and Bill Clinton in 1998. Neither was subsequently convicted by the Senate; however, Johnson was acquitted by just one vote.
Under Section 3 of the Twenty-fifth Amendment, the President may transfer the presidential powers and duties to the Vice President, who then becomes Acting President, by transmitting a statement to the Speaker of the House and the President pro tempore of the Senate stating the reasons for the transfer. The President resumes the discharge of the presidential powers and duties when he transmits, to those two officials, a written declaration stating that resumption.
Under Section 4 of the Twenty-fifth Amendment, the Vice President and a majority of the Cabinet may transfer the presidential powers and duties from the President to the Vice President once they transmit to the Speaker of the House and the President pro tempore of the Senate a statement declaring the President's incapacity to discharge the presidential powers and duties. If this occurs, then the Vice President will assume the presidential powers and duties as Acting President; however, the President can declare that no such inability exists and resume the discharge of the presidential powers and duties. If the Vice President and Cabinet contest this claim, it is up to Congress, which must meet within two days if not already in session, to decide the merit of the claim.
The United States Constitution mentions the resignation of the President but does not regulate the form of such a resignation or the conditions for its validity. By Act of Congress, the only valid evidence of the President's decision to resign is a written instrument declaring the resignation signed by the President and delivered to the office of the Secretary of State.[11] The only President to resign was Richard Nixon on August 9, 1974; he was facing likely impeachment in the midst of the Watergate scandal. Just before his resignation, the House Judiciary Committee had reported favorably on articles of impeachment against him.
The Constitution states that the Vice President is to be the President's successor in the case of a vacancy. If the offices of President and Vice President both are either vacant or have a disabled holder of that office, the next officer in the Presidential line of succession, the Speaker of the House, becomes Acting President. The line extends to the President pro tempore of the Senate after the Speaker, followed by every member of the Cabinet in a set order.

Powers and duties




President George W. Bush delivering the 2007 State of the Union Address, with Vice President Dick Cheney and Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi behind him.


Main article: Powers of the President of the United States
The President is the chief executive of the United States, putting him at the head of the executive branch of the government, whose responsibility is to "take care that the laws be faithfully executed." To carry out this duty, he is given control of the four million employees of the federal executive branch, including one million active duty personnel in the military. Both the legislative and judicial branches maintain checks and balances on the powers of the President and vice versa.
Various executive and judicial branch appointments are made by Presidents. Up to 6,000 appointments may be made by an incoming President before he takes office and 8,000 more may be made while in office. Ambassadors, judges of the federal court system, members of the Cabinet, and other federal officers, are all appointed by the President with the "advice and consent" of the Senate, granted by a simple majority. Appointments made while the Senate is in recess are temporary and expire at the end of the next session of the Senate. He may also grant pardons and reprieves, as is often done just before the end of a presidential term.
In addition, while the President cannot directly introduce legislation, he can play an important role in shaping it, especially if the President's political party has a majority in one or both houses of Congress. While members of the executive branch are prohibited from simultaneously holding seats in Congress, they often write legislation and allow a member of Congress to introduce it for them. The President can further influence the legislative branch through the annual constitutionally-mandated report to Congress, which may be written or oral but in modern times is the State of the Union Address, which often outlines the President's legislative proposals for the coming year. If Congress passes a bill of which the President disapproves, he may veto it; the veto can be overridden only by two-thirds of both houses of Congress, making it substantially more difficult to enact the law.
Perhaps the most important of all presidential powers is command of the armed forces as commander-in-chief. The framers of the Constitution took care to limit the President's powers regarding the military; Alexander Hamilton explains this in Federalist No. 69:


“
The President is to be commander-in-chief of the army and navy of the United States. [...] It would amount to nothing more than the supreme command and direction of the military and naval forces [...] while that [the power] of the British king extends to the DECLARING of war and to the RAISING and REGULATING of fleets and armies, all [of] which [...] would appertain to the legislature.[12]
”


While the power to declare war is constitutionally vested in Congress, the President commands and directs the military and is responsible for planning military strategy. The Congress, pursuant to the War Powers Resolution, must authorize any troop deployments more than 60 days in length. Congress, providing a check to presidential power, also governs military spending and regulations. Along with the armed forces, foreign policy is also directed by the President, including the ability to negotiate treaties, which are ratified with the consent by two-thirds of the Senate.
Since Franklin D. Roosevelt's Fireside chats, the President has given a weekly Presidential radio address usually every Saturday.[13]

Models of Presidential Power
James MacGregor Burns, noted presidential scholar, has categorized Presidents into three categories based on how each enacts policy:

Madisonian Model: The President relies on Congress to lead in setting policy. The President mainly administers policies set by Congress.
Hamiltonian Model: The President should be heroic and above partisanship. He should rely on the Constitution and public opinion for support. The President should lead in all areas and ignore Congress if necessary.
Jeffersonian Model: The President should lead through his party. He should act similar to a Prime Minister in a parliamentary system. The party, influenced and led by the President, sets policy. The President assists the party with getting their platform enacted.

Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr. theorized his own model of the modern presidency centering on the President, which he called The Imperial Presidency. President Gerald Ford, in office at the time, called it the Imperilled presidency, arguing that the enlarged bureaucracy around the President was difficult to control.

Privileges of office




A USAF Boeing VC-25A flying over Mount Rushmore.


The White House in Washington, D.C. serves as the official place of residence for the President; he (or she) is entitled to use its staff and facilities, including medical care, recreation, housekeeping, and security services. One of two Boeing VC-25 aircraft, which are extensively modified versions of Boeing 747-200B airliners, serve as long distance travel for the President, and are referred to as Air Force One while the president is on board.[8][14] A salary of $400,000, along with other benefits, is paid to the President annually.[9]
The president also uses a United States Marine Corps helicopter, designated Marine One when the president is aboard. Similarly, "Navy One", "Army One", and "Coast Guard One" are the call signs used if the president is aboard a craft belonging to these services.[15] For ground travel, the president uses an armored presidential limousine, built on a heavily modified Cadillac-based chassis.[16]

Salary
The First U.S. Congress voted to pay George Washington a salary of $25,000 a year, about $566,000 in 2008 terms. Washington, already a wealthy man, refused to accept his salary; however, he asked for his living expenses to be covered. Theodore Roosevelt spent his entire $50,000 salary on entertaining guests at the White House.[17] John F. Kennedy donated his salary to charities.[18]


Date established
Salary
Salary in 2008
dollars



September 24, 1789
$25,000
$566,000


March 3, 1873
$50,000
$865,000


March 4, 1909
$75,000
$1,714,000


January 19, 1949
$100,000
$875,000


January 20, 1969
$200,000
$1,135,000


January 20, 2001
$400,000
$471,000


President Obama currently earns $400,000 per year, along with a $50,000 expense account, a $100,000 nontaxable travel account and $19,000 for entertainment.[9] The most recent raise in salary was approved by Congress and President Bill Clinton in 1999 and went into effect in 2001; prior to the change, the President earned $200,000, plus expense accounts.
Before passage by Congress of the Former Presidents Act (FPA) in 1958, retired Presidents did not receive a pension. All living Presidents in 1959 began to receive a pension of $25,000 per year, an office and a staff. The pension has increased numerous times with Congressional approval. Retired Presidents now receive a pension based on the salary of the current administration's cabinet secretaries (Executive Level I), which is $191,300 as of 2008.[22] Some former Presidents have also collected congressional pensions.[23] The FPA, as amended, also provides former presidents with travel funds and mailing privileges.

Secret Service
Main article: United States Secret Service
The United States Secret Service is charged with protecting the sitting President and his or her family. Until 1997, all former Presidents, and their families, were protected by the Secret Service until the President's death. The last president to have lifetime Secret Service protection is Bill Clinton; George W. Bush and all subsequent Presidents will be protected by the Secret Service for a maximum of ten years after leaving office.[24] However, Congress has debated the wisdom of this law. Following the increase in terrorism and threats to the President in general since 1997, lifetime protection is being reconsidered.[citation needed] As part of their protection, Presidents, First Ladies, their children and other immediate family members, and other prominent persons and locations are assigned Secret Service codenames.[25] The use of such names was originally for security purposes and dates to a time when sensitive electronic communications were not routinely encrypted; today, the names simply serve for purposes of brevity, clarity and tradition.[26][27]

Presidential libraries
Main article: Presidential library
Each President since Herbert Hoover has created a repository known as a presidential library for preserving and making available his papers, records and other documents and materials. Completed libraries are deeded to and maintained by the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA); the initial funding for building and equipping each library must come from private, non-federal sources. There are currently twelve presidential libraries in the NARA system. There are also a number of presidential libraries maintained by state governments and private foundations, such as the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum, which is run by the State of Illinois.

After the presidency
Some Presidents have had significant careers after leaving office. Prominent examples include William Howard Taft's tenure as Chief Justice of the United States and Herbert Hoover's work on government reorganization after World War II. Grover Cleveland, whose bid for reelection failed in 1888, was elected president again four years later in 1892. Two former presidents served in Congress after leaving the White House; John Quincy Adams was elected to the House of Representatives, serving there for seventeen years, and Andrew Johnson returned to the Senate in 1875. John Tyler served in the provisional Congress of the Confederate States during the Civil War and was elected to the Confederate House of Representatives, but died before it convened. More recently, Jimmy Carter has become a global human rights campaigner, international arbiter and election monitor, and a recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize.

See also

Category:Lists relating to the United States presidency
Category:United States presidential history
Curse of Tippecanoe
Executive privilege
Fiction regarding United States presidential succession
Historical rankings of United States Presidents
Imperilled presidency
List of Presidents of the United States
List of United States Presidents by military rank
List of U.S. presidential faux-pas, gaffes, and unfortunate incidents
President of the Continental Congress
Presidential $1 Coin Program
Religious affiliations of United States Presidents
Vice President of the United States


References


^ http://www.whitehouse.gov/our_government/executive_branch/
^ "The Executive Branch". Whitehouse.gov. http://www.whitehouse.gov/our_government/executive_branch/. Retrieved on 2009-01-27. 
^ Current salary information from University of Michigan library [1]
^ "'The President's Own': United States Marine Band". United States Marine Band. http://www.marineband.usmc.mil/learning_tools/discover_american_band_music/1801.htm. Retrieved on 2008-03-21. 
^ see GPO Annotated U.S. Constitution, 2002 Ed., at 611 & nn.772-73.
^ See: Peabody, Bruce G.; Gant, Scott E. (1999). "The Twice and Future President: Constitutional Interstices and the Twenty-Second Amendment". Minnesota Law Review (Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Law Review) 83 (565). ; alternatively, see: Albert, Richard (2005). "The Evolving Vice Presidency". Temple Law Review (Philadelphia, PA: Temple University of the Commonwealth System of Higher Education) 78 (811, at 856-9). 
^ Grover Cleveland was both the twenty-second and twenty-fourth President
^ a b Air Force One. White House Military Office. Retrieved June 17, 2007.
^ a b c "How much does the U.S. president get paid?". Howstuffworks. Retrieved July 24, 2007.
^ U.S. Const. art. II, § 1, cl. 8.
^ 3 U.S.C. § 20
^ Hamilton, Alexander. The Federalist #69 (reposting). Retrieved June 15, 2007.
^ White House Radio
^ Any U.S. Air Force aircraft carrying the president will use the call sign "Air Force One."
^ "Executive One" becomes the call sign of any civilian aircraft when the president boards.
^ New Presidential Limousine enters Secret Service Fleet US Secret Service Press Release (January 14, 2009) Retrieved on 2009-01-20
^ Morris, Edmund. The Rise of Theodore Roosevelt (1986). ISBN 0-3453-3902-9.
^ Richard Reeves. President Kennedy: Profile of Power. (1993)
^ Presidential and Vice Presidential Salaries. Retrieved June 17, 2007.
^ Relative Value in US Dollars. Measuring Worth. Retrieved May 30, 2006.
^ Dept. of Labor Inflation Calculator. Inflation Calculator. Retrieved July 26, 2007.
^ "Former Presidents Act (FPA)". U.S. Senate. 1958. http://www.senate.gov/reference/resources/pdf/98-249.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-01-05. 
^ "Former presidents cost U.S. taxpayers big bucks". Toledo Blade. 2007-01-07. http://toledoblade.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20070107/NEWS09/70107004. Retrieved on 2007-05-22. 
^ 18 U.S.C. § 3056
^ "Junior Secret Service Program: Assignment 7. Code Names". National Park Service. http://www.nps.gov/archive/eise/secret16.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-18. 
^ "Candidate Code Names Secret Service Monikers Used On The Campaign Trail". CBS. 2008-09-16. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2008/09/16/earlyshow/main4452073.shtml?source=RSSattr=Politics_4452073. Retrieved on 2008-11-12. 
^ "Obama's Secret Service Code Name revealed". Eurweb. 2008-09-16. http://www.eurweb.com/story/eur48530.cfm. 



Further reading


Couch, Ernie. Presidential Trivia. Rutledge Hill Press. March 1, 1996. ISBN 1-55853-412-1
Lang, J. Stephen. The Complete Book of Presidential Trivia. Pelican Publishing. September 2001. ISBN 1-56554-877-9
Leonard Leo, James Taranto, and William J. Bennett. Presidential Leadership: Rating the Best and the Worst in the White House. Simon and Schuster, June, 2004, hardcover, 304 pages, ISBN 0-7432-5433-3
Presidential Studies Quarterly, published by Blackwell Synergy, is a quarterly academic journal on the President.
Waldman, Michael, and George Stephanopoulos. My Fellow Americans: The Most Important Speeches of America's Presidents, from George Washington to George W. Bush. Sourcebooks Trade. September 2003. ISBN 1-4022-0027-7
Winder, Michael K. Presidents and Prophets: The Story of America's Presidents and the LDS Church. Covenant Communications. September 2007. ISBN 1-59811-452-2



External links













Hail to the Chief



















Problems listening to this file? See media help.







Wikisource has original text related to this article:
President of the United States





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Presidents of the United States



Official

"Executive Office of the President". http://www.whitehouse.gov/president/. Retrieved on 2005-10-07. 
"White House". http://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/. Retrieved on 2009-01-21. 


Presidential histories

A New Nation Votes: American Election Returns, 1787–1825 – Presidential Election Returns including town and county breakdowns.
"Life Portraits of the American Presidents". C-SPAN. http://www.americanpresidents.org/. Retrieved on 2005-10-07.  – A companion website for the C-SPAN television series: American Presidents: Life Portraits
"Presidential Documents from the National Archives". http://www.footnote.com/us-presidents.php. Retrieved on 2007-03-21.  – A collection of letters, portraits, photos, and other documents from the National Archives
"The American Presidency Project". UC Santa Barbara. http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/. Retrieved on 2005-10-07.  – A collection of over 67,000 Presidential documents


Miscellaneous

"All the President's Roles". Ask Gleaves. http://www.gvsu.edu/hauenstein/index.cfm?id=600041AC-93E7-4378-305E5A2BF6EC3C57. Retrieved on 2006-10-20.  – An article analyzing the president's many hats.
"Allpresidents.org". Hauenstein Center for Presidential Studies. http://www.gvsu.edu/hauenstein/. Retrieved on 2006-10-18.  – An educational site on the American presidency.
"Presidents' Occupations". http://www.factmonster.com/ipka/A0768854.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-20.  Listing of every President's occupation(s) before and after becoming the Commander in Chief
"Presidential Rankings". Wall Street Journal. http://www.opinionjournal.com/hail/print_rankings.html. Retrieved on 2005-10-07.  – Opinion poll of how great each President is believed to be.
The Great Republic: Presidents and States of the United States of America, and Comments on American History Classical liberal perspective of Presidential history.
"The Masonic Presidents Tour". The Masonic Library and Museum of Pennsylvania. http://www.pagrandlodge.org/mlam/presidents/index.html. Retrieved on 2005-10-07.  – Brief histories of the Masonic careers of Presidents who were members of the Freemasons.
"The Presidents". American Experience. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/presidents/. Retrieved on 2007-03-04.  – A PBS site on the American presidency.
Presidents of the United States: Resource Guides from the Library of Congress








v • d • e

Presidents of the United States






George Washington · John Adams · Thomas Jefferson · James Madison · James Monroe · John Quincy Adams · Andrew Jackson · Martin Van Buren · William Henry Harrison · John Tyler · James K. Polk · Zachary Taylor · Millard Fillmore · Franklin Pierce · James Buchanan · Abraham Lincoln · Andrew Johnson · Ulysses S. Grant · Rutherford B. Hayes · James A. Garfield · Chester A. Arthur · Grover Cleveland · Benjamin Harrison · Grover Cleveland · William McKinley · Theodore Roosevelt · William Howard Taft · Woodrow Wilson · Warren G. Harding · Calvin Coolidge · Herbert Hoover · Franklin D. Roosevelt · Harry S. Truman · Dwight D. Eisenhower · John F. Kennedy · Lyndon B. Johnson · Richard Nixon · Gerald Ford · Jimmy Carter · Ronald Reagan · George H. W. Bush · Bill Clinton · George W. Bush · Barack Obama














v • d • e

Chief executive branch authorities in the United States





President

President of the United States






State governors

Alabama • Alaska • Arizona • Arkansas • California • Colorado • Connecticut • Delaware • Florida • Georgia • Hawaii • Idaho • Illinois • Indiana • Iowa • Kansas • Kentucky • Louisiana • Maine • Maryland • Massachusetts • Michigan • Minnesota • Mississippi • Missouri • Montana • Nebraska • Nevada • New Hampshire • New Jersey • New Mexico • New York • North Carolina • North Dakota • Ohio • Oklahoma • Oregon • Pennsylvania • Rhode Island • South Carolina • South Dakota • Tennessee • Texas • Utah • Vermont • Virginia • Washington • West Virginia • Wisconsin • Wyoming






Territorial executives

American Samoa • District of Columbia • Guam • Northern Mariana Islands • Puerto Rico  • Virgin Islands






Defunct

Pre-state territories • Panama Canal Zone • Philippine Islands













v • d • e

Lists of Presidents and Vice Presidents of the United States





Presidential lists by order

Service · Age · Birth · Death · Historical rankings · Military rank · Number living · Oldest · Time in office · Timeline






Professional life

Political affiliation · Political occupation · Elected office · Executive experience · Inaugurations · Doctrines · Judicial appointments · Pardons · Vetoes · Control of Congress · Assassination attempts · Currency appearances · Libraries






Personal life

Nicknames · Name origins and statistics · Genealogical relationship · College education · Military service · Pets · Place of birth · Place of primary affiliation · Previous occupation · Religious affiliation · Residences · Handedness · Deaths in office






Vice presidential lists

Order of service · Time in office · Age of ascension · Political occupation · Birth · Tie-breaking votes · Longevity, place of death, burial · Vacancies · Place of primary affiliation · Religious affiliation






Succession

Line of succession · Designated survivor






Elections

Electoral College margin · Popular vote margin · 2000 Electors · 2004 Electors · 2008 Electors






Candidates

1789–1852 · 1856–present · Democratic tickets · Republican tickets · Height · African American · Female · Lost their home state · Former presidents who ran again · Unsuccessful but received at least one electoral vote






Fictional

Presidents · Vice Presidents · Candidates · Succession






Families

First ladies (List · Longevity · Number living) · Second ladies · Children













v • d • e

Military of the United States






Portal (A · MC · N · AF · CG) · Category (A · MC · N · AF · CG · PHS · NOAA) · Navbox (A · MC · N · AF · CG)





Leadership

Commander-in-chief · Secretary of Defense · Deputy Secretary of Defense · Joint Chiefs of Staff (Chairman) · Senate Committee on Armed Services · House Committee on Armed Services · Active duty four-star officers · Highest ranking officers in history · Goldwater-Nichols Act






Organization





Service Departments


Department of Defense (Secretary): Army (Secretary) · Navy (Secretary) · Air Force (Secretary)
Department of Homeland Security (Secretary): Coast Guard







Branches


Army (Chief of Staff) · Marine Corps (Commandant) · Navy (Chief of Naval Operations) · Air Force (Chief of Staff) · Coast Guard (Commandant)







Other Uniformed Services


U.S. PHS Commissioned Corps (Surgeon General) · NOAA Commissioned Corps (Director)







Reserve Components


Reserves: (A · MC · N · AF · CG) · National Guard: (A · AF)







Civilian Auxiliaries


Military Affiliate Radio System · Merchant Marine · Maritime Service · Civil Air Patrol · Coast Guard Auxiliary







Unified Combatant Command


Northern · Central · European · Pacific · Southern · Africa · Joint Forces · Special Operations · Strategic · Transportation









Structure

Title 10 of the United States Code · The Pentagon · Bases · Budget · Units: (A · MC · N · AF · CG) · Logistics · Media






Operations & History

Current Deployments · Conflicts · History: (A · MC · N · AF · CG) · Historical Events






Personnel





Training


MEPS · ASVAB · Recruit training: (A · MC · N · AF · CG) · Officer Candidate School: (A · MC · N · AF) · Service Academies: (A (prep) · N (prep) · AF (prep) · CG · Merchant Marine · PHS) · Junior/Reserve Officers' Training Corps: (A · MC/N · AF) · Other Education







Uniforms


Uniforms: (A · MC · N · AF · CG) · Awards & Decorations: (Inter-service · A · MC/N · AF · CG · Foreign · International · Devices) · Badges: (Identification · A · MC · N · AF · CG)







Ranks


Enlisted: (A · MC · N · AF · CG) · Warrant Officers · Officer: (A · MC · N · AF · CG · PHS · NOAA)







Other


Oath: (Enlistment · Office) · Code of Conduct · Military Occupational Specialty/Rating/Air Force Specialty Code · Pay · Uniform Code of Military Justice · Judge Advocate General's Corps · Military Health System/TRICARE · Separation · Veterans Affairs









Equipment





Land


Individual Weapons · Crew-Served Weapons · Vehicles (active)







Sea


All watercraft · Ships: (A · N (active) · AF · CG · MSC · NOAA) · Weapons: (N · CG) · Aircraft: (N · CG · NOAA) · Reactors







Air


Aircraft (active) · Aircraft Designation · Missiles · Helicopter Arms







Other


Electronics (designations) · Flags: (A · MC · N · AF · CG · Ensign · Jack · Guidons) · Food · WMDs: (Nuclear · Biological · Chemical)









Legend: A=Army, MC=Marine Corps, N=Navy, AF=Air Force, CG=Coast Guard, PHS=Public Health Service, NOAA=National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, MSC=Military Sealift Command












v • d • e

 United States presidential elections






1789 · 1792 · 1796 · 1800 · 1804 · 1808 · 1812 · 1816 · 1820 · 1824 · 1828 · 1832 · 1836 · 1840 · 1844 · 1848 · 1852 · 1856 · 1860 · 1864 · 1868 · 1872 · 1876 · 1880 · 1884 · 1888 · 1892 · 1896 · 1900 · 1904 · 1908 · 1912 · 1916 · 1920 · 1924 · 1928 · 1932 · 1936 · 1940 · 1944 · 1948 · 1952 · 1956 · 1960 · 1964 · 1968 · 1972 · 1976 · 1980 · 1984 · 1988 · 1992 · 1996 · 2000 · 2004 · 2008 · 2012

Electoral College · Electoral vote changes · Results by Electoral College margin · Results by popular vote margin · Results by state · Voter turnout · Presidential primaries
House elections · Senate elections · Gubernatorial elections














v • d • e

United States topics





History





Timeline


Pre-Columbian · Colonial era (Thirteen Colonies) · Declaration of Independence · American Revolution · Territorial changes · American Civil War · Reconstruction era · African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954) · World War I · Great Depression · World War II (Home front) · Cold War · Korean War · African-American Civil Rights Movement (1955–1968) · Feminist Movement · Vietnam War  · Post-Cold War (1991-present) · War on Terrorism (War in Afghanistan · Iraq War)







By topic


Demographic · Economic · Military · Postal · Technological and industrial · Inventions and discoveries









Federal
government








   


Law
U.S. Constitution
Bill of Rights
Civil liberties
Federalism
Separation of powers
Law Enforcement
Department of Justice (DOJ)
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)




Legislature - Congress
House of Representatives
Senate
Vice President
Executive - President
Executive Office of the President
Cabinet/Executive departments
Independent agencies
Policies




Judiciary - Supreme Court
Federal courts
Courts of appeal
District courts
Intelligence
U.S. Intelligence Community
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA)
National Security Agency (NSA)




Military
Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard














Politics

State governments  · Local governments  · Elections (Electoral College) · Political divisions · Political ideologies · Political parties (Democratic Party · Republican Party · Third parties) · Political scandals · Political status of Puerto Rico · Red states and blue states · Uncle Sam






Geography

Cities, towns and villages · Counties · Extreme points · Islands · Mountains (Appalachian · Rocky) · National Park System · Regions (New England · Mid-Atlantic · Southern · Midwestern · Great Plains · Northwestern · Southwestern) · Rivers (Mississippi · Missouri · Colorado) · States · Territory · Water supply and sanitation






Economy

Banking · Communications · Companies · Federal Reserve System · Insurance · Standard of living (Personal income · Household income · Homeownership · Income inequality) · Tourism · Transportation (Airports · Highways · Interstate Highway System · Passenger vehicles · Railroads · Trucking industry) · U.S. dollar · Wall Street  · Total debt






Society

Adolescent sexuality · Crime · Demographics · Education · Health care · Health insurance · Incarceration · Languages (American English · Spanish) · Media · People · Public holidays · Religion · Social class (Affluence · American Dream · American middle class · Educational attainment · Poverty · Professional and working class conflict) · Sports






Culture

American literature (Beat Generation · Folklore · Harlem Renaissance · Poetry · Transcendentalism) · Architecture · Cuisine · Dance · Fashion · Flag · Music (American classical music · American folk music · American popular music · Country music · Blues · Jazz · Rock and roll) · Radio · Television / Cinema (Hollywood) · Visual arts (Abstract expressionism)






Issues

Abortion · Affirmative action · American exceptionalism · Anti-Americanism · Capital punishment · Drug policy / Prohibition · Energy policy · Environmental movement · Gun politics · Health care reform · Human rights · Immigration (United States–Mexico barrier · Third Border Initiative) · Obesity · Racism · Same-sex marriage






Portal





 



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/President_of_the_United_States"
Categories: Presidents of the United States | Presidency of the United States | Lists of presidentsHidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | Articles needing additional references from July 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
አማርኛ
Asturianu
Brezhoneg
Български
Bosanski
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Gaeilge
Galego
文言
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
ייִדיש
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 15:11.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
