













Dziga Vertov - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Dziga_Vertov";
		var wgTitle = "Dziga Vertov";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "8930";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = "277767079";
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Dziga Vertov

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (August 2007)






Dziga Vertov


Dziga Vertov (Russian: Дзига Вертов, Ukrainian: Дзиґа Вертов) January 15 (New Style), 1896–February 12, 1954) was a Soviet pioneer documentary film and newsreel director. His brothers Boris Kaufman and Mikhail Kaufman were also notable filmmakers.




Contents


1 Early years
2 Career after the October Revolution

2.1 Kino-Pravda
2.2 Man with a Movie Camera
2.3 Cine-Eye
2.4 Late career
2.5 Influence


3 Quotes
4 Filmography
5 Notes
6 References
7 See also
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early years
Born David Abelevich Kaufman (Russian: Давид Абелевич Кауфман) into a family of Jewish intellectuals in Białystok, Congress Poland, then a part of the Russian Empire. His father was a librarian. He Russified his Jewish patronymic to Arkadievich at some point after 1918. Kaufman studied music at Białystok Conservatory until his family fled from the invading German army to Moscow in 1915. The Kaufmans soon settled in Petrograd, where Denis Kaufman began writing poetry, science fiction and satire. In 1916-1917 Kaufman was studying medicine at the Psychoneurological Institute in Saint Petersburg and experimenting with "sound collages" in his free time. Kaufman adopted the name "Dziga Vertov", which means "spinning top"[1] in Ukrainian; Vertov's political writings and his work on the Kino-Pravda newsreel series show a revolutionary romanticism.

[edit] Career after the October Revolution
After the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, at the age of 22, Vertov began editing for Kino-Nedelya (Кино-Неделя, the Moscow Cinema Committee's weekly film series, and the first newsreel series in Russia). While working for Kino-Nedelya he met Elizaveta Svilova, who at the time was employed in film preservation; she was later to become his wife. The first issue of the series came out in June 1918.




Boris Kaufman (cameraman) with Jean Vigo (director)


Vertov worked on the series for three years, helping establish and run a film-car on Mikhail Kalinin's agit-train during the ongoing Russian Civil War between Communists and counterrevolutionaries. Some of the cars on the agit-trains were equipped with actors for live performances or printing presses; Vertov's had equipment to shoot, develop, edit, and project film. The trains went to battlefronts on agitation-propaganda missions intended primarily to bolster the morale of the troops; they were also intended to stir up revolutionary fervor of the masses.
In 1919, Vertov compiled newsreel footage for his documentary Anniversary of the Revolution; in 1921 he compiled History of the Civil War. The so-called "Council of Three," a group issuing manifestoes in LEF, a radical Russian newsmagazine, was established in 1922; the group's "three" were Vertov, his wife and editor Elizaveta Svilova, and his brother and cinematographer Mikhail Kaufman. Vertov's interest in machinery led to a curiosity about the mechanical basis of cinema.

[edit] Kino-Pravda
In 1922, the year that Nanook of the North was released, Vertov started the Kino-Pravda series. The series took its title from the official government newspaper Pravda. "Kino-Pravda" (literally translated, "film truth") continued Vertov's agit-prop bent. "The Kino-Pravda group began its work in a basement in the centre of Moscow" Vertov explained. He called it damp and dark. There was an earthen floor and holes one stumbled into at every turn. Dziga said, " This dampness prevented our reels of lovingly edited film from sticking together properly, rusted our scissors and our splicers." "Before dawn- damp, cold, teeth chattering- I wrap comrade Svilova in a third jacket."
Vertov's driving vision, expounded in his frequent essays, was to capture "film truth"—that is, fragments of actuality which, when organized together, have a deeper truth that cannot be seen with the naked eye. In the "Kino-Pravda" series, Vertov focused on everyday experiences, eschewing bourgeois concerns and filming marketplaces, bars, and schools instead, sometimes with a hidden camera, without asking permission first. The episodes of "Kino-Pravda" usually did not include reenactments or stagings (one exception is the segment about the trial of the Social Revolutionaries: the scenes of the selling of the newspapers on the streets and the people reading the papers in the trolley were both staged for the camera). The cinematography is simple, functional, unelaborate—perhaps a result of Vertov's disinterest in both "beauty" and the "grandeur of fiction." Twenty-three issues of the series were produced over a period of three years; each issue lasted about twenty minutes and usually covered three topics. The stories were typically descriptive, not narrative, and included vignettes and exposés, showing for instance the renovation of a trolley system, the organization of farmers into communes, and the trial of Social Revolutionaries; one story shows starvation in the nascent Marxist state. Propagandistic tendencies are also present, but with more subtlety, in the episode featuring the construction of an airport: one shot shows the former Tsar's tanks helping prepare a foundation, with an intertitle reading "Tanks on the labor front."
Vertov clearly intended an active relationship with his audience in the series—in the final segment he includes contact information—but by the 14th episode the series had become so experimental that some critics dismissed Vertov's efforts as "insane". Vertov responds to their criticisms with the assertion that the critics were hacks nipping "revolutionary effort" in the bud, and concludes the essay with his promise to "explode art's tower of Babel."[2] In Vertov's view, "art's tower of Babel" was the subservience of cinematic technique to narrative, commonly known as the Institutional Mode of Representation.
By this point in his career, Vertov was clearly and emphatically dissatisfied with narrative tradition, and expresses his hostility towards dramatic fiction of any kind both openly and repeatedly; he regarded drama as another "opiate of the masses". Vertov freely admitted one criticism leveled at his efforts on the "Kino-Pravda" series--that the series, while influential, had a limited release.
By the end of the "Kino-Pravda" series, Vertov made liberal use of stop motion, freeze frames, and other cinematic "artificialities," giving rise to criticisms not just of his trenchant dogmatism, but also of his cinematic technique. Vertov explains himself in "On 'Kinopravda'": in editing "chance film clippings" together for the Kino-Nedelia series, he "began to doubt the necessity of a literary connection between individual visual elements spliced together.... This work served as the point of departure for 'Kinopravda.'"[3] Towards the end of the same essay, Vertov mentions an upcoming project which seems likely to be Man with the Movie Camera, calling it an "experimental film" made without a scenario; just three paragraphs above, Vertov mentions a scene from "Kino Pravda" which should be quite familiar to viewers of Man with the Movie Camera: the peasant works, and so does the urban woman, and so too, the woman film editor selecting the negative...."[4]

[edit] Man with a Movie Camera
With Lenin's admission of limited private enterprise through his New Economic Policy, Russia began receiving fiction films from afar, an occurrence that Vertov regarded with undeniable suspicion, calling drama a "corrupting influence" on the proletarian sensibility ("On 'Kinopravda,'" 1924). By this time Vertov had been using his newsreel series as a pedestal to vilify dramatic fiction for several years; he continued his criticisms even after the warm reception of Sergei Eisenstein's Battleship Potemkin in 1925. Potemkin was a heavily fictionalized film telling the story of a mutiny on a battleship which came about as a result of the sailors' mistreatment; the film was an obvious but skillful propaganda piece glorifying the proletariat. Vertov lost his job at Sovkino in January 1927, possibly as a result of criticizing a film which effectively preaches the Communist party line. He was fired for creating "A Sixth Part of the World: Advertising and the Soviet Universe" for the State Trade Organization into a propaganda film, selling the Soviet as an advanced society under the New Economic Policy of Lenin, instead of showing how they fit into the world economy. The Ukraine State Studio hired Vertov to create "man with a Movie Camera". Vertov says in his essay "The Man with a Movie Camera" that he was fighting "for a decisive cleaning up of film-language, for its complete separation from the language of theater and literature."[5] By the later segments of "Kino-Pravda," Vertov was experimenting heavily, looking to abandon what he considered film clichés (and receiving criticism for it); his experimentation was even more pronounced and dramatic by the time of Man with the Movie Camera (filmed in the Ukraine). Some have criticized the obvious stagings in Man With the Movie Camera as being at odds with Vertov's credos "life as it is" and "life caught unawares": the scene of the woman getting out of bed and getting dressed is obviously staged, as is the reversed shot of the chess pieces being pushed off a chess board and the tracking shot which films Mikhail Kaufman riding in a car filming a third car.
However, Vertov's two credos, often used interchangeably, are in fact distinct, as Yuri Tsivian points out in the commentary track on the DVD for Man with the Movie Camera: for Vertov, "life as it is" means to record life as it would be without the camera present. "Life caught unawares" means to record life when surprised, and perhaps provoked, by the presence of a camera (16:04 on the commentary track). This explanation contradicts the common assumption that for Vertov "life caught unawares" meant "life caught unaware of the camera." All of these shots might conform to Vertov's credo "caught unawares." Dziga's slow motion, fast motion, and other camera techniques were a way to dissect the image, Vertov's brother Mikhail described in a interview. It was to be the honest truth of perception. For example, in "Man with a Movie Cameara", two trains are shown almost melting into each other, although we are taught to see trains as not riding that close, Vertov tried to portray the actual sight of two passing trains. Mikhail talked about Eisenstein's films as different from his and his brother Vertov's in that Eisenstein, "came from the theatre, in the theatre one directs dramas, one strings beads." "We all felt...that through documentary film we could develop a new kind of art. Not only documentary art, or the art of chronicle, but rather an art based on images, the creation of an image-oriented journalism" Mikhail explained. More than even film truth, "Man with a Movie Camera," was supposed to be a way to make those in the Soviet Union more efficient in their actions. He slowed down his actions, such as the decision whether to jump or not, you can see the decision in his face, a psychological dissection for the audience. He wanted a peace between the actions of man and the actions of a machine, form them to be in a sense, one.

[edit] Cine-Eye
Dziga Vertov believed his concept of Cine-Eye, or "Kino Eye" would help contemporary man evolve from a flawed creature into a higher, more precise form. He compared man unfavorably to machines: “In the face of the machine we are ashamed of man’s inability to control himself, but what are we to do if we find the unerring ways of electricity more exciting than the disorderly haste of active people [...]”[6] "I am an eye. I am a mechanical eye. I, a machine, I am showing you a world, the likes of which only I can see" Dziga was quoted as saying.
Like other Russian filmmakers, he attempted to connect his ideas and techniques to the advancement of the aims of the Soviet Union. Whereas Sergei Eisenstein viewed his montage of attractions as a propaganda tool through which the film-viewing masses could be subjected to “emotional and psychological influence” and therefore able to perceive “the ideological aspect” of the films they were being shown, Vertov believed the Cine-Eye would influence the actual evolution of man, “from a bumbling citizen through the poetry of the machine to the perfect electric man.”[7]
Vertov believed film was too “romantic” and “theatricalised” due to the influence of literature, theater, and music, and that these psychological film-dramas “prevent man from being as precise as a stop watch and hamper his desire for kinship with the machine.” He desired to move away from “the pre-Revolutionary ‘fictional’ models” of filmmaking to one based on the rhythm of machines, seeking to “bring creative joy to all mechanical labour”[8] and to “bring men closer to machines.”[8]

[edit] Late career
Vertov's cinema success continued into the 1930s. In 1931, he released Enthusiasm: Symphony of the Donbass, an examination into Soviet miners. Enthusiasm has been called a 'sound film', with sound recorded on location, and these mechanical sounds woven together, producing a symphony-like effect.
Three years later, Three Songs about Lenin looked at the revolution through the eyes of the Russian peasantry. For his film, however, Vertov had been hired by Mezhrabpomfilm, a Soviet studio that produced mainly propaganda efforts. To conform to the studio's, and the Soviet government's expectations, the film was edited to include Stalin and provide a more acceptable, 'Stalinesque', ending[specify]. With the rise and official sanction of socialist realism in 1934, Vertov was forced to cut his personal artistic output significantly, eventually becoming little more than an editor for Soviet newsreels. Lullaby, perhaps the last film in which Vertov was able to maintain his artistic vision, was released in 1937. Dziga Vertov died of cancer in 1954, after surviving, unscathed, Stalin's purges.
Vertov's brother Boris Kaufman was a noted cinematographer who worked much later for directors such as Elia Kazan and Sidney Lumet in America; his other brother, Mikhail Kaufman, worked as Vertov's cinematographer until he became a documentarian in his own right.

[edit] Influence
Vertov's legacy still lives on today. His independent, explorative style influenced and inspired many filmmakers and directors, including the Situationist Guy Debord and companies such as "Vertov Industries". The Dziga Vertov Group borrowed his name.
New Media theorist Lev Manovich suggested Vertov as on of the early pioneers of database cinema genre in his essay Database as a symbolic form.

[edit] Quotes

"It is far from simple to show the truth, yet the truth is simple." [1]


"I am the machine that reveals the world to you as only I alone am able to see it."


"I was returning from the railroad station. In my ears, there remained chugs and bursts of steam from a departing train. Somebody cries in laughter, a whistle, the station bell, the clanking locomotive...whispers, shouts, farewells. And walking away I thought I need to find a machine not only to describe but to register, to photograph these sounds. Otherwise, one cannot organize or assemble them. They fly like time. Perhaps a camera? That records the visual. But to organize the visual world and not the audible world? Is this the answer?"- Dziga Vertov


"Our eyes see very little and very badly – so people dreamed up the microscope to let them see invisible phenomena; they invented the telescope...now they have perfected the cinecamera to penetrate more deeply into the visible world, to explore and record visual phenomena so that what is happening now, which will have to be taken account of in the future, is not forgotten."


[edit] Filmography




Poster for Kino-Glaz, designed by Aleksandr Rodchenko (1924)



1919 Кинонеделя (Kino Nedelya, Cinema Week)
1919 Годовщина революции (Anniversary of the Revolution)
1922 История гражданской войны (History of the Civil War)
1924 Советские игрушки (Soviet Toys)
1924 Кино-глаз (Kino Glaz, Cinema Eye)
1925 Киноправда (Kino Pravda)
1926 Шестая часть мира (A Sixth of the World/The Sixth Part of the World)
1928 Одиннадцатый (The Eleventh)
1929 Человек с киноаппаратом (Man with a Movie Camera)
1931 Энтузиазм (Enthusiasm)
1934 Три песни о Ленине (Three Songs About Lenin)
1937 Памяти Серго Орджоникидзе (In Memory of Sergo Ordzhonikidze)
1937 Колыбельная (Lullaby)
1938 Три героини (Three Heroines)
1942 Казахстан — фронту! (Kazakhstan for the Front!)
1944 В горах Ала-Тау (In the Mountains of Ala-Tau)
1954 Новости дня (News of the Day)


[edit] Notes


^ Roberts, p. 15
^ Vertov 1924, p. 47
^ Vertov 1924, p. 42
^ Vertov 1924, p. 46
^ Vertov 1928, p. 83
^ Vertov 1922, p. 69
^ Vertov 1922, pp. 69-71
^ a b Vertov 1922, p. 71



[edit] References

Books and Articles


Erik Barnouw. Documentary: a History of the Non-fiction Film. Oxford University Press. Original copyright 1974.
Bohlman, Philip Vilas. "Music, Modernity, and the Foreign in the New Germany." 1994, pgs. 121-152
Cook, Simon. "Our Eyes, Spinning Like Propellers: Wheel of Life, Curve of Velocities, and Dziga Vertov's Theory of the Interval." October, 2007,pages 79-91.
Jack C. Ellis. The Documentary Idea: A Critical History of English-Language Documentary Film and Video. Prentice Hall, 1989.
Seth Feldman. "'Peace between Man and Machine': Dziga Vertov's The Man with a Movie Camera." in Barry Keith Grant, and Jeannette Sloniowski, eds.Documenting the Documentary: Close Readings of Documentary Film and Video. Wayne State University Press, 1998. pp. 40-53.
Feldman, Seth. "Evolution of style in the early work of Dziga Vertov." 1977, Arno Press, New York.
Graffy, Julian; Deriabin, Aleksandr ;Sarkisova, Oksana ; Keller, Sarah ; Scandiffio, Theresa . "Lines of resistance : Dziga Vertov and the twenties / edited and with an introduction by Yuri Tsivian." Le Giornate del cinema muto, Gemona, Udine
Jeremy Hicks. Dziga Vertov: Defining Documentary Film. London & New York: IB Tauris, 2007.
Christie,Ian. "Rushes: Pordenone Retrospective: Gazing into the Future."Sight and Sound. 2005, 15, 1, 4-5, British Film Institute
Malcolm Le Grice. Abstract Film and Beyond. Studio Vista, 1977.
John MacKay. "Allegory and Accommodation: Vertov's Three Songs of Lenin (1934) as a Stalinist Film." In Film History: An International Journal 18.4 (2006) 376-391.
John MacKay. "Disorganized Noise: Enthusiasm and the Ear of the Collective." Available at [www.kinokultura.com/articles/jan05-mackay.html].
John MacKay. "Film Energy: Process and Metanarrative in Dziga Vertov's The Eleventh Year (1928)." October 121 (Summer 2007): 41-78.
John MacKay. "The 'Spinning Top' Takes Another Turn: Vertov Today." Available at [www.kinokultura.com/articles/apr05-mackay.html].
Annette Michelson and Malcolm Turvey eds. "New Vertov Studies." Special Issue of October, (October 121 (Summer 2007)).
Graham Roberts. The Man with the Movie Camera. I.B.Tauris, 2001. ISBN 1860643949
Ben Singer. "Connoisseurs of Chaos: Whitman, Vertov and the 'Poetic Survey,'" Literature/Film Quarterly 15:4 (Fall 1987): 247-258.
Thomas Tode, Barbara Wurm, Austrian Film Museum eds.Dziga Vertov. The Vertov Collection at the Austrian Film Museum, Bilingual (German-English). (Paperback - May 2006), FilmmuseumSynemaPublikationen, available at [www.filmmuseum.at].
Yuri Tsivian, ed. Lines of Resistance: Dziga Vertov and the Twenties. La Giornate del Cinema Muto, 2004. ISBN 88-86155-15-8
Dziga Vertov. On Kinopravda. 1924, and The Man with the Movie Camera. 1928, in Annette Michelson ed. Kevin O'Brien tr. Kino-Eye : The Writings of Dziga Vertov, University of California Press, 1995.
Dziga Vertov. We. A Version of a Manifesto. 1922, in Ian Christie, Richard Taylor eds. The Film Factory: Russian and Soviet Cinema in Documents, 1896-1939 Routledge, 1994. ISBN 041505298X
Charles Warren ed. Beyond Document: Essays on Nonfiction Film. Wesleyan University Press, 1996.


DVDs


Dziga Vertov's Man with the Movie Camera DVD, audio commentary track by Yuri Tsivian.
Entuziazm (Simfonija Donbassa) DVD, restored version and unrestored version plus documentary on Peter Kubelka's restoration.




Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Dziga Vertov



[edit] See also

Political Cinema


[edit] External links

Dziga Vertov at Senses of Cinema
Fragments from Dziga Vertov's Kino-Pravda watchable and downloadable with Esperanto subtitles
Dziga Vertov's Kino-Eye watchable and downloadable with Esperanto subtitles
Dziga Vertov's The Sixth Part Of The World watchable and downloadable with Esperanto subtitles




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dziga_Vertov"
Categories: 1896 births | 1954 deaths | Polish Jews | Russian Jews | Soviet film directors | Soviet propagandists | Propaganda film directors | Film theorists | Documentary film directors | Soviet cinematographersHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations | Articles containing Russian language text | Articles needing more detailed references 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search



 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Български
Català
Česky
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
한국어
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Latviešu
Magyar
日本語
Polski
Português
Русский
Suomi
Türkçe









 This page was last modified on 17 March 2009, at 00:43.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
