













Panic disorder - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Panic_disorder";
		var wgTitle = "Panic disorder";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "419652";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282065493;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Panic disorder

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Panic disorder
Classification and external resources


ICD-10
F41.0


ICD-9
300.01, 300.21


DiseasesDB
30913


MeSH
D016584


Panic Disorder is an anxiety disorder characterized by recurring severe panic attacks. It may also include significant behavioral change lasting at least a month and of ongoing worry about the implications or concern about having other attacks. The latter are called anticipatory attacks (DSM-IVR). Panic disorder is not the same as agoraphobia, although many with panic disorder also suffer from agoraphobia.




Contents


1 Symptoms
2 Occurrence
3 Substance abuse and panic disorder

3.1 Smoking
3.2 Alcohol and sedatives


4 Panic disorder in children
5 Treatment
6 Interoceptive Desensitization/Symptom Inductions
7 Causes
8 Mediators and Moderators of Panic Disorder
9 DSM-IV-TR criteria
10 References
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Symptoms
Panic disorder sufferers usually have a series of intense episodes of extreme anxiety during panic attacks. These attacks typically last about ten minutes, but can be as short-lived as 1–5 minutes and last as long as twenty minutes or until medical intervention. However, attacks can wax and wane for a period of hours (panic attacks rolling into one another), and the intensity and specific symptoms of panic may vary over the duration. Common symptoms of an attack include rapid heartbeat, perspiration, dizziness, dyspnea, trembling, uncontrollable fear, hyperventilation, etc. Some individuals deal with these events on a regular basis, sometimes daily or weekly. The outward symptoms of a panic attack often cause negative social experiences (i.e. embarrassment, social stigma, social isolation, etc.). As many as 36% of all individuals with panic disorder also have agoraphobia.[1]
Limited symptom attacks are similar to panic attacks, but have fewer symptoms. Most people with PD experience both panic attacks and limited symptom attacks.

[edit] Occurrence
Panic disorder is a serious health problem that in many cases can be successfully treated, although there is no known cure. It is estimated that up to 1.7 percent of the adult American population has panic disorder at some point in their lives. It typically strikes in early adulthood; roughly half of all people who have panic disorder develop the condition before age 24, especially if the person has been subjected to a traumatic experience. However, some sources say that the majority of young people affected for the first time are between the ages of 25 and 30. Women are twice as likely as men to develop panic disorder.[1]
Panic disorder can continue for months or even years, depending on how and when treatment is sought. If left untreated, it may worsen to the point where the person's life is seriously affected by panic attacks and by attempts to avoid or conceal the condition. In fact, many people have had problems with friends and family or employment while struggling to cope with panic disorder. Some people with panic disorder may begin to lie to conceal their condition, because of the stigma of mental illness. In some individuals symptoms may occur frequently for a period of months or years, then many years may pass symptom-free. In others, the symptoms persist at the same level indefinitely. There is also some evidence that many individuals (especially those who develop symptoms at an early age) may experience a cessation of symptoms naturally later in life (i.e. past age 50).[citation needed]

[edit] Substance abuse and panic disorder

[edit] Smoking
A growing body of evidence exists that shows a link between substance abuse and panic disorder. Several studies have found that cigarette smoking increases the risk of panic attacks and panic disorder in young people.[2][3] While the mechanism of how smoking increases panic attacks is not fully understood, a few hypotheses have been derived. Smoking cigarettes may lead to panic attacks by causing changes in respiratory function (e.g. feeling short of breath). These respiratory changes in turn can lead to the formation of panic attacks, as respiratory symptoms are a prominent feature of panic.[4][5] Respiratory abnormalities have been found in children with high levels of anxiety, which suggests that a person with these difficulties may be susceptible to panic attacks, and thus more likely to subsequently develop panic disorder. Nicotine, a stimulant, could contribute to panic attacks.[6][7] However, nicotine withdrawal may also cause significant anxiety which could contribute to panic attacks.

[edit] Alcohol and sedatives
Whilst alcohol initially helps ease panic disorder symptoms, medium- or long-term alcohol abuse can cause panic disorder to develop or worsen during alcohol intoxication, especially during alcohol withdrawal syndrome.[8] Approximately half of patients attending mental health services for conditions including anxiety disorders such as panic disorder or social phobia are the result of alcohol or sedative abuse.[citation needed] Often times anxiety pre-existed alcohol or sedative dependence, but the dependence acts to keep the anxiety disorders going and may progressively make them worse. Many people who are addicted to alcohol or are abusing sedatives, when it is explained to them they have a choice between ongoing ill mental health or quitting and recovering from their symptoms, decide on quitting alcohol and/or their sedative drugs.[citation needed] It was noted that every individual has a unique sensitivity level to alcohol or sedative-hypnotic drugs, and what one person can tolerate without ill health another will suffer very ill health and that even moderate drinking can cause rebound anxiety symptoms and sleep disorders. A person who is suffering the toxic effects of alcohol or sedative abuse will not benefit from other therapies or medications as they do not address the root cause of the symptoms which is a "poisoned brain".[citation needed] Recovery from sedative abuse may take longer than recovery from alcohol. Symptoms may temporarily worsen, however, during alcohol withdrawal or benzodiazepine withdrawal.[9]
Deacon and Valentiner (2000)[10] conducted a study that examined co-morbid panic attacks and substance use in a non-clinical sample of young adults who experienced regular panic attacks. The authors found that compared to healthy controls, therapeutic alcohol and sedative use was greater for non-clinical participants who experienced panic attacks. These findings are consistent with the suggestion made by Cox, Norton, Dorward, and Fergusson (1989)[11] that panic disorder patients self-medicate if they believe that certain substances will be successful in alleviating their symptoms. If panic disorder patients are indeed self-medicating, there may be a portion of the population with undiagnosed panic disorder who will not seek professional help as a result of their own self-medication. In fact, for some patients panic disorder is only diagnosed after they seek treatment for their self-medication habit.[12]

[edit] Panic disorder in children
A retrospective study has shown that 40% of adult panic disorder patients reported that their disorder began before the age of 20.[13] In an article examining the phenomenon of panic disorder in youth, Diler et al. (2004)[14] found that only a few past studies have examined the occurrence of juvenile panic disorder. They report that these studies have found that the symptoms of juvenile panic disorder almost replicate those found in adults (e.g. heart palpitations, sweating, trembling, hot flashes, nausea, abdominal distress, and chills).[15][16][17][18][19] The anxiety disorders co-exist with staggeringly high numbers of other mental disorders in adults.[20] The same comorbid disorders that are seen in adults are also reported in children with juvenile panic disorder. Last and Strauss (1989)[21] examined a sample of 17 adolescents with panic disorder and found high rates of comorbid anxiety disorders, major depressive disorder, and conduct disorders. Eassau et al. (1999)[22] also found a high number of comorbid disorders in a community-based sample of adolescents with panic attacks or juvenile panic disorder. Within the sample, adolescents were found to have the following comorbid disorders: major depressive disorder (80%), dysthymic disorder (40%), generalized anxiety disorder (40%), somatoform disorders (40%), substance abuse (40%), and specific phobia (20%). Consistent with this previous work, Diler et al. (2004) found similar results in their study in which 42 youths with juvenile panic disorder were examined. Compared to non-panic anxiety disordered youths, children with panic disorder had higher rates of comorbid major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder.
Despite the evidence pointing to the existence of early-onset panic disorder, the DSM-IV-TR currently only recognizes six anxiety disorders in children: separation anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, specific phobia, obsessive-compulsive disorder, social anxiety disorder (a.k.a. social phobia), and post-traumatic stress disorder. Panic disorder is notably excluded from this list.

[edit] Treatment
Panic disorder is real and potentially disabling, but can be controlled and successfully treated. Because of the intense symptoms that accompany panic disorder, it may be mistaken for a life-threatening physical illness such as a heart attack. This misconception often aggravates or triggers future attacks. People frequently go to hospital emergency rooms when they are having panic attacks, and extensive medical tests may be performed to rule out these other conditions, thus creating further anxiety. Nonetheless, Coryell et al [23] found death rates in panic disorder patients exceeded those in the general population. In their study, 20% of deaths in 113 former psychiatric inpatients with panic disorder followed 35 years later were suicides; however, due to the co-morbidity of anxiety disorders, it is unclear whether panic disorder was the main cause of suicide. This study also found that men with panic disorder had twice the risk of cardiovascular mortality compared to men in the general population. Effective treatment of panic disorder has been shown to offset costs of medical care by as much as 94%. Identification of treatments that engender as full a response as possible, and can minimize relapse, is imperative.[24]
Current treatment guidelines American Psychiatric Association and the American Medical Association primarily recommend either cognitive-behavioral therapy or one of a variety of psychopharmacological interventions. Some evidence exists supporting the superiority of combined treatment approaches [25][26][27]. Medication is sometimes not required to treat panic disorder; however, the best first approach is to obtain a reliable psychiatric assessment in order to determine the specifics of the problem. To pursue pharmacological treatment for panic disorder, one should visit a psychiatrist. In remote areas, or when a psychiatrist is unavailable, a general practice physician (family doctor) may be competent to manage the pharmacological treatment. A psychiatrist is, by training, better prepared than a general practice physician in pharmacological treatment and should be sought out if available. A psychologist is not a medical doctor and cannot prescribe medication.
There is little evidence that pharmacological interventions can alter phobias, and few studies have been performed. Medications can be used to treat panic disorder. Medications can include:

Antidepressants (SSRIs, MAOIs, tricyclic antidepressants): these are taken regularly every day, and alter neurotransmitter configurations which in turn can help to block symptoms. Although these medications are described as "antidepressants", nearly all of them — especially the tricyclic antidepressants — have anti-anxiety properties, in part, due to their sedative effects. SSRIs have been known to exacerbate symptoms in panic disorder patients, especially in the beginning of treatment and have even provoked panic attacks in otherwise healthy individuals. SSRIs are also known to produce withdrawal symptoms which include rebound anxiety and panic attacks. Comorbid depression has been cited as imparting the worst course, leading to chronic, disabling illness [28][29].
Anti-anxiety drugs (benzodiazepines): these drugs are prescribed to prevent panic attacks from occurring, although there is some evidence that benzodiazepine use can limit the effects of CBT. Some sufferers take them on an "as needed" basis when anxiety and/or panic attacks occur. These drugs may be habit-forming for some individuals, mostly those with a history of substance abuse. Benzodiazepines can be safely taken long-term for management of panic disorder, although some physicians — especially those in the UK — prefer only short-term treatment due to the risk of tolerance to their effects and the risk of developing a withdrawal syndrome when the drug is abruptly or improperly withdrawn. Although tolerance to the sedative effects of benzodiazepines does occur, tolerance to the anxiolytic effect is rare. However, benzodiazepines should be avoided in the long term, because of the development of tolerance and dependence. [30]

A panel of over 50 peer-nominated, internationally recognized experts in the pharmacotherapy of anxiety and depression judged benzodiazepines, especially combined with an antidepressant, as the mainstays of pharmacotherapy for anxiety disorders.[31][32][33][34]
Despite increasing focus on the use of antidepressants and other agents for the treatment of anxiety, benzodiazepines have remained a mainstay of anxiolytic pharmacotherapy due to their robust efficacy, rapid onset of therapeutic effect, and generally favorable side effect profile.[35] Treatment patterns for psychotropic drugs appear to have remained stable over the past decade, with benzodiazepines being the most commonly used medication for panic disorder.[36]
Phobic symptoms are often resistant to pharmacological interventions. CBT and one tested form of psychodynamic psychotherapy have been shown to efficaciously treat panic disorder with and without agoraphobia.[37][38][39] Clinically, a combination of psychotherapy and medication can often produce good results, although research evidence of this approach has been less robust. Some improvement may be noticed in a fairly short period of time — about 6 to 8 weeks. Thus appropriate treatment by an experienced professional can prevent panic attacks or at least substantially reduce their severity and frequency — bringing significant relief to percent of people with panic disorder.[40] Relapses may occur, but they can often be effectively treated just like the initial episode.
In addition, people with panic disorder may need treatment for other emotional problems. Clinical depression has often been associated with panic disorder, as have alcoholism and drug addiction. More extensive treatment is required for people with treatment-resistant panic disorder, which may not respond to many drug or psychotherapies. However, many choices exist, and it is likely that most patients will respond to at least one of the currently available forms of treatment. For patients with panic disorder in New York City or Philadelphia, PA, free high quality psychotherapy is available through a research study, sponsored by the National Institute of Mental Health [41].
About 30% of people with panic disorder use alcohol and 17% use psychoactive drugs.[42] This is in comparison with 61% (alcohol)[2] and 7.9% (other psychoactive drugs) [3] of the general population who use alcohol and psychoactive drugs, respectively. Utilization of recreational drugs or alcohol generally make symptoms worse (American Psychiatric Association: Practice guideline for the treatment of patients with panic disorder. [43] Most stimulant drugs (caffeine, nicotine, cocaine) would be expected to worsen the condition, since they directly increase the symptoms of panic, such as heart rate. Cannabis commonly precipitates panic in panic patients. As with many disorders, having a support structure of family and friends who understand the condition can help increase the rate of recovery. During an attack, it is not uncommon for the sufferer to develop irrational, immediate fear, which can often be dispelled by a supporter who is familiar with the condition. For more serious or active treatment, there are support groups for anxiety sufferers which can help people understand and deal with the disorder.
Breathing exercises, such as diaphragmatic breathing, can also be found helpful.[citation needed] In some cases, a therapist may use a procedure called interoceptive exposure, in which the symptoms of a panic attack are induced in order to promote coping skills and show the patient that no harm can come from a panic attack.

[edit] Interoceptive Desensitization/Symptom Inductions
One particularly helpful and effective form of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is Interoceptive Desensitization. Techniques used may include those based upon the concept that intentional exposure to the symptoms will help decrease the sufferer's fear of panic attacks. In a study by Barlow & Craske (1989), 87% of the individuals that participated in the two of four treatments that involved Interoceptive Desensitization were free of panic at the end of treatment and these results were maintained at a 2-year follow up.[citation needed]
In controlled studies of Interoceptive Desensitization treatments compared to other treatments, those treatments that included Interoceptive Desensitization were found to be significantly superior to other treatments such as muscle relaxation alone, or education or insight-oriented treatments. Indeed, Interoceptive Desensitization often leads to a dramatic reduction in the frequency and intensity of panic attacks and as such should be implemented immediately under the guidance of a mental health professional.[citation needed] It is important the patient is given medical clearance and permission from a medical doctor before attempting these exercises.[citation needed]
Symptom inductions generally occur for one minute and may include:

Intentional hyperventilation – creates lightheadedness, derealization, blurred vision, dizziness
Spinning in a chair – creates dizziness, disorientation
Straw breathing – creates dyspnea, airway constriction
Breath holding – creates sensation of being out of breath
Running in place – creates increased heart rate, respiration, perspiration
Body tensing – creates feelings of being tense and vigilant

The key to the induction is that the exercises should mimic the most frightening symptoms of a panic attack. Symptom inductions should be repeated three to five times per day until the patient has little to no anxiety in relation to the symptoms that were induced. Often it will take a period of weeks for the afflicted to feel no anxiety in relation to the induced symptoms. With repeated trials, a person learns through experience that these internal sensations do not need to be feared and the individual becomes less sensitized or desensitized to the internal sensation. After repeated trials, when nothing catastrophic happens, the brain learns (hippocampus & amygdala) to not fear the sensations, and the sympathetic nervous system activation fades.

[edit] Causes
There is no single cause for panic disorder, but one thing that is certain is that panic disorder has been found to run in families, and this may mean that inheritance plays a strong role in determining who will get it. It has also been found to exist as a co-morbid condition with many hereditary disorders, such as bipolar disorder, and alcoholism. However, many people who have no family history of the disorder develop it. Malfunctioning of brain structures, such as the amygdala and hormonal/adrenaline glands, may cause an overproduction of certain chemicals and could be source of the physical symptoms. Imaging studies have shown that those with panic disorder have 10-20% less GABA activity in the brain than those without the condition.
Other biological factors, stressful life events, life transitions, environment, and thinking in a way that exaggerates relatively normal bodily reactions are also believed to play a role in the onset of panic disorder. Often the first attacks are triggered by physical illnesses, major stress, or certain medications. Some people develop the disorder after using recreational drugs such as cannabis and having a bad experience.[citation needed] People who tend to take on excessive responsibilities may develop a tendency to suffer panic attacks. Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) patients also show a much higher rate of panic disorder than the general population. The exact causes of panic disorder are unknown at this point.
There is some evidence to suggest hypoglycemia, hyperthyroidism, mitral valve prolapse, labyrinthitis and pheochromocytoma can cause or aggravate panic disorder.
Studies in animals and humans have focused on pinpointing the specific brain areas involved in anxiety disorders such as panic disorder. Fear, an emotion that evolved to deal with danger, causes an automatic, rapid protective response that occurs without the need for conscious thought. This is termed the fight or flight response. It has been found that the body's fear response is coordinated by a small but complicated structure deep inside the brain called the amygdala. Eating disorders have also been linked to have caused panic attacks in several people. Some mood disorders can cause panic disorder. In addition to clinical depression, bipolar disorder can cause panic disorder in some people. Due to the nature of the fight or flight response many cases of panic disorder may be linked with the limbic system and be initiated by those biological factors that could be biological, reinterpreted emotionally as a threat to survival, such as hypoxia (lack of oxygen). If panic disorder is experienced more severely during sleep, it would be recommended to have the sufferer evaluated for conditions such as sleep apnea or hypopnea. A sleep-related panic disorder could be most easily distinguished from a night terror by the ability (usually instantaneous) of the panic disorder sufferer to regain full consciousness, unlike the night terror sufferer.
Prepulse inhibition has been found to be reduced in patients with Panic Disorder [4]. Disorders with PPI deficits are characterized by a loss of the normal ability to suppress or gate irrelevant sensory, motor or cognitive information. This loss of ‘gating’ may be experienced as intrusive thoughts or sensory information. Reduced PPI and gating functions may be a cause of the heightened state of sensory overload that patients suffering from panic attack often experience.
Stimulants are a rather common cause for panic attacks. An excess of common stimulants such as caffeine and nicotine often can induce panic attacks in less experienced users. Chemicals, including carbon monoxide, in tobacco smoke can also trigger panic attacks in certain people. Some people's response to small amounts of carbon monoxide is to panic. Not surprisingly, the attacks stop or get much less severe after they quit the cause, such as smoking. Many SSRIs also have stimulant side-effects during the beginning of treatment which may exacerbate the condition and have actually caused first-time panic attacks in otherwise healthy individuals being treated for depression.
Psychological explanations of panic disorder have also been put forward. Clark (1986)[citation needed] suggests that panic disorder is often caused by "catastrophic misinterpretations", whereby normal bodily sensations, often normal responses to anxiety such as palpitations and sweating, are interpreted as indicating something seriously wrong such as a heart-attack, and this interpretation can be done either consciously or subconsciously. Quite a bit of evidence exists for this theory.
Flöttmann describes the genesis of panic psychodynamicly. Panic is a stress symptom. Fear is characteristic of each developmental stage because of feeling of guilt or symbiotic binding. Floating fear or panic stands for the parental stressing call: "Come back to me. You'll panic in your life, you'll have fear of sexuality, fear of separation from me, of being autonomous, and you'll have fear in any situation in your life! You'll feel anxiously, if you do anything that is separating you from mother or father. Don't grow up!" It is the panic that appears in any developmental moment of life.[44]
Further, a study by Ehlers et al (1988) which provided false heart-rate feedback to participants found that those with panic disorder react with far greater anxiety.[citation needed]
There are other researchers looking at some individuals with panic disorder as having a chemical imbalance within the limbic system and one of its regulatory chemicals GABA-A. The reduced production of GABA-A sends false information to the amygdala which regulates the body's "fight or flight response" mechanism and in return, produces the physiological symptoms that lead to the disorder. Clonazepam, an anticonvulsant benzodiazepine with a long half-life, has been successful in keeping the condition in check[5].

[edit] Mediators and Moderators of Panic Disorder
Statistically speaking, three criteria are required to identify a mediating variable: First, the independent variable must be statistically associated with the predicted mediator. Second, the predicted mediator must be statistically associated with the dependent variable. Finally, when statistically controlled for in the presence of the mediator, the association between the independent variable and dependent variable must become non-significant (or be significantly reduced in size). A moderating variable is identified when the interaction between the independent variable and the predicted moderator is significant when predicting the outcome variable [45].
Recently, researchers have begun to identify mediators and moderators of aspects of panic disorder. One such mediator is the partial pressure of carbon dioxide, which mediates the relationship between panic disorder patients receiving breathing training and anxiety sensitivity; thus, breathing training affects the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in a patient’s arterial blood, which in turn lowers anxiety sensitivity [46]. Another mediator is hypochondriacal concerns, which mediate the relationship between anxiety sensitivity and panic symptomatology; thus, anxiety sensitivity affects hypochondriacal concerns which, in turn, affect panic symptomatology [47].
Perceived threat control has been identified as a moderator within panic disorder, moderating the relationship between anxiety sensitivity and agoraphobia; thus, the level of perceived threat control dictates the degree to which anxiety sensitivity results in agoraphobia [48]. Another recently-identified moderator of panic disorder is genetic variations in the gene coding for galanin; these genetic variations moderate the relationship between females suffering from panic disorder and the level of severity of panic disorder symptomatology [49].

[edit] DSM-IV-TR criteria
DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for panic disorder with (or without) agoraphobia:

A. Both (1) and (2):



recurrent unexpected panic attacks
at least one of the attacks has been followed by 1 month (or more) of one (or more) of the following:




persistent concern about having additional attacks
worry about the implications of the attack or its consequences (e.g., losing control, having a heart attack, "going crazy")
significant change in behavior related to the attacks






B. The presence (or absence) of agoraphobia
C. The panic attacks are not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
D. The panic attacks are not better accounted for by another mental disorder, such as social phobia (e.g., occurring on exposure to feared social situations), specific phobia (e.g., on exposure to a specific phobic situation), obsessive-compulsive disorder (e.g., on exposure to dirt in someone with an obsession about contamination), post-traumatic stress disorder (e.g., in response to stimuli associated with a severe stressor), or separation anxiety disorder (e.g., in response to being away from home or close relatives).


[edit] References


^ "Facts about Panic Disorder". National Institute of Mental Health. http://www.nimh.nih.gov/publicat/panicfacts.cfm. Retrieved on 2006-09-30. 
^ Johnson, J. G., Cohen, P., Pine, D. S., Klein, D. F., Kasen, S., & Brook, J. S. (2000). Association between cigarette smoking and Anxiety Disorders during adolescence and early adulthood. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical Association, 284(risk of panic: Findings from a prospective community study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60(7), 692-700.
^ Goodwin, R. D., Lewinsohn, P. M., & Seeley, J. R. (2005). Cigarette smoking and panic attacks among young adults in the community: The role of parental smoking and anxiety disorders. Biological psychiatry, 58(9), 686-693.
^ Breslau, N., & Klein, D. F. (1999). Smoking and panic attacks: An epidemiologic investigation. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56(12), 1141-1147.
^ Johnson, J. G., Cohen, P., Pine, D. S., Klein, D. F., Kasen, S., & Brook, J. S. (2000). Association between cigarette smoking and anxiety disorders during adolescence and early adulthood. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical Association, 284(18), 2348-2351.
^ Pine, D. S., Klein, R. G., Coplan, J. D., Papp, L. A., Hoven, C. W., Martinez, J., et al. (2000). Differential carbon dioxide sensitivity in childhood anxiety disorders and nonill comparison group. Archives of General Psychiatry, 57(10), 960-967.
^ Gorman, J. M., Kent, J., Martinez, J., Browne, S., Coplan, J., & Papp, L. A. (2001). Physiological changes during carbon dioxide inhalation in patients with panic disorder, major depression, and premenstrual dysphoric disorder: Evidence for a central fear mechanism. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58(2), 125-131.
^ Terra MB, Figueira I, Barros HM (August 2004). "Impact of alcohol intoxication and withdrawal syndrome on social phobia and panic disorder in alcoholic inpatients". Rev Hosp Clin Fac Med Sao Paulo 59 (4): 187–92. doi:/S0041-87812004000400006. PMID 15361983. http://www.scielo.br/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0041-87812004000400006&lng=en&nrm=iso&tlng=en. 
^ Cohen SI (February 1995). "Alcohol and benzodiazepines generate anxiety, panic and phobias" (PDF). J R Soc Med 88 (2): 73–7. PMID 7769598. PMC: 1295099. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/picrender.fcgi?artid=1295099&blobtype=pdf. 
^ Deacon, B. J., & Valentiner, D. P. (2000). Substance use and non-clinical panic attacks in a young adult sample. Journal of substance abuse, 11(1), 7-15.
^ Cox, B. J., Norton, G. R., Forward, J., & Fergusson, P. A. (1989). The relationship between panic attacks and chemical dependencies. Addictive Behaviors, 14(1), 53-60.
^ Cox, B. J., Norton, G. R., Swenson, R. P., & Ender, N. S. (1990). Substance abuse and panic-related anxiety: A critical review. Behaviour research and therapy, 28(5), 385-393.
^ Moreau, D. L. & Follet, C. (1993). Panic disorder in children and adolescents. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am, 2, 581-602.
^ Diler, R. S., Barmier, B., Brent, D. A., Axel son, D. A., Firinciogullari, S., Chiapetta, L., et al. (2004). Phenomenology of panic disorder in youth. Depression and anxiety, 20(1), 39-43.
^ Alessi, N. E. & Magen, J. (1988). Panic disorders in psychiatrically hospitalized children. American Journal of Psychiatry, 145, 1450-1452.
^ Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Marrs, A., & Moore, P. (1997). Panic disorder and agoraphobia in consecutively referred children and adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 36(2), 214-223.
^ Essau, C. A., Conradt, J. & Petermann, F. (1999). Frequency of panic attacks and panic disorder in adolescents. Depression and Anxiety, 9, 19-26.
^ King, N. J., Gallone, E., Tonge, B. J. & Ollendick, T. H. (1993). Self reports of panic attacks and manifest anxiety in adolescents. Behavioural Research Therapy, 31, 111-116.
^ Macauly, J. L. & Kleinknecht, R. A. (1989). Panic and panic attacks in adolescents. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 3, 221-241.
^ de Reiter, C., Rifkin, H., Garssen, B., & Van Schawk, A. (1989). Comorbidity among the anxiety disorders. Journal of anxiety disorders, 3(2), 57-68.
^ Last, C. G., & Strauss, C. C. (1989). Panic disorder in children and adolescents. Journal of anxiety disorders, 3(2), 87-95.
^ Essau, C. A., Conradt, J. & Petermann, F. (1999). Frequency of panic attacks and panic disorder in adolescents. Depression and Anxiety, 9, 19-26.
^ Coryell, W, Noyes, R, Clancy, J: Excess mortality in panic disorder: a comparison with primary unipolar depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1982;39:701-703
^ Salvador-Carulla, L, Segui, J, Fernandez-Cano, P et al: Costs and offset effect in panic disorders. Br J Psychiatry 1995;66:(Suppl) 23-28
^ Barlow, DH, Gorman, JM, Shear, MK et al: Cognitive-behavioral therapy, imipramine, or their combination for panic disorder JAMA 2000;283:2529-2536
^ Marks, IM, Swinson, RP, Basoglu, M et al: Alprazolam and exposure alone and combined in panic disorder with agoraphobia Br J Psych 1993;162:776-787
^ Wiborg, IM, Dahl, AA: Does brief dynamic psychotherapy reduce the relapse rate of panic disorder? Arch Gen Psychiatry 1996;53:689-694
^ Roy-Byrne, PP, Stang, P, Wittchen, HU, et al: Lifetime panic-depression comorbidity in the National Comorbidity Survey. Association with symptoms, impairment, course, and help-seeking Br J Psychiatry 2000; 176:229-35
^ Hollifield, M, Katon, W, Skipper, B et al: Panic disorder and quality of life: variables predictive of functional impairment. Am J Psychiatry 1997;154:766-772
^ Damsa C, Lazignac C, Iancu R, et al (February 2008). "[Panic disorders: differential diagnosis and care in emergencies]" (in French). Rev Med Suisse 4 (144): 404–6, 408–9. PMID 18320769. 
^ Uhlenhuth EH, Balter MB, Ban TA, Yang K (1999). "International study of expert judgment on therapeutic use of benzodiazepines and other psychotherapeutic medications: VI. Trends in recommendations for the pharmacotherapy of anxiety disorders, 1992-1997". Depress Anxiety 9 (3): 107–16. PMID 10356648.
^ Uhlenhuth EH, Balter MB, Ban TA, Yang K (1995). "International study of expert judgement on therapeutic use of benzodiazepines and other psychotherapeutic medications: II. Pharmacotherapy of anxiety disorders". J Affect Disord 35 (4): 153–62. doi:10.1016/0165-0327(95)00064-X. PMID 8749980. 
^ Uhlenhuth EH, Balter MB, Ban TA, Yang K (1999). "Trends in recommendations for the pharmacotherapy of anxiety disorders by an international expert panel, 1992-1997". Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 9 Suppl 6: S393–8. doi:10.1016/S0924-977X(99)00050-4. PMID 10622685. 
^ Uhlenhuth EH, Balter MB, Ban TA, Yang K (1999). "International study of expert judgment on therapeutic use of benzodiazepines and other psychotherapeutic medications: IV. Therapeutic dose dependence and abuse liability of benzodiazepines in the long-term treatment of anxiety disorders". J Clin Psychopharmacol 19 (6 Suppl 2): 23S–29S. doi:10.1097/00004714-199912002-00005. PMID 10587281. 
^ Stevens JC, Pollack MH (2005). "Benzodiazepines in clinical practice: consideration of their long-term use and alternative agents". J Clin Psychiatry 66 Suppl 2: 21–7. PMID 15762816. 
^ Bruce SE, Vasile RG, Goisman RM, et al (2003). "Are benzodiazepines still the medication of choice for patients with panic disorder with or without agoraphobia?". Am J Psychiatry 160 (8): 1432–8. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.160.8.1432. PMID 12900305. 
^ Milrod,B, Leon,AC, Barber,JP et al: Do Comorbid Personality Disorders Moderate Panic-Focused Psychotherapy? An Exploratory Examination of the APA Practice Guideline Journal of Clinical Psychiatry (2007) 68:885-891
^ Barlow, DH, Gorman, JM, Shear, MK et al: Cognitive-behavioral therapy, imiprimine, or their combination for panic disorder JAMA 2000;283:2529-2536
^ Marks, IM, Swinson, RP, Basoglu, M et al: Alprazolam and exposure alone and combined in panic disorder with agoraphobia Br J Psych 1993;162:776-787
^ "Panic Disorder". National Institute of Mental Health. http://www.pueblo.gsa.gov/cic_text/health/panic/panfly.htm. Retrieved on 2006-05-12. 
^ (R01 MH070918 "Dynamic Therapy vs. CBT vs. Applied Relaxation for Panic Disorder)
^ "Panic Disorder". Mental Health America. http://www.nmha.org/go/panic-disorder. Retrieved on 2007-07-02. 
^ Am J Psych 1998;155(May Suppl.)
^ "New Theses about the Borderline Personality". http://wilhelm-griesinger-institut.de/veroeffentlichungen/borderline,engl.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-31. 
^ Barron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychological research: conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173-1182.
^ Meuret, A. E., Rosenfield, D., Hofmann, S. G., Suyak, M. K., & Roth, W. T. (2008). Changes in respiration mediate changes in fear of bodily sensations in panic disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research, Article-in-Press.
^ Berrocal, C., Moreno, F. R., & Cano, J. (2007). Anxiety sensitivity and panic symptomology: the mediator role of hypochondriacal concerns. The Spanish Journal of Psychology, 10, 159-166.
^ White, K. S., Brown, T. A., Somers, T. J., & Barlow, D. H. (2006). Avoidance behavior in panic disorder: the moderating influence of perceived control. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44, 147-157.
^ Unschuld, P. G., Ising, M., Erhardt, A., Lucae, S., Kohli, M., Kloiber, S., et al. (2008). Polymorphisms in the galanin gene are associated with symptom-severity in female patients suffering from panic disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 105, 177-184.



[edit] External links

Anxiety Disorders Association of America
Overcome panic disorder and agoraphobia - tips by clinical psychologist David Carbonell, based on cognitive-behavioral therapy
Tips to Naturally Relieve Panic Attacks
Adolescent Panic - Website for information and treatment of adolescent sufferers of panic attacks
What Is Panic Disorder?
Answers to Your Questions About Panic Disorder








v • d • e

WHO ICD-10 mental and behavioral disorders (F · 290–319)





Neurological/symptomatic

Dementia (Alzheimer's disease, multi-infarct dementia, Pick's disease, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, Huntington's disease, Parkinson's disease, AIDS dementia complex, Frontotemporal dementia, Elopement, Sundowning, Wandering) · Delirium · Post-concussion syndrome · Organic brain syndrome






Psychoactive substance

alcohol (acute alcohol intoxication, drunkenness, alcohol dependence, alcoholic hallucinosis, Alcohol withdrawal, delirium tremens, Korsakoff's syndrome, alcohol abuse) · opioids (opioid overdose, opioid dependency) · sedative/hypnotic (benzodiazepine overdose, benzodiazepine dependence, benzodiazepine withdrawal) · cocaine (cocaine dependence) · general (Intoxication/Drug overdose, Drug abuse, Physical dependence, Rebound effect, Withdrawal)






Schizophrenia, schizotypal
and delusional

Psychosis (Schizoaffective disorder, Schizophreniform disorder, Brief reactive psychosis) · Schizophrenia (Disorganized schizophrenia, Delusional disorder, Folie à deux) · Personality disorder (Schizotypal personality disorder)






Mood (affective)

Mania · Bipolar disorder (Bipolar I, Bipolar II, Cyclothymia) · Depression (Major depressive disorder, Dysthymia)






Neurotic, stress-related
and somatoform





Anxiety disorder/
adjustment disorder


phobic anxiety disorders: Agoraphobia · Social anxiety/Social phobia (Anthropophobia) · Specific phobia (Claustrophobia)
Panic disorder/Panic attack · Generalized anxiety disorder · OCD · stress (Acute stress reaction, PTSD)







Somatoform disorder


Somatization disorder · Body dysmorphic disorder · Hypochondriasis · Nosophobia · Da Costa's syndrome · Psychalgia · Conversion disorder (Ganser syndrome) · Neurasthenia







Dissociative disorder


Dissociative identity disorder · Psychogenic amnesia









Physiological/physical
behavioral





Eating disorder


Anorexia nervosa · Bulimia nervosa







Sleep disorder


Dyssomnia (Hypersomnia, Insomnia) · Parasomnia (REM behavior disorder, Night terror) · Nightmare







Sexual dysfunction


Erectile dysfunction · Premature ejaculation · Vaginismus · Dyspareunia · Hypersexuality · Female sexual arousal disorder







Postnatal


Postpartum depression · Postnatal psychosis









Adult personality
and behavior

Personality disorder · Impulse control disorder (Kleptomania, Trichotillomania, Pyromania) · Factitious disorder (Munchausen syndrome) · Ego-dystonic sexual orientation · Paraphilia (Voyeurism, Fetishism)






Mental disorders
diagnosed in childhood





Mental retardation


X-Linked mental retardation







Psychological development
(developmental disorder)






Specific


speech and language (expressive language disorder, aphasia, expressive aphasia, receptive aphasia, Landau-Kleffner syndrome, lisp) · Scholastic skills (dyslexia, dysgraphia, Gerstmann syndrome) · Motor function (developmental dyspraxia)







Pervasive


Autism · Rett syndrome · Asperger syndrome










Behavioral and emotional


ADHD · Conduct disorder (ODD) · emotional disorder (Separation anxiety disorder) · social functioning (Selective mutism, RAD, DAD) · Tic disorder (Tourette syndrome) · Speech (Stuttering, Cluttering) · Stereotypic movement disorder












Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panic_disorder"
Categories: Anxiety disordersHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Català
Česky
Deutsch
Español
فارسی
日本語
Polski
Português
Русский
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 08:08 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
