













Hilbert's problems - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Hilbert\'s_problems";
		var wgTitle = "Hilbert\'s problems";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "154584";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 275225341;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Hilbert's problems

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
Hilbert's problems are a list of twenty-three problems in mathematics put forth by German mathematician David Hilbert at the Paris conference of the International Congress of Mathematicians in 1900. The problems were all unsolved at the time, and several of them turned out to be very influential for 20th century mathematics. Hilbert presented ten of the problems (1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 13, 16, 19, 21 and 22) at the conference, speaking on 8 August in the Sorbonne; the full list was published later.[1]




Contents


1 Nature and influence of the problems
2 Ignorabimus
3 The 24th Problem
4 Sequels
5 Summary
6 Table of problems

6.1 Notes


7 References
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Nature and influence of the problems
Hilbert's problems ranged widely, not only across many areas of pure and applied mathematics, but also in scope and precision. Some of them are propounded precisely enough to admit a clear affirmative/negative answer, like the 3rd problem (probably the easiest for a nonspecialist to understand and also the first to be solved) or the notorious 8th problem (the Riemann hypothesis). There are other problems (notably the 5th) for which experts have traditionally agreed on a single interpretation and a solution to the accepted interpretation has been given, but for which there remain open problems which are so closely related so as to be, perhaps, part of what Hilbert had in mind. Sometimes Hilbert's statements were not precise enough to specify a particular problem but were suggestive enough so that certain problems of more contemporary origin seem to fit in nicely, e.g. most modern number theorists would probably see the 9th problem as referring to the (conjectural) Langlands correspondence on representations of the absolute Galois group of a number field. Still other problems (e.g. the 11th and the 16th) call for work on what are now flourishing mathematical subdisciplines, like the theories of quadratic forms and real algebraic curves.
There are two problems which are not only unresolved but may in fact be unresolvable by modern standards. The 6th problem calls for the axiomatization of physics, a goal that twentieth century developments in physics (including its recognition as a discipline independent from mathematics) seem to render both more remote and less important than in Hilbert's day. Also the 4th problem concerns the foundations of geometry, in a manner which is now generally judged to be too vague to admit a definitive answer.
Remarkably, the other twenty-one problems have all received significant attention, and late into the twentieth century work on these problems was still considered to be of the highest importance. Notably, Paul Cohen received the Fields Medal in 1966 for his work on the first problem, and the negative solution of the tenth problem in 1970 by Matiyasevich (completing work of Davis, Putnam and Robinson) generated similar excitement and acclaim. Aspects of these problems are still of great interest today.

[edit] Ignorabimus
Several of the Hilbert problems have been resolved (or arguably resolved) in ways that would have been profoundly surprising, and even disturbing, to Hilbert himself. Following Frege and Russell, Hilbert sought to place mathematics on a sound logical foundation using the method of formal systems, i.e., finitistic proofs from an agreed upon set of axioms.[2] One of the main goals of Hilbert's program was a finitistic proof of the consistency of the axioms of arithmetic: that is his second problem.[3]
However, Gödel's second incompleteness theorem gives a precise sense in which such a finitistic proof of the consistency of arithmetic is provably impossible. Hilbert lived for 12 years after Gödel's theorem, but he does not seem to have written any formal response to Gödel's work.[4] [5] But there is no doubt that the significance of Gödel's work to mathematics as a whole (and not just the field of formal logic) was amply and dramatically illustrated by its applicability to one of Hilbert's problems.
Hilbert's tenth problem does not ask whether there exists an algorithm for deciding the solvability of Diophantine equations, but rather asks for the construction of such an algorithm: "to devise a process according to which it can be determined in a finite number of operations whether the equation is solvable in rational integers." That the solution to this problem comes by way of showing that there can be no such algorithm would presumably have been very surprising to him.
In discussing his opinions that every mathematical problem should have a solution, Hilbert allows for the possibility that the solution could be a proof that the original problem is impossible.[6] Famously, he stated that the point is to know one way or the other what the solution is, and he believed that we always can know this, that in mathematics there is no ignorabimus.[7] It seems unclear whether he would have regarded the solution of the tenth problem as an instance of ignorabimus: what we are proving not to exist is not the integer solution, but (in a certain sense) our own ability to discern whether a solution exists.
On the other hand, the status of the first and second problems is even more complicated: there is no clear mathematical consensus as to whether the results of Gödel (in the case of the second problem), or Gödel and Cohen (in the case of the first problem) give definitive negative solutions or not, since these solutions apply to a certain formalization of the problems, a formalization which is quite reasonable but is not necessarily the only possible one.[8]

[edit] The 24th Problem
Hilbert originally included 24 problems on his list, but decided against including one of them in the published list. The "24th problem" (in proof theory, on a criterion for simplicity and general methods) was rediscovered in Hilbert's original manuscript notes by German historian Rüdiger Thiele in 2000.[9]

[edit] Sequels
Since 1900, other mathematicians and mathematical organizations have announced problem lists, but, with few exceptions, these later problem collections have not had nearly as much influence or generated as much work as Hilbert's problems.
One of the exceptions is furnished by three conjectures made by André Weil in the late 1940s (the Weil conjectures). In the fields of algebraic geometry, number theory and the links between the two, the importance of the Weil conjectures was (and is) colossal. The first of the Weil conjectures was proved by Bernard Dwork, and a completely different proof of the first two conjectures via l-adic cohomology was given by Alexander Grothendieck. The last and deepest of the Weil conjectures (an analogue of the Riemann hypothesis) was proven by Pierre Deligne in what is widely regarded as one of the greatest mathematical achievements of all time. Both Grothendieck and Deligne were awarded the Fields medal. However, the Weil conjectures in their scope are more like a single Hilbert problem, and Weil never intended them as a programme for all mathematics. This is somewhat ironic, since arguably Weil was the mathematician of the 1940s and 1950s who best played the Hilbert role, being conversant with nearly all areas of (theoretical) mathematics and having played key roles in the development of many of them.
The turn of the millennium, being also the centennial of Hilbert's announcement of his problems, was a natural occasion to propose "a new set of Hilbert problems." Several mathematicians took up the challenge, notably Fields Medalist Steve Smale, who responded to a request of Vladimir Arnold by proposing a list of 18 problems. Smale's problems have thus far not received much attention from the media, and it seems unclear how much attention they are getting from the mathematical community.
At least in the mainstream media, the de facto 21st century analogue of Hilbert's problems is the list of seven Millennium Prize Problems chosen in 2000 by the Clay Mathematics Institute. Unlike the Hilbert problems, where the primary award was the admiration of Hilbert in particular and the worldwide mathematical community in general, each prize problem carries a million dollar bounty. As for the Hilbert problems, one of the prize problems (the Poincaré conjecture) was solved relatively soon after the problems were announced.
Noteworthy for its appearance on the list of Hilbert problems, Smale's list and the list of Millennium Prize Problems — and even, in its geometric guise, in the Weil Conjectures — is the Riemann hypothesis. Notwithstanding some famous (and occasionally loud) recent assaults from leading mathematicians of our day, many experts believe that the Riemann hypothesis will lurk at the top of problem lists for some centuries yet to come. Hilbert himself had this to say: "If I were to awaken after having slept for a thousand years, my first question would be: has the Riemann hypothesis been proven?"
In 2008, DARPA announced its own list of 23 problems which it hopes could lead to major mathematical breakthroughs, "thereby strengthening the scientific and technological capabilities of DoD" [10] [11]. The problems can be found on the Federal Business Opportunities website. Proposals are currently due on September 25, 2009.

[edit] Summary
Of the cleanly-formulated Hilbert problems, problems 3, 7, 10, 11, 13, 14, 17, 19, 20, and 21 have a resolution that is accepted by consensus. On the other hand, problems 1, 2, 5, 9, 12, 15, 18+, and 22 have solutions that have partial acceptance, but where there exists some controversy as to whether it resolves the problem.
The + on 18 denotes that the Kepler conjecture solution is a computer-assisted proof, a notion anachronistic for a Hilbert problem and also to some extent controversial because of its lack of verifiability by a human reader in a reasonable time.
That leaves 8 (the Riemann hypothesis) and 12 unresolved, both being in number theory. On this classification 4, 6, 16, and 23 are too loose to be ever described as solved. The withdrawn 24 would also fall in this class.

[edit] Table of problems
Hilbert's twenty-three problems are:


Problem
Brief explanation
Status


1st
The continuum hypothesis (that is, there is no set whose size is strictly between that of the integers and that of the real numbers)
Proven to be impossible to prove or disprove within the Zermelo–Frankel set theory with or without the Axiom of Choice. There is no consensus on whether this is a solution to the problem.


2nd
Prove that the axioms of arithmetic are consistent.
There is no consensus on whether results of Gödel and Gentzen give a solution to the problem as stated by Hilbert. Gödel's second incompleteness theorem, proved in 1931, shows that no proof of its consistency can be carried out within arithmetic itself. Gentzen proved in 1936 that the consistency of arithmetic follows from the well-foundedness of the ordinal ε0.


3rd
Given any two polyhedra of equal volume, is it always possible to cut the first into finitely many polyhedral pieces which can be reassembled to yield the second?
Resolved. Result: no, proved using Dehn invariants.


4th
Construct all metrics where lines are geodesics.
Too vague[12] to be stated resolved or not.


5th
Are continuous groups automatically differential groups?
Resolved by Andrew Gleason, depending on how the original statement is interpreted. If, however, it is understood as an equivalent of the Hilbert–Smith conjecture, it is still unsolved.


6th
Axiomatize all of physics
Unresolved.


7th
Is a b transcendental, for algebraic a ≠ 0,1 and irrational algebraic b ?
Resolved. Result: yes, illustrated by Gelfond's theorem or the Gelfond–Schneider theorem.


8th
The Riemann hypothesis (the real part of any non-trivial zero of the Riemann zeta function is ½) and Goldbach's conjecture (every even number greater than 2 can be written as the sum of two prime numbers).
Unresolved.


9th
Find most general law of the reciprocity theorem in any algebraic number field
Partially resolved.[13]


10th
Find an algorithm to determine whether a given polynomial Diophantine equation with integer coefficients has an integer solution.
Resolved. Result: no, Matiyasevich's theorem implies that there is no such algorithm.


11th
Solving quadratic forms with algebraic numerical coefficients.
Partially resolved.[citation needed]


12th
Extend the Kronecker–Weber theorem on abelian extensions of the rational numbers to any base number field.
Unresolved.


13th
Solve all 7-th degree equations using functions of two parameters.
A variant of this problem, looking for a solution within the universe of continuous functions, was solved (negatively) by Andrei Kolmogorov and Vladimir Arnold. It is not difficult to show that the problem has a positive solution within the space of single-valued analytic functions (Raudenbush). Some authors argue that Hilbert intended for a solution within the space of (multi-valued) algebraic functions, thus continuing his own work on algebraic functions and being a question about a possible extension of the Galois theory (see, for example, Abyankar [14], Vitushkin [15], Chebotarev [16] and others). It appears from one of the Hilbert's papers [17] that this was his original intention for the problem. As such, the problem is still unresolved.


14th
Proof of the finiteness of certain complete systems of functions.
Resolved. Result: no, generally, due to counterexample made by Masayoshi Nagata.


15th
Rigorous foundation of Schubert's enumerative calculus.
Partially resolved.[citation needed]


16th
Topology of algebraic curves and surfaces.
Unresolved.


17th
Expression of definite rational function as quotient of sums of squares
Resolved. Result: An upper limit was established for the number of square terms necessary.[citation needed]


18th
Is there a non-regular, space-filling polyhedron? What is the densest sphere packing?
Resolved.[18]


19th
Are the solutions of Lagrangians always analytic?
Resolved. Result: yes, proven by Ennio de Giorgi and, independently and using different methods, by John Forbes Nash.


20th
Do all variational problems with certain boundary conditions have solutions?
Resolved. A significant area of research throughout the 20th century, culminating in solutions[citation needed] for the non-linear case.


21st
Proof of the existence of linear differential equations having a prescribed monodromic group
Resolved. Result: Yes or no, depending on more exact formulations of the problem.[citation needed]


22nd
Uniformization of analytic relations by means of automorphic functions
Resolved.[citation needed]


23rd
Further development of the calculus of variations
Unresolved.




[edit] Notes

^ Reid 1996/1970:81–82.
^ A reliable source of Hilbert's axiomatic system, his comments on them and on the foundational "crisis" that was on-going at the time (translated into English), appears as Hilbert's 1927 "The foundations of mathematics". This can be found on p. 464ff in Jean van Heijenoort (editor) 1976/1966, From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1979–1931, Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA, ISBN 0-67j4-32449-8(pbk.).
^ See Nagel and Newman revised by Hofstadter 2001:107, footnote #37: "Moreover, although most specialists in mathematical logic do not question the cogency of [Gentzen's] proof, it is not finitistic in the sense of Hilbert's original stipulations for an absolute proof of consistency". Also see next page: "But these proofs [Gentzen's et. al.] cannot be mirrored inside the systems that they concern, and, since they are not finitistic, they do not achieve the proclaimed objectives of Hilbert's original program." Hofstadter rewrote the original (1958) footnote slightly, changing the word "students" to "specialists in mathematical logic". And this point is taken up again on page 109 and has not been modified by Hofstadter. (p.108)
^ Reid reports that upon hearing about "Gödel's work from Bernays, he was 'somewhat angry'. . . . At first he was only angry and frustrated, but then he began to try to deal constructively with the problem. . . . It was not yet clear just what influence Gödel's work would ultimately have." (p. 198–199). Reid reports that Hilbert proposed a different form of induction called "'unendliche Induktion.' In 1931 two papers in the new direction appeared." (p. 199)
^ Reid's biography of Hilbert, written in the 1960's from interviews and letters, reports that "Godel (who never had any correspondence with Hilbert) feels that Hilbert's scheme for the foundations of mathematics 'remains highly interesting and important in spite of my negative results' (p. 217). Observe the use of present tense – she reports that Gödel and Bernays among others "answered my questions about Hilbert's work in logic and foundations"(p. vii).
^ This issue that finds its roots in the "foundational crisis" of the early 20th century, in particular the controversy about under what circumstances could the Law of Excluded Middle be employed in proofs. See much more at Brouwer–Hilbert controversy.
^ This famous quote appeared at the end of his presentation of the problems before the Second International Congress of Mathematicians in Paris in 1900. The entire first part of the address can be found in Reid 1996:74–83. The quote itself can be found on page 81: "This conviction of the solvability of every mathematical problem is a powerful incentive to the worker. We hear within us the perpetual call: There is the problem. Seek its solution. You can find it by pure reason, for in mathematics there is no ignorabimus." Reid reports that "the text of the entire talk appears in the Bulletin [Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, vol. 8, 1902, pp. 437–445, 478–479] translated into English by Dr. Mary Winston Newson with the approval of Prof. Hilbert]" (footnote 1 Reid 1996:74).
^ Nagel, Newman and Hofstadter discuss this issue: "The possibility of constructing a finitistic absolute proof of consistency for a formal system such as Principia Mathematica is not excluded by Gödel's results. ... His argument does not eliminate the possibility ... But no one today appears to have a clear idea of what a finitistic proof would be like that is not capable of being mirrored inside Principia Mathematica (footnote 39, page 109). The authors conclude that the prospect "is most unlikely."
^ [1] Hilbert’s twenty-fourth problem, Rüdiger Thiele American Mathematical Monthly
^ "The world's 23 toughest math questions". 2008-09-29. http://www.networkworld.com/community/node/33361. 
^ "DARPA Mathematics Challenge solicitation". 2008-09-26. http://www.darpa.mil/baa/DARPA-BAA08-65.html. 
^ According to Rowe & Gray (see reference below), most of the problems have been solved. Some were not completely defined, but enough progress has been made to consider them "solved"; Rowe & Gray lists the fourth problem as too vague to say whether it has been solved.
^ Problem 9 has been solved in the abelian case, by the development of class field theory; the non-abelian case remains unsolved, if one interprets that as meaning non-abelian class field theory.
^ Shreeram S. Abhyankar: Hilbert's Thirteenth Problem (last retrieved on March 20, 2008)
^ A. G. Vitushkin: On Hilbert's thirteenth problem and related questions, (last retrieved on March 20, 2008)
^ N. G. Chebotarev, "On certain questions of the problem of resolvents"
^ D. Hilbert, "¨Uber die Gleichung neunten Grades", Math. Ann. 97 (1927), 243–250
^ Rowe & Gray also list the 18th problem as "open" in their 2000 book, because the sphere-packing problem (also known as the Kepler conjecture) was unsolved, but a solution to it has now been claimed (see reference below).


[edit] References

Rowe, David; Gray, Jeremy J. (2000). The Hilbert Challenge. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-850651-1
Yandell, Benjamin H. (2002). The Honors Class. Hilbert's Problems and Their Solvers. A K Peters. ISBN 1-56881-141-1
On Hilbert and his 24 Problems. In: Proceedings of the Joint Meeting of the CSHPM 13(2002)1–22 (26th Meeting; ed. M. Kinyon)
John W. Dawson, Jr, Jr Logical Dilemmas, The Life and Work of Kurt Gödel, AK Peters, Wellesley, Mass., 1997. A wealth of information relevant to Hilbert's "program" and Gödel's impact on the Second Question, the impact of Arend Heyting's and Brouwer's Intuitionism on Hilbert's philosophy. Dawson is Professor of Mathematics at Penn State U, cataloguer of Gödel's papers for the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, and a co-editor of Gödel's Collected Works.
Felix E. Browder (editor), Mathematical Developments Arising from Hilbert Problems, Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics XXVIII (1976), American Mathematical Society. A collection of survey essays by experts devoted to each of the 23 problems emphasizing current developments.
Yuri Matiyasevich, Hilbert's Tenth Problem, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1993. An account at the undergraduate level by the mathematician who completed the solution of the problem.
Ernest Nagel and James R. Newman 1958, edited by Douglas R. Hofstadter 2001, Gödel's Proof: Edited and with a New Foreword by Douglas R. Hofstadter, New York University Press, NY, ISBN 0-8147-5816-9.
Constance Reid 1996, originally published 1970, Hilbert, Springer-Verlag New York, ISBN 0-387-94678-8. On pages 74–75 Reid publishes most of 1900 Hilbert's "general remarks from the talk on 'Mathematical Problems'" at the Sorbonne in Paris. See her footnote 1 on page 74 for more information.


[edit] External links

Listing of the 23 problems, with descriptions of which have been solved
Original text of Hilbert's talk, in German
English translation of Hilbert's 1900 address
Details on the solution of the 18th problem
"On Hilbert's 24th Problem: Report on a New Source and Some Remarks."
The Paris Problems
Hilbert's Tenth Problem page!
'From Hilbert's Problems to the Future', lecture by Professor Robin Wilson, Gresham College, 27 February 2008 (available in text, audio and video formats).




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hilbert%27s_problems"
Categories: History of mathematics | Conjectures | Unsolved problems in mathematics | Hilbert's problemsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Français
한국어
Italiano
עברית
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
Piemontèis
Polski
Português
Русский
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 March 2009, at 19:22.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
