













Peter Kropotkin - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Peter_Kropotkin";
		var wgTitle = "Peter Kropotkin";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "51074";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282714936;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Peter Kropotkin

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"Kropotkin" redirects here. For Kropotkin (disambiguation, see Kropotkin (disambiguation).


Peter Kropotkin



Kropotkin, by Nadar



Born
December 9, 1842(1842-12-09)
Moscow, Russia


Died
February 8, 1921 (aged 78)
Dmitrov, USSR


Occupation
Anarchist revolutionary, geographer, zoologist, and political essayist.




Part of the Politics series on


Anarchism







Schools
Agorism · Buddhist · Capitalist
Christian · Collectivist · Communist
Crypto-anarchism · Feminist
Free market · Green · Individualist
Infoanarchism · Insurrectionary
Leftist · Mutualist · Pacifist
Pananarchist · Philosophical
Platformist · Post-anarchist
Post-colonial  · Post-left
Primitivist · Social · Syndicalist
Vegan · Without adjectives · Zen






Theory · Practice
Anarchy · Black bloc
Class struggle  · Communes
Consensus democracy
Decentralization · Deep ecology
Direct action · Direct democracy
Dual power · Especifismo
Horizontalidad · Illegalism
Individual reclamation · Law
Participatory politics
Permanent Autonomous Zone
Prefigurative politics
Private defense agency
Propaganda of the deed
Refusal of work · Rewilding
Social ecology
Spontaneous order






Issues
Anarcho-capitalism · Animal rights
Capitalism · Criticisms · Islam
Lifestylism · Marxism · Nationalism
Orthodox Judaism · Religion
Violence






History
1999 WTO Conference protest
Amakasu Incident
Anarchist Catalonia
Anarchist Exclusion Act
Anarchy in Somalia
Australian Anarchist Centenary
Barcelona May Days
Carnival Against Capitalism
Escuela Moderna · Hague Congress
Haymarket affair
High Treason Incident
Congress of Amsterdam
Kate Sharpley Library
Kronstadt rebellion
Labadie Collection · LIP
Manifesto of the Sixteen
May 1968  · May Day
Paris Commune
Provo · Red inverted triangle
Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine
Spanish Revolution
Third Russian Revolution
Tragic Week · Trial of the thirty






Culture
Anarcho-punk · Arts
Black anarchism · Culture jamming
DIY culture · Freeganism
Independent Media Center
Infoshop · The Internationale
Jewish anarchism · Land and liberty
Lifestylism · Popular education
Property is theft!
Radical cheerleading
Radical environmentalism
Squatting · Symbolism
Terminology · A las barricadas






Economics
Agorism · Capitalism · Collectivism
Communism · Co-operatives
Counter-economics · Free market
Free school · Free store
Geolibertarianism · Gift economy
Market abolitionism · Mutual aid
Mutualism · Participatory economics
Really Really Free Market
Self-ownership · Syndicalism
Wage slavery
Workers' self-management






By region
Africa · Austria-Hungary · Brazil
Canada · China · Cuba · England
France · Greece · India · Ireland
Israel · Italy · Japan · Korea
Mexico · Poland · Russia · Spain
Sweden · Turkey · Ukraine
United States · Vietnam






Lists
Anarcho-punk bands · Books
Communities · Fictional characters
Jewish anarchists · Musicians
Organizations · Periodicals · Poets
Russian anarchists






Related topics
Anti-capitalism · Anti-communism
Anti-consumerism · Anti-corporatism
Anti-globalization · Antimilitarism
Anti-statism · Anti-war · Autarchism
Autonomism · Labour movement
Left communism · Libertarianism
Libertarian perspectives on revolution
Libertarian socialism
Situationist International




 


Anarchism Portal



v • d • e



Peter (Pyotr) Alexeyevich Kropotkin (Russian: Пётр Алексеевич Кропоткин) (9 December, 1842 - 8 February, 1921) was one of Russia's foremost anarchists and one of the first advocates of anarchist communism: most of his life he advocated for a communist society free from central government. Because of his title of prince and his prominence as an anarchist in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, he was known by some as "the Anarchist Prince". Some contemporaries saw him as leading a near perfect life, including Oscar Wilde, who described him as "a man with a soul of that beautiful white Christ which seems coming out of Russia."[1] He wrote many books, pamphlets and articles, the most prominent being The Conquest of Bread and Fields, Factories and Workshops, and his principal scientific offering, Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution. He was also a contributor to the Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition.




Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Early life
1.2 Expeditions
1.3 Activism
1.4 Timeline


2 Works

2.1 Books
2.2 Articles
2.3 Pamphlets


3 See also
4 References
5 Further reading
6 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography

[edit] Early life
Peter (or Pyotr) Kropotkin was born in Moscow. His father, Prince Alexei Petrovich Kropotkin, owned large tracts of land and nearly 1200 "souls" (male serfs) in three provinces. Kropotkin's male line traced to the legendary prince Rurik; his mother, Yekaterina Nikolaevna Sulima, was the daughter of a Russian general.
In 1857, at age 15, Kropotkin entered the Corps of Pages at St. Petersburg. Only 150 boys — mostly children of nobility belonging to the court — were educated in this privileged corps, which combined the character of a military school endowed with special rights and of a court institution attached to the imperial household. Kropotkin's memoirs detail the hazing and other abuse of pages for which the Corps had become notorious.
In Moscow, Kropotkin had developed an interest in the condition of the peasantry, and this interest increased as he grew older. In St. Petersburg, he read widely on his own account, and gave special attention to the works of the French encyclopædists and to French history. The years 1857-1861 witnessed a rich growth in the intellectual forces of Russia, and Kropotkin came under the influence of the new liberal-revolutionary literature, which largely expressed his own aspirations.
In 1862, Kropotkin was promoted from the Corps of Pages to the army. The members of the corps had the prescriptive right to choose the regiment to which they would be attached. Kropotkin had never wished for a military career, but, as he did not have the means to enter St. Petersburg University, he elected to join a Siberian Cossack regiment in the recently annexed Amur Oblast district, where there were prospects of administrative work. For some time, he was aide de camp to the governor of Transbaikalia at Chita. Later he was appointed attaché for Cossack affairs to the governor-general of East Siberia at Irkutsk.

[edit] Expeditions
Administrative work was scarce, and in 1864 Kropotkin accepted charge of a geographical survey expedition, crossing North Manchuria from Transbaikalia to the Amur, and soon was attached to another expedition which proceeded up the Sungari River into the heart of Manchuria. The expeditions yielded very valuable geographical results. The impossibility of obtaining any real administrative reforms in Siberia now induced Kropotkin to devote himself almost entirely to scientific exploration, in which he continued to be highly successful.
In 1867, he quit the army and returned to St. Petersburg, where he entered the university, becoming at the same time secretary to the geography section of the Russian Geographical Society. In 1871, he explored the glacial deposits of Finland and Sweden for the Society. In 1873, he published an important contribution to science, a map and paper in which he proved that the existing maps entirely misrepresented the physical features of Asia; the main structural lines were in fact from south-west to north-east, not from north to south, or from east to west as had been previously supposed. During this work, he was offered the secretaryship of the Society, but he had decided that it was his duty not to work at fresh discoveries but to aid in diffusing existing knowledge among the people at large. Accordingly, he refused the offer and returned to St. Petersburg, where he joined the revolutionary party.

[edit] Activism
He visited Switzerland in 1872 and became a member of the International Workingmen's Association at Geneva. But he did not like IWA's style of socialism. Instead, he studied the programme of the more radical Jura federation at Neuchâtel and spent time in the company of the leading members, and definitely adopted the creed of anarchism. On returning to Russia, he took an active part in spreading revolutionary propaganda through the nihilist-led Circle of Tchaikovsky.
In 1873, Kropotkin was arrested and imprisoned in the Peter and Paul Fortress. He gained notoriety for his widely publicized escape from the prison in 1876, after which he went to England, moving after a short stay to Switzerland, where he joined the Jura Federation. In 1877, he moved to Paris, where he helped to start the socialist movement. In 1878 he returned to Switzerland, where he edited for Jura Federation's revolutionary newspaper La Révolte, and published various revolutionary pamphlets. He was a very out-going speaker on his beliefs that the peasants were being treated unfairly and deserved to have the same land as the Lords
In 1881, shortly after the assassination of the Tsar Alexander II, the Swiss government expelled Kropotkin from Switzerland. After a short stay at Thonon (Savoy), he went to London, where he stayed nearly a year, and returned to Thonon in late 1882. Soon he was arrested by the French government, tried at Lyon, and sentenced by a police-court magistrate (under a special law passed on the fall of the Paris Commune) to five years' imprisonment, on the ground that he had belonged to the IWA (1883). But the French Chamber repeatedly agitated on his behalf, and he was released in 1886. He settled near London, living at various times in Harrow – where his daughter, Alexandra, was born – Ealing and Bromley. He also lived for a number of years in Brighton.[citation needed]. While living in London, Kropotkin became friends with a number of prominent English-speaking socialists, including William Morris and George Bernard Shaw.
In 1902 Kropotkin published the book Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution, which provided an alternative view on animal and human survival, beyond the claims of 'Survival of the Fittest' proffered at the time by some "social Darwinists", such as Francis Galton.

In the animal world we have seen that the vast majority of species live in societies, and that they find in association the best arms for the struggle for life: understood, of course, in its wide Darwinian sense – not as a struggle for the sheer means of existence, but as a struggle against all natural conditions unfavourable to the species. The animal species, in which individual struggle has been reduced to its narrowest limits, and the practice of mutual aid has attained the greatest development, are invariably the most numerous, the most prosperous, and the most open to further progress. The mutual protection which is obtained in this case, the possibility of attaining old age and of accumulating experience, the higher intellectual development, and the further growth of sociable habits, secure the maintenance of the species, its extension, and its further progressive evolution. The unsociable species, on the contrary, are doomed to decay.
– Peter Kropotkin, Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution (1902), Conclusion.

Kropotkin's authority as a writer on Russia is generally acknowledged, and he contributed to many articles in the Encyclopædia Britannica, including an entry on anarchism in the 1911 edition (see external links, below). Most of the other articles (about 90) are about various aspects of Russian geography.
Kropotkin returned to Russia after the February Revolution and was offered the ministry of education in the provisional government, but he rejected the post. His enthusiasm turned to disappointment when the Bolsheviks seized power. "This buries the revolution," he said. He thought that the Bolsheviks had shown how the revolution was not to be made — by authoritarian rather than libertarian methods.
He died on February 8, 1921 in the city of Dmitrov, Moscow province and was buried at the Novodevichy Cemetery, Moscow.

[edit] Timeline

1842 - born in Moscow, Russia, on December 9.
1857 - joins the Corps of Pages where he begins to develop a rebellious reputation.
1858 - Peter's early writings show interest in political economy and statistics; begins contact with "real" peasants.
1861 - Peter has his first prison experience as a result of participating in a student protest.
1862 - becomes disillusioned with royalty when as page de chambre to the tsar he witnesses the extravagances of court life.
1862-1867 - at his own request serves with the military in Siberia. Witnesses the living conditions there, and the unwillingness of the corrupt administration to do anything to improve this.
1868-1870 - pursues survey and geographical studies.
1871 - becomes interested in the workers' movement and the events surrounding the Paris Commune.
1872 - travels to Switzerland, where he joins the International; returns to Russia with a quantity of prohibited socialist literature.
1873 - as a member of the Chaikovskii Circle, he helps with rewriting pamphlets in a way that can be understood by the uneducated; he shows great ability for communicating with the workers.
1874 - Peter is imprisoned in the Peter and Paul Fortress because of his revolutionary activities. At the intervention of the Geographical Society, he is given special dispensation to work on a paper on glacial periods.
1876 - escapes from a military hospital and moves to England.
1877 - returns to Switzerland to work with the Jura Federation. Attends the last meeting of the First International in Ghent.
1881 - attends the International Anarchist congress in London. In his propaganda of the deed he supports the assassination of Tsar Alexander II on the grounds that an explosion is far more effective than a vote in encouraging the workers to revolution. This gets him kicked out of Switzerland. The Russian government is embarrassed when he discovers a plot to assassinate him in London.
1882 - shortly after moving to France he is arrested for his work in The First International and sentenced to five years in prison. He stays there until 1886 when he is released on condition that he leave France.
1886 - returns to England. Learns of his brother Alexander's suicide in Siberian exile for political activity. Becomes co-founder of British anarchist magazine Freedom.
1890s — spends most of his time writing. Visits Canada and the United States in 1897. The Atlantic Monthly agrees to publish his memoirs. In his books he attempts to develop an anarchist-communist view of society.
1901-1909 - writes material in Russian for readers in his homeland. He was very disappointed by the failure of the 1905 revolution.
1909-1914 - returns to Switzerland on condition that he refrain from anarchist activities. Tries to publicize the massacre of 270 workers at the Lena gold mines, but this activity is cut short by World War I. He then moved to the United Kingdom, where he spent some time in the Brighton area.
1914-1917 - actively supports the war against Germany, and coauthors the Manifesto of the Sixteen. This position, a strange and questionable one for an anarchist to take, alienated him from many of his associates, particularly Errico Malatesta.
1917 - returns to Petrograd where he helps the Kerensky government to formulate policy. He curtails his activity when the Bolsheviks come to power.
1921 - his funeral at the Novodevichy Cemetery, with Lenin's approval, becomes the last mass gathering of anarchists in Russia.


[edit] Works

[edit] Books

Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution (1955 paperback (reprinted 2005), includes Kropotkin's 1914 preface, Foreword and Bibliography by Ashley Montagu, and The Struggle for Existence, by Thomas H. Huxley ed.). Boston: Extending Horizons Books, Porter Sargent Publishers. ISBN 0-87558-024-6.  Project Gutenberg e-text, Project LibriVox audiobook
The Conquest of Bread Project Gutenberg e-text, Project LibriVox audiobook
Fields, Factories and Workshops
P.Kropotkin, In Russian and French Prisons, London: Ward and Downey; 1887.
Memoirs of a Revolutionist, London : Smith, Elder; 1899. Kropotkin's own memoirs, which were also published in the United States in the same year and have appeared in a number of modern editions.
The Great French Revolution, 1789-1793, New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, London, William Heinemann, 1909, translated from the French by N.F. Dryhurst. e-text (in French)
Russian Literature: Ideals and Realities (New York: A. A. Knopf, 1915). Available online at the Anarchy Archives,[2]
Ethics (unfinished). Included as first part of Origen y evolución de la moral (Spanish e-text)
In Russian and French Prisons. Online book. A criticism of the existence of prisons.


[edit] Articles

"Research on the Ice age", Notices of the Imperial Russian Geographical Society, 1876.
"The desiccation of Eur-Asia", Geographical Journal, 23 (1904), 722-741.
Mr. Mackinder; Mr. Ravenstein; Dr. Herbertson; Prince Kropotkin; Mr. Andrews; Cobden Sanderson; Elisée Reclus, "On Spherical Maps and Reliefs: Discussion", The Geographical Journal, Vol. 22, No. 3. (Sep., 1903), pp. 294-299, JSTOR
"Baron Toll", The Geographical Journal, Vol. 23, No. 6. (Jun., 1904), pp. 770-772, JSTOR
"The population of Russia", The Geographical Journal, Vol. 10, No. 2. (Aug., 1897), pp. 196-202, JSTOR
"The old beds of the Amu-Daria", The Geographical Journal, Vol. 12, No. 3. (Sep., 1898), pp. 306-310, JSTOR


[edit] Pamphlets

An Appeal To The Young
War.
Law and Authority.
The Place of Anarchy in Socialist Evolution.
Revolutionary Government.
Are Prisons Necessary? Chapter X from "In Russian and French Prisons" (1887)
Anarchism : Its Philosophy and Ideal (1896)
The State : Its Historic Role (1897)
On Economics Selected Passages from his Writings (1898-1913)


[edit] See also

Katorga
List of atheists


[edit] References


^ Wilde, Oscar, "De Profundis", The Complete Works of Oscar Wilde, Collins.
^ Russian Literature: Ideals and Realities entry at the Anarchy Archives



[edit] Further reading





This article's citation style may be unclear. The references used may be clearer with a different or consistent style of citation, footnoting, or external linking.



The Anarchists by James Joll (2nd ed.) (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1980) LCCN 80-010503. ISBN 0674036417. [historical book]
The Anarchist Prince: A Biographical Study of Peter Kropotkin by George Woodcock & Ivan Avakumovic (1950 & 1971).
"Mutual Aid and the Foraging Mode of Thought: Re-reading Kropotkin on the Khoisan" by Barnard Alan, Social Evolution & History, Vol. 3, No. 1 (March 2004), pages 3-21.
Kropotkin: the Politics of Community by Brian Morris (Humanity Press, 2004)
The Anarchist Geographer: an Introduction to the Life of Peter Kropotkin by Brian Morris (Genge Press, 2007)
Basic Kropotkin: Kropotkin and the History of Anarchism by Brian Morris, Anarchist Communist Editions pamphlet no.17 (The Anarchist Federation, October 2008).


[edit] External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Peter Kropotkin





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Пётр Алексеевич Кропоткин




Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Peter Kropotkin



Works by Peter Kropotkin at Project Gutenberg
 Free audiobooks of Peter Kropotkin at project LibriVox
Kropotkin Page at the Daily Bleed's Anarchist Encyclopedia
The Peter Kropotkin text archive on libcom.org library
BlackCrayon.com: People: Peter Kropotkin
Peter Kropotkin entry at the Anarchy Archives with complete collected works
Peter Kropotkin at (an)archive!
Peter Kropotkin-Short Documentary at YouTube



Persondata


NAME
Kropotkin, Peter


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Kropotkin, Pyotr; Kropotkin, Pëtr


SHORT DESCRIPTION
Anarchist, naturalist


DATE OF BIRTH
21 December 1842


PLACE OF BIRTH
Moscow, Russia


DATE OF DEATH
8 February 1921


PLACE OF DEATH
Dmitrov, Russia





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Kropotkin"
Categories: 1842 births | 1921 deaths | Anarchism theorists | Anarchist communists | Former Eastern Orthodox Christians | Members of the First International | Orthodox converts to atheism | Rurikids | Russian anarchists | Russian atheists | Russian geographers | Russian political writers | Russian revolutionaries | Russian writers | Russian zoologistsHidden categories: Articles containing Russian language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2007 | Wikipedia references cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Aragonés
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
नेपाली
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 06:16 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
