













Green Lantern - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Green_Lantern";
		var wgTitle = "Green Lantern";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "73678";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281614492;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Green Lantern

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"The Green Lantern" redirects here. For the disc jockey, see DJ Green Lantern.


Green Lantern



Cover to Green Lantern: Rebirth #6, art by Ethan Van Sciver. Featured left to right are Guy Gardner, Kyle Rayner, Hal Jordan, John Stewart and Kilowog.


Publisher
DC Comics


First appearance
All-American Comics #16 (July, 1940)


Created by
Bill Finger
Martin Nodell


Characters
Alan Scott
Hal Jordan
Guy Gardner
John Stewart
Kyle Rayner
Jade


See also
Green Lantern Corps
List of Green Lanterns


Green Lantern



Green Lantern vol. 1, #1 (Fall, 1941).
Featuring the Alan Scott version of the character.
Art by Howard Purcell.


Series publication information


Publisher
(vol 1)
All-American Publications
(vol 2-4)
DC Comics


Schedule
(vol 1)
Quarterly (1-18)
Bi-monthly (19-38)
(vol 2)
Bi-monthly (1-10, 82-96)
8 times a year(11-81)
Monthly (97-205)
(vol 3)
Monthly (1-27, 34-38, 43-74, 77-100, 107-159, 166-181)
Bi-weekly (28-33, 39-42, 75-76, 101-106, 160-165)
(vol 4)
Monthly


Format
Ongoing series


Genre
Superhero


Publication date
(vol 1)
Fall 1941 — May-June 1949
(vol 2)
July-August 1960 — April-May 1972;
August-September 1976 — October 1986[1]
(vol 3)
June 1990 — November 2004
(vol 4)
July 2005 — Present


Number of issues
(vol 1)
38
(vol 2)
205, 3 Annuals, 2 Specials
(vol 3)
183 (this includes issues number 0 and 1000000), 9 Annuals
(vol 4)
35+


Main character(s)
(vol 1)
Alan Scott
(vol 2 & 4)
Hal Jordan
John Stewart
(vol 3)
Hal Jordan
Guy Gardner
John Stewart
Kyle Rayner


Green Lantern is the name of several fictional characters, superheroes appearing in comic books published by DC Comics. The first (Alan Scott) was created by writer Bill Finger and artist Martin Nodell in All-American Comics #16 (July 1940).[2]
Each Green Lantern possesses a power ring that gives the user great control over the physical world as long as the wielder has sufficient willpower and strength to wield it. While the ring of the Golden Age Green Lantern (Alan Scott) was magically powered, the rings worn by all subsequent Lanterns were technological creations of the Guardians of the Universe, who granted such rings to worthy candidates. These individuals made up the intergalactic police force known as the Green Lantern Corps.[2]
After World War II, when sales of superhero comic books generally declined, DC ceased publishing new adventures of Alan Scott as the Green Lantern. At the beginning of the Silver Age of Comic Books in the late 1950s, DC editor Julius Schwartz assigned writer John Broome and artist Gil Kane to revive the Green Lantern character, this time as test pilot Hal Jordan, who became a founding member of the Justice League of America. In the early 1970s, writer Denny O'Neil and artist Neal Adams teamed Green Lantern with archer Green Arrow in groundbreaking, socially conscious, and award-winning stories that pitted the sensibilities of the law-and-order-oriented Lantern with the populist Green Arrow. Several cosmically themed series followed, as did occasional different individuals in the role of Earth's Green Lantern. Most prominent of these are John Stewart, Guy Gardner, and Kyle Rayner.
Each of the Earth's Green Lanterns has been a member of either the Justice Society of America or the Justice League of America, and John Stewart was featured as one of the main characters in both the Justice League and the Justice League Unlimited animated series. The Green Lanterns are often depicted as being close friends of the various men who have been the Flash, the most notable friendships having been between Alan Scott and Jay Garrick (the Golden Age Green Lantern and Flash), Hal Jordan and Barry Allen (the Silver Age Green Lantern and Flash), and Kyle Rayner and Wally West (the modern age Green Lantern and Flash), as well as Jordan being friends with West.




Contents


1 Publication history

1.1 Golden Age
1.2 Silver Age revival
1.3 Later developments
1.4 Awards


2 Fictional character biographies

2.1 Golden Age Green Lantern

2.1.1 Alan Scott


2.2 Silver Age Green Lantern

2.2.1 Hal Jordan


2.3 Bronze Age Green Lanterns

2.3.1 Guy Gardner
2.3.2 John Stewart


2.4 Modern Age Green Lantern

2.4.1 Kyle Rayner


2.5 Others who have headlined as Green Lantern

2.5.1 Jade




3 Powers and abilities
4 Green Lantern oath
5 In other media
6 See also
7 Footnotes
8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Publication history

[edit] Golden Age
Green Lantern was created by Martin Nodell (using the name Mart Dellon) and Bill Finger. He first appeared in the Golden Age of comic books in All-American Comics #16 (July 1940), published by All-American Publications, one of three companies that would eventually merge to form DC Comics. The collector market for original copies of this issue is strong, with a sale in October 2007 selling on an online vintage comic trading site, ComicConnect.com, for $29,250.[3] This Green Lantern was Alan Scott, an engineer who had come into possession of a magic lantern. From this, he crafted a magic ring which gave him a wide variety of powers. The limitations of the ring were that it had to be "charged" every 24 hours by touching it to the lantern for a time, and that it did not work on wood.
Nodell had originally planned to give Green Lantern the alter ego "Alan Ladd," this being a linguistic twist on Aladdin, who had a magic lamp and magic ring of his own. DC considered the wordplay distracting and foolish, and the character's name was changed before publication to "Alan Scott." In May 1942, the film This Gun for Hire suddenly made the journeyman actor of the same name a movie star. Nodell would always joke that they'd missed a great opportunity.[4]




Green Lanterns of two worlds: Hal Jordan (left) meets Alan Scott in Green Lantern #40 (Oct. 1965). Cover art by Gil Kane & Murphy Anderson.


Green Lantern was a popular character in the 1940s, featured in both All-American Comics and in his own title and co-starring in Comic Cavalcade along with Flash and Wonder Woman. He was a charter member of the Justice Society of America, whose adventures ran in All Star Comics. After World War II, the popularity of superheroes declined. The Green Lantern comic book was cancelled with issue #40 (October 1949). All Star Comics #57 (1951) was the character's last Golden Age appearance.

[edit] Silver Age revival
In the late 1950s, DC Comics successfully revived superheroes, ushering in what became known as the Silver Age of comic books. Rather than bringing back the same Golden Age heroes — as Atlas Comics, the 1950s precursor of Marvel Comics, unsuccessfully attempted — DC reimagined them as new characters for the modern age. Following the successful revival of the Flash in Showcase #4 (Oct. 1956), a new Green Lantern was introduced in Showcase #22 (September-October 1959).
This Green Lantern was Hal Jordan, a test pilot who was given a power ring by a dying alien, Abin Sur, and who became a member of the Green Lantern Corps, an interstellar organization of police overseen by the Guardians of the Universe. The Corps' rings were powerless against anything colored yellow, due to a necessary impurity in the ring. Jordan's creation was motivated by a desire to make him more of a science fiction hero, editor Julius Schwartz having been a longtime fan of that genre and literary agent who saw pop-culture tastes turning in that direction.
The Silver Age Green Lantern was unique in several ways. He was the first DC superhero with a family.{Green Lantern #9 'Green Lantern's Brother Act'} Written by John Broome and drawn by Gil Kane, these stories have been reprinted in deluxe hardback editions.
This Green Lantern was a founding member of the Justice League of America and starred in his own title as well; in issue #40 (Oct. 1965), he met his Golden Age predecessor, who was established to live on the parallel world of Earth-Two, separate from Jordan's Earth-One. The two Lanterns struck up a close friendship and have periodically come to each other's aid. Hal Jordan's Green Lantern also became close friends with Barry Allen, and the two heroes appeared frequently in each other's comics to team up.

[edit] Later developments




"My ward is a junkie!" Green Lantern vol. 2, #86 (Nov. 1971). Cover art by Neal Adams.


With issue #76 (April 1970), the series made a radical stylistic departure. Editor Schwartz, in one of the company's earliest efforts to provide more than light fantasy, worked with the writer-artist team of Denny O'Neil and Neal Adams to spark new interest in the comic and address a perceived need for social relevance. They added the character Green Arrow (with the cover though not the official name retitled Green Lantern Co-Starring Green Arrow) and had the pair travel through America encountering "real world" issues, to which they reacted in different ways — Green Lantern as fundamentally a lawman, Green Arrow as a liberal iconoclast. Additionally during this run, the groundbreaking "Snowbirds Don't Fly" story was published (issues #85 and #86) in which Green Arrow's teen sidekick Speedy (the later grownup hero Red Arrow) developed a heroin addiction that he was forcibly made to quit. The stories were critically acclaimed, with publications such as The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, and Newsweek citing it as an example of how comic books were "growing up".[5] However, the O'Neil/Adams run was not a commercial success, and after only 14 issues, the two left the title, which was cancelled.
The title would know a number of revivals and cancellations. Its title would change to Green Lantern Corps at one point as the popularity rose and waned. During a time there were two regular titles, each with a Green Lantern, and a third member in the Justice League. A new character, Kyle Rayner, was created to become the feature while Hal Jordan first became the villain Parallax, then died and came back as the Spectre.
In the wake of The New Frontier, writer Geoff Johns returned Hal Jordan as Green Lantern in Green Lantern: Rebirth (2004-05). Johns began to lay groundwork for a 2009 story to be entitled "The Blackest Night," viewing it as the third part of the trilogy started by Rebirth. Expanding on the Green Lantern mythology with the second part, "Sinestro Corps War" (2007), Johns, with artist Ethan van Sciver, found wide critical acclaim and financial success with the series, which promised the introduction of a spectrum of colored "lanterns". Currently, all four "current" Green Lanterns have stories being told in simultaneously published series, Green Lantern and Green Lantern Corps respectively.

[edit] Awards
The series and its creators have received several awards over the years, including the 1961 Alley Award for Best Adventure Hero/Heroine with Own Book; and Academy of Comic Book Arts' Shazam Award for Best Continuing Feature in 1970, for Best Individual Story ("No Evil Shall Escape My Sight", Green Lantern vol. 2, #76, by Dennis O'Neil and Neal Adams), and in 1971 for Best Individual Story ("Snowbirds Don't Fly", Green Lantern vol. 2, #85 by O'Neil and Adams).
Writer O'Neil received the Shazam Award for Best Writer (Dramatic Division) in 1970 for his work on Green Lantern, Batman, Superman, and other titles, while artist Adams received the Shazam for Best Artist (Dramatic Division) in 1970 for his work on Green Lantern and Batman. Inker Dick Giordano received the Shazam Award for Best Inker (Dramatic Division) for his work on Green Lantern and other titles.
In Judd Winick's first regular writing assignment on Green Lantern, he wrote a storyline in which an assistant of Kyle Rayner's emerged as a gay character in Green Lantern #137 (June 2001). In Green Lantern #154 (November 2001) the story entitled "Hate Crime" gained media recognition when Terry was brutally beaten in a homophobic attack. Winick was interviewed on Phil Donahue's show on MSNBC for that storyline on August 15, 2002 and received two GLAAD awards for his Green Lantern work.

[edit] Fictional character biographies




Alan Scott, the original Green Lantern. Promotional cover art for JSA # 77, by Alex Ross.



[edit] Golden Age Green Lantern

[edit] Alan Scott
Main article: Alan Scott
Alan Scott's Green Lantern history traditionally began thousands of years ago when a mystical "green flame" meteor fell to Earth in ancient China. The voice of the flame prophesied that it would act three times: once to bring death (a lamp-maker crafted the green metal of the meteor into a lamp; in fear and as punishment for what they thought sacrilege, the local villagers killed him, only to be destroyed by a sudden burst of the green flame), once to bring life (in modern times, the lamp came into the hands of a patient in a mental institution who fashioned the lamp into a modern lantern; the green flame restored him to sanity and gave him a new life), and once to bring power. By 1940, the lantern passed into the possession of Alan Scott, a young engineer. Following a railroad bridge collapse in which he was the only survivor, the flame instructed Scott how to fashion a ring from its metal, to give him fantastic powers as the superhero Green Lantern. He adopted a colorful costume and became a crimefighter. Alan was a founding member of the Justice Society of America.
After the Crisis on Infinite Earths, a Tales of the Green Lantern Corps story was published that brought Scott even closer to the Corps' ranks. It was revealed that Hal Jordan was predated as Earth's Green Lantern by a citizen of ancient China. Not only was the Corps' now-familiar green, black and white uniform motif not yet adopted, but this ancient Chinese GL altered the basic red of his uniform to more closely resemble the style worn by his countrymen. Power ultimately corrupted this early GL and the Guardians allowed his ring to manifest a weakness to wood, the material from which most Chinese weapons of the time were fashioned. This allowed the locals to ultimately defeat their corrupted “champion." His ring and lantern were burned and it was during this process that the “intelligence” inhabiting the ring and the lantern, and linking them to the Guardians, was damaged.
Centuries later, it was explained, when Scott found the mystical lantern, it had no memory of its true origins, save a vague recollection of the uniform of its last master. This was the origin of Scott’s distinctive costume. Due to the damaged link to the Guardians, those immortals presumed the ring and lantern to be lost in whatever cataclysm overcame their last owner of record. Thus it was that Scott was never noticed by the Guardians and went on to carve a history of his own separate and apart from that of the Corps, still sporting a ring with an artificially induced weakness against anything made of wood. Honoring this separate history, the Guardians never moved to force Scott to relinquish the ring, formally join the Corps, or adopt its colors, although during the Rann-Thanagar War, it was revealed that Scott is an honorary member of the Corps.

[edit] Silver Age Green Lantern

[edit] Hal Jordan
Main article: Hal Jordan




Hal Jordan, Silver Age Green Lantern. Promotional cover art for Green Lantern (vol. 4) #1, by Carlos Pacheco & Jesús Merino.


The next Green Lantern to see publication was Harold "Hal" Jordan, a second-generation test pilot, having followed in the footsteps of his father, Martin Jordan. He was given the power ring and battery (lantern) by a dying alien named Abin Sur, whose spaceship crashed on Earth. Abin Sur used his ring to seek out an individual who was "utterly honest and born without fear" to take his place as Green Lantern. Jordan became a founding member of the Justice League of America and as of the mid-2000s is, along with John Stewart, one of the two active-duty Lanterns in Earth's sector of space.
Jordan was also a member of the Green Lantern Corps, which was modeled after the "Lensmen" from the science fiction novel series written by E.E. Smith. The early 1980s miniseries "Green Lantern Corps" honors this with two characters in the corps: Eddore of Tront and Arisia. A different interpretation of Jordan and the Corps appears in Superman: Red Son.
Following the rebirth of Superman and the destruction of Green Lantern's hometown of Coast City in the early 1990s, Hal Jordan seemingly went insane and destroyed the Green Lantern Corps and the Central Power Battery. Now calling himself Parallax, Hal Jordan would devastate the DC Universe off and on for the next several years. However, after Earth's sun was threatened by a Sun-Eater, Jordan sacrificed his life, expending the last of his vast power to reignite the dying star. Jordan subsequently returned from beyond the grave as the Spectre, the divine Spirit of God's Vengeance, whom Jordan attempted to transform into a Spirit of Redemption, which ended in failure.
In Green Lantern: Rebirth, it is revealed that Jordan was under the influence of a creature known as Parallax when he turned renegade. Parallax was a creature of pure fear that had been imprisoned in the Central Power Battery by the Guardians of the Universe in the distant past. Imprisonment had rendered the creature dormant and it was eventually forgotten, becoming known merely as the "yellow impurity" in the power rings. Sinestro was able to wake Parallax and encourage it to seek out Hal Jordan as a host. Although Parallax had been trying to corrupt Jordan (via his ring) for some time, it was not until after the destruction of Coast City that it was able to succeed. It took advantage of Jordan's weakened emotional state to lure him to Oa and cause him to attack anyone who stood in his way. When Jordan finally entered the Central Power Battery and absorbed all the power, he unwittingly freed the Parallax entity and allowed it to graft onto his soul.
The Spectre bonded with Jordan in the hopes of freeing the former Green Lantern's soul from Parallax's taint, but was not strong enough to do so. In Green Lantern: Rebirth, Parallax began to assert control of the Parallax-Spectre-Jordan composite. Thanks to a supreme effort of will, Jordan was able to free himself from Parallax, rejoin his soul to his body and reclaim his power ring. The newly revived (and youthened) Jordan awoke just in time to save Kyle Rayner and Green Arrow from Sinestro. After the Korugarian's defeat, Jordan was able to successfully lead his fellow Green Lanterns in battle against Parallax and imprison it in the Central Power Battery once more.
Hal Jordan is once again a member of both the Justice League and the Green Lantern Corps, and along with John Stewart is one of the two Corps members assigned to Sector 2814, personally defeating Sinestro in the Sinestro Corps War. Jordan is designated as Green Lantern 2814.1.
Post-"Sinestro Corps War", DC Comics revisited the origin of Hal Jordan as a precursor to "The Blackest Night" storyline, the next chapter in the Geoff Johns era on Green Lantern.

[edit] Bronze Age Green Lanterns

[edit] Guy Gardner
Main article: Guy Gardner (comics)




Guy Gardner. Promotional interior art for Green Lantern Corps: Recharge #1 (Nov 2005), by Patrick Gleason.


In the late 1960s, Guy Gardner appeared as the second choice to replace Abin Sur as Green Lantern of sector 2814. Gardner was originally supposed to receive Abin Sur's ring, but Jordan was closer. This placed him as the "backup" Green Lantern for Jordan. But early in his career as a Green Lantern, tragedy struck Gardner as a power battery blew up in his face, putting him in a coma for years. During the Crisis on Infinite Earths, the Guardians split into factions, one of which appointed a newly revived Gardner as their champion. As a result of his years in a coma, Guy was very emotionally unstable, although he still mostly managed to fight valiantly. He has gone through many changes, including wielding Sinestro's yellow Qwardian power ring, then gaining and losing Vuldarian powers, and readmission to the Corps during Green Lantern: Rebirth. He later became part of the Green Lantern Honor Guard, and oversees new Green Lantern's training. Gardner is designated as Green Lantern 2814.3.

[edit] John Stewart
Main article: John Stewart (comics)




John Stewart. Promotional cover art for Green Lantern (vol. 3) #156, by Ariel Olivetti.


In the early 1970s, John Stewart, an unemployed architect, was selected by the Guardians to replace a comatose Guy Gardner as the backup Green Lantern for Jordan. When Jordan resigned from the Corps for an extended period of time, Stewart served as the regular Lantern for that period. Since then, Stewart was in and out of action due to various circumstances, even becoming the first mortal Guardian of the Universe. He also joined and lead the Darkstars when the Green Lantern Corps were destroyed by Parallax. After that, he took over being Green Lantern for Kyle Rayner when he left Earth, also taking his place in the JLA. Now he has begun serving with Jordan as one of his sector's two designated regular-duty Lanterns designated as Green Lantern 2814.2.

[edit] Modern Age Green Lantern

[edit] Kyle Rayner
Main article: Kyle Rayner




Kyle Rayner. Promotional cover art for Green Lantern (vol. 3) #151, by Jim Lee & Scott Williams.


Kyle Rayner is a struggling freelance artist when he is approached by the last Guardian of the Universe, Ganthet, to become a new Green Lantern with the last power ring. Ganthet's reasons for choosing Rayner remained a secret for quite some time. Despite not being cut from the same cloth of bravery and fearlessness as Hal Jordan — or perhaps because of that — Rayner proved to be popular with readers and his fellow characters. Having continually proven himself on his own and with the JLA, he became known amongst the Oans as The Torch Bearer. He was responsible for the rebirth of the Guardians and the re-ignition of the Central Power Battery, essentially restoring all that Jordan had destroyed as Parallax. Rayner later began operating as the Green Lantern known as Ion.
Kyle Rayner was chosen to wield the last ring because he knew fear, and Parallax had been released from the Central Power Battery. Ganthet knew this and chose Kyle because his experiences dealing with fear enabled him to resist Parallax. Because Parallax is a manifestation of fear, and yellow, none of the other Green Lanterns, including Hal, could harm Parallax and, therefore, came under his control. Kyle taught them to feel and overcome fear so they could defeat Parallax and incarcerate him in the Central Power Battery once again.
Kyle became Ion, who is later revealed to be the manifestation of willpower in the same way Parallax is fear. During the Sinestro Corps War between the Green Lantern Corps and the Sinestro Corps, Ion was imprisoned while Parallax possesses Kyle. In Green Lantern (vol. 4) #24, Parallax consumes Hal Jordan. Hal Jordan enters into Kyle's prison, and with his help, Kyle finally escapes Parallax.
Afterward, Ganthet and Sayd trap Parallax in the Lanterns of the four Green Lanterns of Earth. Ganthet asks Kyle to give up his right to be Ion and become a Green Lantern again. Kyle accepts, and Ganthet gives Kyle a power ring. Kyle is outfitted with a new costume including a mask that looks like the one from his first uniform. Kyle is now a member of the Green Lantern Corps Honor Guard, and has been partnered with Guy Gardner.
Kyle now shows up mostly as part of the ensemble cast of Green Lantern Corps. Corps rookie Sodam Yat took over the mantle of Ion. Sodam has made an appearance in the Legion of Super Heroes Final Crisis tie-in Legion of Three Worlds as the last surviving Green Lantern/Guardian of the Universe.
Kyle is designated as Green Lantern 2814.4 within the Corps.

[edit] Others who have headlined as Green Lantern

[edit] Jade




Jennifer-Lynn Hayden as Green Lantern


Main article: Jade (comics)
The daughter of Alan Scott, the Golden Age Green Lantern, Jennifer-Lynn Hayden would discover she shared her father's mystical connection to the Starheart, which gave her the abilities of a Green Lantern. Choosing to follow in her father's footsteps, she became the superheroine Jade. She would later fight a manifestation of the Starheart and lose those abilities.
After Jade was stripped of her powers, Kyle Rayner gave her a copy of Hal Jordan's power ring. When Rayner left Earth to restart the Green Lantern Corps, Jade donned the classic Green Lantern uniform and served as the planet's Green Lantern until losing the ring during a battle with the villain Fatality. Later, when the ring was returned to her, she changed her Green Lantern uniform to a modified version of Rayner's. Jade continued to function as a Green Lantern until Rayner, as Ion, used his power to restore her connection to the Starheart. During Infinite Crisis, she died while trying to stop Alexander Luthor, Jr. from destroying the universe to create a new multiverse. Upon her death, Jade returned her Starheart power to Rayner.

[edit] Powers and abilities
Main article: Power ring (weapon)





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2007)


Each Green Lantern wields a power ring that can generate a variety of effects, sustained purely by the ring wearer's strength of will. The greater the user's willpower, the more effective the ring. The limits of the power ring's abilities are not clearly defined and it has been referred to as "the most powerful weapon in the universe" on more than one occasion. Across the years, the ring has been shown capable of accomplishing anything within the imagination of the ring bearer. Stories in 2006 retconned the ring's long-established lack of effect on yellow objects, stating that the ring-wielder need only feel fear and overcome it in order to affect yellow objects. In one issue Kyle Rayner blows up an entire yellow sun in order to destroy a group of hundreds of unpopulated planets that held deadly sicknesses by manipulating the sun's energy to destroy itself.
Power rings as used by various wielders have exhibited (but are not limited to) the following effects:

Creates solid 'light energy' which is only limited by the mind
Constructs of green 'solid-energy,' often of tremendous size and/or complexity.
Flight, including flight at speeds beyond that of light.
Plasma bolts.
Ability to walk through walls by travelling through 'the Fourth Dimension' [Alan Scott]
The rings can act as semi-sentient computers, including accessing the Book of Oa, a massive database of everything from the laws of the Guardians and the Corps to the history of the universe.
Time travel.
The rings are still reliant on the lantern-shaped power batteries, but no longer limited to 24 hours' charge as they originally were. Kyle Rayner's ring was the first ring to absorb more power than originally thought, having stored the main power battery's energy following its explosion on Oa.
Telepathic powers.
Translation of virtually all languages.
Force field generation.
Radiation, including simulated kryptonite radiations.
Generate "earplugs" to block out all telepathic communication and manipulation.[6]
Render user invisible.[7]
Green Lantern: Rebirth revealed that only a certain type of willpower can use the ring effectively, as evidenced when Green Arrow's "cynical" willpower barely allows him to generate a single arrow and leaves him exhausted after this feat.
Put humans into a state of suspended animation [8]


[edit] Green Lantern oath
Green Lantern is famous for the oath he recites when he charges his ring. Originally, the oath was simple:


“


...and I shall shed my light over dark evil.
For the dark things cannot stand the light,
The light of the Green Lantern!


”



—Alan Scott



(This oath was later given as an in-joke to Tomar-Re, Green Lantern of sector 2813 and the first Lantern Hal Jordan met after Abin Sur.)
In the mid-1940s, this was revised into the form that became famous during the Hal Jordan era:


“


In brightest day, in blackest night,
No evil shall escape my sight
Let those who worship evil's might,
Beware my power... Green Lantern's light!


”



—Hal Jordan/All Current Lanterns



The word "blackest" was often replaced with "darkest" to avoid racist connotations. The above is the most popular version of Green Lantern's oath. Science fiction writer Alfred Bester, who wrote many Green Lantern stories in the 1940s, has been credited as the creator of this oath. However, in an interview with journalist F. Gwynplaine MacIntyre at the 1979 World Science Fiction Convention in Brighton, England, Bester stated that the brightest-day oath was already in place before he began writing for the character.
The Pre-Crisis version of Hal Jordan has created the oath when he had three early adventures that inspired him on how he can defeat any attempt to elude him. For instance, he captured robbers who used a powerfully bright flare to blind everyone in an area by using his ring as a radar to find them (In brightest day). The second was when he tracked criminals hiding in a dark cave with a fog-like dust suspension that reflected back any external light. Jordan solved the problem by making certain elements of the criminals' bodies grow from within the fog, allowing the Lantern to target them (in blackest night). Finally, Jordan tracked down safecrackers after an inefficient aerial reconnaissance by detecting the faint shockwaves from the explosives used by the criminals and tracing it back (No evil shall escape my sight).
It had been established in the past that each Green Lantern has his, her, or its own oath. For example, Medphyll, the Green Lantern of the planet J586 (seen in Swamp Thing #61, "All Flesh is Grass"), a planet where a sentient plant species lives, has the following oath:

In forest dark or glade beferned
No blade of grass shall go unturned
Let those who have the daylight spurned
Tread not where this green lamp has burned.

Other notable oaths include that of Jack T. Chance:

You who are wicked, evil and mean
I'm the nastiest creep you've ever seen!
Come one, come all, put up a fight
I'll pound your butts with Green Lantern's light!
Yowza.

and that of Rot Lop Fan, a Green Lantern whose species lacks sight, and thus has no concepts of brightness, darkness, day, night, color, or lanterns:

In loudest din or hush profound
My ears catch evil's slightest sound
Let those who toll out evil's knell
Beware my power, the F-Sharp Bell!

Since Green Lantern: Rebirth and the restart of the Green Lantern Corps, the only oath used has been the Brightest Day, Blackest Night version.
In Green Lantern (vol. 4) #27, the Alpha Lanterns are revealed to have their own oath:

In days of peace, in nights of war
Obey the Laws forever more
Misconduct must be answered for,
Swear us the chosen: The Alpha Corps!

In Legion of 3 Worlds, Sodam Yat in the 31st century as the last of the Green Lanterns and the last of the Guardians recited a new oath.

In brightest day, through Blackest Night,
No other Corps shall spread its light!
Let those who try to stop what's right,
Burn like my power, Green Lantern's Light!

It is unknown if this represents his personal oath, or a change for all the Corps after the events the Blackest Night storyline, which has yet to be published. The "other Corps" line refers to the different colored Lanterns that play a pivotal role in Blackest Night and its prelude stories. The final two lines are lifted from the oath of the Sinestro Corps, a more brutal and lethal version of the Green Lantern Corps
In the animated TV series Duck Dodgers, Duck Dodgers temporarily becomes a Green Lantern after accidentally picking up Hal Jordan's laundry. In the first part of the episode, he forgets the real quote and makes up his own version:

In sunny day or sleepless night
Watermelon, cantaloupe, yadda yadda
Erm... superstitious and cowardly lot
With liberty and justice for some!


[edit] In other media
Main article: Green Lantern in other media

[edit] See also

Doctor Spectrum a Marvel superhero based on the Green Lantern as a homage.
Green Lantern Corps
List of Green Lantern enemies
List of Green Lanterns
Power Ring
Sinestro Corps


[edit] Footnotes


^ The series was cancelled in 1972. When it was revived in 1976, the numbering was carried over. The indecia was changed to Green Lantern Corps with issue 206.
^ a b Wallace, Dan (2008), "Green Lantern", in Dougall, Alastair, The DC Comics Encyclopedia, New York: Dorling Kindersley, pp. 144-147, ISBN 0-7566-4119-5, OCLC 213309017 
^ Collectors Society Message Boards: ComicConnect.com progress update: All-American #16 sells for
^ Monitor Duty (Feb. 13, 2006): "Alan Kistler's Profile On: Green Lantern!"
^ Wright, Bradford W. Comic Book Nation. Johns Hopkins, 2001. Pg. 227
^ 52, Week #13. Writers Geoff Johns, Grant Morrison, Greg Rucka and Mark Waid Artists Todd Nauck and Marlo Alquiza.
^ Identity Crisis #2
^ Justice League of America v1 #77 p18 Dec-1969"



[edit] References

Emerald Dawn
Green Lantern Corps. JLResource.com entry
Green Lantern Rebirth
The Book of OA


[edit] External links

Green Lantern in Internet Movie Database
The Green Lantern Shrine
The Unofficial Green Lantern Corps Web Page
Index of Hal Jordan's (and John Stewart's) Earth-1 adventures
Justice League: Mortal in Internet Movie Database








v • d • e

Green Lantern





Creators

Bill Finger • Martin Nodell • John Broome • Gil Kane • Dennis O'Neil • Neal Adams • Ron Marz • Darryl Banks • Other writers and artists






Green Lanterns

Alan Scott • Hal Jordan • Guy Gardner • John Stewart • Kyle Rayner • Jade






Green Lantern Corps

Guardians of the Universe: Appa Ali Apsa  • Ganthet  • Sayd  • Lianna  • Scar
Members: Abin Sur • Arisia • Boodikka • Ch'p • Flodo Span • Galius Zed • Gnort • Graf Toren • Green Man • Isamot Kol • Jack T. Chance • Katma Tui • Ke'Haan • Kilowog • Kreon • Laira • Medphyll • Mogo • Raker Qarrigat • Salaak • Sodam Yat • Soranik Natu • Stel • Tomar-Re • Tomar-Tu • Turytt • Vath Sarn
Additional: Ion • The Alpha Lanterns • The Corpse






Supporting Characters

Alexandra DeWitt • Carol Ferris • Doiby Dickles • Oliver Queen • Roy Harper • Molly Mayne • Obsidian • Rose Canton • Terry Berg • Thomas Kalmaku •Jillian Pearlman






Enemies

Amon Sur • Atrocitus • Black Hand • Controllers • Doctor Polaris • Effigy • Evil Star • Fatality • Goldface • Harlequin • Hector Hammond • Legion • Major Force • Manhunters • Monsieur Stigmonus • Nekron • Nero • Red Lantern Corps • Scar • Shark • Solomon Grundy • Sonar • Star Sapphire • Tattooed Man • Thorn • Traitor • Vandal Savage • Zamaron
Sinestro Corps: Anti-Monitor • Hank Henshaw • Parallax • Sinestro • Superboy-Prime • Other members






Other Corps

Black Lantern Corps •Blue Lantern Corps •Orange Lantern Corps •Red Lantern Corps •Sinestro Corps •Star Sapphire Corps






Locations

Coast City • Korugar • Maltus • Oa • Qward • Zamaron






Storylines

"Snowbirds Don't Fly" • "Emerald Twilight" • "Emerald Knights" • Circle of Fire • Rebirth • Rann-Thanagar War • Recharge • "Sinestro Corps War" • The Blackest Night






Miscellanea

Power Ring • Emotional spectrum • Green Lantern in other media • Green Lantern: First Flight









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Green_Lantern"
Categories: All-American Publications characters | DC Comics superheroes | 1940 comics characters debuts | 1959 comics characters debuts | 1968 comics characters debuts | 1971 comics characters debuts | 1994 comics characters debuts | All-American Publications titles | DC Comics titles | 1941 comic debuts | 1960 comic debuts | 1990 comic debuts | 2005 comic debuts | Superhero comics | Green LanternHidden categories: Set index pop | Title pop | Articles needing additional references from October 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Български
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Français
Italiano
עברית
Nederlands
日本語
Português
Русский
Sardu
Simple English
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
Türkçe
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 01:34.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
