













Democratic Party (United States) - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Democratic_Party_(United_States)";
		var wgTitle = "Democratic Party (United States)";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "5043544";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281804779;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Democratic Party (United States)

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Democratic Party.
For comparison with other parties, see Political parties in the United States#Politics comparison.


Democratic Party





Party Chairman
Tim Kaine (D-VA)


Senate Leader
Joe Biden (President of the United States Senate) (D-DE)
Robert Byrd (Senate president pro tempore) (D-WV)
Harry Reid (majority leader) (D-NV)


House Leader
Nancy Pelosi (speaker) (D-CA)
Steny Hoyer (majority leader) (D-MD)


Founded
1828 (modern)[1]
1792 (historic)


Headquarters
430 South Capitol Street SE
Washington, D.C.
20003


Political ideology
Historical:
Classical liberalism
Bimetallism
States' rights
Modern:
Social liberalism
Progressivism
American liberalism
Third Way


Political position
Fiscal: Center, Center-left
Social: Center, Center-left


International affiliation
None


Seats in the Senate
[2]


Seats in the House of Representatives



Color(s)
Blue (unofficial)


Website
www.democrats.org




United States



This article is part of the series:
Politics and government of
the United States









Federal government


Constitution
Taxation




Legislature


Congress

House

Speaker
Party Leaders
Congressional districts


Senate

President pro tempore
Party Leaders








Presidency


President
Vice President
Cabinet
Federal agencies




Judiciary


Federal courts

Supreme Court
Circuit Courts of Appeal
District Courts






Elections


Presidential elections
Midterm elections




Political Parties


Democratic
Republican
Third parties




Subdivisions


State government

Governors
Legislatures (List)
State Courts


Local Government








Other countries · Atlas
 US Government Portal
view • talk • edit



The Democratic Party is one of the two major contemporary political parties in the United States, along with the Republican Party. It is the oldest political party in continuous operation in the United States and it is one of the oldest parties in the world. Today, the party supports a liberal and/or center-left platform. [3][4][5]
The Democratic Party traces its origins to the Democratic-Republican Party, founded by Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and other influential opponents of the Federalists in 1792. However, the modern Democratic party truly arose in the 1830s, with the election of Andrew Jackson. Since the division of the Republican Party in the election of 1912, it has gradually positioned itself to the left of the Republican Party on economic and social issues. Until the period following the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Democratic Party was primarily a coalition of two parties divided by region. Southern Democrats were typically given high conservative ratings by the American Conservative Union while northern Democrats were typically given very low ratings. Southern Democrats were a core bloc of the bipartisan conservative coalition that lasted through the Reagan-era. The economically activist philosophy of Franklin D. Roosevelt, which has strongly influenced American liberalism, has shaped much of the party's economic agenda since 1932, and served to tie the two regional factions of the party together until the late 1960s. In fact, Roosevelt's New Deal coalition usually controlled the national government until the 1970s.
In 2004, it was the largest political party, with 72 million voters (42.6% of 169 million registered) claiming affiliation. By comparison the Republican Party has 55 million members. [6] An August 2008 estimate claims that 51% of registered voters, including independents, lean toward the Democratic Party and 38% lean toward the Republican Party.[7] Since the 2008 general elections, the Democratic Party is the majority party for the 111th Congress; the party holds a majority in both the House of Representatives and the United States Senate. Democrats also hold a majority of state governorships and control a majority of state legislatures. Barack Obama, the current President of the United States, is the 16th Democrat to hold that office.




Contents


1 Current structure and composition
2 Ideology
3 Voter Base

3.1 Liberals
3.2 Civil libertarians
3.3 Conservatives
3.4 Centrists
3.5 Professionals

3.5.1 Academia


3.6 Youth
3.7 Labor
3.8 Working class
3.9 African Americans
3.10 Hispanics
3.11 Asian Americans
3.12 Native Americans
3.13 Jewish Americans
3.14 Arab and Muslim Americans


4 Recent issue stances

4.1 Economic issues

4.1.1 Minimum wage
4.1.2 Renewable energy and oil
4.1.3 Fiscal policy
4.1.4 Health care and insurance coverage
4.1.5 Environment
4.1.6 College education
4.1.7 Trade agreements
4.1.8 Alternative Minimum Tax


4.2 Social issues

4.2.1 Discrimination
4.2.2 LGBT rights
4.2.3 Reproductive rights
4.2.4 Stem cell research


4.3 Foreign policy issues

4.3.1 Invasion of Afghanistan
4.3.2 Israel
4.3.3 Iraq War
4.3.4 Unilateralism
4.3.5 Political status of Puerto Rico


4.4 Legal issues

4.4.1 Torture
4.4.2 USA PATRIOT Act
4.4.3 Right to privacy
4.4.4 Gun control




5 History
6 Name and symbols
7 State and territorial parties
8 See also
9 References
10 External links

10.1 Organizations
10.2 General







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Current structure and composition




Registered Democrats, Republicans and Independents in 2004.[6]


The Democratic National Committee (DNC) is responsible for promoting Democratic campaign activities. While the DNC is responsible for overseeing the process of writing the Democratic Platform, the DNC is more focused on campaign and organizational strategy than public policy. In presidential elections it supervises the Democratic National Convention. The national convention is, subject to the charter of the party, the ultimate authority within the Democratic Party when it is in session, with the DNC running the party's organization at other times. The DNC is currently chaired by Virginia Governor Tim Kaine.
The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee (DCCC) assists party candidates in House races; its current chairman (selected by the party caucus) is Rep. Chris Van Hollen of Maryland. Similarly the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee (DSCC) raises large sums for Senate races. It is currently headed by Senator Robert Menendez of New Jersey. The Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee (DLCC), currently chaired by Mike Gronstal of Iowa, is a smaller organization with much less funding that focuses on state legislative races. The DNC sponsors the College Democrats of America (CDA), a student-outreach organization with the goal of training and engaging a new generation of Democratic activists. Democrats Abroad is the organization for Americans living outside the United States; they work to advance the goals of the party and encourage Americans living abroad to support the Democrats. The Young Democrats of America (YDA) is a youth-led organization that attempts to draw in and mobilize young people for Democratic candidates, but operates outside of the DNC. In addition, the recently created branch of the Young Democrats, the Young Democrats High School Caucus, attempts to raise awareness and activism amongst teenagers to not only vote and volunteer, but participate in the future as well.The Democratic Governors Association (DGA) is an organization supporting the candidacies of Democratic gubernatorial nominees and incumbents; it is currently chaired by Governor Brian Schweitzer of Montana. Similarly the mayors of the largest cities and urban centres convene as the National Conference of Democratic Mayors.
Each state also has a state committee, made up of elected committee members as well as ex-officio committee members (usually elected officials and representatives of major constituencies), which in turn elects a chair. County, town, city and ward committees generally are composed of individuals elected at the local level. State and local committees often coordinate campaign activities within their jurisdiction, oversee local conventions and in some cases primaries or caucuses, and may have a role in nominating candidates for elected office under state law. Rarely do they have much funding, but in 2005 DNC Chairman Dean began a program (called the "50 State Strategy") of using DNC national funds to assist all state parties and paying for full-time professional staffers.[8]

[edit] Ideology
Further information: Political ideologies in the United States and Factions in the Democratic Party (United States)




Composition of the Democratic base according to a 2005 Pew Research Center study.


Since the 1890s, the Democratic Party has favored "liberal" positions (the term "liberal" in this sense describes social liberalism, not classical liberalism). In recent exit polls, the Democratic Party has had broad appeal across all socio-ethno-economic demographics.[9][10][11] The Democratic Party is currently the nation's largest party. In 2004, roughly 72 million (42.6 percent) Americans were registered Democrats, compared to 55 million (32.5 percent) Republicans and 42 million (24.8 percent) independents.[6]
Historically, the party has favored farmers, laborers, labor unions, and religious and ethnic minorities; it has opposed unregulated business and finance, and favored progressive income taxes. In foreign policy, internationalism (including interventionism) was a dominant theme from 1913 to the mid-1960s. In the 1930s, the party began advocating welfare spending programs targeted at the poor. The party had a pro-business wing, typified by Al Smith, and a Southern conservative wing that shrank after President Lyndon B. Johnson supported the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The major influences for liberalism were labor unions (which peaked in the 1936–1952 era), and the African American wing, which has steadily grown since the 1960s. Since the 1970s, environmentalism has been a major new component.
In recent decades, the party has adopted a centrist economic and more socially progressive agenda, with the voter base having shifted considerably. Once dominated by unionized labor and the working class, the Democratic base currently consists of well-educated and relatively affluent liberals, the socially more conservative working class, middle class moderates, the young, women, minorities, and LGBTS.[12] Today, Democrats advocate more social freedoms, affirmative action, balanced budget, and a free enterprise system tempered by government intervention (mixed economy). The economic policy adopted by the modern Democratic Party, including the former Clinton administration, may also be referred to as the "Third Way".[13] The party believes that government should play a role in alleviating poverty and social injustice, even if such requires a larger role for government and progressive taxation.
The Democratic Party, once dominant in the Southeastern United States (with the exception of Virginia, North Carolina, and Florida), is now strongest in the Northeast (Mid-Atlantic and New England), Great Lakes region, and the Pacific Coast (including Hawaii). The Democrats are also strongest in major cities.



[edit] Voter Base

[edit] Liberals
Main articles: Modern liberalism in the United States, Liberalism in the United States, and Progressivism in the United States




Opinions of liberals in a 2005 Pew Research Center study.


Social liberals, also referred to as progressives or modern liberals, constitute roughly half of the Democratic voter base. Liberals thereby form the largest united typological demographic within the Democratic base. According to the 2008 exit poll results, liberals constituted 22 percent of the electorate, and 89 percent of American liberals favored the candidate of the Democratic Party.[14] While college-educated professionals were mostly Republican until the 1950s, they now compose perhaps the most vital component of the Democratic Party.[15] A majority of liberals favor diplomacy over military action, stem cell research, the legalization of same-sex marriage, secular government, stricter gun control, and environmental protection laws as well as the preservation of abortion rights. Immigration and cultural diversity is deemed positive; liberals favor cultural pluralism, a system in which immigrants retain their native culture in addition to adopting their new culture. They tend to be divided on free trade agreements and organizations such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Most liberals oppose increased military spending and the display of the Ten Commandments in public buildings.[12]
This ideological group differs from the traditional organized labor base. According to the Pew Research Center, a plurality of 41 percent resided in mass affluent households and 49 percent were college graduates, the highest figure of any typographical group. It was also the fastest growing typological group between the late 1990s and early 2000s.[12] Liberals include most of academia[16] and large portion of the professional class.[9][10][11]
Many progressive Democrats are descendants of the New Left of Democratic presidential candidate Senator George McGovern of South Dakota; others were involved in the presidential candidacies of Vermont Governor Howard Dean and U.S. Representative Dennis Kucinich of Ohio; still others are disaffected former members of the Green Party.[citation needed] The Congressional Progressive Caucus (CPC) is a caucus of progressive Democrats, and is the single largest Democratic caucus in the House of Representatives. Its members have included Dennis Kucinich of Ohio, John Conyers of Michigan, Jim McDermott of Washington, John Lewis of Georgia, Barbara Lee of California, the late Senator Paul Wellstone of Minnesota, and Sherrod Brown of Ohio, now a Senator.

[edit] Civil libertarians
See also: Libertarian Democrat
Civil libertarians also often support the Democratic Party because Democratic positions on such issues as civil rights and separation of church and state are more closely aligned to their own than the positions of the Republican Party, and because the Democratic economic agenda may be more appealing to them than that of the Libertarian Party.[citation needed] They oppose gun control, the "War on Drugs," protectionism, corporate welfare, government debt, and an interventionist foreign policy. The Democratic Freedom Caucus is an organized group of this faction.

[edit] Conservatives
See also: Southern Democrats.
The Pew Research Center has stated that conservative Democrats represent 15% of registered voters and 14% of the general electorate.[12] In the House of Representatives, the Blue Dog Coalition, a caucus of fiscal and social conservatives and moderates, primarily southerners, forms part of the Democratic Party's current faction of conservative Democrats. They have acted as a unified voting bloc in the past, giving its forty plus members some ability to change legislation and broker compromises with the Republican Party's leadership. Historically, southern Democrats were generally much more ideologically conservative. In 1972, the last year that a sizable number of conservatives dominated the southern wing of the Democratic Party, the American Conservative Union gave higher ratings to most southern Democratic Senators and Congressmen than it did to Republicans. Today, Democrats are usually classified as 'conservatives' on the basis of holding some socially conservative views to the right of the national party, even though their overall viewpoint is generally far more liberal than conservative Democrats of years past.

[edit] Centrists
Though centrist Democrats differ on a variety of issues, they typically foster a mix of political views and ideas. Compared to other Democratic factions, they tend to be more supportive of the use of military force, including the war in Iraq, and are more willing to reduce government welfare, as indicated by their support for welfare reform and tax cuts. One of the most influential factions is the Democratic Leadership Council (DLC), a nonprofit organization that advocates centrist positions for the party. The DLC hails President Bill Clinton as proof of the viability of "Third Way" politicians and a DLC success story. Former Representative Harold Ford, Jr. of Tennessee is its current chairman.

[edit] Professionals
Professionals, those who have a college education and whose work revolves around the conceptualization of ideas, have supported the Democratic Party by a slight majority since 2000. Between 1988 and 2000, professionals favored Democrats by a 12 percentage point margin. While the professional class was once a stronghold of the Republican Party it has become increasingly split between the two parties, leaning in favor of the Democratic Party. The increasing support for Democratic candidates among professionals may be traced to the prevalence of social liberal values among this group.[17]


“
Professionals, who are, roughly speaking, college-educated producers of services and ideas, used to be the most staunchly Republican of all occupational groups... now chiefly working for large corporations and bureaucracies rather than on their own, and heavily influenced by the environmental, civil-rights, and feminist movements — began to vote Democratic. In the four elections from 1988 to 2000, they backed Democrats by an average of 52 percent to 40 percent.
”


A study on the political attitudes of medical students, for example, found that "U.S. medical students are considerably more likely to be liberal than conservative and are more likely to be liberal than are other young U.S. adults. Future U.S. physicians may be more receptive to liberal messages than conservative ones, and their political orientation may profoundly affect their health system attitudes."[18] Similar results are found for professors, who are more strongly inclined towards liberalism and the Democratic Party than other occupational groups.[16]

[edit] Academia
Academics, intellectuals and the highly educated overall constitute an important part of the Democratic voter base. Academia in particular tends to be progressive. In a 2005 survey, nearly 72% of full-time faculty members identified as liberal, while 15% identified as conservative. The social sciences and humanities were the most liberal disciplines while business was the most conservative. Male professors at more advanced stages of their careers as well as those at elite institutions tend be the most liberal.[16] Another survey by UCLA conducted in 2001/02, found 47.6% of professors identifying as liberal, 34.3% as moderate, and 18% as conservative.[19] Percentages of professors who identified as liberal ranged from 49% in business to over 80% in political science and the humanities.[16] Social scientists, such as Brett O'Bannon of DePauw University, have claimed that the "liberal" opinions of professors seem to have little, if any, effect on the political orientation of students.[20][21] Whether or not that is true, some conservatives and Republicans complain they are offended and even threatened by the liberal atmosphere of college campuses. As of July 2008 the Students for Academic Freedom arm of the David Horowitz Freedom Center, a conservative organization, posted a list of 440 student complaints, most of which pertain to perceived liberal bias of college professors (Abuse Center).
The liberal inclination of American professors is attributed by some to the liberal outlook of the highly educated.[20]
Those with Postgraduate education, have become increasingly Democratic beginning in the 1992,[22] 1996,[22] 2000,[9] 2004,[10] and 2008[23] elections. Intellectualism, is the tendency to constantly reexamine issues, or in the words of Edwards shields, the "penetration beyond the screen of immediate concrete experience," have also been named as an explanation why the academy is strongly democratic and liberal.[24][25]
Although Democrats are well represented at the post graduate level, self-identified Republicans appear to dominate among those who have, at the least, attained a 4-year college degree. The trends for the years 1955 through 2004 are shown by gender in the graphs below, reproduced with permission from Democrats and Republicans — Rhetoric and Reality, a book published in 2008 by Joseph Fried.[26] These results are based on surveys conducted by the National Election Studies, supported by the National Science Foundation.
















[edit] Youth
Studies have shown that younger voters tend to vote mostly for Democratic candidates in recent years. Despite supporting Ronald Reagan and George H. W. Bush, the young have voted in favor of the Democratic presidential candidate in every election since Bill Clinton in 1992, and are more likely to identify as liberals than the general population.[27] In the 2004 presidential election, Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry received 54% of the vote from voters of the age group 18–29, while Republican George W. Bush received 45% of the vote from the same age group. In the 2006 midterm elections, the Democrats received 60% of the vote from the same age group.[10][11] Polls suggest that younger voters tend to be more liberal than the general population and have more liberal views than the general public on same-sex marriage and universal healthcare, helping Barack Obama carry 66% of their votes in 2008.

[edit] Labor
Since the 1930s, a critical component of the Democratic Party coalition has been organized labor. Labor unions supply a great deal of the money, grass roots political organization, and voting base of support for the party. Democrats are far more likely to be represented by unions, although union membership has declined, in general, during the last few decades. This trend is depicted in the following graph from the book, Democrats and Republicans — Rhetoric and Reality.[28] It is based on surveys conducted by the National Election Studies (NES).







The historic decline in union membership over the past half century has been accompanied by a growing disparity between public sector and private sector union membership percentages. The three most significant labor groupings in the Democratic coalition today are the AFL-CIO and Change to Win labor federations, as well as the National Education Association, a large, unaffiliated teachers' union. Both the AFL-CIO and Change to Win have identified their top legislative priority for 2007 as passage of the Employee Free Choice Act. Other important issues for labor unions include supporting industrial policy (including protectionism) that sustains unionized manufacturing jobs, raising the minimum wage and promoting broad social programs such as Social Security and universal health care.

[edit] Working class
Further information: Social class in the United States




American social class model according to Dennis Gilbert.[29]


While the American working class has lost much of its political strength with the decline of labor unions,[30] it remains a stronghold of the Democratic Party and continues as an essential part of the Democratic base. Today roughly a third of the American public is estimated to be working class with around 52 percent being either members of the working or lower classes.[29][31] Yet, as those with lower socioeconomic status are less likely to vote, the working and lower classes are underrepresented in the electorate. The working class is largely distinguished by highly routinized and closely supervised work. It consists mainly of clerical and blue-collar workers.[29] Even though most in the working class are able to afford an adequate standard of living, high economic insecurity and possible personal benefit from an extended social safety net, make the majority of working class person left-of-center on economic issues. Most working class Democrats differ from most liberals, however, in their more socially conservative views. Working class Democrats tend to be more religious and likely to belong to an ethnic minority. Socially conservative and disadvantaged Democrats are among the least educated and lowest earning ideological demographics. In 2005, only 15% had a college degree, compared to 27% at the national average and 49% of liberals, respectively. Together socially conservative and the financially disadvantaged comprised roughly 54% of the Democratic base.[12] The continued importance of the working class votes manifests itself in recent CNN exit polls, which shows that the majority of those with low incomes and little education vote for the Democratic Party.[9][10][11]

[edit] African Americans
From the end of the Civil War, African Americans almost unanimously favored the Republican Party due to its overwhelming political and more tangible efforts in achieving abolition, particularly through President Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation. The south had long been a Democrat stronghold, favoring a state's right to legal slavery. In addition, the ranks of the fledgling Ku Klux Klan were comprised almost entirely of white Democrats angry over poor treatment by northerners, both perceived and actual. However, as years passed and memories waned, African Americans began drifting to the Democratic Party, as Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal programs gave economic relief to all minorities, including African Americans and Hispanics. Support for the Civil Rights Movement in the 1960s by Democratic presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson and a hard-fought Republican congressional movement, helped give the Democrats even larger support among the African American community, which consistently vote 85-95% Democrat. However, this alienated many of the southern whites that had been a stronghold for Democrats in the past. In addition, recent Caribbean and African immigrants have voted solidly Democratic.

[edit] Hispanics
The Hispanic population, particularly the large Mexican American and Salvadoran American population in the Southwest and the large Puerto Rican and Dominican populations in the Northeast, have been strong supporters of the Democratic Party. They commonly favor liberal views on immigration. In the 1996 presidential election, Democratic President Bill Clinton received 72 percent of the Hispanic vote. Since then, however, the Republican Party has gained increasing support from the Hispanic community, especially among Hispanic Protestants and Pentecostals. Along with Bush's much more liberal views on immigration, President Bush was the first Republican president to gain 40 percent of the Hispanic vote (he did so in the 2004 presidential election). Yet, the Republican Party's support among Hispanics eroded in the 2006 mid-term elections, dropping from 44 to 30 percent, with the Democrats gaining in the Hispanic vote from 55 percent in 2004 to 69 percent in 2006.[10][11] The shift in the Hispanic population's support back to the Democratic party was largely due to the Immigration Debate,[citation needed] which was sparked by H. R. 4437, a Republican enforcement-only bill concerning illegal immigration. Democrats increased their share of the Hispanic vote in the 2008 presidential election, with Barack Obama receiving 67%. Cuban Americans still heavily vote Republican but Mexican Americans, Puerto Rican Americans, Dominican Americans, and Central American and South American immigrants have all voted dependably for Democrats.

[edit] Asian Americans
The Democratic Party also has considerable support in the growing Asian American population. The Asian American population had been a stronghold of the Republican Party until the 1992 presidential election in which George H. W. Bush won 55% of the Asian American vote, compared to Bill Clinton winning 31%, and Ross Perot winning 15% of the Asian American vote. The Democrats made gains among the Asian American population starting with 1996 and in 2006, won 62% of the Asian American vote. This is due to demographic shifts in the Asian American community, with growing numbers of well-educated Chinese and Indian American immigrants that are typically economic centrists and social progressives. Newer generations of more liberal Vietnamese American and Filipino American youth have also began to replace older more conservative generations that have voted reliably Republican. Vietnamese Americans still vote mostly Republican (though this has lessened recently), while Chinese Americans, Indian Americans, Korean Americans, Japanese Americans, Southeast Asian Americans other than Vietnamese (especially Hmong Americans, Cambodian Americans, and Laotian Americans,) and Pacific Islander Americans have voted mostly Democratic. Filipino Americans have recently begun to lean Democratic, especially the young. Younger Asian-Americans of all ethnic backgrounds aged 18–30 have gravitated towards the Democratic Party in the last few elections.

[edit] Native Americans
The Democratic Party also has strong support among the Native American population, particularly in Arizona, New Mexico, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Washington, Alaska, Minnesota, Wisconsin, and North Carolina.[32]

[edit] Jewish Americans
Jewish American communities tend to be a stronghold for the Democratic Party, with more than 70% of Jewish voters having cast their ballots for the Democrats in the 2004 and 2006 elections.[10][11] Support tends to vary among specific sectarian groups, with only 13% of Orthodox Jews supporting Barack Obama while around 60% of Conservative Jews and Reform Jews do so.[33]

[edit] Arab and Muslim Americans
Arab Americans and Muslim Americans have leaned Democratic since the Iraq War.[34] Zogby found in June 2007 that 39% of Arab Americans identify as Democrats, 26% as Republicans, and 28% as independents.[34] Arab Americans historically voted Republican until recent years, having supported George W. Bush over Al Gore in 2000.[35]

[edit] Recent issue stances
These views are generally held by most Democrats. Some Democrats take other positions on these issues.

[edit] Economic issues

[edit] Minimum wage
Democrats favor a higher minimum wage, and more regular increases, in order to assist the working poor. The Fair Minimum Wage Act of 2007 was an early component of the Democrats' agenda during the 110th Congress. In 2006, the Democrats supported six state ballot initiatives to increase the minimum wage; all six initiatives passed.

[edit] Renewable energy and oil
Democrats have opposed tax cuts and incentives to oil companies, favoring a policy of developing domestic renewable energy, such as Montana's state-supported wind farm and "clean coal" programs as well as setting in place a cap and trade policy in hopes of reducing carbon emissions.

[edit] Fiscal policy
Democrats generally support a more progressive tax structure to provide more services and reduce injustice.[36] Currently they have proposed reversing those tax cuts the Bush administration gave to the wealthiest Americans while wishing to keep in place those given to the middle class.[36][37] Democrats generally support more government spending on social services while spending less on the military.[38][39] They oppose the cutting of social services, such as Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, and various welfare programs,[40] believing it to be harmful to efficiency and social justice. Democrats believe the benefits of social services, in monetary and non-monetary terms, are a more productive labor force and cultured population, and believe that the benefits of this are greater than any benefits that could be derived from lower taxes, especially on top earners, or cuts to social services. Furthermore, Democrats see social services as essential towards providing positive freedom, i.e. freedom derived from economic opportunity. The Democratic-led House of Representatives reinstated the PAYGO (pay-as-you-go) budget rule at the start of the 110th Congress.[41] DNC Chairman Howard Dean has cited Bill Clinton's presidency as a model for fiscal responsibility.

[edit] Health care and insurance coverage
Democrats call for "affordable and quality health care," and many advocate an expansion of government intervention in this area. Many Democrats favor national health insurance or universal health care in a variety of forms to address the rising costs of modern health insurance. Some Democrats, such as Representative John Dingell and Senator Edward Kennedy, have called for a program of "Medicare for All."[42]
Some Democratic governors have supported purchasing Canadian drugs, citing lower costs and budget restrictions as a primary incentive. Recognizing that unpaid insurance bills increase costs to the service provider, who passes the cost on to health-care consumers, many Democrats advocate expansion of health insurance coverage.

[edit] Environment
Democrats believe that the government should protect the environment, and have promised to fight to strengthen the laws that ensure people have clean air to breathe and clean water to drink. They also promise to make sure these laws are enforced. They feel that a sensible energy policy is key to a strong economy, national security, and a clean environment.[43]
The Democratic Party rejects the idea that a healthy economy and a healthy environment is mutually exclusive, because they believe that a cleaner environment means a stronger economy. They protect hunting and fishing heritage by expanding conservation lands. They encourage open space and rail travel to relieve highway and airport congestion and improve air quality and economy, and "believe that communities, environmental interests, and government should work together to protect resources while ensuring the vitality of local economies. Once Americans were led to believe they had to make a choice between the economy and the environment. They now know this is a false choice."[44]
The biggest environmental concern of the Democratic party is global warming. Democrats, most notably former Vice President Al Gore, have pressed for stern regulation of greenhouse gases. On October 15, 2007, he won the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to build greater knowledge about man-made climate change, and laying the foundations for the measures needed to counteract these changes. asserting that "the climate crisis is not a political issue, it is a moral and spiritual challenge to all of humanity."[45]

[edit] College education
Most Democrats have the long-term aim of having low-cost, publicly funded college education with low tuition fees (like in much of Europe and Canada), which should be available to every eligible American student, or alternatively, with increasing state funding for student financial aid such as the Pell Grant or college tuition tax deduction.[46][47]

[edit] Trade agreements
The Democratic Party has a mixed record on international trade agreements that reflects a diversity of viewpoints in the party. The liberal and cosmopolitan wing of the party, including the intelligentsia and college-educated professionals overall, tend to favor globalization, while the organized labor wing of the party opposes it.[48] In the 1990s, the Clinton administration and a number of prominent Democrats pushed through a number of agreements such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Since then, the party's shift away from free trade became evident in the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) vote, with 15 House Democrats voting for the agreement and 187 voting against.[49][50]
In his 1997 Achieving Our Country, philosopher Richard Rorty, professor at Stanford University states that economic globalization "invites two responses from the Left. The first is to insist that the inequalities between nations need to be mitigated... The second is to insist that the primary responsibility of each democratic nation-state is to its own least advantaged citizens... the first response suggests that the old democracies should open their borders, whereas the second suggests that they should close them. The first response comes naturally to academic leftists, who have always been internationally minded. The second comes naturally to members of trade unions, and to marginally employed people who can most easily be recruited into right-wing populist movements." (p. 88)[48]

[edit] Alternative Minimum Tax
While the Democratic Party is in support of a progressive tax structure, it has vowed to adjust the Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT). The tax was originally designed to tax the rich but now may affect many households, especially those with incomes between $75,000 to $100,000. The party proposed to re-adjust the tax in such manner as to restore its initial intention. According to a 2007 Reuters News Report, "House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Charles B. Rangel has said he will push for permanent AMT relief for those taxpayers who were never meant to pay it."[51]

[edit] Social issues

[edit] Discrimination
The Democratic Party supports equal opportunity for all Americans regardless of sex, age, race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, creed, or national origin. The Party supports affirmative action programs to further this goal. Democrats also strongly support the Americans with Disabilities Act to prohibit discrimination against people on the basis of physical or mental disability.

[edit] LGBT rights
The Democratic Party is divided on the subject of same-sex marriage. Some members favor civil unions for same-sex couples, others favor full and equal legalized marriage, and others are opposed to same-sex marriage on religious or ideological grounds. A June 2008 Newsweek poll found that 42% of Democrats support same-sex marriage while 23% support civil unions or domestic partnership laws and 28% oppose any legal recognition at all.[52] The 2004 Democratic National Platform stated that marriage should be defined at the state level and it repudiated the Federal Marriage Amendment.[53] Senator John Kerry, Democratic presidential candidate in 2004, did not support same-sex marriage.
President Barack Obama has stated that he considers marriage to be "something sanctified between a man and a woman". He campaigned for the election promising to "give same-sex couples equal legal rights and privileges as married couples" in civil unions.[54] At the same time, Obama opposed California's Prop 8,[55] and he has promised to repeal the Defense of Marriage Act.[54] Obama has stated that generally "decisions about marriage should be left to the states as they always have been."[56]
A broad majority of Democrats have supported other LGBT related laws such as extending hate crime statutes to cover violence against LGBT people, legally preventing discrimination against LGBT people in the workforce, and repealing Don't Ask, Don't Tell. Some issues are controversial while others have wide support. A 2006 Pew Research Center poll of Democrats found that 55% support gay adoption with 40% opposed while 70% support gays in the military with only 23% opposed.[57]

[edit] Reproductive rights
Most members of the Democratic Party believe that all women should have access to birth control, and supports public funding of contraception for poor women. The Democratic Party, in its national platforms since 1992, has called for abortion to be "safe, legal and rare" — namely, keeping it legal by rejecting laws that allow governmental interference in abortion decisions, and reducing the number of abortions by promoting both knowledge of reproduction and contraception, and incentives for adoption. When Congress voted on the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act in 2003, Congressional Democrats were split, with a minority (including current Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid) supporting the ban, and the majority of Democrats opposing the legislation.
The Democratic Party opposes attempts to reverse the 1973 Supreme Court decision Roe v. Wade, which declared abortion covered by the constitutionally protected individual right to privacy under the Ninth Amendment, and Planned Parenthood v. Casey, which lays out the legal framework in which government action alleged to violate that right is assessed by courts. As a matter of the right to privacy and of gender equality, many Democrats believe all women should have the ability to choose to abort without governmental interference. They believe that each woman, conferring with her conscience, has the right to choose for herself whether abortion is morally correct. Many Democrats also believe that poor women should have a right to publicly funded abortions.
Current Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid self-identifies as 'pro-life', while President Barack Obama and Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi self-identify as 'pro-choice'. The pro-life faction in the Party is represented by groups such as Democrats for Life of America while the pro-choice faction is represented by groups such as EMILY's List. A Newsweek poll from October 2006 found that 25% of Democrats were pro-life while a 69% majority were pro-choice.[58] Pro-life Democrats themselves state that they represent over 40% of Democrats.[59]

[edit] Stem cell research
The Democratic Party has voiced overwhelming support for all stem cell research with federal funding.[60] In his 2004 platform, John Kerry affirmed his support of federally funded stem cell research "under the strictest ethical guidelines," saying, "We will not walk away from the chance to save lives and reduce human suffering."[53]

[edit] Foreign policy issues

[edit] Invasion of Afghanistan
Democrats in the House of Representatives and United States Senate near-unanimously voted for the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists against "those responsible for the recent attacks launched against the United States" in Afghanistan in 2001, supporting the NATO coalition invasion of the nation. Most elected Democrats continue in their support of the Afghanistan conflict, and some have voiced concerns that the Iraq War is shifting too many resources away from the presence in Afghanistan.[61][62][63] Some Democrats also oppose the invasion.[64] In spring 2008, Gallup found that 41% of Democrats called the invasion a "mistake" while a 55% majority disagreed.[64]
Since 2006, Democratic candidate Barack Obama has called for a "surge" of troops into Afghanistan and, since 2008, Republican candidate John McCain has also called for a "surge".[63] Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi and Senator Chuck Schumer have expressed support for Obama's plan.[61] Pelosi has stated that “We need more resources there... We are understaffed there, not only in our military presence, but also in terms of the reconstruction of Afghanistan."[61] In spring 2008, Gallup found Democrats evenly divided about whether or not more troops should be sent — 56% support it if it would mean removing troops from Iraq and only 47% support it otherwise.[64]

[edit] Israel
See also: National Jewish Democratic Council. See also: Israel-United States relations.
71% of Americans define themselves as supporters of the state of Israel, making it Americans' 5th most favored country.[65] Democrats are no exception and have both recently and historically supported Israel.[65][66] A 2008 Gallup Poll found that 64% say that they have a favorable image of Israel while only 16% say that they have a favorable image of the Palestinian Authority.[65] Within the party, the majority view is held by the Democratic leadership with the minority pro-Palestinian view held by individual members of the party's left-wing such as John Conyers Jr., George Miller, Nick Rahall, Dave Obey, Dennis J. Kucinich, Jim McDermott, and Cynthia McKinney as well as former President Jimmy Carter.[66] The party leadership refers to the other side as a "fringe".[66]
The 2008 Democratic Party Platform acknowledged a "special relationship with Israel, grounded in shared interests and shared values, and a clear, strong, fundamental commitment to the security of Israel, our strongest ally in the region and its only established democracy." It also included:

It is in the best interests of all parties, including the United States, that we take an active role to help secure a lasting settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict with a democratic, viable Palestinian state dedicated to living in peace and security side by side with the Jewish State of Israel. To do so, we must help Israel identify and strengthen those partners who are truly committed to peace, while isolating those who seek conflict and instability, and stand with Israel against those who seek its destruction. The United States and its Quartet partners should continue to isolate Hamas until it renounces terrorism, recognizes Israel’s right to exist, and abides by past agreements. Sustained American leadership for peace and security will require patient efforts and the personal commitment of the President of the United States. The creation of a Palestinian state through final status negotiations, together with an international compensation mechanism, should resolve the issue of Palestinian refugees by allowing them to settle there, rather than in Israel. All understand that it is unrealistic to expect the outcome of final status negotiations to be a full and complete return to the armistice lines of 1949. Jerusalem is and will remain the capital of Israel. The parties have agreed that Jerusalem is a matter for final status negotiations. It should remain an undivided city accessible to people of all faiths.[67]

A January 2009 Pew Research Center study found that, when asked "which side do you sympathize with more", 42% of Democrats and 33% of liberals side with the Israelis. Around half of all political moderates and/or independents sided with Israel.[68]

[edit] Iraq War
In 2002, Democrats were divided as a majority (29 for, 21 against) in the Senate and a minority of Democrats in the House (81 for, 126 against) voted for the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq. Since then, many prominent Democrats, such as former Senator John Edwards, have expressed regret about this decision, and have called it a mistake, while others, such as Senator Hillary Clinton have criticized the conduct of the war but not repudiated their initial vote for it. Referring to Iraq, in April 2007 Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid declared the war to be "lost" while other Democrats (especially during the 2004 presidential election cycle) accused the President of lying to the public about WMDs in Iraq. Amongst lawmakers, Democrats are the most vocal opponents of Operation Iraqi Freedom and campaigned on a platform of withdrawal ahead of the 2006 mid-term elections.
A March 2003 CBS News poll taken a few days before the invasion of Iraq found that 34% of Democrats would support it without United Nations backing, 51% would support it only with its backing, and 14% would not support it at all.[69] The Los Angeles Times stated in early April 2003 that 70% of Democrats supported the decision to invade while 27% opposed it.[70] The Pew Research Center stated in August 2007 that opposition increased from 37% during the initial invasion to 74%.[71] In April 2008, a CBS News poll found that about 90% of Democrats disapprove of the Bush administration's conduct and want to end the war within the next year.[72]
Democrats in the House of Representatives near-unanimously supported a non-binding resolution disapproving of President Bush's decision to send additional troops into Iraq in 2007. Congressional Democrats overwhelmingly supported military funding legislation that included a provision that set "a timeline for the withdrawal of all US combat troops from Iraq" by March 31, 2008, but also would leave combat forces in Iraq for purposes such as targeted counter-terrorism operations.[73][74] After a veto from the president, and a failed attempt in Congress to override the veto,[75] the U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans' Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Appropriations Act, 2007 was passed by Congress and signed by the president after the timetable was dropped. Criticism of the Iraq war subsided after the Iraq War troop surge of 2007 led to a dramatic decrease in Iraqi violence. The Democratic-controlled 110th Congress continued to fund efforts in both Iraq and Afghanistan. Presidential candidate Barack Obama advocated a withdrawal of combat troops within Iraq by late 2010 with a residual force of peacekeeping troops left in place.[76] He stated that both the speed of withdrawal and the amount of troops left over would be "entirely conditions-based."[76]
On February 27, 2009, President Obama announced, “As a candidate for president, I made clear my support for a timeline of 16 months to carry out this drawdown, while pledging to consult closely with our military commanders upon taking office to ensure that we preserve the gains we’ve made and protect our troops... Those consultations are now complete, and I have chosen a timeline that will remove our combat brigades over the next 18 months."[77] Around 50,000 non-combat related forces will remain.[77] Obama's plan drew wide bipartisan support, including defeated Republican Presidential candidate Senator John McCain.[77]

[edit] Unilateralism
Democrats usually oppose the doctrine of unilateralism, which dictates that the United States should use military force without any assistance from other nations whenever it believes there is a threat to its security or welfare. They believe the United States should act in the international arena in concert with strong alliances and broad international support. This was a major foreign policy issue of John Kerry's 2004 presidential campaign; his platform attributed rifts with international allies to unilateralism. Barack Obama's 2008 campaign also discussed promoting the image of the United States abroad.
In a general sense, the modern Democratic Party is more closely aligned with the international relations theories of liberalism, neoliberalism, and functionalism than realism and neorealism, though realism has some influence on the party. Wilsonian idealism, in which unilateral foreign intervention is justified to end genocide or other humanitarian crises, has also played a major role both historically and currently- with its supporters known as 'liberal hawks'.

[edit] Political status of Puerto Rico
The Democratic Party have expressed their support for the U.S. Citizens of Puerto Rico to exercise their right to self determination. Puerto Rico has been under U.S. sovereignty for over a century and Puerto Ricans have been U.S. citizens since 1917, but the island’s ultimate status still has not been determined and its 3.9 million residents still do not have voting representation in their national government. The following are the appropriate section from the 2000, 2004 and 2008 party platforms:
Democratic Party 2008 Platform

We believe that the people of Puerto Rico have the right to the political status of their choice, obtained through a fair, neutral, and democratic process of self-determination. The White House and Congress will work with all groups in Puerto Rico to enable the question of Puerto Rico’s status to be resolved during the next four years. We also believe that economic conditions in Puerto Rico call for effective and equitable programs to maximize job creation and financial investment. Furthermore, in order to provide fair assistance to those in greatest need, the U.S. citizens in Puerto Rico should receive treatment under federal programs that is comparable to that of citizens in the States. We will phase-out the cap on Medicaid funding and phase-in equal participation in other federal health care assistance programs. Moreover, we will provide equitable treatment to the U.S. citizens in Puerto Rico on programs providing refundable tax credits to working families.[78]

Democratic Party 2004 Platform

We believe that four million disenfranchised American citizens residing in Puerto Rico have the right to the permanent and fully democratic status of their choice. The White House and Congress will clarify the realistic status options for Puerto Rico and enable Puerto Ricans to choose among them.[53]

Democratic Party 2000 Platform

Puerto Rico has been under U.S. sovereignty for over a century and Puerto Ricans have been U.S. citizens since 1917, but the island’s ultimate status still has not been determined and its 3.9 million residents still do not have voting representation in their national government. These disenfranchised citizens — who have contributed greatly to our country in war and peace — are entitled to the permanent and fully democratic status of their choice. Democrats will continue to work in the White House and Congress to clarify the options and enable them to choose and to obtain such a status from among all realistic options.[79]


[edit] Legal issues

[edit] Torture
Democrats are opposed to use of torture against individuals apprehended and held prisoner by the U.S. military, and hold that categorizing such prisoners as unlawful combatants does not release the U.S. from its obligations under the Geneva Conventions. Democrats contend that torture is inhumane, decreases the United States' moral standing in the world, and produces questionable results. Democrats largely spoke out against waterboarding.

[edit] USA PATRIOT Act
All Democrats in the U.S. Senate, except for Russ Feingold of Wisconsin, voted for the original USA PATRIOT Act legislation. After voicing concerns over the "invasion of privacy" and other civil liberty restrictions of the Act, the Democrats split on the renewal in 2006. Most Democratic Senators voted to renew it, while most Democratic Representatives voted against renewal. Renewal was allowed after many of the most invasive clauses in the Act were removed or curbed.

[edit] Right to privacy
The Democratic Party believes that individuals should have a right to privacy. For example, Democrats have generally opposed the NSA warrantless surveillance of U.S. citizens.
Some Democratic officeholders have championed consumer protection laws that limit the sharing of consumer data between corporations. Most Democrats oppose sodomy laws and believe that government should not regulate consensual noncommercial sexual conduct among adults as a matter of personal privacy.

[edit] Gun control
With a stated goal of reducing crime and homicide, the Democratic Party has introduced various gun control measures, most notably the Gun Control Act of 1968, the Brady Bill of 1993 and Crime Control Act of 1994. However, many Democrats, especially rural, Southern, and Western Democrats, favor fewer restrictions on firearm possession and warned the party was defeated in the 2000 presidential election in rural areas because of the issue.[80] In the national platform for 2004, the only statement explicitly favoring gun control was a plan calling for renewal of the 1994 Assault Weapons Ban.

[edit] History
Main article: History of the United States Democratic Party
The Democratic Party evolved from Anti-Federalist factions that opposed the fiscal policies of Alexander Hamilton in the early 1790s. Thomas Jefferson and James Madison organized these factions into the Democratic-Republican Party. The party favored states' rights and strict adherence to the Constitution; it opposed a national bank and wealthy, moneyed interests. The Democratic-Republican Party ascended to power in the election of 1800. After the War of 1812, the party's chief rival, the Federalist Party disbanded. Democratic-Republicans split over the choice of a successor to President James Monroe, and the party faction that supported many of the old Jeffersonian principles, led by Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren, became the Democratic Party. Along with the Whig Party, the Democratic Party was the chief party in the United States until the Civil War. The Whigs were a commercial party, and usually less popular, if better financed. The Whigs divided over the slavery issue after the Mexican–American War and faded away. In the 1850s, under the stress of the Fugitive Slave Law and the Kansas-Nebraska Act, anti-slavery Democrats left the party. Joining with former members of existing or dwindling parties, the Republican Party emerged.
The Democrats split over the choice of a successor to President James Buchanan along Northern and Southern lines, while the Republican Party gained an ascendancy in the election of 1860. As the American Civil War broke out, Northern Democrats were divided into War Democrats and Peace Democrats and Southern Democrats formed their own party. Most War Democrats rallied to Republican President Abraham Lincoln and the Republicans' National Union Party. The Democrats benefited from white Southerners' resentment of Reconstruction after the war and consequent hostility to the Republican Party. After Redeemers ended Reconstruction in the 1870s, and the extremely violent disenfranchisement of African Americans took place in the 1890s, the South, voting Democratic, became known as the "Solid South." Though Republicans continued to control the White House until 1884, the Democrats remained competitive. The party was dominated by pro-business Bourbon Democrats led by Samuel J. Tilden and Grover Cleveland, who represented mercantile, banking and railroad interests, opposed imperialism and overseas expansion, fought for the gold standard, opposed bimetallism, and crusaded against corruption, high taxes, and tariffs. Cleveland was elected to non-consecutive presidential terms in 1884 and 1892.
Agrarian Democrats demanding Free Silver overthrew the Bourbon Democrats in 1896 and nominated William Jennings Bryan for the presidency (a nomination repeated by Democrats in 1900 and 1908). Bryan waged a vigorous campaign attacking Eastern moneyed interests, but he lost to Republican William McKinley. The Democrats took control of the House in 1910 and elected Woodrow Wilson as president in 1912 and 1916. Wilson led Congress to, in effect, put to rest the issues of tariffs, money, and antitrust that had dominated politics for 40 years with new progressive laws. The Great Depression in 1929 that occurred under Republican President Herbert Hoover and the Republican Congress set the stage for a more liberal government; the Democrats controlled the House of Representatives nearly uninterrupted from 1931 until 1995 and won most presidential elections until 1968. Franklin D. Roosevelt, elected to presidency in 1932, came forth with government programs called the New Deal. New Deal liberalism meant the promotion of social welfare, labor unions, civil rights, and regulation of business. The opponents, who stressed long-term growth, support for business, and low taxes, started calling themselves "conservatives."
Issues facing parties and the United States after the Second World War included the Cold War and the Civil Rights Movement. Republicans attracted conservatives and white Southerners from the Democratic coalition with their resistance to New Deal and Great Society liberalism and the Republicans' use of the Southern strategy. African Americans, who traditionally supported the Republican Party, began supporting Democrats following the ascent of the Franklin Roosevelt administration, the New Deal, and the Civil Rights movement. The Democratic Party's main base of support shifted to the Northeast, marking a dramatic reversal of history. Bill Clinton was elected to the presidency in 1992, governing as a New Democrat when the Democratic Party lost control of Congress in the election of 1994 to the Republican Party. Re-elected in 1996, Clinton was the first Democratic President since Franklin Roosevelt to serve for two terms. The Democratic Party regained majority control of Congress in the 2006 elections. Some of the party's key issues in the early 21st century in their last national platform have included the methods of how to combat terrorism, homeland security, expanding access to health care, labor rights, environmentalism, and the preservation of liberal government programs.

[edit] Name and symbols





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2008)






"A Live Jackass Kicking a Dead Lion" by Thomas Nast. Harper's Weekly, January 19, 1870.


Initially calling itself the "Republican Party," Jeffersonians were labeled "Democratic" by the opposition Federalists, with the hope of stigmatizing them as purveyors of democracy or mob rule.[81] By the Jacksonian era, the term "The Democracy" was in use by the party; the name "Democratic Party" was eventually settled upon.[82] In the 20th and 21st centuries, "Democrat Party" is a political epithet that is sometimes used by opponents to refer to the party. The current official name of the party is the "Democratic Party."
The most common mascot symbol for the party is the donkey. According to the Democratic National Committee, the party itself never officially adopted this symbol but has made use of it.[83] They say Andrew Jackson had been labeled a jackass by his opponents during the intense mudslinging that occurred during the presidential race of 1828. A political cartoon titled "A Modern Balaam and his Ass" depicting Jackson riding and directing a donkey (representing the Democratic Party) was published in 1837. A political cartoon by Thomas Nast in an 1870 edition of Harper's Weekly revived the donkey as a symbol for the Democratic Party. Cartoonists followed Nast and used the donkey to represent the Democrats, and the elephant to represent the Republicans.
In the early 20th century, the traditional symbol of the Democratic Party in Midwestern states such as Indiana, Kentucky, Oklahoma and Ohio was the rooster, as opposed to the Republican eagle. This symbol still appears on Oklahoma, Kentucky, Indiana, and West Virginia[84] ballots. In New York, the Democratic ballot symbol is a five-pointed star.[85] For the majority of the 20th century, Missouri Democrats used the Statue of Liberty as their ballot emblem. This meant that when Libertarian candidates received ballot access in Missouri in 1976, they could not use the Statue of Liberty, their national symbol, as the ballot emblem. Missouri Libertarians instead used the Liberty Bell until 1995, when the mule became Missouri's state animal. From 1995 to 2004, there was some confusion among voters, as the Democratic ticket was marked with the Statue of Liberty, and it seemed that the Libertarians were using a mule.
Although both major political parties (and many minor ones) use the traditional American red, white, and blue colors in their marketing and representations, since election night 2000 the color blue has become the identified color of the Democratic Party, while the color red has become the identified color of the Republican Party. That night, for the first time, all major broadcast television networks used the same color scheme for the electoral map: blue states for Al Gore (Democratic nominee) and red states for George W. Bush (Republican nominee). Since then, the color blue has been widely used by the media to represent the party, much to the confusion of non-American observers, as blue is the traditional color of the right and red the color of the left outside of the United States (c.f. red for the Liberals and blue for the Conservatives in Canada, or red for Labour and blue for Conservative in the United Kingdom). Blue has also been used by party supporters for promotional efforts (e.g. ActBlue, BuyBlue, BlueFund) and by the party itself, which in 2006 unveiled the "Red to Blue Program" to support Democratic candidates running against Republican incumbents in the 2006 midterm elections.
Jefferson-Jackson Day is the annual fundraising event (dinner) held by Democratic Party organizations across the United States.[86] It is named after Presidents Thomas Jefferson and Andrew Jackson, whom the party regards as its distinguished early leaders.
The song "Happy Days Are Here Again" is the unofficial song of the Democratic Party. It was used prominently when Franklin D. Roosevelt was nominated for president at the 1932 Democratic National Convention and remains a sentimental favorite for Democrats today. For example, Paul Shaffer played the theme on the Late Show with David Letterman after the Democrats won Congress in 2006. More recently, the emotionally similar song "Beautiful Day" by the band U2 has become a favorite theme song for Democratic candidates. John Kerry used the song during his 2004 presidential campaign, and it was used as a celebratory tune by several Democratic Congressional candidates in 2006.[87][88] Aaron Copland's Fanfare for the Common Man is traditionally performed at the beginning of the Democratic National Convention.

[edit] State and territorial parties




Alabama Democratic Party (Site)
Alaska Democratic Party (Site)
Arizona Democratic Party (Site)
Democratic Party of Arkansas (Site)
California Democratic Party (Site)
Colorado Democratic Party (Site)
Democratic State Central Committee of Connecticut (Site)
Delaware Democratic Party (Site)
District of Columbia Democratic State Committee (Site)
Florida Democratic Party (Site)
Democratic Party of Georgia (Site)
Democratic Party of Hawaii (Site)
Idaho Democratic Party (Site)
Democratic Party of Illinois (Site)
Indiana Democratic Party (Site)
Iowa Democratic Party (Site)
Kansas Democratic Party (Site)
Kentucky Democratic Party (Site)
Louisiana Democratic Party (Site)
Maine Democratic Party (Site)
Maryland Democratic Party (Site)
Massachusetts Democratic Party (Site)
Michigan Democratic Party (Site)
Minnesota Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party (Site)
Democratic Party of the State of Mississippi (Site)
Missouri Democratic Party (Site)




Montana Democratic Party (Site)
Nebraska Democratic Party (Site)
Nevada Democratic Party (Site)
New Hampshire Democratic Party ( Site)
New Jersey Democratic State Committee (Site)
Democratic Party of New Mexico (Site)
New York State Democratic Committee (Site)
North Carolina Democratic Party ( Site)
North Dakota Democratic-NPL Party (Site)
Ohio Democratic Party (Site)
Oklahoma Democratic Party (Site)
Democratic Party of Oregon (Site)
Pennsylvania Democratic Party (Site)
Puerto Rico Democratic Party (Site)
Rhode Island Democratic Committee (Site)
South Carolina Democratic Party (Site)
South Dakota Democratic Party (Site)
Tennessee Democratic Party (Site)
Texas Democratic Party (Site)
Utah Democratic Party (Site)
Vermont Democratic Party (Site)
Democratic Party of Virginia (Site)
Washington State Democratic Party (Site)
West Virginia Democratic Party (Site)
Democratic Party of Wisconsin (Site)
Wyoming Democratic Party (Site)





[edit] See also

List of United States Democratic Party presidential tickets
Democratic organizations
Politics of the United States - Organization of American political parties
Political party strength in U.S. states
2008 Democratic National Convention
Atari Democrat
Progressive Democrats of America
National Jewish Democratic Council


[edit] References


^ Aldrich, John H. (1995). Why Parties?: The Origin and Transformation of Political Parties in America, 6, 97. ISBN 0226012727 The hallmark of the "modern mass political party" is "mobilization of the electorate." Author credits the Democratic Party as the first party ever to achieve modern, mass-based status. Weed is one of the things they aim to make legal.
^ Independents Joe Lieberman and Bernie Sanders caucus with the Democratic Party, giving the Democratic Caucus two extra seats (58/99). One Senate seat in Minnesota is still in dispute.
^ Witcover, Jules (2003). "1". Party of the People: A History of the Democrats. New York, NY: Random House. p. 3. ISBN 0375507426.  "The Democratic Party of the United States, one of the oldest existing in the world, was in a sense an illegitimate child, unwanted by the founding fathers of the American Republic."
^ Micklethwait, John; Wooldridge, Adrian (2004). The Right Nation: Conservative Power in America. New York: Penguin Press. p. 15. ISBN 1594200203.  "The country possesses the world's oldest written constitution (1787); the Democratic Party has a good claim to being the world's oldest political party."
^ Democratic Party, Encyclopædia Britannica Online, Accessed August 21, 2007.
^ a b c "Neuhart, P. (January 22, 2004). Why politics is fun from catbirds' seats. USA Today'.". http://www.usatoday.com/news/opinion/columnist/neuharth/2004-01-22-neuharth_x.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-11. 
^ "Pew Research Center, A Closer Look at the Parties in 2008". http://pewresearch.org/pubs/933/a-closer-look-at-the-parties-in-2008. Retrieved on 2008-09-03. 
^ Gilgoff, Dan (2006-07-16). "Dean's List". U.S. News & World Report. http://www.usnews.com/usnews/news/articles/060716/24dems.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-26. 
^ a b c d "CNN. (2000). Exit Poll.". http://www.cnn.com/ELECTION/2000/results/index.epolls.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-11. 
^ a b c d e f g "CNN. (2004). Exit Poll.". http://www.cnn.com/ELECTION/2004/pages/results/states/US/P/00/epolls.0.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-11. 
^ a b c d e f "CNN. (2006). Exit Poll.". http://www.cnn.com/ELECTION/2006/pages/results/states/US/H/00/epolls.0.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-11. 
^ a b c d e "Pew Research Center. (May 10, 2005). Beyond Red vs. Blue.". http://people-press.org/reports/display.php3?PageID=945. Retrieved on 2007-07-12. 
^ "Democratic Leadership Council. (June 1, 1998). About the Third Way.". http://www.ndol.org/ndol_ci.cfm?kaid=128&subid=187&contentid=895. Retrieved on 2007-07-11. 
^ "National Exit Polls CNN.com.". http://www.cnn.com/ELECTION/2008/results/polls/#USP00p1. Retrieved on 2009-03-02. 
^ "Judis, B. J. (July 11, 2003). The trouble with Howard Dean. Salon.com.". http://dir.salon.com/story/news/feature/2003/07/11/dean/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-19. 
^ a b c d "Kurtz, H. (March 29, 2005). College Faculties A Most Liberal Lot, Study Finds. The Washington Post.". http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A8427-2005Mar28.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-02. 
^ "Judis, J. B. & Teixeira, R. (June 19, 2007). Back to the Future. The American Prospect.". http://72.14.253.104/search?q=cache:bueazvJ1K7IJ:www.prospect.org/cs/articles%3Farticle%3Dback_to_the_future061807+liberals+demographic&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=14&gl=us. Retrieved on 2007-08-19. 
^ "Frank, E., Carrera, J. & Dharamsi, S. (February 9, 2007). Political Self-characterization of U.S. Medical Students. Journal of General Internal Medicine.". http://www.springerlink.com/content/402j845476w87208/. Retrieved on 2007-09-26. 
^ "Shea, C. (October 12, 2003). What liberal academia? The Bosoton Globe.". http://www.boston.com/news/globe/ideas/articles/2003/10/12/what_liberal_academia/. Retrieved on 2007-08-19. 
^ a b "O'Bannon, B. R. (August 27, 2003). In Defense of the 'Liberal' Professor. Indianapolis Star.". http://www.collegenews.org/x2782.xml. Retrieved on 2007-07-02. 
^ "George, D. L. & Medler, J. F. (1996). College Faculty as an Inconsequential Agent of Political Socialization. Department of Political Science, Cal Poly State University, San Louis Obispo.". http://cla.calpoly.edu/~dgeorge/Faculty.Study/Pol.Soc.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-25. 
^ a b http://elections.nytimes.com/2008/results/president/national-exit-polls.html
^ http://www.cnn.com/ELECTION/2008/results/polls/#USP00p1
^ Shields, E. (1958). The Intellectuals and the Powers: Some Perspectives for Comparative Analysis. Comparative Studies in Society and History, 1(5).
^ Lipset, S. M. & Ladd, E. C. (1972). The Politics of American Sociologists. American Journal of Sociology, 78(67), 67–104.
^ Fried, Joseph, Democrats and Republicans — Rhetoric and Reality (New York: Algora Publishing, 2008), 74–5.
^ "Nagourney, A. (June 27, 2007). Young Americans are leaning left, new poll finds. The New York Times.". http://www.nytimes.com/2007/06/27/washington/27poll.html?_r=3&hp=&adxnnl=1&oref=slogin&adxnnlx=1182947253-8kvQkT+aYTOYz/BCpTsRCg&oref=slogin&oref=slogin. Retrieved on 2007-04-05. 
^ Fried, Joseph, Democrats and Republicans — Rhetoric and Reality (New York: Algora Publishing, 2008), 126.
^ a b c Gilbert, Dennis (1998). The American Class Structure. New York: Wadsworth Publishing. ISBN 0-534-50520-1. 
^ Zweig, Michael (2004). What's Class Got To Do With It, American Society in the Twenty-First Century. New York, NY: Cornell University Press. ISBN 0-8014-8899-0. 
^ Thompson, William; Joseph Hickey (2005). Society in Focus. Boston, MA: Pearson. ISBN 0-205-41365-X. 
^ Dems woo Native American vote. Politico. Published 5/29/08.
^ Survey by the American Jewish Committee in September 2008.
^ a b Arab-American Voters Say Iraq Top Issue in 2008 Campaign. By Mohamed Elshinnawi. Voice of America. Published July 23, 2007,
^ Mideast, Civil Liberties Concern Arab-Americans. By James Q. Lynch. The Gazette (Cedar Rapids-Iowa City). Reprinted by the Arab-American Institute. Published July 19, 2003
^ a b How High Should Taxes Be?
^ Dems in debate urge taxes on wealthiest - OPENERS - Ohio Politics Blog by The Plain Dealer
^ The Wall Street Journal Online - Hot Topic
^ Budget Resolution Calls for Massive Tax Hikes and Spending Increases
^ U.S. GOVERNMENT > Social Support > The Social Safety Net
^ "Day Two: House passes new budget rules". Associated Press. 2007-01-05. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/16487187. Retrieved on 2007-01-05. 
^ Medicare for AllPDF. Retrieved on 2007-01-25.
^ "Agenda - Environment". http://www.democrats.org/a/national/clean_environment/. Retrieved on 2007-03-18. 
^ "Democratic Party on Environment". http://www.ontheissues.org/Celeb/Democratic_Party_Environment.htm. Retrieved on 2007-10-24. 
^ John Nicols (2007-10-12). "Al Gore Wins Nobel Peace Prize". The Nation. 
^ "Clinton Joins Key Senate Democrats to Release Report on "The College Cost Crunch"". clinton.senate.gov. 2006-06-28. http://clinton.senate.gov/news/statements/details.cfm?id=258005. Retrieved on 2006-11-25. 
^ Economic Prosperity and Educational Excellence. Retrieved on 2006-11-25.
^ a b Rorty, R. (1997). Achieving Our Country: Leftist Thought In Twentieth Century America. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674003128
^ Weisman, Jonathan (2005-07-06). "CAFTA Reflects Democrats' Shift From Trade Bills". The Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2005/07/05/AR2005070501345_pf.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-10. 
^ Nichols, John (2005-07-28). "CAFTA Vote Outs "Bush Democrats"". The Nation. http://www.thenation.com/blogs/thebeat?bid=1&pid=8874. Retrieved on 2006-12-15. 
^ "Smith, D. (April 14, 2007). Democrat says middle class tax relief a priority. Reuters.". http://www.reuters.com/article/politicsNews/idUSN1322551420070415. Retrieved on 2007-07-11. 
^ Civil Rights related polls from Pollingreport
^ a b c The 2004 Democratic National PlatformPDF (111 KB)
^ a b LGBT issues. CNN.
^ Obama Opposes Gay Marriage Ban. The Washington Post. By Perry Bacon Jr. Published July 2, 2008.
^ Obama Statement on Vote Against Constitutional Amendment to Ban Gay Marriage. United States Senate Official Website. Published June 7, 2006.
^ Less Opposition to Gay Marriage, Adoption and Military Service. Pew Research Center. Published March 22, 2006.
^ Abortion related polls from Pollingreport.
^ A Pro-Choice Party No More. By Kristin Day. National Review. Published December 02, 2004.
^ Those Favoring Stem Cell Research Increases to a 73 to 11 Percent Majority. Harris Interactive. Published August 18, 2004. Accessed September 1, 2008
^ a b c "Pelosi, Schumer Express Support for Troop Surge in Afghanistan" CNS News. Published August 1, 2008. Accessed August 22, 2008.
^ Democrats say McCain forgot Afghanistan. Boston Globe. Published July 24, 2008. Accessed August 23, 2008
^ a b John McCain & Barack Obama urge Afghanistan surge. New York Daily News. Published July 15, 2008. Accessed August 23, 2008
^ a b c "Afghan War Edges Out Iraq as Most Important for U.S." by Frank Newport. Gallup.com. Published July 30, 2008. Accessed August 22, 2008.
^ a b c Americans’ Most and Least Favored Nations. By Lydia Saad. Gallup. Published March 3, 2008.
^ a b c Left could push pro-Israel voters to GOP. By Jennifer Rubin.The Politico. Published 7-18-07.
^ Renewing America's Promise: Democratic Party Platform, 2008
^ Ideological Gaps Over Israel on Both Sides of Atlantic. Pew Research Center. Published January 29, 2009.
^ Archive page #16 of polls from Pollingreport
^ Archive page #15 of polls from Pollingreport
^ Pew Research Center: Along the Iraq-Vietnam Parallel. Pew Research Center. Published Aug 28, 2007.
^ Recent polls from Pollingreport.
^ Flaherty, Anne (2007-04-26). "Congress passes Iraq bill, veto awaits". Associated Press. http://www.boston.com/news/nation/washington/articles/2007/04/26/veto_awaits_iraq_troop_withdrawal_bill/. Retrieved on 2007-04-26. .
^ "US Democrats push for 2008 Iraq exit". Reuters. 2007-04-26. http://news.brisbanetimes.com.au/us-democrats-push-for-2008-iraq-exit/20075426-9l4.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-26. 
^ "Democrats fail to override Bush on war funding". International Herald Tribune. 2007-05-02. http://www.iht.com/articles/2007/05/02/africa/prexy.php. Retrieved on 2007-05-02. 
^ a b Obama says conditions to dictate final Iraq force. Reuters. Published July 27, 2008.
^ a b c Top Republicans embrace Iraq plan. The Politico. Published February 27, 2009.
^ The 2008 Democratic National PlatformPDF (223 KB)
^ Let Puerto Rico Decide: An Introduction to Puerto Rico's Status Debate
^ Abramsky, Sasha (2005-04-18). "Democrat Killer?". The Nation. http://www.thenation.com/doc/20050418/abramsky. Retrieved on 2006-10-10. 
^ Appleby, Joyce (2003). Thomas Jefferson. p. 81. 
^ Appleby, Joyce (2003). Thomas Jefferson. p. 4. 
^ History of the Democratic Donkey. Retrieved on 2006-11-15.
^ "Barbour County, West Virginia General Election Ballot". 2008-11-04. http://www.wvsos.com/elections/ballots/barbourgen.pdf. 
^ "Ballots for Upcoming Elections". Schenectady County, New York. http://www.schenectadycounty.com/FullStory.aspx?m=320&amid=930. 
^ Trotter, Bill (2008-02-11). "Obama sets sights on November battle". Bangor Daily News. http://www.bangornews.com/news/t/city.aspx?articleid=160039&zoneid=176. Retrieved on 2008-02-12. 
^ Gruss, Michael (2006-11-21). "Local roast becomes political pep rally for Democrats". The Virginian-Pilot. http://hamptonroads.com/node/185421. Retrieved on 2007-04-15. 
^ Scherer, Michael (2006-11-08). "'The Democrats are ready to lead'". Salon.com. http://www.salon.com/news/feature/2006/11/08/pelosi/. Retrieved on 2007-03-18. 



[edit] External links

[edit] Organizations

Democratic National Committee — Official website
Democratic Senate Caucus
Democratic House Caucus
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee
Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee
Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee
Democratic Governors Association
Democratic Attorneys General Association
National Conference of Democratic Mayors
National Federation of Democratic Women
College Democrats of America
Young Democrats of America
Democrats Abroad
Progressive Democrats of America


[edit] General

2008 National PlatformPDF (434 KB), HTML version
2004 National PlatformPDF (111 KB), HTML version
Charter & BylawsPDF (1.63 MB)
Democratic Party at the Open Directory Project








v • d • e

National political parties in the United States (list)





Major parties

Democratic · Republican






Third parties

Constitution · Green · Libertarian






Smaller parties

America First · America's Independent Party · American Independent · Boston Tea · Communist · Progressive Labor · Independence · Labor · Modern Whig · Marijuana · Objectivist · Populist · Prohibition · Reform · Socialism and Liberation · Socialist · Socialist Equality · Socialist Workers · Veterans · Workers World · Working Families






Historical
parties

American (Know Nothing) · Anti-Masonic · Black Panther Party · Citizens · Conservative · Constitutional Union · Democratic-Republican · Farmer-Labor · Federalist · Free Soil · National Greenback · Liberal Republican  · Liberty · National Republican · National Union · New Alliance · Nullifier · Opposition · Populist (People's) · Progressive (1912 ~ 1924 ~ 1948) · Readjuster · Silver · Silver Republican · Socialist · Socialist Labor · States Rights (Dixiecrat) · Union · U.S. Labor · Whig






Portal:Politics - List of political parties - Politics of the United States












v • d • e

United States topics





History





Timeline


Pre-Columbian · Colonial era (Thirteen Colonies) · Declaration of Independence · American Revolution · Territorial changes · American Civil War · Reconstruction era · African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954) · World War I · Great Depression · World War II (Home front) · Cold War · Korean War · African-American Civil Rights Movement (1955–1968) · Feminist Movement · Vietnam War  · Post-Cold War (1991-present) · War on Terrorism (War in Afghanistan · Iraq War)







By topic


Demographic · Economic · Military · Postal · Technological and industrial · Inventions and discoveries









Federal
government








   


Law
U.S. Constitution
Bill of Rights
Civil liberties
Federalism
Separation of powers
Law Enforcement
Department of Justice (DOJ)
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)




Legislature - Congress
House of Representatives
Senate
Vice President
Executive - President
Executive Office of the President
Cabinet/Executive departments
Independent agencies
Policies




Judiciary - Supreme Court
Federal courts
Courts of appeal
District courts
Intelligence
U.S. Intelligence Community
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA)
National Security Agency (NSA)




Military
Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard














Politics

State governments  · Local governments  · Elections (Electoral College) · Political divisions · Political ideologies · Political parties (Democratic Party · Republican Party · Third parties) · Political scandals · Political status of Puerto Rico · Red states and blue states · Uncle Sam






Geography

Cities, towns and villages · Counties · Extreme points · Islands · Mountains (Appalachian · Rocky) · National Park System · Regions (New England · Mid-Atlantic · Southern · Midwestern · Great Plains · Northwestern · Southwestern) · Rivers (Mississippi · Missouri · Colorado) · States · Territory · Water supply and sanitation






Economy

Banking · Communications · Companies · Federal Reserve System · Insurance · Standard of living (Personal income · Household income · Homeownership · Income inequality) · Tourism · Transportation (Airports · Highways · Interstate Highway System · Passenger vehicles · Railroads · Trucking industry) · U.S. dollar · Wall Street  · Total debt






Society

Adolescent sexuality · Crime · Demographics · Education · Health care · Health insurance · Incarceration · Languages (American English · Spanish) · Media · People · Public holidays · Religion · Social class (Affluence · American Dream · American middle class · Educational attainment · Poverty · Professional and working class conflict) · Sports






Culture

American literature (Beat Generation · Folklore · Harlem Renaissance · Poetry · Transcendentalism) · Architecture · Cuisine · Dance · Fashion · Flag · Music (American classical music · American folk music · American popular music · Country music · Blues · Jazz · Rock and roll) · Radio · Television / Cinema (Hollywood) · Visual arts (Abstract expressionism)






Issues

Abortion · Affirmative action · American exceptionalism · Anti-Americanism · Capital punishment · Drug policy / Prohibition · Energy policy · Environmental movement · Gun politics · Health care reform · Human rights · Immigration (United States–Mexico barrier · Third Border Initiative) · Obesity · Racism · Same-sex marriage






Portal









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Democratic_Party_(United_States)"
Categories: Political parties established in 1792 | Political parties in the United States | Democratic Party (United States) | Liberal partiesHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 | Articles needing additional references from February 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
Bân-lâm-gú
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latina
Lietuvių
Magyar
മലയാളം
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
ייִדיש
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 00:36.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
