













Figure of speech - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Figure_of_speech";
		var wgTitle = "Figure of speech";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "77691";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281231256;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Figure of speech

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
A figure of speech is a use of a word that diverges from its normal meaning, or a phrase with a specialized meaning not based on the literal meaning of the words in it. Figures of speech often provide emphasis, freshness of expression, or clarity. However, clarity may also suffer from their use, as any figure of speech introduces an ambiguity between literal and figurative interpretation. A figure of speech is sometimes called a rhetoric or a locution.
Not all theories of meaning have a concept of "literal language" (see literal and figurative language). Under theories that do not, figure of speech is not an entirely coherent concept.

[edit] Examples







Contents


1 Examples
2 Categories of figures of speech

2.1 Schemes
2.2 Tropes


3 References
4 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>



The utterance "I got your back" almost never has the literal meaning of receipt or possession of another's spine. It is a figure of speech that means the speaker intends to protect the listener, actually or symbolically. It originates from war, in which one soldier informs another that the first will train his weapon toward an area from which an enemy might shoot the second in the back.
Here are other examples of figures of speech:

"It's raining cats and dogs" means it's raining intensely.
"I'll give you a piece of my mind" means the speaker will state a frank opinion.
"Break a leg" is a saying from theater meaning "Good luck."
"Butterflies in your stomach" figuratively describes nervousness.

In each of these examples of figures of speech, there is a literal meaning of the words, which a listener would normally reject as absurd or inappropriate. The listener would select the figurative meaning of the utterance, assisted by the context.
Absence of the proper context may defeat the figurative meaning. If someone not in a theater troupe tells someone else to break a leg, the listener must decide whether the speaker intends to adapt the figure of speech from theater to the present context; if not, the literal meaning would be provocative. If there is no cause for nervousness, complaining about butterflies in one's stomach might make a listener consider briefly whether to interpret the words literally.
Cadence and grammar is sometimes non-standard when uttering a figure of speech. Some figures of speech, such as "cats and dogs" in the above example, are uttered breezily as though it were a single word. If animals were literally falling from the sky, each noun would receive greater emphasis. In the first example in this section, the use of "got" instead of the more standard "have" or "have got" is a clue that the utterance is a figure of speech.

[edit] Categories of figures of speech
Scholars of classical Western rhetoric have divided figures of speech into two main categories: schemes and tropes. Schemes (from the Greek schēma, form or shape) are figures of speech that change the ordinary or expected pattern of words. For example, the phrase, "John, my best friend" uses the scheme known as apposition. Tropes (from the Greek tropein, to turn) change the general meaning of words. An example of a trope is irony, which is the use of words to convey the opposite of their usual meaning ("For Brutus is an honorable man; / So are they all, all honorable men").
During the Renaissance, scholars meticulously enumerated and classified figures of speech. Henry Peacham, for example, in his The Garden of Eloquence (1577), enumerated 184 different figures of speech.
For simplicity, this article divides the figures between schemes and tropes, but does not further sub-classify them (e.g., "Figures of Disorder"). Within each category, words are listed alphabetically. Most entries link to a page that provides greater detail and relevant examples, but a short definition is placed here for convenience. Some of those listed may be considered rhetorical devices, which are similar in many ways.

[edit] Schemes
Main article: Scheme (linguistics)

accumulation: Summarization of previous arguments in a forceful manner.
adnominatio: Repetition of a word with a change in letter or sound
alliteration: A series of words that begin with the same letter or sound alike
anacoluthon: A change in the syntax within a sentence
anadiplosis: Repetition of a word at the end of a clause at the beginning of another
anaphora: The repetition of the same word or group of words at the beginning of successive clauses
anastrophe: Inversion of the usual word order
anticlimax: the arrangement of words in order of decreasing importance
antimetabole: Repetition of words in successive clauses, in reverse order
antistrophe: The repetition of the same word or phrase at the end of successive clauses (see epistrophe)
antithesis: The juxtaposition of opposing or contrasting ideas
aphorismus: statement that calls into question the definition of a word
aposiopesis: Breaking off or pausing speech for dramatic or emotional effect
apostrophe: Directing the attention away from the audience and to a personified abstraction
apposition: The placing of two elements side by side, in which the second defines the first
assonance: The repetition of vowel sounds, most commonly within a short passage of verse
asteismus: Facetious or mocking answer that plays on a word
asyndeton: Omission of conjunctions between related clauses
cacophony: The juxtaposition of words producing a harsh sound
classification (literature & grammar): linking a proper noun and a common noun with an article
chiasmus: Reversal of grammatical structures in successive clauses
climax: The arrangement of words in order of increasing importance
consonance: The repetition of consonant sounds, most commonly within a short passage of verse
dystmesis: A synonym for tmesis
ellipsis: Omission of words
enallage: The substitution of forms that are grammatically different, but have the same meaning
enjambment: A breaking of a syntactic unit (a phrase, clause, or sentence) by the end of a line or between two verses.
enthymeme: Informal method of presenting a syllogism
epanalepsis: Repetition of the initial word or words of a clause or sentence at the end of the clause or sentence.
epistrophe: The repetition of the same word or group of words at the end of successive clauses. The counterpart of anaphora (also known as antistrophe)
euphony: The opposite of cacophony - i.e. pleasant sounding
hendiadys: Use of two nouns to express an idea when the normal structure would be a noun and a modifier
hendiatris: Use of three nouns to express one idea
homographs: Words that are identical in spelling but different in origin and meaning
homonyms: Words that are identical with each other in pronunciation and spelling, but differing in origin and meaning.
homophones:Words that are identical with each other in pronunciation but differing in origin and meaning.
hypallage: Changing the order of words so that they are associated with words normally associated with others
hyperbaton: Schemes featuring unusual or inverted word order.
hyperbole: An exaggeration of a statement.
hysteron proteron: The inversion of the usual temporal or causal order between two elements.
isocolon: Use of parallel structures of the same length in successive clauses
internal rhyme : Using two or more rhyming words in the same sentence
kenning: A metonymic compound where the terms together form a sort of synecdoche
merism: Referring to a whole by enumerating some of its parts
non sequitur: a statement that bears no relationship to the context preceding
onomatopoeia: A word imitating a real sound (e.g. tick-tock or boom)
paradiastole: Repetition of the disjunctive pair "neither" and "nor"
parallelism: The use of similar structures in two or more clauses
paraprosdokian: Unexpected ending or truncation of a clause
parenthesis: Insertion of a clause or sentence in a place where it interrupts the natural flow of the sentence
paroemion: A resolute alliteration in which every word in a sentence or phrase begins with the same letter
parrhesia: Speaking openly or boldly, or apologizing for doing so (declaring to do so)
perissologia: The fault of wordiness
pleonasm: The use of superfluous or redundant words
polyptoton: Repetition of words derived from the same root
polysyndeton: Repetition of conjunctions
pun: When a word or phrase is used in two different senses
sibilance: Repetition of letter 's', it is a form of alliteration
superlative: Saying something the best of something i.e. the ugliest,the most precious
spoonerism: Interchanging of (usually initial) letters of words with amusing effect
symploce: Simultaneous use of anaphora and epistrophe: the repetition of the same word or group of words at the beginning and the end of successive clauses
synchysis: Interlocked word order
synesis: An agreement of words according to the sense, and not the grammatical form
synizesis: The pronunciation of two juxtaposed vowels or diphthongs as a single sound
synonymia: The use of two or more synonyms in the same clause or sentence
tautology: Redundancy due to superfluous qualification; saying the same thing twice
tmesis: Division of the elements of a compound word


[edit] Tropes
Main article: Trope (linguistics)

allegory: An extended metaphor in which a story is told to illustrate an important attribute of the subject
alliteration: The repetition of the first consonant sound in a phrase.
allusion: An indirect reference to another work of literature or art
anacoenosis: Posing a question to an audience, often with the implication that it shares a common interest with the speaker
antanaclasis: A form of pun in which a word is repeated in two different senses
anthimeria: The substitution of one part of speech for another, often turning a noun into a verb
anthropomorphism: Ascribing human characteristics to something that is not human, such as an animal or a god (see zoomorphism)
antimetabole: A repetition of words in successive clauses, but in transposed grammatical order
antiphrasis: A word or words used contradictory to their usual meaning, often with irony
antonomasia: The substitution of a phrase for a proper name or vice versa
aphorism: A tersely phrased statement of a truth or opinion, an adage
apophasis: Invoking an idea by denying its invocation
aporia: Deliberating with oneself, often with the use of rhetorical questions
apostrophe: Addressing a thing, an abstraction or a person not present
archaism: Use of an obsolete, archaic, word(a word used in olden language, e.g. Shakespeare's language)
auxesis: A form of hyperbole, in which a more important sounding word is used in place of a more descriptive term
catachresis: A mixed metaphor (sometimes used by design and sometimes a rhetorical fault)
chiasmus: The word order in one clause is inverted in the other (inverted parallelism).
circumlocution: "Talking around" a topic by substituting or adding words, as in euphemism or periphrasis
commiseration: Evoking pity in the audience
correctio: Linguistic device used for correcting one's mistakes, a form of which is epanorthosis
denominatio: Another word for metonymy
double negative: grammar construction that can be used as an expression and it is the repetition of negative words
dysphemism: Substitution of a harsher, more offensive, or more disagreeable term for another. Opposite of euphemism
epanorthosis: Immediate and emphatic self-correction, often following a slip of the tongue
enumeratio: A form of amplification in which a subject is divided, detailing parts, causes, effects, or consequences to make a point more forcibly
epanados: Repetition in a sentence with a reversal of words. Example: The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath
erotema: Synonym for rhetorical question
euphemism: Substitution of a less offensive or more agreeable term for another
hermeneia: Repetition for the purpose of interpreting what has already been said
hyperbaton: Words that naturally belong together are separated from each other for emphasis or effect
hyperbole: Use of exaggerated terms for emphasis
hypophora: Answering one's own rhetorical question at length
hysteron proteron: Reversal of anticipated order of events; a form of hyperbaton
innuendo: Having a hidden meaning in a sentence that makes sense whether it is detected or not
invocation: An apostrophe to a god or muse
irony: Use of word in a way that conveys a meaning opposite to its usual meaning
kataphora: the repetition of a cohesive device at the end
litotes: Emphasizing the magnitude of a statement by denying its opposite
malapropism: Using a word through confusion with a word that sounds similar
meiosis: Use of understatement, usually to diminish the importance of something
merism: A statement of opposites to indicate reality
metalepsis: Referring to something through reference to another thing to which it is remotely related
metaphor: A comparison between two things
metonymy: Substitution of a word to suggest what is really meant
neologism: The use of a word or term that has recently been created, or has been in use for a short time. Opposite of archaism
onomatopoeia: Words that sound like their meaning
oxymoron: Using two terms together, that normally contradict each other
parable: An extended metaphor told as an anecdote to illustrate or teach a moral lesson
paradox: Use of apparently contradictory ideas to point out some underlying truth
paradiastole: Extenuating a vice in order to flatter or soothe
paraprosdokian: A phrase in which the latter part causes a rethinking or reframing of the beginning
parallel irony: An ironic juxtaposition of sentences or situations (informal)
paralipsis: Drawing attention to something while pretending to pass it over
paronomasia: A form of pun, in which words similar in sound but with different meanings are used
pathetic fallacy: Using a word that refers to a human action on something non-human
periphrasis: Using several words instead of few
personification/prosopopoeia/anthropomorphism: Attributing or applying human qualities to inanimate objects, animals, or natural phenomena
praeteritio: Another word for paralipsis
procatalepsis: Refuting anticipated objections as part of the main argument
prolepsis: Another word for procatalepsis
proslepsis: An extreme form of paralipsis in which the speaker provides great detail while feigning to pass over a topic
proverb: A succinct or pithy expression of what is commonly observed and believed to be true
pun: A play on words that will have two meanings
repetition: The repeated usage of word(s)/group of words in the same sentence to create a poetic/rhythmic effect
rhetorical question: Asking a question as a way of asserting something. Or asking a question not for the sake of getting an answer but for asserting something (or as in a poem for creating a poetic effect)
satire: The use of irony, sarcasm, ridicule, or the like, in exposing, denouncing, or deriding vice, folly, etc. A literary composition, in verse or prose, in which human folly and vice are held up to scorn, derision, or ridicule. A literary genre comprising such compositions.
simile: A comparison between two things using like or as
snowclone: quoted or misquoted cliché or phrasal template
superlative: Saying that something is the best of something or has the most of some quality, e.g. the ugliest, the most precious etc
syllepsis: A form of pun, in which a single word is used to modify two other words, with which it normally would have differing meanings
syncatabasis ("condescension, accommodation"): adaptation of style to the level of the audience
synecdoche: A form of metonymy, in which a part stands for the whole
synesthesia: The description of one kind of sense impression by using words that normally describe another.
tautology: Needless repetition of the same sense in different words Example: The children gathered in a round circle
transferred epithet: The placing of an adjective with what appears to be the incorrect noun
truism: a self-evident statement
tricolon diminuens: A combination of three elements, each decreasing in size
tricolon crescens: A combination of three elements, each increasing in size
zeugma: a figure of speech related to syllepsis, but different in that the word used as a modifier is not compatible with one of the two words it modifies
zoomorphism: applying animal characteristics to humans or gods

This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it.

[edit] References

Aristotle, The Art of Rhetoric, (Translated by J. H. Freese), Loeb Classical Library.
Baldwin, Charles Sears, Ancient Rhetoric and Poetic: Interpreted from Representative Works, Peter Smith, Gloucester, 1959 (reprint).
Rhetorica ad Herennium, (Translated by Henry Caplan) Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press, 1954.
Corbett, Edward P.J., Classical Rhetoric for the Modern Student Oxford University Press, New York, 1971.
Kennedy, George, Art of Persuasion in Greece. Princeton Univ Press, 1969 (4th printing).
Lanham, Richard A., A Handlist of Rhetorical Terms, Berkeley, University of California Press, 1991.
Mackin, John H. Classical Rhetoric for Modern Discourse, Free Press, New York, 1969.
Quintilian. Institutio oratoria, (In five volumes, trans. Donald A. Russell) Loeb Classical Library, 2002.
The Use of Figures of Speech in Print Ad Headlines, by James H. Leigh © 1994 M.E. Sharpe, Inc..
PAUL DREW and ELIZABETH HOLT Figures of speech: Figurative expressions and the management of topic transition in conversation Language in Society (1998), 27:495-522 Cambridge doi:10.1017/S0047404598004035 University Press


[edit] External links

A Glossary of Rhetorical Terms with Examples from the University of Kentucky
A Guide to Rhetorical Ideas from Silva Rhetoricae
Figures of Speech from Paul Niquette
Figures of Speech from Silva Rhetoricae
It Figures - Figures of Speech from Jay Heinrichs
Stylistic Devices on English Grammar Online from Lingo4you GbR
Introducing Philosophy 21: Rhetoric from Paul Newall (2005)




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Figure_of_speech"
Categories: Figures of speech | RhetoricHidden categories: Incomplete lists 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Français
Galego
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Македонски
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Suomi
Tagalog
中文









 This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 05:05.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
