













Immortality - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Immortality";
		var wgTitle = "Immortality";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "177052";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281784148;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Immortality

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Immortality (disambiguation).
See also List of long-living organisms
See also: Transhumanism—Controversy




Fountain of Eternal Life, Cleveland, Ohio. It symbolizes "Man rising above death, reaching upward to his God and toward Peace."[1]


Immortality (or eternal life) is the concept of living in a physical or spiritual form for an infinite or inconceivably vast length of time.[2]
As immortality is the negation of mortality—not dying or not being subject to death—it has been a subject of fascination to mankind since at least the beginning of history. The Epic of Gilgamesh, one of the first literary works, dating back at least to the 22nd century BCE, is primarily a quest of a hero seeking to become immortal.[3] What form an unending human life would take, or whether the soul exists and possesses immortality, has been a major point of focus of religion, as well as the subject of speculation, fantasy, and debate.
It is not known whether human physical immortality is an unachievable phenomenon or not. Biological forms have inherent limitations — for example, their fragility and slow adaptability to changing environments, which may or may not be able to be overcome through medical interventions, engineering, etc. On the other hand, biological immortality already exists among some simple, but multicellular life-forms.
Some scientists, futurists, and philosophers, such as scientists Aubrey de Grey and Ray Kurzweil believe that human immortality is achievable in the next few decades. Others are somewhere in the middle of these two extreme viewpoints, thinking that immortality is achievable in some period of time longer than 20–30 years, but not impossible.
Biological immortality is what life extension advocates feel is likely in decades to come. Specifically this refers to the absence of aging of the body due to baseline biological human limitations, but acknowledgement that complete immortality in a human form is unlikely due to the fact that even when you remain biologically young, once every few hundred years individuals will get killed in an accident (4.4% of U.S. deaths now) or by other means [4].
Ultimately, a timeless existence is also not known for certain to be achievable, or even definable, despite millennia of arguments for eternity. Wittgenstein, in a notably non-theological interpretation of eternal life, writes in the Tractatus that, "If we take eternity to mean not infinite temporal duration but timelessness, then eternal life belongs to those who live in the present."[5]




Contents


1 Definitions

1.1 Spiritual
1.2 Hypothetical
1.3 Physical


2 Physical immortality

2.1 Causes of death

2.1.1 Aging
2.1.2 Disease
2.1.3 Trauma


2.2 Biological immortality

2.2.1 Biologically immortal species
2.2.2 Evolution of aging


2.3 Prospects for human biological immortality

2.3.1 Scientific "Elixir of Youth"
2.3.2 Technological immortality
2.3.3 Cryonics
2.3.4 Mind-to-computer uploading
2.3.5 Cyborgology


2.4 Mystical and religious pursuits of physical immortality


3 Religious traditions

3.1 Hinduism
3.2 Shintoism
3.3 Zoroastrianism
3.4 Buddhism
3.5 Judaism
3.6 Christianity

3.6.1 Roman Catholicism
3.6.2 Jehovah's Witnesses
3.6.3 Mormonism
3.6.4 Other Christian beliefs


3.7 Islam
3.8 Taoism


4 Ethics of immortality

4.1 Undesirability of immortality
4.2 Desirablity of immortality


5 Symbols
6 Fiction
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links

10.1 Scientific and engineering prospects for immortality
10.2 Religious and spiritual prospects for immortality
10.3 In literature







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Definitions

[edit] Spiritual

The belief in an afterlife experienced by an immortal soul is a fundamental tenet of many branches of Christianity, Zoroastrianism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism and the Bahá'í Faith.


[edit] Hypothetical

Fame itself has been described as a method to "achieve immortality", if only semantically,[6] so that the name or works of a famous individual would "live on" after his or her death. This view of immortality places value on how one will be remembered by generations to come. For example, in Homer's Iliad, Achilles is already nigh-invincible, so his primary motive for fighting in the Trojan War is recognition and everlasting fame.
Mystic approaches to immortality include those of the ancient Chinese Taoists and European medieval alchemists, seeking an elixir of life.
Should metaphysical universals and abstract phenomena have an eternal existence, and if they can be interacted with by human beings, then a person might obtain a degree of immortality by interacting with them.[citation needed]
Quantum immortality is not widely regarded by the scientific community as being a verifiable or even necessarily correct offshoot of the many worlds interpretation. In the many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics, the wavefunction never collapses, and thus all possible outcomes of a quantum event exist simultaneously, with each event apparently spawning an entirely new universe in which a single possible outcome exists. In this theory, a person could hypothetically live forever as there might exist a string of possible quantum outcomes in which that individual never dies.


[edit] Physical

The persistence of life itself across time is a form of immortality, insofar as leaving surviving offspring or genetic material is a means of defeating death. Sociobiology and Richard Dawkins' theory of the selfish gene are related to this understanding of immortality.[citation needed]
Life extension technologies promise a path to complete rejuvenation. Cryonics holds out the hope that the dead can be revived in the future, following sufficient medical advancements.
Mind uploading is the concept of transference of consciousness from a human brain to an alternative medium providing the same functionality. Assuming the process to be possible and repeatable, this would provide immortality to the consciousness, as predicted by futurists such as Ray Kurzweil.[7]



[edit] Physical immortality
Physical immortality is a state of life that allows a person to avoid death and maintain conscious thought. It can mean the unending existence of a person from a physical source other than organic life, such as a computer. In the early 21st century, physical immortality remains a goal rather than a current reality. Active pursuit of physical immortality can either be based on scientific trends, such as cryonics, breakthroughs in rejuvenation or predictions of an impending technological singularity, or because of a spiritual belief, such as those held by Rastafarians or Rebirthers.

[edit] Causes of death





This section includes a list of references or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (May 2008)


Main article: Death
By definition, all causes of death must be overcome or avoided for physical immortality to be achieved. There are three main causes of death: ageing, disease and trauma.

[edit] Aging
Aubrey de Grey, a leading researcher in the field,[3] defines ageing as follows: “a collection of cumulative changes to the molecular and cellular structure of an adult organism, which result in essential metabolic processes, but which also, once they progress far enough, increasingly disrupt metabolism, resulting in pathology and death.” The current causes of ageing in humans are cell loss (without replacement), oncogenic nuclear mutations and epimutations, cell senescence, mitochondrial mutations, lysosomal aggregates, extracellular aggregates, random extracellular cross-linking, immune system decline, and endocrine changes. Eliminating ageing would require finding a solution to each of these causes, a program de Grey calls engineered negligible senescence.[8][9]

[edit] Disease
Disease is theoretically surmountable via technology. Human understanding of genetics is leading to cures and treatments of myriad previously incurable diseases.[which?] The mechanisms by which other diseases do their damage are becoming better understood. Sophisticated methods of detecting diseases early are being developed. Preventative medicine is becoming better understood. Neurodegenerative diseases like Parkinson's and Alzheimer's may soon be curable with the use of stem cells. Breakthroughs in cell biology and telomere research are leading to treatments for cancer. Vaccines are being researched for AIDS and tuberculosis. Genes associated with type 1 diabetes and certain types of cancer have been discovered allowing for new therapies to be developed. Artificial devices attached directly to the nervous system may restore sight to the blind. Drugs are being developed to treat myriad other diseases and ailments.

[edit] Trauma
Physical trauma would remain as a threat to perpetual physical life, even if the problems of aging and disease were overcome, as an otherwise immortal person would still be subject to unforeseen accidents or catastrophes. Ideally, any methods to achieve physical immortality would mitigate the risk of encountering trauma. Taking preventative measures by engineering inherent resistance to injury is thus relevant in addition to entirely reactive measures more closely associated with the paradigm of medical treatment.[citation needed]
The speed and quality of paramedic response remains a determining factor in surviving severe trauma.[10] A body that could automatically treat itself from severe trauma, such as speculated uses for nanotechnology,[who?] would mitigate this factor. Without improvements to such things, very few people would remain alive after several tens of thousands of years purely based on accident rate statistics, much less millions or billions or more.[citation needed]
Being the seat of consciousness, the brain cannot be risked to trauma if a continuous physical life is to be maintained. Therefore, it cannot be replaced or repaired in the same way other organs can. A method of transferring consciousness would be required for an individual to survive trauma to the brain, and this transfer would have to anticipate and precede the damage itself.[citation needed]

[edit] Biological immortality




Human chromosomes (grey) capped by telomeres (white)


Main article: Biological immortality
Biological immortality is an absence of aging, specifically the absence of a sustained increase in rate of mortality as a function of chronological age. A cell or organism that does not experience aging, or ceases to age at some point, is biologically immortal.
Biologists have chosen the word immortal to designate cells that are not limited by the Hayflick limit, where cells no longer divide because of DNA damage or shortened telomeres. Prior to the work of Leonard Hayflick there was the erroneous belief fostered by Alexis Carrel that all normal somatic cells are immortal. By preventing cells from reaching senescence one can achieve biological immortality; telomeres, a “cap” at the end of DNA, are thought to be the cause of cell aging. Every time a cell divides the telomere becomes a bit shorter; when it is finally worn down, the cell is unable to split and dies. Telomerase is an enzyme which rebuilds the telomeres in stem cells and cancer cells, allowing them to replicate an infinite number of times.[11] No definitive work has yet demonstrated that telomerase can be used in human somatic cells to prevent healthy tissues from aging. On the other hand, scientists hope to be able to grow organs with the help of stem cells, allowing organ transplants without the risk of rejection, another step in extending human life expectancy. These technologies are the subject of ongoing research, and are not yet realized.[citation needed]

[edit] Biologically immortal species
Life defined as biologically immortal is still susceptible to causes of death besides aging, including disease and trauma, as defined above. Notable immortal species include:

Bacteria (as a colony) — Bacteria reproduce through cell division. A parent bacterium splits itself into two identical daughter cells. These daughter cells then split themselves in half. This process repeats, thus making the bacterium colony essentially immortal.
Recent research, however, suggests that even bacteria as a colony may eventually die since each succeeding generation is slightly smaller, weaker, and more likely to die than the previous.[12]
Hydra can be considered biologically immortal as they do not undergo senescence or aging.
Turritopsis nutricula, a jellyfish, after becoming a sexually mature adult, can transform itself back into a child (the polyp stage) using the cell conversion process of transdifferentiation. Turritopsis nutricula repeats this cycle, meaning that it may have an indefinite lifespan.[13]
Bristlecone Pines are speculated to be potentially immortal; the oldest known living specimen is over 4800 years old.


[edit] Evolution of aging
Main article: Evolution of ageing
As the existence of biologically immortal species demonstrates, there is no thermodynamic necessity for senescence: a defining feature of life is that it takes in free energy from the environment and unloads its entropy as waste. Living systems can even build themselves up from seed, and routinely repair themselves. Ageing is therefore presumed to be a byproduct of evolution, but why mortality should be selected for remains a subject of research and debate. Programmed cell death and the teleomere "end replication problem" are found even the earliest and simplest of organisms.[14] This may be a tradeoff between selecting for cancer and selecting for ageing.[15]
Modern theories on the evolution of ageing include the following:

Mutation accumulation is a theory formulated by Peter Medawar in 1952 to explain how evolution would select for aging. Essentially, ageing is never selected against, as organisms have offspring before the mortal mutations surface in an individual.
Antagonistic pleiotropy is a theory proposed as an alternative by George C. Williams, a critic of Medawar, in 1957. In antagonistic pleiotropy, genes carry effects that are both beneficial and detrimental. In essence this refers to genes that offer benefits early in life, but exact a cost later on, i.e. decline and death.[16]
The disposable soma theory was proposed in 1977 by Thomas Kirkwood, which states that an individual body must allocate energy for metabolism, reproduction, and maintenance, and must compromise when there is food scarcity. Compromise in allocating energy to the repair function is what causes the body gradually to deteriorate with age, according to Kirkwood.[17]


[edit] Prospects for human biological immortality





This section includes a list of references or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (May 2008)



[edit] Scientific "Elixir of Youth"
Scientists believe that boosting the amount or proportion of a naturally forming enzyme, telomerase, in the body could prevent cells from dying and so may ultimately lead to extended, healthier, lifespans. Telomerase is a protein that helps maintain the protective caps at the ends of chromosomes.[18] A team of researchers at the Spanish National Cancer Centre (Madrid) tested the hypothesis on mice. It was found that those mice which were genetically engineered to produce 10 times the normal levels of telomerase lived 50% longer than normal mice.[19]
In normal circumstances, without the presence of telomerase, if a cell divides recursively, at some point all the progeny will reach their Hayflick limit. With the presence of telomerase, each dividing cell can replace the lost bit of DNA, and any single cell can then divide unbounded. While this unbounded growth property has excited many researchers, caution is warranted in exploiting this property, as exactly this same unbounded growth is a crucial step in enabling cancerous growth.
Embryonic stem cells express telomerase, which allows them to divide repeatedly and form the individual. In adults, telomerase is highly expressed in cells that need to divide regularly (e.g., in the immune system), whereas most somatic cells express it only at very low levels in a cell-cycle dependent manner.

[edit] Technological immortality
Further information: Transhumanism
Technological immortality is the prospect for much longer life spans made possible by scientific advances in a variety of fields: nanotechnology, emergency room procedures, genetics, biological engineering, regenerative medicine, microbiology, and others. Contemporary life spans in the advanced industrial societies are already markedly longer than those of the past because of better nutrition, availability of health care, standard of living and bio-medical scientific advances. Technological immortality predicts further progress for the same reasons over the near term. An important aspect of current scientific thinking about immortality is that some combination of human cloning, cryonics or nanotechnology will play an essential role in extreme life extension. Robert Freitas, a nanorobotics theorist, suggests tiny medical nanorobots could be created to go through human bloodstreams, find dangerous things like cancer cells and bacteria, and destroy them.[20] Freitas anticipates that gene-therapies and nanotechnology will eventually make the human body effectively self-sustainable and capable of living indefinitely, short of severe trauma. This supports the theory that we will be able to continually create biological or synthetic replacement parts to replace damaged or dying ones.

[edit] Cryonics
Main article: Cryonics
Cryonics, the practice of preserving organisms (either intact specimens or only their brains) for possible future revival by storing them at cryogenic temperatures where metabolism and decay are almost completely stopped, is the answer for those who believe that life extension technologies like nanotechnology or nanorobots will not develop sufficiently within their lifetime. Ideally, cryonics would allow clinically dead people to be brought back in the future after cures to the patients' diseases have been discovered and aging is reversible. Modern cryonics procedures use a process called vitrification which creates a glass-like state rather than freezing as the body is brought to low temperatures. This process reduces the risk of ice crystals damaging the cell-structure, which would be especially detrimental to cell structures in the brain, as their minute adjustment evokes the individuals mind.

[edit] Mind-to-computer uploading
Main article: Mind uploading
One idea that has been advanced involves uploading an individual's personality and memories via direct mind-computer interface.The individuals memory may be loaded to a computer or to a newly born babies mind. The baby will then grow with previous persons individuality and may not develop his own personality.[who?] Extropian futurists like Moravec and Kurzweil have proposed that, thanks to exponentially growing computing power, it will someday be possible to upload human consciousness onto a computer system, and live indefinitely in a virtual environment. This could be accomplished via advanced cybernetics, where computer hardware would initially be installed in the brain to help sort memory or accelerate thought processes. Components would be added gradually until the person's entire brain functions were handled by artificial devices, avoiding sharp transitions that would lead to issues of identity. After this point, the human body could be treated as an optional accessory and the mind could be transferred to any sufficiently powerful computer. Persons in this state would then be essentially immortal, short of loss or traumatic destruction of the machines that maintained them.

[edit] Cyborgology
Main article: Cyborg
Transforming a human into a cyborg can include brain implants or extracting a human mind and placing it in a robotic life-support system. Even replacing biological organs with robotic ones could increase life span (ie pace makers) and depending on the definition, many technological upgrades to the body, like genetic modifications or the addition of nanobots would qualify an individual as a cyborg. Such modifications would make one impervious to aging and disease and theoretically immortal unless killed or destroyed.




Joseph Wright of Derby, The Alchymist, In Search of the Philosopher's Stone, 1771



[edit] Mystical and religious pursuits of physical immortality
Many Indian fables and tales include instances of metempsychosis — the ability to jump into another body — performed by advanced Yogis in order to live a longer life. There are also entire Hindu sects devoted to the attainment of physical immortality by various methods, namely the Naths and the Aghoras.[citation needed]
Long before modern science made such speculation feasible, people wishing to escape death turned to the supernatural world for answers. Examples include Chinese Taoists[citation needed] and the medieval alchemists and their search for the Philosopher's Stone, or more modern religious mystics, who believed in the possibility of achieving physical immortality through spiritual transformation.
Individuals claiming to be physically immortal include Comte de Saint-Germain; in 18th century France, he claimed to be centuries old, and people who adhere to the Ascended Master Teachings are convinced of his physical immortality.[citation needed] An Indian saint known as Vallalar claimed to have achieved immortality before disappearing forever from a locked room in 1874.[21]
Rastafarians believe in physical immortality as a part of their religious doctrines. They believe that after God has called the Day of Judgment they will go to what they describe as Mount Zion in Africa to live in freedom for ever. They avoid the term "everlasting life"' and deliberately use "ever-living" instead.
Another group that believes in physical immortality are the Rebirthers, who believe that by following the connected breathing process of rebirthing they can physically live forever.

[edit] Religious traditions





The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. Please improve this article or discuss the issue on the talk page.


Main article: Afterlife
Until the late 20th century, there were no creditable scientific forecasts that physical immortality was obtainable. As late as 1952, the editorial staff of the Syntopicon found that in their compilation of the Great Books of the Western World, "The philosophical issue concerning immortality cannot be separated from issues concerning the existence and nature of man's soul."[22] Thus, the vast majority of speculation regarding immortality before the 21st century was regarding the nature of the afterlife.
Spiritual immortality, also known as the immortality of the soul, is the unending existence of a person from a nonphysical source, or in a nonphysical state, such as a soul.
It is a belief that is expressed in nearly every religious tradition. In both Western and Eastern religions, the spirit is an energy or force that transcends the mortal body, and returns to: (1) the spirit realm whether to enjoy heavenly bliss or suffer eternal torment in hell, or; (2) the cycle of life, directly or indirectly depending on the tradition.
The world's major religions hold a number of perspectives on spiritual immortality.

[edit] Hinduism




Representation of a soul undergoing punarjanma. Illustration from Hinduism Today, 2004


Hindus believe in an immortal soul which is reincarnated after death. According to Hinduism, people repeat a process of life, death, and rebirth in a cycle called samsara. If they live their life well, their karma improves and their station in the next life will be higher, and conversely lower if they live their life poorly. Eventually after many life times of perfecting its karma, the soul is freed from the cycle and lives in perpetual bliss. There is no eternal torment in Hinduism, temporal existence being harsh enough, although if a soul consistently lives very evil lives, it could work its way down to the very bottom of the cycle.
The Aghoris of India consume human flesh in pursuit of immortality and supernatural powers.[23] They distinguish themselves from other Hindu sects and priests by their alcoholic and cannibalistic rituals.[24]

[edit] Shintoism
Shintoists claim that except for those who choose or are dispatched to the underground world of Yomi, every living and non-living being may lose its body, but not its soul (tamashii), and that they live together with mortal souls as an immortal being called Kami. Shinto allows anything to attain Kami status regardless of its existence before becoming Kami. Therefore, even those that do not believe in Shinto may choose to become Kami, as well as things like a rock, or a tree. Some may be reincarnated for various reasons.

[edit] Zoroastrianism
Zoroastrians believe that on the fourth day after death, the human soul leaves the body and the body remains as an empty shell. Souls would go to either heaven or hell; these concepts of the afterlife in Zoroastrianism may have influenced Abrahamic religions.

[edit] Buddhism
Buddhism teaches that there is a cycle of birth, death, and rebirth and that the process is according to the qualities of a person's actions. This constant process of becoming ceases at the fruition of Bodhi (enlightenment) at which a being is no longer subject to causation (karma) but enters into a state that the Buddha called amata (deathlessness).
According to the philosophical premise of the Buddha, the initiate to Buddhism who is to be "shown the way to Immortality (amata)",[25] wherein liberation of the mind (cittavimutta) is effectuated through the expansion of wisdom and the meditative practices of sati and samādhi, must first be educated away from his former ignorance-based (avijja) materialistic proclivities in that he "saw any of these forms, feelings, or this body, to be my Self, to be that which I am by nature".
Thus, desiring a soul or ego (ātman) to be permanent is a prime consequence of ignorance, itself the cause of all misery and the foundation of the cycle of reincarnation (saṃsāra). Form and consciousness being two of the five skandhas, or aggregates of ignorance, Buddhism teaches that physical immortality is neither a path to enlightenment, nor an attainable goal: even the gods which can live for eons eventually die. Upon enlightenment, the "karmic seeds" (saṅkhāras or sanskaras) for all future becoming and rebirth are exhausted. After biological death an arhat, or buddha, enters into parinirvana, an everlasting state of transcendental happiness.

[edit] Judaism
Judaism claims that the righteous dead will be resurrected in the Messianic age with the coming of the messiah. They will then be granted immortality in a perfect world. The wicked dead, on the other hand, will not be resurrected at all. This is not the only Jewish belief about the afterlife. The Tanakh is not specific about the afterlife, so there are wide differences in views and explanations among believers.
The Hebrew Bible speaks about sheol (שאול), the underworld to which the souls of the dead depart. The doctrine of resurrection is mentioned explicitly only in Daniel 12:1-4 although it may be implied in several other texts. Later Judaism accepted that there would be a resurrection of all men (cf. Acts 24:14-15) and the intertestamental literature describes in more detail what the dead experience in sheol. By the second century BC, Jews who accepted the Oral Torah had come to believe that those in sheol awaited the resurrection either in comfort (in the bosom of Abraham) or in torment.

[edit] Christianity





This section is in need of attention from an expert on the subject. WikiProject Christianity or the Christianity Portal may be able to help recruit one. (August 2007)







This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please improve this section if you can. (August 2008)






Adam and Eve condemned to mortality. Hans Holbein the Younger, Danse Macabre, 16th century


Christian theology holds that Adam and Eve lost physical immortality for themselves and all their descendants in the Fall of Man, though this initial "imperishability of the bodily frame of man" was "a preternatural condition."[26]
According to the book of Enoch, the righteous and wicked await the resurrection in separate divisions of sheol, a teaching which may have influenced Jesus' parable of Lazarus and Dives.[27] Christians believe that every person that believes in Christ will be resurrected; Bible passages are interpreted as teaching that the resurrected body will, like the present body, be both physical (but a renewed and non-decaying physical body) and spiritual.
Specific imagery of resurrection into immortal form is found in the Pauline letters:

Behold, I shew you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed,
In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.
For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.
So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory.
O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?
The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law.
But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord. —1Corinthians 15:51-58

In Romans 2:6-7 Paul declares that God "will render to every man according to his deeds: To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honour and immortality, eternal life", but then in Romans 3 warns that no one will ever meet this standard.
After the Last Judgment, those who have been born again will live forever in the presence of God, and those who were never born again will be abandoned to never-ending consciousness of guilt, separation from God, and punishment for sin. Eternal death is depicted in the Bible as a realm of constant physical and spiritual anguish in a lake of fire, and a realm of darkness away from God. Some see the fires of Hell as a theological metaphor, representing the inescapable presence of God endured in absence of love for God; others suggest that Hell represents complete destruction of both the physical body and of spiritual existence.

[edit] Roman Catholicism
Catholic Christians teach that there is a supernatural realm called Purgatory where souls who have died in a state of grace but have yet to expiate venial sins or temporal punishments due to past sins are cleansed before they are admitted into Heaven.

[edit] Jehovah's Witnesses
Jehovah's Witnesses believe the word soul (nephesh or psykhe) as used in the Bible is a person, an animal, or the life a person or animal enjoys. Hence, the soul is not part of man, but is the whole man — man as a living being. Hence, when a person or animal dies, the soul dies, and death is a state of non-existence, based on Ezekiel 18:4.[28] Hell (hades or sheol) is not a place of fiery torment, but rather the common grave of humankind, a place of unconsciousness.[29][30]
After the final judgment, it is expected that the righteous will receive eternal life and live forever in an earth turned into a paradise. Another group referenced as "the little flock" of 144,000 people will receive immortality and go to heaven to rule as Kings and Priests. Jehovah's Witnesses make the distinction that those with 'eternal life' can die though they do not succumb to disease or old age, whereas immortal ones cannot die by any cause.[31] They teach that Jesus was the first to be rewarded with heavenly immortality, but that Revelation 7:4 and Revelation 14:1, 3 refer to a literal number (144,000) of additional people who will become "self-sustaining," that is, not needing anything outside themselves (food, sunlight, etc.) to maintain their own life.[32]

[edit] Mormonism




A non-doctrinal illustration of the Mormon Plan of Salvation.


In Mormon theology, there are three degrees of glory which are the ultimate, eternal dwelling place for nearly all who lived on earth. Prior to mortal birth individuals existed as men and women in a spirit state. That period of life is also referred to as the first estate or Pre-existence. Mormon theologians cite a Biblical scripture, Jeremiah 1:5, as an allusion to the concept that mankind had a preparation period prior to mortal birth: "Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations".[33] Joseph Smith, Jr., the founder of the Latter Day Saint movement, provided a description of the afterlife based upon a vision he reportedly received, recorded within the Mormon canonical writings entitled Doctrine and Covenants.[34] According to this section of LDS scripture, the afterlife consists of three degrees or kingdoms of glory, called the Celestial Kingdom, the Terrestrial Kingdom, and the Telestial Kingdom. The few who do not inherit any degree of glory (though they are resurrected) reside in a state called outer darkness, which, though not a degree of glory, is often discussed in this context. The only ones who go there are known as "Sons of Perdition".

[edit] Other Christian beliefs
The doctrine of conditional immortality states the human soul is naturally mortal, and that immortality is granted by God as a gift. The doctrine is a "significant minority evangelical view" that has "grown within evangelicalism in recent years". [35]
Some sects who hold to the doctrine of baptismal regeneration also believe in a third realm called Limbo, which is the final destination of souls who have not been baptised, but who have been innocent of mortal sin. Souls in Limbo include unbaptised infants and those who lived virtuously but were never exposed to Christianity in their lifetimes. Christian Scientists believe that sin brought death, and that death will be overcome with the overcoming of sin.




The Golden Gate in Jerusalem, known as "The Gate of Eternal Life" in Arabic, as it stood in 1900



[edit] Islam





This section is in need of attention from an expert on the subject. WikiProject Islam or the Islam Portal may be able to help recruit one. (May 2008)


Muslims believe that everyone has an immortal soul which will live on after death. A soul undergoes correction in Jahannam (Hell) if it has led an evil life, but once this correction is over, the soul is admitted to Jannah (Paradise).[citation needed] Souls that commit unforgivable evil will never leave hell. Some souls will therefore never taste Heaven. 
[edit] Taoism
The taoist believe by Xiu Xing and Lian Dan, one can achieve immortality to become an enlightened person, or Xian.

[edit] Ethics of immortality
The possibility of clinical immortality raises a host of medical, philosophical, and religious issues and ethical questions. These include persistent vegetative states, the nature of personality over time, technology to mimic or copy the mind or its processes, social and economic disparities created by longevity, and survival of the heat death of the universe.

[edit] Undesirability of immortality
Essential to many of the world's religions is a doctrine of an eternal afterlife. Narratives from Christianity and Islam assert that eternal afterlife is not desirable to the unfaithful:


The rich man also died, and was buried; And in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom. And he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame. But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. And beside all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed: so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence.

—Luke 16:22-26 King James Bible Translation



Those who are wretched shall be in the Fire: There will be for them therein (nothing but) the heaving of sighs and sobs: They will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure, except as thy Lord willeth: for thy Lord is the (sure) accomplisher of what He planneth. And those who are blessed shall be in the Garden: They will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure, except as thy Lord willeth: a gift without break.

—The Qur'an, 11:106-108

Instances from other religions include the Buddhist concept of eternal rebirth, which considers that rebirth is caused by ignorance, an essentially undesirable condition that is to be overcome.[citation needed]
Physical immortality has also been imagined as a form of eternal torment, as in Mary Shelley's short story "The Mortal Immortal", the protagonist of which witnesses everyone he cares about dying around him. Jorge Luis Borges explored the idea that life gets its meaning from death in the short story "'The Immortal"; an entire society having achieved immortality, they found time becoming infinite, and so found no motivation for any action.

[edit] Desirablity of immortality
Many religions promise their faithful an eternal paradise in an afterlife. These presume perfection, as they are part of a divine plan, and are categorically desirable.
Physical immortality is considered desirable over its counterpart, death, which to date has been inevitable for all human beings. This presumes tolerable living conditions as an incentive for perpetual life, as the prevalence of suicide demonstrates.

[edit] Symbols




Ankh






Trefoil knot


There are numerous symbols representing immortality. Pictured here is an Egyptian symbol of life that holds connotations of immortality when depicted in the hands of the gods and pharaohs who were seen as having control over the journey of life, the ankh (left). The Möbius strip in the shape of a trefoil knot is another symbol of immortality. Most symbolic representations of infinity or the life cycle are often used to represent immortality depending on the context they are placed in. Other examples include the Ouroboros, the Chinese fungus of longevity, the ten kanji, the phoenix, and the colors amaranth (in Western culture) and peach (in Chinese culture).

[edit] Fiction
Main article: Immortality in fiction
Immortal beings and species abound in fiction, especially fantasy fiction.

[edit] See also

List of life extension-related topics





Actuarial escape velocity
Amaranth
Ambrosia
Amrita
Bioethics
Biogerontology
Chiranjeevin
Alex Chiu
Consciousness
Crown of Immortality




Cryonics
Elixir of life
Eternal youth
Holy grail
Immortal DNA strand hypothesis
Immortalist Society
Immortality Institute
Immortality test
Indefinite lifespan




Infinity
Internal alchemy
Henrietta Lacks
Lich
Life extension
List of immortal people
Longevity
Methuselah Mouse Prize
Molecular nanotechnology
Omega Point (Tipler)




Organlegging
Posthuman
Queen Mother of the West
Real death
Rejuvenation (aging)
Simulated reality
Suspended animation
Technological singularity
Dyson's eternal intelligence
Nikola Tesla
Xian (Taoism)





[edit] References


^ Marshall Fredericks (2003). "GCVM History and Mission". Greater Cleveland Veteran's Memorial, Inc.. http://www.clevelandvetsmemorial.org/GCVM_History.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-14. 
^ (cf Concise Oxford Dictionary
^ a b Joel Garreau (October 31, 2007). "The Invincible Man". Washington Post: C01. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/10/30/AR2007103002222_pf.html. 
^ Centres for disease control and prevention (October 12, 2004). "Deaths: Final Data for 2002" (PDF). National Vital Statistics Resports. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr53/nvsr53_05acc.pdf. 
^ Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1921). Hypertext Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. pp. 6.4311. http://www.kfs.org/~jonathan/witt/t6431en.html Hypertext. 
^ Morris, William (1979). American Heritage Dictionary. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. pp. 658. 
^ Kurzweil, Raymond (2005). The Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology. Viking Adult. ISBN 0-670-03384-7. 
^ Aubrey, de Grey (1999). The Mitochondrial Free Radical Theory of Aging. Austin, Texas: Landes Bioscience. 
^ de Grey, Aubrey; & Rae, Michael (September 2007). Ending Aging: The Rejuvenation Breakthroughs that Could Reverse Human Aging in Our Lifetime. New York, NY: St. Martin's Press. pp. 416. ISBN 0312367066. 
^ Walker, Peter (1991). International Search and Rescue Teams, A League Discussion Paper. Geneva: League of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. 
^ Lin Kah Wai (2004). "Telomeres, Telomerase, and Tumorigenesis -- A Review". MedGenMed 6 (3): 19. PMID 15520642. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?tool=pubmed&pubmedid=15520642. 
^ "Bacteria Death Reduces Human Hopes of Immortality". New Scientist magazine, issue 2485, page 19. February 5, 2005. http://www.newscientist.com/channel/health/mg18524855.800-bacteria-death-reduces-human-hopes-of-immortality.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-02. 
^ Scott F. Gilbert (March 5, 2003). "Cheating Death: The Immortal Life Cycle of Turritopsis". Developmental Biology, 8th edition. http://8e.devbio.com/preview_article.php?ch=2&id=6. Retrieved on 2007-04-02. 
^ Clark, W.R. 1999. A Means to an End: The biological basis of aging and death. New York: Oxford University Press. [1] About telomeres and programmed cell death.
^ Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine, Ch. 69, Cancer cell biology and angiogenesis, Robert G. Fenton and Dan L. Longo, p. 454.
^ Williams, G.C. 1957. Pleiotropy, natural selection and the evolution of senescence. Evolution, 11:398-411. [2] Paper in which Williams describes his theory of antagonistic pleiotropy.
^ Kirkwood, T.B.L. 1977. Evolution of ageing. Nature, 270: 301-304. [3] Origin of the disposable soma theory.
^ http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-1087860/Scientists-step-closer-creating-elixir-life.html
^ http://www.telegraph.co.uk/health/healthnews/3489881/Scientists-take-a-step-closer-to-an-elixir-of-youth.html
^ Robert A. Freitas Jr., Microbivores: Artificial Mechanical Phagocytes using Digest and Discharge Protocol, self-published, 2001 [4]
^ vallalar.org
^ Adler, Mortimer J., ed., et al (1952). The Great Ideas: A Syntopicon of Great Books of the Western World. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica. pp. 788. 
^ Indian doc focuses on Hindu cannibal sect, MSNBC
^ The Aghoris, Channel 4
^ Majjhima Nikaya 2.265, Samyutta Nikaya 5.9 (PTS)
^ Adler, Mortimer J., ed., et al (1952). The Great Ideas: A Syntopicon of Great Books of the Western World. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica. pp. 784. 
^ New Bible Dictionary 3rd edition, IVP Leicester 1996. "Sheol".
^ "Is There LIFE After Death?", The Watchtower July 15, 2001. Web version available at [5] accessed January 26, 2006.
^ Hell-Eternal Torture or Common Grave? The Watchtower, April 15, 1993, p. 6.
^ What Really Is Hell? The Watchtower, July 15, 2002.
^ The Watchtower, 1 December 1963, 732, "The Gift of Immortality"
^ Insight on the Scriptures Vol. 1 p. 1196: "Incorruption"
^ Jeremiah 1:5
^ Section 76 lds.org
^ The Nature of Hell. Conclusions and Recommendations by Evangelical Alliance



[edit] Further reading

Allen, Richard James (1999). Thursday's Fictions. Wollongong: Five Islands Press. ISBN 0-86418-596-0. 
Alexander, Brian (2003). Rapture: How Biotech Became the New Religion. Basic Books. ISBN 0-7382-0761-6. 
Bova, Ben (2000). Immortality: How Science Is Extending Your Life Span-and Changing the World. Avon: New York. ISBN 0-380-79318-0. 
Cullmann, Oscar (1955). Immortality of the Soul or Resurrection of the Dead?. http://www.geocities.com/pastorkeith/cullmann.html. 
de Grey, Aubrey; & Rae, Michael (September 2007). Ending Aging: The Rejuvenation Breakthroughs that Could Reverse Human Aging in Our Lifetime. New York, NY: St. Martin's Press. pp. 416. ISBN 0312367066. 
Edwards, Paul (1997). Immortality. Prometheus Books. ISBN 1-57392-130-0. 
Elixxir (2001). The Immortalist Manifesto: Stay Young & Save the World. Authorhouse Books. ISBN 0-7596-5339-9. 
Freitas Jr., Robert A. (2002). "Death is an Outrage". http://www.rfreitas.com/Nano/DeathIsAnOutrage.htm. Retrieved on 2008-02-14. 
Hall, Stephen S. (2003). Merchants of Immortality: Chasing the Dream of Human Life Extension. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-618-09524-1. 
Immortality Institute (2004). The Scientific Conquest Of Death. Libros En Red. ISBN 987-561-135-2. 
Perry, R. Michael (2000). Forever For All: Moral philosophy, Cryonics, and the Scientific Prospects for Immortality. New York: Universal Publishers: New York: Universal Publishers. ISBN 1-58112-724-3. 
Pickover, Clifford (2007). A Beginner's Guide to Immortality: Extraordinary People, Alien Brains, and Quantum Resurrection. New York: Thunder's Mouth Press. ISBN 1-56025-984-1. 
West, Michael D. (2003). The Immortal Cell: One Scientist's Quest to Solve the Mystery of Human Aging. Doubleday. ISBN 0-385-50928-6. 


[edit] External links



Look up immortality in
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Immortality



[edit] Scientific and engineering prospects for immortality

The Methuselah Foundation Aubrey de Grey's non-profit organization dedicated to finding a cure for aging
KurzweilAI.net Ray Kurzweil resource site
Immortality Online News feeds on immortality and human life extension
Pimm - Partial immortalization Blog of Tulane research scientist Attila Chordash
BiologicalGerontology.com Chris Smelick's Biogerontology site
Vitae Institute Chris Smelick's non-profit organization
Immortality Institute Scientific and sociological discussions, activism, research


[edit] Religious and spiritual prospects for immortality

"Death and Immortality" Dictionary of the History of Ideas, etext at the University of Virginia Library
The Immortality of the Soul and the Resurrection of the Body Lecture by Heinrich J. Vogel
An Essay on the Scriptural Doctrine of Immortality by James Challis
Eternity: Christ’s Return, Chiliasm, Resurrection of the Dead, Judgment, Hell, Luther on Eternity, Heaven J. P. Meyer, The Northwestern Lutheran, August 22, 1954, Vol. 41, # 17 to April 14, 1957, Vol. 44, #8
"How you Can Have Eternal Life" Jack Graham, PowerPoint Ministries, Christianity.com
Got Eternal Life? Got Questions Ministries
Immortality Taoist essay, personaltao.com


[edit] In literature

Mary Shelley's The Mortal Immortal









v • d • e

Time





Major concepts

Time · Eternity · Arguments for eternity · Immortality
Deep time · History · Past · Present · Future · Futurology


Time Portal





Measurement and Standards

Chronometry · UTC · UT · TAI · Second · Minute · Hour · Sidereal time · Solar time · Time zone
Clock · Horology · History of timekeeping devices · Astrarium · Marine chronometer · Sundial · Water clock
Calendar · Day · Week · Month · Year · Tropical year · Julian · Gregorian · Islamic
  Intercalation · Leap second · Leap year






Chronology

Astronomical chronology · Geologic Time · Geological history · Geochronology · Archaeological dating
Calendar era · Regnal year · Chronicle · Timeline · Periodization






Religion and Mythology

Time and fate deities · Wheel of time · Kāla · Kalachakra · Prophecy · Dreamtime






Philosophy

Causality · Eternalism · Eternal return · Event · The Unreality of Time · A-series and B-series · B-Theory of time
Endurantism · Four dimensionalism · Perdurantism · Presentism · Temporal finitism · Temporal parts






Physical Sciences

Time in physics · Spacetime · Absolute time and space · T-symmetry
Arrow of time · Chronon · Fourth dimension · Planck epoch · Planck time · Time domain
Theory of relativity · Time dilation · Gravitational time dilation · Coordinate time · Proper time






Biology

Chronobiology · Circadian rhythms






Psychology

Consciousness and spacetime · Mental chronometry · Reaction time · Sense of time · Specious present






Sociology and Anthropology

Futures studies · Long Now Foundation · Time discipline · Time use research






Economics

Newtonian time in economics · Time value of money · Time Banking · Time-based currency






Related topics

Space · Duration · Time capsule · Time travel · Time signature · System time · Metric time · Hexadecimal time · Carpe diem · Tempus fugit













v • d • e

Time in religion and mythology





Major subjects

Time — Cosmology · Religion · Mythology — Eternity · Arguments for eternity · Immortality

Ritual · Religious festival — Destiny and fate · Predestination · Prophecy · Oracle · Divination · Eschatology




Time Portal





Time and fate deities
of antiquity

Egyptian — Hemsut · Huh
Ancient Near East — Ashima · Ishtar · Mamitu · Mammetun · Manah · Manu the Great · Meni
Greek — The Fates: Moirae — Atropos · Clotho · Lachesis





Ananke · Geras · Horae · Kairos · Khronos · Tyche





Roman — The Fates: Parcae — Decima · Morta · Nona





Camenae: Antevorte/Porrima · Carmenta · Egeria · Postverta
Aeternitas · Anna Perenna · Caerus · Chronos · Fortuna · Vertumnus





Etruscan — Nortia · Tinia
Norse — Norns (Urðr · Verðandi · Skuld)





Day: (Dagr · Skinfaxi) · Night: (Nótt · Hrímfaxi) · Seasons: (Sumarr and Vetr) · Old age: Elli





Baltic — Dalia · Lauma
Polish — Sudz
Romanian — Fates: Ursitoare
Other European — Matres and Matrones · Father Time · Beten
Philippine — Kan-Laon






Hinduism

Kalpa · Manvantara · Yuga · Kāla (time)
Hindu calendar · Hindu units of measurement  · Kali






Buddhism

Wheel of time · Kalachakra · Maitreya






Judaism

Ancient of Days · Ein Sof (Kabbalah)
Hebrew calendar · Missing years · Jewish holidays · Passover · Shabbat






Christianity

Gregorian calendar · Liturgical year · Sabbath in Christianity
Easter · Computus · Moveable feast · Easter controversy · Quartodecimanism · Reform of the date of Easter






Islam

Islamic calendar · Muslim holidays · Predestination in Islam






Other traditions

Dreamtime / The Dreaming · Oracle bone · Maya calendar






Related topics

Week-day names













v • d • e

Death and related topics





In medicine

Autopsy · Brain death · Clinical death · Euthanasia · Lazarus Syndrome · Persistent vegetative state · Terminal illness






Lists

Causes of death by rate · Preventable causes of death · People by cause of death · Notable deaths in 2007 · Notable deaths in 2008






Mortality

Immortality · Infant mortality · Legal death · Maternal death · Mortality rate






After death

Body: Burial · Cremation · Cryonics · Promession · Resomation · Mummification · Decomposition · 
Death certificate · Funeral · Grief · Mourning · Category:Customs · Afterlife · Intermediate state






Paranormal

Out-of-body experience · Near-death experience · Near-death studies · Reincarnation research · Séance






Other

Murder · Genocide · Suicide · Fascination with death · Martyrdom · Sacrifices (Human · Animal) · War · Personification of Death · Death and culture · Category:Death by country






Legal

Wills · Trust · Estate









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immortality"
Categories: Articles needing expert attention since August 2007 | Aging | Death | Eschatology | Life extension | Fictional superhuman features or abilitiesHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2008 | Articles lacking in-text citations | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since May 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since June 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 | Articles with limited geographic scope | Christianity articles needing expert attention | Cleanup from August 2008 | Islam articles needing expert attention | Articles needing expert attention since May 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Български
Català
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
한국어
Հայերեն
Italiano
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
Polski
Português
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 22:18.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
