












Albert Einstein - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Albert_Einstein";
		var wgTitle = "Albert Einstein";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "736";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 287145193;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Albert Einstein

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Albert einstein)
Jump to: navigation, search 
"Einstein" redirects here. For other uses, see Einstein (disambiguation).





Albert Einstein



Albert Einstein, 1921



Born
14 March 1879 (1879-03-14)
Ulm, Kingdom of Württemberg, German Empire


Died
18 April 1955 (1955-04-19) (aged 76)
Princeton, New Jersey, USA


Residence
Germany, Italy, Switzerland, USA


Citizenship
Württemberg/Germany (1879–96)
Switzerland (1901–55)
Austria (1911–12)
Germany (1914–33)
United States (1940–55)


Ethnicity
Ashkenazi Jewish


Fields
Physics


Institutions
Swiss Patent Office (Berne)
University of Zurich
German Karl-Ferdinands-Universität, Prague
ETH Zurich
Prussian Academy of Sciences
Kaiser Wilhelm Institute
University of Leiden
Institute for Advanced Study


Alma mater
ETH Zurich
University of Zurich


Doctoral advisor
Alfred Kleiner


Other academic advisors
Heinrich Friedrich Weber


Notable students
Ernst G. Straus
Nathan Rosen


Known for
General relativity
Special relativity
Photoelectric effect
Brownian motion
Mass-energy equivalence
Einstein field equations
Unified Field Theory
Bose–Einstein statistics


Notable awards
Nobel Prize in Physics (1921)
Copley Medal (1925)
Max Planck Medal (1929)
Person of the Century


Religious stance
See main text


Signature



Albert Einstein (German:  ˈalbɐt ˈaɪ̯nʃtaɪ̯n ; English: /ˈælbərt ˈaɪnstaɪn/; 14 March 1879 – 18 April 1955) was a German-born theoretical physicist. He is best known for his theory of relativity and specifically mass–energy equivalence, expressed by the equation E = mc2. Einstein received the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics "for his services to Theoretical Physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect."[1]
Einstein's many contributions to physics include:

Special theory of relativity, which reconciled mechanics with electromagnetism
General theory of relativity, a new theory of gravitation which added the principle of equivalence to the principle of relativity
Founding of relativistic cosmology with a cosmological constant
The first post-Newtonian expansions for the perihelion advance of planet Mercury and frame-dragging
The deflection of light by gravity and gravitational lensing
An explanation for capillary action
The first fluctuation dissipation theorem which explained the Brownian movement of molecules
The photon theory and wave-particle duality from the thermodynamic properties of light
The quantum theory of atomic motion in solids
Zero-point energy
The semiclassical version of the Schrodinger equation
Relations for atomic transition probabilities which predicted stimulated emission
The quantum theory of a monatomic gas which predicted Bose-Einstein condensation
The EPR paradox
A program for a unified field theory by the geometrization of physics.

Einstein published more than 300 scientific works and more than 150 non-scientific works.[2][3] In 1999 Time magazine named him the "Person of the Century", and in the words of Einstein biographer Don Howard, "to the scientifically literate and the public at large, Einstein is synonymous with genius."[4]:159




Contents


1 Youth and schooling
2 Patent office
3 Marriage and family life
4 Annus Mirabilis and special relativity
5 Light and general relativity
6 Nobel Prize
7 Unified field theory
8 Collaboration and conflict

8.1 Bose–Einstein statistics
8.2 Schrödinger gas model
8.3 Einstein refrigerator
8.4 Bohr versus Einstein


9 Religious views
10 Politics

10.1 Zionism
10.2 Anti-Nazism
10.3 Atomic bomb
10.4 Cold War era


11 Death
12 Legacy
13 Honors
14 Effect on popular culture
15 See also
16 Publications
17 References
18 Further reading
19 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Youth and schooling
Albert Einstein was born into a Jewish family in Ulm, in the Kingdom of Württemberg in the German Empire on March 14, 1879. His father was Hermann Einstein, a salesman and engineer. His mother was Pauline Einstein (née Koch). In 1880, the family moved to Munich, where his father and his uncle founded a company, Elektrotechnische Fabrik J. Einstein & Cie, that manufactured electrical equipment based on Direct current.
The Einsteins were not observant of Jewish religious practices, and Albert attended a Catholic elementary school. Although Einstein had early speech difficulties, he was a top student in elementary school.[5][6]




Albert Einstein in 1893 (age 14), taken before the family moved to Italy


When Einstein was five, his father showed him a pocket compass. Einstein realized that there must be something in the space, previously thought to be empty, that was moving the needle and later stated that this experience made "a deep and lasting impression".[7] At his mother's insistence, he took violin lessons starting at age six, and although he disliked them and eventually quit, he later took great pleasure in Mozart's violin sonatas. As he grew, Einstein built models and mechanical devices for fun, and began to show a talent for mathematics.
In 1889, family friend Max Talmud, a medical student,[8] introduced the ten-year-old Einstein to key science, mathematics, and philosophy texts, including Kant's Critique of Pure Reason and Euclid's Elements (Einstein called it the "holy little geometry book").[8] From Euclid, Einstein began to understand deductive reasoning, and by the age of twelve, he had learned Euclidean geometry. Soon thereafter he began to investigate infinitesimal calculus.
In his early teens, Einstein attended the Luitpold Gymnasium. His father intended for him to pursue electrical engineering, but Einstein clashed with authorities and resented the school regimen. He later wrote that the spirit of learning and creative thought were lost in strict rote learning.
In 1894, when Einstein was fifteen, his father's business failed, as DC had lost the War of Currents to alternating current (AC). In search of business, the Einstein family moved to Italy, first to Milan and then, after a few months, to Pavia. During this time, Einstein wrote his first scientific work, "The Investigation of the State of Aether in Magnetic Fields".[9] Einstein had been left behind in Munich to finish high school, but in the spring of 1895, he withdrew to join his family in Pavia, convincing the school to let him go by using a doctor's note.
Rather than completing high school, Einstein decided to apply directly to the Eidgenössische Polytechnische Schule (later Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule (ETH)) in Zürich, Switzerland. Lacking a school certificate, he was required to take an entrance examination, which he did not pass, although he got exceptional marks in mathematics and physics.[10] Einstein wrote that it was in that same year, at age 16, that he first performed his famous thought experiment visualizing traveling alongside a beam of light (Einstein 1979).
The Einsteins sent Albert to Aarau, Switzerland to finish secondary school. While lodging with the family of Professor Jost Winteler, he fell in love with the family's daughter, Marie. (Albert's sister Maja later married Paul Winteler.)[11] In Aarau, Einstein studied Maxwell's electromagnetic theory. At age 17 he graduated, and, with his father's approval, renounced his citizenship in the German Kingdom of Württemberg to avoid military service, to finally enroll in 1896 in the mathematics and physics program at the Polytechnic in Zurich. Marie Winteler moved to Olsberg, Switzerland for a teaching post.
In the same year, Einstein's future wife, Mileva Marić, also entered the Polytechnic to study mathematics and physics, being the only woman in the group. During the next few years, Einstein and Marić's friendship developed into romance. Einstein graduated in 1900 from the Polytechnic with a diploma in mathematics and physics,[12] whereas Marić failed her final exams. That same year, Einstein's friend Michele Besso introduced him to the work of Ernst Mach. The next year, Einstein published a paper in the prestigious Annalen der Physik on the capillary forces of a straw (Einstein 1901). He gained Swiss citizenship on 21 February 1901.[13]

Patent office




The 'Einsteinhaus' on the Kramgasse in Berne where Einstein lived with Mileva on the first floor during his Annus Mirabilis


Following graduation, Einstein could not find a teaching post. After almost two years of searching, a former classmate's father helped him get a job in Berne, at the Federal Office for Intellectual Property,[14] the patent office, as an assistant examiner. His responsibility was evaluating patent applications for electromagnetic devices. In 1903, Einstein's position at the Swiss Patent Office was made permanent, although he was passed over for promotion until he "fully mastered machine technology".[15]
With friends he met in Berne, Einstein formed a weekly discussion club on science and philosophy, jokingly named "The Olympia Academy". Their readings included Poincaré, Mach, and Hume, who influenced Einstein's scientific and philosophical outlook.[16]
During this period Einstein had almost no personal contact with the physics community.[17] Much of his work at the patent office related to questions about transmission of electric signals and electrical-mechanical synchronization of time: two technical problems that show up conspicuously in the thought experiments that eventually led Einstein to his radical conclusions about the nature of light and the fundamental connection between space and time.[15][16]

Marriage and family life
Einstein and Mileva Marić had a daughter they called Lieserl, who was born in early 1902, probably in Novi Sad.[18] Her fate is uncertain after 1903.
Einstein married Mileva on 6 January 1903, although his mother had objected to the match because she had a prejudice against Serbs and thought Marić "too old" and "physically defective."[19] [20] Their relationship was for a time a personal and intellectual partnership. In a letter to her, Einstein called Marić "a creature who is my equal and who is as strong and independent as I am."[21] There has been occasional debate about whether Marić influenced Einstein's work, however, the overwhelming consensus amongst academic historians of science is that she did not.[22][23][24] On 14 May 1904, Albert and Mileva's first son, Hans Albert Einstein, was born in Berne, Switzerland. Their second son, Eduard, was born in Zurich on 28 July 1910.
Albert and Marić divorced on 14 February 1919, having lived apart for five years. On 2 June of that year, Einstein married Elsa Löwenthal (née Einstein), who had nursed him through an illness. Elsa was Albert's first cousin maternally and his second cousin paternally. Together the Einsteins raised Margot and Ilse, Elsa's daughters from her first marriage.[25] Their union produced no children.

Annus Mirabilis and special relativity
Main articles: Annus Mirabilis Papers and History of special relativity




Albert Einstein, 1905


In 1905, while he was working in the patent office, Einstein had four papers published in the Annalen der Physik, the leading German physics journal. These are the papers that history has come to call the Annus Mirabilis Papers:

His paper on the particulate nature of light put forward the idea that certain experimental results, notably the photoelectric effect, could be simply understood from the postulate that light interacts with matter as discrete "packets" (quanta) of energy, an idea that had been introduced by Max Planck in 1900 as a purely mathematical manipulation, and which seemed to contradict contemporary wave theories of light (Einstein 1905a).
His paper on Brownian motion explained the random movement of very small objects as direct evidence of molecular action, thus supporting the atomic theory. (Einstein 1905c)
His paper on the electrodynamics of moving bodies introduced the radical theory of special relativity, which showed that the observed independence of the speed of light on the observer's state of motion required fundamental changes to the notion of simultaneity. Consequences of this include the time-space frame of a moving body slowing down and contracting (in the direction of motion) relative to the frame of the observer. This paper also argued that the idea of a luminiferous aether—one of the leading theoretical entities in physics at the time—was superfluous. (Einstein 1905d)
In his paper on mass–energy equivalence (previously considered to be distinct concepts), Einstein deduced from his equations of special relativity what has been called the twentieth century's most well known equation: E = mc2.[26][27] This suggests that tiny amounts of mass could be converted into huge amounts of energy and presaged the development of nuclear power. (Einstein 1905e)

All four papers are today recognized as tremendous achievements—and hence 1905 is known as Einstein's "Wonderful Year". At the time, however, they were not noticed by most physicists as being important, and many of those who did notice them rejected them outright. Some of this work—such as the theory of light quanta—remained controversial for years.[28][29]
At the age of 26, having studied under Alfred Kleiner, Professor of Experimental Physics, Einstein was awarded a PhD by the University of Zurich. His dissertation was entitled A New Determination of Molecular Dimensions. (Einstein 1905b)

Light and general relativity
See also: History of general relativity and Relativity priority dispute




One of the 1919 eclipse photographs taken during Arthur Stanley Eddington's expedition, which confirmed Einstein's predictions of the gravitational bending of light.


In 1906, the patent office promoted Einstein to Technical Examiner Second Class, but he had not given up on academia. In 1908, he became a privatdozent at the University of Bern.[30] In 1910, he wrote an expository paper that described the cumulative effect of light scattered by individual molecules in the atmosphere, i.e., why the sky is blue.[31]
During 1909, Einstein published "Über die Entwicklung unserer Anschauungen über das Wesen und die Konstitution der Strahlung" ("The Development of Our Views on the Composition and Essence of Radiation"), on the quantization of light. In this and in an earlier 1909 paper, Einstein showed that Max Planck's energy quanta must have well-defined momenta and act in some respects as independent, point-like particles. This paper introduced the photon concept (although the term itself was introduced by Gilbert N. Lewis in 1926) and inspired the notion of wave–particle duality in quantum mechanics.
In 1911, Einstein became an associate professor at the University of Zurich. However, shortly afterward, he accepted a full professorship at the German Charles-Ferdinand University in Prague. There, Einstein published a paper about the effects of gravity on light, specifically the gravitational redshift and the gravitational deflection of light. The paper appealed to astronomers to find ways of detecting the deflection during a solar eclipse.[32] German astronomer Erwin Finlay-Freundlich publicized Einstein's challenge to scientists around the world.[33]
In 1912, Einstein returned to Switzerland to accept a professorship at his alma mater, the ETH. There he met mathematician Marcel Grossmann who introduced him to Riemannian geometry and more generally differential geometry, and at the recommendation of Italian mathematician Tullio Levi-Civita, Einstein began exploring the usefulness of general covariance (essentially the use of tensors) for his gravitational theory. Although for a while Einstein thought that there were problems with that approach, he later returned to it and by late 1915 had published his general theory of relativity in the form that is still used today (Einstein 1915). This theory explains gravitation as distortion of the structure of spacetime by matter, affecting the inertial motion of other matter.
After many relocations, Mileva established a permanent home with the children in Zürich in 1914, just before the start of World War I. Einstein continued on alone to Berlin, where he became a member of the Prussian Academy of Sciences. As part of the arrangements for his new position, he also became a professor at the Humboldt University of Berlin, although with a special clause freeing him from most teaching obligations. From 1914 to 1932 he was also director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics.[34]
During World War I, the speeches and writings of Central Powers scientists were available only to Central Powers academics, for national security reasons. Some of Einstein's work did reach the United Kingdom and the United States through the efforts of the Austrian Paul Ehrenfest and physicists in the Netherlands, especially 1902 Nobel Prize-winner Hendrik Lorentz and Willem de Sitter of the Leiden University. After the war ended, Einstein maintained his relationship with the Leiden University, accepting a contract as an Extraordinary Professor; he travelled to Holland regularly to lecture there between 1920 and 1930.[35]
In 1917, Einstein published an article in Physikalische Zeitschrift that proposed the possibility of stimulated emission, the physical process that makes possible the maser and the laser (Einstein 1917b). He also published a paper introducing a new notion, the cosmological constant, into the general theory of relativity in an attempt to model the behavior of the entire universe (Einstein 1917a).
1917 was the year astronomers began taking Einstein up on his 1911 challenge from Prague. The Mount Wilson Observatory in California, U.S., published a solar spectroscopic analysis that showed no gravitational redshift.[36] In 1918, the Lick Observatory, also in California, announced that they too had disproven Einstein's prediction, although their findings were not published.[37]
However, in May 1919, a team led by British astronomer Arthur Stanley Eddington claimed to have confirmed Einstein's prediction of gravitational deflection of starlight by the Sun while photographing a solar eclipse in Sobral, northern Brazil, and Príncipe.[33] On 7 November 1919, leading British newspaper The Times printed a banner headline that read: "Revolution in Science – New Theory of the Universe – Newtonian Ideas Overthrown".[38] In an interview Nobel laureate Max Born praised general relativity as the "greatest feat of human thinking about nature";[39] fellow laureate Paul Dirac was quoted saying it was "probably the greatest scientific discovery ever made".[40]
From this point on, the international media guaranteed Einstein's global renown. There have been later claims that scrutiny of the specific photographs taken on the Eddington expedition showed the experimental uncertainty to be of about the same magnitude as the effect Eddington claimed to have demonstrated, and that a 1962 British expedition concluded that the method was inherently unreliable,[38] the deflection of light during a solar eclipse has been confirmed by later, more accurate observations.[41]
There was some resentment toward the newcomer Einstein's fame in the scientific community, notably among some German physicists, who later started the Deutsche Physik (German Physics) movement.[42][43]

Nobel Prize




Einstein, 1921. Age 42.


In 1922 Einstein was awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics,[44] "for his services to Theoretical Physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect". This refers to his 1905 paper on the photoelectric effect: "On a Heuristic Viewpoint Concerning the Production and Transformation of Light", which was well supported by the experimental evidence by that time. The presentation speech began by mentioning "his theory of relativity [which had] been the subject of lively debate in philosophical circles [and] also has astrophysical implications which are being rigorously examined at the present time." (Einstein 1923)
It was long reported that Einstein gave the Nobel prize money directly to his first wife, Mileva Marić, in compliance with their 1919 divorce settlement. However, personal correspondence made public in 2006[45] shows that he invested much of it in the United States, and saw much of it wiped out in the Depression.
Einstein traveled to New York City in the United States for the first time on 2 April 1921. When asked where he got his scientific ideas, Einstein explained that he believed scientific work best proceeds from an examination of physical reality and a search for underlying axioms, with consistent explanations that apply in all instances and avoid contradicting each other. He also recommended theories with visualizable results (Einstein 1954).[46]

Unified field theory
Main article: Classical unified field theories
Einstein's research after general relativity consisted primarily of a long series of attempts to generalize his theory of gravitation to include new geometric structures which would explain electromagnetism. In 1950, he described this approach "unified field theory" in a Scientific American article entitled "On the Generalized Theory of Gravitation" (Einstein 1950). Although he continued to be lauded for his work, Einstein became increasingly isolated in his research, and his efforts were ultimately unsuccessful.
In his pursuit of a unification of the fundamental forces, Einstein ignored some mainstream developments in physics, most notably the strong and weak nuclear forces, which were not well understood until many years after his death. Mainstream physics, in turn, largely ignored Einstein's approaches to unification. Einstein's dream of unifying the laws of physics with gravity is the motivation for modern research in string theory, where new geometrical fields emerge in a unified quantum-mechanical setting.

Collaboration and conflict

Bose–Einstein statistics
In 1924, Einstein received a description of a statistical model from Indian physicist Satyendra Nath Bose, based on a counting method that assumed that light could be understood as a gas of indistinguishable particles. Bose's statistics applied to some atoms as well as to the proposed light particles, and Einstein submitted his translation of Bose's paper to the Zeitschrift für Physik. Einstein also published his own articles describing the model and its implications, among them the Bose–Einstein condensate phenomenon that should appear at very low temperatures (Einstein 1924). It was not until 1995 that the first such condensate was produced experimentally by Eric Allin Cornell and Carl Wieman using ultra-cooling equipment built at the NIST-JILA laboratory at the University of Colorado at Boulder.[47] Bose–Einstein statistics are now used to describe the behaviors of any assembly of "bosons". Einstein's sketches for this project may be seen in the Einstein Archive in the library of the Leiden University.[48]

Schrödinger gas model
Einstein suggested to Erwin Schrödinger an application of Max Planck's idea of treating energy levels for a gas as a whole rather than for individual molecules, and Schrödinger applied this in a paper using the Boltzmann distribution to derive the thermodynamic properties of a semiclassical ideal gas. Schrödinger urged Einstein to add his name as co-author, although Einstein declined the invitation.[49]

Einstein refrigerator
In 1926, Einstein and his former student Leó Szilárd, a Hungarian physicist who later worked on the Manhattan Project and is credited with the discovery of the chain reaction, co-invented (and in 1930, patented) the Einstein refrigerator, revolutionary for having no moving parts and using only heat as an input.[50][51]

Bohr versus Einstein
See also: Bohr-Einstein debates




Einstein and Niels Bohr. Photo taken by Paul Ehrenfest during their 1925 Leiden visit.


In the 1920s, quantum mechanics developed into a more complete theory. Einstein was unhappy with the "Copenhagen interpretation" of quantum theory developed by Niels Bohr and Werner Heisenberg, wherein quantum phenomena are inherently probabilistic, with definite states resulting only upon interaction with classical systems. A public debate between Einstein and Bohr followed, lasting for many years (including during the Solvay Conferences). Einstein formulated thought experiments against the Copenhagen interpretation, which were all rebutted by Bohr. In a 1926 letter to Max Born, Einstein wrote: "I, at any rate, am convinced that He [God] does not throw dice." (Einstein 1969).[52]
Einstein was never satisfied by what he perceived to be quantum theory's intrinsically incomplete description of nature, and in 1935 he further explored the issue in collaboration with Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen, noting that the theory seems to require non-local interactions; this is known as the EPR paradox (Einstein 1935). The EPR experiment has since been performed, with results confirming quantum theory's predictions.[53]
Einstein's disagreement with Bohr revolved around the idea of scientific determinism. For this reason the repercussions of the Einstein-Bohr debate have found their way into philosophical discourse as well.

Religious views
The question of scientific determinism gave rise to questions about Einstein's position on theological determinism, and whether or not he believed in a God. In 1929, Einstein told Rabbi Herbert S. Goldstein "I believe in Spinoza's God, who reveals Himself in the lawful harmony of the world, not in a God Who concerns Himself with the fate and the doings of mankind."[54] In a 1950 letter to M. Berkowitz, Einstein stated that "My position concerning God is that of an agnostic. I am convinced that a vivid consciousness of the primary importance of moral principles for the betterment and ennoblement of life does not need the idea of a law-giver, especially a law-giver who works on the basis of reward and punishment."[55] Einstein also stated: "I have repeatedly said that in my opinion the idea of a personal God is a childlike one. You may call me an agnostic, but I do not share the crusading spirit of the professional atheist whose fervor is mostly due to a painful act of liberation from the fetters of religious indoctrination received in youth." He is reported to have said in a conversation with Hubertus, Prince of Löwenstein-Wertheim-Freudenberg, "In view of such harmony in the cosmos which I, with my limited human mind, am able to recognize, there are yet people who say there is no God. But what really makes me angry is that they quote me for the support of such views."[56] Einstein clarified his religious views in a letter he wrote in response to those who claimed that he worshipped a Judeo-Christian god: "It was, of course, a lie what you read about my religious convictions, a lie which is being systematically repeated. I do not believe in a personal god and I have never denied this but have expressed it clearly. If something is in me which can be called religious then it is the unbounded admiration for the structure of the world so far as our science can reveal it."[57] In his book The World as I See It, he wrote: "A knowledge of the existence of something we cannot penetrate, of the manifestations of the profoundest reason and the most radiant beauty, which are only accessible to our reason in their most elementary forms—it is this knowledge and this emotion that constitute the truly religious attitude; in this sense, and in this alone, I am a deeply religious man."[58]
In a 1930 New York Times article,[59] Einstein distinguished three styles which are usually intermixed in actual religion. The first is motivated by fear and poor understanding of causality, and hence invents supernatural beings. The second is social and moral, motivated by desire for love and support. Einstein noted that both have an anthropomorphic concept of God. The third style, which Einstein deemed most mature, is motivated by a deep sense of awe and mystery. He said, "The individual feels ... the sublimity and marvelous order which reveal themselves in nature ... and he wants to experience the universe as a single significant whole." Einstein saw science as an antagonist of the first two styles of religion, but as a partner of the third style.
Einstein was also a Humanist and a supporter of Ethical Culture. He served on the advisory board of the First Humanist Society of New York.[60][61] For the seventy-fifth anniversary of the New York Society for Ethical Culture, he noted that the idea of Ethical Culture embodied his personal conception of what is most valuable and enduring in religious idealism. He observed, "Without 'ethical culture' there is no salvation for humanity."[62]
Einstein published a paper in Nature in 1940 entitled "Science and Religion"[63] in which he said that: "a person who is religiously enlightened appears to me to be one who has, to the best of his ability, liberated himself from the fetters of his selfish desires and is preoccupied with thoughts, feelings and aspirations to which he clings because of their super-personal value ... regardless of whether any attempt is made to unite this content with a Divine Being, for otherwise it would not be possible to count Buddha and Spinoza as religious personalities. Accordingly a religious person is devout in the sense that he has no doubt of the significance of those super-personal objects and goals which neither require nor are capable of rational foundation ... In this sense religion is the age-old endeavour of mankind to become clearly and completely conscious of these values and goals, and constantly to strengthen their effects." He argued that conflicts between science and religion "have all sprung from fatal errors." "[E]ven though the realms of religion and science in themselves are clearly marked off from each other" there are "strong reciprocal relationships and dependencies ... science without religion is lame, religion without science is blind ... a legitimate conflict between science and religion cannot exist." In Einstein's view, "neither the rule of human nor Divine Will exists as an independent cause of natural events. To be sure, the doctrine of a personal God interfering with natural events could never be refuted ... by science, for [it] can always take refuge in those domains in which scientific knowledge has not yet been able to set foot." (Einstein 1940, pp. 605–607)
In a letter to Eric Gutkind in 1954 Einstein wrote:

I read a great deal in the last days of your book, and thank you very much for sending it to me. What especially struck me about it was this. With regard to the factual attitude to life and to the human community we have a great deal in common. ... The word God is for me nothing more than the expression and product of human weaknesses, the Bible a collection of honourable, but still primitive legends which are nevertheless pretty childish. No interpretation no matter how subtle can (for me) change this. These subtilised interpretations are highly manifold according to their nature and have almost nothing to do with the original text. For me the Jewish religion like all other religions is an incarnation of the most childish superstitions. And the Jewish people to whom I gladly belong and with whose mentality I have a deep affinity have no different quality for me than all other people. As far as my experience goes, they are also no better than other human groups, although they are protected from the worst cancers by a lack of power. Otherwise I cannot see anything 'chosen' about them. In general I find it painful that you claim a privileged position and try to defend it by two walls of pride, an external one as a man and an internal one as a Jew. As a man you claim, so to speak, a dispensation from causality otherwise accepted, as a Jew the privilege of monotheism. But a limited causality is no longer a causality at all, as our wonderful Spinoza recognized with all incision, probably as the first one. And the animistic interpretations of the religions of nature are in principle not annulled by monopolisation. With such walls we can only attain a certain self-deception, but our moral efforts are not furthered by them. On the contrary. Now that I have quite openly stated our differences in intellectual convictions it is still clear to me that we are quite close to each other in essential things, ie in our evaluations of human behaviour. What separates us are only intellectual 'props' and 'rationalisation' in Freud's language. Therefore I think that we would understand each other quite well if we talked about concrete things. With friendly thanks and best wishes Yours, A. Einstein.

Einstein had previously explored this belief that man could not understand the nature of God when he gave an interview to Time Magazine explaining:

I'm not an atheist. I don't think I can call myself a pantheist. The problem involved is too vast for our limited minds. We are in the position of a little child entering a huge library filled with books in many languages. The child knows someone must have written those books. It does not know how. It does not understand the languages in which they are written. The child dimly suspects a mysterious order in the arrangement of the books but doesn't know what it is. That, it seems to me, is the attitude of even the most intelligent human being toward God. We see the universe marvelously arranged and obeying certain laws but only dimly understand these laws.


Politics




Einstein and Indian poet and Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore during their widely publicized 14 July 1930 conversation


With increasing public demands, his involvement in political, humanitarian, and academic projects in various countries, and his new acquaintances with scholars and political figures from around the world, Einstein was less able to achieve the productive isolation that he needed in order to work.[64] Due to his fame and genius, Einstein found himself called on to give conclusive judgments on matters that had nothing to do with theoretical physics or mathematics. He was not timid, and he was aware of the world around him, with no illusion that ignoring politics would make world events fade away. His very visible position allowed him to speak and write frankly, even provocatively, at a time when many people of conscience could only flee to the underground or keep doubts about developments within their own movements to themselves for fear of internecine fighting. Einstein flouted the ascendant Nazi movement, tried to be a voice of moderation in the tumultuous formation of the State of Israel and braved anti-communist politics and resistance to the civil rights movement in the United States. He participated in the 1927 congress of the League against Imperialism in Brussels.[65]

Zionism
Einstein was a socialist Zionist who supported the creation of a Jewish national homeland in the British mandate of Palestine.[66] In 1931, The Macmillan Company published About Zionism: Speeches and Lectures by Professor Albert Einstein.[67] Querido, an Amsterdam publishing house, collected eleven of Einstein's essays into a 1933 book entitled Mein Weltbild, translated to English as The World as I See It; Einstein's foreword dedicates the collection "to the Jews of Germany".[68] In the face of Germany's rising militarism, Einstein wrote and spoke for peace.[69][70]




Albert Einstein, seen here with his wife Elsa Einstein and Zionist leaders, including future President of Israel Chaim Weizmann, his wife Dr. Vera Weizmann, Menahem Ussishkin, and Ben-Zion Mossinson on arrival in New York City in 1921.


Einstein publicly stated reservations about the proposal to partition the British-supervised British Mandate of Palestine into independent Arab and Jewish countries. In a 1938 speech, "Our Debt to Zionism", he said: "My awareness of the essential nature of Judaism resists the idea of a Jewish state with borders, an army, and a measure of temporal power, no matter how modest. I am afraid of the inner damage Judaism will sustain—especially from the development of a narrow nationalism within our own ranks, against which we have already had to fight strongly, even without a Jewish state. ... If external necessity should after all compel us to assume this burden, let us bear it with tact and patience."[71] In a 1947 letter to Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, Einstein stated that the Balfour Declaration's proposal to establish a national home for Jews in Palestine "redresses the balance" of justice and history.[72]
The United Nations did divide the mandate, demarcating the borders of several new countries including the State of Israel, and war broke out immediately. Einstein was one of the authors of an open letter to the New York Times in 1948 criticizing Menachem Begin's Herut (Freedom) Party for the Deir Yassin massacre (Einstein et al. 1948).
Einstein served on the Board of Governors of The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. In his Will of 1950, Einstein bequeathed literary rights to his writings to The Hebrew University, where many of his original documents are held in the Albert Einstein Archives.[73]
When President Chaim Weizmann died in 1952, Einstein was asked to be Israel's second president, but he declined, stating that he had "neither the natural ability nor the experience to deal with human beings." [74] He wrote: "I am deeply moved by the offer from our State of Israel, and at once saddened and ashamed that I cannot accept it. "[75]

Anti-Nazism
In January 1933, Adolf Hitler was appointed Chancellor of Germany. One of the first actions of Hitler's administration was the Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service, which removed Jews and politically suspect government employees (including university professors) from their jobs, unless they had demonstrated their loyalty to Germany by serving in World War I. In response to this growing threat Einstein had prudently traveled to the U.S. in December 1932. For several years he had been wintering at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, California,[76] and also was a guest lecturer at Abraham Flexner's newly founded Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey.[77]
The Einsteins bought a house in Princeton (where Elsa died in 1936), and Einstein remained an integral contributor to the Institute for Advanced Study until his death in 1955. During the 1930s and into World War II, Einstein wrote affidavits recommending United States visas for a huge number of European Jews who were trying to flee persecution. He raised money for Zionist organizations and was, in part, responsible for the formation, in 1933, of the International Rescue Committee.[75][78]




Einstein receiving his certificate of American citizenship from Judge Phillip Forman in 1940


Meanwhile, in Germany, a campaign to eliminate Einstein's work from the German lexicon as unacceptable "Jewish physics" (Jüdische Physik) was led by Nobel laureates Philipp Lenard and Johannes Stark. Deutsche Physik activists published pamphlets and even textbooks denigrating Einstein, and instructors who taught his theories were blacklisted—including Nobel laureate Werner Heisenberg, who had debated quantum probability with Bohr and Einstein. Philipp Lenard claimed that the mass–energy equivalence formula needed to be credited to Friedrich Hasenöhrl to make it an Aryan creation.[79][80] An anti-Einstein organization was formed, and a man who was convicted of composing a plot to kill Einstein was fined a mere six dollars.[81]
Einstein became a citizen of the United States in 1940 and remained there the rest of his life, although he retained his Swiss citizenship.[82]

Atomic bomb
Main article: Manhattan Project




Einstein-Szilárd letter


Concerned scientists, many of them refugees from European anti-Semitism in the U.S., recognized the danger of German scientists developing an atomic bomb based on the newly discovered phenomena of nuclear fission. In 1939, the Hungarian émigré Leó Szilárd, having failed to arouse U.S. government interest on his own, worked with Einstein to write a letter to U.S. President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, which Einstein signed, urging U.S. development of such a weapon.[83] In August 1939, Roosevelt received the Einstein-Szilárd letter and authorized secret research into the harnessing of nuclear fission for military purposes.[84]
By 1942 this effort had become the Manhattan Project, the largest secret scientific endeavor undertaken up to that time. By late 1945, the U.S. had developed operational nuclear weapons, and used them on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Einstein himself did not play a role in the development of the atomic bomb other than signing the letter. He did help the United States Navy with some unrelated theoretical questions it was working on during the war.[85]
According to Linus Pauling, Einstein later expressed regret about his letter to Roosevelt.[86] In 1947, Einstein wrote an article for The Atlantic Monthly arguing that the United States should not try to pursue an atomic monopoly, and instead should equip the United Nations with nuclear weapons for the sole purpose of maintaining deterrence.[87]

Cold War era




Einstein, 1947. Age 68.


When he was a visible figure working against the rise of Nazism, Einstein had sought help and developed working relationships in both the West and what was to become the Soviet bloc. After World War II, enmity between the former allies became a very serious issue for people with international résumés. To make things worse, during the first days of McCarthyism Einstein was writing about a single world government; it was at this time that he wrote, "I do not know how the third World War will be fought, but I can tell you what they will use in the Fourth—rocks!"[88] In a 1949 Monthly Review article entitled "Why Socialism?"[89] Albert Einstein described a chaotic capitalist society, a source of evil to be overcome, as the "predatory phase of human development" (Einstein 1949). With Albert Schweitzer and Bertrand Russell, Einstein lobbied to stop nuclear testing and future bombs. Days before his death, Einstein signed the Russell-Einstein Manifesto, which led to the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs.[90]




Einstein's house in Princeton, NJ


Einstein was a member of several civil rights groups, including the Princeton chapter of the NAACP. When the aged W. E. B. Du Bois was accused of being a Communist spy, Einstein volunteered as a character witness, and the case was dismissed shortly afterward. Einstein's friendship with activist Paul Robeson, with whom he served as co-chair of the American Crusade to End Lynching, lasted twenty years.[91]
In 1946, Einstein collaborated with Rabbi Israel Goldstein, Middlesex University heir C. Ruggles Smith, and activist attorney George Alpert on the Albert Einstein Foundation for Higher Learning, which was formed to create a Jewish-sponsored secular university, open to all students, on the grounds of the former Middlesex University in Waltham, Massachusetts. Middlesex was chosen in part because it was accessible from both Boston and New York City, Jewish cultural centers of the U.S. Their vision was a university "deeply conscious both of the Hebraic tradition of Torah looking upon culture as a birthright, and of the American ideal of an educated democracy."[92] The collaboration was stormy, however. Finally, when Einstein wanted to appoint British economist Harold Laski as the university's president, George Alpert wrote that Laski was "a man utterly alien to American principles of democracy, tarred with the Communist brush."[92] Einstein withdrew his support and barred the use of his name.[93] The university opened in 1948 as Brandeis University. In 1953, Brandeis offered Einstein an honorary degree, but he declined.[92]
Given Einstein's links to Germany and Zionism, his socialist ideals, and his links to Communist figures, the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation kept a file on Einstein[94] that grew to 1,427 pages. Many of the documents in the file were sent to the FBI by concerned citizens: some objecting to his immigration, while others asked the FBI to protect him.[95]
Although Einstein had long been sympathetic to the notion of vegetarianism, it was only near the start of 1954 that he adopted a strict vegetarian diet.[96]

Death
On 17 April 1955, Albert Einstein experienced internal bleeding caused by the rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm, which had previously been diagnosed and reinforced.[97] He took a draft of a speech he was preparing for a television appearance commemorating the State of Israel's seventh anniversary with him to the hospital, but he did not live long enough to complete it.[98] He died in Princeton Hospital early the next morning at the age of 76, having continued to work until near the end. Einstein's remains were cremated and his ashes were scattered.[99][100]
Before the cremation, Princeton Hospital pathologist Thomas Stoltz Harvey removed Einstein's brain for preservation, without the permission of his family, in hope that the neuroscience of the future would be able to discover what made Einstein so intelligent.[101]

Legacy
While travelling, Einstein had written daily to his wife Elsa and adopted stepdaughters, Margot and Ilse, and the letters were included in the papers bequeathed to The Hebrew University. Margot Einstein permitted the personal letters to be made available to the public, but requested that it not be done until twenty years after her death (she died in 1986[102]). Barbara Wolff, of The Hebrew University's Albert Einstein Archives, told the BBC that there are about 3,500 pages of private correspondence written between 1912 and 1955.[103]
The United States' National Academy of Sciences commissioned the Albert Einstein Memorial, a monumental bronze and marble sculpture by Robert Berks, dedicated in 1979 at its Washington, D.C. campus adjacent to the National Mall.
Einstein bequeathed the royalties from use of his image to The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Corbis, successor to The Roger Richman Agency, licenses the use of his name and associated imagery, as agent for the Hebrew University.[104][105]

Honors




Max Planck presents Albert Einstein with the Max-Planck medal of the German Physical Society, June 28, 1929 in Berlin.


See also: List of things named after Albert Einstein
In 1999, Albert Einstein was named "Person of the Century" by Time magazine,[106][107] a Gallup poll recorded him as the fourth most admired person of the 20th century[108] and according to The 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Persons in History, Einstein is "the greatest scientist of the twentieth century and one of the supreme intellects of all time."[109]
A partial list of his memorials:

The International Union of Pure and Applied Physics named 2005 the "World Year of Physics" in commemoration of the 100th anniversary of the publication of the Annus Mirabilis Papers.[110]
The Albert Einstein Institute
The Albert Einstein Memorial by Robert Berks
A unit used in photochemistry, the einstein
The chemical element 99, einsteinium
The asteroid 2001 Einstein
The Albert Einstein Award
The Albert Einstein Peace Prize

In 1990, his name was added to the Walhalla temple.[111]

Effect on popular culture
Main article: Albert Einstein in popular culture
In the period before World War II, Albert Einstein was so well-known in America that he would be stopped on the street by people wanting him to explain "that theory." He finally figured out a way to handle the incessant inquiries. He told his inquirers "Pardon me, sorry! Always I am mistaken for Professor Einstein."[112]
Albert Einstein has been the subject of or inspiration for many novels, films, and plays. Einstein is a favorite model for depictions of mad scientists and absent-minded professors; his expressive face and distinctive hairstyle have been widely copied and exaggerated. Time magazine's Frederic Golden wrote that Einstein was "a cartoonist's dream come true."[107]
Einstein's association with great intelligence has made the name Einstein synonymous with genius, often used in ironic expressions such as "Nice job, Einstein!".

See also


Annus Mirabilis Papers
Heinrich Burkhardt
Hermann Einstein
EPR paradox
History of general relativity
History of gravitational theory
History of special relativity
Introduction to special relativity
Pauline Koch
List of coupled cousins
List of scientific publications by Albert Einstein
List of things named after Einstein
Mass–energy equivalence (also known as E=mc2)
Photoelectric effect
Relativity priority dispute
Sticky bead argument
Summation convention
The Einstein Theory of Relativity (educational film about the theory of relativity)
Theory of everything
German inventors and discoverers
Wikipedia Books: Albert Einstein



Publications
The following publications by Albert Einstein are referenced in this article. A more complete list of his publications may be found at List of scientific publications by Albert Einstein.


Einstein, Albert (1901), "Folgerungen aus den Capillaritätserscheinungen (Conclusions Drawn from the Phenomena of Capillarity)", Annalen der Physik 4: 513, doi:10.1002/andp.19013090306 
Einstein, Albert (1905a), "On a Heuristic Viewpoint Concerning the Production and Transformation of Light", Annalen der Physik 17: 132–148, http://lorentz.phl.jhu.edu/AnnusMirabilis/AeReserveArticles/eins_lq.pdf . This annus mirabilis paper on the photoelectric effect was received by Annalen der Physik 18 March.
Einstein, Albert (1905b), A new determination of molecular dimensions . This PhD thesis was completed 30 April and submitted 20 July.
Einstein, Albert (1905c), "On the Motion—Required by the Molecular Kinetic Theory of Heat—of Small Particles Suspended in a Stationary Liquid", Annalen der Physik 17: 549–560 . This annus mirabilis paper on Brownian motion was received 11 May.
Einstein, Albert (1905d), "On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies", Annalen der Physik 17: 891–921 . This annus mirabilis paper on special relativity was received 30 June.
Einstein, Albert (1905e), "Does the Inertia of a Body Depend Upon Its Energy Content?", Annalen der Physik 18: 639–641 . This annus mirabilis paper on mass-energy equivalence was received 27 September.
Einstein, Albert (1915), "Die Feldgleichungen der Gravitation (The Field Equations of Gravitation)", Koniglich Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften: 844–847 
Einstein, Albert (1917a), "Kosmologische Betrachtungen zur allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie (Cosmological Considerations in the General Theory of Relativity)", Koniglich Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften 
Einstein, Albert (1917b), "Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung (On the Quantum Mechanics of Radiation)", Physikalische Zeitschrift 18: 121–128 
Einstein, Albert (11 July 1923), "Fundamental Ideas and Problems of the Theory of Relativity", Nobel Lectures, Physics 1901–1921, Amsterdam: Elsevier Publishing Company, http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1921/einstein-lecture.pdf, retrieved on 2007-03-25 
Einstein, Albert (1924), "Quantentheorie des einatomigen idealen Gases (Quantum theory of monatomic ideal gases)", Sitzungsberichte der Preussichen Akademie der Wissenschaften Physikalisch—Mathematische Klasse: 261–267 . First of a series of papers on this topic.
Einstein, Albert (1926), "Die Ursache der Mäanderbildung der Flussläufe und des sogenannten Baerschen Gesetzes", Die Naturwissenschaften 14: 223–224, doi:10.1007/BF01510300 . On Baer's law and meanders in the courses of rivers.
Einstein, Albert; Podolsky, Boris; Rosen, Nathan (15 May 1935), "Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?", Physical Review 47 (10): 777–780, doi:10.1103/PhysRev.47.777 
Einstein, Albert (1940), "On Science and Religion", Nature 146: 605, doi:10.1038/146605a0 
Einstein, Albert, et al. (4 December 1948), "To the editors", New York Times, http://phys4.harvard.edu/~wilson/NYTimes1948.html 
Einstein, Albert (May 1949), "Why Socialism?", Monthly Review, http://www.monthlyreview.org/598einst.htm, retrieved on 2006-01-16 
Einstein, Albert (1950), "On the Generalized Theory of Gravitation", Scientific American CLXXXII (4): 13–17 
Einstein, Albert (1954), Ideas and Opinions, New York: Random House, ISBN 0-517-00393-7 
Einstein, Albert (1969) (in German), Albert Einstein, Hedwig und Max Born: Briefwechsel 1916–1955, Munich: Nymphenburger Verlagshandlung 
Einstein, Albert (1979), Autobiographical Notes (Centennial ed.), Chicago: Open Court, ISBN 0-875-48352-6 . The chasing a light beam thought experiment is described on pages 48–51.
Collected Papers: Stachel, John, Martin J. Klein, a. J. Kox, Michel Janssen, R. Schulmann, Diana Komos Buchwald and others (Eds.) (1987–2006). The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Vol 1–10. Princeton University Press.  Further information about the volumes published so far can be found on the webpages of the Einstein Papers Project and on the Princeton University Press Einstein Page



References


^ "The Nobel Prize in Physics 1921". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on 2008-10-05. http://www.webcitation.org/5bLXMl1V0. Retrieved on 2007-03-06. 
^ Paul Arthur Schilpp, editor (1951). Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, Volume II. New York: Harper and Brothers Publishers (Harper Torchbook edition). pp. 730–746.  His non-scientific works include: About Zionism: Speeches and Lectures by Professor Albert Einstein (1930), "Why War?" (1933, co-authored by Sigmund Freud), The World As I See It (1934), Out of My Later Years (1950), and a book on science for the general reader, The Evolution of Physics (1938, co-authored by Leopold Infeld).
^ "Albert Einstein — Biography". Nobel Foundation. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1921/einstein-bio.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-07. 
^ Howard, Don, and Stachel, John J. Einstein: The Formative Years, 1879-1909, Springer (2000)
^ Rosenkranz, Ze'ev (2005). Albert Einstein — Derrière l'image. Neue Zürcher Zeitung. p. 29. ISBN 3-03823-182-7. 
^ Sowell, Thomas (2001). The Einstein Syndrome: Bright Children Who Talk Late. Basic Books. pp. 89–150. ISBN 0-465-08140-1. 
^ Schilpp (Ed.), P. A. (1979). Albert Einstein — Autobiographical Notes. Open Court Publishing Company. pp. 8–9. 
^ a b Dudley Herschbach, "Einstein as a Student," Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA, page 3, web: HarvardChem-Einstein-PDF: about Max Talmud visited on Thursdays for six years.
^ Mehra, Jagdish. "Albert Einstein's first paper" (PDF). http://www.worldscibooks.com/phy_etextbook/4454/4454_chap1.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-03-04. 
^ Highfield, Roger; Carter, Paul (1993), The Private Lives of Albert Einstein, London: Faber and Faber, p. 21, ISBN 0-571-17170-2 
^ Highfield (1993, pp. 21,31,56–57)
^ "A Brief Biography of Albert Einstein". April 2005. http://www.ssqq.com/archive/alberteinstein.htm. Retrieved on 2007-06-11. 
^ "Einstein's nationalities at einstein-website.de". http://www.einstein-website.de/z_information/variousthings.html#national. Retrieved on 4 October 2006. 
^ Now the "Swiss Federal Institute of Intellectual Property". http://www.ipi.ch/E/institut/i1.shtm. Retrieved on 16 October 2006. . See also their "FAQ about Einstein and the Institute". http://www.ipi.ch/E/institut/i1094.shtm. 
^ a b Peter Galison, "Einstein's Clocks: The Question of Time" Critical Inquiry 26, no. 2 (Winter 2000): 355–389.
^ a b Galison, Peter (2003). Einstein's Clocks, Poincaré's Maps: Empires of Time. New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 0393020010. 
^ E.g. Pais, Abraham (1982), Subtle is the Lord. The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein, Oxford University Press, p. 17, ISBN 0-19-520438-7 
^ This conclusion is from Einstein's correspondence with Marić. Lieserl is first mentioned in a letter from Einstein to Marić (who was staying with her family in or near Novi Sad at the time of Lieserl's birth) dated 4 February 1902 (Collected papers Vol. 1, document 134).
^ Highfield (1993, pp. 54,58): "she did not seem to care that Mileva was not Jewish"
^ Oregon Public Broadcasting (2003), Einstein's Wife: The Life of Mileva Maric Einstein, Public Broadcasting Service, http://www.pbs.org/opb/einsteinswife/, retrieved on 2006-11-8  This web site, companion to the controversial Geraldine Hilton documentary of the same name, is currently under review for historical accuracy. (See Getler, Michael (15 December 2006), "Einstein’s Wife: The Relative Motion of ‘Facts’", PBS Ombudsman, http://www.pbs.org/ombudsman/2006/12/einsteins_wife_the_relative_motion_of_facts.html, retrieved on 2007-03-25 .)
^ Letter Einstein to Marić on 3 October 1900 (Collected Papers Vol. 1, document 79).
^ Alberto A Martínez. "Arguing about Einstein's wife (April 2004) - Physics World — PhysicsWeb (See above)". http://physicsweb.org/articles/world/17/4/2. Retrieved on 21 November 2005. 
^ Allen Esterson. "Mileva Marić: Einstein’s Wife". http://www.esterson.org/milevamaric.htm. Retrieved on 2007-02-23. 
^ John Stachel. "“Albert Einstein and Mileva Maric. A Collaboration That Failed to Develop” in: Creative Couples in the Sciences, H. M. Pycior et al. (ed)" (PDF). http://philoscience.unibe.ch/lehre/winter99/einstein/Stachel1966.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-02-23. 
^ "Short life history: Elsa Einstein". http://www.einstein-website.de/biographies/einsteinelsa_content.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-11. 
^ Hawking, S. W. (2001), The Universe in a Nutshell, Bantam Books, ISBN 0-55-380202-X 
^ Schwartz, J.; McGuinness, M. (1979), Einstein for Beginners, Pantheon Books, ISBN 0-39-450588-3 
^ On the reception of relativity theory around the world, and the different controversies it encountered, see the articles in Thomas F. Glick, ed., The Comparative Reception of Relativity (Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1987), ISBN 9027724989.
^ Pais, Abraham (1982), Subtle is the Lord. The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein, Oxford University Press, pp. 382–386, ISBN 0-19-520438-7 
^ Pais, Abraham (1982), Subtle is the Lord. The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein, Oxford University Press, p. 522, ISBN 0-19-520438-7 
^ Levenson, Thomas. "Einstein's Big Idea." Public Broadcasting Service. 2005. Retrieved on 25 February 2006.
^ Einstein, Albert (1911). "On the Influence of Gravity on the Propagation of Light". Annalen der Physik 35: 898–908. doi:10.1002/andp.19113401005.  (also in Collected Papers Vol. 3, document 23)
^ a b Crelinsten, Jeffrey. "Einstein's Jury: The Race to Test Relativity." Princeton University Press. 2006. Retrieved on 13 March 2007. ISBN 9780691123103
^ Kant, Horst. "Albert Einstein and the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics in Berlin." in Renn, Jürgen. "Albert Einstein — Chief Engineer of the Universe: One Hundred Authors for Einstein." Ed. Renn, Jürgen. Wiley-VCH. 2005. pp. 166–169. ISBN = 3527405747
^ "Two friends in Leiden". http://www.lorentz.leidenuniv.nl/history/einstein/einstein.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-11. 
^ Crelinsten, Jeffrey (2006), Einstein's Jury: The Race to Test Relativity, Princeton University Press, pp. 103–108, ISBN 978-0-691-12310-3, http://www.pupress.princeton.edu/titles/8165.html, retrieved on 2007-03-13 
^ Crelinsten, Jeffrey (2006), Einstein's Jury: The Race to Test Relativity, Princeton University Press, pp. 114–119, ISBN 978-0-691-12310-3, http://www.pupress.princeton.edu/titles/8165.html, retrieved on 2007-03-13 
^ a b Andrzej, Stasiak (2003). "Myths in science". EMBO reports 4 (3): 236. doi:10.1038/sj.embor.embor779. http://www.nature.com/embor/journal/v4/n3/full/embor779.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-31. 
^ "The genius of space and time". The Guardian. 2005-09-17. http://books.guardian.co.uk/reviews/scienceandnature/0,,1571826,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-31. 
^ Schmidhuber, Jürgen. "Albert Einstein (1879–1955) and the 'Greatest Scientific Discovery Ever'." 2006. Retrieved on 4 October 2006.
^ See the table in MathPages Bending Light
^ Hentschel, Klaus and Ann M. (1996), Physics and National Socialism: An Anthology of Primary Sources, Birkhaeuser Verlag, xxi, ISBN 3-76-435312-0 
^ For a discussion of astronomers' attitudes and debates about relativity, see Crelinsten, Jeffrey (2006), Einstein's Jury: The Race to Test Relativity, Princeton University Press , especially chapters 6, 9, 10 and 11.
^ "Albert Einstein - Frequently Asked Questions". Nobelprize.org. 1955-04-18. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1921/einstein-faq.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-07. 
^ BBC (2006), "Letters Reveal Einstein Love Life", BBC News (BBC), http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/5168002.stm, retrieved on 2008-11-25 
^ See Albert Einstein, "Geometry and Experience," (1921), reprinted in Ideas and Opinions.
^ "Cornell and Wieman Share 2001 Nobel Prize in Physics". 2001-10-09. http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/releases/n01-04.htm. Retrieved on 2007-06-11. 
^ "Einstein archive at the Instituut-Lorentz." Instituut-Lorentz. 2005. Retrieved on 21 November 2005.
^ Moore, Walter (1989). Schrödinger: Life and Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-43767-9. 
^ Goettling, Gary. Einstein's refrigerator Georgia Tech Alumni Magazine. 1998. Retrieved on 21 November 2005.
^ On 11 November 1930, U.S. patent 1,781,541  was awarded to Albert Einstein and Leó Szilárd for the refrigerator.
^ A reprint of this book was published by Edition Erbrich in 1982, ISBN 388682005X
^ Aspect, Alain; Dalibard, Jean; Roger, Gérard (1982). "Experimental test of Bell's inequalities using time-varying analyzers". Physical Review Letters 49 (25): 1804–1807. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.49.1804.  The first of many experimental tests relating to EPR.
^ Brian, Dennis (1996), Einstein: A Life, New York: John Wiley & Sons, p. 127, ISBN 0-471-11459-6 
^ Albert Einstein in a letter to M. Berkowitz, 25 October 1950; Einstein Archive 59-215; from Alice Calaprice, ed., The New Quotable Einstein, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2000, p. 216.
^ "Albert Einstein (1879-1955)". http://www.stephenjaygould.org/ctrl/quotes_einstein.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-21. 
^ Helen Dukas and Banesh Hoffman (eds) (1981). Albert Einstein, The Human Side. Princeton University Press. p. 43. 
^ Einstein, Albert (1949). The World as I See It. New York: Philosophical Library. ISBN 0806527900. http://www.einsteinandreligion.com/worldsee2.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-14. 
^ "Albert Einstein: Religion and Science". Sacred-texts.com. 1930-11-09. http://www.sacred-texts.com/aor/einstein/einsci.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-07. 
^ Stringer-Hye, Richard (1999), "Charles Francis Potter", Dictionary of Unitarian and Universalist Biography, Unitarian Universalist Historical Society 
^ Wilson, Edwin H. (1995), "Chapter 2: The Background of Religious Humanism", Genesis of a Humanist Manifesto, The Secular Web Library 
^ Ericson, Edward L. "The Humanist Way: An Introduction to Ethical Humanist Religion". The American Ethical Union. http://ethicalunion.org/ericson2.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-23. 
^ Einstein, A. (1940). "Science and religion". Nature 146: 605–607. doi:10.1038/146605a0. 
^ Clark, Ronald W. (1971), Einstein: The Life and Times, Avon, ISBN 0-380-44123-3 
^ "Nationalist-Communist Civil War 1927-1937". http://san.beck.org/15-4-ChinaCivilWar1927-37.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ Zionism and Israel Information Center, Albert Einstein and Zionism, http://www.zionism-israel.com/Albert_Einstein/Albert_Einstein_about_zionism.htm, retrieved on 2008-08-14 
^ ASIN: B00085M906
^ Available in reprint paperback from Filiquarian Publishing, LLC, ISBN 1599869659.
^ American Museum of Natural History (2002), Einstein's Revolution, http://www.amnh.org/exhibitions/einstein/revolution/index.php, retrieved on 2007-03-14 
^ See the AMNH site's popup of translated letter from Freud, in the section "Freud and Einstein", regarding proposed joint presentation on "What can be done to rid mankind of the menace of war?"
^ Rowe, David E.; Schulmann, Robert (2007), Einstein on Politics: His Private Thoughts and Public Stands on Nationalism, Zionism, War, Peace, and the Bomb, Princeton University Press, ISBN 0691120943 
^ Jewish Virtual Library, Albert Einstein on Zionism, http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/Quote/einsteinq.html, retrieved on 2008-08-14 
^ Albert Einstein Archives (2007), "History of the Estate of Albert Einstein", Albert Einstein Archives, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, http://albert-einstein.org/history5.html, retrieved on 2007-03-25 
^ TIME Online (1952), [www.time.com Einstein Declines], http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,817454,00.html, retrieved on 2008-08-08 
^ a b Princeton Online (1995), "Einstein in Princeton: Scientist, Humanitarian, Cultural Icon", Historical Society of Princeton 
^ Clark, R. "Einstein: The Life and Times" Harper-Collins, 1984. 880 pp.
^ Hakim, Joy (1995). A History of Us: War, Peace and all that Jazz. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-509514-6. 
^ The International Rescue Committee gives support and shelter to refugees of social and political persecution.
^ "MathPages — Reflections on Relativity: Who Invented Relativity?". http://www.mathpages.com/rr/s8-08/8-08.htm. Retrieved on 2007-06-25. 
^ Christian Schlatter (April 2002). "Philipp Lenard et la physique aryenne" (PDF). École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne. http://ame.epfl.ch/biblio/schlatter1.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-06-25. 
^ Hawking, S. W. (1988), A Brief History of Time: The updated and expanded tenth anniversary edition, Bantam Books, ISBN 0-55-338016-8 
^ "An Albert Einstein Chronology". http://www.aip.org/history/einstein/chron.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-06. 
^ Discover Magazine March 2008. "Chain Reaction: From Einstein to the Atomic Bomb". http://discovermagazine.com/2008/mar/18-chain-reaction-from-einstein-to-the-atomic-bomb. 
^ The Atomic Heritage Foundation. "Einstein's Letter to Franklin D. Roosevelt". http://www.mphpa.org/index2.php?option=com_content&do_pdf=1&id=172. Retrieved on 2007-05-26. 
^ Schwarz, Frederic (1998-04). "Einstein's Ordnance". AmericanHeritage.com. http://www.americanheritage.com/articles/magazine/it/1998/4/1998_4_8.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-03-23. 
^ Scientist Tells of Einstein's A-bomb Regrets. The Philadelphia Bulletin, 13 May 1955. (PDF document from the Swiss Federal Archives from Internet Archive.)
^ Einstein, Albert (11 1947). "Atomic War or Peace". Atlantic Monthly. http://theamericanideabook.theatlantic.com/archives/2007/09/atomic_war_or_peace.php. Retrieved on 2008-03-23. 
^ Calaprice, Alice (2005), The new quotable Einstein, Princeton University Press, p. 173, ISBN 0-691-12075-7  Other versions of the quote exist.
^ "Why Socialism?". http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1132/is_n8_v40/ai_6944290. Retrieved on 2007-06-30. 
^ Butcher, Sandra Ionno (May 2005). "The Origins of the Russell-Einstein Manifesto" (PDF). Council of the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs. http://www.pugwash.org/publication/phs/history9.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-05-02. 
^ "Albert Einstein, Civil Rights activist". 2007-04-12. http://www.news.harvard.edu/gazette/2007/04.12/01-einstein.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-11. 
^ a b c Reis, Arthur H., Jr (1998), "The Albert Einstein Involvement", Brandeis Review, 50th Anniversary Edition, http://www.brandeis.edu/publications/review/50threview/einstein.pdf, retrieved on 2007-03-25 
^ New York Times (22 June 1947), "Dr. Einstein Quits University Plan", The New York Times, http://select.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=F50812FA385D13728DDDAB0A94DE405B8788F1D3, retrieved on 2007-03-14 
^ "The FBI and Albert Einstein". http://www.wsws.org/articles/2002/sep2002/eins-s03.shtml. 
^ Federal Bureau of Investigation (2005), "Albert Einstein", FBI Freedom of Information Act Website, U.S. Federal Government, U.S. Department of Justice 
^ "History of Vegetarianism — Albert Einstein". http://www.ivu.org/history/northam20a/einstein.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-11. 
^ "The Case of the Scientist with a Pulsating Mass". 2002-06-14. http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/436253. Retrieved on 2007-06-11. 
^ Albert Einstein Archives (April 1955), "Draft of projected Telecast Israel Independence Day, April 1955 (last statement ever written)", Einstein Archives Online, http://www.alberteinstein.info/db/ViewImage.do?DocumentID=20078&Page=1, retrieved on 2007-03-14 
^ O'Connor, J.J.; Robertson, E.F. (1997), "Albert Einstein", The MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St. Andrews 
^ "Dr. Albert Einstein Dies in Sleep at 76. World Mourns Loss of Great Scientist.". New York Times. 19 April 1955, Tuesday.  "Princeton, New Jersey, 18 April 1955. Dr. Albert Einstein, one of the great thinkers of the ages, died in his sleep here early today." 
^ "The Long, Strange Journey of Einstein's Brain". http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=4602913. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ New York Times obituary [1]
^ BBC (2006), "Letters Reveal Einstein Love Life", BBC News (BBC), http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/5168002.stm, retrieved on 2007-03-14 
^ Roger Richman Agency (2007), "Albert Einstein Licensing" ; Archive copy at the Internet Archive
^ "Einstein". Corbis Rights Representation. http://einstein.biz/. Retrieved on 2008-08-08. 
^ Isaacson, Walter (3 January 2000), "Person of the Century: Why We Chose Einstein", Time, http://www.time.com/time/time100/poc/magazine/who_mattered_and_why4a.html, retrieved on 2007-07-16 
^ a b Golden, Frederic (3 January 2000), "Person of the Century: Albert Einstein", Time, http://www.time.com/time/time100/poc/magazine/albert_einstein5a.html, retrieved on 2006-02-25 
^ "Mother Teresa Voted by American People as Most Admired Person of the Century". 1999-12-31. http://www.gallup.com/poll/3367/Mother-Teresa-Voted-American-People-Most-Admired-Person-Century.aspx. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ Hart, Michael H. (1978), The 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Persons in History, Citadel Press, p. 52, ISBN 0-8065-1350-0 
^ "World Year of Physics 2005". http://www.wyp2005.org/overview.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ "Walhalla Ruhmes- und Ehrenhalle" (in German). http://www.walhalla-regensburg.de/deutsch/index.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ The New Yorker April 1939 pg 69 Disguise



Further reading

Moring, Gary, "The complete idiot’s guide to understanding Einstein", Indianapolis, IN : Alpha books : Macmillan USA, Inc., 2000 (2nd edition, 2004). ISBN 0028631803
Schweber, S. S., Einstein and Oppenheimer: The Meaning of Genius, Harvard University Press, 2008, ISBN 978-0674028289.


External links

Find more about Albert Einstein on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Einstein Page from Princeton University Press, publisher of Einstein's writings since 1921.
Albert Einstein at the Open Directory Project
Einstein Archives Online
"Emilio Segre Visual Archives: Albert Einstein", American Institute of Physics
"The MacTutor History of Mathematics archive": Albert Einstein University of Saint Andrews, School of Mathematics and Statistics (huge bibliography for further reading)
"Einstein's Big Idea" Nova television documentary series website, Public Broadcasting Service
Nobelprize.org: The Nobel Prize in Physics 1921
Mathematics Genealogy Project: Albert Einstein, Mathematics Genealogy Project (a service of the NDSU Department of Mathematics, in association with the American Mathematical Society)
In Einstein's Shadow BBC Radio 4 series on Einstein's contributions to science
Works by Albert Einstein (public domain in Canada)
"A. Einstein: Image and Impact", on the American Institute of Physics's "AIP Center for the History of Physics" site: biography, audio and full site as downloadable PDF for classroom use
Einstein's Annus Mirabilis 1905 - collection at Johns Hopkins University
Key Participants: Albert Einstein - Linus Pauling and the International Peace Movement: A Documentary History


Videos


Archival footage of Einstein
Einstein in 1943
Einstein explains E=mc^2
Einstein's 1933 arrival in the US
Footage of the 1927 Solvay conference
Einstein talks about nuclear energy








v • d • e

Albert Einstein's Family





Main family

Pauline Koch · Hermann Einstein · Albert Einstein · Maja Einstein






Children

Hans Albert Einstein · Eduard Einstein · Lieserl Einstein






Grand Children

Bernhard Caesar Einstein (son of Hans Albert Einstein)






Wives

Mileva Marić · Elsa Einstein













v • d • e

Nobel Laureates in Physics








Wilhelm Röntgen (1901) · Hendrik Lorentz / Pieter Zeeman (1902) · Henri Becquerel / Pierre Curie / Marie Curie (1903) · Lord Rayleigh (1904) · Philipp Lenard (1905) · J. J. Thomson (1906) · Albert Michelson (1907) · Gabriel Lippmann (1908) · Guglielmo Marconi / Ferdinand Braun (1909) · Johannes van der Waals (1910) · Wilhelm Wien (1911) · Gustaf Dalén (1912) · Kamerlingh Onnes (1913) · Max von Laue (1914) · W. L. Bragg / W. H. Bragg (1915) · Charles Barkla (1917) · Max Planck (1918) · Johannes Stark (1919) · Charles Guillaume (1920) · Albert Einstein (1921) · Niels Bohr (1922) · Robert Millikan (1923) · Manne Siegbahn (1924) · James Franck / Gustav Hertz (1925)












Complete roster | (1901–1925) | (1926–1950) | (1951–1975) | (1976–2000) | (2001–present)










Persondata


NAME
Einstein, Albert


ALTERNATIVE NAMES



SHORT DESCRIPTION
Physicist


DATE OF BIRTH
14 March 1879(1879-03-14)


PLACE OF BIRTH
Ulm, Baden-Württemberg, German Empire


DATE OF DEATH
18 April 1955


PLACE OF DEATH
Princeton, New Jersey


           



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albert_Einstein"
Categories: 1879 births | 1955 deaths | Academics of the Charles University | Albert Einstein | American humanists | American pacifists | American philosophers | American physicists | American socialists | American vegetarians | Ashkenazi Jews | Cosmologists | Deaths from abdominal aortic aneurysm | Einstein family | ETH Zurich alumni | ETH Zurich faculty | Fellows of the Leopoldina | German agnostics | German-American Jews | German-American scientists | German humanists | German immigrants to Switzerland | German immigrants to the United States | German Jews | German Jews who emigrated to the United States to escape Nazism | German-language philosophers | German Nobel laureates | German pacifists | German physicists | German refugees | German socialists | German vegetarians | Institute for Advanced Study faculty | Jewish American scientists | Jewish American writers | Jewish inventors | Jewish skeptics | Pantheists | Jewish pacifists | Jewish philosophers | Jewish refugees | Jewish scientists | Leiden University faculty | Members of the Prussian Academy of Sciences | Naturalized citizens of the United States | Nobel laureates in Physics | Patent examiners | People associated with the University of Zurich | People from Ulm | Philosophers of cosmology | University of Zurich alumni | University of Zurich faculty | People from the Kingdom of Württemberg | Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class) | Relativists | Stateless persons | Swiss immigrants to the United States | Swiss humanitarians | Swiss Jews | Swiss Nobel laureates | Swiss pacifists | Swiss physicists | Swiss vegetarians | Theoretical physicists | Violinists | Walhalla enshrinees | Zionists | Theorists | Recipients of the Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical SocietyHidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | Articles including recorded pronunciations (German) 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Bân-lâm-gú
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
العربية
Aragonés
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
Bamanankan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gàidhlig
Galego
ગુજરાતી
한국어
Hawai`i
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ಕನ್ನಡ
Kapampangan
ქართული
Kiswahili
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Ladino
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Lojban
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
مصرى
مَزِروني
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Myanmasa
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Occitan
O'zbek
Pangasinan
ភាសាខ្មែរ
Piemontèis
Tok Pisin
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qaraqalpaqsha
Ripoarisch
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Tatarça/Татарча
తెలుగు
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
Tiếng Việt
Volapük
Võro
Walon
Winaray
Wolof
ייִדיש
粵語
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 30 April 2009, at 23:21 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
