













OSI model - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "OSI_model";
		var wgTitle = "OSI model";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "22747";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282175998;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); OSI model

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


OSI Model


7
Application Layer


6
Presentation Layer


5
Session Layer


4
Transport Layer


3
Network Layer


2
Data Link Layer

LLC sublayer
MAC sublayer




1
Physical Layer


The Open Systems Interconnection Reference Model (OSI Reference Model or OSI Model) is an abstract description for layered communications and computer network protocol design. It was developed as part of the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) initiative.[1] In its most basic form, it divides network architecture into seven layers which, from top to bottom, are the Application, Presentation, Session, Transport, Network, Data-Link, and Physical Layers. It is therefore often referred to as the OSI Seven Layer Model.
A layer is a collection of conceptually similar functions that provide services to the layer above it and receives service from the layer below it. For example, a layer that provides error-free communications across a network provides the path needed by applications above it, while it calls the next lower layer to send and receive packets that make up the contents of the path.




Contents


1 History
2 Description of OSI layers

2.1 Layer 7: Application Layer
2.2 Layer 6: Presentation Layer
2.3 Layer 5: Session Layer
2.4 Layer 4: Transport Layer
2.5 Layer 3: Network Layer
2.6 Layer 2: Data Link Layer

2.6.1 WAN Protocol architecture
2.6.2 IEEE 802 LAN architecture


2.7 Layer 1: Physical Layer


3 Interfaces
4 Examples
5 Comparison with TCP/IP
6 See also
7 References
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
In 1977, work on a layered model of network architecture was started, and the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) began to develop its OSI framework architecture. OSI has two major components: an abstract model of networking, called the Basic Reference Model or seven-layer model, and a set of specific protocols.
Note: The standard documents that describe the OSI model can be freely downloaded from the ITU-T as the X.200-series of recommendations.[2] A number of the protocol specifications are also available as part of the ITU-T X series. The equivalent ISO and ISO/IEC standards for the OSI model are available from the ISO, but only some of the ISO/IEC standards are available as cost-free downloads.[3]
All aspects of OSI design evolved from experiences with the CYCLADES network, which also influenced Internet design. The new design was documented in ISO 7498 and its various addenda. In this model, a networking system is divided into layers. Within each layer, one or more entities implement its functionality. Each entity interacts directly only with the layer immediately beneath it, and provides facilities for use by the layer above it.
Protocols enable an entity in one host to interact with a corresponding entity at the same layer in another host. Service definitions abstractly describe the functionality provided to an (N)-layer by an (N-1) layer, where N is one of the seven layers of protocols operating in the local host.

[edit] Description of OSI layers


OSI Model



Data unit
Layer
Function


Host
layers
Data
7. Application
Network process to application


6. Presentation
Data representation and encryption


5. Session
Interhost communication


Segment
4. Transport
End-to-end connections and reliability


Media
layers
Packet
3. Network
Path determination and logical addressing


Frame
2. Data Link
Physical addressing


Bit
1. Physical
Media, signal and binary transmission



[edit] Layer 7: Application Layer
Main article: Application Layer
The application layer is the OSI layer closest to the end user, which means that both the OSI application layer and the user interact directly with the software application. This layer interacts with software applications that implement a communicating component. Such application programs fall outside the scope of the OSI model. Application layer functions typically include identifying communication partners, determining resource availability, and synchronizing communication. When identifying communication partners, the application layer determines the identity and availability of communication partners for an application with data to transmit. When determining resource availability, the application layer must decide whether sufficient network resources for the requested communication exist. In synchronizing communication, all communication between applications requires cooperation that is managed by the application layer. Some examples of application layer implementations include Telnet, Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), File Transfer Protocol (FTP) , and Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP).

[edit] Layer 6: Presentation Layer
Main article: Presentation Layer
The Presentation Layer establishes a context between Application Layer entities, in which the higher-layer entities can use different syntax and semantics, as long as the Presentation Service understands both and the mapping between them. The presentation service data units are then encapsulated into Session Protocol Data Units, and moved down the stack.
This layer provides independence from differences in data representation (e.g., encryption) by translating from application to network format, and vice versa. The presentation layer works to transform data into the form that the application layer can accept. This layer formats and encrypts data to be sent across a network, providing freedom from compatibility problems. It is sometimes called the syntax layer.
The original presentation structure used the Basic Encoding Rules of Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1), with capabilities such as converting an EBCDIC-coded text file to an ASCII-coded file, or serializing objects and other data structures into and out of XML.

[edit] Layer 5: Session Layer
Main article: Session Layer
The Session Layer controls the dialogues (connections) between computers. It establishes, manages and terminates the connections between the local and remote application. It provides for full-duplex, half-duplex, or simplex operation, and establishes checkpointing, adjournment, termination, and restart procedures. The OSI model made this layer responsible for "graceful close" of sessions, which is a property of TCP, and also for session checkpointing and recovery, which is not usually used in the Internet Protocol Suite. The Session Layer is commonly implemented explicitly in application environments that use remote procedure calls (RPCs).

[edit] Layer 4: Transport Layer
The Transport Layer provides transparent transfer of data between end users, providing reliable data transfer services to the upper layers. The Transport Layer controls the reliability of a given link through flow control, segmentation/desegmentation, and error control. Some protocols are state and connection oriented. This means that the Transport Layer can keep track of the segments and retransmit those that fail.
Although not developed under the OSI Reference Model and not strictly conforming to the OSI definition of the Transport Layer, the best known examples of a Layer 4 protocol are the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and User Datagram Protocol (UDP).[citation needed]
Of the actual OSI protocols, there are five classes of connection-mode transport protocols ranging from class 0 (which is also known as TP0 and provides the least error recovery) to class 4 (which is also known as TP4 and is designed for less reliable networks, similar to the Internet). Class 0 contains no error recovery, and was designed for use on network layers that provide error-free connections. Class 4 is closest to TCP, although TCP contains functions, such as the graceful close, which OSI assigns to the Session Layer. Also, all OSI TP connection-mode protocol classes provide expedited data and preservation of record boundaries, both of which TCP is incapable. Detailed characteristics of TP0-4 classes are shown in the following table:[4]


Feature Name
TP0
TP1
TP2
TP3
TP4


Connection oriented network
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes


Connectionless network
No
No
No
No
Yes


Concatenation and separation
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes


Segmentation and reassembly
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes


Error Recovery
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes


Reinitiate connection (if an excessive number of PDUs are unacknowledged)
No
Yes
No
Yes
No


multiplexing and demultiplexing over a single virtual circuit
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes


Explicit flow control
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes


Retransmission on timeout
No
No
No
No
Yes


Reliable Transport Service
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes


Perhaps an easy way to visualize the Transport Layer is to compare it with a Post Office, which deals with the dispatch and classification of mail and parcels sent. Do remember, however, that a post office manages the outer envelope of mail. Higher layers may have the equivalent of double envelopes, such as cryptographic presentation services that can be read by the addressee only. Roughly speaking, tunneling protocols operate at the Transport Layer, such as carrying non-IP protocols such as IBM's SNA or Novell's IPX over an IP network, or end-to-end encryption with IPsec. While Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) might seem to be a Network Layer protocol, if the encapsulation of the payload takes place only at endpoint, GRE becomes closer to a transport protocol that uses IP headers but contains complete frames or packets to deliver to an endpoint. L2TP carries PPP frames inside transport packet.

[edit] Layer 3: Network Layer
Main article: Network Layer
The Network Layer provides the functional and procedural means of transferring variable length data sequences from a source to a destination via one or more networks, while maintaining the quality of service requested by the Transport Layer. The Network Layer performs network routing functions, and might also perform fragmentation and reassembly, and report delivery errors. Routers operate at this layer—sending data throughout the extended network and making the Internet possible. This is a logical addressing scheme – values are chosen by the network engineer. The addressing scheme is hierarchical.
The best-known example of a Layer 3 protocol is the Internet Protocol (IP). It manages the connectionless transfer of data one hop at a time, from end system to ingress router, router to router, and from egress router to destination end system. It is not responsible for reliable delivery to a next hop, but only for the detection of errored packets so they may be discarded. When the medium of the next hop cannot accept a packet in its current length, IP is responsible for fragmenting the packet into sufficiently small packets that the medium can accept.
A number of layer management protocols, a function defined in the Management Annex, ISO 7498/4, belong to the Network Layer. These include routing protocols, multicast group management, Network Layer information and error, and Network Layer address assignment. It is the function of the payload that makes these belong to the Network Layer, not the protocol that carries them.

[edit] Layer 2: Data Link Layer
Main article: Data Link Layer
The Data Link Layer provides the functional and procedural means to transfer data between network entities and to detect and possibly correct errors that may occur in the Physical Layer. Originally, this layer was intended for point-to-point and point-to-multipoint media, characteristic of wide area media in the telephone system. Local area network architecture, which included broadcast-capable multiaccess media, was developed independently of the ISO work, in IEEE Project 802. IEEE work assumed sublayering and management functions not required for WAN use. In modern practice, only error detection, not flow control using sliding window, is present in modern data link protocols such as Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP), and, on local area networks, the IEEE 802.2 LLC layer is not used for most protocols on Ethernet, and, on other local area networks, its flow control and acknowledgment mechanisms are rarely used. Sliding window flow control and acknowledgment is used at the Transport Layer by protocols such as TCP, but is still used in niches where X.25 offers performance advantages.
The ITU-T G.hn standard, which provides high-speed local area networking over existing wires (power lines, phone lines and coaxial cables), includes a complete Data Link Layer which provides both error correction and flow control by means of a selective repeat Sliding Window Protocol.
Both WAN and LAN services arrange bits, from the Physical Layer, into logical sequences called frames. Not all Physical Layer bits necessarily go into frames, as some of these bits are purely intended for Physical Layer functions. For example, every fifth bit of the FDDI bit stream is not used by the Layer.

[edit] WAN Protocol architecture
Connection-oriented WAN data link protocols, in addition to framing, detect and may correct errors. They also are capable of controlling the rate of transmission. A WAN Data Link Layer might implement a sliding window flow control and acknowledgment mechanism to provide reliable delivery of frames; that is the case for SDLC and HDLC, and derivatives of HDLC such as LAPB and LAPD.

[edit] IEEE 802 LAN architecture
Practical, connectionless LANs began with the pre-IEEE Ethernet specification, which is the ancestor of IEEE 802.3. This layer manages the interaction of devices with a shared medium, which is the function of a Media Access Control sublayer. Above this MAC sublayer is the media-independent IEEE 802.2 Logical Link Control (LLC) sublayer, which deals with addressing and multiplexing on multiaccess media.
While IEEE 802.3 is the dominant wired LAN protocol and IEEE 802.11 the wireless LAN protocol, obsolescent MAC layers include Token Ring and FDDI. The MAC sublayer detects but does not correct errors.

[edit] Layer 1: Physical Layer
Main article: Physical Layer
The Physical Layer defines the electrical and physical specifications for devices. In particular, it defines the relationship between a device and a physical medium. This includes the layout of pins, voltages, cable specifications, Hubs, repeaters, network adapters, Host Bus Adapters (HBAs used in Storage Area Networks) and more.
To understand the function of the Physical Layer in contrast to the functions of the Data Link Layer, think of the Physical Layer as concerned primarily with the interaction of a single device with a medium, where the Data Link Layer is concerned more with the interactions of multiple devices (i.e., at least two) with a shared medium. The Physical Layer will tell one device how to transmit to the medium, and another device how to receive from it (in most cases it does not tell the device how to connect to the medium). Standards such as RS-232 do use physical wires to control access to the medium.
The major functions and services performed by the Physical Layer are:--

Establishment and termination of a connection to a communications medium.
Participation in the process whereby the communication resources are effectively shared among multiple users. For example, contention resolution and flow control.
Modulation, or conversion between the representation of digital data in user equipment and the corresponding signals transmitted over a communications channel. These are signals operating over the physical cabling (such as copper and optical fiber) or over a radio link.

Parallel SCSI buses operate in this layer, although it must be remembered that the logical SCSI protocol is a Transport Layer protocol that runs over this bus. Various Physical Layer Ethernet standards are also in this layer; Ethernet incorporates both this layer and the Data Link Layer. The same applies to other local-area networks, such as Token ring, FDDI, ITU-T G.hn and IEEE 802.11, as well as personal area networks such as Bluetooth and IEEE 802.15.4.

[edit] Interfaces
Neither the OSI Reference Model nor OSI protocols specify any programming interfaces, other than as deliberately abstract service specifications. Protocol specifications precisely define the interfaces between different computers, but the software interfaces inside computers are implementation-specific.
For example, Microsoft Windows' Winsock, and Unix's Berkeley sockets and System V Transport Layer Interface, are interfaces between applications (Layer 5 and above) and the transport (Layer 4). NDIS and ODI are interfaces between the media (Layer 2) and the network protocol (Layer 3).
Interface standards, except for the Physical Layer to Media, are approximate implementations of OSI Service Specifications.

[edit] Examples


Layer
Misc. examples
IP suite
SS7[5]
AppleTalk suite
OSI suite
IPX suite
SNA
UMTS


#
Name


7
Application
HL7, Modbus
NNTP, SIP, SSI, DNS, FTP, Gopher, HTTP, NFS, NTP, DHCP, SMPP, SMTP, SNMP, Telnet, RIP, BGP
INAP, MAP, TCAP, ISUP, TUP
AFP, ZIP, RTMP, NBP
FTAM, X.400, X.500, DAP, ROSE, RTSE, ACSE
RIP, SAP
APPC



6
Presentation
TDI, ASCII, EBCDIC, MIDI, MPEG
MIME, XDR, SSL, TLS (Not a separate layer)

AFP
ISO/IEC 8823, X.226, ISO/IEC 9576-1, X.236





5
Session
Named Pipes, NetBIOS, SAP, Half Duplex, Full Duplex, Simplex, SDP
Sockets. Session establishment in TCP. SIP. (Not a separate layer with standardized API.), RTP

ASP, ADSP, PAP
ISO/IEC 8327, X.225, ISO/IEC 9548-1, X.235
NWLink
DLC?



4
Transport
NBF
TCP, UDP, SCTP

DDP
ISO/IEC 8073, TP0, TP1, TP2, TP3, TP4 (X.224), ISO/IEC 8602, X.234
SPX




3
Network
NBF, Q.931, IS-IS
IP, IPsec, ICMP, IGMP
SCCP, MTP
ATP (TokenTalk or EtherTalk)
ISO/IEC 8208, X.25 (PLP), ISO/IEC 8878, X.223, ISO/IEC 8473-1, CLNP X.233.
IPX

RRC (Radio Resource Control) Packet Data Convergence Protocol (PDCP) and BMC (Broadcast/Multicast Control)


2
Data Link
802.3 (Ethernet), 802.11a/b/g/n MAC/LLC, 802.1Q (VLAN), ATM, HDP, FDDI, Fibre Channel, Frame Relay, HDLC, ISL, PPP, Q.921, Token Ring, CDP, ARP (maps layer 3 to layer 2 address), ITU-T G.hn DLL
OSPF, PPP, SLIP, PPTP, L2TP
MTP, Q.710
LocalTalk, AppleTalk Remote Access, PPP
ISO/IEC 7666, X.25 (LAPB), Token Bus, X.222, ISO/IEC 8802-2 LLC Type 1 and 2
IEEE 802.3 framing, Ethernet II framing
SDLC
LLC (Logical Link Control), MAC (Media Access Control)


1
Physical
RS-232, V.35, V.34, I.430, I.431, T1, E1, 10BASE-T, 100BASE-TX, POTS, SONET, SDH, DSL, 802.11a/b/g/n PHY, ITU-T G.hn PHY

MTP, Q.710
RS-232, RS-422, STP, PhoneNet
X.25 (X.21bis, EIA/TIA-232, EIA/TIA-449, EIA-530, G.703)

Twinax
UMTS L1 (UMTS Physical Layer)



[edit] Comparison with TCP/IP
In the TCP/IP model of the Internet, protocols are deliberately not as rigidly designed into strict layers as the OSI model.[6] RFC 3439 contains a section entitled "Layering considered harmful." However, TCP/IP does recognize four broad layers of functionality which are derived from the operating scope of their contained protocols, namely the scope of the software application, the end-to-end transport connection, the internetworking range, and lastly the scope of the direct links to other nodes on the local network.
Even though the concept is different than in OSI, these layers are nevertheless often compared with the OSI layering scheme in the following way: The Internet Application Layer includes the OSI Application Layer, Presentation Layer, and most of the Session Layer. Its end-to-end Transport Layer includes the graceful close function of the OSI Session Layer as well as the OSI Transport Layer. The internetworking layer (Internet Layer) is a subset of the OSI Network Layer, while the Link Layer includes the OSI Data Link and Physical Layers, as well as parts of OSI's Network Layer. These comparisons are based on the original seven-layer protocol model as defined in ISO 7498, rather than refinements in such things as the internal organization of the Network Layer document.
The presumably strict consumer/producer layering of OSI as it is usually described does not present contradictions in TCP/IP, as it is permissible that protocol usage does not follow the hierarchy implied in a layered model. Such examples exist in some routing protocols (e.g., OSPF), or in the description of tunneling protocols, which provide a Link Layer for an application, although the tunnel host protocol may well be a Transport or even an Application Layer protocol in its own right.
The TCP/IP design generally favors decisions based on simplicity, efficiency and ease of implementation.

[edit] See also

TCP/IP
Cross-layer optimization
Cognitive networks
Cognitive radio


[edit] References

^ X.200 : Information technology - Open Systems Interconnection - Basic Reference Model: The basic model
^ ITU-T X-Series Recommendations.
^ Publicly Available Standards
^ "ITU-T Recommendation X.224 (11/1995) ISO/IEC 8073". http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.224-199511-I/en/. 
^ ITU-T Recommendation Q.1400 (03/1993), Architecture framework for the development of signalling and OA&M protocols using OSI concepts, pp 4, 7.
^ RFC 3439


[edit] External links

(license agreement for downloading) and ISO/IEC standard 7498-1:1994 (ZIP format)
ITU-T X.200 (the same contents as from ISO)
OSI Reference Model — The ISO Model of Architecture for Open Systems InterconnectionPDF (776 KB), Hubert Zimmermann, IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 28, no. 4, April 1980, pp. 425 - 432.
Internetworking Basics




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSI_model"
Categories: Network architecture | ISO standards | ITU-T recommendations | OSI protocols | Reference modelsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Lietuvių
Magyar
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 19:40.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
