













1980s - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "1980s";
		var wgTitle = "1980s";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "34557";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281009660;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); 1980s

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss these issues on the talk page.

It needs additional references or sources for verification. Tagged since May 2007.
Its neutrality is disputed. Tagged since May 2008.
It may contain original research or unverifiable claims. Tagged since June 2007.
It may not present a worldwide view of the subject. Tagged since January 2008.







Millennium:
2nd millennium


Centuries:
19th century - 20th century - 21st century


Decades:
1950s 1960s 1970s - 1980s - 1990s 2000s 2010s


Years:
1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989


Categories:
Births - Deaths - Architecture
Establishments - Disestablishments






The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 was one of the most well-known events of the 1980s.


The 1980s or the Eighties, was the decade that ran from January 1, 1980 to December 31, 1989.
The decade saw social, economic and general upheaval as wealth, production and western culture migrated to new industrializing economies. As economic liberalization increased in the western world, multiple multinational corporations associated with the manufacturing industry relocated into Mexico, Korea, Taiwan, China and new market economies in eastern Europe following the collapse of communism in eastern Europe.
Developing countries across the world facing increasing economic and social difficulties as they suffer from multiple debt crises in the 1980s, requiring many of these countries to apply for financial assistance from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. Ethiopia witnessed widespread famine in the mid-1980s, resulting in the country having to depend on foreign aid to provide food to its population and worldwide efforts to address and raise money to help Ethiopians, such as the famous Live Aid concert in 1985.




Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan were the leaders of the UK and the USA. Both leaders led the revival of right-wing politics. These policies eventually became known as Thatcherism and Reaganomics respectively in their home countries.


The western world witnessed the political revival of right-wing politics and advancement of neoliberalism with the rule of politicians including Margaret Thatcher as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Ronald Reagan as President of the United States, Helmut Kohl as Chancellor of Germany, Brian Mulroney as Prime Minister of Canada and Carlos Salinas de Gortari as President of Mexico.
Major civil discontent and violence occurs in the Middle East including the Iran-Iraq War, major conflict and violence in Lebanon from 1982 to 1983, U.S. military action against Libya in 1985, and the First Intifada in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.
In the eastern world, hostility to authoritarianism and the failing command economies of communist states resulted in a wave of reformist policies by communist regimes such as the policies of perestroika and glasnost in the USSR, along with the overthrows and attempted overthrows of a number of communist regimes, such as in Poland, Hungary, the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 in China, the Czechoslovak velvet revolution, and the overthrow of the dictatorial regime in Romania and other communist Warsaw Pact states in Central and Eastern Europe. It came to be called as the late 1980s purple passage of the autumn of nations. By 1989 with the disintigration of the Warsaw Pact, the Soviet Union announced the abandonment of political hostility to the western world and thus the Cold War ended. These changes continued to be felt in the 1990s and into the 21st century.
The 1980s was also an era of tremendous population growth around the world, surpassing even the 1970s and 1990s for arguably being the largest in human history. Population growth was particularly rapid in a number of African, Middle Eastern, and South Asian countries during this decade, with rates of natural increase close to or exceeding 4% annually.
During the 1980s, for the first time in world history, transpacific trade equaled that of transatlantic trade[1], solidifying American economic power[2]




Contents


1 Zeitgeist and characterization
2 Social trends
3 Culture

3.1 Sports
3.2 Fashion
3.3 Music
3.4 Film
3.5 Video games


4 International issues

4.1 Africa
4.2 Americas
4.3 Asia
4.4 Europe


5 Wars and Conflicts

5.1 Europe
5.2 Oceania


6 Disasters

6.1 Non-natural disasters


7 External links
8 References





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Zeitgeist and characterization
The 1980s backlashed the hippie movement of the late 1960s, with religion, patriotism and materialism making a comeback.
The kitsch of the 1970s, while itself rejected, influenced the fashion of the 1980s - in the beginning of the decade marked by the New Romantic movement and later by fashion inspired by hair metal bands, including teased hair, ripped jeans and neon clothing.
Michael Jackson was by far the most popular entertainer of the 1980s, and his leather jacket, glove and Moonwalk dance were often imitated.
The keyboard synthesizer and drum machine, introduced in the 1970s, were most popular in music in the 1980s, especially in New Wave music, after the 1980s electronic instruments were no longer popular in rock but continued to be the main component of mainstream pop.

[edit] Social trends

The Reagan administration accelerated the War on Drugs, publicized through anti-drug campaigns including the Just Say No campaign of First Lady Nancy Reagan. In spite of the sentences imposed by the Reagan administration, new drugs such as Crack cocaine appeared in the country.
The role of women in the workplace increased greatly. Continuing the 1970s' trend, more and more women in the English-speaking world took to calling themselves "Ms.", rather than "Mrs." or "Miss." A similar change occurred in Germany, with women choosing "Frau" instead of "Fräulein" in an effort to disassociate marital status from title. In most western countries, women began to exercise the option of keeping their maiden names after marriage; in Canada, legislation was enacted to end the practice of automatically changing a woman's last name upon marriage.
National safety campaigns raised awareness of seat belt usage to save lives in automobile accidents, helping to make the measure mandatory in most parts of the world by 1990. Similar efforts arose to push child safety seats and bike helmet use, already mandatory in a number of regions.
Rejection of smoking based on health concerns increases throughout the western world.
Increased awareness and opposition to white-minority apartheid rule in South Africa occur in the western world.
Counterculture in the eastern world revolves around "pro-democracy" stances in opposition to multiple communist states perceived as authoritarian.
Opposition to nuclear power plants grew, especially after the catastrophic 1986 Chernobyl accident.
Environmental concerns intensified. In the United Kingdom, environmentally friendly domestic products surged in popularity. Western European countries adopted "greener" policies to cut back on oil use, recycle most of their nations' waste, and increase focus on water and energy conservation efforts. Similar "Eco-activist" trends appeared in the U.S. in the late 1980s.
Gay rights became more widely accepted in the Western world, particularly with suspected gay figures such as Boy George and Holly Johnson of Frankie Goes to Hollywood. Negative public views generated by most Americans still condemned homosexuals and used the outbreak of AIDS to support their views. They claimed AIDS was God's punishment for homosexuals and their "immorality". Later on in the decade however as the death toll continued to rise for AIDS and after the illness claimed many famous people such as 1950's male heartthrob actor Rock Hudson the general public started to show more sympathy to the victims.


[edit] Culture
Main article: Culture of the 1980s

[edit] Sports
See also: Sports timeline#1980s

The 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow were disrupted by a boycott led by the United States and 64 other countries in protest of the 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
The 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles were boycotted by the Soviet Union in response to the actions taken by the United States and other countries in the previous 1980 Moscow Summer Olympic.
The 1984 Winter Olympics are held in Sarajevo, Yugoslavia (now Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina). Yugoslavia becomes the second communist country to host the Olympic Games, but unlike the Soviet Union in 1980, there were no boycotts on the games by western countries.
The Jamaica national bobsled team received major media attention and stunned the world at the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary, Canada for its unexpected good performance. It overcame the stereotype that northern countries were the only efficient competitors in winter Olympic Games due to the fact of having an actual winter. The events surrounding the Jamaica bobsled team in 1988 would lead to the creation of the hit Disney movie Cool Runnings five years later which was based on Jamaica's 1988 bobsled team.
FIA bans Group B rallying after a series of deaths and injuries take place in the 1986 season.
Canadian hockey player Wayne Gretzky rises to fame as a dominant player in the North American National Hockey League (NHL) during the 1980s.


[edit] Fashion
Main article: 1980s in fashion

[edit] Music

See also 1980s in music, Timeline of musical events#1980s





Stage view of Live Aid concert at Philadelphia's JFK Stadium in the United States in 1985. The whole entire concert was an major global international effort by musicians and activists to sponsor action to send aid to the people of Ethiopia who were really suffering from a major famine.



The decade began with a backlash against disco music in the United states, and a movement away from the orchestral arrangements that had characterized much of the music of the 1970s. Music in the 1980s was characterized by unheard of electronic sounds accomplished through the use of synthesizers and keyboards, along with drum machines. This made a dramatic change in music.
In the United States, MTV was launched and music videos began to have a huge effect on the record industry.U.S. Pop artists such as Duran Duran Madonna and Michael Jackson mastered the format and turned it into big business.
New Wave and Synthpop were developed by many British and American artists, and became popular phenomena throughout the decade, especially in the early and mid eighties.
Hard rock, heavy metal, Big Hair Bands and Glam metal, experienced extreme popularity in 1980s, becoming one of the most dominating music genres of the 1980s.
Live Aid concert in 1985 containing many artists promotes attention and action to send food aid to Ethiopia whose people were suffering from a major famine.
The Hip hop scene continued to evolve, gaining recognition and exhibiting a stronger influence on the music industry.


[edit] Film
Main article: 1980s in film

[edit] Video games

See also History of video games in the 1980s

Although popularity of video games and arcades began in the mid to late 1970s, it continued throughout the 1980s with rapid growth in video game technology throughout the decade. Space Invaders, developed in Japan in 1978, was first previewed at a UK trade show in 1979, making a huge impact on the early 80s gaming scene. Many other games followed including Pac-Man, creating a Pac Man fever craze early in the decade, especially in 1982 and 1983; Super Mario Bros. games became a highly successful franchise starting in 1985 (highest selling franchise of all time), with its popularity continuing today.
In the 1980s, Atari failed to apply proper quality control to the software development process for its popular Video Computer System game console. The amount of low-quality software caused a massive collapse of the home console industry. The release of Nintendo's Famicom/NES console rectified the problem and revived home gaming by only being able to play games approved by the company. PC Engine and Sega Mega Drive were next generation game consoles that were released during the last years of the decade.
Home computers become popular in the 1980s and during that decade they were used heavily for gaming, especially the ZX Spectrum. The prevailing IBM PC standard was born in 1981 but had a status of a non-entertainment computer throughout the decade. Along with the IBM PC, the Commodore 64 (1982) was the most popular 8-bit home computer and its successor, the Amiga (1985), was the most popular 16-bit home computer.

[edit] International issues

Militance against communist governments in Europe and Asia, collapse of the Warsaw Pact precipitates the end of the Cold War.
International debt crisis in developing countries, reliance of these countries on aid from the International Monetary Fund.
Spread of neoliberal economics in developed world.


[edit] Africa




A United Kingdom Royal Air Force C-130 transport aircraft airdropping food during 1985 famine in Ethiopia.



Zimbabwe becomes independent from official colonial rule of the United Kingdom in 1980.
The Second Sudanese Civil War erupts in 1983 between the Muslim government of Sudan in the north and non-Muslim rebel secessionists in Southern Sudan. The conflict continues through the present day Darfur genocide.
1984–1985 famine in Ethiopia occurs, resulting in international efforts to help the Ethiopian people, including the famous Live Aid concert in July 1985.
The United States launches an aerial bombardment of Libya in 1986 in retaliation for Libyan support of terrorism and attacks on US personnel in Germany and Turkey.
Nigeria suffered multiple military coups in 1983 and 1985.
Battle of Cuito Cuanavale takes place as part of the Angolan civil war and South African Border War from 1987 to 1988. The battle involves the largest fighting in Africa since World War II between military forces from Angola, Cuba (expeditionary forces), Namibia versus military forces from South Africa and the dissident Angolan UNITA organization.
The South African Border War between South Africa versus Angola, Namibia, and Zambia ends in 1989, ending over-thirty years of conflict.


[edit] Americas




United States President Ronald Reagan plays a pivotal role in the final years of the Cold War and has a large influence in the U.S. and its allied countries in the adoption of neoliberal economic policies.






The Argentine warship General Belgrano sinking after being attacked by British forces during the Falklands War.



Ten thousand Cubans storm the Peruvian embassy in Havana seeking political asylum on April 6, 1980. On April 7 the Cuban government granted permission for the emigration of Cubans seeking refuge in the Peruvian embassy.
Peru faces the beginning of internal conflict by the communist Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement in 1980 that would continue until the end of the 1990s.
Famous former Beatles musician John Lennon is assassinated in 1980 in the United States.
Political unrest in the province of Quebec, which rooted from the many differences between the dominant francophone population versus the anglophone minority and the francophones rights in the dominantly English-speaking Canada, came to a head in 1980 when the provincial government called a public referendum on partial separation from the rest of Canada. The referendum ended with the "no" side winning majority (59.56% no, 40.44% yes).
Ronald Reagan elected U.S. President in 1980. In international affairs, Reagan pursued a hardline policy towards preventing the spread of communism, initiating a massive buildup of U.S. military power to challenge the Soviet Union. He further directly challenges the Iron Curtain by demanding that the Soviet Union dismantle the Berlin Wall.
Mexico suffers from a debt crisis starting in 1982.
The Falklands War occurred from 2 April 1982 – 14 July 1982 between the United Kingdom and Argentina over the disputed territory of the Falkland Islands. Britain emerged victorious and its stance in international affairs and its reputation as a great power increased substantially. Argentina on the other hand was left humiliated by the defeat and its dictator Leopoldo Galtieri was deposed three days after the end of the war.
Canada gains official independence from the United Kingdom with a new Constitution on April 17, 1982, authorized by the signature by Queen Elizabeth II. This Act severed all Political Dependencies of the United Kingdom in Canada.
The United States engages in significant direct conflict and indirect conflict in the decade via alliances with various groups in a number of Central and South American countries claiming that the U.S. was acting to oppose the spread of communism and end illicit drug trade. The U.S. government supports the government of Colombia's attempts to destroy its large illicit cocaine-trafficking industry. U.S. provides support for right-wing rebels in El Salvador which becomes controversial after the El Mozote massacre on December 11, 1981 in when U.S.-trained Salvadoran paramilitaries killed 1000 Salvadoran civilians. The United States, along with members of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, invaded Grenada in 1983. The Iran-Contra affair erupts which involves U.S. interventionism in Nicaragua, resulting in members of the U.S. government being indicted in 1986. U.S. military action begins against Panama in December 1989 to overthrow its president, Manuel Noriega.
Air India Flight 182 is destroyed on June 23, 1985 by Sikh-Canadian militants. It is the largest mass murder involving Canadians in Canada's history.
The Space Shuttle Challenger breaks apart during takeoff off the coast of central Florida on January 28, 1986, killing all 7 crew members onboard.
Haitian dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier is overthrown by a popular uprising on February 6, 1986.
The 1986 World's Fair, Expo 86, was held in Vancouver.
Enactment of the Canada-United States Free Trade Agreement in 1989.
Military dictatorships give way to democracy in Argentina (1983), Uruguay (1984-5), Brazil (1985-8) and Chile (1988-9).
Independence is awarded to Antigua, Belize, (both 1981) and St. Kitts (1983).
Exxon Valdez oil spill in March 1989.


[edit] Asia




Iranian soldier during the Iran-Iraq war.



The Iran-Iraq war takes place from 1980 to 1988. Iraq is accused of using illegal chemical weapons to kill Iranian forces and against its own dissident Kurdish populations.
Serious conflicts erupt in Lebanon in the 1980s. The 1982 Lebanon War occurs when Israel attacks Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) forces inside Lebanon, in which Israel faces war with Lebanese and Syrian armed forces inside Lebanon. The controversial Siege of Beirut by Israeli military forces resulted in enormous damage to the infrastructure and significant civilian casualties in Lebanon's capital and was internationally condemned, even by the United States, a traditional close ally of Israel.[1]. The1983 Beirut barracks bombing kills U.S. marines in Lebanon.
The Bhopal disaster occurs in 1984 when a toxic gas leak occurred in Bhopal, India.
Indian prime minister Indira Gandhi is assassinated on October 31, 1984.
The Red Army of the Soviet Union begins to suffer serious casualties and defeats in the ongoing Soviet-Afghan war by 1985 resulting in new Soviet Union leader Mikhail Gorbachev beginning to design a strategy for the eventual departure of Red Army forces from Afghanistan.


[edit] Europe




1980 strike at Gdańsk Shipyard, birthplace of the Polish Solidarity movement and the beginning of the eventual collapse of communism in Europe.






Soviet Union leader Mikhail Gorbachev in the 1980s engages in major political reforms, such as increasing freedom of the press and works to end the Cold War.



The Solidarity movement begins in Poland in 1980, involving workers demanding political liberalization and democracy in Poland. Attempts by the communist government to crush the Solidarity movement fail and negotiations between the movement and the government take place. Solidarity would be instrumental in encouraging people in other communist states to demand political reform.
The United Kingdom is governed by the Conservative Party under Margaret Thatcher throughout the decade. Under her rule, the party introduces widespread economic reforms including the privitisation of industries and the de-regulation of stock markets echoing similar reforms of U.S President Ronald Reagan.
Mikhail Gorbachev becomes leader of the Soviet Union in 1985, and initiates major reforms to the Soviet Union's government through increasing the rights of expressing political dissent, allowing some democratic elections (though maintaining Communist dominance). Gorbachev pursues negotiation with the United States to decrease tensions and eventually end the Cold War.
The European Community's enlargement continued with the accession of Greece in 1981 and Spain and Portugal in 1986.
At the end of the decade, the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 would be followed in 1990 by the German reunification.


[edit] Wars and Conflicts

The First Intifada (First Uprising) in the Gaza Strip and West Bank begins in 1987 when Palestinian Arabs begin large-scale protests against the Israeli military presence in the Gaza Strip and West Bank which the Palestinians claim as their own. The Intifada soon became violent as the Israeli army and Palestinian militants fought for control over the disputed territories. The First Intifada would continue until peace negotiations began between the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) and the Israeli government in 1993.
Soviet-Afghan war ends on February 15, 1989, ending almost ten years of warfare between the two countries and is the last war that the Soviet Union's Red Army participated in.
Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 occurs in the People's Republic of China in 1989, in which pro-democracy protestors demand political reform. The protest is repressed by government forces.


[edit] Europe

In 1981 there was an assassination attempt on Pope John Paul II in Saint Peter's Square.
In 1984 there was an assassination attempt on the British Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher and the Conservative Government by the IRA.
In 1986, Swedish Prime Minister Olof Palme was assassinated.
The Rome and Vienna airport attacks take place on December 27, 1985 against people going on the Israeli El Al airline. The attack was done by militants loyal to Abu Nidal, backed by the government of Libya.
The European Community's enlargement continued with the accession of Greece in 1981 and Spain and Portugal in 1986.
Significant political reforms occurred in a number of communist countries in eastern Europe as the populations of these countries grew increasingly hostile and politically active in opposing communist governments. These reforms included attempts to increase individual liberties and market liberalization, and promises of democratic renewal. One exception was Romania where the communist government of Nicolae Ceauşescu violently fought against protestors until the government was overthrown. By 1989, a number of former Warsaw Pact countries had abandoned communism and adopted multi-party democracy.
In Yugoslavia, following the death of communist leader Joseph Broz Tito, the trend of political reform of the communist system occurred along with a trend towards ethnic nationalism and inter-ethnic hostility, especially in Serbia, beginning with the 1986 Memorandum of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts followed by the agenda of Serbian communist leader Slobodan Milošević who aggressively pushed for increased political influence of Serbs in the late 1980s, condemning non-Serb Yugoslav politicians who challenged his agenda as being enemies of Serbs.
Continuing civil strife in Northern Ireland and the adoption of Hunger strikes by Irish Republican Army prisoners seeking the reintroduction political status.


[edit] Oceania

Australia adopts a new constitution in 1986, fully separating Australia's government from influence of the parliament of the United Kingdom.
The 1988 World's Fair, Expo '88, is held in Brisbane, Australia.
Sitiveni Rabuka stages two military coups in Fiji in 1987, and declares the country a republic the same year.
The Kanak Socialist National Liberation Front begins a violent campaign for Independence in New Caledonia.
Independence is granted to Vanuatu (1980) and Palau (1981).
Greenpeace's attempts to monitor French nuclear testing on Mururoa are halted by the sinking of the Rainbow Warrior.


[edit] Disasters




Lake Nyos, Cameroon.



Mount St. Helens erupted in Washington, U.S. on May 18 1980, killing 57 people.
The 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake struck the San Francisco Bay Area during the 1989 World Series, gaining worldwide attention. Sixty-five people were killed and thousands injured, with major structural damage on freeways and buildings and broken gas-line fires in San Francisco, California. The cost of the damage totaled $13 billion (1989 USD).
The US Drought of 1988 decimated the US with many parts of the country becoming victim. This was the worst drought to hit the United States in many years. The US Drought of 1988 caused $60 billion in damage (between $80 billion and $120 billion for 2008 USD). The concurrent heat waves killed 4800 to 17000 people in the United States.
Hurricane Allen (1980), Hurricane Alicia (1983), Hurricane Gilbert (1988), Hurricane Joan (1988), and Hurricane Hugo (1989)
Other natural disasters: The 1982–1983 El Nino brought destructive weather to most of the world; the 1985 Mexico earthquake registered 8.1 on the Richter scale and devastated Mexico City and other areas throughout central Mexico; the 1985 Nevado del Ruiz lahar in Colombia; the 1986 Lake Nyos limnic eruption in Cameroon; and the 1988 Armenian earthquake, which rocked the Caucasus region of the USSR.


[edit] Non-natural disasters




The space shuttle Challenger disintegrates on January 28, 1986.


In 1984 the Bhopal disaster resulted from a toxic MIC gas leak at the Union Carbide plant in Bhopal, India, killing 3,000 immediately and ultimately claiming 15,000-20,000 lives.
On Sept. 1, 1983, the Soviet shootdown of Korean Air Lines Flight 007 carrying 269 people including a sitting U.S. congressman, Larry McDonald
Japan Air Lines Flight 123 carrying 524 people crashed on August 12 1985 while on a flight from Tokyo to Osaka killing 520 of the people on board. This is the worst plane crash involving only one plane.
In 1986 the Chernobyl disaster, a large-scale nuclear meltdown in the Ukrainian SSR, Soviet Union, spread a large amount of radioactive material across Europe, killing 47 people, dooming countless others to future radiation-related cancer, and causing the displacement of 300,000 people.
In 1986, the Challenger disaster, the NASA Space Shuttle Challenger disintegrates after launch, killing all of the crew onboard. This is the first disaster involving the destruction of a NASA space shuttle. A faulty o-ring was the cause of the accident.
In 1989 the Exxon Valdez oil spill occurred in Alaska. Although not among the largest oil spills, its remote and sensitive location made it one of the most devastating ecological disasters ever.

[edit] External links

Memories of the toys, games, TV, movies and music of the 1980s
The UK in the 1980s
australia in the 1980s
80s Culture, Fashion, Movies, TV, and Music
80s Nostalgia - a nostalgic look back at our favourite decade.


[edit] References


^ "The Next Hundred Years", George Friedman, 2009, pg 4
^ "The Next Hundred Years", George Friedman, 2009, pg 45





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1980s"
Categories: 1980sHidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from May 2007 | NPOV disputes from May 2008 | Articles that may contain original research since June 2007 | Articles with limited geographic scope 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Asturianu
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Føroyskt
Français
Gaeilge
Gàidhlig
贛語
한국어
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ქართული
Қазақша
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
Māori
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
O'zbek
Polski
Português
Ripoarisch
Română
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
Tatarça/Татарча
Türkçe
Українська
Tiếng Việt
Walon
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 03:35.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
