











Chile - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Chile";
		var wgTitle = "Chile";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "5489";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282008250;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Chile

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Chile (disambiguation).





This article may be too long to comfortably read and navigate. Please consider splitting content into sub-articles and using this article for a summary of the key points of the subject. (April 2009)







Republic of Chile
República de Chile  (Spanish)










Flag
Coat of arms





Motto: Por la razón o la fuerza
"By right or might" (Spanish)[1]


Anthem: Himno Nacional de Chile (Spanish)










Capital
(and largest city)
Santiago1
33°26′S 70°40′W﻿ / ﻿33.433°S 70.667°W﻿ / -33.433; -70.667


Official languages
Spanish


Ethnic groups 
65% Castizo, 30% White, 5% Amerindian[2]


Demonym
Chilean


Government
Representative democracy


 - 
President
Michelle Bachelet


Independence
from Spain 


 - 
First National
Government Junta

September 18, 1810 


 - 
Declared
February 12, 1818 


 - 
Recognized
April 25, 1844 


 - 
Current constitution

September 11, 1980 


Area


 - 
Total
756,950 km2 (38th)
292,183 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
1.07²


Population


 - 
June 2009 estimate
16,928,873 (60th)


 - 
2002 census
15,116,435 


 - 
Density
22/km2 (194th)
57/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2008 estimate


 - 
Total
$246.482 billion[3] 


 - 
Per capita
$14,688[3] (59th)


GDP (nominal)
2008 estimate


 - 
Total
$181.464 billion[3] (45st)


 - 
Per capita
$10,813[3] (53rd)


Gini (2006)
54[4] (high) 


HDI (2006)
▲ 0.874 (high) (40th)


Currency
Peso (CLP)


Time zone
n/a (UTC-4)


 - 
Summer (DST)
n/a (UTC-3)


Internet TLD
.cl


Calling code
56


1
The legislative body operates in Valparaíso.


2
Includes Easter Island and Isla Sala y Gómez; does not include 1,250,000 square kilometres (480,000 sq mi) of territory claimed in Antarctica.


Chile, officially the Republic of Chile (Spanish:  República de Chile), is a country in South America occupying a long and narrow coastal strip wedged between the Andes mountains and the Pacific Ocean. It borders Peru to the north, Bolivia to the northeast, Argentina to the east, and the Drake Passage at the country's southernmost tip. It is one of only two countries in South America that does not have a border with Brazil. The Pacific forms the country's entire western border, with a coastline that stretches over 6,435 kilometres.[5] Chilean territory extends to the Pacific Ocean which includes the overseas territories of Juan Fernández Islands, the Salas y Gómez islands, the Desventuradas Islands and Easter Island located in Polynesia. Chile claims 1,250,000 square kilometres (480,000 sq mi) of territory in Antarctica.
Chile's unusual, ribbon-like shape — 4,300 kilometres (2,700 mi) long and on average 175 kilometres (109 mi) wide — has given it a varied climate, ranging from the world's driest desert — the Atacama — in the north, through a Mediterranean climate in the centre, to a snow-prone Alpine climate in the south, with glaciers, fjords and lakes.[6] The northern Chilean desert contains great mineral wealth, principally copper. The relatively small central area dominates the country in terms of population and agricultural resources. This area also is the cultural and political center from which Chile expanded in the late 19th century, when it incorporated its northern and southern regions. Southern Chile is rich in forests and grazing lands and features a string of volcanoes and lakes. The southern coast is a labyrinth of fjords, inlets, canals, twisting peninsulas, and islands. The Andes Mountains are located on the eastern border.[7]
Prior to the coming of the Spanish in the 16th century, northern Chile was under Inca rule while the indigenous Araucanians inhabited central and southern Chile. Although Chile declared its independence in 1810, decisive victory over the Spanish was not achieved until 1818. In the War of the Pacific (1879-83), Chile defeated Peru and Bolivia and won its present northern regions. It was not until the 1880s that the Araucanian Indians were completely subjugated.[5] The country, which had been relatively free of the coups and arbitrary governments that blighted the South American continent, endured a 17 year military dictatorship (1973-1990), one of the bloodiest in 20th-century Latin America that left more than 3,000 people dead and missing.[6]
Currently, Chile is one of South America's most stable and prosperous nations.[6] Within the greater Latin American context it leads in terms of human development, gross domestic product per capita (at market prices[8] and purchasing power parity[9]), competitiveness, quality of life, political stability, globalization, economic freedom, low perception of corruption and comparatively low poverty rates.[10] It also ranks high regionally in freedom of the press and democratic development. It has a high income inequality, as measured by the Gini index.[4]




Contents


1 Etymology
2 History
3 Geography

3.1 Administrative division
3.2 Climate
3.3 Time zones


4 Economy

4.1 Foreign trade
4.2 Finance


5 Demographics

5.1 Racial and ethnic structure
5.2 Indigenous communities
5.3 Immigration
5.4 Religion
5.5 Languages

5.5.1 Spanish
5.5.2 Indigenous languages




6 Government and politics

6.1 Defense

6.1.1 Army
6.1.2 Navy
6.1.3 Air Force
6.1.4 Carabineros


6.2 Foreign relations


7 Culture

7.1 Music and dance
7.2 Literature
7.3 Cuisine
7.4 Sports


8 Tourism
9 National symbols
10 International rankings
11 See also
12 Notes and references
13 Bibliography
14 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Etymology
There are various theories about the origin of the word Chile. According to a theory proposed by 18th century Spanish chronicler Diego de Rosales,[11] the Incas of Peru called the valley of the Aconcagua "Chili" by corruption of the name of a Picunche tribal chief ("cacique") called Tili, who ruled the area at the time of the Incan conquest in the 15th century.[12][13] Another theory points to the similarity of the valley of the Aconcagua with that of the Casma Valley in Peru, where there was a town and valley named Chili.[13] Other theories say Chile may derive its name from the indigenous Mapuche word chilli, which may mean "where the land ends,"[14] "the deepest point of the Earth,"[15] or "sea gulls;"[16] or from the Quechua chin, "cold", or the Aymara tchili, meaning "snow".[17][18] Another meaning attributed to chilli is the onomatopoeic cheele-cheele—the Mapuche imitation of a bird call.[14] The Spanish conquistadors heard about this name from the Incas, and the few survivors of Diego de Almagro's first Spanish expedition south from Peru in 1535-36 called themselves the "men of Chilli."[14] Ultimately, Almagro is credited with the universalization of the name Chile, after naming the Mapocho valley as such.[13]

History
Main article: History of Chile




The Mapuche were the original inhabitants of central and southern Chile.


About 10,000 years ago, migrating Native Americans settled in fertile valleys and coastal areas of what is present day Chile. Example settlement sites from the very early human habitation are Cueva del Milodon and the Pali Aike Crater's lava tube.[19] The Incas briefly extended their empire into what is now northern Chile, but the Mapuche successfully resisted many attempts by the Inca Empire to subjugate them, despite their lack of state organization.[20] They fought against the Sapa Inca Tupac Yupanqui and his army. The result of the bloody three-day confrontation known as the Battle of the Maule was that the Inca conquest of the territories of Chile ended at the Maule river.[21]
In 1520, while attempting to circumnavigate the earth, Ferdinand Magellan discovered the southern passage now named after him, the Strait of Magellan. The next Europeans to reach Chile were Diego de Almagro and his band of Spanish conquistadors, who came from Peru in 1535 seeking gold. The Spanish encountered hundreds of thousands of Native Americans from various cultures in the area that modern Chile now occupies. These cultures supported themselves principally through slash-and-burn agriculture and hunting. The conquest of Chile began in earnest in 1540 and was carried out by Pedro de Valdivia, one of Francisco Pizarro's lieutenants, who founded the city of Santiago on February 12, 1541. Although the Spanish did not find the extensive gold and silver they sought, they recognized the agricultural potential of Chile's central valley, and Chile became part of the Viceroyalty of Peru.




Pedro de Valdivia.


Conquest of the land took place only gradually, and the Europeans suffered repeated setbacks at the hands of the local population. A massive Mapuche insurrection that began in 1553 resulted in Valdivia's death and the destruction of many of the colony's principal settlements. Subsequent major insurrections took place in 1598 and in 1655. Each time the Mapuche and other native groups revolted, the southern border of the colony was driven northward. The abolition of slavery in 1683 defused tensions on the frontier between the colony and the Mapuche land to the south, which permitted increased trade between colonists and the Mapuche.
Cut off to the north by desert, to the south by the Mapuche (or Araucanians), to the east by the Andes Mountains, and to the west by the ocean, Chile became one of the most centralized, homogeneous colonies in Spanish America. Serving as a sort of frontier garrison, the colony found itself with the mission of forestalling encroachment by Araucanians and by Spain's European enemies, especially the British and the Dutch. In addition to the Araucanians, buccaneers and English adventurers menaced the colony, as was shown by Sir Francis Drake's 1578 raid on Valparaíso, the principal port. Because Chile hosted one of the largest standing armies in the Americas, it was one of the most militarized of the Spanish possessions, as well as a drain on the treasury of Peru.[14]
The drive for independence from Spain was precipitated by usurpation of the Spanish throne by Napoleon's brother Joseph in 1808. A national junta in the name of Ferdinand—heir to the deposed king—was formed on September 18, 1810. The junta proclaimed Chile an autonomous republic within the Spanish monarchy. A movement for total independence soon won a wide following. Spanish attempts to re-impose arbitrary rule during what was called the "Reconquista" led to a prolonged struggle.




Bernardo O'Higgins.


Intermittent warfare continued until 1817, when an army led by Bernardo O'Higgins, Chile's most renowned patriot, and José de San Martín, hero of the Argentine War of Independence, crossed the Andes into Chile and defeated the royalists. On February 12, 1818, Chile was proclaimed an independent republic under O'Higgins' leadership. The political revolt brought little social change, however, and 19th century Chilean society preserved the essence of the stratified colonial social structure, which was greatly influenced by family politics and the Roman Catholic Church. A strong presidency eventually emerged, but wealthy landowners remained extremely powerful.




War of the Pacific: The Battle of Iquique on May 21, 1879.


Toward the end of the nineteenth century, the government in Santiago consolidated its position in the south by ruthlessly suppressing the Mapuche during the Occupation of Araucanía. In 1881, it signed a treaty with Argentina confirming Chilean sovereignty over the Strait of Magellan. As a result of the War of the Pacific with Peru and Bolivia (1879–83), Chile expanded its territory northward by almost one-third, eliminating Bolivia's access to the Pacific, and acquired valuable nitrate deposits, the exploitation of which led to an era of national affluence. The Chilean Civil War in 1891 brought about a redistribution of power between the President and Congress, and Chile established a parliamentary style democracy. However, the Civil War had also been a contest between those who favored the development of local industries and powerful Chilean banking interests, particularly the House of Edwards who had strong ties to foreign investors. Hence the Chilean economy partially degenerated into a system protecting the interests of a ruling oligarchy. By the 1920s, the emerging middle and working classes were powerful enough to elect a reformist president, Arturo Alessandri Palma, whose program was frustrated by a conservative congress. Alessandri Palma's reformist tendencies were partly tempered later by an admiration for some elements of Benito Mussolini's Italian Corporate State. In the 1920s, Marxist groups with strong popular support arose.




Diego Portales (1793-1837), Founder of the Chilean State and creator of the Constitution of 1833.


A military coup led by General Luis Altamirano in 1924 set off a period of great political instability that lasted until 1932. The longest lasting of the ten governments between those years was that of General Carlos Ibáñez del Campo, who briefly held power in 1925 and then again between 1927 and 1931 in what was a de facto dictatorship, although not really comparable in harshness or corruption to the type of military dictatorship that has often bedeviled the rest of Latin America, and certainly not comparable to the violent and repressive regime of Augusto Pinochet decades later. By relinquishing power to a democratically elected successor, Ibáñez del Campo retained the respect of a large enough segment of the population to remain a viable politician for more than thirty years, in spite of the vague and shifting nature of his ideology. When constitutional rule was restored in 1932, a strong middle-class party, the Radicals, emerged. It became the key force in coalition governments for the next 20 years. During the period of Radical Party dominance (1932–52), the state increased its role in the economy. In 1952, voters returned Ibáñez del Campo to office for another six years. Jorge Alessandri succeeded Ibáñez del Campo in 1958, bringing Chilean conservatism back into power democratically for another term.
The 1964 presidential election of Christian Democrat Eduardo Frei Montalva by an absolute majority initiated a period of major reform. Under the slogan "Revolution in Liberty", the Frei administration embarked on far-reaching social and economic programs, particularly in education, housing, and agrarian reform, including rural unionization of agricultural workers. By 1967, however, Frei encountered increasing opposition from leftists, who charged that his reforms were inadequate, and from conservatives, who found them excessive. At the end of his term, Frei had accomplished many noteworthy objectives, but he had not fully achieved his party's ambitious goals.
In 1970, Senator Salvador Allende Gossens won a plurality of votes in a three-way contest. He was a Marxist physician and member of Chile's Socialist Party, who headed the "Popular Unity" (UP or "Unidad Popular") coalition of the Socialist, Communist, Radical, and Social-Democratic Parties, along with dissident Christian Democrats, the Popular Unitary Action Movement (MAPU), and the Independent Popular Action. Despite pressure from the government of the United States, the Chilean Congress, keeping with tradition, conducted a runoff vote between the leading candidates, Allende and former president Jorge Alessandri and chose Allende by a vote of 153 to 35. Frei refused to form an alliance with Alessandri to oppose Allende, on the grounds that the Christian Democrats were a workers party and could not make common cause with the oligarchs.
Allende's program included advancement of workers' interests; implementation of agrarian reform; reorganization of the national economy into socialized, mixed, and private sectors; a foreign policy of "international solidarity" and national independence; and a new institutional order (the "people's state" or "poder popular"), including the institution of a unicameral congress. The Popular Unity platform also called for nationalization of foreign (U.S.) ownership of Chile's major copper mines.
An economic depression that began in 1967 peaked in 1970, exacerbated by capital flight, plummeting private investment, and withdrawal of bank deposits by those opposed to Allende's socialist program. Production fell and unemployment rose. Allende adopted measures including price freezes, wage increases, and tax reforms, which had the effect of increasing consumer spending and redistributing income downward. Joint public-private public works projects helped reduce unemployment. Much of the banking sector was nationalized. Many enterprises within the copper, coal, iron, nitrate, and steel industries were expropriated, nationalized, or subjected to state intervention. Industrial output increased sharply and unemployment fell during the Allende administration's first year.
Other reforms undertaken during the early Allende period included redistributing millions of hectares of land to landless agricultural workers as part of the agrarian reform program, giving the armed forces an overdue pay increase, and providing free milk to children. The Indian Peoples Development Corporation and the Mapuche Vocational Institute were founded to address the needs of Chile's indigenous population.
The nationalization of U.S. and other foreign-owned companies led to increased tensions with the United States. As a result, the Richard Nixon administration organized and inserted secret operatives in Chile, in order to quickly destabilize Allende’s government.[22][23][24][25] In addition, international financial pressure restricted economic credit to Chile.
Simultaneously, the CIA funded opposition media, politicians, and organizations, helping to accelerate a campaign of domestic destabilization. By 1972, the economic progress of Allende's first year had been reversed, and the economy was in crisis. Political polarization increased, and large mobilizations of both pro- and anti-government groups became frequent, often leading to clashes.




The Controversial General Augusto Pinochet Ugarte


By early 1973, inflation was out of control. The crippled economy was further battered by prolonged and sometimes simultaneous strikes by physicians, teachers, students, truck owners, copper workers, and the small business class. A military coup overthrew Allende on September 11, 1973. As the armed forces bombarded the presidential palace (Palacio de La Moneda), Allende reportedly committed suicide.[26][27] A military government, led by General Augusto Pinochet Ugarte, took over control of the country. The first years of the regime were marked by serious human rights violations. On October 1973, at least 72 people were murdered by the Caravan of Death.[28] At least a thousand people were executed during the first six months of Pinochet in office, and at least two thousand more were killed during the next sixteen years, as reported by the Rettig Report. Some 30,000 were forced to flee the country, and tens of thousands of people were detained and tortured, as investigated by the 2004 Valech Commission. A new Constitution was approved by a highly irregular and undemocratic plebiscite characterized by the absence of registration lists, on September 11, 1980, and General Pinochet became president of the republic for an 8-year term.
In the late 1980s, the regime gradually permitted greater freedom of assembly, speech, and association, to include trade union and limited political activity. The right-wing military government pursued free market economic policies. During Pinochet's nearly 17 years in power, Chile moved away from state involvement, toward a largely free market economy that saw an increase in domestic and foreign private investment, although the copper industry and other important mineral resources were not returned to foreign ownership. In a plebiscite on October 5, 1988, General Pinochet was denied a second 8-year term as president (56% against 44%). Chileans elected a new president and the majority of members of a two-chamber congress on December 14, 1989. Christian Democrat Patricio Aylwin, the candidate of a coalition of 17 political parties called the Concertación, received an absolute majority of votes (55%).[29] President Aylwin served from 1990 to 1994, in what was considered a transition period.
In December 1993, Christian Democrat Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle, the son of previous president Eduardo Frei Montalva, led the Concertación coalition to victory with an absolute majority of votes (58%).[30] Frei Ruiz-Tagle was succeeded in 2000 by Socialist Ricardo Lagos, who won the presidency in an unprecedented runoff election against Joaquín Lavín of the rightist Alliance for Chile.[31] In January 2006 Chileans elected their first woman president, Michelle Bachelet Jeria, of the Socialist Party.[32] She was sworn in on March 11, 2006, extending the Concertación coalition governance for another four years.[33]

Geography
Main article: Geography of Chile




Parinacota Volcano in northern Chile.






Elqui Valley in north-central Chile.






Conguillío National Park in south-central Chile.






Grey Glacier in southern Chile.


A long and narrow coastal Southern Cone country on the west side of the Andes Mountains, Chile stretches over 4,630 kilometres (2,880 mi) north to south, but only 430 kilometres (265 mi) at its widest point east to west. This encompasses a remarkable variety of landscapes. It contains 756,950 square kilometres (292,260 sq mi) of land area.
The northern Atacama Desert contains great mineral wealth, primarily copper and nitrates. The relatively small Central Valley, which includes Santiago, dominates the country in terms of population and agricultural resources. This area also is the historical center from which Chile expanded in the late nineteenth century, when it integrated the northern and southern regions. Southern Chile is rich in forests, grazing lands, and features a string of volcanoes and lakes. The southern coast is a labyrinth of fjords, inlets, canals, twisting peninsulas, and islands. The Andes Mountains are located on the eastern border. Chile is the longest north-south country in the world, and also claims 1,250,000 km2 (480,000 sq mi) of Antarctica as part of its territory. However, this latter claim is suspended under the terms of the Antarctic Treaty, of which Chile is signatory.[34]
Chile controls Easter Island and Sala y Gómez Island, the easternmost islands of Polynesia, which it incorporated to its territory in 1888, and Robinson Crusoe Island, more than 600 kilometres (370 mi) from the mainland, in the Juan Fernández archipelago. Easter Island is nowadays a province of Chile. Also controlled but only temporally inhabited (by some local fishermen) are the small islands of Sala y Gómez, San Ambrosio and San Felix. These islands are notable because they extend Chile's claim to territorial waters out from its coast into the Pacific. [35] <--above reference covers entire paragraph-->

Administrative division
Main articles: Regions of Chile, Provinces of Chile, and Communes of Chile
Chile is divided into 15 regions, each of which is headed by an intendant appointed by the President of Chile. Every region is further divided into provinces, with a provincial governor also appointed by the president. Finally each province is divided into communes[36] which are administered by municipalities, each with its own mayor and councilmen elected by their inhabitants for four years.
Each region is designated by a name and a Roman numeral, assigned from north to south. The only exception is the region housing the nation's capital, which is designated RM, that stands for Región Metropolitana (Metropolitan Region).
Two new regions, Arica and Parinacota in the north, and Los Ríos in the south, were created in 2006, and became operative in October 2007. In the numbering scheme, Region XIII was skipped; Arica and Parinacota was designated Region XV, while Los Ríos was designated Region XIV.









Key
Name
Spanish
Capital


XV
Arica and Parinacota
Región de Arica y Parinacota
Arica


I
Tarapacá
Región de Tarapacá
Iquique


II
Antofagasta
Región de Antofagasta
Antofagasta


III
Atacama
Región de Atacama
Copiapó


IV
Coquimbo
Región de Coquimbo
La Serena


V
Valparaíso
Región de Valparaíso
Valparaiso


VI
O'Higgins
Región del Libertador General Bernardo O'Higgins
Rancagua


VII
Maule
Región del Maule
Talca


VIII
Biobío
Región del Biobío
Concepción


IX
Araucanía
Región de la Araucanía
Temuco


XIV
Los Ríos
Región de Los Ríos
Valdivia


X
Los Lagos
Región de Los Lagos
Puerto Montt


XI
Aisén
Región Aisén del General Carlos Ibáñez del Campo
Coihaique


XII
Magallanes
Región de Magallanes y de la Antártica Chilena
Punta Arenas


RM
Santiago
Región Metropolitana de Santiago
Santiago






Climate
Main article: Climate of Chile




A Glacier in southern Chile.


The climate of Chile comprises a wide range of weather conditions across a large geographic scale, extending across 38 degrees in latitude, making generalisations difficult. According to the Köppen system, Chile within its borders hosts at least seven major climatic subtypes, ranging from desert in the north, to alpine tundra and glaciers in the east and south east, humid subtropical in Easter Island, Oceanic in the south and mediterranean climate in central Chile. There are four seasons in most of the country: summer (December to February), autumn (March to May), winter (June to August), and spring (September to November).

Time zones
Because of the distance between the mainland and Easter Island, Chile uses 4 different UTC offsets:

The mainland uses UTC-4, and in summer as daylight saving time UTC-3.
Easter Island uses UTC-6, and in summer as daylight saving time UTC-5.


Economy
Main article: Economy of Chile




Chilean notes currently in circulation.


After a decade of impressive growth rates, Chile began to experience a moderate economic downturn in 1999, brought on by unfavorable global economic conditions related to the Asian financial crisis, which began in 1997. The economy remained sluggish until 2003, when it began to show clear signs of recovery, achieving 4.0% real GDP growth.[37] The Chilean economy finished 2004 with growth of 6.0%. Real GDP growth reached 5.7% in 2005 before falling back to 4.0% growth in 2006. Higher energy prices as well as lagging consumer demand were drags on the economy in 2006. Higher Chilean Government spending and favorable external conditions (including record copper prices for much of 2006) were not enough to offset these drags. For the first time in many years, Chilean economic growth in 2006 was among the weakest in Latin America. GDP expanded 5.1% in 2007.[7]




Chilean (blue) and average South American (orange) GDP per Capita (1945-2003).


Chile has pursued generally sound economic policies for nearly three decades.[38] The 1973-90 military government sold many state-owned companies, and the three democratic governments since 1990 have continued privatization, though at a slower pace. The government's role in the economy is mostly limited to regulation, although the state continues to operate copper giant CODELCO and a few other enterprises (there is one state-run bank). Chile is strongly committed to free trade and has welcomed large amounts of foreign investment. Chile has signed free trade agreements (FTAs) with a whole network of countries, including an FTA with the United States, which was signed in 2003 and implemented in January 2004.[39] Over the last several years, Chile has signed FTAs with the European Union, South Korea, New Zealand, Singapore, Brunei, China, and Japan. It reached a partial trade agreement with India in 2005 and began negotiations for a full-fledged FTA with India in 2006. Chile conducted trade negotiations in 2007 with Australia, Malaysia, and Thailand, as well as with China to expand an existing agreement beyond just trade in goods. Chile concluded FTA negotiations with Australia and the expanded agreement with China in 2008. The members of the P4 (Chile, Singapore, New Zealand, and Brunei) also plan to conclude a chapter on finance and investment in 2008.[7] The economic international organization the OECD agreed to invite Chile to be among four countries to open discussions in becoming an official member.[40]
High domestic savings and investment rates helped propel Chile's economy to average growth rates of 8% during the 1990s. The privatized national pension system (AFP) has encouraged domestic investment and contributed to an estimated total domestic savings rate of approximately 21% of GDP.[41] However, the AFP is not without its critics, who cite low participation rates (only 55% of the working population is covered), with groups such as the self-employed outside the system. There has also been criticism of the inefficiency and high costs because of a lack of competition among pension funds. Critics cite loopholes in the use of pension savings through lump sum withdraws for the purchase of a second home or payment of university fees as fundamental weaknesses of the AFP. The Bachelet administration plans substantial reform, but not an overhaul, of the AFP during the next several years.[7]




Chile GDP growth since 1961.


Unemployment hovered in the 8%-10% range after the start of the economic slowdown in 1999, above the 7% average for the 1990s. Unemployment finally dipped to 7.8% for 2006, and has kept falling in 2007, averaging 6.8% monthly (up to August).[42] Wages have risen faster than inflation as a result of higher productivity, boosting national living standards. The percentage of Chileans with household incomes below the poverty line—defined as twice the cost of satisfying a person's minimal nutritional needs—fell from 45.1% in 1987 to 13.7% in 2006, according to government polls.[43] Critics in Chile, however, argue true poverty figures are considerably higher than those officially published, because the government uses an outdated 1987 household budget poll, updated every 10 years. According to these critics, using the 1997 household budget data, the poverty rate rises to 29%.[44] Using the relative yardstick favoured in many European countries, 27% of Chileans would be poor, according to Juan Carlos Feres of the ECLAC.[45] Despite enjoying a comparatively higher GDP and more robust economy compared to most other countries of Latin America, Chile also suffers from one of the most uneven distributions of wealth in the world, ahead only of Brazil in the Latin American region and lagging behind even of most developing sub-Saharan African nations. Chile's top 10 richest percentile possesses 47 percent of the country's wealth.[46] In relation to income distribution, some 6.2% of the country populates the upper economic income bracket, 15% the middle bracket, 21% the lower middle, 38% the lower bracket, and 20% the extreme poor.




Airbus A340 of Chile's LAN Airlines.


Chile's independent Central Bank pursues an inflation target of between 2% and 4%. Inflation has not exceeded 5% since 1998. Chile registered an inflation rate of 3.2% in 2006. The Chilean peso's rapid appreciation against the U.S. dollar in recent years has helped dampen inflation. Most wage settlements and loans are indexed, reducing inflation's volatility. Under the compulsory private pension system, most formal sector employees pay 10% of their salaries into privately managed funds.[7]
Total foreign direct investment (FDI) was only $3.4 billion in 2006, up 52% from a poor performance in 2005. However, 80% of FDI continues to go to only four sectors: electricity, gas, water and mining. Much of the jump in FDI in 2006 was also the result of acquisitions and mergers and has done little to create new employment in Chile. The Chilean Government has formed a Council on Innovation and Competition, which is tasked with identifying new sectors and industries to promote. It is hoped that this, combined with some tax reforms to encourage domestic and foreign investment in research and development, will bring in additional FDI and to new parts of the economy. As of 2006, Chile invested only 0.6% of its annual GDP in research and development (R&D). Even then, two-thirds of that was government spending. The fact that domestic and foreign companies spend almost nothing on R&D does not bode well for the Government of Chile's efforts to develop innovative, knowledge-based sectors.[neutrality disputed] Beyond its general economic and political stability, the government also has encouraged the use of Chile as an "investment platform" for multinational corporations planning to operate in the region, but this will have limited value given the developing business climate in Chile itself. Chile's approach to foreign direct investment is codified in the country's Foreign Investment Law, which gives foreign investors the same treatment as Chileans. Registration is simple and transparent, and foreign investors are guaranteed access to the official foreign exchange market to repatriate their profits and capital.[7]
Faced with an international economic downturn the government announced a $4 billion economic stimulus plan to spur employment and growth despite the global financial crisis, aiming for an expansion of between 2 percent and 3 percent of GDP for 2009. Nonetheless, economic analysts differ from the government stimates and forecast economic growth at a median of 1.5 percent.[47]

Foreign trade




Chile is responsible for over a third of world's copper production.


2006 was a record year for Chilean trade. Total trade registered a 31% increase over 2005. During 2006, exports of goods and services totaled US$58 billion, an increase of 41%. This figure was somewhat distorted by the skyrocketing price of copper. In 2006, copper exports reached a historical high of US$33.3 billion. Imports totaled US$35 billion, an increase of 17% compared to the previous year. Chile thus recorded a positive trade balance of US$23 billion in 2006.[7]
The main destinations for Chilean exports were the Americas (US$39 billion), Asia (US$27.8 billion) and Europe (US$22.2 billion). Seen as shares of Chile's export markets, 42% of exports went to the Americas, 30% to Asia and 24% to Europe. Within Chile's diversified network of trade relationships, its most important partner remained the United States. Total trade with the U.S. was US$14.8 billion in 2006. Since the U.S.-Chile Free Trade Agreement went into effect on January 1, 2004, U.S.-Chilean trade has increased by 154%. Internal Government of Chile figures show that even when factoring out inflation and the recent high price of copper, bilateral trade between the U.S. and Chile has grown over 60% since then.[7]
Total trade with Europe also grew in 2006, expanding by 42%. The Netherlands and Italy were Chile's main European trading partners. Total trade with Asia also grew significantly at nearly 31%. Trade with Korea and Japan grew significantly, but China remained Chile's most important trading partner in Asia. Chile's total trade with China reached U.S. $8.8 billion in 2006, representing nearly 66% of the value of its trade relationship with Asia.[7]




Chile is the world's fifth largest exporter of wine.[48]


The growth of exports in 2006 was mainly caused by a strong increase in sales to the United States, the Netherlands, and Japan. These three markets alone accounted for an additional US$5.5 billion worth of Chilean exports. Chilean exports to the United States totaled US$9.3 billion, representing a 37.7% increase compared to 2005 (US$6.7 billion). Exports to the European Union were US$15.4 billion, a 63.7% increased compared to 2005 (US$9.4 billion). Exports to Asia increased from US$15.2 billion in 2005 to US$19.7 billion in 2006, a 29.9% increase.[7]
During 2006, Chile imported US$26 billion from the Americas, representing 54% of total imports, followed by Asia at 22%, and Europe at 16%. Mercosur members were the main suppliers of imports to Chile at US$9.1 billion, followed by the United States with US$5.5 billion and the European Union with US$5.2 billion. From Asia, China was the most important exporter to Chile, with goods valued at US$3.6 billion. Year-on-year growth in imports was especially strong from a number of countries—Ecuador (123.9%), Thailand (72.1%), Korea (52.6%), and China (36.9%).[7]
Chile's overall trade profile has traditionally been dependent upon copper exports. The state-owned firm CODELCO is the world's largest copper-producing company, with recorded copper reserves of 200 years. Chile has made an effort to expand nontraditional exports. The most important non-mineral exports are forestry and wood products, fresh fruit and processed food, fishmeal and seafood, and wine.[7]
Successive Chilean governments have actively pursued trade-liberalizing agreements. During the 1990s, Chile signed free trade agreements (FTA) with Canada, Mexico, and Central America. Chile also concluded preferential trade agreements with Venezuela, Colombia, and Ecuador. An association agreement with Mercosur—Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay—went into effect in October 1996. Continuing its export-oriented development strategy, Chile completed landmark free trade agreements in 2002 with the European Union and South Korea. Chile, as a member of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) organization, is seeking to boost commercial ties to Asian markets. To that end, it has signed trade agreements in recent years with New Zealand, Singapore, Brunei, India, China, and most recently Japan. In 2007, Chile held trade negotiations with Australia, Thailand, Malaysia, and China. In 2008, Chile hopes to conclude an FTA with Australia, and finalize an expanded agreement (covering trade in services and investment) with China. The P4 (Chile, Singapore, New Zealand, and Brunei) also plan to expand ties through adding a finance and investment chapter to the existing P4 agreement. Chile's trade talks with Malaysia and Thailand are also scheduled to continue in 2008.[7]




San Antonio port in Chile.


After two years of negotiations, the United States and Chile signed an agreement in June 2003 that will lead to completely duty-free bilateral trade within 12 years. The U.S.-Chile FTA entered into force January 1, 2004, following approval by the U.S. and Chilean congresses. The bilateral FTA has inaugurated greatly expanded U.S.-Chilean trade ties, with total bilateral trade jumping by 154% during the FTA's first three years.[7]
Chile unilaterally lowered its across-the-board import tariff for all countries with which it does not have a trade agreement to 6% in 2003. Higher effective tariffs are charged only on imports of wheat, wheat flour, and sugar as a result of a system of import price bands. The price bands were ruled inconsistent with Chile's World Trade Organization (WTO) obligations in 2002, and the government has introduced legislation to modify them. Under the terms of the U.S.-Chile FTA, the price bands will be completely phased out for U.S. imports of wheat, wheat flour, and sugar within 12 years.[7]
Chile is a strong proponent of pressing ahead on negotiations for a Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) and is active in the WTO's Doha round of negotiations, principally through its membership in the G-20 and Cairns Group.[7]

Finance




Skyline of Santiago's Financial District.


Chile's financial sector has grown quickly in recent years, with a banking reform law approved in 1997 that broadened the scope of permissible foreign activity for Chilean banks. The Chilean Government implemented a further liberalization of capital markets in 2001, and there is further pending legislation proposing further liberalization. Over the last ten years, Chileans have enjoyed the introduction of new financial tools such as home equity loans, currency futures and options, factoring, leasing, and debit cards. The introduction of these new products has also been accompanied by an increased use of traditional instruments such as loans and credit cards. Chile's private pension system, with assets worth roughly $70 billion at the end of 2006, has been an important source of investment capital for the capital market. However, by 2009, it has been reported that $21 billion had been lost from the pension system to the global financial crisis. [49] Chile maintains one of the best credit ratings (S&P A+) in Latin America.[50]There are three main ways for Chilean firms to raise funds abroad: bank loans, issuance of bonds, and the selling of stocks on U.S. markets through American Depository Receipts (ADRs). Nearly all of the funds raised through these means go to finance domestic Chilean investment. The government is required by law to run a fiscal surplus of at least 1% of GDP. In 2006, the Government of Chile ran a surplus of $11.3 billion, equal to almost 8% of GDP. The Government of Chile continues to pay down its foreign debt, with public debt only 3.9% of GDP at the end of 2006.[7]

Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Chile




A view of the capital Santiago.






Population of Chile from 1820, projected up to 2050.


Chile's 2002 census reported a population of 15,116,435. Its growth has been declining since 1990, because of a decreasing birth rate.[51] By 2050 the population is expected to reach approximately 20.2 million.[52] About 85% of the country's population lives in urban areas, with 40% living in Greater Santiago. The largest agglomerations according to the 2002 census are Greater Santiago with 5.4 million people, Greater Valparaíso with 804,000 and Greater Concepción with 666,000.

Racial and ethnic structure




Congregation of people in Chile


The Chilean population is approximately 30% white, with mestizos of predominantly white (castizos) ancestry further estimated at 65%.[53]
Another recent study estimates that the white population corresponds to about 8.8 millions or 52,7% of Chileans.[54] The White and Mestizo figures appear combined in some sources, so that Chile's population is classified as 95.4% white and white-amerindian by publications such as the World Factbook.[55][56]
The white segment, also consists mainly of Spanish descent, as well as Italian, Irish, French, German, English, Swiss or Croat ancestry, alone or combined among themselves. The mestizo segment, and derives from the racial mixture between colonial Spanish settlers (mainly Andalusians and Castilian) and indigenous tribes (mainly Picunches, Diaguitas and Mapuches). In that respect, Chile is relatively homogeneous, with the majority of the people sharing a common ethnic identity stemming from what is known locally as Chilenidad.
The Afro-Chilean population was negligible, reaching a high of 25,000 during the colonial period; their racial contribution is less than 1%. The current Native American population is small (see below) according to the censuses; their numbers are boosted when taking into consideration those that are associated to them either linguistically or socially.[57]
According to the Census 2002, 4.6% of the Chilean population was Indian, although most show varying degrees of miscegenation.[58]

Indigenous communities


Those belonging to recognised indigenous communities (2002)


Alacaluf
2,622
0.02%
Mapuche
604,349
4.00%


Atacameño
21,015
0.14%
Quechua
6,175
0.04%


Aymara
48,501
0.32%
Rapanui
4,647
0.03%


Colla
3,198
0.02%
Yámana
1,685
0.01%


The 1907 census reported 101,118 Araucanian Indians, or 3.1% of the total country population. Only those that practiced their native culture or spoke their native language were considered, irrespective of their "racial purity."[59]
At the 1992 census, a total of 10.33% of the total Chilean population surveyed declared themselves indigenous, irrespective of whether they currently practiced a native culture or spoke a native language; almost one million people (9.61% of Chileans) declared themselves Mapuche, 0.50% declared to be Aymara, and 0.23% reported as Rapanui.
At the 2002 census, only indigenous people that still practiced a native culture or spoke a native language were surveyed: 4.6% of the population (692,192 people) fit that description; of these, 87.3% declared themselves Mapuche.[60]although most show varying degrees of miscegenation.[58]

Immigration




German influence is visible in southern Chile: Puerto Varas Church.


Immigrants were important to the evolution of Chilean society and Chile as a nation. Basque families arrived from Spain and regions in the south of France. Who migrated to Chile in the 18th century vitalized the economy and joined the old Castilian aristocracy to become the political elite that still dominates the country.[61] Chileans of Basque descent are estimated at 10% (1,600,000) or as high as 27% (4,500,000) of the Chilean population.[62][63][64][65][66] Some non-Spanish European immigrants arrived in Chile mainly to the northern and southern extremities of the country during the 19th and 20th centuries, including English, Germans, Irish, Italians, French, Croatians, and former Yugoslavians.[67][68] The prevalence of non-Hispanic European surnames among the governing body of modern Chile are a testament to their disproportionate contribution and influence on the country. Also worth mentioning are the Croatians, were the most numerous Chile has an estimated 380,000 with the highest number of descendants of Croats.[69][70] and especially Palestinian communities, the latter being the largest colony of that people outside of the Arab world.[71][72][73]The volume of immigrants from neighboring countries to Chile during those same periods was of a similar value.[68]




Houses on the hills of Valparaíso.


After independence and during the republican era, English and Irish descendants between 350,000 to 420,000.[74], Italian, and French merchants established themselves in the growing cities of Chile and incidentally joined the political or economic elites of the country. In 1848 an important and sizable German immigration took place, laying the foundations of a present German-Chilean community. Sponsored by the Chilean government with aims of colonising the southern region. These Germans (which included German-speaking Swiss, Silesians, Alsatians and Austrians), markedly influenced the cultural composition of the southern of Chile. During the second half of the 19th century was exceptional. Small numbers of displaced eastern European Jews and Christian Syrians and Palestinians fleeing the Ottoman Empire arrived in Chile. Today they spearhead financial and small manufacturing operations.[75] Greeks have also immigrated to Chile and have formed a notable ethnic identity[76] .Greeks Estimated to be descendants from 90,000 to 120,000[77] Most of them live either in the Santiago area or in the Antofagasta area. Chile is one of the 5 countries with more descendants of Greeks in the world.[78]
European immigration, and to a lesser degree in the Middle East, produced during the second half of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries (large "waves" in America), after corresponding to the Atlantic coasts of the Southern Cone ( that is, Argentina, Uruguay and South Brazil), was the most significant Latin America is favored mainly by the intense traffic that is produced through extreme south of the country until the opening of the Panama Canal in 1920, although other numbers came from Argentina, across the Cordillera.
Currently, immigration from neighboring countries to Chile is greatest.[79] [80] Chile’s 2002 census counted 184,464 immigrants in the country, 26 percent of whom were from Argentina, 21 percent from Peru and 6 percent from Bolivia.[81] Emigration of Chileans has decreased during the last decade: It is estimated that 857,781 Chileans live abroad, 50.1% of those being in Argentina, 13.3% in the United States, 8.8% in Brazil, 4.9% in Sweden, and around 2% in Australia.[82][83]

Religion
Main article: Religion in Chile
According to the most recent census (2002), 70 percent of the population over age 14 identify as Roman Catholic and 15.1 percent as evangelical. In the census, the term "evangelical" referred to all non-Catholic Christian churches with the exception of the Orthodox Church (Greek, Persian, Serbian, Ukrainian, and Armenian), the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons), Seventh-day Adventists, and Jehovah's Witnesses. Approximately 90 percent of evangelicals are Pentecostal. Wesleyan, Lutheran, Reformed Evangelical, Presbyterian, Anglican, Episcopalian, Baptist, and Methodist churches are also present.[84]
The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and other laws and policies contribute to the generally free practice of religion. The law at all levels protects this right in full against abuse, either by governmental or private actors.[84]
Church and state are officially separate. The 1999 law on religion prohibits religious discrimination; however, the Catholic Church enjoys a privileged status and occasionally receives preferential treatment. Government officials attend Catholic events and also major Protestant and Jewish ceremonies.[84]
The Government observes Christmas, Good Friday, the Feast of the Virgin of Carmen, the Feast of Saints Peter and Paul, the Feast of the Assumption, All Saints' Day, and the Feast of the Immaculate Conception as national holidays.[84] The government has recently declared October 31st, a public national holiday, in honor of the Protestant churches of the country.[85][86]

Languages

Spanish
Main article: Chilean Spanish
The Spanish spoken in Chile is distinctively accented and quite unlike that of neighbouring South American countries because final syllables and 's' sounds are dropped, and some consonants have a soft pronunciation. Accent varies only very slightly from north to south; more noticeable are the small differences in accent based on social class or whether one lives in the city or the country. The fact that the Chilean population essentially was formed in a relatively small section of the center of the country and then migrated in modest numbers to the north and south helps explain this relative lack of differentiation, which is now maintained by the national reach of radio and especially of television. The media diffuse and homogenize colloquial expressions.[87]
German and Croatian is spoken in southern Chile.[88]
English language learning and teaching is popular among students, academics and professionals,[citation needed] with some English words being absorbed and appropriated into everyday Spanish speech.[89]

Indigenous languages
Main article: Languages of Chile
There are several indigenous languages spoken in Chile: Mapudungun, Quechua and Rapa Nui. After the Spanish invasion, Spanish took over as the lingua franca and the indigenous languages have become minority languages, with some now extinct or close to extinction.[90]

Government and politics
Main article: Politics of Chile




Palacio de La Moneda in downtown Santiago.


The Constitution of Chile was approved in a highly irregular national plebiscite in September 1980, under the military government of Augusto Pinochet. It entered into force in March 1981. After Pinochet's defeat in the 1988 plebiscite, the constitution was amended to ease provisions for future amendments to the Constitution. In September 2005, President Ricardo Lagos signed into law several constitutional amendments passed by Congress. These include eliminating the positions of appointed senators and senators for life, granting the President authority to remove the commanders-in-chief of the armed forces, and reducing the presidential term from six to four years.[91]
Chileans voted in the first round of presidential elections on December 11, 2005. None of the four presidential candidates won more than 50% of the vote. As a result, the top two vote-getters—center-left Concertación coalition's Michelle Bachelet and center-right Alianza coalition's Sebastián Piñera—competed in a run-off election on January 15, 2006, which Michelle Bachelet won. She was sworn in on March 11, 2006. This was Chile's fourth presidential election since the end of the Pinochet era. All four have been judged free and fair. The president is constitutionally barred from serving consecutive terms.
The Congress of Chile has a 38-seat Senate and a 120-member Chamber of Deputies. Senators serve for 8 years with staggered terms, while deputies are elected every 4 years. The current Senate has a 20-18 split in favor of pro-government senators. The last congressional elections were held on December 11, 2005, concurrently with the presidential election. The current lower house—the Chamber of Deputies—contains 63 members of the governing center-left coalition and 57 from the center-right opposition. The Congress is located in the port city of Valparaíso, about 140 kilometres (84 mi) west of the capital, Santiago.
Chile's congressional elections are governed by a binomial system that rewards large representations. Therefore, there are only two senate and two deputy seats apportioned to each electoral district, parties are forced to form wide coalitions and, historically, the two largest coalitions (Concertación and Alianza) split most of the seats in a district. Only if the leading coalition ticket out-polls the second place coalition by a margin of more than 2-to-1 does the winning coalition gain both seats. In the 2001 congressional elections, the conservative Independent Democratic Union surpassed the Christian Democrats for the first time to become the largest party in the lower house. In the 2005 parliamentary election, both leading parties, the Christian Democrats and the UDI lost representation in favor of their respective allies Socialist Party (which became the biggest party in the Concertación block) and National Renewal in the right-wing alliance. The Communist Party again failed to gain any seats in the election.
Chile's judiciary is independent and includes a court of appeal, a system of military courts, a constitutional tribunal, and the Supreme Court of Chile. In June 2005, Chile completed a nation-wide overhaul of its criminal justice system.[92] The reform has replaced inquisitorial proceedings with an adversarial system more similar to that of the United States.

Defense
Main article: Military of Chile
Chile's Armed Forces are subject to civilian control exercised by the president through the Minister of Defense. The president has the authority to remove the commanders-in-chief of the armed forces.[7]

Army
The commander in chief of the Chilean Army is General Oscar Izurieta Ferrer. The Chilean Army is 45,000 strong and is organized with an Army headquarters in Santiago, seven divisions throughout its territory, an Air Brigade in Rancagua, and a Special Forces Command in Colina. The Chilean Army is one of the most professional and technologically advanced armies in Latin America.[7]

Navy




Chilean frigate Almirante Blanco Encalada (FF-15) at Pearl Harbor, 2006.


Admiral Rodolfo Codina directs the 21,773-person Navy [93], including 2,500 Marines. Of the fleet of 29 surface vessels, only eight are operational major combatants (frigates). Those ships are based in Valparaiso. [94] The Navy operates its own aircraft for transport and patrol; there are no Navy fighter or bomber aircraft. The Navy also operates four submarines based in Talcahuano.[7] [95]

Air Force
Gen. Ricardo Ortega Perrier heads a force of 12,500. Air assets are distributed among five air brigades headquartered in Iquique, Antofagasta, Santiago, Puerto Montt, and Punta Arenas. The Air Force also operates an airbase on King George Island, Antarctica. The Air Force took delivery of the final 2 of 10 F-16s, all purchased from the U.S., in March 2007. Chile also took delivery in 2007 of a number of reconditioned Block 15 F-16s from the Netherlands, bringing to 18 the total of F-16s purchased from the Dutch.[7]

Carabineros
After the military coup in September 1973, the Chilean national police (Carabineros) were incorporated into the Defense Ministry. With the return of democratic government, the police were placed under the operational control of the Interior Ministry but remained under the nominal control of the Defense Ministry. Gen. Eduardo Gordon is the head of the national police force of 40,964[96] men and women who are responsible for law enforcement, traffic management, narcotics suppression, border control, and counter-terrorism throughout Chile.[7]

Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of Chile




President Michelle Bachelet saluting with world leaders at the inauguration ceremony in Valparaíso.


Since the early decades after independence, Chile has always had an active involvement in foreign affairs. In 1837 the country aggressively challenged the dominance of Peru's port of Callao for preeminence in the Pacific trade routes, defeating the short-lived alliance between Peru and Bolivia, the Peru-Bolivian Confederation (1836-39) in the War of the Confederation. The war dissolved the confederation while distributing power in the Pacific. A second international war, the War of the Pacific (1879-83), further increased Chile's regional role, while adding considerably to its territory.[14]
During the nineteenth century, Chile's commercial ties were primarily with Britain, a country that had a decisive influence on the organization of the navy. The French influenced Chile's legal and educational systems and had a decisive impact on Chile, through the architecture of the capital in the boom years at the turn of the century. German influence came from the organization and training of the army by Prussians.[14]
On June 26, 1945, Chile participated as a founding member of the United Nations being among 50 countries that signed the United Nations Charter in San Francisco, California.[97][98][99] With the military coup of 1973, Chile became isolated politically as a result of widespread human rights abuses.[14]
Since its return to democracy in 1990, Chile has been an active participant in the international political arena. Chile completed a 2-year non-permanent position on the UN Security Council in January 2005. Jose Miguel Insulza, a Chilean national, was elected Secretary General of the Organization of American States in May 2005. Chile is currently serving on the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Board of Governors, and the 2007-2008 chair of the board is Chile's ambassador to the IAEA, Milenko E. Skoknic. The country is an active member of the UN family of agencies and participates in UN peacekeeping activities. It is currently bidding for a seat on the UN Human Rights Council. Chile hosted the Defense Ministerial of the Americas in 2002 and the APEC summit and related meetings in 2004. It also hosted the Community of Democracies ministerial in April 2005 and the Ibero-American Summit in November 2007. An associate member of Mercosur and a full member of APEC, Chile has been an important actor on international economic issues and hemispheric free trade.[7]
The Chilean Government has diplomatic relations with most countries. It settled its territorial disputes with Argentina during the 1990s. Chile and Bolivia severed diplomatic ties in 1978 over Bolivia's desire to reacquire territory it lost to Chile in 1879-83 War of the Pacific. The two countries maintain consular relations and are represented at the Consul General level.[7]

Culture
Main articles: Culture of Chile, Music of Chile, and Cuisine of Chile




Gabriela Mistral, Nobel Prize for Literature (1945).






Pablo Neruda, Nobel Prize for Literature (1971).


During the period between early agricultural settlements and to the late pre-Hispanic period, northern Chile was a region of Andean culture that was influenced by altiplano traditions spreading to the coastal valleys of the north. While southern regions were areas of Mapuche cultural activities. Through the colonial period following the conquest, and during the early Republican period, the country's culture was dominated by the Spanish. Other European influences, primarily English, French, and German began in the 19th century and have continued to this day. German migrants influenced the Bavarian style rural architecture and cuisine in the south of Chile in cities such as Valdivia, Frutillar, Puerto Varas, Osorno, Temuco, Pucón and Puerto Montt.[100][101][102][103][104]

Music and dance
Music in Chile ranges from folkloric music , popular music and also to classical music. Its large geography generates different musical expressions in the north, center and south of the country, including also Easter Island and Mapuche music [105]. The national dance is the cueca. Another form of traditional Chilean song, though not a dance, is the tonada. Arising from music imported by the Spanish colonists, it is distinguished from the cueca by an intermediate melodic section and a more prominent melody. Between 1950 and 1970 appears a rebirth in folk music leading by groups such as Los de Ramon and Los Huasos Quincheros among others [106] with composers such as Raul de Ramon, Violeta Parra, Nicanor Molinare and others [107]. In the mid-1960s native musical forms were revitalized by the Parra family with the Nueva Canción Chilena, which was associated with political activists and reformers such as Victor Jara, and by the folk singer and researcher on folklore and Chilean ethnography, Margot Loyola.

Literature
Chileans call their country país de poetas—country of poets.[108][109]Gabriela Mistral was the first Chilean to win a Nobel Prize for Literature (1945). Chile's most famous poet, however, is Pablo Neruda, who also won the Nobel Prize for Literature (1971) and is world-renowned for his extensive library of works on romance, nature, and politics. His three highly individualistic homes, located in Isla Negra, Santiago and Valparaíso are popular tourist destinations.

Cuisine
Chilean cuisine is a reflection of the country's topographical variety, featuring an assortment of seafood, beef, fruits, and vegetables. Traditional recipes include cazuela, empanadas, humitas, and curanto.[110]

Sports




Rodeo is a national sport in rural Chile.






Marcelo Ríos was chosen Chilean sportsman of the century.


Chile's most popular sport is association football (soccer). Chile has appeared in seven FIFA World Cups which includes hosting the 1962 FIFA World Cup where the national football team finished third. Other results achieved by the national football team include four finals at the Copa América, one silver and two bronze medals at the Pan American Games, a bronze medal at the 2000 Summer Olympics and two third places finishes in the FIFA under-17 and under-20 youth tournaments. The main soccer clubs are Colo-Colo, CF Universidad de Chile and CD Universidad Católica. Colo-Colo is the country's most successful club, winning 46 national tournaments and three international championships, including the coveted Copa Libertadores South American club tournament.
Tennis is the country's most successful sport. Its national team won the World Team Cup clay tournament twice in 2003-04, and played the Davis Cup final against Italy in 1976. At the 2004 Summer Olympics the country captured gold and bronze in men's singles and gold in men's doubles. Marcelo Ríos became the first Latin American man to reach the number one spot in the ATP singles rankings in 1998. Anita Lizana won the US Open in 1937, becoming the first women from Latin America to win a grand slam tournament. Luis Ayala was twice a runner-up at the French Open and both Ríos and Fernando González reached the Australian Open men's singles finals.
At the Olympic Games Chile boasts two gold medals (tennis), seven silver medals (athletics, equestrian, boxing, shooting and tennis) and four bronze medals (tennis, boxing and football).
Rodeo is the country's national sport and is practiced in the more rural areas of the country. A sport similar to hockey called chueca was played by the Mapuche people during the Spanish conquest. Skiing and snowboarding are practiced at ski centers located in the Central Andes, while surfing is popular at some coastal towns.
Polo is professionally practiced within Chile and in 2008 Chile achieved top prize in the World Polo Championship a tournament where the country has earned both second and third places medals in previous editions.
Popular among Chileans is basketball a sport in which the Andean country has earned a bronze medal in the first men's FIBA World Championship held in 1950 and winning a second bronze medal when Chile hosted the 1959 FIBA World Championship. Chile hosted the first FIBA World Championship for Women in 1953 finishing the tournament with the silver medal.

Tourism
Main article: Tourism in Chile




San Pedro de Atacama.


Tourism in Chile has experienced sustained growth over the last few decades. In 2005, tourism grew by 13.6%, generating more than 4.5 billion dollars of which 1.5 billion is attributed to foreign tourists. According to the National Service of Tourism (Sernatur), 2 million people a year visit the country. Most of these visitors come from other countries in the American continent, mainly Argentina; followed by a growing number from the United States, Europe, and Brazil with a growing number of Asians from South Korea and PR China.[111]




Easter Island.


The main attractions for tourists are places of natural beauty situated in the extreme zones of the country: San Pedro de Atacama, in the north, is very popular with foreign tourists who arrive to admire the Incaic architecture, the altiplano lakes, and the Valley of the Moon. In Putre, also in the North, there is the Chungará Lake, as well as the Parinacota and the Pomerape volcanoes, with altitudes of 6,348 m and 6,282 m, respectively. Throughout the central Andes there are many ski resorts of international repute, like Portillo and Valle Nevado. In the south, the main tourist sites are the Chiloé Archipelago and Patagonia, which includes Laguna San Rafael National Park, with its many glaciers, and the Torres del Paine National Park. The central port city of Valparaíso, with its unique architecture, is also popular. Finally, Easter Island in the Pacific Ocean is one of the main Chilean tourist destinations.




Torres del Paine.


For locals, tourism is concentrated mostly in the summer (December to March), and mainly in the coastal beach towns. Arica, Iquique, Antofagasta, La Serena and Coquimbo are the main summer centres in the north, and Pucón on the shores of Lake Villarrica is the main one in the south. Because of its proximity to Santiago, the coast of the Valparaíso Region, with its many beach resorts, receives the largest number of tourists. Viña del Mar, Valparaíso's northern affluent neighbor, is popular because of its beaches, casino, and its annual song festival, the most important musical event in Latin America.
In November 2005, the government launched a campaign under the brand "Chile: All Ways Surprising," intended to promote the country internationally for both business and tourism.[112]

National symbols




The Andean condor is the national bird of Chile.






A red copihue.


The national flower is the copihue (Lapageria rosea, Chilean bellflower), which grows in the woods of southern Chile.
The coat of arms depicts the two national animals: the condor (Vultur gryphus, a very large bird that lives in the mountains) and the huemul (Hippocamelus bisulcus, an endangered white tail deer). It also has the legend Por la razón o la fuerza (By right or might or By reason or by force).
The flag of Chile consists of two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red; there is a blue square the same height as the white band at the hoist-side end of the white band; the square bears a white five-pointed star in the center representing a guide to progress and honor; blue symbolizes the sky, white is for the snow-covered Andes, and red stands for the blood spilled to achieve independence.

International rankings


Publisher
Index
Overall ranking
Lat. Am. ranking
Countries surveyed
 % rank.
Date


Freedom House
Freedom in the World 2008
Free ▬
—
193
—
2008/01


SOPAC/UNEP
2005 Environmental Vulnerability Index
Vulnerable
—
235
—
2005/05


Fraser Institute
Economic Freedom of the World - 2008 Annual Report
6 ▲
1
141
4
2008/09


Heritage Foundation/The Wall Street Journal
2008 Index of Economic Freedom
8 ▲
1
157
5
2008/01


Fund for Peace
Failed States Index 2008
21 ▼ (157)[113]
1 (20)[113]
177
12
2008/07


Transparency International
2008 Corruption Perceptions Index
23 ▼
1
180
13
2008/09


The Economist
The Global Peace Index, 2008
19 ▼
1
140
14
2008/05


Forbes
Best Countries for Business, 2008
19 ▲
1
121
16
2008/06


World Health Organization
The world health report 2000 - Health system performance (overall)
33
2
191
17
2000/06


The Economist
Democracy index, 2008
32 ▼
3
167
19
2008/10


Yale University/Columbia University
2008 Environmental Performance Index
29
4
149
19
2008/01


World Economic Forum
The Global Competitiveness Report 2008-2009's Global Competitiveness Index
28 ▼
1
134
21
2008/10


World Bank
Logistics Performance Index
32
1
150
21
2007/11


World Bank
Doing Business - Ease of Doing Business, 2009
40 ▼
2[114]
181
22
2008/09


AccountAbility
Responsible Competitiveness Index 2007
24
1
108
22
2007/07


United Nations Development Programme
Human Development Report - Human Development Index 2008 Statistical Update
40 ▬
1
179
22
2008/12


International Living
Quality of Life Index 2008
48 ▲
8
194
25
2008/03


Legatum Institute
2008 Legatum Prosperity Index
27 ▼
1
104
26
2008/10


World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2007-2008's Networked Readiness Index
34 ▼
1
127
27
2008/04


World Bank
Where is the Wealth of Nations? (2005) - Total wealth per capita
32
4
118
27
2005/09


KOF Swiss Economic Institute
KOF Index of Globalization 2008
34
1
122
28
2008/01


The Economist
The World in 2005 - Worldwide quality-of-life index, 2005
31
1
111
28
2004/11


Unesco
EFA Global Monitoring Report 2008 - EFA Development Index
37
3
129
29
2007/11


Yale University/Columbia University
2005 Environmental Sustainability Index
42
9
146
29
2005/01


Reporters without borders
Worldwide Press Freedom Index 2008
56 ▼
3
173
32
2008/10


Freedom House
Freedom of the Press 2008
67 ▼
2
195
34
2008/04


World Economic Forum
The Travel & Tourism Competitiveness Index 2008
51 ▼
5[114]
130
39
2008/03


FedEx
The Power of Access - 2006 Access Index
32
1
75
43
2006/05


Brown University
Seventh Annual Global e-Government Study (2007)
85 ▼
8
198
43
2007/07


Economist Intelligence Unit/Business Software Alliance
IT industry competitiveness index 2008
30 ▲
1
66
45
2008/09


Economist Intelligence Unit/IBM Institute for Business Value
E-readiness rankings 2008
32 ▼
1
70
46
2008/04


IMD International
World Competitiveness Yearbook 2008
26 ▬
1
55
47
2008/05


World Economic Forum
The Global Gender Gap Index 2008
65 ▲
12
130
50
2008/11


United Nations Development Programme
Human Development Report - Technology Achievement Index 2001
37
4
72
51
2001/07


Anholt-GfK Roper
2008 Nation Brands Index
38
4
50
76
2008/09


A.T. Kearney/Foreign Policy Magazine
Globalization Index 2007
43 ▼
2
72
78
2007/12



See also




Chile portal



Main article: List of Chile-related topics


Notes and references


^ "Banknotes and Coins". Chilean Central Bank. http://www.bcentral.cl/eng/banknotes-coins/coins/m0100.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-11. 
^ "Racial Structure". Estructura Racial. http://mazinger.sisib.uchile.cl/repositorio/lb/ciencias_quimicas_y_farmaceuticas/medinae/cap2/5b6.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-11. 
^ a b c d "Chile". International Monetary Fund. http://imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2006&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=228&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&grp=0&a=&pr.x=47&pr.y=16. Retrieved on 2008-10-09. 
^ a b "Encuesta Casen" (PDF). Mideplan. 2007. http://www.mideplan.cl/final/bajar.php?path=casen2006regional&id=Imp_Distrib.pdf. 
^ a b "CIA - The World Factbook - Chile". Central Intelligence Agency. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ci.html. 
^ a b c "Country profile: Chile". http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/country_profiles/1222764.stm. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x "Background Note: Chile". United States Department of State, Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs, January 2008. http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/1981.htm. 
^ "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2008". http://imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?pr.x=37&pr.y=17&sy=2007&ey=2007&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=213%2C263%2C268%2C273%2C218%2C278%2C223%2C283%2C228%2C288%2C233%2C293%2C238%2C243%2C248%2C253%2C298%2C258%2C299&s=NGDPDPC&grp=0&a=. Retrieved on 2008-10-11. 
^ "The World Factbook, GDP - per capita (PPP)". Central Intelligence Agency. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2004rank.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-19. 
^ "Human and income poverty: developing countries". UNDP. http://hdrstats.undp.org/indicators/25.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-19. 
^ http://www.chile.com/tpl/articulo/detalle/ver.tpl?cod_articulo=7225
^ http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/459648/Picunche
^ a b c Encina, Francisco A., and Leopoldo Castedo (1961). Resumen de la Historia de Chile. 4th ed. Santiago. I. Zig-Zag. p. 44. http://img242.imageshack.us/img242/6293/chilenameuo6.jpg. 
^ a b c d e f g Hudson, Rex A., ed.. "Chile: A Country Study". GPO for the Library of Congress. 1995. http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/cltoc.html. Retrieved on 2005-02-27. 
^ Pearson, Neale J. (2004). "Chile". Grolier Multimedia Encyclopedia. Scholastic Library Publishing. http://gme.grolier.com. Retrieved on 2005-03-02. 
^ "Chile". Encyclopedia Americana. Grolier Online. 2005. http://ea.grolier.com. 
^ "Chile (república)". Enciclopedia Microsoft Encarta Online. 2005. http://es.encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia_761572974_4/Chile_(república).html. Retrieved on 2005-02-26. 
^ "CHILE". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th edition ed.). 1911. 
^ C. Michael Hogan {2008) Pali Aike, Megalithic Portal, ed. Andy Burnham [1]
^ http://books.google.com/books?id=Nf8SnJ_ZJbkC&pg=PA27&lpg=PA27&dq=inca+did+not+conquer+araucanians&source=web&ots=GKMOvVrZk4&sig=o4L95tJNazXsyNh72Zb89viAlNM&hl=en&sa=X&oi=book_result&resnum=2&ct=result#PPA27,M1
^ http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/1981.htm
^ http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB8/ch01-01.htm
^ http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB8/ch27-01.htm
^ http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB8/ch05-01.htm
^ http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB8/nsaebb8.htm
^ Soto, Óscar. El Último dia de Salvador Allende. 
^ Ahumada, Eugeno. Chile: La memoria prohibida. 
^ "Flashback: Caravan of Death". BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/850932.stm. Retrieved on 2008-05-02. 
^ "Man in the News: Patricio Aylwin; A Moderate Leads Chile". The New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=950DE6DD1E3BF935A25751C1A96F948260. Retrieved on 2008-05-02. 
^ "Chile elects new leader Late president's son wins big". http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1P2-8257609.html. 
^ "Moderate socialist Lagos wins Chilean presidential election". CNN. January 16, 2000. http://archives.cnn.com/2000/WORLD/americas/01/17/chile.elex.01/. Retrieved on 2008-05-02. 
^ "Chile elects first woman president". msnbc.com. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/10819903/. Retrieved on 2008-05-02. 
^ "Bachelet Sworn In As Chile's President". The Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/03/11/AR2006031101381.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-02. 
^ [2] Antarctic Treaty and how Antarctica is governed.
^ [3] Derecho de Aguas by Alejandro Vergara Blanco
^ "Organigrama". Gobierno de Chile. http://www.gobiernodechile.cl/organigrama/organigrama.asp. 
^ [4] Chile GDP - real growth rate
^ [5]Chile: Overview of economy
^ [6] USA-Chile FTA Final Text
^ "Economic Department". Embassy of Chile in the United States of America. http://www.chileusafta.com/noticia%2047.htm. 
^ [7] The Chilean pension system
^ "Chilean Central Bank". http://si2.bcentral.cl/Basededatoseconomicos/951_417.asp?m=EMP03&f=M&i=E. 
^ "CASEN 2006 en profundidad" (PDF). Libertad y Desarrollo. 2007-06-22. http://www.trabajoyequidad.cl/documentos/temp/TP-825-CASEN%202006%20en%20profundidad-22-06-2007.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-22. 
^ "Una muy necesaria corrección: Hay cuatro millones de pobres en Chile". El Mercurio. 2007-10-14. http://www.economiaynegocios.cl/noticias/noticias.asp?id=35048. Retrieved on 2007-10-22. 
^ "Destitute no more". The Economist. 2007-08-16. http://www.economist.com/displaystory.cfm?story_id=9645174. Retrieved on 2007-10-22. 
^ "Human Development Report 2006". United Nations Development Programme, p. 335. November 9, 2006. http://hdr.undp.org/hdr2006/. 
^ http://www.reuters.com/article/economicNews/idUSN1027661220090110
^ "World Wine Situation and Outlook". USDA. http://www.fas.usda.gov/agx/ISMG/Global%20Wine%20Report%20Final%20Aug2006.pdf. 
^ http://www.globalpost.com/dispatch/chile/090121/uncertain-future
^ [8]Chile: Overview of economy
^ "Anuario Estadísticas Vitales 2003". Instituto National de Estadísticas (INE). http://www.ine.cl/canales/chile_estadistico/demografia_y_vitales/estadisticas_vitales/pdf/anuarios/vitales2003.zip. 
^ "Chile: Proyecciones y Estimaciones de Población. Total País 1950- 2050" (PDF). Instituto National de Estadísticas (INE). http://www.ine.cl/canales/chile_estadistico/demografia_y_vitales/proyecciones/Informes/Microsoft%20Word%20-%20InforP_T.pdf. 
^ "5.2.6. Estructura racial". La Universidad de Chile. http://mazinger.sisib.uchile.cl/repositorio/lb/ciencias_quimicas_y_farmaceuticas/medinae/cap2/5b6.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-26. 
^ "Composición Étnica de las Tres Áreas Culturales del Continente Americano al Comienzo del Siglo XXI" (PDF). http://books.google.cl/books?id=LcabJ98-t1wC&pg=PA93&lpg=PA93&dq=chile+60%25+blancos+Esteva-Fabregat&source=bl&ots=AMUjY09aVi&sig=3PCwfKDokrZYem3dcZ2gkToFIoE&hl=es&ei=k8WjSYT3HJaitgfGncnOBA&sa=X&oi=book_result&resnum=9&ct=result#PPA110,M1. 
^ World Factbook
^ Argentina, como Chile y Uruguay, su población está formada casi exclusivamente por una población blanca e blanca mestiza procedente del sur de Europa, más del 90% E. García Zarza, 1992, 19.
^ "Elementos de Salud Pública, section 5.2.6". University of Chile. http://mazinger.sisib.uchile.cl/repositorio/lb/ciencias_quimicas_y_farmaceuticas/medinae/. 
^ a b El gradiente sociogenético chileno y sus implicaciones ético-sociales.
^ 1907 census.
^ "Censo 2002 - Síntesis de Resultados" (PDF). Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas. http://www.ine.cl/cd2002/sintesiscensal.pdf. 
^ Chile. (2007). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved July 15, 2007, from Encyclopædia Britannica Online: http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-24684
^ Diariovasco.
^ entrevista al Presidente de la Cámara vasca.
^ vascos Ainara Madariaga: Autora del estudio "Imaginarios vascos desde Chile La construcción de imaginarios vascos en Chile durante el siglo XX".
^ Basques au Chili.
^ Contacto Interlingüístico e intercultural en el mundo hispano.instituto valenciano de lenguas y culturas.Universitat de València Cita: " Un 20% de la población chilena tiene su origen en el País Vasco".
^ "People". Embassy of Chile in Australia. June 9, 2006. http://www2.embachile-australia.com/en/brief/people.html. 
^ a b Doña, Cristián; Amanda Levinson (February 2004). "Chile: Moving Towards a Migration Policy". Migration Information Source. http://www.migrationinformation.org/Profiles/display.cfm?ID=199. 
^ Diaspora Croata.
^ hrvatski.
^ descendientes de árabes en porcentajes.
^ 500,000 descendientes de palestinos en Chile.
^ immigrants Palestinians in Chile.
^ "Inmigración britanica en Chile". http://www.galeon.com/typepad/. Retrieved on 2009-01-26. 
^ "Chile: The people". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-24684. 
^ "Journal for General Social Issues, Issue 6". CEEOL Social Research. 2006. http://www.ceeol.com/aspx/issuedetails.aspx?issueid=e78d823f-dcb9-4a0a-adda-b7d03d4ccd82&articleId=f3ec457a-bf8b-4820-9e0b-41eb7810f57a. 
^ http://viajerosgriegos.ar.vg/
^ Griegos de Chile
^ http://bibliotecavirtual.clacso.org.ar/ar/libros/becas/2000/stefoni.pdf
^ http://www.ansa.it/ansalatina/notizie/notiziari/peru/20071222155634546440.html
^ http://ipsnews.net/news.asp?idnews=39794
^ http://www.gobiernodechile.cl/chilenos_exterior/registro_chilenos_exterior.pdf
^ http://www.lanacion.cl/prontus_noticias/site/artic/20050816/pags/20050816125322.html
^ a b c d "Chile - International Religious Freedom Report 2008". United States Department of State. 2008-09-19. http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2008/108518.htm. 
^ http://www.economist.com/world/americas/displaystory.cfm?story_id=12564066&fsrc=rss
^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/spanish/specials/2007/en_nombre_de_la_fe/newsid_7701000/7701290.stm
^ Country Studies.
^ http://www.research-worldwide.de/article-chile2005.html
^ [9] Anglicism in Chilean Spanish.
^ "Languages of Chile". http://www.ethnologue.com/show_country.asp?name=CL. 
^ "Chile scraps Pinochet-era system". BBC NEWS. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/4157908.stm. 
^ "President Lagos: We can make a greater effort to make yesterday's and today's trials equally just". Chilean Government. http://www.chileangovernment.cl/index.php?id=448&option=com_content&task=view. 
^ http://www.armada.cl/p4_ingles/site/artic/20050707/pags/20050707095041.html
^ http://www.armada.cl/p4_ingles/site/artic/20050719/pags/20050719132710.html
^ http://www.armada.cl/p4_ingles/site/artic/20050719/pags/20050719132849.html
^ Carabineros de Chile, accessed on May 31, 2008
^ "United Nations Member States". http://www.un.org/members/list.shtml#c. 
^ "United Nations Member States". http://www.un.org/members/growth.shtml. 
^ "The San Francisco Conference: Chile Signs United Nations Charter". http://www.un.org/av/photo/detail/0001314.html?browse=all.html. 
^ "Valdivia, Chile Living Guide". http://www.allsouthernchile.com/southamerica/valdivia-southern-chile-city-guide/index.html. 
^ "Chile". http://www.globaladrenaline.com/latinamerica/chile/. 
^ "Chile". http://www.learnapec.org/index.cfm?action=exploration&cou_id=4. 
^ "Foreign Relations". http://www.country-studies.com/chile/foreign-relations.html. 
^ "Food in Chile". http://www.foodbycountry.com/Algeria-to-France/Chile.html. 
^ Memoria Chilena
^ Conjuntos Folkloricos de Chile
^ Folkloristas de Chile
^ http://www.protocolo.com.mx/articulos.php?id_sec=2&id_art=600
^ http://www.uchile.cl/cultura/poetasjovenes/bianchi26.htm
^ [10] The South American Table by Maria Baez Kijac
^ "Unknown" (PDF). http://www.rides.cl/pdf/trade_tourism_chile.pdf. 
^ "Unknown". ProChile. http://www.prochile.us/. 
^ a b Reversed ranking shown. Actual ranking in parentheses.
^ a b Includes Puerto Rico.



Bibliography

Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs, United States Department of State, August 2006
Library of Congress country profile
Encyclopaedia Britannica, Chile - Country Page
Chile entry at The World Factbook
Disputes between Chile and Argentine


External links

Find more about Chile on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity



Wikibooks Cookbook has a recipe/module on
Chile




Official resources


Gobierno - Government (English version)

Ministerio del Interior - Interior Ministry
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores - Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Ministerio de Hacienda - Ministry of Finance (English version)


Congreso Nacional - National Congress

Senado - Senate
Cámara de Diputados - Chamber of Deputies
Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional - Library of National Congress


Poder Judicial - Judiciary
Banco Central - Central Bank (English version)
Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas (INE) - National Statistics Institute
Chief of State and Cabinet Members


General information


Chile entry at The World Factbook
Chile at UCB Libraries GovPubs
Chile at the Open Directory Project
Wikimedia Atlas of Chile
Chile travel guide from Wikitravel
Atacama, Chile Web Site
Atacama Chile
Several links compiled by LANIC
Council of Hemispheric Affairs An independent source of Latin American News and Opinion
Congressional Research Service (CRS) Reports regarding Chile
Invest in Chile
Native flora species
Chile travel ideas









v • d • e

 Chile topics





History

Timeline · Kingdom of Chile · Arauco War · Independence · Parliamentary Era (1891-1925) · Presidential Republic (1925-1973) · Chile under Allende · 1973 coup · Chile under Pinochet · Transition to democracy






Politics

Chamber of Deputies · Citizenship · Constitution · Law · Elections · Flag · Foreign relations · National Congress · Political parties · President






Geography

Climate · Administrative regions (Provinces) · Natural regions · CORFO regions (Norte Grande · Norte Chico · Zona Central · Zona Sur · Zona Austral) · Easter Island · Sala y Gómez






Military

Army · Navy · Air Force · Carabineros






Culture

Cuisine · Holidays · Music · Mythology · Religion






Economy

Transport · Tourism · Communications · Energy






Other topics

Demographics · Education · Languages · Law






Portal











 
Geographic international














v • d • e

Countries of South America





Countries and territories also in or commonly reckoned to be elsewhere in the Americas shown in italics







Sovereign states
Argentina · Bolivia · Brazil · Chile · Colombia · Ecuador · Guyana · Panama · Paraguay · Peru · Suriname · Uruguay · Venezuela

Dependencies
Falkland Islands / South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands (UK) · Aruba / Netherlands Antilles (Netherlands)

Overseas department
French Guiana (France)



















 
International membership














v • d • e

Latin Union





Member Nations

Andorra · Angola · Bolivia · Brazil · Cape Verde · Chile · Colombia · Costa Rica · Côte d'Ivoire · Cuba · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · El Salvador · France · Guatemala · Guinea-Bissau · Haiti · Honduras · Italy · Mexico · Moldova · Monaco · Mozambique · Nicaragua · Panama · Paraguay · Peru · Philippines · Portugal · Romania · San Marino · São Tomé and Príncipe · Senegal · Spain · East Timor · Uruguay · Venezuela






Permanent Observers

Argentina · Holy See · Sovereign Military Order of Malta






Official languages

Catalan · French · Italian · Portuguese · Romanian · Spanish













v • d • e

Group of Fifteen (G15)









   


 Algeria
 Argentina
 Brazil




 Chile
 Egypt
 India




 Indonesia
 Iran
 Jamaica




 Kenya
 Malaysia
 Mexico




 Nigeria
 Peru
 Senegal




 Sri Lanka
 Venezuela
 Zimbabwe


















v • d • e

 Union of South American Nations





Members

Argentina · Bolivia · Brazil · Chile · Colombia · Ecuador · Guyana · Paraguay · Peru · Suriname · Uruguay · Venezuela






Topics

Bank of the South · South American Parliament · Mercosur · Andean Community · Cuzco Declaration · 2004 South American Summit · South American Energy Summit · Initiative for Infrastructure Integration of South America · Arab League













v • d • e

Mercosur · Mercosul  (Southern Common Market)











Full Members
Argentina · Brazil · Paraguay · Uruguay


Becoming Full Members
Venezuela


Associate members
Bolivia · Chile · Colombia · Ecuador · Peru


Observers
Mexico





















v • d • e

Organization of American States (OAS)






Antigua and Barbuda · Argentina · Barbados • Belize • Bahamas · Bolivia · Costa Rica · Cuba · Canada • Dominica · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · El Salvador · Grenada · Guatemala · Guyana · Haiti · Honduras · Jamaica · Mexico · Nicaragua · Panama · Paraguay · Peru · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · St. Kitts and Nevis · Suriname · Trinidad and Tobago · United States · Uruguay · Venezuela
















v • d • e

States belonging to the Community of Democracies at the United Nations





Members

 Cape Verde ·  Chile ·  Czech Republic ·  El Salvador ·  India ·  Italy ·  Korea, South ·  Lithuania ·  Mali
 Mexico ·  Mongolia ·  Morocco ·  Philippines ·  Poland ·  Portugal ·  South Africa ·  United States



















 
Languages












v • d • e

 Chilean cities with a population of over 100,000








Antofagasta · Arica · Calama · Chiguayante · Chillán · Concepción · Copiapo · Coquimbo · Coronel · Curico · Iquique · La Serena · Los Angeles · Osorno · Puerto Montt · Punta Arenas · Quilpue · Rancagua · Santiago · Talca · Talcahuano · Temuco · Valdivia · Valparaiso · Villa Alemana · Viña del Mar








  



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chile"
Categories: Chile | Spanish-speaking countries | G15 nations | Former Spanish colonies | Liberal democraciesHidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism | Wikipedia protected pages without expiry | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with minor POV problems | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
Arpetan
Asturianu
Avañe'ẽ
Aymar aru
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Chavacano de Zamboanga
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Kalaallisut
ಕನ್ನಡ
Kapampangan
ქართული
कश्मीरी - (كشميري)
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Kreyòl ayisyen
Ladino
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
مَزِروني
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
नेपाली
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Occitan
O'zbek
پښتو
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Ripoarisch
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
संस्कृत
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
Tetun
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
Volapük
Võro
Walon
文言
Wolof
吴语
ייִדיש
粵語
Zazaki
Zeêuws
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 01:29.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
