













Book of Revelation - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Book_of_Revelation";
		var wgTitle = "Book of Revelation";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "4379";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281590868;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 


wgOggPlayer.msg = {"ogg-play": "Play", "ogg-pause": "Pause", "ogg-stop": "Stop", "ogg-no-player": "Sorry, your system does not appear to have any supported player software.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload a player\x3c/a\x3e.", "ogg-player-videoElement": "Native browser support", "ogg-player-oggPlugin": "Browser plugin", "ogg-player-cortado": "Cortado (Java)", "ogg-player-vlc-mozilla": "VLC", "ogg-player-vlc-activex": "VLC (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-quicktime-mozilla": "QuickTime", "ogg-player-quicktime-activex": "QuickTime (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-totem": "Totem", "ogg-player-kaffeine": "Kaffeine", "ogg-player-kmplayer": "KMPlayer", "ogg-player-mplayerplug-in": "mplayerplug-in", "ogg-player-thumbnail": "Still image only", "ogg-player-selected": "(selected)", "ogg-use-player": "Use player:", "ogg-more": "More…", "ogg-download": "Download file", "ogg-desc-link": "About this file", "ogg-dismiss": "Close", "ogg-player-soundthumb": "No player", "ogg-no-xiphqt": "You do not appear to have the XiphQT component for QuickTime.\nQuickTime cannot play Ogg files without this component.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload XiphQT\x3c/a\x3e or choose another player."};
wgOggPlayer.cortadoUrl = "http://upload.wikimedia.org/jars/cortado.jar";
wgOggPlayer.extPathUrl = "/w/extensions/OggHandler";


.ogg-player-options {
	border: solid 1px #ccc;
	padding: 2pt;
	text-align: left;
	font-size: 10pt;
}
 <!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Book of Revelation

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Book of Revelation (disambiguation).




Visions of John of Patmos, as depicted in the Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry. Four seraphim surround the throne; the twenty-four elders sit to the left and right. They are dressed in white robes, representing pureness, and have crowns of gold on their heads, denoting royalty and honor (Rev 4:4). The book of Revelation does not specifically identify who the twenty-four elders are, though they are thought to be the twelve sons of Jacob and the twelve Disciples of Jesus.


The Book of Revelation, also called Revelation to John, Apocalypse of John (pronounced /əˈpɒkəlɨps/, from the Greek: Ἀποκάλυψις Ἰωάννου, Apokálypsis Iōánnou), and Revelation of Jesus Christ is the last canonical book of the New Testament in the Christian Bible. It is the only biblical book that is wholly composed of apocalyptic literature.[1]


The Bible


New Testament




Matthew
Mark
Luke
John
Acts
Romans
1 Corinthians
2 Corinthians
Galatians
Ephesians
Philippians
Colossians
1 Thessalonians
2 Thessalonians
1 Timothy
2 Timothy
Titus
Philemon
Hebrews
James
1 Peter
2 Peter
1 John
2 John
3 John
Jude
Revelation


This box: view • talk • edit





Bible portal










Contents


1 Title
2 Introduction
3 Authorship

3.1 Traditional view
3.2 Early views
3.3 Modern views


4 Dating
5 Chronology
6 Interpretations

6.1 Preterist view
6.2 Historicist view
6.3 Futurist view
6.4 Eastern Orthodox view
6.5 Anglican view
6.6 Paschal Liturgical view
6.7 Esoteric view
6.8 Radical Discipleship view
6.9 Spiritual or Idealist view
6.10 Aesthetic and Literary view
6.11 The Historical-Critical view
6.12 Dismissal


7 Footnotes
8 Book references

8.1 Commentaries


9 See also

9.1 Directly related
9.2 General


10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Title


A series of articles on


"John" in the Bible


Johannine literature


Gospel of John · First Epistle of John · Second Epistle of John · Third Epistle of John · Revelation · Authorship


Names


John the Apostle · Disciple whom Jesus loved · John the Presbyter · John the Evangelist · John of Patmos


Communities


Twelve Apostles · The Early Church


Related literature


Apocryphon of John · Acts of John · Logos · Signs Gospel




This box: view • talk • edit




Though now known as the Book of Revelation, the title found on some of the earliest manuscripts is "The Apocalypse of John" (Ἀποκάλυψις Ἰωάννου), and the most common title found on later manuscripts is "The Apocalypse of the theologian" (Ἀποκάλυψις τοῦ Θεολόγου). (In English, apocalypse is often rendered as revelation and the literal meaning of the Greek word is "unveiling".)[2] Some later manuscripts add Evangelist or Apostle to the title.[3] The first words of the book are effectively self-titled, "The Revelation of Jesus Christ".

[edit] Introduction
After a short introduction (ch. 1:1–10)[4], the book presents a brief account of the author. The first vision (1:11–3:22), related by "one like unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle", speaking with "a great voice, as of a trumpet", is a statement addressing the seven churches of Asia. The second vision, which makes up the rest of the book (chs. 4–22)[5], begins with "a door … opened in the sky" and describes what some might call the end of the world— or more properly, the end of the age, in which Satan's rule through Man is destroyed by the Messiah. These events are foreseen: the Great Tribulation, the Campaign of Armageddon, the Second Coming of the Messiah with the restoration of peace to the world and His 1,000 year reign, the imprisonment of Satan (portrayed as a dragon) until he is 'loosed' for the final rebellion, God's final judgment over Satan, the Great White throne judgment, and the ushering in of the New Heavens and New Earth. Alternatively, according to the Preterist theory, the events of the latter part of the Apocalypse of John are interpreted as being fulfilled by events in the 1st century.
Revelation is considered by some to be one of the most controversial and difficult books of the Bible, with many diverse interpretations of the meanings of the various names and events in the account. Protestant founder Martin Luther at first considered Revelation to be "neither apostolic nor prophetic" and stated that "Christ is neither taught nor known in it",[6] and placed it in his Antilegomena. John Calvin believed the book to be canonical, yet it was the only New Testament book on which he did not write a commentary.[7]
In the 4th century, Gregory of Nazianzus and other bishops argued against including this book in the New Testament canon, chiefly because of the difficulties of interpreting it and the danger for abuse.[8] Christians in Syria also reject it because of the Montanists' heavy reliance on it.[9] In the 9th century, it was included with the Apocalypse of Peter among "disputed" books in the Stichometry of St. Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople.[citation needed] In the end it was included in the accepted canon, although it remains the only book of the New Testament that is not read within the Divine Liturgy of the Eastern Orthodox Church.
Artists throughout the centuries have portrayed the visions described by John.

[edit] Authorship
Main article: Authorship of the Johannine works

[edit] Traditional view
The author of Revelation identifies himself several times as "John" (1:1, 4, 9; 22:8). The author also states that he was on the island of Patmos when he received his first vision (1:9; 4:1–2). As a result, the author of Revelation is referred to as John of Patmos. John explicitly addresses Revelation to seven churches of Asia Minor: Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamos, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea (1:4, 11). All of these sites are located in what is now Turkey. The traditional view holds that John the Apostle—considered to have written the Gospel and epistles by the same name—was exiled on Patmos in the Aegean archipelago during the reign of Emperor Domitian, and wrote the Revelation there. Those in favor of a single common author point to similarities between the Gospel and Revelation. For example, both works are soteriological (e.g., referring to Jesus as a lamb) and possess a high Christology, stressing Jesus' divine side as opposed to the human side stressed by the Synoptic Gospels. In the Gospel of John and in Revelation, Jesus is referred to as "the Word of God" ([[logos|Ὁ λόγος τοῦ Θεοῦ]]), although the context in Revelation is very different from John. The Word in Rev 19:13 is involved in judgment but in John 1:1, the image is used to speak of a role in creation and redemption.[10] Explanations of the differences between John's work by proponents of the single-author view include factoring in underlying motifs and purposes, authorial target audience, the author's collaboration with or utilization of different scribes and the advanced age of John the Apostle when he wrote Revelation. Like his Old Testament counterpart Daniel, John was kept alive to receive the prophetic vision.
A natural reading of the text would reveal that John is writing literally as he sees the vision (Rev 1:11; 10:4; 14:3; 19:9; 21:5) and that he is warned by an angel not to alter the text through a subsequent edit (Rev 22:18-19), in order to maintain the textual integrity of the book.[11]

[edit] Early views
A number of Church Fathers weighed in on the authorship of Revelation. Justin Martyr avows his belief in its apostolic origin. Irenaeus (178) assumes it as a conceded point. At the end of the 2nd century, we find it accepted at Antioch, by Theophilus, and in Africa by Tertullian. At the beginning of the 3rd century, it is adopted by Clement of Alexandria and by Origen of Alexandria, later by Methodius, Cyprian, and Lactantius. Dionysius of Alexandria (247) rejected it, upon doctrinal rather than critical grounds. Eusebius (315) inclined to class the Apocalypse with the spurious books.[12] Jerome relegated it to second class.[12] Most canons included it, but some, especially in the Eastern Church, rejected it. It is wholly absent from the Peshitta.[12]

[edit] Modern views
Modern scholarship[13] suggests that John the Apostle, John the Evangelist, and John of Patmos refer to three separate individuals. This can be determined via new means of inquiry such as textual criticism. Certain lines of evidence suggest that John of Patmos wrote only Revelation, not the Gospel of John nor the Epistles of John. For one, the author of Revelation identifies himself as "John" several times, but the author of the Gospel of John never identifies himself directly. While both works liken Jesus to a lamb, they consistently use different words for lamb when referring to him—the Gospel uses amnos, Revelation uses arnion.[14] Lastly, the Gospel is written in nearly flawless Greek, but Revelation contains grammatical errors and stylistic abnormalities which indicate its author may not have been as familiar with the Greek language as the Gospel's author.[15]
In the Anchor Bible volume on Revelation, J. Massynberde Ford contends that the core verses of the book, in general chapters 4 through 22, are surviving records of the prophecies of John the Baptist.[16] She notes, for example, that the Lamb of God references in the Gospels are all associated with John the Baptist, and she ties other hallmarks of Revelation to what is known of the Baptist.

[edit] Dating
According to early tradition, the writing of this book took place near the very end of Domitian's reign, around 95 or 96. Others contend for an earlier date, 68 or 69, in the reign of Nero or shortly thereafter.[17] The majority of modern scholars also use these dates.[18] Those who are in favor of the later date appeal to the external testimony of the Christian father Irenaeus (d. 185), who stated that he had received information relative to this book from those who had seen John face to face. He says that "it was not seen very long time since, but almost in our day, towards the end of Domitian's reign" (A.H. 5.30.3), who according to Eusebius had started the persecution referred to in the book; however, recent scholars dispute that the book is situated in a time of ongoing persecution and have also doubted the reality of a large-scale Domitian persecution.[19]
According to Epiphanius of Salamis, the Revelation of John was written in the time of Claudius (PG, XLI 909-910).
Some exegetes (Paul Touilleux, Albert Gelin, André Feuillet) distinguish two dates: publication (under Domitian) and date of the visions (under Vespasian). Various editors would have a hand in the formation of the document, according to these theories. The dating of the work is still widely debated in the scholarly community.

[edit] Chronology
Main article: Chronology of Revelation
Revelation is divided into seven cycles of events. The number seven appears frequently as a symbol within the text. The chapters of Revelation present a series of events, full of imagery, and metaphor; which detail the chronology of God's judgment on the world.
Exact interpretations of the chronology of Revelation vary extensively. The work may be interpreted literally, as a chronological list of events that will occur as the time of Revelation grows near. At the same time, the imagery can be seen to contain symbolic commentaries on the world during the historical period in which Revelation was written, or "pre-commentaries" on our world today.

[edit] Interpretations













John the Revelator









A Gospel interpretation by the Spiritual Four Quartet.









Problems listening to this file? See media help.





See also: Christian eschatological differences





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2008)


These interpretations are not mutually exclusive and many Christians adopt a combination of these approaches. Some churches have also established their own specific positions on Revelation.

[edit] Preterist view
Preterism holds that the contents of Revelation constitute a prophecy of events that were fulfilled in the 1st century[20]. Preterist interpretations generally identify either Jerusalem or Pagan Rome as the persecutor of the Church, "Babylon", the "Mother of Harlots", etc. They see Armageddon as God's judgment on the Jews, carried out by the Roman army, which is identified as "the beast". Some preterists see the second half of Revelation as changing focus to Rome, its persecution of Christians, and the fall of the Roman Empire. It sees the Revelation being fulfilled in 70, thereby bringing the full presence of God to dwell with all humanity. It also holds that the Emperor Nero was possibly the number of the beast mentioned in the book as his name equals 666 in Hebrew[21] if using the Greek spelling of Nero's name (Neron Caesar), but using the Hebrew symbols with their assigned numeric values (an ancient method known as gematria). However, a few ancient manuscripts of the Revelation say the number is 616, fifty less than the more well known numeral. A possible method to this problem lies in early translation. In the assumption that the Revelation was meant to be distributed among the early Christians, it could very well be assumed that occasionally someone may have used the Latin spelling of Nero's name (Nero Caesar), so the total value of the gematria would be 616[22][23].

[edit] Historicist view
The historicist view regards the prophecy as spanning the time from the end of the first century through the second coming of Christ.
Politically, historicist interpretations apply the symbols of Revelation to the gradual division and collapse of the Roman Empire, the emergence of a divided Europe in the West and a Arabic empire in the East, and the collapse of the Eastern Empire while Europe attempts to reunite and recreate the Roman Empire.
Ecclesiastically, historicist interpretations see Revelation as teaching that the Church would expand, despite persecution, until it "conquered" the whole world—but in the process, would gradually evolve into an apostate system within which true Christians would be a persecuted minority. The apostate Church is associated with the symbols of the "Mother of Harlots" and with "Babylon". It is seen as an "Antichrist system" which exists for much of history rather than expecting a single "Antichrist" in the last days, as futurist interpretations do.
The exact constitution of this confederacy differs between interpretations: in some it is mainly composed of Eastern European countries, notably Russia; in others, Western European; some include Britain, while others suggest that Britain and former Commonwealth nations will oppose the confederacy. In all historicist interpretations, Christ defeats this confederacy, rescues Israel from certain destruction, judges apostate Christianity and vindicates the true believers, and sets up a kingdom on earth.
The earliest Christian writers adopted a historicist viewpoint, though at such an early date, the distinction between historicist and futurist views was less pronounced. Historicist interpretations tend to be millenarian, emphasizing the literal reign of Christ on earth, and as that doctrine receded in importance, so too did the historicist focus in interpretation. Today, historicist interpretations are favored in the most ardently millenarian sects.
Some Protestant writers today use this school of interpretation as the foundation for an anti-Catholic polemic, but it should be noted that such is not an inherent property of historical interpretations. Many Catholic writers in the fourth and fifth centuries applied the notion of future apostasy to their own church, in various ways. Some argued that an apostasy would arise within the church. Others argued that this had already happened, and cited one or another sect which arose over some theological dispute. What differs between interpretations is the identity of the apostasy.

[edit] Futurist view
The futurist view assigns all or most of the prophecy to the future, shortly before the second coming; especially when interpreted in conjunction with Daniel, Isaiah 2:11-22, 1 Thessalonians 4:15-5:11, and other eschatological sections of the Bible.
Futurist interpretations generally predict a resurrection of the dead and a Rapture of the living, wherein all true Christians and those who have not reached an age of accountability are gathered to Christ at the time God's kingdom comes on earth. They also believe a Great Tribulation will occur - a seven year (this is only one view, and does not reflect what the bible actually teaches. Instead in is a man made doctrine) period of time when believers will experience worldwide persecution and martyrdom, and be purified and strengthened by it. Futurists differ on when believers will be raptured ("caught up"), but there are three primary views: 1) before the Tribulation; 2) near or at the midpoint of the Tribulation; or 3) at the end of the Tribulation. There is also a fourth view of multiple raptures throughout the Tribulation, but this view does not have a mainstream following.
Pretribulationists believe that all Christians then alive will be taken up to meet Christ before the Tribulation begins. In this manner, Christians are "kept" from the Tribulation, much as Noah was removed before God judged the antediluvian world.
Midtribulationists believe that the rapture of the faithful will occur approximately halfway through the Tribulation, after it begins but before the worst part of it occurs. Some midtribulationists, particularly those holding to a "pre-wrath rapture" of the church, believe that God's wrath is poured out during a "Great Tribulation" that is limited to the last 3-1/2 years of the Tribulation, after believers have been caught up to Christ.
Post-tribulationists believe that Christians will not be taken up into Heaven, but will be received into the Kingdom at the end of the Tribulation. (Pretribulationist Tim LaHaye admits a post-tribulation rapture is the closest of the three views to that held by the early church.)
All three views hold that Christians will return with Christ at the end of the Tribulation. Proponents of all three views also generally portray Israel as unwittingly signing a seven year peace treaty with the Antichrist, which initiates the seven year Tribulation. Many also tend to view the Antichrist as head of a revived Roman Empire, but the geographic location of this empire is unknown. Hal Lindsey suggests that this revived Roman Empire will be centered in western Europe, with Rome as its capital. Tim LaHaye promotes the belief that Babylon will be the capital of a worldwide empire. Joel Richardson and Walid Shoebat have both recently written books proposing a revived eastern Roman Empire, which will fall with the boundaries of the Ottoman Empire. (Istanbul also has seven hills, was a capital of the Roman Empire and is known as the Golden Horn - notable given the eschatological references to the "Little Horn"Daniel 7:8,8:9.)
There is also a variant futuristic view that the Tribulation can occur in any generation, meaning Satan always has an antichrist in the wings and there is always a nation-state that can become the revived Roman Empire. This variant view is developed by Angela Hunt in her fictional work, The Immortal.
The futurist view was first proposed by two Catholic writers, Manuel Lacunza and Ribera. Lacunza wrote under the pen name "Ben Ezra", and his work was banned by the Catholic Church. It has grown in popularity in the 19th and 20th centuries, so that today it is probably most readily recognized. Books about the "rapture" by authors like Hal Lindsey, and the more recent Left Behind novels (by Jerry Jenkins and Tim LaHaye) and movies, have done much to popularize this school of thought.
The Rastafarians hold a futurist view of the book of Revelation, relating it both to 20th-century events such as the crowning of Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie and the Second Italo-Ethiopian War, and also to future events such as the second coming of Selassie on the day of judgment.
The various views on tribulation are actually a subset of theological interpretations on the Millennium, mentioned in Revelation 20. There are three main interpretations: Premillennialism, Amillennialism, and Postmillennialism.
Premillennialism believes that Christ will return to the earth, bind Satan, and reign for a literal thousand years on earth with Jerusalem as his capital. Thus Christ returns before ("pre-") the thousand years mentioned in chapter 20. There are generally two subclasses of Premillennialism: Dispensational and Historic. Some form of premillennialism is thought to be the oldest millennial view in church history.[citation needed] Papias, believed to be a disciple of the Apostle John, was a premillenialist, according to Eusebius.
Amillennialism, the traditional view for Roman Catholicism, believes that the thousand years mentioned are not ("a-") a literal thousand years, but is figurative for what is now the church age, usually, the time between Christ's first ascension and second coming. This view is often associated with Augustine of Hippo. Amillennialists differ on the time frame of the millennium. Some say it started with Pentecost, others say it started with the fulfillment of Jesus' prophecy regarding the destruction of the temple in Jerusalem (70), and other starting points have also been proposed. Whether this eschatology is the result of caesaropapism, which may have also been the reason that premillennialism was condemned, is sharply disputed.
Postmillennialism believes that Christ will return after ("post-") a literal/figurative thousand years, in which the world will have essentially become a Christendom. This view was held by Jonathan Edwards. This view gained momentum through the nineteenth century, but World Wars I and II dealt a setback to this approach.

[edit] Eastern Orthodox view




Orthodox icon of the Apocalypse of St. John (16th century).


Eastern Orthodoxy treats the text as simultaneously describing contemporaneous events and as prophecy of events to come, for which the contemporaneous events were a form of foreshadow. It rejects attempts to determine, before the fact, if the events of Revelation are occurring by mapping them onto present-day events, taking to heart the Scriptural warning against those who proclaim "He is here!" prematurely. Instead, the book is seen as a warning to be spiritually and morally ready for the end times, whenever they may come ("as a thief in the night"), but they will come at the time of God's choosing, not something that can be precipitated nor trivially deduced by mortals.[24]
Book of Revelation is the only book of the New Testament that is not read during services by the Eastern Orthodox Church. In the Coptic Orthodox Church (which is not in communion with the Eastern Orthodox church but is liturgically similar), the whole book of revelation is read during apocalypse night or bright Saturday (the eve of the resurrection).

[edit] Anglican view
The Anglican/Episcopal view is that this book should be seen as a book of hope and also a book of warning. It gives hope to those Christians who are being persecuted, assuring them that their suffering is not in vain. It also warns those non-Christians of the coming events and what will happen to them. Revelation is an example of typical Jewish Apocalyptic literature. It uses symbolic imagery to communicate hope to those in the midst of persecution.

[edit] Paschal Liturgical view
This view, which has found expression among both Catholic and Protestant theologians, considers the liturgical worship, particularly the Easter rites, of early Christianity as background and context for understanding the Book of Revelation's structure and significance. This perspective is explained in The Paschal Liturgy and the Apocalypse (new edition, 2004) by Massey H. Shepherd, an Episcopal scholar, and in Scott Hahn's The Lamb's Supper: The Mass as Heaven on Earth, in which he states that Revelation in form, is structured after creation, fall, judgment and redemption. Those who hold this view say that the Temple’s destruction (A.D. 70) had a profound effect on the Jewish people, not only in Jerusalem but among the Greek-speaking Jews of the Mediterranean.[25]. They believe The Book of Revelation provides insight into the early Eucharist, saying that it is the new Temple worship in the New Heaven and Earth. The idea of the Eucharist as a foretaste of the heavenly banquet is also explored by British Methodist Geoffrey Wainwright in his book Eucharist and Eschatology (Oxford University Press, 1980).

[edit] Esoteric view
The esoterist views Revelation as bearing multiple levels of meaning, the lowest being the literal or "dead-letter." Those who are instructed in esoteric knowledge enter gradually into more subtle levels of understanding of the text. They see the book as delivering both a series of warnings for humanity and a detailed account of internal, spiritual processes of the individual soul.
The Gnostic Kabbalist believes that Revelation (like Genesis) is a very profound book of Kabbalistic symbolism. This view is held by teachers such as H.P. Blavatsky, Eliphas Levi, Rudolf Steiner and Samael Aun Weor.[citation needed] Edgar Cayce held the view that the Book of Revelation is symbolic of the body and that each emblem, emotion and condition relate to self. For example, the 24 elders of Revelation 4:4 relate to the 12 pairs (24) of cranial nerves; and the seven churches of Asia in Revelation Ch. 1 are symbolic of the 7 chakras or spiritual centers.
The seven seals also are also seen to represent the seven chakras and the consequence of opening them is the unleashing of the physiological forces that reside there. The Second Coming is thus a personal event, the integration of your spiritual self with your animal self, resulting in a fully conscious human.[26]
Some scholars have noted the rider on a white horse as being similar to the Buddhist and Hindu myths of Kalki who is considered the last avatar in the cycle of ages and is also associated with the end of time.[26]
The esoteric view also presents the Book as the Christian yoga (union) practices text on death and rebirth in Christ. The four horsemen are described as the four elemental forces (fire, water, air, earth) and are used in the spiritual purification of the body and mind. The characters of Revelation are considered anthropomorphized aspects of human consciousness. [27]

[edit] Radical Discipleship view
The radical discipleship view asserts that the Book of Revelation is best understood as a handbook for radical discipleship; i.e. how to remain faithful to the spirit and teachings of Jesus and avoid simply assimilating to surrounding society. In this view, the primary agenda of the book is to expose the worldly powers as impostors which seek to oppose the ways of God. The chief temptation for Christians in the 1st Century, and today, is to fail to hold fast to the teachings of Jesus and instead be lured into unquestioning adoption of national or cultural values, imperialism being the most dangerous and insidious. This perspective (closely related to Liberation theology) draws on the approach of radical Bible scholars such as Ched Myers, William Stringfellow, Richard Horsley, Daniel Berrigan, Wes Howard-Brook [28] and Joerg Reiger [29]

[edit] Spiritual or Idealist view
The Spiritual view (also called Idealist by some writers) does not see the book of Revelation as predicting specific events in history. Rather it sees the visions as expressing eternal spiritual truths that find expression throughout history. Only in the last few chapters are specifically predictive eschatological issues taken up. An example of this view can be found in Revelation: The Road to Overcoming by Charles A. Neal, which in turn is based on the work of Charles Fillmore.

[edit] Aesthetic and Literary view
Recently aesthetic and literary modes of interpretation have developed, which focus on Revelation as a work of art and imagination, viewing the imagery as symbolic depictions of timeless truths and the victory of good over evil.

[edit] The Historical-Critical view
The historical-critical method treats Revelation as a text and attempts to understand Revelation in its first century historical context within the genre of Jewish and Christian apocalyptic literature.
This approach considers the text as an address to seven historical communities in Asia Minor. Under this view, assertions that "the time is near" are to be taken literally by those communities. Consequently the work is viewed as a warning not to conform to contemporary Greco-Roman society which John "unveils" as beastly, demonic and subject to divine judgment. There is further information on these topics in the entries on higher criticism and apocalyptic literature.
The acceptance of Revelation into the canon is itself the result of a historical process, essentially no different from the career of other texts. The eventual exclusion of other contemporary apocalyptic literature from the canon may throw light on the unfolding historical processes of what was officially considered orthodox, what was heterodox, what was even heretical. Interpretation of meanings and imagery are anchored in what the historical author intended and what his contemporary audience inferred; a message to Christians not to assimilate into the Roman Imperial Culture was John's central message. Thus, his letter (written in the apocalyptic genre) is pastoral in nature, and the symbolism of Revelation is to be understood entirely within its historical, literary and social context. Critics study the conventions of apocalyptic literature and events of the 1st century to make sense of what the author may have intended.
During a discussion about Revelation on 23 August 2006, Pope Benedict XVI remarked: "The seer of Patmos, identified with the apostle, is granted a series of visions meant to reassure the Christians of Asia amid the persecutions and trials of the end of the first century."[30]

[edit] Dismissal
Nineteenth-century agnostic Robert G. Ingersoll branded Revelation "the insanest of all books".[31] Thomas Jefferson omitted it entirely from the Bible he edited, and wrote that he "considered it as merely the ravings of a maniac, no more worthy nor capable of explanation than the incoherences of our own nightly dreams." [32] "Martin Luther found it an offensive piece of work" and "John Calvin had grave doubts about its value."[33]

[edit] Footnotes


^ Other apocalypses popular in the early Christian era did not achieve canonical status, except for 2 Esdras (Apocalypse of Ezra), which is canonical in the Ethiopian Orthodox Churches.
^ The former is found in Codex Sinaiticus and Codex Alexandrinus, among other manuscripts, while the latter is found in the Majority Text and others; however a number of other variations of the title do exist. Nestle-Aland. Novum Testamentum Graece. 27th ed. Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft, Druck: 1996, p. 632.
^ "Apocalypse", Encyclopedia Biblica
^ "Revelation 1:1-10 (King James Version)". BibleGateway.com. http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Revelation%201:1-10&version=9. 
^ "Revelation 4-22 (King James Version)". BibleGateway.com. http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Revelation%204-22;&version=9;. 
^ Luther's Treatment of the 'Disputed Books' of the New Testament
^ Anthony A. Hoekema,The Bible and the future, P.297. ISBN 0802835163 ISBN 9780802835161, Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1979.
^ Poems I, 11, 5.
^ see N. B. Stonehouse, Apocalypse in the Ancient Church, (c. 1929), pp. 139-142, esp. p. 138
^ Revelation By Ben Witherington III, p. 32
^ Guthrie, D: "New Testament Introduction - Hebrews to Revelation", page 260ff. The Tyndale Press: London, 1966
^ a b c "Apocalypse", Encyclopedia Biblica
^ Griggs, C. Wilfred. "John the Beloved" in Ludlow, Daniel H., ed. Selections from the Encyclopedia of Mormonism: Scriptures of the Church (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1992) p. 379. Griggs favors the "one John" theory but mentions that some modern scholars have hypothesized that there are multiple Johns.
^ New Testament Greek Lexicon based on Strong's Concordance
^ Ehrman 2004, p. 467ff
^ Ford, p. 30.
^ Before Jerusalem Fell, ISBN 0930464206. Powder Springs, GA: American Vision, 1989.
^ Robert Mounce. The Book of Revelation. Cambridge: Eerdman's.
^ Brown 1997, p. 806-809
^ "The Whore of Babylon". Catholic Answers. http://www.catholic.com/library/Whore_of_Babylon.asp. Retrieved on 2007-05-11. 
^ "Apocalypse". Catholic encyclopeadia. http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/01594b.htm. Retrieved on 2007-05-11. 
^ Grout, James. "Nero as the Antichrist". Encyclopaedia Romana. http://penelope.uchicago.edu/~grout/encyclopaedia_romana/gladiators/nero.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-13. 
^ Hanegraaff, Hank. 2007. The Apocalypse Code (ISBN 0-8499-0184-7) Nashville, TN: Thomas Nelson, Inc.
^ Averky (Taushev), Archbishop (1996-Eng. tr. Fr. Seraphim Rose), The Apocalypse: In the Teachings of Ancient Christianity, Platina CA: St. Herman of Alaska Brotherhood, ISBN 978-0938635673 
^ Scott Hahn, The Lamb's Supper: The Mass as Heaven on Earth, ISBN 0385496591. New York, NY: Doubleday, 1999.
^ a b Aun Weor, 1960
^ Hudson, 2006
^ Howard-Brook, Wes; Gwyther, Anthony (1999). Unveiling Empire: Reading Revelation Then and Now. Orbis Books. ISBN 9781570752872. 
^ {{cite book title=Christ & Empire: From Paul to Postcolonial Times last=Rieger first=Joerg publisher=Fortress Press year=2007 isbn=978-0800620387}}<
^ Pope Benedict: Read Book of Revelation as Christ's victory over evil - Catholic Online
^ Robert Green Ingersoll. "The Devil". http://www.infidels.org/library/historical/robert_ingersoll/devil.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-30. 
^ Bergh: Writings of Thomas Jefferson, Vol. 16
^ Drane, John. An Introduction to The Bible. ISBN 0745919103 p 778



[edit] Book references


The Holy Bible: New Testament: Revelation.


[edit] Commentaries

Aune D.E., Revelation 6-16, WBC, t. 52B, Thomas Nelson Publishers, Nashville 1998.
Bass, Ralph E., Jr. (2004) Back to the Future: A Study in the Book of Revelation Greenville, SC: Living Hope Press, ISBN 0-9759547-0-9.
Beale G.K., The Book of Revelation, NIGTC, Grand Rapids – Cambridge 1999. = ISBN 0-8028-2174-X
Bousset W., Die Offenbarung Johannis, Göttingen 18965, 19066.
Boxall, Ian, (2006) The Revelation of Saint John (Black's New Testament Commentary) London: Continuum, and Peabody, MA: Hendrickson. ISBN 0-8264-7135-8 U.S. edition: ISBN 1-5656-3202-8
Boxall, Ian (2002)Revelation: Vision and Insight - An Introduction to the Apocalypse London: SPCK ISBN 0-2810-5362-6
Brown, Raymond E. (1997-10-03). Introduction to the New Testament. Anchor Bible. ISBN 0-385-24767-2. 
Ehrman, Bart D. (2004). The New Testament: A Historical Introduction to the Early Christian Writings. New York: Oxford. ISBN 0-19-515462-2. 
Ford, J. Massyngberde (1975) Revelation, The Anchor Bible, New York: Doubleday ISBN 0-385-00895-3.
Gentry, Kenneth L., Jr. (1998) Before Jerusalem Fell: Dating the Book of Revelation Powder Springs, GA: American Vision, ISBN 0-915815-43-5.
Gentry, Kenneth L., Jr. (2002) The Beast of Revelation Powder Springs, GA: American Vision, ISBN 0-915815-41-9.
Hudson, Gary W. (2006) Revelation: Awakening The Christ Within, Vesica Press, ISBN 0977851729
Kiddle M., The Revelation of St. John (The Moffat New Testament Commentary), New York – London 1941.
Lohmeyer E., Die Offenbarung des Johannes, Tübingen 1953.
Mounce R.H., The Book of Revelation, Michigan 19771, 19982.
Prigent P., L’Apocalypse, Paris 1981.
Müller U.B., Die Offenbarung des Johannes, Güttersloh 1995.
Roloff J., Die Offenbarung des Johannes, Zürich 19872.
Samael Aun Weor (2004) [1960]. The Aquarian Message: Gnostic Kabbalah and Tarot in the Apocalypse of St. John. Thelema Press. ISBN 0-9745916-5-3. 
Hahn, Scott (1999) The Lamb's Supper: Mass as Heaven on Earth, Darton, Longman, Todd, ISBN 0-232-52500-5
Shepherd, Massey H. (2004) The Paschal Liturgy and the Apocalypse, James Clarke, ISBN 0-227-17005-9
Stonehouse, Ned B., (c. 1929) The Apocalypse in the Ancient Church. A Study in the History of the New Testament Canon, n.d., Goes: Oosterbaan & Le Cointre. [Major discussion of the controversy surrounding the acceptance/rejection of Revelation into the New Testament canon.]
Sweet, J. P. M., (1979, Updated 1990) Revelation, London: SCM Press, and Philadelphia: Trinity Press International. ISBN 0-3340-2311-4.
Wikenhauser A., Offenbarung des Johannes, Regensburg 1947, 1959.
Zahn Th., Die Offenbarung des Johannes, t. 1-2, Leipzig 1924-1926.



[edit] See also

[edit] Directly related

Laodicean Church
Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse
Seven seals
The Two Witnesses of Apocalypse
Woman of the Apocalypse
Number of the Beast
Whore of Babylon
Apocalypse
Fifth Monarchy Men
Christian eschatological differences
Apocalypse of John - dated astronomically
Second Coming
The book with seven seals (oratorio)
Beast and the Harlot (Song)- Avenged Sevenfold


[edit] General

Caesaropapism
Christian eschatology
Abomination of Desolation
Apocalyptic literature
Apocalypse of Peter
Apocalypticism
Bible code
End times
Millennialism
Left Behind
Endtime Ministries
New World Order (conspiracy)
Oracle of Damascus


[edit] External links


Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Revelation (KJV)



Early Christian Writings: Apocalypse of John: text, introduction, context
Apocalypse, Book of - Article from the Catholic Encyclopedia
Understanding the Book of Revelation - Article by L. Michael White from PBS Frontline program "Apocalypse!"
Jewish Encyclopedia: REVELATION (BOOK OF)




Book of Revelation
Apocalyptic Epistle



Preceded by
Jude
New Testament
Books of the Bible
Succeeded by
—









v • d • e

Books of the Bible





Major Divisions





Old Testament
(Hebrew Protocanon)


Genesis · Exodus · Leviticus · Numbers · Deuteronomy · Joshua · Judges · Ruth · 1-2 Samuel · 1-2 Kings · 1-2 Chronicles · Ezra · Nehemiah · Esther · Job · Psalms · Proverbs · Ecclesiastes · Song · Isaiah · Jeremiah · Lamentations · Ezekiel · Daniel · Hosea · Joel · Amos · Obadiah · Jonah · Micah · Nahum · Habakkuk · Zephaniah · Haggai · Zechariah · Malachi







Deuterocanon
& Apocrypha


Catholic, Orthodox: Baruch & Letter of Jeremiah · Additions to Daniel (Susanna, Song of the Three Children, Bel & the Dragon)  · Additions to Esther · Judith · 1 Maccabees · 2 Maccabees  · Sirach  · Tobit · Wisdom  · Orthodox: Prayer of Manasseh · 1 Esdras · 2 Esdras · Orthodox: 3 Maccabees · 4 Maccabees · Odes  · Psalm 151 · Syriac Peshitta only: 2 Baruch  · Psalms 152–155 · Ethiopian Orthodox only: 4 Baruch · Enoch · Jubilees · 1-3 Meqabyan







New Testament


Matthew • Mark • Luke • John • Acts • Romans • 1 Corinthians • 2 Corinthians • Galatians • Ephesians • Philippians • Colossians • 1 Thessalonians • 2 Thessalonians • 1 Timothy • 2 Timothy  • Titus  • Philemon • Hebrews • James • 1 Peter • 2 Peter • 1 John • 2 John • 3 John • Jude • Revelation









Canon

Development: Old Testament · New Testament · Christian Canon
Others: Deuterocanon · Apocrypha: Biblical · New Testament






More divisions

Chapters and verses · Pentateuch · History · Wisdom · Major & Minor prophets · Gospels (synoptic) · Epistles (Pauline, Johannine, pastoral, general) · Apocalyptic literature






Translations

Vulgate · Luther · Wyclif · Tyndale · KJV · Modern English Bibles · Debate · Dynamic v. Formal · JPS · RSV · NASB · Amp · NAB · NEB · TLB · GNB · NIV · NJB · NRSV · REB · NLT · ESV · Msg






Manuscripts

Septuagint · Samaritan Pentateuch · Dead Sea scrolls · Targum · Diatessaron · Muratorian fragment · Peshitta · Vetus Latina · Masoretic Text · New Testament manuscripts






See also

Authorship · Esdras · Non-canonical books referenced in the Bible · Studies · Synod of Hippo · Textual criticism






Category · Portal · WikiProject









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_of_Revelation"
Categories: Book of Revelation | Christian apocalyptic writings | Christian eschatology | New Testament books | New Testament narrative | Abrahamic prophecyHidden categories: Articles containing Greek language text | Articles containing non-English language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 | Articles needing additional references from November 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Asturianu
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
chiShona
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Furlan
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ქართული
Қазақша
Kiswahili
Kreyòl ayisyen
Latina
Magyar
മലയാളം
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Gagana Samoa
Sardu
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
Tiếng Việt
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 22:56.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
