













Standard Model - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Standard_Model";
		var wgTitle = "Standard Model";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "47641";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 279060714;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Standard Model

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Standard model (disambiguation).


Standard model of particle physics





Standard Model


History of...


Background


Quantum field theory
Gauge theory
Spontaneous symmetry breaking
Higgs mechanism




Constituents


Electroweak interaction
Quantum chromodynamics
CKM matrix




Limitations


Strong CP problem
Hierarchy problem
Neutrino oscillations




Theorists


Sudarshan • Marshak • Feynman • Gell-Mann • Sakata • Glashow • Zweig • Nambu • Han • Cabibbo • Weinberg • Salam • Kobayashi • Maskawa • 't Hooft • Veltman • Gross • Politzer • Wilczek






This box: view • talk • edit




The Standard Model of particle physics is a theory of three of the four known fundamental interactions and the elementary particles that take part in these interactions. These particles make up all visible matter in the universe. The standard model is a gauge theory of the electroweak and strong interactions with the gauge group SU(3)×SU(2)×U(1).
Numerous experiments carried out since the mid-20th century have yielded findings consistent with the Standard Model. The Standard Model falls short of being a complete theory of fundamental interactions because it does not include gravity and because it is incompatible with the recent observation of neutrino oscillations.




The Standard Model of elementary particles, with the gauge bosons in the rightmost column.






Contents


1 Historical background
2 Overview
3 Particle content

3.1 Elementary particles: fermions
3.2 Force mediating particles
3.3 The Higgs boson


4 Field content

4.1 Spin 1
4.2 Spin 1/2
4.3 Spin 0
4.4 Lagrangian
4.5 Higgs mechanism
4.6 Masses and CKM matrix


5 Theoretical aspects

5.1 Construction of the Standard Model Lagrangian

5.1.1 The QCD sector
5.1.2 The electroweak sector
5.1.3 The Higgs sector


5.2 Additional symmetries of the Standard Model
5.3 List of standard model fermions


6 Tests and predictions
7 Challenges to the standard model
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References

10.1 Introductory textbooks
10.2 Advanced textbooks
10.3 Journal articles


11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Historical background
The first step towards the Standard Model was Sheldon Glashow's discovery, in 1963, of a way to combine the electromagnetic and weak interactions. In 1967, Steven Weinberg and Abdus Salam incorporated the Higgs mechanism into Glashow's electroweak theory, giving it its modern form.[1][2] The Higgs mechanism is also believed to give rise to the rest masses of all the elementary particles the Standard Model accounts for, the W and Z bosons, and the fermions, the latter broken down into quarks and leptons.
After the discovery at CERN of neutral weak currents,[3][4][5][6] caused by Z boson exchange, the electroweak theory became widely accepted. Glashow, Salam, and Weinberg shared the 1979 Nobel Prize in Physics for discovering the electroweak theory. The W and Z bosons were discovered experimentally in 1981, and their masses were found to be as the Standard Model predicted.
The theory of the strong interaction, to which many contributed, acquired its modern form around 1973-74, when experiments confirmed that the hadrons were composed of fractionally charged quarks.

[edit] Overview
At present, matter and energy are best understood in terms of the kinematics and interactions of elementary particles. To date, physics has reduced the laws governing the behavior and interaction of all known forms of matter and energy, to a small set of fundamental laws and theories. A major goal of physics is to find the "common ground" that would unite all of these theories into one integrated theory of everything, of which all the other known laws would be special cases, and from which the behavior of all matter and energy could be derived (at least in principle). "Details can be worked out if the situation is simple enough for us to make an approximation, which is almost never, but often we can understand more or less what is happening." (Feynman's lectures on Physics, Vol 1. 2–7)
The Standard Model groups two major extant theories — quantum electroweak and quantum chromodynamics — into an internally consistent theory describing the interactions between all experimentally observed particles. The Standard Model describes each type of particle in terms of a mathematical field, via quantum field theory. For a technical description of these fields and their interactions, see Standard Model (mathematical formulation).

[edit] Particle content

[edit] Elementary particles: fermions
In the Standard Model, fermions are defined as elementary particles having spin-1⁄2, and that respect the Pauli Exclusion Principle in accordance with the spin-statistics theorem. There are 12 known fermions, each with a corresponding antiparticle. They are classified according to how they interact (or equivalently, by what charges they carry). There are six quarks (up, down, charm, strange, top, bottom), and six leptons (electron, muon, tauon, and their corresponding neutrinos).

Organization of Fermions

 
Charge
First generation
Second generation
Third generation


Quarks
+2⁄3
Up
u
Charm
c
Top
t


−1⁄3
Down
d
Strange
s
Bottom
b


Leptons
−1
Electron
e−
Muon
μ−
Tauon
τ−


0
Electron neutrino
νe
Muon neutrino
νμ
Tauon neutrino
ντ


Pairs from each classification are grouped together to form a generation, with corresponding particles exhibiting similar physical behavior (see table at right).
The defining property of the quarks is that they carry color charge, and hence, interact via the strong force. The infrared confining behavior of the strong force results in quarks being perpetually (or at least since very soon after the start of the big bang) bound to one another, forming color-neutral composite particles (hadrons) containing either a quark and an antiquark (mesons) or three quarks (baryons). The familiar proton and the neutron are the two baryons having the smallest mass. Quarks also carry electric charge and weak isospin. Hence they interact with other fermions both electromagnetically and via the weak nuclear interaction.
The remaining six fermions do not carry color charge and are called leptons. The three neutrinos do not carry electric charge either, so their motion is directly influenced only by the weak nuclear force, which makes them notoriously difficult to detect. However, by virtue of carrying an electric charge, the electron, muon and the tauon interact electromagnetically.
Each member of a generation has greater mass than the corresponding particles of lower generations. The first generation charged particles do not decay; hence all ordinary (baryonic) matter is made of such particles. Specifically, all atoms consist of electrons orbiting atomic nuclei ultimately constituted of up and down quarks. Second and third generations charged particles, on the other hand, decay with very short half lives, and are observed only in very high-energy environments. Neutrinos of all generations also do not decay and pervade the universe, but rarely interact with baryonic matter.

[edit] Force mediating particles




Summary of interactions between particles described by the Standard Model.


Forces in physics are the ways that particles interact and influence each other. At a macro level, the electromagnetic force allows particles to interact with one another via electric and magnetic fields, and the force of gravitation allows two particles with mass to attract one another in accordance with Newton's Law of Gravitation. The standard model explains such forces as resulting from matter particles exchanging other particles, known as force mediating particles. When a force mediating particle is exchanged, at a macro level the effect is equivalent to a force influencing both of them, and the particle is therefore said to have mediated (i.e., been the agent of) that force. Force mediating particles are believed to be the reason why the forces and interactions between particles observed in the laboratory and in the universe exist.
The known force mediating particles described by the Standard Model also all have spin (as do matter particles), but in their case, the value of the spin is 1, meaning that all force mediating particles are bosons. As a result, they do not follow the Pauli Exclusion Principle. The different types of force mediating particles are described below.

Photons mediate the electromagnetic force between electrically charged particles. The photon is massless and is well-described by the theory of quantum electrodynamics.


The W+, W−, and Z gauge bosons mediate the weak interactions between particles of different flavors (all quarks and leptons). They are massive, with the Z being more massive than the W±. The weak interactions involving the W± act on exclusively left-handed particles and right-handed antiparticles. Furthermore, the W± carry an electric charge of +1 and −1 and couple to the electromagnetic interactions. The electrically neutral Z boson interacts with both left-handed particles and antiparticles. These three gauge bosons along with the photons are grouped together which collectively mediate the electroweak interactions.


The eight gluons mediate the strong interactions between color charged particles (the quarks). Gluons are massless. The eightfold multiplicity of gluons is labeled by a combination of color and an anticolor charge (e.g., red–antigreen).[7] Because the gluon has an effective color charge, they can interact among themselves. The gluons and their interactions are described by the theory of quantum chromodynamics.

The interactions between all the particles described by the Standard Model are summarized by the diagram at the top of this section.

Force Mediating Particles

Electromagnetic Force
Weak Nuclear Force
Strong Nuclear Force


Photon
γ
W+, W−, and Z
Gauge Bosons
W+, W−, Z
8 Gluons
g



[edit] The Higgs boson
Main article: Higgs boson
The Higgs particle is a massive scalar elementary particle predicted by the Standard Model. It has no intrinsic spin, and for that reason is classified as a boson (like the force mediating particles, which have integer spin). Because an exceptionally large amount of energy and beam luminosity are required to create a Higgs boson in high energy colliders, it is the only fundamental particle predicted by the Standard Model that has yet to be observed.
The Higgs boson plays a unique role in the Standard Model, by explaining why the other elementary particles, the photon and gluon excepted, are massive. In particular, the Higgs boson would explain why the photon has no mass, while the W and Z bosons are very heavy. Elementary particle masses, and the differences between electromagnetism (mediated by the photon) and the weak force (mediated by the W and Z bosons), are critical to many aspects of the structure of microscopic (and hence macroscopic) matter. In electroweak theory, the Higgs boson generates the masses of the leptons (electron, muon, and tauon) and quarks.
As yet, no experiment has directly detected the existence of the Higgs boson, but there is some indirect evidence for it. It is hoped that the Large Hadron Collider at CERN will confirm the existence of this particle.
Chien-Peng Yuan et al. believe that the Higgs boson may have been produced but overlooked:

"...experimenters may have already overlooked a Higgs particle, argues theorist Chien-Peng Yuan of Michigan State University in East Lansing and his colleagues. They considered the simplest possible supersymmetric theory. Ordinarily, theorists assume that the lightest of theory's five Higgses is the one that drags on the W and Z. Those interactions then feed back on Higgs and push its mass above 121 times the mass of the proton, the highest mass searched for at CERN's Large Electron–Positron (LEP) collider, which ran from 1989 to 2000. But it's possible that the lightest Higgs weighs as little as 65 times the mass of a proton and has been missed, Yuan and colleagues argue in a paper to be published in Physical Review Letters."[8]


[edit] Field content
The standard model has the following fields:

[edit] Spin 1

A U(1) gauge field  with coupling  (weak U(1) or weak hypercharge)
An SU(2) gauge field  with coupling  (weak SU(2) or weak isospin)
An SU(3) gauge field  with coupling  (strong SU(3) or color)


[edit] Spin 1/2
The spin 1/2 particles are in representations of the gauge groups. For the U(1) group, we list the value of the weak hypercharge instead.
The left-handed fermionic fields are:

An SU(3) singlet, SU(2) doublet with U(1) weak hypercharge −1 (left-handed lepton)
An SU(3) singlet, SU(2) singlet with U(1) weak hypercharge 2 (left-handed antilepton)
An SU(3) triplet, SU(2) doublet, with U(1) weak hypercharge 1⁄3 (left-handed quarks)
An SU(3) triplet, SU(2) singlet, with U(1) weak hypercharge −4⁄3 (left-handed up-type antiquark)
An SU(3) triplet, SU(2) singlet, with U(1) weak hypercharge 2⁄3 (left-handed down-type antiquark)

By CPT symmetry, there is a set of right-handed fermions with the opposite quantum numbers.
This describes one generation of leptons and quarks, and there are three generations, so there are three copies of each field. Note that there are twice as many left-handed lepton field components as left-handed antilepton field components in each generation, but an equal number of left-handed quark and antiquark fields.

[edit] Spin 0

An SU(2) doublet H with U(1) hyper-charge −1 (Higgs field)

note that | H | 2, summed over the two SU(2) components, is invariant under both SU(2) and under U(1), and so it can appear as a renormalizable term in the Lagrangian, as can its square.
This field acquires a vacuum expectation value, leaving a combination of the weak isospin and hypercharge unbroken. This is the electromagnetic gauge group, and the photon remains massless. The standard formula for the electric charge (which defines the normalization of the weak hypercharge, which would otherwise be somewhat arbitrary) is:







Beware that the normalization q = Iz + Y sometimes is also used.

[edit] Lagrangian
The Lagrangian for the spin 1 and spin 1/2 fields is the most general renormalizable gauge field Lagrangian with no fine tunings:
Spin 1: 
where the traces are over the SU(2) and SU(3) indices hidden in W and G respectively. The two-index objects are the field strengths derived from W and G the vector fields. There are also two extra hidden parameters: the theta angles for SU(2) and SU(3).
Note that the spin 1/2 particles can have no mass terms, because there is no right/left helicity pair with the same SU(2) and SU(3) representation and the same weak hypercharge. This means that if the gauge charges were conserved in the vacuum, none of the spin 1/2 particles could ever swap helicity, and they would all be massless.
For a neutral fermion, for example, a hypothetical right-handed lepton N, or Nα in relativistic two-spinor notation, with no SU(3),SU(2) representation and zero charge, it is possible to add the term:







and this term gives the neutral fermion a Majorana mass. Since the generic value for M will be of order 1, such a particle would generically be unacceptably heavy.
Note that the interactions are completely determined by the theory – the leptons introduce no extra parameters.

[edit] Higgs mechanism
Main article: Higgs mechanism
The Lagrangian for the Higgs includes the most general renormalizable self interaction:







The parameter v2 has dimensions of mass squared, and it gives the location where the classical Lagrangian is at a minimum. In order for the Higgs mechanism to work, v2 must be a positive number. v has units of mass, and it is the only parameter in the standard model which is not dimensionless. It is also much smaller than the Planck scale, it is approximately equal to the Higgs mass and sets the scale for the mass of everything else. This is the only real fine-tuning to a small nonzero value in the standard model, and it is called the Hierarchy problem.
It is traditional to choose the SU(2) gauge so that the Higgs doublet in the vacuum has expectation value (v,0).

[edit] Masses and CKM matrix
The rest of the interactions are the most general spin-0 spin-1⁄2 Yukawa interactions, and there are many of these. These constitute most of the free parameters in the model. The Yukawa couplings generate the masses and mixings once the Higgs gets its vacuum expectation value.
The terms L * HR generate a mass term for each of the three generations of leptons. There are 9 of these terms, but by relabeling L and R, the matrix can be diagonalized. Since only the upper component of H is nonzero, the upper SU(2) component of L mixes with R to make the electron, the muon, and the tauon, leaving over a lower massless component, the neutrino.
The terms QHU generate up masses, while QHD generate down masses. But since there is more than one right-handed singlet in each generation, it is not possible to diagonalize both with a good basis for the fields, and there is an extra CKM matrix.

[edit] Theoretical aspects

[edit] Construction of the Standard Model Lagrangian

Parameters of the Standard Model

Symbol
Description
Renormalization
scheme (point)
Value


me
Electron mass

511 keV


mμ
Muon mass

106 MeV


mτ
Tauon mass

1.78 GeV


mu
Up quark mass
()
1.9 MeV


md
Down quark mass
()
4.4 MeV


ms
Strange quark mass
()
87 MeV


mc
Charm quark mass
()
1.32 GeV


mb
Bottom quark mass
()
4.24 GeV


mt
Top quark mass
(on-shell scheme)
172.7 GeV


θ12
CKM 12-mixing angle

0.229


θ23
CKM 23-mixing angle

0.042


θ13
CKM 13-mixing angle

0.004


δ
CKM CP-violating Phase

0.995


g1
U(1) gauge coupling
()
0.357


g2
SU(2) gauge coupling
()
0.652


g3
SU(3) gauge coupling
()
1.221


θQCD
QCD Vacuum Angle

~0


μ
Higgs quadratic coupling

Unknown


λ
Higgs self-coupling strength

Unknown


Technically, quantum field theory provides the mathematical framework for the standard model, in which a Lagrangian controls the dynamics and kinematics of the theory. Each kind of particle is described in terms of a dynamical field that pervades space-time. The construction of the standard model proceeds following the modern method of constructing most field theories: by first postulating a set of symmetries of the system, and then by writing down the most general renormalizable Lagrangian from its particle (field) content that observes these symmetries.
The global Poincaré symmetry is postulated for all relativistic quantum field theories. It consists of the familiar translational symmetry, rotational symmetry and the inertial reference frame invariance central to the theory of special relativity. The local SU(3)SU(2)U(1) gauge symmetry is an internal symmetry that essentially defines the standard model. Roughly, the three factors of the gauge symmetry give rise to the three fundamental interactions. The fields fall into different representations of the various symmetry groups of the Standard Model (see table). Upon writing the most general Lagrangian, one finds that the dynamics depend on 19 parameters, whose numerical values are established by experiment. The parameters are summarized in the table at right.

[edit] The QCD sector
Main article: Quantum chromodynamics

[edit] The electroweak sector
Main article: Electroweak interaction
The electroweak sector is a Yang–Mills gauge theory with the symmetry group ,



where Bμ is the U(1) gauge field; YW is the weak hypercharge — the generator of the U(1) group;  is the three-component SU(2) gauge field;  are the Pauli matrices — infinitesimal generators of the SU(2) group, the subscript L indicates that they only act on left fermions;  and g are coupling constants.

[edit] The Higgs sector
In the Standard Model, the Higgs field is a complex spinor of the group SU(2)L:



where the indexes + and 0 indicate the Q-charges of the components. The YW-charge of both components is 1.
Before symmetry breaking, the Higgs Lagrangian is:
      
for which you may also find the following abbreviation:
      

[edit] Additional symmetries of the Standard Model
From the theoretical point of view, the Standard Model exhibits four additional global symmetries, not postulated at the outset of its construction, collectively denoted accidental symmetries, which are continuous U(1) global symmetries. The transformations leaving the Lagrangian invariant are:






The first transformation rule is shorthand meaning that all quark fields for all generations must be rotated by an identical phase simultaneously. The fields ML, TL and (μR)c, (τR)c are the 2nd (muon) and 3rd (tauon) generation analogs of EL and (eR)c fields.
By Noether's theorem, each symmetry above has an associated conservation law: the conservation of baryon number, electron number, muon number, and tauon number. Each quark is assigned a baryon number of 1/3, while each antiquark is assigned a baryon number of -1/3. Conservation of baryon number implies that the number of quarks minus the number of antiquarks is a constant. Within experimental limits, no violation of this conservation law has been found.
Similarly, each electron and its associated neutrino is assigned an electron number of +1, while the antielectron and the associated antineutrino carry −1 electron number. Similarly, the muons and their neutrinos are assigned a muon number of +1 and the tau leptons are assigned a tau lepton number of +1. The Standard Model predicts that each of these three numbers should be conserved separately in a manner similar to the way baryon number is conserved. These numbers are collectively known as lepton family numbers (LF). Symmetry works differently for quarks than for leptons, mainly because the Standard Model predicts that neutrinos are massless. However, it was recently found that neutrinos have small masses and oscillate between flavors, signaling that the conservation of lepton family number is violated.
In addition to the accidental (but exact) symmetries described above, the Standard Model exhibits several approximate symmetries. These are the "SU(2) custodial symmetry" and the "SU(2) or SU(3) quark flavor symmetry."

Symmetries of the Standard Model and Associated Conservation Laws

Symmetry
Lie Group
Symmetry Type
Conservation Law


Poincaré
Translations×SO(3,1)
Global symmetry
Energy, Momentum, Angular momentum


Gauge
SU(3)×SU(2)×U(1)
Local symmetry
Electric charge, Weak isospin, Color charge


Baryon phase
U(1)
Accidental Global symmetry
Baryon number


Electron phase
U(1)
Accidental Global symmetry
Electron number


Muon phase
U(1)
Accidental Global symmetry
Muon number


Tauon phase
U(1)
Accidental Global symmetry
Tauon number



Field content of the Standard Model

Field
(1st generation)
Spin
Gauge group
Representation
Baryon
Number
Electron
Number


Left-handed quark
QL
1 / 2
(, , + 1 / 3)
1 / 3
0


Left-handed up antiquark

1 / 2
(, , − 4 / 3)
− 1 / 3
0


Left-handed down antiquark

1 / 2
(, , + 2 / 3)
− 1 / 3
0


Left-handed lepton
LL
1 / 2
(, , − 1)
0
1


Left-handed antielectron

1 / 2
(, , + 2)
0
− 1


Hypercharge gauge field
Bμ
1
(, , 0)
0
0


Isospin gauge field
Wμ
1
(, , 0)
0
0


Gluon field
Gμ
1
(, , 0)
0
0


Higgs field
H
0
(, , + 1)
0
0



[edit] List of standard model fermions
This table is based in part on data gathered by the Particle Data Group (QuarksPDF (54.8 KB)).

Left-handed fermions in the Standard Model

Generation 1


Fermion
(left-handed)
Symbol
Electric
charge
Weak
isospin
Weak
hypercharge
Color
charge *
Mass **


Electron





511 keV


Positron





511 keV


Electron neutrino





< 2 eV ****


Up quark





~ 3 MeV ***


Up antiquark





~ 3 MeV ***


Down quark





~ 6 MeV ***


Down antiquark





~ 6 MeV ***


 


Generation 2


Fermion
(left-handed)
Symbol
Electric
charge
Weak
isospin
Weak
hypercharge
Color
charge *
Mass **


Muon





106 MeV


Antimuon





106 MeV


Muon neutrino





< 2 eV ****


Charm quark





~ 1.337 GeV


Charm antiquark





~ 1.3 GeV


Strange quark





~ 100 MeV


Strange antiquark





~ 100 MeV


 


Generation 3


Fermion
(left-handed)
Symbol
Electric
charge
Weak
isospin
Weak
hypercharge
Color
charge *
Mass **


Tauon





1.78 GeV


Antitauon





1.78 GeV


Tauon neutrino





< 2 eV ****


Top quark





171 GeV


Top antiquark





171 GeV


Bottom quark





~ 4.2 GeV


Bottom antiquark





~ 4.2 GeV


Notes:

* These are not ordinary abelian charges, which can be added together, but are labels of group representations of Lie groups.
** Mass is really a coupling between a left-handed fermion and a right-handed fermion. For example, the mass of an electron is really a coupling between a left-handed electron and a right-handed electron, which is the antiparticle of a left-handed positron. Also neutrinos show large mixings in their mass coupling, so it's not accurate to talk about neutrino masses in the flavor basis or to suggest a left-handed electron antineutrino.
*** The masses of baryons and hadrons and various cross-sections are the experimentally measured quantities. Since quarks can't be isolated because of QCD confinement, the quantity here is supposed to be the mass of the quark at the renormalization scale of the QCD scale.
**** The Standard Model assumes that neutrinos are massless. However, several contemporary experiments prove that neutrinos oscillate between their flavour states, which could not happen if all were massless.[9] It is straightforward to extend the model to fit these data but there are many possibilities, so the mass eigenstates are still open. See Neutrino#Mass.








Log plot of masses in the Standard Model.



[edit] Tests and predictions





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2008)


The Standard Model (SM) predicted the existence of the W and Z bosons, gluon, and the top and charm quarks before these particles were observed. Their predicted properties were experimentally confirmed with good precision. To give an idea of the success of the SM, the following table compares the measured masses of the W and Z bosons with the masses predicted by the SM:


Quantity
Measured (GeV)
SM prediction (GeV)


Mass of W boson
80.398±0.025
80.3900±0.0180


Mass of Z boson
91.1876±0.0021
91.1874±0.0021


The SM also makes several predictions about the decay of Z bosons, which have been experimentally confirmed by the Large Electron-Positron Collider at CERN.

[edit] Challenges to the standard model





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)




Unsolved problems in physics: 
What gives rise to the Standard Model of particle physics?
Why do particle masses and coupling constants have the values that we measure?
Does the Higgs boson really exist?
Why are there three generations of particles?

There is some experimental evidence consistent with neutrinos having mass, which the Standard Model does not allow. To accommodate such findings, the Standard Model can be modified by adding a non-renormalizable interaction of lepton fields with the square of the Higgs field. This is natural in certain grand unified theories, and if new physics appears at about 1016 GeV, the neutrino masses are of the right order of magnitude.
Currently, there is one elementary particle predicted by the Standard Model that has yet to be observed: the Higgs boson. A major reason for building the Large Hadron Collider is that the high energies of which it is capable are expected to make the Higgs observable. However, as of August 2008, there is only indirect empirical evidence for the existence of the Higgs boson, so that its discovery cannot be claimed.
A fair amount of theoretical and experimental research has attempted to extend the Standard Model into a theory of everything, a complete theory explaining all physical phenomena. Inadequacies of the Standard Model that motivate such research 'Beyond the Standard Model' include:

Does not attempt to explain gravity, and there is no known way of adapting the quantum field theory of the sort the Standard Model employs freely, with general relativity, the canonical theory of gravity. This means, among other things, that we have no good theory for the very early universe;
Seems rather ad-hoc and inelegant, requiring 19 numerical constants whose values are unrelated and arbitrary. Although the Standard Model, as it now stands, cannot explain why neutrinos have masses (and the specifics of neutrino mass are still unclear), it is believed that explaining neutrino mass will require an additional 7 or 8 constants;
Gives rise to the hierarchy problem, namely why the weak scale and Planck scale are so disparate;
Should be modified so as to be consistent with the emerging "standard model of cosmology." Specifically, a truly satisfactory theory of the elementary particles and of the fundamental interactions must explain the initial conditions of the universe that gave rise to certain observed properties of the present-day universe, properties such as the predominance of matter over antimatter (matter/antimatter asymmetry), and its isotropy and homogeneity over large distances.


[edit] See also

The theoretical formulation of the standard model
Weak interactions, Fermi theory of beta decay and electroweak theory
Strong interactions, flavour, quark model and quantum chromodynamics
For open questions, see quark matter, CP violation and neutrino masses
Beyond the Standard Model
noncommutative standard model
BTeV
Penguin diagram


[edit] Notes


^ S. Weinberg Phys. Rev.Lett. 19 1264–1266 (1967).
^ "Broken Symmetries and the Masses of Gauge Bosons". http://link.aps.org/abstract/PRL/v13/p508. 
^ F. J. Hasert et al. Phys. Lett. 46B 121 (1973).
^ F. J. Hasert et al. Phys. Lett. 46B 138 (1973).
^ F. J. Hasert et al. Nucl. Phys. B73 1(1974).
^ "The discovery of the weak neutral currents". CERN courier. 2004-10-04. http://cerncourier.com/cws/article/cern/29168. Retrieved on 2008-05-08. 
^ Technically, there are nine such color–anticolor combinations. However there is one color symmetric combination that can be constructed out of a linear superposition of the nine combinations, reducing the count to eight.
^ "Higgs Hiding in Plain Sight?". ScienceNOW. 2008-01-23. http://sciencenow.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/2008/123/3. Retrieved on 2008-05-08. 
^ Particle Data Group: Neutrino mass, mixing, and flavor change (2006v)



[edit] References

[edit] Introductory textbooks

Griffiths, David J. (1987). Introduction to Elementary Particles. Wiley, John & Sons, Inc. ISBN 0-471-60386-4. 
D.A. Bromley (2000). Gauge Theory of Weak Interactions. Springer. ISBN 3-540-67672-4. 
Gordon L. Kane (1987). Modern Elementary Particle Physics. Perseus Books. ISBN 0-201-11749-5. 


[edit] Advanced textbooks

Cheng, Ta Pei; Li, Ling Fong. Gauge theory of elementary particle physics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-851961-3.  Highlights gauge theory aspects of the Standard Model.
Donoghue, J. F.; Golowich, E.; Holstein, B. R.. Dynamics of the Standard Model. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521476522.  Highlights dynamical and phenomenological aspects of the Standard Model.
O'Raifeartaigh, L.. Group structure of gauge theories. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-34785-8. 
:Highlights group-theoretical aspects of the Standard Model.


[edit] Journal articles

S.F. Novaes, Standard Model: An Introduction, hep-ph/0001283
D.P. Roy, Basic Constituents of Matter and their Interactions — A Progress Report, hep-ph/9912523
Y. Hayato et al., Search for Proton Decay through p → νK+ in a Large Water Cherenkov Detector. Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1529 (1999).
Ernest S. Abers and Benjamin W. Lee, Gauge theories. Physics Reports (Elsevier) C9, 1–141 (1973).


[edit] External links

New Scientist story: Standard Model may be found incomplete
The Universe Is A Strange Place, a lecture by Frank Wilczek
Observation of the Top Quark at Fermilab
PDF version of the Standard Model Lagrangian (after electroweak symmetry breaking, with no explicit Higgs boson)
PDF, PostScript, and LaTeX version of the Standard Model Lagrangian with explicit Higgs terms
The particle adventure.








v • d • e

Particles in physics





Elementary particles

Fermions:  Quarks: u · d · c · s · t · b • Leptons: e− · e+ · μ− · μ+ · τ− · τ+ · νe · νμ · ντ · νe · νμ · ντ
Bosons:  Gauge bosons: γ · g · W± · Z 
Other:  Ghosts






Composite particles

Hadrons:  Baryons/Hyperons/Nucleons: p · n · Δ · Λ · Σ · Ξ · Ω • Mesons/Quarkonia: π · K · ρ · J/ψ · ϒ · B · D · η · η′ · φ
Other:  Atomic nuclei • Atoms • Exotic atoms: Positronium · Muonium · Onia • Molecules






Hypothetical elementary particles

Superpartners: Axino · Chargino · Gaugino · Gluino · Gravitino · Higgsino · Neutralino · Sfermion
Other: A0 · Dilaton · G · H0 · J · Tachyon · X · Y · W' · Z' · Sterile neutrino






Hypothetical composite particles

Exotic hadrons:  Exotic baryons: Dibaryon · Pentaquark • Exotic mesons: Glueball · Tetraquark
Other:  Mesonic molecule · Pomeron






Quasiparticles

Davydov soliton · Exciton · Magnon · Phonon · Plasmon · Polariton · Polaron · Roton






Lists

List of particles · List of quasiparticles · List of baryons · List of mesons · Timeline of particle discoveries













v • d • e

General subfields within physics






Astrophysics · Atomic, molecular, and optical physics · Condensed matter physics · Dynamics (Fluid dynamics · Thermodynamics) · Electromagnetism (Optics) · High energy physics · Mechanics (Classical mechanics · Quantum mechanics · Statistical mechanics) · Relativity (Special relativity · General relativity) · Quantum field theory · Statics (Fluid statics) · Mathematical physics









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_Model"
Categories: Fundamental physics concepts | Particle physics | Standard ModelHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2008 | Articles needing additional references from March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
中文









 This page was last modified on 23 March 2009, at 01:31.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
