













Bioinformatics - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Bioinformatics";
		var wgTitle = "Bioinformatics";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "4214";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280654260;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [""];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [""];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Bioinformatics

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 




Map of the human X chromosome (from the NCBI website). Assembly of the human genome is one of the greatest achievements of bioinformatics.


Bioinformatics is the application of information technology to the field of molecular biology. The term bioinformatics was coined by Paulien Hogeweg in 1978 for the study of informatic processes in biotic systems. Bioinformatics nowadays entails the creation and advancement of databases, algorithms, computational and statistical techniques, and theory to solve formal and practical problems arising from the management and analysis of biological data. Over the past few decades rapid developments in genomic and other molecular research technologies and developments in information technologies have combined to produce a tremendous amount of information related to molecular biology. It is the name given to these mathematical and computing approaches used to glean understanding of biological processes. Common activities in bioinformatics include mapping and analyzing DNA and protein sequences, aligning different DNA and protein sequences to compare them and creating and viewing 3-D models of protein structures. Bioinformatics is the branch of life science that deals with the study of application of information technology to the field of molecular biology.
The primary goal of bioinformatics is to increase our understanding of biological processes. What sets it apart from other approaches, however, is its focus on developing and applying computationally intensive techniques (e.g., data mining, and machine learning algorithms) to achieve this goal. Major research efforts in the field include sequence alignment, gene finding, genome assembly, protein structure alignment, protein structure prediction, prediction of gene expression and protein-protein interactions, genome-wide association studies and the modeling of evolution.




Contents


1 Introduction
2 Major research areas

2.1 Sequence analysis
2.2 Genome annotation
2.3 Computational evolutionary biology
2.4 Measuring biodiversity
2.5 Analysis of gene expression
2.6 Analysis of regulation
2.7 Analysis of protein expression
2.8 Analysis of mutations in cancer
2.9 Prediction of protein structure
2.10 Comparative genomics
2.11 Modeling biological systems
2.12 High-throughput image analysis
2.13 Protein-protein docking
2.14 Software and tools
2.15 Web services in bioinformatics


3 See also

3.1 Related topics
3.2 Related fields


4 References
5 External links
6 See also





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Introduction
Bioinformatics was applied in the creation and maintenance of a database to store biological information at the beginning of the "genomic revolution", such as nucleotide and amino acid sequences. Development of this type of database involved not only design issues but the development of complex interfaces whereby researchers could both access existing data as well as submit new or revised data.
In order to study how normal cellular activities are altered in different disease states, the biological data must be combined to form a comprehensive picture of these activities. Therefore, the field of bioinformatics has evolved such that the most pressing task now involves the analysis and interpretation of various types of data, including nucleotide and amino acid sequences, protein domains, and protein structures. The actual process of analyzing and interpreting data is referred to as computational biology. Important sub-disciplines within bioinformatics and computational biology include: a) the development and implementation of tools that enable efficient access to, and use and management of, various types of information. b) the development of new algorithms (mathematical formulas) and statistics with which to assess relationships among members of large data sets, such as methods to locate a gene within a sequence, predict protein structure and/or function, and cluster protein sequences into families of related sequences.

[edit] Major research areas

[edit] Sequence analysis
Main articles: Sequence alignment and Sequence database
Since the Phage Φ-X174 was sequenced in 1977, the DNA sequences of hundreds of organisms have been decoded and stored in databases. The information is analyzed to determine genes that encode polypeptides, as well as regulatory sequences. A comparison of genes within a species or between different species can show similarities between protein functions, or relations between species (the use of molecular systematics to construct phylogenetic trees). With the growing amount of data, it long ago became impractical to analyze DNA sequences manually. Today, computer programs are used to search the genome of thousands of organisms, containing billions of nucleotides. These programs would compensate for mutations (exchanged, deleted or inserted bases) in the DNA sequence, in order to identify sequences that are related, but not identical. A variant of this sequence alignment is used in the sequencing process itself. The so-called shotgun sequencing technique (which was used, for example, by The Institute for Genomic Research to sequence the first bacterial genome, Haemophilus influenzae) does not give a sequential list of nucleotides, but instead the sequences of thousands of small DNA fragments (each about 600-800 nucleotides long). The ends of these fragments overlap and, when aligned in the right way, make up the complete genome. Shotgun sequencing yields sequence data quickly, but the task of assembling the fragments can be quite complicated for larger genomes. In the case of the Human Genome Project, it took several days of CPU time (on one hundred Pentium III desktop machines clustered specifically for the purpose) to assemble the fragments. Shotgun sequencing is the method of choice for virtually all genomes sequenced today, and genome assembly algorithms are a critical area of bioinformatics research.
Another aspect of bioinformatics in sequence analysis is the automatic search for genes and regulatory sequences within a genome. Not all of the nucleotides within a genome are genes. Within the genome of higher organisms, large parts of the DNA do not serve any obvious purpose. This so-called junk DNA may, however, contain unrecognized functional elements. Bioinformatics helps to bridge the gap between genome and proteome projects--for example, in the use of DNA sequences for protein identification.
See also: sequence analysis, sequence profiling tool, sequence motif.

[edit] Genome annotation
Main article: Gene finding
In the context of genomics, annotation is the process of marking the genes and other biological features in a DNA sequence. The first genome annotation software system was designed in 1995 by Dr. Owen White, who was part of the team that sequenced and analyzed the first genome of a free-living organism to be decoded, the bacterium Haemophilus influenzae. Dr. White built a software system to find the genes (places in the DNA sequence that encode a protein), the transfer RNA, and other features, and to make initial assignments of function to those genes. Most current genome annotation systems work similarly, but the programs available for analysis of genomic DNA are constantly changing and improving.

[edit] Computational evolutionary biology
Evolutionary biology is the study of the origin and descent of species, as well as their change over time. Informatics has assisted evolutionary biologists in several key ways; it has enabled researchers to:

trace the evolution of a large number of organisms by measuring changes in their DNA, rather than through physical taxonomy or physiological observations alone,
more recently, compare entire genomes, which permits the study of more complex evolutionary events, such as gene duplication, horizontal gene transfer, and the prediction of factors important in bacterial speciation,
build complex computational models of populations to predict the outcome of the system over time
track and share information on an increasingly large number of species and organisms

Future work endeavours to reconstruct the now more complex tree of life.
The area of research within computer science that uses genetic algorithms is sometimes confused with computational evolutionary biology, but the two areas are unrelated.

[edit] Measuring biodiversity
Biodiversity of an ecosystem might be defined as the total genomic complement of a particular environment, from all of the species present, whether it is a biofilm in an abandoned mine, a drop of sea water, a scoop of soil, or the entire biosphere of the planet Earth. Databases are used to collect the species names, descriptions, distributions, genetic information, status and size of populations, habitat needs, and how each organism interacts with other species. Specialized software programs are used to find, visualize, and analyze the information, and most importantly, communicate it to other people. Computer simulations model such things as population dynamics, or calculate the cumulative genetic health of a breeding pool (in agriculture) or endangered population (in conservation). One very exciting potential of this field is that entire DNA sequences, or genomes of endangered species can be preserved, allowing the results of Nature's genetic experiment to be remembered in silico, and possibly reused in the future, even if that species is eventually lost.[1]

[edit] Analysis of gene expression
The expression of many genes can be determined by measuring mRNA levels with multiple techniques including microarrays, expressed cDNA sequence tag (EST) sequencing, serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) tag sequencing, massively parallel signature sequencing (MPSS), or various applications of multiplexed in-situ hybridization. All of these techniques are extremely noise-prone and/or subject to bias in the biological measurement, and a major research area in computational biology involves developing statistical tools to separate signal from noise in high-throughput gene expression studies. Such studies are often used to determine the genes implicated in a disorder: one might compare microarray data from cancerous epithelial cells to data from non-cancerous cells to determine the transcripts that are up-regulated and down-regulated in a particular population of cancer cells.

[edit] Analysis of regulation
Regulation is the complex orchestration of events starting with an extracellular signal such as a hormone and leading to an increase or decrease in the activity of one or more proteins. Bioinformatics techniques have been applied to explore various steps in this process. For example, promoter analysis involves the identification and study of sequence motifs in the DNA surrounding the coding region of a gene. These motifs influence the extent to which that region is transcribed into mRNA. Expression data can be used to infer gene regulation: one might compare microarray data from a wide variety of states of an organism to form hypotheses about the genes involved in each state. In a single-cell organism, one might compare stages of the cell cycle, along with various stress conditions (heat shock, starvation, etc.). One can then apply clustering algorithms to that expression data to determine which genes are co-expressed. For example, the upstream regions (promoters) of co-expressed genes can be searched for over-represented regulatory elements.

[edit] Analysis of protein expression
Protein microarrays and high throughput (HT) mass spectrometry (MS) can provide a snapshot of the proteins present in a biological sample. Bioinformatics is very much involved in making sense of protein microarray and HT MS data; the former approach faces similar problems as with microarrays targeted at mRNA, the latter involves the problem of matching large amounts of mass data against predicted masses from protein sequence databases, and the complicated statistical analysis of samples where multiple, but incomplete peptides from each protein are detected.

[edit] Analysis of mutations in cancer
In cancer, the genomes of affected cells are rearranged in complex or even unpredictable ways. Massive sequencing efforts are used to identify previously unknown point mutations in a variety of genes in cancer. Bioinformaticians continue to produce specialized automated systems to manage the sheer volume of sequence data produced, and they create new algorithms and software to compare the sequencing results to the growing collection of human genome sequences and germline polymorphisms. New physical detection technology are employed, such as oligonucleotide microarrays to identify chromosomal gains and losses (called comparative genomic hybridization), and single nucleotide polymorphism arrays to detect known point mutations. These detection methods simultaneously measure several hundred thousand sites throughout the genome, and when used in high-throughput to measure thousands of samples, generate terabytes of data per experiment. Again the massive amounts and new types of data generate new opportunities for bioinformaticians. The data is often found to contain considerable variability, or noise, and thus Hidden Markov model and change-point analysis methods are being developed to infer real copy number changes.
Another type of data that requires novel informatics development is the analysis of lesions found to be recurrent among many tumors .

[edit] Prediction of protein structure
Main article: Protein structure prediction
Protein structure prediction is another important application of bioinformatics. The amino acid sequence of a protein, the so-called primary structure, can be easily determined from the sequence on the gene that codes for it. In the vast majority of cases, this primary structure uniquely determines a structure in its native environment. (Of course, there are exceptions, such as the bovine spongiform encephalopathy - aka Mad Cow Disease - prion.) Knowledge of this structure is vital in understanding the function of the protein. For lack of better terms, structural information is usually classified as one of secondary, tertiary and quaternary structure. A viable general solution to such predictions remains an open problem. As of now, most efforts have been directed towards heuristics that work most of the time.
One of the key ideas in bioinformatics is the notion of homology. In the genomic branch of bioinformatics, homology is used to predict the function of a gene: if the sequence of gene A, whose function is known, is homologous to the sequence of gene B, whose function is unknown, one could infer that B may share A's function. In the structural branch of bioinformatics, homology is used to determine which parts of a protein are important in structure formation and interaction with other proteins. In a technique called homology modeling, this information is used to predict the structure of a protein once the structure of a homologous protein is known. This currently remains the only way to predict protein structures reliably.
One example of this is the similar protein homology between hemoglobin in humans and the hemoglobin in legumes (leghemoglobin). Both serve the same purpose of transporting oxygen in the organism. Though both of these proteins have completely different amino acid sequences, their protein structures are virtually identical, which reflects their near identical purposes.
Other techniques for predicting protein structure include protein threading and de novo (from scratch) physics-based modeling.
See also: structural motif and structural domain.

[edit] Comparative genomics
Main article: Comparative genomics
The core of comparative genome analysis is the establishment of the correspondence between genes (orthology analysis) or other genomic features in different organisms. It is these intergenomic maps that make it possible to trace the evolutionary processes responsible for the divergence of two genomes. A multitude of evolutionary events acting at various organizational levels shape genome evolution. At the lowest level, point mutations affect individual nucleotides. At a higher level, large chromosomal segments undergo duplication, lateral transfer, inversion, transposition, deletion and insertion. Ultimately, whole genomes are involved in processes of hybridization, polyploidization and endosymbiosis, often leading to rapid speciation. The complexity of genome evolution poses many exciting challenges to developers of mathematical models and algorithms, who have recourse to a spectra of algorithmic, statistical and mathematical techniques, ranging from exact, heuristics, fixed parameter and approximation algorithms for problems based on parsimony models to Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithms for Bayesian analysis of problems based on probabilistic models.
Many of these studies are based on the homology detection and protein families computation.

[edit] Modeling biological systems
Main article: Systems biology
Systems biology involves the use of computer simulations of cellular subsystems (such as the networks of metabolites and enzymes which comprise metabolism, signal transduction pathways and gene regulatory networks) to both analyze and visualize the complex connections of these cellular processes. Artificial life or virtual evolution attempts to understand evolutionary processes via the computer simulation of simple (artificial) life forms.

[edit] High-throughput image analysis
Computational technologies are used to accelerate or fully automate the processing, quantification and analysis of large amounts of high-information-content biomedical imagery. Modern image analysis systems augment an observer's ability to make measurements from a large or complex set of images, by improving accuracy, objectivity, or speed. A fully developed analysis system may completely replace the observer. Although these systems are not unique to biomedical imagery, biomedical imaging is becoming more important for both diagnostics and research. Some examples are:

high-throughput and high-fidelity quantification and sub-cellular localization (high-content screening, cytohistopathology)
morphometrics
clinical image analysis and visualization
determining the real-time air-flow patterns in breathing lungs of living animals
quantifying occlusion size in real-time imagery from the development of and recovery during arterial injury
making behavioral observations from extended video recordings of laboratory animals
infrared measurements for metabolic activity determination
inferring clone overlaps in DNA mapping, e.g. the Sulston score


[edit] Protein-protein docking
Main article: Protein-protein docking
In the last two decades, tens of thousands of protein three-dimensional structures have been determined by X-ray crystallography and Protein nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (protein NMR). One central question for the biological scientist is whether it is practical to predict possible protein-protein interactions only based on these 3D shapes, without doing protein-protein interaction experiments. A variety of methods have been developed to tackle the Protein-protein docking problem, though it seems that there is still much work to be done in this field.

[edit] Software and tools
Software tools for bioinformatics range from simple command-line tools, to more complex graphical programs and standalone web-services available from various bioinformatics companies or public institutions. The computational biology tool best-known among biologists is probably BLAST, an algorithm for determining the similarity of arbitrary sequences against other sequences, possibly from curated databases of protein or DNA sequences. BLAST is one of a number of generally available programs for doing sequence alignment. The NCBI provides a popular web-based implementation that searches their databases.

[edit] Web services in bioinformatics
SOAP and REST-based interfaces have been developed for a wide variety of bioinformatics applications allowing an application running on one computer in one part of the world to use algorithms, data and computing resources on servers in other parts of the world. The main advantages lay in the end user not having to deal with software and database maintenance overheads[2] Basic bioinformatics services are classified by the EBI into three categories: SSS (Sequence Search Services), MSA (Multiple Sequence Alignment) and BSA (Biological Sequence Analysis). The availability of these service-oriented bioinformatics resources demonstrate the applicability of web based bioinformatics solutions, and range from a collection of standalone tools with a common data format under a single, standalone or web-based interface, to integrative, distributed and extensible bioinformatics workflow management systems.

[edit] See also

[edit] Related topics


Biocybernetics
Bioinformatics companies
Biologically-inspired computing
Biomedical informatics
Computational biology
Computational biomodeling
Computational genomics
DNA sequencing theory
Dot plot (bioinformatics)
Dry lab
Margaret Oakley Dayhoff
Metabolic network modelling
Molecular modelling
Morphometrics
Natural computation
Pharmaceutical company
Protein-protein interaction prediction
List of numerical analysis software
List of scientific journals in bioinformatics



[edit] Related fields


Applied mathematics
Artificial intelligence
Biology
Cheminformatics
Clinomics
Comparative genomics
Computational biology
Computational epigenetics
Computational science
Computer science
Cybernetics
Ecoinformatics
Genomics
Informatics
Information theory
Mathematical biology
Neuroinformatics
Proteomics
Pervasive adaptation
Scientific computing
Statistics
Structural biology
Systems biology
Theoretical biology
Veterinary informatics



[edit] References


^ Important projects: Species 2000 project; uBio Project; Partnership for Biodiversity Informatics
^ European Bioinformatics Institute







This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (February 2008)




Achuthsankar S Nair Computational Biology & Bioinformatics - A gentle Overview, Communications of Computer Society of India, January 2007
Aluru, Srinivas, ed. Handbook of Computational Molecular Biology. Chapman & Hall/Crc, 2006. ISBN 1584884061 (Chapman & Hall/Crc Computer and Information Science Series)
Baldi, P and Brunak, S, Bioinformatics: The Machine Learning Approach, 2nd edition. MIT Press, 2001. ISBN 0-262-02506-X
Barnes, M.R. and Gray, I.C., eds., Bioinformatics for Geneticists, first edition. Wiley, 2003. ISBN 0-470-84394-2
Baxevanis, A.D. and Ouellette, B.F.F., eds., Bioinformatics: A Practical Guide to the Analysis of Genes and Proteins, third edition. Wiley, 2005. ISBN 0-471-47878-4
Baxevanis, A.D., Petsko, G.A., Stein, L.D., and Stormo, G.D., eds., Current Protocols in Bioinformatics. Wiley, 2007. ISBN 0-471-25093-7
Claverie, J.M. and C. Notredame, Bioinformatics for Dummies. Wiley, 2003. ISBN 0-7645-1696-5
Cristianini, N. and Hahn, M. Introduction to Computational Genomics, Cambridge University Press, 2006. (ISBN 9780521671910 | ISBN 0521671914)
Durbin, R., S. Eddy, A. Krogh and G. Mitchison, Biological sequence analysis. Cambridge University Press, 1998. ISBN 0-521-62971-3
Gilbert, D. Bioinformatics software resources. Briefings in Bioinformatics, Briefings in Bioinformatics, 2004 5(3):300-304.
Keedwell, E., Intelligent Bioinformatics: The Application of Artificial Intelligence Techniques to Bioinformatics Problems. Wiley, 2005. ISBN 0-470-02175-6
Kohane, et al. Microarrays for an Integrative Genomics. The MIT Press, 2002. ISBN 0-262-11271-X
Lund, O. et al. Immunological Bioinformatics. The MIT Press, 2005. ISBN 0-262-12280-4
Michael S. Waterman, Introduction to Computational Biology: Sequences, Maps and Genomes. CRC Press, 1995. ISBN 0-412-99391-0
Mount, David W. Bioinformatics: Sequence and Genome Analysis Spring Harbor Press, May 2002. ISBN 0-87969-608-7
Pachter, Lior and Sturmfels, Bernd. "Algebraic Statistics for Computational Biology" Cambridge University Press, 2005. ISBN 0-521-85700-7
Pevzner, Pavel A. Computational Molecular Biology: An Algorithmic Approach The MIT Press, 2000. ISBN 0-262-16197-4
Tisdall, James. "Beginning Perl for Bioinformatics" O'Reilly, 2001. ISBN 0-596-00080-4
Dedicated issue of Philosophical Transactions B on Bioinformatics freely available
Catalyzing Inquiry at the Interface of Computing and Biology (2005) CSTB report
Calculating the Secrets of Life: Contributions of the Mathematical Sciences and computing to Molecular Biology (1995)
Foundations of Computational and Systems Biology MIT Course
Computational Biology: Genomes, Networks, Evolution Free MIT Course
Algorithms for Computational Biology Free MIT Course
Zhang, Z., Cheung, K.H. and Townsend, J.P. Bringing Web 2.0 to bioinformatics, Briefing in Bioinformatics. In press



[edit] External links





This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links.






Look up bioinformatics in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.




At Wikiversity you can learn more and teach others about Bioinformatics at:
The Department of Bioinformatics




Major Organizations

Bioinformatics Organization (Bioinformatics.Org): The Open-Access Institute
EMBnet
European Bioinformatics Institute
European Molecular Biology Laboratory
The International Society for Computational Biology
National Center for Biotechnology Information
National Institutes of Health homepage
Open Bioinformatics Foundation: umbrella non-profit organization supporting certain open-source projects in bioinformatics
Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute




Major Journals

Algorithms in Molecular Biology
Bioinformatics
BMC Bioinformatics
Briefings in Bioinformatics
Evolutionary Bioinformatics
Genome Research
The International Journal of Biostatistics
Journal of Computational Biology
Cancer Informatics
Journal of the Royal Society Interface
Molecular Systems Biology
PLoS Computational Biology
Statistical Applications in Genetic and Molecular Biology
Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics - IEEE/ACM
International Journal of Bioinformatics Research and Applications
List of Bioinformatics journals at Bioinformatics.fr
EMBnet.News at EMBnet.org
International Journal of Computational Biology and Drug Design (IJCBDD)
International Journal of Functional Informatics and Personalized Medicine (IJFIPM)




Other sites

The Collection of Biostatistics Research Archive
Human Genome Project and Bioinformatics
List of Bioinformatics Research Groups at Bioinformatics.fr
List of Bioinformatics Research Groups at the Open Directory Project




Tutorials / Resources / Primers

Bioinformatics - A Science Primer — by NCBI










v • d • e

Genomics topics






Genome project · Paleopolyploidy · Glycomics · Human Genome Project · Proteomics · Metabolomics · Chemogenomics · Structural genomics · Pharmacogenetics · Pharmacogenomics · Toxicogenomics · Computational genomics · Bioinformatics · Cheminformatics · Systems biology













v • d • e

Major subfields of biology






Anatomy · Astrobiology · Biochemistry · Biophysics · Bioinformatics · Biostatistics · Botany · Cell biology · Chronobiology · Conservation biology · Developmental biology · Ecology · Epidemiology · Evolutionary biology · Genetics · Genomics · Human biology · Immunology · Marine biology · Microbiology · Molecular biology · Neuroscience · Nutrition · Origin of life · Paleontology · Parasitology · Pathology · Physiology · Systems biology · Taxonomy · Zoology













v • d • e

Major fields of technology





Applied science

Archaeology · Artificial intelligence · Ceramic engineering · Computing · Electronics · Energy · Energy storage · Engineering physics · Environmental Engineering Science · Environmental technology · Fisheries science · Materials science and engineering · Microtechnology · Nanotechnology · Nuclear technology · Optics · Particle physics · Zoography






Information

Communication · Graphics · Information technology · Music · Speech recognition · Visual technology · Systematics · Informatics






Industry

Construction · Financial engineering · Fishing · Industrial technology · Manufacturing · Machinery · Mining · Business informatics






Military

Ammunition · Bombs · Combat engineering · Military technology · Military technology and equipment · Naval engineering






Domestic

Educational technology · Domestic appliances · Domestic technology · Food technology






Engineering

Aerospace · Agricultural · Architectural · Audio · Automotive · Biological · Biochemical · Biomedical · BioTech · Broadcast · Building officials · Ceramic · Chemical · Civil · Computer · Construction · Control · Cryogenic · Electrical · Electronic · Engineering technology · Enterprise · Environmental · Food · Genetic · Hydraulics · Industrial · Materials · Mechanical · Mechatronics · Metallurgical · Mining · Naval · Network · Nuclear · Ocean · Ontology · Optical · Petroleum · Radio Frequency · Software · Structural · Systems · Technician · Textile · Tissue · Transport · Traffic






Health and safety

Biomedical · Bioinformatics · Biotechnology · Cheminformatics · Fire protection engineering · Health technologies · Medical technology · Nutrition · Pharmaceuticals · Safety engineering · Sanitary engineering






Transport

Aerospace · Aerospace engineering · Automotive engineering · Marine engineering · Motor vehicles · Space technology







[edit] See also

International Society of Intelligent Biological Medicine (ISIBM)





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bioinformatics"
Categories: Bioinformatics | Bioengineering | Biostatistics | Mathematical biology | Computational biology | Formal sciencesHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations | Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
বাংলা
Bosanski
Български
Česky
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
한국어
हिन्दी
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Limburgs
Magyar
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Novial
Polski
Português
Русский
සිංහල
Simple English
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
中文









 This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 14:46.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
