













Oslo Accords - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Oslo_Accords";
		var wgTitle = "Oslo Accords";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "72359";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280447221;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Oslo Accords

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Part of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict
and Arab–Israeli conflict series


Israeli–Palestinian
Peace Process





     
Israel


     
West Bank, Gaza Strip, Golan Heights a





Negotiating Parties



Palestinians

Israel


History


Camp David Accords · Madrid Conference
Oslo Accords / Oslo II · Hebron Protocol
Wye River / Sharm el-Sheikh Memoranda
2000 Camp David Summit · Taba Summit
Road Map · Annapolis Conference


Primary Negotiation Concerns


Antisemitic incitements · Israeli settlements
Israeli West Bank barrier · Jewish state
Palestinian political violence
Palestinian refugees · Palestinian state
Places of worship · Status of Jerusalem


  Current Leaders  


Mahmoud Abbas
Salam Fayyad
Benjamin Netanyahu
Shimon Peres


International Brokers


Diplomatic Quartet · Arab League · Egypt


     


Other Proposals


Arab Peace Initiative · Elon Peace Plan
Lieberman Plan · Geneva Accord · Hudna
Israel's unilateral disengagement plan
Israel's realignment plan
Peace-orientated projects · Peace Valley






a
The Golan Heights are not part of the Israeli-Palestinian process.






view • talk • edit







Yitzhak Rabin, Bill Clinton, and Yasser Arafat during the Oslo Accords on 13 September 1993.


See also: Israeli-Palestinian conflict
The Oslo Accords, officially called the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements or Declaration of Principles (DOP) was a milestone in the Palestinian - Israeli conflict. It was the first direct, face-to-face agreement between Israel and political representatives of Palestinians. It was intended to be a framework for the future relations between Israel and the anticipated Palestinian state, when all outstanding final status issues between the two states would be addressed and resolved in one agreement.
The Accords were wrapped-up in Oslo, Norway on 20 August 1993, and subsequently officially signed at a public ceremony in Washington D.C. on 13 September 1993 in the presence of PLO chairman Yasser Arafat, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and US President Bill Clinton, with Mahmud Abbas signing for the Palestine Liberation Organization, foreign Minister Shimon Peres for the State of Israel, Secretary of State Warren Christopher for the United States and foreign minister Andrei Kozyrev for Russia.
The Oslo Accords were a framework for the future relations between the two parties. The Accords provided for the creation of a Palestinian Authority. The Palestinian Authority would have responsibility for the administration of the territory under its control. The Accords also called for the withdrawal of the Israel Defence Forces from parts of the Gaza Strip and West Bank.
It was anticipated that this arrangement would last for a five-year interim period during which a permanent agreement would be negotiated (beginning no later than May 1996). Permanent issues such as Jerusalem, Palestinian refugees, Israeli settlements, security and borders were deliberately left to be decided at a later stage. Interim self-government was to be granted by Israel in phases.
Support for the Accords, of the concessions made and the process were not free from criticism. The repeated public posturing of all sides has discredited the process, not to mention putting into question the possibility of achieving peace, at least in the short-term.
Further strain was put on the process after Hamas won 2006 Palestinian elections. Although it offered Israel a number of longterm ceasefires and accepted the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative, Hamas has repeatedly refused to officially recognise Israel,[1] to renounce violent resistance, or accept some agreements previously made by the Palestinian Authority. It has claimed that it is being held to an unfair standard and points out that Israel has not recognized a Palestinian state, renounced violence or lived up to all pledges it has made during previous negotiations. Hamas has always renounced the Oslo Accords.




Contents


1 Background
2 Principles of the Accords

2.1 Annexes of the accords

2.1.1 Annex 1: Conditions of Palestinian Elections
2.1.2 Annex 2: Withdrawal of Israeli forces
2.1.3 Annex 3: Economic cooperation
2.1.4 Annex 4: Regional development


2.2 Agreed minutes of the accords

2.2.1 Minute A: General understandings
2.2.2 Minute B: Specific understandings

2.2.2.1 Article IV: Council's jurisdiction
2.2.2.2 Article VI (2): Transferring authority
2.2.2.3 Article VII (2): Cooperation
2.2.2.4 Article VII (5): Israel's powers
2.2.2.5 Article VIII: Police
2.2.2.6 Article X: Designating officials
2.2.2.7 Annex II: Israel's continuing responsibilities






3 Reaction
4 Criticisms
5 Subsequent negotiations

5.1 Oslo 2
5.2 Additional agreements


6 Loss of credibility
7 Arab-Israeli peace diplomacy and treaties
8 References
9 External links
10 See also

10.1 Issues
10.2 People







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Background
From the Rhodes conference in 1949 to the Madrid Conference of 1991,[2][3] there were many failed attempts for a settlement to bring about a lasting end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. However, what made the Oslo negotiations different was the decision by Israel to at last hold direct, face-to-face talks, with the Palestinian Liberation Organization.
A renewal of the Israeli-Palestinian quest for peace began at the end of the Cold War as the United States took the lead in international affairs. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Western observers were optimistic, as Francis Fukuyama wrote in an article, titled "The End of History". The hope was that the end of the Cold War heralded the beginning of a new international order. President George H. W. Bush, in a speech on 11 September 1990, spoke of a "rare opportunity" to move toward a "New world order" in which "the nations of the world, east and west, north and south, can prosper and live in harmony," adding that "today the new world is struggling to be born".[4][5]
The optimism of the moment appealed to Israelis, and 60% of them supported the Oslo Accords when they were first presented.[6] Some Israelis had become tired of the constant violence of the First Intifada, and many were willing to take risks for peace.[6] Some wanted to realize the economic benefits in the new global economy. The Gulf War (1990-1991) did much to persuade Israelis that the defensive value of territory had been overstated, and that the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait psychologically reduced their sense of security.[7] The Gulf War had also shown that a superior air force and technology was more important than territory in winning a war.
The Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) realized the loss of its most important diplomatic patron, due to the deterioration of the Soviet Union that started in 1989, and Arafat's failing relationship with Moscow. Another factor which pushed the PLO to the accords was the fallout from the Gulf War; because Arafat took a pro-Iraqi stand during the war, the Arab Gulf states cut off financial assistance to the PLO, and the PLO was not invited to the Madrid Conference of 1991 at which Israel discussed peace with Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and Palestinian groups that were not associated with the PLO.
In December 1992, in the background of the official "Madrid negotiations" in London, Israeli vice-minister of foreign affairs Yossi Beilin and Norwegian researcher Terje Rød-Larsen set up a secret meeting for PLO representative Ahmed Qurei and Israeli history professor Yair Hirschfeld. Qurei and Hirschfeld made a connection and decided to meet again in what was going to be a series of 14 meetings in Oslo. During the first few meetings, a concept of an accord was discussed and agreed upon. The Foreign Affairs Minister of Israel, Shimon Peres, was interested and sent the highest-ranking non-political representative and a military lawyer to continue the negotiations. In contrast to the official negotiations in Madrid, where actual meetings between the delegations were often limited to a few hours a day, the Israeli and Palestinian delegations in Norway were usually accommodated in the same residence, they had breakfast, lunch and dinner at the same table, resulting in mutual respect and close friendships. The Norwegian government covered the expenses, provided security and kept the meetings away from the public eye, using the research institute Fafo as a front.[8]
In August 1993, the delegations had reached an agreement which was signed in secrecy by Peres while visiting Oslo. Peres took the agreement to the United States to the surprise of US negotiator Dennis Ross. However, the Palestinians and Israelis had not yet agreed on the wording of the agreement, in which the PLO would acknowledge the state of Israel and pledge to reject violence, and Israel would recognise the (unelected) PLO as the official Palestinian authority, allowing Yasser Arafat to return to the West Bank. Most of the negotiations for this agreement were carried out in a hotel in Paris, now in full view of the public and the press. An agreement was reached and signed by Yasser Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin, just in time for the official signing in Washington.[8]

[edit] Principles of the Accords
In essence, the accords called for the withdrawal of Israeli forces from parts of the Gaza Strip and West Bank, and affirmed a Palestinian right of self-government within those areas through the creation of a Palestinian Authority. Palestinian rule was to last for a five-year interim period during which a permanent agreement would be negotiated (beginning no later than May 1996). Permanent issues such as Jerusalem, Palestinian refugees, Israeli settlements, and security and borders were deliberately excluded from the Accords and left to be decided. Israel was to grant interim self-government to the Palestinians in phases. Until a final status accord was established, West Bank and Gaza would be divided into three zones:

Area A - under complete control of the Palestinian Authority.
Area B - under Palestinian civil control and Israeli security control.
Area C - under complete Israeli control, except over Palestinian civilians. These areas were Israeli settlements and "security zones."

Along with the principles, the two groups signed Letters of Mutual Recognition - the Israeli government recognized the PLO as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, while the PLO recognized the right of the state of Israel to exist and renounced terrorism as well as other violence, and its desire for the destruction of the Israeli state.
The aim of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations was to establish a Palestinian Interim Self-Government Authority, an elected Council, for the Palestinian people in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, for a transitional period not exceeding five years, leading to a permanent settlement based on United Nations Security Council Resolution 242, and 338, an integral part of the whole peace process.
In order that the Palestinians govern themselves according to democratic principles, free and general political elections would be held for the Council.
Jurisdiction of the Palestinian Council would cover the West Bank and Gaza Strip, except for issues that would be finalized in the permanent status negotiations. The two sides viewed the West Bank and Gaza as a single territorial unit.
The five-year transitional period would commence with Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and Jericho area. Permanent status negotiations would begin as soon as possible between Israel and the Palestinians. The negotiations would cover remaining issues, including: Jerusalem, Palestinian refugees, Israeli settlements, security arrangements, borders, relations and cooperation with other neighbors, and other issues of common interest.
There would be a transfer of authority from the Israel Defence Forces to the authorized Palestinians, concerning education and culture, health, social welfare, direct taxation, and tourism.
The Council would establish a strong police force, while Israel would continue to carry the responsibility for defending against external threats.
An Israeli-Palestinian Economic Cooperation Committee would be established in order to develop and implement in a cooperative manner the programs identified in the protocols.
A redeployment of Israeli military forces in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip would take place.
The Declaration of Principles would enter into force one month after its signing. All protocols annexed to the Declaration of Principles and the Agreed Minutes pertaining to it, were to be regarded as part of it.

[edit] Annexes of the accords

[edit] Annex 1: Conditions of Palestinian Elections
This annex covered election agreements, a system of elections, rules and regulations regarding election campaigns, including agreed arrangements for the organizing of mass media, and the possibility of licensing a TV station. (Source: Reference.com)

[edit] Annex 2: Withdrawal of Israeli forces
An agreement on the withdrawal of Israeli military forces from the Gaza Strip and Jericho area. This agreement will include comprehensive arrangements to apply in the Gaza Strip and the Jericho area subsequent to the Israeli withdrawal. Internal security and public order by the Palestinian police force consisting of police officers recruited locally and from abroad (holding Jordanian passports and Palestinian documents issued by Egypt). Those who will participate in the Palestinian police force coming from abroad should be trained as police and police officers.

A temporary international or foreign presence, as agreed upon.
Establishment of a joint Palestinian-Israeli Coordination and Cooperation Committee]] for mutual security purposes.
Arrangements for a safe passage for persons and transportation between the Gaza Strip and Jericho area.
Arrangements for coordination between both parties regarding passages: Gaza - Egypt; and Jericho - Jordan.


[edit] Annex 3: Economic cooperation
The two sides agree to establish an Israeli-Palestinian continuing Committee for economic cooperation, focusing, among other things, on the following:

Cooperation in the field of water
Cooperation in the field of electricity
Cooperation in the field of energy
Cooperation in the field of finance
Cooperation in the field of transport and communications
Cooperation in the field of trade and commerce
Cooperation in the field of industry
Cooperation in, and regulation of, labor relations
Cooperation in social welfare issues
An environmental protection plan
Cooperation in the field of communication and media


[edit] Annex 4: Regional development
The two sides will cooperate in the context of the multilateral peace efforts in promoting a Development Program for the region, including the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, to be initiated by the G7.

[edit] Agreed minutes of the accords

[edit] Minute A: General understandings
Any powers and responsibilities transferred to the Palestinians through the Declaration of Principles prior to the inauguration of the Council will be subject to the same principles pertaining to Article IV, as set out in the agreed minutes below.

[edit] Minute B: Specific understandings

[edit] Article IV: Council's jurisdiction
It was to be understood that: Jurisdiction of the Council would cover West Bank and Gaza Strip territory, except for issues that would be negotiated in the permanent status negotiations.

[edit] Article VI (2): Transferring authority
It was agreed that the transfer of authority would be as follows: The Palestinians would inform the Israelis of the names of the authorized Palestinians who would assume the powers, authorities and responsibilities that would be transferred to the Palestinians according to the Declaration of Principles in the following fields: education and culture, health, social welfare, direct taxation, tourism, and any other authorities agreed upon.

[edit] Article VII (2): Cooperation
The Interim Agreement would also include arrangements for coordination and cooperation.

[edit] Article VII (5): Israel's powers
The withdrawal of the military government would not prevent Israel from exercising the powers and responsibilities not transferred to the Council.

[edit] Article VIII: Police
It was understood that the Interim Agreement would include arrangements for cooperation and coordination. It was also agreed that the transfer of powers and responsibilities to the Palestinian police would be accomplished in a phased manner.

[edit] Article X: Designating officials
It was agreed that the Israeli and Palestinian delegations would exchange the names of the individuals designated by them as members of the Joint Israeli-Palestinian Liaison Committee which would reach decisions by agreement.

[edit] Annex II: Israel's continuing responsibilities
It was understood that, subsequent to the Israeli withdrawal, Israel would continue to be responsible for external security, and for internal security and public order of settlements and Israelis. Israeli military forces and civilians would be allowed to continue using roads freely within the Gaza Strip and the Jericho area.

[edit] Reaction
The accords aroused among both Israelis and Palestinians a wave of hope for an end to the conflict, but skeptics abounded everywhere.
In Israel, a strong debate over the accords took place; the left wing supported them, while the right wing opposed them. After a two-day discussion in the Knesset on the government proclamation in the issue of the accord and the exchange of the letters, on 23 September 1993 a vote of confidence was held in which 61 Knesset members voted for the decision, 50 voted against and 8 abstained.
Palestinian reactions were also divided. Fatah, the group that represented the Palestinians in the negotiations, accepted the accords. But Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (which were known as the "refusal organizations") objected to the accords because their own charters refuse to recognize Israel's right to exist in Palestine.
On both sides there were fears of the other side's intentions. Israelis suspected that the Palestinians were entering into a tactical peace agreement, and that they were not sincere about wanting to reach peace and coexistence with Israel. They saw it as part of the Ten Point Program which calls for a national authority over any piece of liberated Palestinian land, and for a secular democratic bi-national state in Israel/Palestine with equal rights for all its citizens. For evidence they brought statements by Arafat in Palestinian forums, in which he compared the accord to the Hudaibiya agreement that Muhammad signed with the sons of the tribe of Quraish. They understood those statements as an attempt to justify the signing of the accords in accordance with historical-religious precedent, with step agreements to reach final goal.
After the signing of the agreements, Israel refrained from building new settlements although the Oslo agreements stipulated no such ban. However, it continued expanding existing settlements which fell far short of the Shamir government's 1991-92 level. Construction of Housing Units Before Oslo: 1991-92 14,320 units. After Oslo: 1994-95 3,850 units; 1996-1997 3,570 units [9] although the settler population in the West Bank continued growing by around 10,000 per year.[10] The Palestinians built throughout area C administered by Israel without permit.[11]
According to the Israeli government, the Israeli's trust in the accords was undermined by the fact that after the signing, the attacks against Israel intensified,[12] which some explained as an attempt by certain Palestinian organizations to thwart the peace process. Others believed that the Palestinian Authority had no interest in stopping these attacks and was instead endorsing them. As evidence, they showed that when violence flared up in September 1996, Palestinian police turned their guns on the Israelis in clashes which left 61 Palestinians and 15 Israeli soldiers dead. [13] Important sections of the Israeli public opposed the process; notably, the Jewish settlers feared that it would lead to them losing their homes.
Many Palestinians feared that Israel was not serious about dismantling their settlements in the West Bank, especially around Jerusalem. They feared they might even accelerate their settlement program in the long run, by building more settlements and expanding existing ones.[14]

[edit] Criticisms
The Oslo Accords may appear not to have considered factors that would influence its interpretation. For example, the Cave of the Patriarchs massacre is often blamed for undermining Palestinian trust in the process. Similarly, the expansion of Israeli settlements[15] and blockades caused the deterioration of economic conditions, and much frustration for Palestinians. These factors caused a drop in support for the accord and for those who supported it.
Some academics[who?] have argued that the principles of the Oslo Accord cannot be accepted by both sides, and would only further separate the Israelis and Palestinians, both of whom believe they have a claim to the land they are fighting over, by creating a superior side and an inferior side.[clarification needed] Israel expanded its settlements, 'targeted assassinations' and heavy-handed tactics, the Palestinians grew frustrated.
There have been suggested alternatives to boundary setting and creating principles that divide Israelis and Palestinians. One alternative is to move a peace process towards the creation of a bi-national state, a "one-state solution", that promotes co-existence rather than to continuing to divide. An argument for this as a possible way of reconciliation is that neither side can wholly justify a claim for homogeneity. Palestine has a varied history of occupancy, such as the Canaanites, Hittites and Ammonites in ancient times.[16] Also, some Israeli and Palestinian thinkers have previously argued for a bi-national state as a more attractive alternative to separatism.[17]
Norwegian academics, including Norway's leading authority on the negotiations, Hilde Henriksen Waage, have focused on the flawed role of Norway during the Oslo process. In 2001, the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) commissioned Waage to produce an official, comprehensive history of the Norwegian-mediated back channel negotiations. In order to do the research, she was given privileged access to all relevant, classified files in the ministry's archives. The MFA had been at the heart of the Oslo process. Waage was surprised to discover "not a single scrap of paper for the entire period from January to September 1993 - precisely the period of the backchannel talks". Waage has written that, "Had the missing documents been accessible, there seems no doubt they would have shown the extent to which the Oslo process was conducted on Israel’s premises, with Norway acting as Israel's helpful errand boy".[18].

[edit] Subsequent negotiations
In addition to the first accord, namely the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government, other more specific accords are often informally also known as "Oslo":

[edit] Oslo 2

The Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip (also called Oslo 2), signed on 28 September 1995 gave Palestinians self-rule in Bethlehem, Hebron, Jenin, Nablus, Qalqilya, Ramallah, Tulkarm, and some 450 villages.


[edit] Additional agreements
Additional Israeli-Palestinian documents related to the Oslo Accords are:

Israel-Palestine Liberation Organization letters of recognition, (9 September 1993),
Protocol on Economic Relations, signed in Paris on 29 April 1994,
1994 Cairo Agreement on the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area (4 May 1994),
1994 Washington Declaration (25 July 1994),
Agreement on Preparatory Transfer of Powers and Responsibilities Between Israel and the PLO (29 August 1994),
Protocol on Further Transfer of Powers and Responsibilities signed at Cairo on 27 August 1995
Protocol Concerning the Redeployment in Hebron (15 January/17 January 1997)
Wye River Memorandum (23 October 1998)
Sharm el-Sheikh Memorandum (4 September 1999)


[edit] Loss of credibility
Since the start of the al-Aqsa Intifada, the Oslo Accords are viewed with increasing disfavor by both the Palestinian and Israeli public. In May 2000, seven years after the Oslo Accords and five months before the start of the al-Aqsa Intifada, a survey by the Tami Steinmetz Center for Peace Research at the University of Tel Aviv found that 39% of all Israelis supported the Accords and that 32% believed that the Accords would result in peace in the next few years.[19]. By contrast, the May 2004 survey found that 26% of all Israelis supported the Accords and 18% believed that the Accords would result in peace in the next few years. Many Palestinians believed that the Oslo Accords had turned the PLO leadership into a tool of the Israeli state in suppressing their own people. While benefiting a small elite, the conditions of most Palestinians worsened. This was seen as one of the causes for the al-Aqsa Intifada.

[edit] Arab-Israeli peace diplomacy and treaties

Paris Peace Conference, 1919
Faisal-Weizmann Agreement (1919)
1949 Armistice Agreements
Camp David Accords (1978)
Israel-Egypt Peace Treaty (1979)
Madrid Conference of 1991
Oslo Accords (1993)
Israel-Jordan Treaty of Peace (1994)
Camp David 2000 Summit
Peace process in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
Projects working for peace among Israelis and Arabs
List of Middle East peace proposals
International law and the Arab-Israeli conflict


[edit] References


^ Dershowitz, Alan. The Case for Israel. Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2003. p. 3.
^ Israel-Egypt Armistice Agreement Jewish Virtual Library
^ Madrid Peace Conference, 1991 Palestine Facts
^ President Bush's speech to Congress al-bab.com
^ A Chronological History of the New World Order Constitution Society
^ a b The Israel-Palestine Conflict, James L. Gelvin
^ the gulf conflict 1990-1991: Diplomacy and war in the new world order, Lawrence Freedman and Efraim Karsh
^ a b Gaza First: the secret Norway channel to peace between Israel and the PLO, Jane Corbin
^ Foundation for Middle East Peace
^ Foundation for Middle East Peace, statistics
^ http://imra.org.il/story.php3?id=1127 Independent Media Review Analysis
^ In 5 Years Since Oslo, More Israelis Have Been Killed by Palestinian Terrorists than in the 15 Years Prior to the Accord Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 10 September 1998
^ The Palestinian Army Christians for Israel
^ Existential Threats to Israel and Palestine: Suicides and Settlements Al-Ittihad, 26 May 2002 (republished on the Nixon Center website)
^ Settlements information, Foundation for Middle East Peace. "Sources of Population Growth: Total Israeli Population and Settler Population, 1991 - 2003". http://www.fmep.org/settlement_info/stats_data/settler_population_growth/sources_population_growth_1991-2003.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-12. 
^ R. Garaudy ‘The Case of Israel’ London, Shorouk International. p 32.
^ Truth and reconciliation Al-Ahram Weekly, Issue 412
^ Postscript to Oslo: The Mystery of Norway's Missing Files, Journal of Palestine Studies, Vol. XXXVIII, No. 1 (Autumn 2008)
^ Statistics on Israeli support of the Oslo Accords by the Tami Steinmetz Center for Peace Research



Bregman, Ahron Elusive Peace: How the Holy Land Defeated America.
Clinton, Bill (2005). My Life. Vintage. ISBN 1-4000-3003-X.
Eran, Oded. "Arab-Israel Peacemaking." The Continuum Political Encyclopedia of the Middle East. Ed. Avraham Sela. New York: Continuum, 2002.


[edit] External links

[1]


[edit] See also

Second Intifada
Economic Cooperation Foundation
Peace process in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
Peace Now
Aqabah


[edit] Issues

Israeli-Palestinian conflict
Proposals for a Palestinian state
Arab-Israeli conflict


[edit] People

Yair Hirschfeld - academic who first made secret contacts with Ahmed Qurei in London.
Terje Rød-Larsen and Mona Juul - Norwegian facilitators during the negotiations.
Johan Jørgen Holst - Norwegian Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Jan Egeland - Norwegian Deputy Foreign Minister, provided political cover, facilities and finances for the negotiations.
Ahmed Qurei - currently negotiator for the Palestinian Authority, was head of the Palestinian negotiating team.
Uri Savir - former Director General of the Israeli Foreign Ministry, was Head of the Israeli negotiating team.
Joel Singer - Chief lawyer for the Israeli negotiating team.
Ron Pundak - currently Director General of the Peres Center for Peace, formed first Israeli negotiating team with Hirschfeld, before official Israeli involvement.
Yossi Beilin - former Minister of Justice and head of Meretz Party, was initiator of negotiations, and conducted numerous meetings in Israel, West Bank and worldwide.
Shimon Peres - currently President of Israel, was the Israeli Minister of Foreign Affairs and received Nobel Peace Prize.
Yitzhak Rabin - Israeli prime minister who initiated official governmental negotiations with the PLO, signed the Oslo Accords, and was assassinated by a Jewish-religious fundamentalist in 1995. Received Nobel Peace Prize.
Bill Clinton - US president who encouraged the parties to meet and negotiate, hosted the Oslo Accords signing ceremonies and also convened the Camp David summit in 2000.
Yasser Arafat - was Chairman and President of the Palestinian Authority, previously Chairman of the PLO, initiated official PLO negotiations with Israel. Received Nobel Peace Prize.
Mahmoud Abbas - currently President of the Palestinian Authority, was the lead drafter of the Oslo Accords, and maintained communications between negotiators and Arafat throughout the negotiations process.
Yigal Amir - religious student at Bar Ilan University Law School who assassinated Yitzhak Rabin to prevent Israeli withdrawal from Judea, Samaria and Gaza. Currently serving life in prison.
Ehud Barak - currently Minister of Defense, was the Israeli prime minister during Camp David summit in 2000. Previously, was the Chief of Staff of the IDF between 1992-1995.




v • d • e
Israeli-Palestinian conflict (Part of the Arab-Israeli conflict)


Participants
Individuals
Conflicts / Violence / Terrorism
Diplomacy



 Israel:

Israel Defense Forces
Israel Police
Mossad
Shabak

 Palestinians:
Main:

Palestine Liberation Organisation
Palestinian National Authority
Fatah
 Hamas

Other:

Al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades
 DFLP
Palestine Liberation Front
Palestinian Islamic Jihad
Palestinian Popular Struggle Front
 PFLP
PFLP-GC
Popular Resistance Committees

Influence:

Arab League
 British Mandate of Palestine (1920–48)
 Egypt
 European Union
 Germany
 France
 Hezbollah
 Iran
 Iraq
 Jordan
 Lebanon
 Libya
 Muslim Brotherhood
 Al-Qaeda
 Russia
 Saudi Arabia
 Syria
 Tunisia
 United Kingdom
 United Nations
 United States
 Yemen



 Moshe Arens
 Ami Ayalon
 Ehud Barak
 Menachem Begin
 Meir Dagan
 Avi Dichter
 Yuval Diskin
 David Ben-Gurion
 Ephraim Halevy
 Dan Halutz
 Golda Meir
 Shaul Mofaz
 Yitzhak Mordechai
 Benjamin Netanyahu
 Ehud Olmert
 Shimon Peres
 Yaakov Peri
 Yitzhak Rabin
 Amnon Lipkin-Shahak
 Yitzhak Shamir
 Ariel Sharon
 Shabtai Shavit
 Moshe Ya'alon
 Danny Yatom
 Zvi Zamir
 Tzipi Livni

 Abu Abbas
 Mahmoud Abbas
 Moussa Arafat
 Yasser Arafat
 Yahya Ayyash
 Marwan Barghouti
 Mohammed Dahlan
 Mohammed Deif
 George Habash
 Wadie Haddad
 Ismail Haniya
 Nayef Hawatmeh
 Amin al-Husayni
 Ghazi Jabali
 Ahmed Jibril
 Abu Jihad
 Salah Khalaf
 Leila Khaled
 Sheikh Khalil
 Khaled Mashal
 Zuheir Mohsen
 Abu Ali Mustafa
 Abu Nidal
 Izz ad-Din al-Qassam
 Jibril Rajoub
 Abdel Aziz al-Rantissi
 Ali Hassan Salameh
 Salah Shahade
 Ramadan Shallah
 Fathi Shaqaqi
 Ahmed Yassin


1920 Palestine riots
1921 Jaffa riots
1929 Palestine riots
1929 Hebron massacre
1936–1939 Arab revolt
1930s Irgun attacks
1947 Jerusalem riots
1948 Arab-Israeli War
· 1948 war massacres
· 1948 Deir Yassin massacre
· 1948 Hadassah medical convoy massacre
· 1948 Palestinian exodus
1948-1967 Jewish exodus from Arab lands
1948-1967 Terrorist attacks against Israel
1953-1955 Unit 101
1966 Samu Incident
1967 Six-Day War
1968 Battle of Karameh
1969-1970 War of Attrition
1970 Avivim school bus massacre
1972 Munich Olympics massacre
· 1972 Operation Wrath of God
· 1973 Israeli raid on Lebanon
1973 Yom Kippur War
1974 Kiryat Shmona massacre
1974 Maalot massacre
1975 Savoy Hotel attack
1975 Zion Square bombing
1976 Operation Entebbe
1978 Coastal Road massacre
1978 South Lebanon conflict
1980 Misgav Am attack
1982 Lebanon War
· 1982 Siege of Beirut
· 1982 Sabra and Shatila massacre
1984 Bus 300 hijacking
1985 Operation Wooden Leg
1987 Night of the Gliders
1987–1990 Intifada
· 1988 Tunis Raid
· 1989 Bus 405 attack
Palestinian Islamic Jihad suicide attacks
Hamas suicide attacks
1994 Cave of the Patriarchs massacre
1996 Bus 18 suicide bombings
2000–2006 Al-Aqsa Intifada
· Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade suicide attacks
· Massacres during Al-Aqsa Intifada
· Assassinations during Al-Aqsa Intifada
· 2001 Dolphinarium discotheque suicide bombing
· 2001 Sbarro restaurant suicide bombing
· 2002 Passover suicide bombing
· 2002 Egged bus 841 suicide bombing
· 2002 Operation Defensive Shield
· 2002 Battle of Jenin
· 2003 Shmuel HaNavi bus bombing
· 2003 Maxim restaurant suicide bombing
· 2004 Israel-Gaza conflict
· 2004 Operation Rainbow
· 2004 Operation Days of Penitence
· 2006 Israel-Gaza conflict
· 2006 shelling of Beit Hanoun
2006-2007 Fatah-Hamas conflict
2007–2008 Israel-Gaza conflict
· 2008 Operation Hot Winter
· 2008 Mercaz HaRav shooting
· 2008 Jerusalem bulldozer attack
2008–2009 Israel–Gaza conflict


Hussein-McMahon Correspondence
Sykes-Picot Agreement
Balfour Declaration
UN Partition Plan Resolution 181
Israeli Declaration of Independence
UN Resolution 194
UN Resolution 242
Palestinian Declaration of Independence
1991 Madrid Conference
1993 Oslo Accords
1997 Hebron Agreement
1998 Wye River Memorandum
1999 Sharm el-Sheikh Memorandum
2000 Camp David Summit
2001 Taba Summit
2002 Road map for peace
Quartet on the Middle East
2005 Israel's unilateral disengagement plan
2007 Annapolis Conference






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oslo_Accords"
Categories: Israeli-Palestinian peace efforts | Israeli-Palestinian conflict | 1993 in IsraelHidden categories: All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since March 2009 | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Français
Galego
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Svenska
中文









 This page was last modified on 29 March 2009, at 16:56 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
