













Bamboo - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Bamboo";
		var wgTitle = "Bamboo";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "39029";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281594230;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Bamboo

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please improve this article if you can. (April 2009)


For other uses, see Bamboo (disambiguation).


Bamboo



Bamboo forest in Kyoto, Japan



Scientific classification





Kingdom:
Plantae


(unranked):
Angiosperms


(unranked):
Monocots


(unranked):
Commelinids


Order:
Poales


Family:
Poaceae


Subfamily:
Bambusoideae


Supertribe:
Bambusodae


Tribe:
Bambuseae
Kunth ex Dumort.





Diversity


Around 92 genera and 5,000 species


Subtribes




Arthrostylidiinae
Arundinariinae
Bambusinae
Chusqueinae
Guaduinae
Melocanninae
Nastinae
Racemobambodinae
Shibataeinae

See the full Taxonomy of the Bambuseae.



The bamboos  listen (help·info) are a group of woody perennial evergreen (except for certain temperate species) plants in the true grass family Poaceae, subfamily Bambusoideae, tribe Bambuseae. Some are giant bamboos, the largest members of the grass family. Bamboos are the fastest growing woody plants in the world. Their growth rate (up to 60 centimeters (24 in.)/day) is due to a unique rhizome-dependent system, but is highly dependent on local soil and climate conditions.
They are of economic and high cultural significance in East Asia and South East Asia where they are used extensively in gardens, as a building material, and as a food source.
There are more than 70 genera divided into about 1,000 species.[1] They are found in diverse climates, from cold mountains to hot tropical regions. They occur across East Asia, from 50°N latitude in Sakhalin through to Northern Australia, and west to India and the Himalayas.[2] They also occur in sub-Saharan Africa, and in the Americas from the Southeastern United States[3] south to Argentina and Chile, reaching their southernmost point anywhere, at 47°S latitude. Major areas with no native bamboos include Europe, North Africa, Western Asia, Canada, and Antarctica.[4]




Contents


1 Terms in other languages
2 Ecology

2.1 Growth
2.2 Mass flowering


3 Cultivation

3.1 Commercial timber
3.2 Ornamental bamboos


4 Uses

4.1 Culinary
4.2 Medicine
4.3 Construction
4.4 Torture
4.5 Other


5 Bamboo in human culture

5.1 Myths and legends
5.2 Bamboo slip


6 Other aspects
7 Gallery
8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Terms in other languages
Bamboo is known as bambus in German, Norwegian, Polish and Icelandic; bambusz in Italian; Hungarian; Spanish as bambú; Filipino as kawayan; Chamorro as piao; Standard Mandarin as zhu (Chinese: 竹; pinyin: zhú); Japanese as take (Kanji: 竹; Hiragana: たけ ?); Korean as dae (대) or daenamu (대나무); Vietnamese as Tre /tʃe/; Hindi as baans (बाँस) or vainoo (वेणु); Persian as nei (نی); Russian as bambook (бамбук) or saza (саза); Arabic as "khaizran" (خيزران); Indonesian as bambu[5].

[edit] Ecology

[edit] Growth
Bamboo is the fastest-growing plant on Earth; it has been measured surging skyward as fast as 121 cm (47.6 inches) in a 24-hour period,[6] and can also reach maximal growth rate exceeding one meter (39 inches) per hour for short periods of time. Many prehistoric bamboos exceeded heights of 75 meters (250 feet). Primarily growing in regions of warmer climates during the Cretaceous, vast fields existed in what is now Asia. Modern bamboos can only sustain their maximal growth rate for short periods of time[clarification needed]. Bamboo can grow six or more inches a day though there are exceptions (below).

[edit] Mass flowering
Although some bamboos flower every year, most species flower infrequently. In fact, many bamboos only flower at intervals as long as 60 or 120 years. These taxa exhibit mass flowering (or gregarious flowering), with all plants in the population flowering simultaneously. The longest mass flowering interval known is 130 years, and is found for all the species Phyllostachys bambusoides (Sieb. & Zucc.). In this species, all plants of the same stock flower at the same time, regardless of differences in geographic locations or climatic conditions, then the bamboo dies. The lack of environmental impact on the time of flowering indicates the presence of some sort of “alarm clock” in each cell of the plant which signals the diversion of all energy to flower production and the cessation of vegetative growth.[7] This mechanism, as well as the evolutionary cause behind it, is still largely a mystery.
One theory to explain the evolution of this semelparous mass flowering is the predator satiation hypothesis. This theory argues that by fruiting at the same time, a population increases the survival rate of their seeds by flooding the area with fruit so that even if predators eat their fill, there will still be seeds left over. Thus, according to this hypothesis, the death of the adult clone is due to resource exhaustion, as it would be more effective for parent plants to devote all resources to creating a large seed crop than to hold back energy for their own regeneration.[8]
A second theory, the fire cycle hypothesis, argues that the death of the adult plants has evolved as a mechanism to create disturbance in the habitat, thus providing the seedlings with a gap to grow in. This hypothesis argues that the dead culms create a large fuel load, and also a large target for lightning strikes, increasing the likelihood of wildfire.[9] Because bamboos are very aggressive as early successional plants, the seedlings would be able to outstrip other plants and take over the space left by their parents. However, both of these theories contain flaws[specify], and the cause of this mass flowering and fruiting remains uncertain.
The mass fruiting also has direct economic and ecological consequences, however. The huge increase in available fruit in the forests often causes a boom in rodent populations, leading to increases in disease and famine in nearby human populations. For example, there are devastating consequences when the Melocanna bambusoides population flowers and fruits once every 30–35 years around the Bay of Bengal. The death of the bamboo plants following their fruiting means the local people lose their building material, and the large increase in bamboo fruit leads to a rapid increase in rodent populations. As the number of rodents increase, they consume all available food, including grain fields and stored food, sometimes leading to famine. These rats can also carry dangerous diseases such as typhus, typhoid, and bubonic plague, which can reach epidemic proportions as the rodents increase in number.[10][11]

[edit] Cultivation





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2008)







This section contains instructions, advice, or how-to content. The purpose of Wikipedia is to present facts, not to train. Please help improve this article either by rewriting the how-to content or by moving it to Wikiversity or Wikibooks. (April 2009)






Bamboo foliage with yellow stems (probably Phyllostachys aurea)



[edit] Commercial timber
Timber is harvested from cultivated and wild stands and some of the larger bamboos, particularly species in the genus Phyllostachys, are known as "timber bamboos".

[edit] Ornamental bamboos
Many bamboos are popular in cultivation as garden trees. There are two general patterns for the growth of bamboo: "clumping" (sympodial) and "running" (monopodial). Clumping bamboo species tend to spread slowly, as the growth pattern of the rhizomes is to simply expand the root mass gradually, similar to ornamental grasses. "Running" bamboos, on the other hand, need to be taken care of in cultivation because of their potential for aggressive behavior. They spread mainly through their roots and/or rhizomes, which can spread widely underground and send up new culms to break through the surface. Running bamboo species are highly variable in their tendency to spread; this is related to both the species and the soil and climate conditions. Some can send out runners of several meters a year, while others can stay in the same general area for long periods. If neglected, over time they can cause problems by moving into adjacent areas.




Bamboo foliage with black stems (probably Phyllostachys nigra)


Bamboos seldom and unpredictably flower, and the frequency of flowering varies greatly from species to species. Once flowering takes place, a plant will decline and often die entirely. Seeds collected from a planting. Although there are always a few species of bamboo in flower at any given time, collectors desiring to grow specific bamboo typically obtain their plants as divisions of already-growing plants, rather than waiting for seeds to be produced.
to control and deeper cuts will need to be made. Regular maintenance will indicate major growth directions and locations. Once the rhizomes are cut, they are typically removed; however, rhizomes take a number of months to mature and an immature, severed rhizome will usually cease growing if left in-ground. If any bamboo shoots come up outside of the bamboo area afterwards, their presence indicates the precise location of the missed rhizome. The fibrous roots that radiate from the rhizomes do not grow up to be more bamboo so if they stay in the ground, that's not a problem.
The second way to control growth is by surrounding the plant or grove with a physical barrier. This method is very detrimental to ornamental bamboo as the bamboo within quickly becomes rootbound--showing all the signs of any unhealthy containerized plant. Symptoms include rhizomes escaping over the top, down underneath, and bursting the barrier. The bamboo within generally deteriorates in quality as fewer and fewer culms grow each year, culms live shorter periods, new culm diameter decreases, fewer leaves grow on the culms, and leaves turn yellow as the unnaturally contained rootmass quickly depletes the soil of nutrients, and curling leaves as the condensed roots cannot collect the water they need to sustain the foliage. Concrete and specially-rolled HDPE plastic are the usual materials used. This is placed in a 60-90 cm (2-3 feet) deep ditch around the planting, and angled out at the top to direct the rhizomes to the surface. (This is _only_ possible if the barrier is installed in a straight line.) Strong rhizomes and tools can penetrate plastic barriers with relative ease, so great care must be taken. Barriers usually fail sooner or later, or the bamboo within suffers greatly. Casual observation of many failed barriers has shown bursting of 60 mil HDPE in 5–6 years, and rhizomes diving underneath in as few as 3 years post install. In small areas regular maintenance is the only perfect method of controlling the spreading bamboos. Bamboo in barriers is much more difficult to remove than free-spreading bamboo. Barriers and edging are unnecessary for clump-forming bamboos. Clump-forming bamboos may eventually need to have portions removed if they get too large.

[edit] Uses

[edit] Culinary




Edible bamboo shoots in a Japanese market


Main article: Bamboo shoot
The shoots (new bamboo culms that come out of the ground) of bamboo are edible. They are used in numerous Asian dishes and broths, and are available in supermarkets in various sliced forms, both fresh and canned version. A health warning is appropriate in the case of the shoots of the giant bamboo, as they contain cyanide. Despite this, the Golden Bamboo Lemur ingests many times the quantity of toxin that would kill a human.
The bamboo shoot in its fermented state (called khorisa) forms an important ingredient in the cuisine of Assam.
In Indonesia, they are sliced thin and then boiled with santan (thick coconut milk) and spices to make a dish named gulai rebung. Other recipes using bamboo shoots are sayur lodeh (mixed vegetables in coconut milk) and lun pia (sometimes written lumpia: fried wrapped bamboo shoots with vegetables). Note that the shoots of some species contain toxins that need to be leached or boiled out before they can be eaten safely.
Pickled bamboo, used as a condiment, may also be made from the pith of the young shoots.
The sap of young stalks tapped during the rainy season may be fermented to make ulanzi (a sweet wine) or simply made into a soft drink. Zhúyèqing jiu (竹葉青酒) is a green-coloured Chinese liquor that has bamboo leaves as one of its ingredients.
Bamboo leaves are also used as wrappers for zongzi, a steamed dumpling typical of southern China, which usually contains glutinous rice and other ingredients.
The empty hollow in the stalks of larger bamboo is often used to cook food in many Asian cultures. Soups are boiled and rice is cooked in the hollows of fresh stalks of bamboo directly over a flame. Similarly, steamed tea is sometimes rammed into bamboo hollows to produce compressed forms of Pu-erh tea. Cooking food in bamboo is said to give the food a subtle but distinctive taste.
In Sambalpur, India, the tender shoots are grated into juliennes and fermented to prepare kardi. The name is derived from the Sanskrit word for Bamboo Shoot "karira". This fermented Bamboo Shoot is used in various culinary preparations, notably "amil", a sour vegetable soup. It is also made into pancakes using rice flour as a binding agent. The Shoots that have turned a little fiberous are fermented, dried, and grounded to sand size particles to prepare a garnish known as "Hendua". It is also cooked with tender Pumpkin leaves to make Sag "Green Leaves" a green leaves recipe.
In addition, bamboo is frequently used for cooking utensils within many cultures. In modern times, some see bamboo tools as an eco-friendly alternative to other manufactured utensils.[12]

[edit] Medicine
Bamboo is used in Chinese medicine for treating infections. It is also a low calorie source of potassium. It has also been known for its sweet taste and good source of nutrients. In Ayurveda, the Indian system of traditional medicine, the silicious concretion found in the culms of the bamboo stem is called banslochan. It is known as tabashir or tawashir in Unani-Tibb the Indo-Persian system of Medicine. In English this concretion is called "bamboo manna". This concretion is said to be a tonic for the respiratory diseases. This concretion, which was earlier obtained from Melocanna bambusoides is very hard to get now and has been largely replaced by synthetic silcic acid. In most Indian literature, Bambusa arundinacea is described as the source of bamboo manna. (Puri, 2003).

[edit] Construction




Bamboo scaffolding can reach great heights.






House made from 100% bamboo


When treated, bamboo forms a very hard wood which is both lightweight and exceptionally durable. In tropical climates it is used in elements of house construction, construction scaffolding, as a substitute for steel reinforcing rods in concrete construction, and so on. Modern companies are also attempting to popularize bamboo flooring made of bamboo pieces steamed, flattened, glued together, finished, and cut. However, bamboo wood is easily infested by wood-boring insects unless treated with wood preservatives or kept very dry (see picture). A lot of institutes and universities are working on the bamboo as an ecological construction material. It is possible to get in the United States and France houses 100% made with bamboo, earthquake and cyclone-resistant, with international certification. Three ISO standards are for bamboo as construction material.

[edit] Torture
There are many records of humans being tortured by bamboo.[citation needed] Because bamboo grows quickly, it can grow through a person, causing them much pain.[citation needed] The Mythbusters found that a piece of bamboo can grow through a person in 2–4 days, given the right growing conditions.[13] It has also been documented that in World War II, Japanese troops tortured U.S. soldiers by removing their fingernails with bamboo[citation needed], as did the Viet Cong troops.[citation needed]

[edit] Other




Chinese bamboo carving, late Qing Dynasty.






Making a bamboo undershot water wheel in the Yangshuo countryside, Guangxi, China (March 2007)






A complete opium smoking “layout” including a bamboo opium pipe.






Bicycle frame made of bamboo (1896)






Woven Bamboo Basket kept for sale in K R Market, Bangalore, India


Besides its use as a construction material, it is also used for fencemaking, bridges, toilets, walking sticks, canoes, tableware, decorative artwork carving, furniture, chopsticks, food steamers, toys, bicycles, hats, and martial arts weaponry, including fire arrows, flame throwers and rockets. Also, abaci and various musical instruments such as the dizi, xiao, shakuhachi, palendag, jinghu, angklung, it can also be used in building tree forts that can hold a normal child's body weight. The Bamboo Organ of Las Piñas, Philippines has pipes made of bamboo culms. Bamboo is the traditional material used for fly fishing rods. When bamboo is harvested for wood, care is needed to select mature stems that are several years old, as first-year stems, although full sized, are not fully developed and are not as strong as more mature stems.
Bamboo canes are normally round in cross-section, but square canes can be produced by forcing the young culms to grow through a tube of square cross-section slightly smaller than the culm's natural diameter, thereby constricting the growth to the shape of the tube. Every few days the tube is removed and replaced higher up the fast-growing culm.
The fiber of bamboo has been used to make paper in China since early times. A high quality hand-made paper is still produced in small quantities. Coarse bamboo paper is still used to make spirit money in many Chinese communities.
The wood is used for knitting needles and a rayon type fabric made of bamboo fiber can be used for yarn and fabrics. A technique of making bamboo fiber from bamboo pulp has been developed in East Asian countries. The textile industry benefits from the many properties of this kind of fabric: soft, absorbent, antibacterial, UV resistant, hypoallergenic, thermo-regulating.[14]





Lists of miscellaneous information should be avoided. Please relocate any relevant information into appropriate sections or articles. (March 2009)


Sharpened bamboo is also traditionally used to tattoo in Japan, Hawai'i and elsewhere.
Bamboo is used for the stems of traditional Vietnamese, Chinese and Japanese smoking pipes, and was also utilized for crafting the stems of opium pipes.
A variety of species of bamboo was one of about two dozen plants carried by Polynesian voyagers to provide all their needs settling new islands; in the Hawaiian Islands, among many uses, ʻOhe (bamboo) carried water, made irrigation troughs for taro terraces, was used as a traditional knife for cutting the umbilical cord of a newborn, as a stamp for dyeing bark tapa cloth, and for four hula instruments — nose flute, rattle, stamping pipes and Jew's harp.
Some skateboard and snowboard deck manufacturers as well as surfboard builders are beginning to use bamboo construction. It is both lighter and stronger than traditional materials and its cultivation is environmentally friendly. At least one snow ski manufacturing company, Liberty Skis, now uses bamboo construction for these reasons.[15]
Bamboo has been used in the construction of fishing rods since the mid 1800s. However, following the invention of fiberglass and graphite, bamboo use in fishing rods has declined dramatically. There is something of a resurgence of the use of bamboo, particularly for bamboo fly rods as demonstrated by some companies because of their aesthetics and impact on the environment.
Bamboo is also used to make enclosures in fish farming, where cages can be made from a wooden frame and bamboo lattices.
A single shoot of Bamboo can also be made into a didgeridoo, a wind instrument that is indigenous to Australia.
Bamboo has gained increasing popularity in the culinary world as a material for cutting boards, as they are hard enough to withstand years of knife abuse, yet more forgiving to the knife blade, causing less damage to the edged utensils over time[citation needed].
In Indonesia, bamboo has been used for making various kinds of musical instruments. The most popular ones are the kolintang and the angklung.
Bamboo is used in Philippines to make chairs,wooden sofa,wooden beds,and as a framing for the traditional Filipino house, Nipa Hut.
Most recently, Smock, a letterpress print shop in Syracuse, New York has created a completely sustainable bamboo paper. Free of pesticides or fertilizer and is harvested from areas in Thailand where no traditional or civil rights are violated.
Bamboo can also be used in IT and electronics products. In 2008, Taiwanese hardware producer Asus launched the first ever laptop with an outer casing made from bamboo.[16] The laptop is marketed in France as being écolo.[17]
There have been several breakthroughs in the use of bamboo as an alternative fuel. In this capacity it is most widely known for charcoal. In 2008 one U.S. Company [Lorachell] in a collaborative effort with Vietnam has successfully tested bamboo use as an alternative bio mass fuel. The Bamboo is chipped and fermented producing a biogas. This also reduces soil pollution.

[edit] Bamboo in human culture




Bamboo, by Xu Wei, Ming Dynasty.


Bamboo's long life makes it a Chinese symbol of longevity, while in India it is a symbol of friendship. The rarity of its blossoming has led to the flowers' being regarded as a sign of impending famine. This may be due to rats feeding upon the profusion of flowers, then multiplying and destroying a large part of the local food supply. The most recent flowering began in May 2006 (see Mautam). Bamboo is said to bloom in this manner only about every 50 years (see 28–60 year examples in FAO: 'gregarious' species table).
In Chinese culture, the bamboo, plum blossom, orchid, and chrysanthemum (often known as méi lán zhú jú 梅兰竹菊) are collectively referred to as the Four Noble Ones. These four plants also represent the four seasons and, in Confucian ideology, four aspects of the junzi ("prince" or "noble one").
The pine tree, the bamboo, and the plum blossom (song zhú méi 松竹梅) are also admired for their perseverance under harsh conditions, and are together known as the "Three Friends in Winter" (岁寒三友). The "Three Friends" is traditionally used as a system of ranking in Japan, for example in sushi sets or accommodations at a traditional Ryokan (inn). Pine (matsu 松) is of the first rank, bamboo (také 竹) is of second rank, and plum (ume 梅) is of the third.
In Japan, a bamboo forest sometimes surrounds a Shinto shrine as part of a sacred barrier against evil. Many Buddhist temples also have bamboo groves.




A cylindrical bamboo brush holder or holder of poems on scrolls, created by Zhang Xihuang in the 17th century, late Ming or early Qing Dynasty. In the calligraphy of Zhang's style, the poem Returning to My Farm in the Field by the 4th century poet Tao Yuanming is incised on the holder.


Bamboo symbolizes the spirit of Vovinam (a Vietnamese martial arts): "cương nhu phối triển" (coordination between hard and soft (martial arts)). Bamboo also symbolizes the Vietnamese hometown and Vietnamese soul: the gentlemanlike, straightforwardness, hard working, optimism, unity and adaptableness. Furthermore, some scientists even regard that Vietnamese culture is bamboo culture. A Vietnamese proverb says: "When the bamboo is old, the bamboo sprouts appear", the meaning being Vietnam will never be annihilated; if the previous generation dies, the children take their place. Therefore the Vietnam nation and Vietnamese value will be maintained and developed eternally. Traditional Vietnamese villages are surrounded by thick bamboo hedges (lũy tre).
The Bozo, an ethnic group in West Africa, are so named because boso means "bamboo house" in Bamana (Bambara) and the other West Mande languages. The Bozo/Boso are traditional fisherpeople on the Niger River. To many people in Western Europe and North America, bamboo is a symbol of East Asia, while in fact many bamboo species grow naturally--and are used extensively in human culture--in sub-Saharan Africa.
The Song Dynasty (960-1279 AD) Chinese scientist and polymath Shen Kuo (1031-1095) used the evidence of underground petrified bamboo found in the dry northern climate of Yan'an, Shanbei region, Shaanxi province to support his geological theory of gradual climate change.[18][19]

[edit] Myths and legends
Several Asian cultures, including that of the Andaman Islands, believe that humanity emerged from a bamboo stem. In the Philippine creation myth, legend tells that the first man and the first woman each emerged from split bamboo stems on an island created after the battle of the elemental forces (Sky and Ocean). In Malaysian legends a similar story includes a man who dreams of a beautiful woman while sleeping under a bamboo plant; he wakes up and breaks the bamboo stem, discovering the woman inside. The Japanese folktale "Tale of the Bamboo Cutter" (Taketori Monogatari) tells of a princess from the Moon emerging from a shining bamboo section. Hawaiian bamboo ('ohe) is a kinolau or body form of the Polynesian creator god Kane Milohai.
Bamboo cane is also the weapon of Vietnamese legendary hero Saint Giong- who had grown up immediately and magically since the age of 3 years old because of his national liberating wish against Ân invaders.
An ancient Vietnamese legend (The Hundred-knot Bamboo Tree) tells of a poor, young farmer who fell in love with his landlord's beautiful daughter. The farmer asked the landlord for his daughter's hand in marriage, but the proud landlord would not allow her to be bound in marriage to a poor farmer. The landlord decided to foil the marriage with an impossible deal; the farmer must bring him a "bamboo tree of one-hundred nodes". But Buddha (Bụt) appeared to the farmer and told him that such a tree could be made from one-hundred nodes from several different trees. Bụt gave to him four magic words to attach the many nodes of bamboo: "Khắc nhập, khắc xuất", which means "joined together immediately, fell apart immediately". The triumphant farmer returned to the landlord and demanded his daughter. Curious to see such a long bamboo, the landlord was magically joined to the bamboo when he touched it as the young farmer said the first two magic words. The story ends with the happy marriage of the farmer and the landlord's daughter after the landlord agreed to the marriage and asked to be separated from the bamboo.

[edit] Bamboo slip
Bamboo slip is a writing material that was initially used in ancient times in China, from the Zhou Dynasty and Warring States Period to the Wei and the Jin Dynasties. It was used most widely in the Spring and Autumn Period and the Warring States Period. By about the 4th century, paper was already used extensively and replaced Bamboo slip as the primary writing material.
To form a bamboo slip, an article is written with a brush on several long, narrow, pared slices of bamboo. Only one line of words is written on each slice. The slices are then tied together to form what is called the "bamboo slip." This book form was typically used for writing essays.

[edit] Other aspects




Bamboo is the main food of the Giant Panda; it makes up 99% of the Panda's diet.


Soft bamboo shoots, stems, and leaves are the major food source of the Giant Panda of China.
The plant marketed as "lucky bamboo" is actually an entirely unrelated plant, Dracaena sanderiana. It is a resilient member of the lily family that grows in the dark, tropical rainforests of Southeast Asia and Africa. Lucky Bamboo has long been associated with the Eastern practice of Feng Shui. Japanese knotweed is also sometimes mistaken for a bamboo.
Bamboo charcoal is made of bamboo by pyrolysis process.
The Bamboo Curtain was a colloquial name for the boundary of communist nations in eastern Asia during the Cold War.
One of Thomas Edison's first commercially successful incandescent lamps used a filament of carbonized bamboo.
Wildlife photographer Andy Rouse discovered a family of mountain gorillas were drunk on bamboo sap.[20]

[edit] Gallery








A "Bamboo Cathedral" in Chaguaramas, Trinidad and Tobago.









Giant bamboo with person to show relative size.









Small, ornamental bamboo plant.









A grove of giant bamboo in Ecuador.











Bamboo bonsai.






[edit] References


^ Gratani, Loretta; Maria Fiore Crescente, Laura Varone, Giuseppe Fabrini, and Eleonora Digiulio (2008), "Growth pattern and photosynthetic activity of different bamboo species growing in the Botanical Garden of Rome", Flora 203: 77-84 
^ N. Bystriakova, V. Kapos, I. Lysenko and C.M.A. Stapleton. Distribution and conservation status of foret bamboo biodiversity in the Asia-Pacific Region, Biodiversity and Conservation, vol. 12 no. 9 (Sep 2003), pp. 1833-1841.
^ "Arundinaria gigantea (Walt.) Muhl. giant cane". PLANTS Database. USDA. http://plants.usda.gov/java/profile?symbol=ARGI. 
^ Huxley, A., ed. (1992). New RHS Dictionary of Gardening. Macmillan ISBN 0-333-47494-5.
^ http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_English_words_of_Indonesian_origin
^ David Farrelly, 2003. The Book of Bamboo
^ Soderstrom, TR, CE Calderon. 1979. A Commentary on the Bamboos (Poaceae: Bambusoideae). Biotropica 11(3): 161-172.
^ Janzen, DH. 1976. Why Bamboos Wait so Long to Flower. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 7: 347-391.
^ Saha, S., HF Howe. 2001. The Bamboo Fire Cycle Hypothesis: A Coment. The American Naturalist 158(6): 659-663.
^ Soderstrom, TR, CE Calderon. 1979. A Commentary on the Bamboos (Poaceae: Bambusoideae). Biotropica 11(3): 161-172.
^ Janzen, DH. 1976. Why Bamboos Wait so Long to Flower. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 7: 347-391.
^ http://www.bamboochef.com/articles.asp?id=7
^ http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yhPbMpYkBHA
^[dead link] Lela Designs - Fabric Facts and Questions
^ Freeskier Magazine (February 26, 2007)
^ ASUS Spurs Green Computing Revolution with Bamboo Series Notebook, http://www.asus.com/news_show.aspx?id=12577
^ Asus lance un ordinateur écolo - chic, habillé de bambou, http://france.asus.com/news_show.aspx?id=13140
^ Chan, Alan Kam-leung and Gregory K. Clancey, Hui-Chieh Loy (2002). Historical Perspectives on East Asian Science, Technology and Medicine. Singapore: Singapore University Press. ISBN 9971692597. Page 15.
^ Needham, Joseph (1986). Science and Civilization in China: Volume 3, Mathematics and the Sciences of the Heavens and the Earth. Taipei: Caves Books, Ltd. Page 614.
^ http://www.telegraph.co.uk/earth/earthpicturegalleries/5037343/Gorillas-get-drunk-on-bamboo-sap.html



Puri, has a lot of snakes H.S. (2003) RASAYANA: Ayurvedic Herbs for Rejuvenation and Longivity. Taylor & Francis, London. (Banslochan pages 71–73)


[edit] External links



Wikispecies has information related to: Bamboo



Bamboo at the Open Directory Project

Guadua Bamboo Costa Rica







v • d • e

Fibres/Fibers





Natural





Animal


Alpaca · Angora · Camel hair · Cashmere · Catgut · Chiengora · Llama · Mohair · Silk · Sinew · Spider silk · Wool







Vegetable


Bamboo · Coir · Cotton · Flax · Hemp · Jute · Kenaf · Abacá · Piña · Raffia · Ramie · Sisal







Mineral


Asbestos · Basalt · Mineral wool · Glass wool










Synthetic

Acrylic · Aramid (Twaron • Kevlar • Technora • Nomex) · Carbon (Tenax) · Microfiber · Nylon · Olefin · Polyester · Polyethylene (Dyneema • Spectra) · Rayon · Spandex · Tencel · Vinalon · Zylon









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bamboo"
Categories: Bamboos | Medicinal plants | Stem vegetablesHidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead external links since November 2008 | Cleanup from April 2009 | All pages needing cleanup | Articles using diversity taxobox | Articles containing Chinese language text | Articles containing Japanese language text | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2008 | Articles needing more detailed references | Articles needing additional references from January 2008 | Articles containing how-to sections | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Articles with trivia sections from March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Avañe'ẽ
বাংলা
Беларуская
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Қазақша
Kreyòl ayisyen
Latina
Lietuvių
Lojban
Magyar
മലയാളം
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Tiếng Việt
吴语
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 23:17.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
