













Singapore - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Singapore";
		var wgTitle = "Singapore";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "27318";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282254301;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Singapore

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





Republic of Singapore


新加坡共和国 (Chinese)
Republik Singapura (Malay)
சிங்கப்பூர் குடியரசு (Tamil)












Flag






Motto: "Majulah Singapura"  (Malay)
"Onward, Singapore"


Anthem: Majulah Singapura






Images, from top, left to right: Merlion by the CBD, Singapore Zoo entrance, Esplanade - Theatres on the Bay, Gateway of Sentosa, Statue of Thomas Stamford Raffles, Downtown Core of Singapore, Raffles Hotel











Capital
Singapore City
(Downtown Core, Central)1


Official languages
English (main)[1]
Malay (national)
Chinese
Tamil


Demonym
Singaporean


Government
Parliamentary republic


 - 
President
S.R. Nathan


 - 
Prime Minister
Lee Hsien Loong


 - 
Speaker of Parliament
Abdullah Tarmugi


 - 
Chief Justice
Chan Sek Keong


Legislature
Parliament


Independence


 - 
Founding
29 January 1819[2] 


 - 
Merger with Malaysia
16 September 1963 


 - 
Separation from Malaysia
9 August 1965 


Area


 - 
Total
710.2 km2 (187th)
274.2 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
1.444


Population


 - 
2008 estimate
4,839,400[3] (114th)


 - 
2000 census
4,117,700 


 - 
Density
6,814/km2 (3rd)
17,649/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2008 estimate


 - 
Total
US$241.121billion[4] (44th)


 - 
Per capita
US$51,649.25[4] (5th)


GDP (nominal)
2008 estimate


 - 
Total
US$244.947billion[4] (45th)


 - 
Per capita
US$35,597.00 [4] (21st)


HDI (2008)
▼ 0.918 (high) (28th)


Currency
Singapore dollar (SGD)


Time zone
SST (UTC+8)


Date formats
dd/mm/yyyy


Drives on the
left


Internet TLD
.sg


Calling code
+652


1
Singapore is a city-state.


2
02 from Malaysia.


Singapore (Chinese: 新加坡; pinyin: Xīnjiāpō; Malay: Singapura; Tamil: சிங்கப்பூர், Cingkappūr), officially the Republic of Singapore, is an island city-state located at the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula, lying 137 kilometres (85 mi) north of the equator, south of the Malaysian state of Johor and north of Indonesia's Riau Islands. At 710.2 km2 (274.2 sq mi),[5] Singapore, a microstate and the smallest nation in Southeast Asia, is by orders of magnitude larger than Monaco and Vatican City, the only other surviving sovereign city-states.
Before European settlement, the island now known as Singapore was the site of a Malay fishing village at the mouth of the Singapore River. Several hundred indigenous Orang Laut people also lived along the nearby coast, rivers and on smaller islands. In 1819, the British East India Company, led by Sir Stamford Raffles, established a trading post on the island, which was used as a port along the spice route.[6] Singapore became one of the most important commercial and military centres of the British Empire, and the hub of British power in Southeast Asia.
The city was occupied by the Japanese during World War II, which Winston Churchill called "Britain's greatest defeat".[7] Singapore reverted to British rule in 1945, immediately after the war. Eighteen years later, in 1963, the city, having achieved independence from Britain, merged with Malaya, Sabah, and Sarawak to form Malaysia. However, the merger proved unsuccessful and less than two years later, it seceded from the federation and became an independent republic on 9 August 1965. Singapore joined the United Nations on 21 September that same year. It also became a member of the British Commonwealth of Nations.
Since independence, Singapore's standard of living has risen dramatically. Foreign direct investment and a state-led drive to industrialisation based on plans drawn up by the Dutch economist Albert Winsemius have created a modern economy focused on industry, education and urban planning.[8] Singapore is the 5th wealthiest country in the world in terms of GDP (PPP) per capita.[9] In December 2008, the foreign exchange reserves of this small island nation stood at around US$174.2billion.[10] The Singapore government had for the first time in history tapped into her official reserves and withdrew some S$4.9 billion with the President's approval. The funds were then used as part of the S$20.5 billion Resilience Package unveiled by Finance Minister Mr. Tharman Shanmugaratnam on 05 February 2009. As at January 2009 Singapore's official reserves stood at US$170.3 billion.
In 2009, Economist Intelligence Unit has ranked Singapore the 10th most expensive city in the world in which to live. It is the 3rd most expensive Asian city to live in, after Japanese cities Tokyo and Osaka.[11]
The population of Singapore is approximately 4.86 million.[3] Singapore is highly cosmopolitan and diverse with Chinese people forming an ethnic majority with large populations of Malay, Indian and other people. English, Malay, Tamil, and Chinese are the official languages.[12]
The Constitution of the Republic of Singapore established the nation's political system as a representative democracy, while the country is recognised as a parliamentary republic.[13] The People's Action Party (PAP) dominates the political process and has won control of Parliament in every election since self-government in 1959.[14]




Contents


1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 First settlement
2.2 Colonial rule
2.3 World War II
2.4 Independence


3 Government and politics
4 Geography and climate
5 Economy

5.1 Free Trade Agreements
5.2 Tourism
5.3 Currency


6 Foreign relations

6.1 Disputes


7 Military

7.1 Singapore Armed Forces
7.2 Singapore Police Force
7.3 Singapore Civil Defence Force
7.4 National Service


8 Demographics

8.1 Population
8.2 Religion
8.3 Education
8.4 Languages


9 Culture

9.1 Cuisine
9.2 Performing arts
9.3 Media

9.3.1 Broadcasting
9.3.2 Print


9.4 Sport and recreation


10 Architecture
11 Resources

11.1 Water resource


12 Transport

12.1 International
12.2 Domestic


13 Notes
14 References
15 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Etymology
The English language name Singapore comes from Malay Singapura, "Lion-city," but it is possible that one element of its name had a more distant original source.[15] Pura comes from Sanskrit puram, "city, fortress," and is related to Greek polis, "citadel, city." Singa- comes from Sanskrit siṁhaḥ, which means lion. Even today, the city-state is refered to as the Lion City.
Recent studies of Singapore, however, indicate that lions probably never lived there, not even Asiatic lions; the beast seen by Sang Nila Utama was most likely a tiger, probably the Malayan Tiger.[16][17]

[edit] History
Main article: History of Singapore

[edit] First settlement
Main article: Early history of Singapore
The first records of settlement in Singapore are from the 2nd century AD.[18] The island was an outpost of the Sumatran Srivijaya empire and originally had the Javanese name Temasek ('sea town'). Temasek (Tumasek) rapidly became a significant trading settlement, but declined in the late 14th century. There are few remnants of old Temasek in Singapore, but archaeologists in Singapore have uncovered artifacts of that and other settlements. Between the 16th and early 19th centuries, Singapore island was part of the Sultanate of Johor. During the Malay-Portugal wars in 1613, the settlement was set ablaze by Portuguese troops.[19] The Portuguese subsequently held control in that century and the Dutch in the 17th, but throughout most of this time the island's population consisted mainly of fishermen.

[edit] Colonial rule
Main article: Founding of modern Singapore




Statue of Thomas Stamford Raffles by Thomas Woolner, erected at the location where he first landed at Singapore. He is recognised as the founder of modern Singapore.


On 29 January 1819, Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles landed on the main island. Spotting its potential as a strategic geographical trading post in Southeast Asia, Raffles signed a treaty with Sultan Hussein Shah on behalf of the British East India Company on 6 February 1819 to develop the southern part of Singapore as a British trading post and settlement. Until August 1824, Singapore was still a territory controlled by a Malay Sultan. Singapore only officially became a British colony in August 1824 when the British extended control over the whole island. John Crawfurd, the second resident of Singapore, was the one who officially made Singapore a British possession. He signed a treaty with Sultan Hussein Shah on 2 August 1824 in which the Sultan and the Temmenggong handed over the whole island to the British East India Company thus marking the start of the island's modern era. Raffles's deputy, William Farquhar, oversaw a period of growth and ethnic migration, which was largely spurred by a no-restriction immigration policy. The British India office governed the island from 1858, but Singapore was made a British crown colony in 1867, answerable directly to the Crown. By 1869, 100,000 lived on the island.[20]
The early onset of town planning in colonial Singapore came largely through a "divide and rule" framework where the different ethnic groups were settled in different parts of the South of the island. The Singapore River was largely a commercial area that was dominated by traders and bankers of various ethnic groups with mostly Chinese and Indian coolies working to load and unload goods from barge boats known locally as "bumboats". The Malays, consisting of the local "Orang Lauts" who worked mostly as fishermen and seafarers, and Arab traders and scholars were mostly found in the South-east part of the river mouth, where Kampong Glam stands today. The European settlers, who were few then, settled around Fort Canning Hill and further upstream from the Singapore River. Like the Europeans, the early Indian migrants also settled more inland of the Singapore River, where Little India stands today. Very little is known about the rural private settlements in those times (known as kampongs), other than the major move by the post-independent Singapore government to re-settle these residents in the late 1960s.

[edit] World War II
Main article: Japanese occupation of Singapore




The Japanese Army marching in downtown Singapore


Years before the rise of the Japanese, the British noted that Japan was building its forces rapidly. Wanting to protect its assets in Southeast Asia, the British decided to build a naval base on the Northern end of Singapore. However, due to the war with Germany, all warships and war equipment were brought over to Europe.
During World War II, the Imperial Japanese Army invaded Malaya, culminating in the Battle of Singapore. The ill-prepared British, with most of their forces in Europe, were defeated in six days, and surrendered the supposedly impregnable fortress to General Tomoyuki Yamashita on 15 February 1942. The surrender was described by British Prime Minister Sir Winston Churchill as "the worst disaster and largest capitulation in British history."[21] The British naval base (see above) was destroyed before the Japanese could take over the base and make use of it. Widespread indiscriminate killing of the Chinese population occurred (see Sook Ching massacre).[22] The Japanese renamed Singapore Shōnantō (昭南島 ?), from Japanese "Shōwa no jidai ni eta minami no shima" ("昭和の時代に得た南の島" ?), or "southern island obtained in the age of Shōwa", and occupied it until the British repossessed the island on 12 September 1945, a month after the Japanese surrender.[23] The name Shōnantō was, at the time, romanised as "Syonan-to" or "Syonan", which means "Light of the South".

[edit] Independence
Main article: History of the Republic of Singapore
Following the war, the British government allowed Singapore to hold its first general election, in 1955, which was won by the pro-independence candidate, David Marshall. Singapore soon became a self-governing state within the British Empire in 1959 with Yusof bin Ishak as its first Yang di-Pertuan Negara or president, and Lee Kuan Yew as its first Prime Minister.[24] It declared independence from Britain unilaterally in August 1963, before joining the Federation of Malaysia in September along with Malaya, Sabah and Sarawak as the result of the 1962 Merger Referendum of Singapore. Singapore left the federation two years after heated ideological conflict between the state's PAP government and the federal Kuala Lumpur government. Singapore officially gained sovereignty on 9 August 1965.[25] Yusof bin Ishak was sworn in as the first President of Singapore and Lee Kuan Yew remained prime minister.
While trying to be self-sufficient, the fledging nation faced problems like mass unemployment, housing shortages, and a dearth of land and natural resources. During Lee Kuan Yew's term as prime minister from 1959 to 1990, his administration tackled the problem of widespread unemployment, raised the standard of living, and implemented a large-scale public housing programme.[26] It was during this time that the foundation of the country's economic infrastructure was developed; the threat of racial tension was curbed; and an independent national defence system centering around compulsory male military service was created.[27]
In 1990, Goh Chok Tong succeeded Lee as Prime Minister. During his tenure, the country faced the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis, the 2003 SARS outbreak, and terrorist threats posed by Jemaah Islamiyah after the September 11 attacks in the United States. In 2004, Lee Hsien Loong, the eldest son of Lee Kuan Yew, became the third prime minister.[28] Amongst his more notable decisions is the plan to open casinos to attract tourism.[29]

[edit] Government and politics




Parliament House


Main article: Politics of Singapore
See also: Law of Singapore
Singapore is a parliamentary democracy with a Westminster system of unicameral parliamentary government representing different constituencies. The bulk of the executive powers rests with the Cabinet, headed by the Prime Minister, currently Mr Lee Hsien Loong. The office of President of Singapore, historically a ceremonial one, was granted some veto powers as of 1991 for a few key decisions such as the use of the national reserves and the appointment of judiciary positions. Although the position is to be elected by popular vote, only the 1993 election has been contested to date. The legislative branch of government is the Parliament.
Parliamentary elections in Singapore are plurality-based for group representation constituencies since the Parliamentary Elections Act was modified in 1991.[30]
The Members of Parliament (MPs) consist of either elected, non-constituency or nominated Members. The majority of the Members of Parliament are elected into Parliament at a General Election on a first-past-the-post basis and represent either Single Member or Group Representation Constituencies (GRCs).
The elected Members of Parliament act as a bridge between the community and the Government by ensuring that the concerns of their constituents are heard in the Parliament. The present Parliament has 94 Members of Parliament consisting of 84 elected Members of Parliament, one NCMP and nine Nominated members of Parliament.




The Istana, the official residence and office of the President of Singapore.


The People's Action Party (PAP) has been the ruling party in Singapore since self-government was attained.[31] There are several opposition parties in Singapore, the most notable being the Workers' Party of Singapore, the Singapore Democratic Party (SDP) and the Singapore Democratic Alliance (SDA). The Economist Intelligence Unit describes Singapore as a "hybrid regime" of democratic and authoritarian elements.[32] Freedom House ranks the country as "partly free".[33] Although general elections are free from irregularities and vote rigging, the PAP has been criticized by some for manipulating the political system through its use of censorship, gerrymandering, and civil libel suits against opposition politicians.[34]
Singapore has a successful and transparent market economy. Government-linked companies are dominant in various sectors of the local economy, such as media, utilities, and public transport. Singapore has consistently been rated as the least corrupt country in Asia and among the world's ten most free from corruption by Transparency International.[35]
Although Singapore's laws are inherited from British and British Indian laws, including many elements of English common law, the government has also chosen not to follow some elements of liberal democratic values. There are no jury trials and there are laws restricting the freedom of speech that may breed ill will or cause disharmony within Singapore's multiracial, multi-religious society. Criminal activity is often punished with heavy penalties including heavy fines or caning and there are laws which allow capital punishment in Singapore for first-degree murder and drug trafficking. The Singapore government argues that Singapore has the sovereign right to determine its own judicial system and impose what it sees as an appropriate punishment, including capital punishment for the most serious crimes.[36]

[edit] Geography and climate




Singapore Downtown as seen from the DHL Balloon.


Main article: Geography and climate of Singapore
Singapore consists of 63 islands, including mainland Singapore. There are two man-made connections to Johor, Malaysia — Johor-Singapore Causeway in the north, and Tuas Second Link in the west. Jurong Island, Pulau Tekong, Pulau Ubin and Sentosa are the largest of Singapore's many smaller islands. The highest natural point of Singapore is Bukit Timah Hill at 166 m (545 ft).
The south of Singapore, around the mouth of the Singapore River and what is now the Downtown Core, used to be the only concentrated urban area, while the rest of the land was either undeveloped tropical rainforest or used for agriculture. Since the 1960s, the government has constructed new residential towns in outlying areas, resulting in an entirely built-up urban landscape. The Urban Redevelopment Authority was established on 1 April 1974, responsible for urban planning.




Singapore Botanic Gardens, a 67.3-hectare (166 acre) Botanic Gardens in Singapore that includes the National Orchid Garden, which has a collection of more than 3,000 species of orchids.


Singapore has on-going land reclamation projects with earth obtained from its own hills, the seabed, and neighbouring countries. As a result, Singapore's land area grew from 581.5 km2 (224.5 sq mi) in the 1960s to 704 km2 (271.8 sq mi) today, and may grow by another 100 km² (38.6 sq mi) by 2030.[37] The projects sometimes involve some of the smaller islands being merged together through land reclamation in order to form larger, more functional islands, such as in the case of Jurong Island.
Under the Köppen climate classification system, Singapore has a tropical rainforest climate with no distinctive seasons. Its climate is characterized by uniform temperature and pressure, high humidity, and abundant rainfall. Temperatures range from 22 °C to 34 °C (72° to 93 °F). On average, the relative humidity is around 90% in the morning and 60% in the afternoon. During prolonged heavy rain, relative humidity often reaches 100%.[38] The lowest and highest temperatures recorded in its maritime history are 19.4 °C (66.9 °F) and 35.8 °C (96.4 °F) respectively. June and July are the hottest months, while November and December make up the wetter monsoon season. From August to October, there is often haze, sometimes severe enough to prompt public health warnings, due to bushfires in neighbouring Indonesia. Singapore does not observe daylight saving time or a summer time zone change. The length of the day. is nearly constant year round due to the country's location near the equator.
About 23% of Singapore's land area consists of forest and nature reserves.[39] Urbanisation has eliminated many areas of former primary rainforest, with the only remaining area of primary rainforest being Bukit Timah Nature Reserve. A variety of parks are maintained with human intervention, such as the Singapore Botanic Gardens.

[edit] Economy
Main article: Economy of Singapore
Singapore has a highly developed market-based economy, which has historically revolved around extended entrepôt trade. Along with Hong Kong, South Korea and Taiwan, Singapore is one of the Four Asian Tigers. The economy depends heavily on exports and refining imported goods, especially in manufacturing. Manufacturing constituted 26% of Singapore's GDP in 2005.[40] The manufacturing industry is well-diversified with significant electronics, petroleum refining, chemicals, mechanical engineering and biomedical sciences manufacturing sectors. In 2006, Singapore produced about 10% of the world's foundry wafer output.[41] Singapore has one of the busiest ports in the world and is the world's fourth largest foreign exchange trading centre after London, New York City and Tokyo.[42]
Singapore has been rated as the most business-friendly economy in the world,[43][44] with thousands of foreign expatriates working in multi-national corporations. Singapore is also considered to be one of the top centres of finance in the region and the world. In addition to this, the city-state also employs tens of thousands of foreign blue-collared workers from around the world.




Singapore's Central Business District (CBD)


As a result of a global recession and a slump in the technology sector, the country's GDP contracted 2.2% in 2001. The Economic Review Committee (ERC) was set up in December 2001, and recommended several policy changes with a view to revitalising the economy. Singapore has since recovered from the recession, largely due to improvements in the world economy; the Singaporean economy grew by 8.3% in 2004, 6.4% in 2005[45] and 7.9% in 2006.[46] On 19 August 2007, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong announced in his National Day Rally Speech that Singapore's economy is expected to grow by at least 4-6% annually over the next 5-10 years.
The per capita GDP in 2006 was US$29,474.[47] As of September 2007, the unemployment rate is 1.7%, which is the lowest in a decade, having improved to around pre-Asian crisis level.[48] Employment continued to grow strongly as the economy maintained its rapid expansion. In the first three quarters of 2007, 171,500 new jobs were created, which is close to the figure of 176,000 for the whole of 2006.[48] For the whole of 2007, Singapore's economy grew 7.5% and drew in a record S$16 billion (US$10.6b, €8.3b)of fixed asset investments in manufacturing and projects generating S$3 billion (US$2b, €1.6b) of total business spending in services.[49]




Orchard Road is decorated for Christmas, 2005.


Singapore introduced a Goods and Services Tax (GST) with an initial rate of 3% on 1 April 1994 substantially increasing government revenue by S$1.6 billion (US$1b, €800m) and stabilising government finances.[50] The taxable GST was increased to 4% in 2003, to 5% in 2004, and to 7% on 1 July 2007.[51]
Due to the economic recession, Singapore's economy expanded by only 1.1% in Year 2008, much lower than the expected 4.5% to 6.5% growth, while the unemployment rate was at 2.8%. [52] The economy is expected to contract greatly by up to 8% in 2009 and unemployment could rise to 5% this year as forecast by several private sector economists.
The Economic Development Board is a statutory board of the Government of Singapore. It has been tasked to plan and execute strategies to sustain Singapore as a leading global hub for business and investment.

[edit] Free Trade Agreements
See also: International trade agreements of Singapore




Senior Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong and then-President of the United States George W. Bush signing the US-Singapore Free Trade Agreement in the White House, 6 May 2003.


Singapore has 14 bilateral and multilateral trade agreements worldwide:[53]

 Association of Southeast Asian Nations ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA)
 India (CECA)
ASEAN-China (ACFTA)
ASEAN-Korea (AKFTA)
 Australia (SAFTA)
EFTA (European Free Trade Association: Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, Switzerland)
 Jordan (SJFTA)
 Japan (JSEPA)
 New Zealand (ANZSCEP)
 Panama (PSFTA)
 Peru
 South Korea(KSFTA)
Trans-Pacific Strategic Economic Partnership Agreement (Trans-Pacific SEP): Brunei, New Zealand, Chile, Singapore
 United States (USSFTA)


[edit] Tourism
Main article: Tourism in Singapore
Singapore is a popular travel destination, making tourism one of its largest industries. About 7.8 million tourists visited Singapore in 2006.[54] The Orchard Road shopping district is one of Singapore's most well-known and popular tourist draws. To attract more tourists, the government decided to legalise gambling and to allow two casino resorts (euphemistically called Integrated Resorts) to be developed at Marina South and Sentosa in 2005.[55] To compete with regional rivals like Hong Kong, Tokyo and Shanghai, the government has announced that the city area would be transformed into a more exciting place by lighting up the civic and commercial buildings.[56] Cuisine has also been heavily promoted as an attraction for tourists, with the Singapore Food Festival in July organised annually to celebrate Singapore's cuisine.
Singapore is fast positioning itself as a medical tourism hub — about 200,000 foreigners seek medical care in the country each year and Singapore medical services aim to serve one million foreign patients annually by 2012 and generate USD 3 billion in revenue.[57] The government expects that the initiative could create an estimated 13,000 new jobs within the health industries.
Under the Infocomm Development Authority of Singapore (IDA), Wireless@SG is a government initiative to build Singapore's infocomm infrastructure. Working through IDA's Call-for-Collaboration, SingTel, iCell and QMax deploy a municipal wireless network throughout Singapore. Since late 2006, users have enjoyed free wireless access through Wi-Fi under the "basic-tier" package offered by all three operators for 3 years.

[edit] Currency
Main article: Singapore Dollar
The currency of Singapore is the Singapore dollar, represented by the symbol S$ or the abbreviation SGD. The central bank of Singapore is the Monetary Authority of Singapore, responsible for issuing currency. Singapore established the Board of Commissioners of Currency, Singapore, on 7 April 1967[58] and issued its first coins and notes.[59] The Singapore dollar was exchangeable at par with the Malaysian ringgit until 1973.[59] Interchangeability with the Brunei dollar is still maintained.[59][60]
On 27 June 2007, to commemorate 40 years of currency agreement with Brunei, a commemorative S$20 note was launched; the back is identical to the Bruneian $20 note launched concurrently.[60][61]

[edit] Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of Singapore
Singapore maintains diplomatic relations with 175 countries,[62] although it does not maintain a high commission or embassy in many of those countries. It is a member of the United Nations, the Commonwealth, ASEAN and the Non-Aligned Movement. Due to obvious geographical reasons, relations with Malaysia and Indonesia are most important but the domestic politics of the three countries often threatens their relations. On the other hand, Singapore enjoys good relations with many European nations, including France, Germany and the United Kingdom, the latter sharing ties via the Five Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA) along with Malaysia, Australia and New Zealand. Good relations are also maintained with the United States, a country perceived as a stabilising force in the region to counterbalance the regional powers.
Singapore supports the concept of Southeast Asian regionalism and plays an active role in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), of which Singapore is a founding member. Singapore is also a member of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum, which has its Secretariat in Singapore. Singapore also has close relations with fellow ASEAN nation Brunei and maintains Army training facilities in the Sultanate.

[edit] Disputes
Singapore has several long-standing disputes with Malaysia over a number of issues:

Water deliveries to Singapore[63][64]
Mutual maritime boundaries
Air routes between Singapore Changi Airport and Kuala Lumpur International Airport





The dispute over the ownership of Pedra Branca, an outcrop of rocks, was resolved on 24 May 2008 (Singapore time) by the International Court of Justice between Singapore and Malaysia (see text).



The Singapore island known as Pedra Branca in Singapore and as Pulau Batu Puteh in Malaysia (names mean "White Rock" in Portuguese and "White Rock Island" in Malay respectively), is located 24 nautical miles (44 km) off the east coast of Singapore with a land area of 2,000 m2 (2,392 sq yd). The island also comprises Middle Rocks owned by Malaysia which are two clusters of rocks situated 0.6 nmi (1.1 km) south of the main island. Both countries had staked a claim on the island and were unable to settle the dispute themselves. The case was heard at the International Court of Justice in 2007, with both parties presenting their case. The court delivered its judgment on 23 May 2008 with Singapore having ownership of Pedra Branca and Malaysia owning Middle Rocks. Ownership of South Ledge, a nearby rock formation which can be seen only at low tide is still disputed [1].
Relocating the Singapore station of Malaysia's Keretapi Tanah Melayu from Tanjong Pagar to Bukit Timah (see Malaysia-Singapore Points of Agreement of 1990) and moving Malaysia's immigration checkpoint from the railway station to the Causeway.
Not allowing laid off workers, employed in Singapore shipyards in 1998, to receive their Central Provident Funds (CPF) contributions, which are estimated to be RM2.4 billion.


[edit] Military
Main article: Ministry of Defence (Singapore)




RSS Formidable during Exercise Malabar 2007.


The Ministry of Defence (MINDEF), currently headed by Minister Teo Chee Hean, oversees the Singapore Army, the Republic of Singapore Navy, and the Republic of Singapore Air Force, collectively known as the Singapore Armed Forces, along with volunteer private companies involved in supporting roles. The Chief of Defence Forces is Lieutenant-General Desmond Kuek Bak Chye.
The armed forces serve primarily as a deterrent against potential aggressors and also provide humanitarian assistance to other countries. Singapore has mutual defence pacts with several countries, most notably the Five Power Defence Arrangements. There is an extensive overseas network of training grounds in the United States, Australia, Republic of China (Taiwan), New Zealand, France, Thailand, Brunei, India and South Africa. Since 1980, the concept and strategy of "Total Defence" has been adopted in all aspects of security; an approach aimed at strengthening Singapore against all kinds of threats.
The recent rise in unconventional warfare and terrorism has cast increasing emphasis on non-military aspects of defence. The Gurkha Contingent, part of the Singapore Police Force, is also a counter-terrorist force. In 1991, the hijacking of Singapore Airlines Flight 117 ended in the storming of the aircraft by Singapore Special Operations Force and the subsequent deaths of all four hijackers without injury to either passengers or SOF personnel. A concern is Jemaah Islamiyah, a militant Islamic group whose plan to attack the Australian High Commission was ultimately foiled in 2001.
Singapore's defence resources have been used in international humanitarian aid missions, including United Nations peacekeeping assignments involved in 11 different countries.[65] In September 2005, the Republic of Singapore Air Force (RSAF) sent three CH-47 Chinook helicopters to Louisiana to assist in relief operations for Hurricane Katrina. In the aftermath of the 2004 Asian Tsunami (or Boxing Day Tsunami), the SAF deployed 3 LSTs (Landing Ship Tank), 12 Super Puma and 8 Chinook helicopters to aid in relief operations to the countries that were affected by the tsunami.

[edit] Singapore Armed Forces
Main article: Singapore Armed Forces




An RSAF CH-47SD lands aboard USS Rushmore during Exercise CARAT 2001


The Singapore Armed Forces, the military forces of Singapore, takes charge of the overall defence of the country. It comprises three branches: the Singapore Army, Republic of Singapore Air Force, and the Republic of Singapore Navy.
The Singapore Army is one of the three services of the Singapore Armed Forces. It is headed by the Chief of Army (COA), currently Major General Neo Kian Hong. The Army focuses on leveraging technology and weapon systems as "force-multipliers". It is currently undergoing the transformation into what it terms a "3rd-Generation fighting force".[66]
The Republic of Singapore Air Force (RSAF), the air force branch, guards the airspace of Singapore. The RSAF was established in 1968 as the Singapore Air Defence Command. It operates four air bases in Singapore and operates its aircraft in several overseas locations in order to provide greater exposure to its pilots. The main aircraft found in its fleet include F-16 Fighting Falcons, CH-47 Chinook and C-130 Hercules.
The final branch, the Republic of Singapore Navy (RSN), is the navy of the Singapore Armed Forces, responsible for the defence of Singapore against seaborne threats and protection of its sea lines of communications. Operating within the crowded littoral waters of the Singapore Strait, the RSN is regarded as one of the best in the region.[67] The RSN operates from two bases, Tuas Naval Base and Changi Naval Base, and has a large number of vessels, including 4 submarines, 6 frigates, and 4 amphibious transport docks. All commissioned ships of the RSN have a prefix RSS, which means Republic of Singapore Ship.

[edit] Singapore Police Force
Main article: Singapore Police Force
The Singapore Police Force (SPF) is the main agency tasked with maintaining law and order in the country.[68] Formerly known as the Republic of Singapore Police, it has grown from an 11-man organisation to a 38,587 strong force. It enjoys a relatively positive public image,[69] and is credited for helping to arrest Singapore's civic unrests and lawlessness in its early years, and maintaining the low crime rate today.[70] The organisation structure of the SPF is split between the staff and line functions, roughly modelled after the military. There are currently 15 staff departments and 13 line units. The SPF is headquartered in a block at New Phoenix Park in Novena, adjacent to a twin block occupied by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
Police officers typically respond to calls in rapid-deployment vehicles known as the Fast Response Car. They have been staunch users of Japanese-made saloon cars since the 1980s for patrol duties, with the mainstay models in use being the various generations of the Mitsubishi Lancers, Mazda 323s, Toyota Corollas & Subaru Impreza.

[edit] Singapore Civil Defence Force




An SCDF Combined Platform Ladder (CPL) Vehicle


Main article: Singapore Civil Defence Force
The Singapore Civil Defence Force (SCDF) is the main agency in charge of the provision of emergency services in Singapore during peacetime and emergencies. A uniformed organisation under the purview of the Ministry of Home Affairs, the SCDF provides ambulance, fire fighting and emergency response services to the Republic of Singapore. It also plays a major role in the Republic's disaster relief operations. It is branched into 6 Operational and Training Divisions beneath the Headquarters Element. Of these six, four are known as Operational Divisions, also known as Territorial Divisions, and each cover vast sections of Singapore corresponding roughly to the four cardinal points of the compass.
The SCDF maintains a large fleet of custom vehicles, called appliances, to provide an emergency response force capable of mitigating any and all kinds of fires and disasters. Ranging from the generic fire truck and ambulance to more sophisticated mobile command structures and disaster mitigation vehicles of all kinds, many of the appliances were designed and commissioned by the Force itself rather than obtaining ready-made designs from industries.

[edit] National Service
Main article: National Service in Singapore
Singapore legislation requires every able-bodied male Singapore citizen and second-generation permanent resident to undertake National Service for a minimum of 2 years upon reaching 18 years of age or completion of his studies (whichever comes first), with exemption on medical or other grounds. After serving for two years, every male is considered operationally ready, and is liable for reservist national service to the age of 40 (50 for commissioned officers). More than 350,000 men serve as operationally-ready servicemen assigned to reservist combat units, and another 72,500 men form the full-time national service and regular corps.

[edit] Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Singapore

[edit] Population




Built in 1843, the Sri Mariamman Temple is the largest Hindu temple in Singapore. It is also one of the many religious buildings marked as national monuments for their historical value.


According to government statistics, the population of Singapore as of 2008 was 4.84 million, of whom 3.64 million were Singaporean citizens and permanent residents (termed "Singapore Residents").[71] Various Chinese linguistic groups formed 75.2% of Singapore's residents, Malays 13.6%, Indians 8.8%, while Eurasians, Arabs and other groups formed 2.4%.
In 2006 the crude birth rate stood at 10.1 per 1000, a very low level attributed to birth control policies, and the crude death rate was also one of the lowest in the world at 4.3 per 1000. The total population growth was 4.4% with Singapore residents growth at 1.8%. The higher percentage growth rate is largely from net immigration, but also increasing life expectancy. Singapore is the second-most densely populated independent country in the world after Monaco. In 1957, Singapore's population was approximately 1.45 million, and there was a relatively high birth rate. Aware of the country's extremely limited natural resources and small territory, the government introduced birth control policies in the late 1960s. In the late 1990s, the population was aging, with fewer people entering the labour market and a shortage of skilled workers. In a dramatic reversal of policy, the Singapore government introduced a "baby bonus" scheme in 2001 (enhanced in August 2004) that encouraged couples to have more children.[72]
In 2006, the total fertility rate was only 1.26 children per woman, the 3rd lowest in the world and well below the 2.10 needed to replace the population.[73] In 2006, 38,317 babies were born, compared to around 37,600 in 2005. This number, however, is not sufficient to maintain the population's growth. To overcome this problem, the government is encouraging foreigners to immigrate to Singapore. These large numbers of immigrants have kept Singapore's population from declining.[74]

[edit] Religion
Main article: Religion in Singapore


Religion in Singapore


religion


percent



Buddhism

  

42.5%


No religion

  

14.8%


Christianity

  

14.6%


Islam

  

13.9%


Taoism

  

8.5%


Hinduism

  

4%


Others

  

1.6%





Singapore is a multi-religious country. According to Statistics Singapore, around 51% of resident Singaporeans (excluding significant numbers of visitors and migrant workers) practice Buddhism and Taoism. About 15%, mostly Chinese, Eurasians, and Indians, practice Christianity - a broad classification including Catholicism, Protestantism and other denominations. Muslims constitute 14%, of whom Malays account for the majority with a substantial number of Indian Muslims and Chinese Muslims. Smaller minorities practice Sikhism, Hinduism and others, according to the 2000 census.[75]
Some religious materials and practices are banned in Singapore. The Jehovah's Witnesses, for example, are prohibited from distributing religious materials[76] and are sometimes jailed for their conscientious refusals to serve in the Singaporean military.[77]
About 15% of the population declared no religious affiliation.

[edit] Education




Students having assembly in the hall of a Singapore secondary school.


Main article: Education in Singapore
English is the medium of instruction in Singapore schools. All Singaporeans are required at least primary 6 education and must attend government schools as part of National Education.
Many children attend private kindergartens until they start at primary school at the age of six. Singapore's ruling political party, the PAP, is the largest provider of preschool education through its community arm.
English is the language of instruction for mathematics and the natural sciences. For the Chinese community, there are Special Assistance Plan schools which receive extra funding to teach in Mandarin along with English. Some schools also integrate language subjects with mathematics and the sciences, using both English and a second language.
Curricular standards are set by the Ministry of Education with a mix of private schools and public schools. There is no strict public-private dichotomy: the degree of autonomy, regarding curriculum and student admission, government funding received, and tuition burden on the students is further classified into "government-run", "government-aided", "autonomous", "independent", and "privately-funded".[78] In addition, international schools cater to expatriate students, and to a few local students given permission by the education ministry.
There are three Autonomous Universities in Singapore; the National University of Singapore, Nanyang Technological University and Singapore Management University. A fourth public university is under consideration as the government looks to provide higher education for 30% of each cohort.[79] There is another category (Private Universities - Comprehensive), SIM University (UniSIM) provides university education to working professionals and adult learners. [2] There are also five polytechnics (Singapore Polytechnic, Ngee Ann Polytechnic, Temasek Polytechnic, Nanyang Polytechnic and Republic Polytechnic). Unlike similarly named institutions in many other countries, polytechnics in Singapore do not award degrees.
The educational system features non-compulsory kindergarten for three years, followed by six years of primary education leading up to the Primary School Leaving Examination (PSLE). Four to five years of secondary education follow, leading up to the Singapore-Cambridge GCE 'N' Level or Singapore-Cambridge GCE 'O' Level examinations that assess academic achievement and determine the kind of post-secondary education routes they can pursue.
Junior Colleges and Centralised Institutes provide a two or three-year pre-university education route. An alternative, the Integrated Programme, lets the more academically-inclined skip the 'O' Level examination and proceed straight to obtain pre-university qualifications such as the GCE 'A' Level certificate, the International Baccalaureate diploma, or other equivalent academic accreditations. Polytechnics offer courses leading up to at least a diploma for students, while the other tertiary institutions offer various bachelor's, master's, doctoral degrees, other higher diplomas, and associate degree courses. Other institutes include the National Institute of Education (NIE), a teaching college to train teachers, various management institutes, and vocational education institutes such as the Institute of Technical Education (ITE).
The Economic Development Board (EDB) has been actively recruiting foreign schools to set up campuses in Singapore under the "Global Schoolhouse" programme which aims to attract 150000 foreign students by 2015.[80] ESSEC Business School, a century-old Parisian business school, provides courses specific to Asia. in 2001 INSEAD, a leading business school, opened its first overseas campus in Singapore, and the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business has a campus in the city as well. The Tisch School of the Arts is the latest to set up a branch campus, opening in 2007.
However, the EDB failed to attract and retain the University of Warwick and University of New South Wales, respectively, citing lack of academic freedom[81] and financial concerns.[82]
In 1999, the Ministry of Education started the Programme for Rebuilding and Improving Existing schools (PRIME) to upgrade school buildings, many of which were built over 20 to 30 years ago, in phases at a cost of S$4.5 billion.[83] This programme aims to provide a better school environment for the students by upgrading school buildings to latest standards. In 2005, the Flexible School Infrastructure (FlexSI) framework was implemented through the building of modular classrooms which can be opened up for larger lectures, and allowing a school's staff members to mould their school's designs to suit the school's unique identity and culture. At the same time, an indoor sports hall will be provided to every school so that schools can carry out physical education lessons in inclement weather.[84]

[edit] Languages




Construction site sign showing Singapore's four official languages: English, Chinese (in Traditional Script), Tamil, and Malay.


Main article: Languages of Singapore
The official languages are English, Malay, Chinese (Mandarin) and Tamil.[12] The national language of Singapore is Malay for historical reasons,[12] and it is used in the national anthem, "Majulah Singapura".[85]
English is the main language of Singapore and has been heavily promoted as such since the country's independence. The English used is primarily based on British English, with some American English influences. The use of English became widespread in Singapore after it was implemented as a first language medium in the education system, and English is the most common language in Singaporean literature. In school, children are required to learn English and one of the three other official languages. By law, all signs and official publications are required to be primarily in English, although they are occasionally translated versions into the other official languages. However, most Singaporeans speak a localised hybrid form of English known as Singlish ("Singapore English"), which has many creole-like characteristics, incorporating vocabulary and grammar from Standard English, various Chinese dialects, Malay, and Indian languages.
The second most common language in Singapore is Mandarin, with over seventy percent of the population having it as a second language. Most Singapore Chinese are, however, descended from immigrants who came from the southern regions of China where other dialects were spoken, such as Hokkien, Teochew and Cantonese. Mandarin use has spread largely as a result of government efforts to support its adoption and use over the dialects.

[edit] Culture
Main article: Culture of Singapore
Singapore is a mixture of an ethnic Malay population with a Chinese majority, as well as Indian and Arab immigrants. There also exist significant Eurasian and Peranakan (known also as 'Straits Chinese') communities.

[edit] Cuisine




Enjoying Singaporean cuisine. Hawker centres and kopi tiams are evenly distributed.


Main article: Cuisine of Singapore
Singaporean cuisine is an example of diversity and cultural diffusion, with influences from Chinese, Indian, Malay and Tamil cuisine. In Singapore's hawker centres, traditionally Malay hawker stalls selling halal food may serve halal versions of traditionally Tamil food. Chinese food stalls may introduce indigenous Malay ingredients or cooking techniques. This continues to make the cuisine of Singapore a significant cultural attraction.
Local foods are diverse, ranging from Hainanese chicken rice to satay. Singaporeans also enjoy a wide variety of seafood including crabs, clams, squid, and oysters. One such dish is stingray barbecued and served on banana leaf with sambal or chili.
Amongst locals, popular dishes include bak chor mee, mee pok, sambal stingray, laksa, nasi lemak, chili crab and satay. All of which, can be found at local hawker centres around Singapore.

[edit] Performing arts




Esplanade, Theatres on the Bay


See also: Music of Singapore
Since the 1990s, the government has been striving to promote Singapore as a centre for arts and culture, and to transform the country into a cosmopolitan 'gateway between the East and West'.[86] The highlight of these efforts was the construction of Esplanade, a centre for performing arts that opened on 12 October 2002.[87]
An annual arts festival is also organised by the National Arts Council that incorporates theatre arts, dance, music and visual arts, among other possibilities.
A first Singapore Biennale took place in 2006 to showcase contemporary art from around the world. The next one will be in 2008 which will feature Southeast Asian works.

[edit] Media
Main article: Media of Singapore
Around 38,000 people work in the media in Singapore, including publishing, print, broadcasting, film, music, digital and IT media sectors. The industry contributed 1.56% to Singapore's gross domestic product (GDP) in 2001 with an annual turnover of S$10 billion($6.6b,€5.1b). The industry grew at an average rate of 7.7% annually from 1990 to 2000, and the government seeks to increase its GDP contribution to 3% by 2012.
The "Singapore government" says the media play an important role in the country, and describes the city as one of the key strategic media centres in the Asia-Pacific region.[88] The goal of the government's Media 21 plan, launched in 2002,[89] is to establish Singapore as a global media hub.
In its Annual Worldwide Press Freedom Index for 2004, Reporters Without Borders ranked Singapore 147 out of 167. Most of the local media are directly or indirectly controlled by the government through shareholdings of these media entities by the state's investment arm Temasek Holdings, and are often perceived as pro-government.

[edit] Broadcasting
Main article: Broadcasting in Singapore
State-owned MediaCorp operates all seven free-to-air terrestrial local television channels licensed to broadcast in Singapore, as well as 14 radio channels. Radio and television stations are all government-owned entities. The radio stations are mainly operated by MediaCorp with the exception of four stations, which are operated by SAFRA Radio and SPH UnionWorks respectively. The Cable and IPTV Pay-TV Service are owned by Starhub TV and Singtel Mio TV. Private ownership of satellite dish receivers capable of viewing uncensored televised content from abroad is illegal.

[edit] Print
Main article: List of newspapers in Singapore




The Straits Times, the most circulated newspaper in the country


There are a total of 16 newspapers in active circulation. Daily newspapers are published in English, Chinese, Malay and Tamil.
Print is dominated by Singapore Press Holdings (SPH), the government-linked publisher of the flagship English-language daily, The Straits Times. SPH publishes all other daily newspapers including a free bilingual daily revamped "my paper" - which claim to be the world's first with equal coverage in both English and Chinese. [3]with the exception of Today, a free English-language tabloid published by the state-owned broadcaster MediaCorp. Most of these papers have parallell online version. SPH papers that are available online includes Straits Times, Business Times, The NewPaper[4], Mediacorp "TODAY" is also available online www.todayonline.com.
There are also several popular magazines circulating in Singapore, like i-weekly, 8 days, Citta Bella, Her World, Brides, Men's Health and FHM Singapore.[5]

[edit] Sport and recreation
Main article: Sports in Singapore
Singaporeans participate in a wide variety of sports and recreational activities. Favorite sports include football, cricket, swimming, badminton, basketball, rugby union, volleyball and table tennis. Most people live in public residential areas that often provide amenities such as swimming pools, outdoor basketball courts and indoor sport complexes. As might be expected on an island, water sports are popular, including sailing, kayaking and water skiing. Scuba diving is another recreation, particularly around the southern island of Pulau Hantu which is known for its rich coral reefs.




Closing ceremony for the use of the National Stadium


The 55,000 seat National Stadium, Singapore, located in Kallang was opened in July 1973 and was used for sporting, cultural, entertainment and national events until its official closure on 30 June 2007 to make way for the Singapore Sports Hub on the same site. This sports complex is expected to be ready by 2011 and will comprise a new 55,000-capacity National Stadium with a retractable roof, a 6,000-capacity indoor aquatic centre, a 400-metre warm-up athletic track and a 3,000-seater multi-purpose arena. 36,000 square metres of space have also been reserved for commercial development.
Singaporean sportsmen have performed in regional as well as international competitions in sports such as table tennis, badminton, bowling, sailing, silat, swimming and water polo. Athletes such as Fandi Ahmad, Ang Peng Siong, Li Jiawei and Ronald Susilo have become household names in the country.
The Singapore Slingers joined the Australian National Basketball League in 2006 and have three Singaporeans in their squad. Despite being the team with the largest support pool in the NBL, they generally get the smallest crowds in the NBL.
Beginning in 2008, Singapore started hosting a round of the Formula One World Championship. The race staged at the Marina Bay Street Circuit in the Marina Bay area and became the first night race on the F1 circuit[90] and the first street circuit in Asia.[91]
On 21 February 2008, the International Olympic Committee announced[92] that Singapore won the bid to host the inaugural 2010 Summer Youth Olympics. Singapore beat Moscow in the final by 53 votes to 44.[93]

[edit] Architecture




The three tallest buildings in Singapore are located at Raffles Place, namely, from left to right, Republic Plaza, UOB Plaza One and OUB Centre. All three buildings are 280 metres in height.


Main article: Architecture of Singapore
The architecture of Singapore is varied, reflecting the ethnic build-up of the country. Singapore has several ethnic neighbourhoods, including Chinatown and Little India. These were formed under the Raffles Plan to segregate the immigrants. Many places of worship were also constructed during the colonial era. Sri Mariamman Temple, the Masjid Jamae mosque and the Church of Gregory the Illuminator are among those that were built during the colonial period. Work is now underway to preserve these religious sites as National Monuments of Singapore.
Due to the lack of space and lack of preservation policies during the 1960s, 70s and 80s, few historical buildings remain in the Central Business District (CBD) - the Fullerton Hotel and the previously-moved Lau Pa Sat being some exceptions. However, just outside of Raffles Place, and throughout the rest of the downtown core, there is a large scattering of pre-WWII buildings - some going back nearly as far as Raffles, as with the Empress Place Building, built in 1827. Many classical buildings were destroyed during the post-war decades, up until the 1990s, when the government started strict programmes to conserve the buildings and areas of historic value.
Past the shopping malls are streets lined with shophouses. Many other such areas have been gazetted as historic districts. Information can be found at the URA Centre in Maxwell Road, where there are exhibits and several models of the island and its architecture. Singapore has also become a centre for postmodern architecture. Historically, the demand for high-end buildings has been in and around the Central Business District (CBD). After decades of development, the CBD has become an area with many tall office buildings. These buildings comprise the skyline along the coast of Marina Bay and Raffles Place, a tourist attraction in Singapore. Plans for tall buildings must be reviewed by the Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore.[94] No building in Singapore may be taller than 280 metres.[95] The three tallest buildings in Singapore, namely Republic Plaza, UOB Plaza One and OUB Centre, are all 280 metres in height.
More contemporary architectural examples in Singapore include the Marina Bay Financial Centre, Marina Bay Sands Integrated Resort, One Raffles Quay, Reflections at Keppel Bay, The Sail @ Marina Bay, the Singapore Flyer, One Marina Boulevard, and Esplanade - Theatres on the Bay.

[edit] Resources

[edit] Water resource
Main article: Water resources of Singapore
Without natural freshwater rivers and lakes, rainfall is the primary domestic source of water supply in Singapore. About half of Singapore's water comes from rain collected in reservoirs and catchment areas while the rest comes from Malaysia. The two countries have long argued of the legality of agreements to supply water that were signed in colonial times.
Singapore has a network of reservoirs and water catchment areas. In 2001, there were 19 raw water reservoirs, 9 treatment works and 14 storage or service reservoirs locally to serve domestic needs. Marina Barrage is a dam being constructed around the estuary of three Singapore rivers, creating a huge freshwater reservoir by 2009, the Marina Bay reservoir.[96] This will increase the rainfall catchment to two-thirds of the country's surface area.
Historically, Singapore relied on imports from Malaysia to supply half of its water consumption. However, two water agreements that supply water to Singapore are due to expire by 2011 and 2061 respectively. The two countries are engaged in a dispute on the price of water. Without a resolution in sight, the government of Singapore decided to increase self-sufficiency in its water supply.[97] Presently, more catchment areas, facilities to recycle water (producing NEWater) and desalination plants are being built. This "four tap" strategy aims to reduce reliance on foreign supply and to diversify its water sources.[97]. In 2008, a water barrage name - The Marina Barrage was built across the Marina Channel between Marina East and Marina South. The barrage aims to provides additional water supply catchment area, improve flood control and serve as an outdoor attraction for tourists and Singaporeans.

[edit] Transport
Main article: Transport in Singapore

[edit] International





The Port of Singapore with Sentosa island in the background.



Singapore is a major Asian transportation hub, positioned on many sea and air trade routes.
The Port of Singapore, managed by port operators PSA International and Jurong Port, was the world's second busiest port in 2005 in terms of shipping tonnage handled, at 1.15 billion gross tons, and in terms of containerised traffic, at 23.2 million twenty-foot equivalent units (TEUs). It was also the world's second busiest in terms of cargo tonnage, coming behind Shanghai with 423 million tons handled. In addition, the Port is the world's busiest for transshipment traffic and the world's biggest ship refuelling centre.[98]




PSA Keppel


Singapore is an aviation hub for the Southeast Asian region and a stopover on the Kangaroo route between Australasia and Europe. Singapore Changi Airport has a network of 81 airlines connecting Singapore to 185 cities in 58 countries. It has been rated as one of the best international airports by international travel magazines, including being rated as the world's best airport for the first time in 2006 by Skytrax.[99] The airport currently has three passenger terminals. There is also a budget terminal, which serves budget carrier Tiger Airways and Cebu Pacific. The national carrier is Singapore Airlines (SIA). The government is moving towards privatising Changi airport.
Singapore is linked to Johor, Malaysia via the Johor-Singapore Causeway and the Tuas Second Link, as well as a railway operated by Keretapi Tanah Melayu of Malaysia, with its southern terminus at Tanjong Pagar railway station. Frequent ferry service to several nearby Indonesian ports also exists.




A C751B train at Eunos MRT Station on the Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) system, one of three heavy rail passenger transport lines in Singapore.



[edit] Domestic
The domestic transport infrastructure has a well-connected island-wide road transport system which includes a network of expressways. The public road system is served by the nation's bus service and a number of licensed taxi-operating companies. The public bus transport has been the subject of criticism by Singaporeans, the majority of whom are dependent on it for their daily commuting. Since 1987, the heavy rail passenger Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) metro system has been in operation. The MRT has been further augmented by the Light Rail Transit (LRT) light rail system, and increases accessibility to housing estates. Established in 2001, the EZ-Link system allows contactless smartcards to serve as stored value tickets for use in the public transport systems in Singapore.
More than 2.85 million people use the bus network daily operated mainly by SBS Transit and SMRT Buses, the two main public bus operators, while more than 1.5 million people use either the LRT or MRT as part of their daily routine.[100] Approximately 945,000 people use the taxi services daily.[100] Private vehicle use in the Central Area is discouraged by tolls implemented during hours of heavy road traffic, through an Electronic Road Pricing system. Private vehicle ownership is discouraged by high vehicle taxes and imposing quotas on vehicle purchase.

[edit] Notes


^ "Mandarin Starts at Home". The Straits Times. 2009-03-18. http://www.straitstimes.com/Breaking%2BNews/Singapore/Story/STIStory_351547.html?vgnmr=1. Retrieved on 2009-03-18. 
^ "Singapore: History". Asian Studies Network Information Center. http://inic.utexas.edu/asnic/countries/singapore/Singapore-History.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-02. 
^ a b "Population - latest data". Singapore Department of Statistics Singapore. 2008-10-17. http://www.singstat.gov.sg/stats/latestdata.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-17. 
^ a b c d "Singapore". International Monetary Fund. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?pr.x=66&pr.y=20&sy=2004&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=576&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&grp=0&a=. Retrieved on 2008-10-09. 
^ "Population & Land area". Singapore Department of Statistics Singapore. 2008-12-15. http://www.singstat.gov.sg/stats/keyind.html#popnarea. Retrieved on 2008-12-15. 
^ "Flavours of Singapore". Uniquely Singapore. Singapore Tourism Board. http://www.visitsingapore.com/publish/stbportal/en/home/getting_around/tours_in_singapore/ethnic___cultural/flavours_of_singapore.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-13. 
^ ""The 30 Greatest Battles of World War II". http://www.strategypage.com/militaryforums/30-18346.aspx. 
^ Murphy, Craig (2006). The United Nations Development Programme: A Better Way?. Cambridge University Press. pp. 101. ISBN 9780521864695. 
^ "List of GDP () per capita by country, 2007". International Monetary Fund. http://imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?pr.x=25&pr.y=9&sy=2007&ey=2007&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=512%2C446%2C914%2C666%2C612%2C668%2C614%2C672%2C311%2C946%2C213%2C137%2C911%2C962%2C193%2C674%2C122%2C676%2C912%2C548%2C313%2C556%2C419%2C678%2C513%2C181%2C316%2C682%2C913%2C684%2C124%2C273%2C339%2C921%2C638%2C948%2C514%2C943%2C218%2C686%2C963%2C688%2C616%2C518%2C223%2C728%2C516%2C558%2C918%2C138%2C748%2C196%2C618%2C278%2C522%2C692%2C622%2C694%2C156%2C142%2C624%2C449%2C626%2C564%2C628%2C283%2C228%2C853%2C924%2C288%2C233%2C293%2C632%2C566%2C636%2C964%2C634%2C182%2C238%2C453%2C662%2C968%2C960%2C922%2C423%2C714%2C935%2C862%2C128%2C716%2C611%2C456%2C321%2C722%2C243%2C942%2C248%2C718%2C469%2C724%2C253%2C576%2C642%2C936%2C643%2C961%2C939%2C813%2C644%2C199%2C819%2C184%2C172%2C524%2C132%2C361%2C646%2C362%2C648%2C364%2C915%2C732%2C134%2C366%2C652%2C734%2C174%2C144%2C328&s=PPPPC&grp=0&a=. 
^ "Official Foreign Reserves". Statistics Singapore. Monetary Authority of Singapore. http://www.mas.gov.sg/data_room/reserves_statistics/Official_Foreign_Reserves.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-15. 
^ ""Survey shows Singapore is world's 10th most expensive city"". http://www.channelnewsasia.com/stories/singaporelocalnews/view/414327/1/.html. 
^ a b c "Republic of Singapore Independence Act". http://statutes.agc.gov.sg/non_version/cgi-bin/cgi_getdata.pl?actno=1997-REVED-RSI&doctitle=REPUBLIC%20OF%20SINGAPORE%20INDEPENDENCE%20ACT%0A&date=latest&method=whole. Retrieved on 2009-01-04. 
^ "CIA - The World Factbook - Singapore". Central Intelligence Agency. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/sn.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-07. 
^ "Country Report: Singapore". Freedom House. http://www.freedomhouse.org/template.cfm?page=22&country=7269&year=2007. Retrieved on 2007-08-03. 
^ "Singapore". bartleby.com. http://www.bartleby.com/61/46/S0424600.html. Retrieved on 2006-04-14. 
^ "Studying In Singapore". Search Singapore Pte Ltd. http://www.schools.com.sg/articles/aboutSingapore.asp. Retrieved on 2006-04-14. 
^ "Sang Nila Utama" (PDF). 24hr Art. http://www.24hrart.org.au/pdf's/Utama_Every.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-04-14. 
^ "Country Studies". Library of Congress. http://countrystudies.us/singapore/3.htm. Retrieved on 2007-05-01. 
^ "Singapore - Precolonial Era". U.S. Library of Congress. http://countrystudies.us/singapore/3.htm. Retrieved on 2006-06-18. 
^ "Founding of Modern Singapore". Ministry of Information, Communications and the Arts, Singapore. http://www.sg/explore/history_founding.htm. Retrieved on 2006-04-14. 
^ "BBC On This Day - 1942: Singapore forced to surrender". BBC. http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/february/15/newsid_3529000/3529447.stm. Retrieved on 2007-05-01. 
^ Blackburn, Kevin. "The Collective Memory of the Sook Ching Massacre and the Creation of the Civilian War Memorial of Singapore". Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 73, 2 (December 2000), 71-90.
^ Ron Taylor. "Fall of Malaya and Singapore". http://www.britain-at-war.org.uk/WW2/Malaya_and_Singapore/index.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-10. 
^ "Headliners; Retiring, Semi". The New York Times. 1990-12-02. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9D0CE4DD123DF931A35751C1A966958260. Retrieved on 2008-12-27. 
^ "Road to Independence". U.S. Library of Congress. http://countrystudies.us/singapore/10.htm. Retrieved on 2006-04-14. 
^ McCarthy, Terry (1999-08-23). "Lee Kuan Yew". Time Asia (Time). http://www.time.com/time/asia/asia/magazine/1999/990823/lee1.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-27. 
^ Suryadinata, Leo (2000). Nationalism and Globalization: East and West. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. pp. 79. ISBN 9789812300782. 
^ "Country profile: Singapore". BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/asia-pacific/country_profiles/1143240.stm. Retrieved on 2006-04-14. 
^ Smale, Will (2004-08-23). "Singapore signs up to global casino club". BBC News (British Broadcasting Corporation). http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/business/3590184.stm. Retrieved on 2008-12-27. 
^ Parliamentary Elections Act (Cap. 218, 2001 Rev. Ed.)
^ Worthington (2002), Mauzy and Milne (2002).
^ "Economist Intelligence Unit democracy index 2006" (PDF). Economist Intelligence Unit. http://www.economist.com/media/pdf/DEMOCRACY_TABLE_2007_v3.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-09-13. 
^ "Country Report: Singapore". Freedom House. http://www.freedomhouse.org/template.cfm?page=22&year=2006&country=7055. 
^ Seow F (1994). "To Catch a Tartar: A Dissident in Lee Kuan Yew's Prison ", Yale University SEA press.
^ "Transparency International - Corruption Perceptions Index 2006". http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi. Retrieved on 2007-02-03. 
^ Ministry of Home Affairs, Singapore (2004-01-30). The Singapore Government's Response To Amnesty International's Report "Singapore - The Death Penalty: A Hidden Toll Of Executions". Press release. http://www.mha.gov.sg/basic_content.aspx?pageid=74. 
^ "Towards Environmental Sustainability, State of the Environment 2005 Report (PDF)". Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources, Singapore. http://app.nea.gov.sg/counter/nea_soecover.asp. Retrieved on 2006-04-14. 
^ "Climate of Singapore". National Environment Agency, Singapore. http://app.nea.gov.sg/cms/htdocs/article.asp?pid=1088. Retrieved on 2006-04-14. 
^ "Earthtrends country profile" (PDF). http://earthtrends.wri.org/pdf_library/country_profiles/for_cou_702.pdf. 
^ "Gross Domestic Product by Industry" (PDF). Singapore Department of Statistics. 2007. http://www.singstat.gov.sg/stats/themes/economy/ess/essa11.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-09-13. 
^ Xilinx (2007-09-14). Xilinx Underscores Commitment To Asia Pacific Market At Official Opening Of New Regional Headquarters Building In Singapore. Press release. http://digital50.com/news/items/PR/2007/09/14/AQF005/xilinx-underscores-commitment-to-asia-pacific-market-at-official-opening-of-new-regio/. Retrieved on 2007-11-21. 
^ "MAS Annual Report 2005/2006". Monetary Authority of Singapore. http://www.mas.gov.sg/about_us/annual_reports/annual20052006/index.htm. 
^ Wong Choon Mei (2006-09-06). "Singapore the most business-friendly economy in the world: World Bank". Singapore News (Singapore: Channel NewsAsia). http://www.channelnewsasia.com/stories/singaporebusinessnews/view/228852/1/.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-31.  "Singapore has been rated as the most business-friendly economy in the world. According to a World Bank-IFC report, Singapore beats previous winner New Zealand for the top spot in the 2005/2006 rankings while the United States came in third." 
^ "Singapore top paradise for business: World Bank". Washington: AFP. 2007-09-26. http://business.asiaone.com/Business/News/SME%2BCentral/Story/A1Story20070926-27084.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-31.  "SINGAPORE once again topped the World Bank's ranks for the best place in the world to do business, and Egypt is the leader in reforms to invite more business, the World Bank said on Tuesday. 'For the second year running, Singapore tops the aggregate rankings on the ease of doing business' in 2006 to 2007, the World Bank said in releasing its 'Doing Business 2008' report. www.Singaporeian.com" 
^ "Performance of the Singapore Economy in 2005, Ministry of Trade and Industry" (PDF). Archived from the original on 2006-08-23. http://web.archive.org/web/20060823185543/http://app.mti.gov.sg/data/article/1962/doc/ESS_2005Ann_+PR.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-04-14. 
^ Dominique Loh (2006-12-31). "Singapore's economy grows by 7.7% in 2006". Channel NewsAsia. http://www.channelnewsasia.com/stories/singaporelocalnews/view/250028/1/.html. 
^ "Per Capita GDP at Current Market Prices". Singapore Department of Statistics. 2006-02-16. http://www.singstat.gov.sg/stats/themes/economy/hist/gdp.html. 
^ a b Manpower Research and Statistics Department. "Employment Situation In Third Quarter 2007: Unemployment rate dropped to pre-Asian crisis level amid continued strong employment creation" (PDF). Singapore Ministry of Manpower. http://www.mom.gov.sg/publish/etc/medialib/mom_library/mrsd/glm.Par.82616.File.tmp/mrsd_Q32007empsit.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-12-30. 
^ Ramesh, S. "Singapore's economy grows 7.5% in 2007: PM Lee". Channel NewsAsia. http://www.channelnewsasia.com/stories/singaporelocalnews/view/320021/1/.html. 
^ "FY 1996 Budget, Revenue And Tax Changes". http://www.mof.gov.sg/budget_1996/revenue.html. Retrieved on 2006-05-01. 
^ "GST rate to rise to 7% from 1 July". http://www.channelnewsasia.com/stories/specialreport/news/258757_26/1/.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-15. 
^ "Singapore's economy grew by 1.1% in 2008". http://www.singstat.gov.sg/news/news/gdp4q2008.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-26-02. 
^ "Singapore Free Trade Agreements". International Enterprise Singapore. http://www.iesingapore.gov.sg/wps/portal/. Retrieved on 2007-09-23. 
^ "Record Year As Tourism Exceeds 2006 Targets With S$12.4 Billion Tourism Receipts And 9.7 Million Visitor Arrivals". Singapore Tourism Board. http://app.stb.com.sg/asp/new/new03a.asp?id=6243. Retrieved on 2007-04-21. 
^ Ministry of Trade and Industry (Singapore) (PDF). Proposal to develop Integrated Resorts - Ministerial Statement by Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong on 18 April 2005. Press release. http://app.mti.gov.sg/data/pages/606/doc/Ministerial%20Statement%20-%20PM%2018apr05.pdf. 
^ "URA News Releases: Let Bright Ideas Light Up Singapore". Urban Renewal Authority. http://www.ura.gov.sg/pr/text/forum06_09.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-29. 
^ Dogra, Sapna. "Medical tourism boom takes Singapore by storm". India: Express Healthcare Management. http://www.expresshealthcaremgmt.com/20050731/medicaltourism01.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-12-29. 
^ Low Siang Kok, Director (Quality), Board of Commissioners of Currency, Singapore. "Chapter 6: Singapore Electronic Legal Tender (SELT) – A Proposed Concept" (PDF). The Future of Money / Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. France: OECD Publications. pp. p.147. ISBN 92-64-19672-2. http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/40/31/35391062.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-12-28.  "The Board of Commissioners of Currency, Singapore (BCCS) was established on 7 April 1967 by the enactment of the Currency Act (Chapter 69). It has the sole right to issue currency notes and coins as legal tender in Singapore." 
^ a b c "The Currency History of Singapore". Monetary Authority of Singapore. 2007-04-09. http://www.mas.gov.sg/currency/currency_info/Heritage_Collection.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-28.  "On 12 June 1967, the currency union which had been operating for 29 years came to an end, and the three participating countries, Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei each issued its own currency. The currencies of the 3 countries were interchangeable at par value under the Interchangeability Agreement until 8 May 1973 when the Malaysian government decided to terminate it. Brunei and Singapore however continue with the Agreement until the present day." 
^ a b "Joint Press Release by the Ministry of Finance, Brunei Darussalam and the Monetary Authority of Singapore Commemorating the 40th Anniversary the Currency Interchangeability Agreement". Monetary Authority of Singapore. 2007-06-27. http://www.mas.gov.sg/news_room/press_releases/2007/Joint_Press_Release_by_the_MOF_Brunei_Darussalam_and_MAS.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-28.  "SINGAPORE, 27 June 2007. Brunei Darussalam and Singapore today celebrate the 40th Anniversary of the Currency Interchangeability Agreement. To mark the auspicious occasion, His Majesty Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Mu'izzaddin Waddaulah, The Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan of Brunei Darussalam and His Excellency Mr. Lee Hsien Loong, Prime Minister of Singapore jointly launched the new $20 polymer notes issued by the two countries in a ceremony held at Istana Nurul Iman in Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei Darussalam." 
^ "Annex 1" (PDF). Commemorating the 40th Anniversary the Currency Interchangeability Agreement. Monetary Authority of Singapore. 2007-06-27. http://www.mas.gov.sg/resource/news_room/press_releases/2007/Joint%20Press%20Release%20by%20the%20Ministry%20of%20Finance,%20Brunei%20Darussalam%20and%20the%20Monetary%20Authority%20of%20Singapore.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-12-28.  "As this is a joint issue by Brunei Darussalam and Singapore, the $20 notes will have common predominant orange colour and common back design." 
^ "Singapore Missions Worldwide". Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Singapore. 31 March 2007. Archived from the original on 2007-08-21. http://web.archive.org/web/20070821210744/http://notesapp.internet.gov.sg/mfa/dipcon/dipcon.nsf/SMAgent. 
^ "Singapore: Transnational Issues". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 2008-05-01. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/sn.html#Issues. 
^ "No sign of deal in Malaysia-Singapore water talks.". http://www.singapore-window.org/sw02/021016re.htm. 
^ "Peacekeepers : In the Service of Peace". http://www.mindef.gov.sg/imindef/about_us/defence_policy.html. Retrieved on 2006-05-01. 
^ "MINDEF - The 3rd Generation SAF". MINDEF. http://www.mindef.gov.sg/imindef/mindef_websites/topics/3g/home.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-25. 
^ Huxley, Tim (2001). Defending the Lion City. Allen & Unwin. ISBN 1-86508-118-3. 
^ "Singapore PUBLIC ORDER AND INTERNAL SECURITY - Flags, Maps, Economy, History, Climate, Natural Resources, Current Issues, International Agreements, Population, Social Statistics, Political System". http://www.photius.com/countries/singapore/national_security/singapore_national_security_public_order_and_int~1587.html. 
^ "Good job, police". The Straits Times. 2000-01-24. 
^ "Singapore is so safe some don't even lock up: survey". The Straits Times. 
^ "Singapore Statistic". Singapore Statistic. http://www.singstat.gov.sg/stats/keyind.html#popnarea. Retrieved on 2008-10-17. 
^ "Baby Bonus". Ministry of Community Development, Youth and Sports. http://www.babybonus.gov.sg. Retrieved on 2006-11-01. 
^ "CIA - Singapore". https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2127rank.html. 
^ "Singapore's birth trend outlook remains dismal". Channel NewsAsia. http://www.channelnewsasia.com/stories/singaporelocalnews/view/257208/1/.html. 
^ "Census of Population 2000 by religion, ethnic group, and gender" (PDF). Statistics Singapore. Singapore Department of Statistics. Archived from the original on 2007-06-28. http://web.archive.org/web/20070628062428/http://www.singstat.gov.sg/keystats/c2000/religion.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-03-12. 
^ "International Religious Freedom Report 2002: Singapore". http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2002/13909.htm. 
^ "Singapore: CONCODOC 1998 report". http://www.wri-irg.org/co/rtba/singapore.htm. 
^ "Education System:Secondary". Archived from the original on 2006-11-11. http://web.archive.org/web/20061111160921/http://www.moe.gov.sg/corporate/secondary_02.htm. Retrieved on 2006-05-01. 
^ Hoe Yeen Nie. "More tertiary options in 2008 and beyond". Channel News Asia. http://www.channelnewsasia.com/stories/singaporelocalnews/view/318031/1/.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-18. 
^ Singapore Economic Development Board (2006-02-01). "Singapore: The Global Schoolhouse". http://www.sedb.com/edb/sg/en_uk/index/news_room/publications/singapore_investment2/singapore_investment0/singapore__the_global.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-14. 
^ John Burton (2005-10-20). "Warwick's decision disrupts Singapore's plans". Financial Times. http://www.yawningbread.org/apdx_2005/imp-226.htm. Retrieved on 2007-12-14. 
^ Derrick A Paulo (2007-05-24). "Shock closure of UNSW in Singapore". ChannelNewsAsia. http://www.channelnewsasia.com/stories/singaporebusinessnews/view/278073/1/.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-14. 
^ "Programme For Rebuilding and Improving Existing schools (PRIME)". MOE-PRIME, Ministry of Education. Archived from the original on 2007-08-23. http://web.archive.org/web/20070823024237/http://www.moe.gov.sg/prime/prime.htm. Retrieved on 2007-05-15. 
^ "Eight More Schools to Benefit from Upgrading". Ministry of Education Press Releases. http://www.moe.gov.sg/press/2007/pr20070214.htm. Retrieved on 2007-05-15. 
^ Singapore Arms and Flag and National Anthem Act (Cap. 296, 1985 Rev. Ed.).
^ "Renaissance City Report: Culture and the Arts in Renaissance Singapore (Ministry of Information, Communications and the Arts)" (PDF). http://www.mica.gov.sg/renaissance/FinalRen.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-05-01. 
^ "Virtual Tourist: Reviews of Esplanade (Theatres by the Bay)". http://www.virtualtourist.com/travel/Asia/Singapore/Singapore-1495679/Things_To_Do-Singapore-Esplanade_Theatres_by_the_Bay-BR-1.html. Retrieved on 2006-03-28. 
^ "Media Overview". Ministry of Information, Communications and the Arts. http://www.mica.gov.sg/mica_business/b_media.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-17. 
^ "Media 21: Transforming Singapore into a Global Media City" (PDF). Media Development Authority Singapore. http://www.mda.gov.sg/wms.ftp://media21.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-09-17. 
^ "News - Singapore confirms 2008 night race". Formula1.com. Archived from the original on 2007-06-13. http://web.archive.org/web/20070613015932/http://www.formula1.com/news/6063.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-18. 
^ "SingTel to sponsor first Singapore Grand Prix". Formula1.com. 2007-11-16. http://www.formula1.com/news/headlines/2007/11/7101.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-10. 
^ "Youth Olympic Games 2010 (Singapore)". http://www.olympic.org/uk/news/media_centre/press_release_uk.asp?release=2492. Retrieved on 2008-03-15. 
^ "Singapore won bid to host the inaugural 2010 Summer Youth Olympics". http://www.singapore2010.sg/. 
^ "Building Height Restriction Map". Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore. http://www.caas.gov.sg/caas/en/e-Services/ANO_Hazard_C/view_building_height_res_map.html. 
^ "Liechtenstein - Singapore: a comparison" (PDF). http://www.liechtenstein.li/en/pdf-fl-multimedia-information-bilateral-singapur.pdf. 
^ "Marina Barrage". PUB. 2007-09-23. http://www.pub.gov.sg/Marina/about.htm. 
^ a b "Clean Water". Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources, Singapore. http://app.mewr.gov.sg/home.asp?cid=167&nid=167&id=SAS763. Retrieved on 2006-04-14. 
^ "Singapore remains world's busiest port". Xinhuanet. 2006-01-12. http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2006-01/12/content_4045562.htm. 
^ "2006 Airport of the Year result". Archived from the original on 2006-12-31. http://web.archive.org/web/20061231160516/http://www.worldairportawards.com/Awards-2006/AirportYear-2006.htm. Retrieved on 2006-06-01. 
^ a b "2007 Average Daily Ridership" (PDF). http://www.lta.gov.sg/corp_info/doc/Average_Daily_Public_Transport_Ridership.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-01. 



[edit] References


Hill, Michael, & Kwen Fee Lian (1995). The Politics of Nation Building and Citizenship in Singapore. Routledge. ISBN 041512025X
Mauzy, Diane K. & R. S. Milne (2002). Singapore Politics: Under the People's Action Party. Routledge. ISBN 0415246539. 
Tan, Kenneth Paul (2007). Renaissance Singapore? Economy, Culture, and Politics. NUS Press. ISBN 9971693770. 
Yew, Lee Kuan (2000). From Third World To First: The Singapore Story: 1965-2000. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 0060197765
Worthington, Ross (2002). Governance in Singapore. Routledge/Curzon. ISBN 070071474X. 
"Census of Population (2000)" (PDF). Singapore Department of Statistics. http://www.singstat.gov.sg/pubn/popn/cop2000admin.pdf. Retrieved on 2000-01-11. 
"Key Facts & Figures". Ministry of Transport, Singapore. http://www.mot.gov.sg/. Retrieved on 2003-01-11. 
"Nation's History". Singapore Infomap. http://www.sg/explore/history.htm. Retrieved on 2004-01-11. 
"MOE-PRIME". Programme For Rebuilding and IMproving Existing schools (PRIME). Archived from the original on 2007-08-23. http://web.archive.org/web/20070823024237/http://www.moe.gov.sg/prime/prime.htm. Retrieved on 2007-05-15. 
"Press Releases". Eight More Schools to Benefit from Upgrading. http://www.moe.gov.sg/press/2007/pr20070214.htm. Retrieved on 2007-05-15. 


This article incorporates public domain text from the websites of Singapore Department of Statistics, United States Department of State, the United States Library of Congress & CIA World Factbook (2004).

[edit] External links







This article contains Chinese text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Chinese characters.









This article contains Indic text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks or boxes, misplaced vowels or missing conjuncts instead of Indic text.



Find more about Singapore on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity




Singapore portal




Government


Singapore Government Directory Interactive
Singapore Government Online Portal
Gateway To All Government Services
Singapore National Service Portal
Singapore Accounting and Corporate Regulatory Authority
Singapore Department of Statistics Annual Data
Chief of State and Cabinet Members
Singapore Economic Development Board


General information


Singapore entry at The World Factbook
Singapore from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Singapore at the Open Directory Project
Singapore Infomap
Wikimedia Atlas of Singapore
WikiSatellite view of Singapore at WikiMapia


Travel


Singapore travel guide from Wikitravel

Singapore from Wikitravel Press










v • d • e

 Singapore topics





History

Timeline · Founding of modern Singapore · Straits Settlements · Battle of Singapore · Japanese occupation · Sook Ching massacre · 1962 referendum · PAP-UMNO relations






Politics and
government

President · Parliament · Political parties · Prime Minister · Cabinet · Elections (Electoral divisions · Constituencies) · Law · Foreign relations · Counter-terrorism · Human rights






Geography

Beaches · Chek Jawa · Conservation · Districts and places · Expressways · Fauna · Flora · Islands · Lakes · Parks · Reservoirs · Rivers · Towns, estates and neighbourhoods · Waterways · Urban planning (Urban Redevelopment Authority)






Economy

Singapore dollar · Companies · Banks · Singapore Exchange · Monetary Authority · Central Provident Fund · Biopolis · Fusionopolis  · Economic Development Board






Demographics

Malay · Chinese · Indian · Peranakan · Eurasian · Arab






Culture

Architecture · Cinema · Cuisine · Education · Public holidays · Languages · Literature · Music · Sports · Homosexuality






Transport

Singapore Changi Airport · Singapore Airlines · Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) · Light Rail Transit (LRT) · Buses · Driving · Expressways · Port






Symbols

National flag / Coat of arms · Majulah Singapura · National pledge · Vanda Miss Joaquim · Lion Head symbol · Merlion






Other topics

Current events in Southeast Asia · Armed Forces · Police Force · Communications · Tourism · National Day Parade · Future developments in Singapore












 
Geographic locale














v • d • e

Countries of Asia








Afghanistan · Armenia · Azerbaijan1 · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Bhutan · Brunei · Burma · Cambodia · People's Republic of China · Republic of China (Taiwan)2 · Cyprus · Egypt3 · Georgia1 · India · Indonesia4 · Iran · Iraq · Israel · Japan · Jordan · Kazakhstan1 · North Korea · South Korea · Kuwait · Kyrgyzstan · Laos · Lebanon · Malaysia · Maldives · Mongolia · Nepal · Oman · Pakistan · Philippines · Qatar · Russia1 · Saudi Arabia · Singapore · Sri Lanka · Syria · Tajikistan · Thailand · East Timor (Timor-Leste)4 · Turkey1 · Turkmenistan · United Arab Emirates · Uzbekistan · Vietnam · Yemen3

For dependent and other territories, see Dependent territory.

1 Partly or significantly in Europe.  2 The Republic of China (Taiwan) is not officially recognized by the United Nations; see Political status of Taiwan.
3 Partly or significantly in Africa.  4 Partly or wholly reckoned in Oceania.















v • d • e

Countries and other territories in Southeast Asia









   



Sovereign states
 Brunei
 Burma (Myanmar)
 Cambodia
 East Timor
 Indonesia
 Laos







 Malaysia
 Philippines
 Singapore
 Thailand
 Vietnam
 Taiwan






Dependencies
 Christmas Island  (Australia)
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands  (Australia)

Divisions of sovereign states
 Andaman and Nicobar Islands  (India)
 Hainan Island  (PRC)














Disputed territories
Islands in the Naf River (Bangladesh, Burma (Myanmar)) · Macclesfield Bank (Philippines, PRC, ROC) · Paracel Islands (PRC, ROC, Vietnam) · Pratas Islands (PRC, ROC) · Scarborough Shoal (Philippines, PRC, ROC) · Spratly Islands (Brunei, Malaysia, Philippines, PRC, ROC, Vietnam)
Active separatist or autonomist movements
Aceh · Maluku Islands · West Papua · Chinland · Sulawesi · Nagaland · Wa State · Zogam · Bangsamoro · Patani














v • d • e

Countries and territories of East Asia






People's Republic of China (S.A.R: Hong Kong · Macau) · Republic of China1 · South Korea · Japan · Mongolia · North Korea
Sometimes included:  Singapore · Vietnam · Russian Far East
1 Commonly known as "Taiwan"; see Political status of Taiwan.














v • d • e

Capitals of Asia









Central Asia
South Asia
Southeast Asia
Southwest Asia








Astana, Kazakhstan †
Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan
Dushanbe, Tajikistan
Ashgabat, Turkmenistan
Tashkent, Uzbekistan
East Asia
Beijing, People's Republic of China (PRC)
Tokyo, Japan
Pyongyang, North Korea
Seoul, South Korea
Ulan Bator, Mongolia 1
Taipei, Republic of China (ROC) 2

North Asia
Moscow, Russia †




Dhaka, Bangladesh
Thimphu, Bhutan
New Delhi, India
Malé, Maldives
Kathmandu, Nepal
Islamabad, Pakistan
Kotte3, Sri Lanka




Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei
Phnom Penh, Cambodia
Dili, East Timor
Jakarta, Indonesia
Vientiane, Laos
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 4
Putrajaya, Malaysia 5
Naypyidaw, Myanmar
Manila, Philippines
Singapore, Singapore
Bangkok, Thailand
Hanoi, Vietnam





Kabul, Afghanistan 6
Yerevan, Armenia ‡
Baku, Azerbaijan †
Manama, Bahrain
Nicosia, Cyprus ‡
Tbilisi, Georgia †
Tehran, Iran
Baghdad, Iraq
Jerusalem, Israel 7‡
Amman, Jordan
Kuwait City, Kuwait
Beirut, Lebanon
Muscat, Oman
Doha, Qatar
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Damascus, Syria
Ankara, Turkey †
Abu Dhabi, UAE
Sana'a, Yemen












1 Often considered part of Central Asia.  2 Commonly known as Taiwan. 3 Full name is Sri Jayawardenapura-Kotte.  4 Formal.  5 Administrative.  6 Often considered part of Central or South Asia.  7 See Positions on Jerusalem for details on Jerusalem's status as capital.  † Transcontinental country.  ‡ Entirely in Southwest Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe.












v • d • e

Countries of the Malay Archipelago








Brunei · East Timor · Indonesia · Malaysia · Philippines · Singapore · Papua New Guinea





















 
International membership














v • d • e

International ties of Singapore





Geographical and geopolitical



Continent of Asia · Southeast Asia








Historical and cultural



Commonwealth of Nations








International organisations


United Nations · APEC · Asian Development Bank · WTO · ASEAN · G-77 · Non-Aligned Movement · Interpol · PCA · ICA · ICRM · WCO · IAEA














v • d • e

Association of Southeast Asian Nations





Members

Brunei · Burma (Myanmar) · Cambodia · Indonesia · Laos · Malaysia · Philippines · Singapore · Thailand · Vietnam







Observers

Papua New Guinea · Timor-Leste






Related articles

Anthem · Charter · Common Time · Date of Establishment · Flag · Free Trade Area · Hymn · Organizations · Secretariat · Summits · Treaty of Amity and Cooperation













v • d • e

Member states of the East Asia Summit (EAS)









   


 Australia
 Brunei
 Burma (Myanmar)
 Cambodia




 India
 Indonesia
 Japan
 Laos




 Malaysia
 New Zealand
 People's Republic of China
 Philippines




 Singapore
 South Korea
 Thailand
 Vietnam











Potential future members       Timor-Leste    Russia












v • d • e

Members of the Commonwealth of Nations





Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda · Australia · Bahamas · Bangladesh · Barbados · Belize · Botswana · Brunei · Cameroon · Canada · Cyprus · Dominica · Fiji · The Gambia · Ghana · Grenada · Guyana · India · Jamaica · Kenya · Kiribati · Lesotho · Malawi · Malaysia · Maldives · Malta · Mauritius · Mozambique · Namibia · Nauru · New Zealand · Nigeria · Pakistan · Papua New Guinea · St. Kitts and Nevis · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · Samoa · Seychelles · Sierra Leone · Singapore · Solomon Islands · South Africa · Sri Lanka · Swaziland · Tanzania · Tonga · Trinidad and Tobago · Tuvalu · Uganda · United Kingdom · Vanuatu · Zambia











Dependencies





Australia




Ashmore and Cartier Islands · Australian Antarctic Territory · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands · Coral Sea Islands · Heard Island and McDonald Islands · Norfolk Island









New Zealand




Cook Islands · Niue · Ross Dependency · Tokelau









United Kingdom




Akrotiri and Dhekelia · Anguilla · Bermuda · British Antarctic Territory · British Indian Ocean Territory · British Virgin Islands · Cayman Islands · Falkland Islands · Gibraltar · Guernsey · Isle of Man · Jersey · Montserrat · Pitcairn Islands · St. Helena (including Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha) · South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands · Turks and Caicos Islands


















v • d • e

Members and observers of the Non-Aligned Movement





Members



Afghanistan · Algeria · Angola · Bahamas · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Barbados · Belarus · Belize · Benin · Bhutan · Bolivia · Botswana · Brunei · Burkina Faso · Burma · Burundi · Cambodia · Cameroon · Cape Verde · Central African Republic · Chad · Chile · Colombia · Comoros · Congo · Côte d'Ivoire · Cuba · Democratic Republic of the Congo · Djibouti · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · Egypt · Equatorial Guinea · Eritrea · Ethiopia · Gabon · Gambia · Ghana · Grenada · Guatemala · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Guyana · Honduras · India · Indonesia · Iran · Jamaica · Jordan · Kenya · Kuwait · Laos · Lebanon · Lesotho · Liberia · Libya · Madagascar · Malawi · Malaysia · Maldives · Mali · Mauritania · Mauritius · Mongolia · Morocco · Mozambique · Namibia · Nepal · Nicaragua · Niger · Nigeria · North Korea · Oman · Pakistan · Palestine · Panama · Papua New Guinea · Peru · Philippines · Qatar · Rwanda · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · São Tomé and Príncipe · Saudi Arabia · Senegal · Seychelles · Sierra Leone · Singapore · Somalia · South Africa · Sri Lanka · Sudan · Suriname · Swaziland · Syria · Tanzania · Thailand · East Timor · Togo · Trinidad and Tobago · Tunisia · Turkmenistan · Uganda · United Arab Emirates · Uzbekistan · Vanuatu · Venezuela · Vietnam · Yemen · Zambia · Zimbabwe








Observers





Countries


Antigua and Barbuda · Armenia · Azerbaijan · Bosnia-Herzegovina · Brazil · China (PRC) · Costa Rica · Croatia · Cyprus · Dominica · El Salvador · Kazakhstan · Kyrgyzstan · Mexico · Montenegro · Serbia · Ukraine · Uruguay




Organizations


African Union · Arab League · United Nations

















v • d • e

Member states of the Four Asian Tigers






 Hong Kong  ·    South Korea  ·    Singapore  ·    Republic of China



















 
Languages














v • d • e

States with an Anglophone majority – the English-speaking world





Europe

Guernsey • Ireland • Isle of Man • Jersey • United Kingdom • Malta






Americas

Antigua and Barbuda • The Bahamas • Barbados • Canada • Dominica • Guyana • Saint Kitts and Nevis • Saint Vincent and the Grenadines • Trinidad and Tobago • United States






Oceania

Australia • Marshall Islands • Federated States of Micronesia • Nauru • New Zealand • Palau






Asia

Singapore













v • d • e

Malay-speaking countries and territories









   


 Brunei
 Malaysia




 Christmas Island




 Cocos Islands
 Singapore




 Philippines
 Thailand




 Indonesia


















v • d • e

Sino-Tibetan-speaking nations and regions









   


 People's Republic of China




 Hong Kong




 Macau




 Singapore




 Republic of China (Taiwan)











Names in italics indicate non-sovereign territories.












v • d • e

Austronesian-speaking countries and territories





Formosan

Taiwan






Malayo-Polynesian

American Samoa · Brunei · Burma (Myanmar) · Cambodia · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands · Cook Islands · Easter Island · East Timor · Fiji · French Polynesia · Guam · Hainan · Hawaii · Indonesia · Kiribati · Madagascar · Malaysia · Marshall Islands · FS Micronesia · Nauru · New Caledonia · New Zealand · Niue · Northern Mariana Islands · Orchid Island · Palau · Papua New Guinea · Patani · Philippines · Samoa · Singapore · Solomon Islands · Sri Lanka · Suriname · Tokelau · Tonga · Tuvalu · United States · Vanuatu · Vietnam · Wallis and Futuna













Coordinates: 01°22′N 103°48′E﻿ / ﻿1.367°N 103.8°E﻿ / 1.367; 103.8




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singapore"
Categories: Capitals in Asia | Singapore | Association of Southeast Asian Nations member states | Coastal settlements | Former British colonies | Island countries | Members of the Commonwealth of Nations | Republics | English-speaking countries and territories | 1965 establishmentsHidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | Articles containing Malay language text | Articles containing Tamil language text | Articles containing Chinese language text | Articles containing Japanese language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
العربية
Aragonés
Arpetan
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Basa Banyumasan
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bikol Central
བོད་ཡིག
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Fiji Hindi
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
贛語
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Hawai`i
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingue
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kapampangan
ქართული
Kaszëbsczi
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Коми
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lojban
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
Malagasy
മലയാളം
Malti
मराठी
مصرى
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Occitan
پښتو
ភាសាខ្មែរ
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
Gagana Samoa
संस्कृत
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Taqbaylit
తెలుగు
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Удмурт
Українська
اردو
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
Tiếng Việt
Volapük
Winaray
Wolof
吴语
ייִדיש
粵語
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 02:26.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
