













Moringa oleifera - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Moringa_oleifera";
		var wgTitle = "Moringa oleifera";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "3485953";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283115398;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Moringa oleifera

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 

"Drumstick Tree" and variants thereof redirect here. This name is also used for the Golden Shower Tree (Cassia fistulosa L.).



Moringa oleifera







Scientific classification





Kingdom:
Plantae


(unranked):
Angiosperms


(unranked):
Eudicots


(unranked):
Rosids


Order:
Brassicales


Family:
Moringaceae


Genus:
Moringa


Species:
M. oleifera





Binomial name


Moringa oleifera


Moringa oleifera, commonly referred to simply as Moringa (Tamil murungai, முருங்கை),(Kannada Nuggekai) (Mulakkaya in Telugu), (Marathi Shevaga), (Malunggay in Tagalog) is the most widely cultivated variety of the genus Moringa. It is of the family Moringaceae. It is an exceptionally nutritious vegetable tree with a variety of potential uses. The tree itself is rather slender with drooping branches that grows to approximately 10 m in height; however, it normally is cut back annually to one meter or less, and allowed to regrow, so that pods and leaves remain within arm's reach.
The Moringa tree grows mainly in semi-arid tropical and subtropical areas, corresponding in the United States to USDA hardiness zones 9 and 10. While it grows best in dry sandy soil, it tolerates poor soil, including coastal areas. It is a fast-growing, drought-resistant tree that is native to the southern foothills of the Himalayas, and possibly Africa and the Middle East[1]. Today it is widely cultivated in Africa, Central and South America, Sri Lanka, India, Mexico, Malaysia and the Philippines. Considered one of the world’s most useful trees, as almost every part of the Moringa tree can be used for food, or has some other beneficial property. In the tropics it is used as forage for livestock. And in many countries, Moringa is used as a micronutrient powder to treat indigenous diseases.
A traditional food plant in Africa, this little-known vegetable has potential to improve nutrition, boost food security, foster rural development and support sustainable landcare.[2]
The immature green pods, called “drumsticks” are probably the most valued and widely used part of the tree. They are commonly consumed in India, and are generally prepared in a similar fashion to green beans and have a slight asparagus taste. The seeds are sometimes removed from more mature pods and eaten like peas or roasted like nuts. The flowers are edible when cooked, and are said to taste like mushrooms. The roots are shredded and used as a condiment in the same way as horseradish, however it contains the alkaloid spirochin, a potentially fatal nerve paralyzing agent, so such practices should be strongly discouraged.[citation needed]




Leaf in Kolkata, West Bengal, India.


The leaves are highly nutritious, being a significant source of beta-carotene, Vitamin C, protein, iron and potassium. The leaves are cooked and used like spinach. In addition to being used fresh as a substitute for spinach, its leaves are commonly dried and crushed into a powder, and used in soups and sauces. Murungakai as it is locally known in Tamil Nadu and Kerala is used in Siddha medicine. Its leaves are full of medicinal properties. The tree is a good source for calcium and phosphorus. In Siddha medicine, the drumstick seeds are used as a sexual virility drug for treating erectile dysfunction in men and also in women for prolonging sexual activity.




Trunk in Kolkata, West Bengal, India


The Moringa seeds yield 38–40% edible oil (called ben oil, from the high concentration of behenic acid contained in the oil). The refined oil is clear, odorless, and resists rancidity at least as well as any other botanical oil. The seed cake remaining after oil extraction may be used as a fertilizer or as a flocculent to purify water.
The bark, sap, roots, leaves, seeds, oil and flowers are used in traditional medicine in several countries. In Jamaica, the sap is used for a blue dye.
The flowers are also cooked and relished as a delicacy in West Bengal and Bangladesh, especially during early spring. There it is called sojne ful and is usually cooked with green peas and potato.




Contents


1 Malnutrition
2 Cultivation

2.1 Soil
2.2 Planting seeds


3 Culinary uses

3.1 India
3.2 Philippines


4 Other uses
5 Names
6 Popular beliefs
7 Gallery
8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Malnutrition
Moringa trees have been used to combat malnutrition, especially among infants and nursing mothers. Three non-governmental organizations in particular—Trees for Life, Church World Service and Educational Concerns for Hunger Organization—have advocated Moringa as “natural nutrition for the tropics.” Leaves can be eaten fresh, cooked, or stored as dried powder for many months without refrigeration, and reportedly without loss of nutritional value. Moringa is especially promising as a food source in the tropics because the tree is in full leaf at the end of the dry season when other foods are typically scarce. (Jed W. Fahey, 2005)
A large number of reports on the nutritional qualities of Moringa now exist in both the scientific and the popular literature. Moringa leaves contain more Vitamin A than carrots, more calcium than milk, more iron than spinach, more Vitamin C than oranges, and more potassium than bananas,” and that the protein quality of Moringa leaves rivals that of milk and eggs. The oral histories recorded by Lowell Fuglie in Senegal and throughout West Africa, who reports countless instances of lifesaving nutritional rescue that are attributed to Moringa (Fuglie, L.J., 1999, 2000). In fact, the nutritional properties of Moringa are now so well known that there seems to be little doubt of the substantial health benefit to be realized by consumption of Moringa leaf powder in situations where starvation is imminent. Nonetheless, the outcomes of well controlled and well documented clinical studies are still clearly of great value. (Jed W. Fahey, 2005) In many cultures throughout the tropics, differentiation between food and medicinal uses of plants (e.g. bark, fruit, leaves, nuts, seeds, tubers, roots, flowers), is very difficult since plant uses span both categories and this is deeply ingrained in the traditions and the fabric of the community (Lockett et al., 2000). ”

[edit] Cultivation
In the Philippines, the plant is propagated by planting limb cuttings 1–2 m long, from June to August, preferably. The plant starts bearing pods 6–8 months after planting but regular bearing commences after the second year. The tree bears for several years. It does not tolerate freezes or frost. It can also be propagated by seed. As with all plants, optimum cultivation depends on producing the right environment for the plant to thrive. Moringa is a sun and heat loving plant. As a seedling, however, you must monitor the environment in the beginning until the tree is established. Seeds can be germinated year round.





This article contains instructions, advice, or how-to content. The purpose of Wikipedia is to present facts, not to train. Please help improve this article either by rewriting the how-to content or by moving it to Wikiversity or Wikibooks.



[edit] Soil
Moringa needs well draining soil. Increase the drainage of your soil by adding perlite or other porous substance.

[edit] Planting seeds
Plant an inch from the surface of the soil, cover and tamp gently.
Rajangam et al write:

India is the largest producer of moringa with an annual production of 1.1 to 1.3 million tonnes of tender fruits from an area of 380 km². Among the states, Andhra Pradesh leads in both area and production (156.65 km²) followed by Karnataka (102.8 km²) and Tamil Nadu (74.08 km²). In other states, it occupies an area of 46.13 km². Tamil Nadu is the pioneering state insomuch as it has varied genotypes from diversified geographical areas, as well as introductions from Sri Lanka.
– [3]

Moringa is common in India, where its triangular, ribbed pods with winged seeds are used as a vegetable crop. It is particularly suitable for dry regions. The drumstick can be grown using rainwater without expensive irrigation techniques. The yield is good even if the water supply is not. The tree can be even grown on land covered with 10-90 cm of mud.
Moringa is grown in home gardens and as living fences in Thailand, where it is commonly sold in local markets. [4] In the Philippines, moringa is commonly grown for its leaves, which are used in soup. [5] The leaves (called dahon ng malunggay in Tagalog or dahon sa kamunggay in Cebuano) are commonly sold in local markets. Moringa is also actively cultivated by the AVRDC in Taiwan. The AVRDC is "the principal international center for vegetable research and development in the world. Its mission is to reduce poverty and malnutrition in developing countries through improved production and consumption of vegetables."

[edit] Culinary uses




Seeds and fruit of the M. oleifera, ready for cooking


The fruit of the tree is quite popular as a vegetable in Asia and Africa. The fruit is a long, thin pod, resembling a drum stick. The fruit itself is called drumstick in India and elsewhere. Moringa leaves are also eaten as a leaf vegetable, particularly in the Philippines and Africa.

[edit] India





This article contains instructions, advice, or how-to content. The purpose of Wikipedia is to present facts, not to train. Please help improve this article either by rewriting the how-to content or by moving it to Wikiversity or Wikibooks.


The moringa pod is known as drumstick or saragwa or saragwe in India. In South India, it is used to prepare a variety of sambar and is also fried. It is also preserved by canning and exported worldwide. In other parts of India, especially West Bengal and also in a neighboring country like Bangladesh it is enjoyed very much. It can be made into varieties of curry by mixing with coconut, poppy seeds and mustard. It can just be boiled, until the drumsticks are semi-soft and consumed directly without any extra processing or cooking. It is used in curries, sambars, kormas, and dals, although it is also used to add flavor to cutlets, etc.
Tender drumstick leaves, finely chopped, make an excellent garnish for any vegetable dishes, dals, sambars, salads, etc. One can use the same in place of or with coriander, as these leaves have high medicinal value. If the pulp has to be scraped out after cooking the sticks, then keep the pieces as long as 4-5 inches long. Also do not scrape the skin before boiling. This will help to hold and scrape them more easily and with less mess. For drumstick sambar follow recipe for traditional sambar, adding boiled drumstick fingers, along with onions in the oil, while stir frying.
Scraped drumstick pulp can be made into drumstick bhurtha, more or less like the baingan bhurtha after the pulp has been obtained. It is a wonderfully unusual and tasty dish. The recipe is identical to that of baingan bhurtha.
Drumstick dal, is also a very tasty version of the traditional 'toor dal'. Add some of the pulp to the boiled dal, and hand beat it along with the dal before seasoning. This will give an unusual, novel flavor to this dal. In another variation you may add pieces of boiled drumstick including the water in which it was boiled, to the traditional toor dal while it is simmering. The pieces are delightful to chew on with the dal & rice. In addition to being known as Drumstick Dal, the South Indian version which is a spiced lentil soup is more popular by the name - sambar or sambhar. Sambar is usually cooked with toor dal, drumsticks and other locally grown vegetables. The spices used typically in this stew are turmeric, chili powder and cumin among others. It is eaten with rice just like the Drumstick dal.

[edit] Philippines
In the Philippines, the leaves are widely eaten. Bunches of leaves are available in many markets, priced below many other leaf vegetables. The leaves are most often added to a broth to make a simple, and highly nutritious soup. The leaves are also sometimes used as a characteristic ingredient in tinola—a traditional chicken dish, composed of chicken in a broth, moringa leaves, and either green papaya or another secondary vegetable.
The leaves are now used in making "polvoron" candy, as bio-fuel and moringa oil.
On September 14, 2007, Senator Loren Legarda campaigned for the popularization of moringa. She asked the government to make moringa among its priority crops for propagation. The Bureau of Plant Industry, in its report, stated that, weight per weight, moringa leaves have the calcium equivalent of 4 glasses of milk, the vitamin C content of 7 oranges, potassium of 3 bananas, 3 times the iron of spinach, 4 times the amount of vitamin A in carrots, and 2 times the protein in milk. Moringa also helps to purify water, a cheaper alternative to mechanical filtration.[6][7]




leaves with flowers in Kolkata, West Bengal, India.



[edit] Other uses
The tree's bark, roots, fruit, flowers, leaves, seeds and gum are also used medicinally. Uses include as an antiseptic and in treating rheumatism, venomous bites and other conditions.

[edit] Names
Other names for the Moringa in English include:

Drumstick tree, from the appearance of the long, slender, triangular seed pods.
Horseradish tree, from the taste of the leaves, which can serve as a rough substitute for horseradish.
Ben oil tree, from the oil derived from the seeds

The Chinese name of the Moringa (辣木), pronounced "la mu" in Putonghua and "lat mok" in Cantonese, means "spicy (hot) wood", and is reminiscent of the English name "horseradish tree".
In some Indian languages, the name is phonetically somewhat similar to "moringa", while in others it is quite different:

In sinhalese it is called Murunga
In Thai language it is called "ma rum มะรุม".
In Assamese it is called Sojina.
In Punjabi it is called Surajana.
In The Philippines it is called Malunggay.
In Tamil The tree is called Murungai Maram (முருங்கை மரம்) and the fruit is called Murungai-kaai (முருங்கைக்காய்).
In Hindi it is called sahjan.
In Marathi is it called Shevga.
In Kannada it is known as Nuggekayee.
In Tulu it is known as Noorggaee.
In Telugu it is called Mulakkaya.
In Konkani it is called Mushinga Saang.
In Gujarati is it called Saragvo.
In Oriya it is called Sajana or Sujuna.
In Bengali it is called Sojne danta.
In Kerala state its known as Muringa Tree and the fruit called Muringakka in Malayalam.
In Nepali it is known as Sajiwan or Swejan.
a In Guyana it is called Sijan

The Tagalog name, in the Philippines - Malunggay - is also phonetically similar to "moringa". In Ilocano, another Filipino language, its called Marungay. It is called "Kamunggay" in Bisaya.
In Haiti, the moringa is called the benzolive (or benzolivier).
In Nicaragua the plant is referred to as Marango.
In Indonesian, the moringa is called kelor (kalor in Malay). In Javanese, it is called limaran.
In Mooré (Burkina Faso), it is called "Arzan Tiiga" which means "tree of paradise".
In Zarma (Niger) it is called Windi Bundu which means, loosely, "fencepost wood", a reference to it's use as live fencing. The leaves are the primary part eaten, and in fact are so common that the Zarma word "kopto", or "leaf", is synonymous with cooked Moringa leaves.
In Dioula (Côte D'Ivoire), it is called "Arjanayiiri".
In Mauritius,it's :"Brede Mouroum",popular among the poor...
The MMPND entry for Moringa gives names in many other languages.

[edit] Popular beliefs
There are several popular beliefs associated with the tree and the fruit in southern India without any medical proof.

The fruit is said to increase sexual libido in men. This belief is so common in the state of Tamil Nadu that there have been passive references to this in its legislative assembly.
The tree is said to host ghosts during the night. This combined with the fact that the tree attracts a host of insects make it unattractive for people to grow it in their backyards.


[edit] Gallery








trunk at Narendrapur near Kolkata, West Bengal, India.









flowering at canopy at Narendrapur near Kolkata, West Bengal, India.









flowers in Kolkata, West Bengal, India.









flowers in Kolkata, West Bengal, India.











flowering branch in Kolkata, West Bengal, India.









leaves at Jayanti in Buxa Tiger Reserve in Jalpaiguri district of West Bengal, India.









flowers at Jayanti in Buxa Tiger Reserve in Jalpaiguri district of West Bengal, India.









flowers at Jayanti in Buxa Tiger Reserve in Jalpaiguri district of West Bengal, India.






[edit] References

^ James A. Duke, (1982). Handbook of Energy Crops: Moringa oleifera. From the Purdue Center for New Crops Web site.
^ National Research Council (2006-10-27). "Moringa". Lost Crops of Africa: Volume II: Vegetables. Lost Crops of Africa. 2. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-0-309-10333-6. http://books.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=11763&page=247. Retrieved on 2008-07-15. 
^ Rajangam J., et al. Status of Production and Utilisation of Moringa in Southern India. In "Development potential for Moringa products", October 29th - November 2nd, 2001, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania
^ Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, The Vegetable Sector in Thailand, 1999
^ Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Country Pasture/Forage Resource Profiles: Philippines
^ Inquirer.net, Legarda pushes for malunggay, her beauty soup
^ AHN, Philippine Lawmaker Urges Agriculture Department To Propagate Highly Potent Malunggay Vegetable


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Moringa oleifera



The home page of the plant family Moringaceae: Photos and information on all 13 species
MoringaNews Network Site
Trees for Life Moringa Site
Moringa en Español
Trees for Life's Moringa Book online
John Sutherland's Moringa oleifera pages
MMPND entry for Moringa
Philippine Medicinal Plants
Jed W. Fahey, Sc.D.. "Moringa oleifera: A Review of the Medical Evidence for Its Nutritional, Therapeutic, and Prophylactic Properties. Part 1.". Trees for Life Journal. http://www.tfljournal.org/article.php/20051201124931586. Retrieved on 2008-08-16. 
Lydia M. Marero. "A Second Look at the Lowly Malunggay". Philippines Food and Nutrition Research Institute. http://www.fnri.dost.gov.ph/wp/malunggay.htm. Retrieved on 2006-12-12. 
www.gmanews.tv/largevideo, Malunggay may be used in biofuel production - 01/25/2008
Abs-Cbn Interactive, Guro nakaimbento ng 'malunggay polvoron'
www.pia.gov.ph, Malunggay eyed as potential biofuel source
newsinfo.inquirer.net, 4 MIT students here studying ‘malunggay’
On-farm Food Crops with "Famine Food" Components: Moringa oleifera (Famine Food Guide website)






This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please improve this article if you can. (April 2008)


Nutritional Values Preparation Serving Size Carbs Fiber (g) Fat (g) Energy (kj) Horseradish - fresh 5g 0.5 0 0.5 35



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moringa_oleifera"
Categories: Filipino cuisine | Moringa | Tropical agriculture | Underutilized crops | Water treatment | Appropriate technology | Flora of PakistanHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles containing how-to sections | Cleanup from April 2008 | All pages needing cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Français
Italiano
Kreyòl ayisyen
Português
मराठी
Русский









 This page was last modified on 11 April 2009, at 04:20 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
