













Seven Laws of Noah - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Seven_Laws_of_Noah";
		var wgTitle = "Seven Laws of Noah";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "21907";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281994920;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Seven Laws of Noah

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 




The Rainbow is the modern symbol of the Noahide Movement, recalling the rainbow that appeared after the Great Flood of the Bible.


The Seven Laws of Noah (Hebrew: שבע מצוות בני נח‎ Sheva mitzvot B'nei Noach), often referred to as the Noahide Laws, are a set of seven moral imperatives that, according to the Talmud, were given by God to Noah as a binding set of laws for all mankind.[1] According to Judaism any non-Jew who lives according to these laws is regarded as a Righteous Gentile and is assured of a place in the world to come (Olam Haba), the Jewish concept of heaven.[2] Adherents are often called "B'nei Noach" (Children of Noah) or "Noahides" and may often network in Jewish synagogues.Noah lived for 3000 years
The seven laws listed by the Tosefta and the Talmud are[3]

Prohibition of Idolatry: You shall not have any idols before God.
Prohibition of Murder: You shall not murder. (Genesis 9:6)
Prohibition of Theft: You shall not steal.
Prohibition of Sexual Promiscuity: You shall not commit any of a series of sexual prohibitions, which include adultery, incest, bestiality and male homosexual intercourse.
Prohibition of Blasphemy: You shall not blaspheme God's name.
Dietary Law: Do not eat flesh taken from an animal while it is still alive. (Genesis 9:4)
Requirement to have just Laws: You shall set up an effective judiciary to enforce the preceding six laws fairly.

The Noahide Laws were predated by six laws given to Adam in the Garden of Eden.[4] Later at the Revelation at Sinai the Seven Laws of Noah were regiven to humanity and embedded in the 613 Laws given to the Children of Israel along with the Ten Commandments, which are part of, and not separate from, the 613 mitzvot. These laws are mentioned in the Torah. According to Judaism, the 613 mitzvot or "commandments" given in the written Torah, as well as their reasonings in the oral Torah, were only issued to the Jews and are therefore binding only upon them, having inherited the obligation from their ancestors. At the same time, at Mount Sinai, the Children of Israel (i.e. the Children of Jacob, i.e. the Israelites) were given the obligation to teach other nations the embedded Noahide Laws. It is actually forbidden by the Talmud for non-Jews on whom the Noahide Laws are still binding, to elevate their observance to the Torah's mitzvot as the Jews do.[5]
While some Jewish organizations, such as Chabad have worked to promote the acceptance of Noahide laws, there are no figures for how many actually do. Noahides exist predominantly in the United States, South America and Europe.[citation needed]




Contents


1 Background

1.1 Hidden Land Institute


2 Early Parallels

2.1 First Century CE, Acts 15


3 Subdividing the Seven Laws

3.1 Prohibition against idolatry
3.2 Prohibition against blasphemy
3.3 Prohibition against murder
3.4 Prohibition against theft
3.5 Prohibition against sexual immorality
3.6 Prohibition against eating the limb of a living animal
3.7 Establish courts of justice


4 Legal status of an observer of Noahide Laws
5 Noahide laws as a basis for secular governance
6 Public endorsement of Noahide Laws

6.1 United States Congress
6.2 Israeli Druze


7 Christianity and the Noahide Laws
8 Islam and the Noahide Laws
9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading

11.1 Audio
11.2 Videos


12 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Background



Part of a series on




                




Judaism



Portal | Category


Jews · Judaism · Denominations


Orthodox · Conservative · Reform


Haredi · Hasidic · Modern Orthodox


Reconstructionist · Renewal


Rabbinic · Humanistic · Karaite · Samaritanism


Jewish philosophy


Principles of faith · Minyan · Kabbalah


Noahide laws · God · Eschatology · Messiah


Chosenness · Holocaust · Modesty


Tzedakah · Ethics · Mussar


Religious texts


Torah · Tanakh · Talmud · Midrash · Tosefta


Rabbinic literature · Kuzari · Mishneh Torah


Ḥumash · Siddur · Piyutim · Zohar


Religious Law


Talmud · Mishne Torah · Tur


Shulchan Aruch · Mishnah Berurah · Chazon Ish


Kashrut · Rov · Chazakah · Hechsher · Chametz


Holy cities


Jerusalem · Safed · Hebron · Tiberias


Important figures


Abraham · Sarah · Isaac · Rebecca ·


Jacob/Israel · Rachel · Leah · Twelve Tribes · Moses


Deborah · Ruth · Solomon · David


Hillel · Shammai · Rabbi Akiva · Judah the Prince


Rav · Saadia Gaon · Rif · Rashi · Tosafists


Maimonides · Nahmanides · Yosef Karo


Jewish life cycle


Brit · Bar/Bat Mitzvah · Shidduch · Marriage


Niddah · Naming · Pidyon haben · Bereavement


Religious roles


Rabbi · Rebbe · Posek · Hazzan


Kohen/Priest · Mashgiah · Gabbai · Maggid


Mohel · Beth din · Rosh yeshiva


Religious Kehilla & institutions


Cheder · Talmud Torah · Yeshiva · Synagogue


Mikvah · Gemach · Chevra Kadisha · Kollel


Religious buildings


Holy Temple / Tabernacle


Synagogue · Mikvah · Sukkah


Religious articles


Tallit · Tefillin · Kippah · Sefer Torah


Tzitzit · Mezuzah · Menorah · Hanukiah · Shofar


4 Species · Kittel · Gartel · Yad


Jewish prayers and services


Shema · Adon Olam · Amidah · Aleinu · Kol Nidre


Musaf · Kaddish · Hallel · Ma Tovu · Selichot


Birkat HaMazon · Tefilat HaDerech · Shehecheyanu


Tachanun · Kabbalat Shabbat · Havdalah


Jewish Clothing Articles


Shtreimel · Bekishe · Fedora · Yarmulke


Sheitel · Tichel


Judaism & other religions


Christianity · Islam · "Judeo-Christian" · Others


Abrahamic faiths · Judeo-Paganism · Pluralism


Related topics


Antisemitism · Criticism


Philo-Semitism · Slavery · Yeshiva · Zionism



v • d • e



According to Judaism, as expressed in the Talmud, the Noahide Laws apply to all humanity through mankind's descent from one paternal ancestor who in Hebrew tradition is called Noah (the head of the only family to survive during The Flood). In Judaism, בני נח B'nei Noah (Hebrew, "Descendants of Noah", "Children of Noah") refers to all of mankind.[citation needed][6]
The Talmud also states: "Righteous people of all nations have a share in the world to come" (Sanhedrin 105a). Any non-Jew who lives according to these laws is regarded as one of "the righteous among the gentiles". Maimonides writes that this refers to those who have acquired knowledge of God and act in accordance with the Noahide laws out of obedience to Him. According to what scholars consider to be the most accurate texts of the Mishneh Torah, Maimonides continues on to say that anyone who upholds the Noahide laws only because they appear logical is not one of the "righteous among the nations," but rather he is one of the wise among them. The more prolific versions of the Mishneh Torah say of such a person: "..nor is he one of the wise among them."[7]
According to the Biblical narrative, the Deluge covered the whole world killing every surface-dwelling creature except Noah, his wife, his sons and their wives, sea creatures, and the animals taken by Noah on Noah's Ark. After the flood, God sealed a covenant with Noah with the following admonitions (Genesis 9):

Food: "However, flesh with its life-blood [in it] you shall not eat." (9:4)
Murder: "Furthermore, I will demand your blood, for [the taking of] your lives, I shall demand it [even] from any wild animal. From man too, I will demand of each person's brother the blood of man. He who spills the blood of man, by man his blood shall be spilt; for in the image of God He made man." (9:5-6)

The Talmud states that the instruction to not eat "flesh with the life" was given to Noah, and that Adam and Eve had already received six other commandments. Adam and Eve were not enjoined from eating from a living animal since they were forbidden to eat any animal. The remaining six are exegetically derived from a seemingly superfluous sentence in Gen 2:16.[8]
Historically, some rabbinic opinion holds that not only are non-Jews not obligated to adhere to all the laws of the Torah, but they are actually forbidden to observe them.[9] Rabbinic Judaism and its modern-day descendants discourage proselytization. However, according to one source, the Jewish Encyclopedia, the restrictions placed on Gentiles of the ancient world are no longer relevant. The Movement for Reform Judaism in the United Kingdom, for example, state on their website that they see "no reason why a person should not become Jewish if they so wish [...] The requirements for conversion are sincerity, knowledge and participation."The Noahide Laws are regarded as the way through which non-Jews can have a direct and meaningful relationship with God or at least comply with the minimal requisites of civilization and of divine law.[citation needed]
A non-Jew who keeps the Noahide Laws in all their details is said to attain the same spiritual and moral level as Israel's own Kohen Gadol (high priest).[10] Maimonides states in his work Mishneh Torah[11] that a non-Jew who is precise in the observance of these Seven Noahide commandments is considered to be a Righteous Gentile and has earned a place in the world to come. This follows a similar statement in the Talmud.[12] However, according to Maimonides, a gentile is considered righteous only if a person follows the Noahide laws specifically because he or she considers them to be of divine origin (through the Torah) and not if they are merely considered to be intellectually compelling or good rules for living.[13]
Noahide law differs radically from the Roman law for gentiles (Jus Gentium), if only because the latter was an enforceable judicial policy. Rabbinic Judaism has never adjudicated any cases under Noahide law (per Novak, 1983:28ff.), although scholars disagree about whether the Noahide law is a functional part of Halakha ("Jewish law") (cf. Bleich).
In recent years, the term "Noahide" has come to refer to non-Jews who strive to live in accord with the seven Noahide Laws; the terms "observant Noahide" or "Torah-centered Noahides" would be more precise but are infrequently used. The rainbow, referring to the Noahide or First Covenant (Genesis 9), is the symbol of many organized Noahide groups, following Genesis 9:12-17. A non-Jewish person of any ethnicity or religion is referred to as a bat ("daughter") or ben ("son") of Noah, but most organizations that call themselves בני נח (b'nei noach) are composed of gentiles who are keeping the Noahide Laws.[citation needed]

[edit] Hidden Land Institute
The first Noahide Degree Granting College in Canada was founded in 2006 and is called Hidden Land Institute[14] HLI seeks to be faithful to the legacy of the Yeshiva of Shem & Eber as well as work in cooperation with the Nascent Sanhedrin toward not only teaching the Paths of Noah to the Nations but also to help train potential Noahide Clergy. HLI enjoys involvement in its efforts of the North American Emissary of the Nascent Sanhedrin for Noahide Affairs.


[edit] Early Parallels

[edit] First Century CE, Acts 15
Main article: Council of Jerusalem
The Jewish Encyclopedia article on Saul of Tarsus states:



According to Acts, Paul began working along the traditional Jewish line of proselytizing in the various synagogues where the proselytes of the gate [a biblical term, for example see Exodus 20:9] and the Jews met; and only because he failed to win the Jews to his views, encountering strong opposition and persecution from them, did he turn to the Gentile world after he had agreed at a convention with the apostles at Jerusalem to admit the Gentiles into the Church only as proselytes of the gate, that is, after their acceptance of the Noachian laws (Acts 15:1–31).



Jewish Encyclopedia: New Testament — Spirit of Jewish Proselytism in Christianity states:



For great as was the success of Barnabas and Paul in the heathen world, the authorities in Jerusalem insisted upon circumcision as the condition of admission of members into the church, until, on the initiative of Peter, and of James, the head of the Jerusalem church, it was agreed that acceptance of the Noachian Laws — namely, regarding avoidance of idolatry, fornication, and the eating of flesh cut from a living animal — should be demanded of the heathen desirous of entering the Church.



Some modern scholars however dispute the connection between Acts 15 and Noahide Law[15] and the nature of Biblical Law in Christianity is still disputed, see Biblical law in Christianity.

[edit] Subdividing the Seven Laws
Various rabbinic sources have different positions on the way the seven laws are to be subdivided in categories. Maimonides[16] lists one additional Noahide commandment forbidding the coupling of different kinds of animals and the mixing of trees. Rabbi David ben Solomon ibn Abi Zimra (Radbaz), a contemporary commentator on Maimonides, expressed surprise that he left out castration and sorcery which were listed in the Talmud[17].
The tenth century Rabbi Saadia Gaon added tithes and levirate marriage. The eleventh century Rav Nissim Gaon included "listening to God's Voice", "knowing God" and "serving God" besides going on to say that all religious acts which can be understood through human reasoning are obligatory upon Jew and Gentile alike. The fourteenth century Rabbi Nissim ben Reuben Gerondi added the commandment of charity.
The sixteenth century work Asarah Maamarot by Rabbi Menahem Azariah of Fano (Rema mi-Fano) enumerates thirty commandments, listing the latter twenty-three as extensions of the original seven. Another commentator, Rabbi Zvi Hirsch Chajes (Kol Hidushei Maharitz Chayess I, end Ch. 10) suggests these are not related to the first seven, nor based on Scripture, but were passed down by oral tradition. The number thirty derives from the statement of the Talmudic sage Ulla in tractate Hullin 92a, though he lists only three other rules in addition to the original seven, consisting of the prohibitions against homosexuality and cannibalism, as well as the imperative to honor the Torah.
Talmud commentator Rashi remarks on this that he does not know the other Commandments that are referred to. Though the authorities seem to take it for granted that Ulla's thirty commandments included the original seven, an additional thirty laws is also possible from the reading.
The tenth century Shmuel ben Hophni Gaon lists thirty Noahide Commandments based on Ulla's Talmudic statement, though the text is problematic[18]. He includes the prohibitions against suicide and false oaths, as well as the imperatives related to prayer, sacrifices and honoring one's parents.

[edit] Prohibition against idolatry

No idolatry (Genesis 2:16)
To pray only to God (Genesis 20:7)
To offer ritual sacrifices only to God (Genesis 8:20)


[edit] Prohibition against blasphemy

To believe that God is one (Genesis 2:16)
No blasphemy (Genesis 2:16)
No consulting oracles (Deuteronomy 18:10)
No divination (Deuteronomy 18:10)
No astrology (Deuteronomy 18:10)
No interpreting omens (Deuteronomy 18:10)
No witchcraft (Deuteronomy 18:10)
No conjuration (Deuteronomy 18:10)
No necromancy (Deuteronomy 18:10)
No consulting of mediums (Deuteronomy 18:10)
To honor one's father and mother (Genesis 9:22-23)


[edit] Prohibition against murder

No murder (Genesis 9:5-6)
No suicide (Genesis 9:5-6)
No Moloch worship (infant sacrifice) (Deuteronomy 18:10)


[edit] Prohibition against theft

No theft (including kidnapping) (Genesis 2:16; 6:11)


[edit] Prohibition against sexual immorality

No adultery (defined only as a married woman having sex with someone other than her husband) (Genesis 20:3)
Formal marriage via bride price and marriage gifts (Genesis 34:12)
No incest with a sister (Genesis 12:13)
No bestiality (Genesis 2:24)
No crossbreeding of animals (Genesis 8:20)
No castration of any male (Leviticus 22:24)
No male homosexuality (Genesis 2:24)


[edit] Prohibition against eating the limb of a living animal

Not to eat a limb torn from a creature while it is still living (Genesis 9:4)
Not to eat or drink blood (Genesis 9:4)
Not to eat carrion (for those recognized by a Beth Din) (Genesis 9:3)


[edit] Establish courts of justice

Justice (the remainder of this section is damaged in the original manuscript)
No false oaths (Genesis 21:23)

The contemporary Rabbi Aaron Lichtenstein counts 66 instructions but Rabbi Harvey Falk has suggested that much work remains to be done in order to properly identify all of the Noahide Commandments, their divisions and subdivisions.
Theft, robbery and stealing covers the appropriate understanding of other persons, their property and their rights. The establishment of courts of justice promotes the value of the responsibility of a corporate society of people to enforce these laws and define these terms. The refusal to engage in unnecessary lust or cruelty demonstrates respect for the creation itself as renewed after the Flood. To not do murder would include human sacrifice.
Maimonides, in his Mishnah Torah, interpreted the prohibition against homicide as including a prohibition against abortion.[19]

[edit] Legal status of an observer of Noahide Laws
Main article: Ger Toshav
From the perspective of traditional halakhah, if a non-Jew is to be accepted to live among the Jewish people in the Land of Israel, then that person must keep the Noahide Laws, and a number of additional Laws and regulations apply as well. Such as person is called a Ger Toshav "Sojourning Alien" amid the people of Israel. A "Ger Toshav" is the only kind of non-Jew who Jewish law permits to live among the Jewish people in the Land of Israel when the land is run according to Halacha and there is a Sanhedrin and a Temple.[citation needed] Jewish law only allows the official acceptance of a "Ger Toshav" as a sojourner in the Land of Israel during a time when the Year of Jubilee (yovel) is in effect.[citation needed]
A Ger Toshav should not be confused with a Ger Tzedek. A Ger Tzedek is a person who prefers to proceed to total conversion to Judaism, a procedure that is traditionally discouraged by Judaism and allowed to take place only after much thought and deliberation over converting.

[edit] Noahide laws as a basis for secular governance
Traditionally, Judaism regards the determination of the details of the Noahide Law as something to be left to Jewish rabbis. This, in addition to the teaching of the Jewish law that punishment for violating one of the seven Noahide Laws includes a theoretical death penalty (Talmud, tractate Sanhedrin 57a), is a factor in modern opposition to the notion of a Noahide legal system. Jewish scholars respond by noting that Jews today no longer carry out the death penalty, even within the Jewish community. Jewish law, in contemporary practice, sees the death penalty as an indicator of the seriousness of an offense; violators are not actually put to death.
Some modern views hold that penalties are a detail of the Noahide Laws and that Noahides themselves must determine the details of their own laws for themselves. According to this school of thought - see N. Rakover, Law and the Noahides (1998); M. Dallen, The Rainbow Covenant (2003)- the Noahide Laws offer mankind a set of absolute values and a framework for righteousness and justice, while the detailed laws that are currently on the books of the world's states and nations are presumptively valid.

[edit] Public endorsement of Noahide Laws

[edit] United States Congress
The Seven Laws of Noah were recognized by the United States Congress in the preamble to the bill that established Education Day in honor of the 90th birthday of Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the leader of the Chabad-Lubavitch movement:


Whereas Congress recognizes the historical tradition of ethical values and principles which are the basis of civilized society and upon which our great Nation was founded; Whereas these ethical values and principles have been the bedrock of society from the dawn of civilization, when they were known as the Seven Noahide Laws.[20]



[edit] Israeli Druze
In January 2004, the spiritual leader of the Druze community in Israel, Sheikh Mowafak Tarif, signed a declaration calling on all non-Jews in Israel to observe the Noahide Laws as laid down in the Talmud and expounded upon in Jewish tradition. The mayor of the Galilean city of Shefa-'Amr (Shfaram) - where Muslim, Christian and Druze communities live side by side - also signed the document. The declaration includes the commitment to make a better, more humane world based on the Seven Noachide Commandments and the values they represent commanded by the Creator to all mankind through Moses on Mount Sinai.
Support for the spread of the Seven Noahide Commandments by the Druze leaders reflects the Biblical narrative itself. The Druze community reveres the non-Jewish father-in-law of Moses, Jethro, whom Arabs call Shoaib. According to the Biblical narrative, Jethro joined and assisted the Jewish people in the desert during the Exodus, accepted monotheism, but ultimately rejoined his own people. In fact, the tomb of Jethro in Tiberias is the most important religious site for the Druze community. [2]

[edit] Christianity and the Noahide Laws
The 18th century rabbi, Jacob Emden proposed that Jesus, and Paul after him, intended to convert the gentiles to the Noahide laws while allowing the Jews to follow full Mosaic Law.[21]

[edit] Islam and the Noahide Laws
Each of the seven Noahide Laws are individually considered to be compatible with some element of Islamic Law.[citation needed]

[edit] See also

B'nei Noah
Ger Tzedek


[edit] References


^ Compare Genesis 9:4-6.
^ Mishneh Torah, Hilkhot M'lakhim 8:14
^ Tosefta Avodah Zarah 8.4, dated circa 300, quoted in Talmud Sanhedrin 56
^ Gen 2:16
^ Yerusha LeYacov,[citation needed] Talmud Bavli
^ Talmud Bavli and Yerushalmi
^ Mishnah Torah Shoftim, Laws of Kings and their wars 8:14
^ Sanhedrin 56a/b, quoting Tosefta Sanhedrin 9:4; see Also Rashi on Gensis 9:3
^ Gentiles May Not Be Taught the Torah.
^ Talmud, Bava Kamma 38a
^ The Laws of Kings 8:11
^ Sanhedrin 105b
^ Mishneh Torah Shoftim, The Laws of Kings 8:14
^ "Hidden Land Institute". http://hiddenlandinstitute.com. 
^ Joseph Fitzmyer, The Acts of the Apostles (The Anchor Yale Bible Commentaries), Yale University Press (December 2, 1998), ISBN 0300139829, chapter V
^ Mishneh Torah, Laws of Kings 10:6
^ Sanhedrin 56b.
^ Each surviving manuscript is defective between the seventeenth and nineteenth positions, cf. The Seven Laws of Noah by Rabbi Aaron Lictenstein, pp. 119
^ Mishnah Torah Shoftim, Laws of Kings and their wars 9:6
^ [1], 102nd Congress of the United States of America, March 5, 1991.
^ Jewish Encyclopedia: Gentile: Gentiles May Not Be Taught the Torah: "R. Emden (), in a remarkable apology for Christianity contained in his appendix to "Seder 'Olam" (pp. 32b–34b, Hamburg, 1752), gives it as his opinion that the original intention of Jesus, and especially of Paul, was to convert only the Gentiles to the seven moral laws of Noah and to let the Jews follow the Mosaic law—which explains the apparent contradictions in the New Testament regarding the laws of Moses and the Sabbath."



[edit] Further reading

Barre Elisheva. "Torah for Gentiles - the Messianic and Political Implications of the Bnei Noah Laws", 2008, ISBN 978-965-91329-0-4
Bleich, J. David. "Judaism and natural law" in Jewish law annual, vol. VII 5-42
Bleich, J. David. "Tikkun Olam: Jewish Obligations to Non-Jewish Society" in: Tikkun olam: social responsibility in Jewish thought and law. Edited by David Shatz, Chaim I. Waxman and Nathan J. Diament. Northvale, N.J.: Jason Aronson, 1997. ISBN 0-7657-5951-9.
Broyde, Michael J. "The Obligation of Jews to Seek Observance of Noahide Laws by Gentiles: A Theoretical Review" in Tikkun olam: social responsibility in Jewish thought and law. Edited by David Shatz, Chaim I. Waxman and Nathan J. Diament. Northvale, N.J. : Jason Aronson, 1997. ISBN 0-7657-5951-9.
Cowen, Shimon Dovid. "Perspectives on the Noahide Laws - Universal ethics". The Institute of Judaism and Civilization (3rd edition) 2008 ISBN 0 9585933 8 8 www.ijc.com.au
Clorfene C and Rogalsky Y. The Path of the Righteous Gentile: An Introduction to the Seven Laws of the Children of Noah. New York: Phillip Feldheim, 1987. ISBN 0-87306-433-X. Online version.
Lichtenstein, Aaron. "The Seven Laws of Noah". New York: The Rabbi Jacob Joseph School Press and Z. Berman Books, 2d ed. 1986. Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 80-69121.
Novak, David. The image of the non-Jew in Judaism: an historical and constructive study of the Noahide Laws. New York : E. Mellen Press, 1983.
Novak, David. Natural law in Judaism. Cambridge ; New York : Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Rakover, Nahum. Law and the Noahides: law as a universal value. Jerusalem: Library of Jewish Law, 1998.
Michael Dallen. The Rainbow Covenant: Torah and the Seven Universal Laws ISBN 0-9719388-2-2 Library of Congress Control Number 2003102494 online excerpts


[edit] Audio

The Lubavitcher Rebbe speaks on the Seven Universal Laws for all mankind
OU Radio show on Bnei Noah - The Jew, The Minister and The Bnei Noah


[edit] Videos

Videos on the Noahide Laws
The Lubavitcher Rebbe speaks about The Seven Noahide Laws


[edit] External links

Hidden Land Institute - The First Degree Granting Noahide College in Canada (and perhaps Globally!)
The Institute of Judaism and Civilization
Jewish Encyclopedia: Laws, Noachian
Wikinoah: Online resource of history, halacha, publications, and websites concerning Bnei Noah
Noahide Nations and Online Classes
United Noahide Academies - asknoah.org
Seven Noahide Laws - Chabad.org
The Lubavitcher Rebbe on educating mankind via the Noahide Code
Several subdivision of the Seven Laws of Noah, including Shmuel ben Hophni Gaon's
half-jewish.org/Torah for non-Jews









v • d • e

Jews and Judaism





Denominations

Schisms · Intra-Jewish relations · Orthodox (Haredi · Hasidic · Modern Orthodox) · Conservative · Reform · Reconstructionist · Jewish Renewal · Rabbinic · Karaite · Samaritan · Humanistic






Philosophy

Principles of faith · Chosen people · Eschatology · Ethics · Halakha · Holocaust theology · Kabbalah · Kashrut · Messianism · Minyan · Mussar Movement · Names of God · Seven Laws of Noah · Tzedakah · Tzniut






Religious texts

Tanakh (Torah · Nevi'im · Ketuvim) · Arba'ah Turim · Chumash · Kuzari · Midrash · Mishnah Berurah · Mishneh Torah · Piyyut · Rabbinic works · Shulchan Aruch · Siddur · Talmud · Tosefta · Zohar






Jewish leadership

Abraham · Isaac · Jacob · Sarah · Rebecca · Rachel · Leah · Moses · Deborah · Ruth · David · Solomon · Elijah · Hillel · Shammai · Judah haNasi · Saadia Gaon · Rashi · Isaac Alfasi · Abraham ibn Ezra · Tosafists · Rambam · Nahmanides · Asher ben Jehiel · Gersonides · Joseph Albo · Yosef Karo · Baal Shem Tov · Shneur Zalman of Liadi · Vilna Gaon · Leopold Zunz · Israel Jacobson · Abraham Geiger · Ben Ish Chai · Avrohom Mordechai Alter · Ovadia Yosef · Moshe Feinstein · Elazar Shach · Menachem Schneerson






Life and culture

Who is a Jew? · Bar and Bat Mitzvah · Bereavement · Brit milah · Etymology of the word Jew · Marriage · Wedding · Niddah · Pidyon haben · Secular Jewish culture · Hiloni · Shidduch · Zeved habat






Roles and places

Four Holy Cities (Jerusalem · Safed · Hebron · Tiberias) · Beth din · Gabbai · Hazzan · Kohen · Maggid · Mashgiach · Mikvah · Mohel · Rabbi · Rebbe · Rosh yeshiva · Synagogue · Temple · Tabernacle · Western Wall






Religious articles

Aleinu · Amidah · Four Species · Gartel · Hallel · Havdalah · Kaddish · Kittel · Kol Nidre · Ma Tovu · Menorah (Hanukiah) · Mezuzah · Prayer · Sefer Torah · Services · Shema Yisrael · Shofar · Tallit · Tefillin · Tzitzit · Yad · Kippah/Yarmulke






Other religions

Jewish views of religious pluralism · Abrahamic religions · Christianity (Catholicism · Christian-Jewish reconciliation · Judeo-Christian · Mormonism) · Islam · Jewish Buddhist · Judeo-Paganism · Others






Languages

Hebrew · Judeo-Arabic · Judeo-Aramaic · Judeo-Persian · Ladino · Yiddish






History

Ancient · Temple in Jerusalem · Babylonian captivity · Jerusalem (Significance · Timeline) · Hasmonean · Herod · Sanhedrin · Pharisees · Saducees · Essenes · First Jewish-Roman War · Bar Kokhba revolt · Diaspora · Middle Ages · Muslim rule · Sabbateans · Haskalah · Emancipation · The Holocaust · Aliyah · Israel (History) · Arab-Israeli / Israeli-Palestinian conflicts · Land of Israel · Baal teshuva movement · Judaism by country






Politics

Zionism (General · Labor · Religious · Revisionist) · Political movements (Jewish left · Jewish right · Jewish anarchism) · General Jewish Labor Union · World Agudath Israel · Feminism · Politics of Israel






Antisemitism

History · Persecution · New · Racial · Religious · Secondary









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seven_Laws_of_Noah"
Categories: Noahides | Jewish law and rituals | Hebrew Bible topics | Christian and Jewish interfaith topicsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
فارسی
Français
한국어
עברית
Lietuvių
Nederlands
Polski
Português
Русский
Svenska
Türkçe
ייִדיש









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 00:06.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
