













Scottish Gaelic - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Scottish_Gaelic";
		var wgTitle = "Scottish Gaelic";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "28397";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280162280;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Scottish Gaelic

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Scottish Gaelic
Gàidhlig 



Bilingual roadsign
in Mallaig:




 


Pronunciation:
[ˈgɑːlʲɪkʲ]


Spoken in:
Scotland, Canada, United States, Australia. 


Region:
Parts of the Scottish Highlands, Western Isles, Cape Breton, Nova Scotia. Formerly all of mainland Scotland, albeit marginally in the southeast (parts of Lothian and Borders)






Total speakers:
58,552 in Scotland. [1]
92,400 people aged three and over in Scotland had some Gaelic language ability in 2001[2] with an additional 2000 in Nova Scotia. [3] 1,610 speakers in the United States in 2000.[4] 822 in Australia in 2001.[5] 669 in New Zealand in 2006.[6]



Language family:
Indo-European
Celtic
Insular Celtic
   Goidelic
    Scottish Gaelic 


Official status


Official language in:
Scotland


Regulated by:
Bòrd na Gàidhlig


Language codes


ISO 639-1:
gd


ISO 639-2:
gla


ISO 639-3:
gla


Note: This page may contain IPA phonetic symbols in Unicode.


Scottish Gaelic (Gàidhlig) is a member of the Goidelic branch of Celtic languages. This branch also includes the Irish and Manx languages. It is distinct from the Brythonic branch of the Celtic languages, which includes Welsh, Cornish, and Breton. Scottish, Manx and Irish Gaelic are all descended from Old Irish. The language is often described as Scottish Gaelic, Scots Gaelic, or Gàidhlig to avoid confusion with the other two Goidelic languages. Outside Scotland, it is occasionally also called Scottish, a usage dating back over 1,500 years; for example Old English Scottas. Scottish Gaelic should not be confused with Scots, because since the 16th century the word Scots has by-and-large been used to describe the Lowland Anglic language, which developed from the northern form of early Middle English. In Scottish English, Gaelic is pronounced [ˈgaːlɪk]; outside Scotland, it is usually pronounced /ˈgeɪlɪk/.




Contents


1 History
2 Current distribution in Scotland
3 Orthography
4 Pronunciation
5 Grammar
6 Official recognition

6.1 Media
6.2 Geography
6.3 Parliament
6.4 Education


7 Church
8 Sport
9 Personal names
10 Loanwords
11 Common Scottish Gaelic words and phrases with Irish and Manx equivalents
12 Gaelic in the Lowlands
13 Qualifications in the Gaelic Language

13.1 Examinations
13.2 Higher and further education

13.2.1 Courses at the UHI Millennium Institute




14 See also
15 References
16 Resources
17 External links

17.1 Scottish Gaelic for beginners







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History




Coronation of King Alexander III on Moot Hill, Scone on 13 July 1249. He is being greeted by the ollamh rígh, the royal poet, who is addressing him with the proclamation "Benach De Re Albanne" (= Beannachd Dé Rígh Alban, "God Bless the King of Scotland"); the poet goes on to recite Alexander's genealogy.


Scottish Gaelic, a descendant of the Goidelic branch of Celtic and closely related to Irish, is the traditional language of the Scotti or Gaels, and became the historical language of the majority of Scotland after it replaced Cumbric, Pictish and Old Norse. It also replaced English in considerable areas.[7] It is not clear how long Gaelic has been spoken in what is now Scotland; it has lately been proposed[citation needed] that it was spoken in Argyll before the Roman period, but no consensus has been reached on this question. However, the consolidation of the kingdom of Dál Riata around the 4th century, linking the ancient province of Ulster in the north of Ireland and western Scotland, accelerated the expansion of Gaelic, as did the success of the Gaelic-speaking church establishment. Placename evidence shows that Gaelic was spoken in the Rhinns of Galloway by the 5th or 6th century.[citation needed]
The Gaelic language eventually displaced Pictish north of the Forth, and until the late 15th century it was known in English as Scottis. Gaelic began to decline in mainland Scotland by the beginning of the 13th century, and with this went a decline in its status as a national language. By the beginning of the 15th century, the highland-lowland line was beginning to emerge.[citation needed]




One interpretation of the linguistic divide in 1400, here based on place-name evidence.


By the early 16th century, English speakers gave the Gaelic language the name Erse (meaning Irish) and thereafter it was invariably the collection of Middle English dialects spoken within the Kingdom of the Scots that they referred to as Scottis (whence Scots). This was ironic as it was at this time that Gaelic was developing its distinctly Scottish forms characteristic of the Modern period[8]. Nevertheless, Gaelic has never been entirely displaced of national language status, and is still recognised by many Scots,[citation needed] whether or not they speak Gaelic, as being a crucial part of the nation's culture. Others may view it primarily as a regional language of the highlands and islands.[citation needed]
Gaelic has a rich oral (beul-aithris) and written tradition, having been the language of the bardic culture of the Highland clans for several centuries. The language preserved knowledge of and adherence to pre-feudal laws and customs (as represented, for example, by the expressions tuatha and dùthchas). The language suffered especially as Highlanders and their traditions were persecuted after the Battle of Culloden in 1746, and during the Highland Clearances, but pre-feudal attitudes were still evident in the complaints and claims of the Highland Land League of the late 19th century: this political movement was successful in getting members elected to the Parliament of the United Kingdom. The Land League was dissipated as a parliamentary force by the 1886 Crofters' Act and by the way the Liberal Party was seen to become supportive of Land League objectives.[citation needed]
The first translation of the Bible into Scottish Gaelic was not made until 1767 when Dr James Stuart of Killin and Dugald Buchanan of Rannoch produced a translation of the New Testament [compare Talk:Scottish Gaelic#Bible in Gaelic though]. Very few European languages have made the transition to a modern literary language without an early modern translation of the Bible. The lack of such a translation until the late eighteenth century undoubtedly contributed to the decline of Scottish Gaelic.[9]
Scottish Gaelic may be more correctly known as Highland Gaelic to distinguish it from the now defunct dialects of Lowland Gaelic. Of these Galwegian Gaelic was spoken in Galloway and seems to have been the last dialect of Gaelic to been spoken in Lowland Scotland, surviving until the Early Modern Period. By the end of the Middle Ages, Lowland Gaelic had been replaced by Middle English/Lowland Scots[citation needed] across much of Lowland Scotland, while the Brythonic language had disappeared. There is, however, no evidence of a linguistic border following the topographical north-south differences. Similarly, there is no evidence from placenames of significant linguistic differences between, for example, Argyll and Galloway. Dialects on both sides of the Straits of Moyle (the North Channel) linking Scottish Gaelic with Irish are now extinct.
According to a reference in The Carrick Covenanters by James Crichton (Undated. “Printed at the Office of Messrs. Arthur Guthrie and Sons Ltd., 49 Ayr Road, Cumnock.”), the last place in the Lowlands where Gaelic was still spoken was the village of Barr in Carrick (only a few miles inland to the east of Girvan, but at one time very isolated).

Gaelic speakers in Scotland (1755 - 2001)

Year
Scottish population
Speakers of Gaelic only
Speakers of Gaelic and English
Speakers of Gaelic and English as % of population


1755
1,265,380
289,798
N/A
N/A (22.9 monoglot Gaelic)


1800
1,608,420
297,823
N/A
N/A (18.5 monoglot Gaelic)


1881
3,735,573
231,594
N/A
N/A (6.1 monoglot Gaelic)


1891
4,025,647
43,738
210,677
5.2


1901
4,472,103
28,106
202,700
4.5


1911
4,760,904
18,400
183,998
3.9


1921
4,573,471
9,829
148,950
3.3


1931
4,588,909
6,716
129,419
2.8


1951
5,096,415
2,178
93,269
1.8


1961
5,179,344
974
80,004
1.5


1971
5,228,965
477
88,415
1.7


1981
5,035,315
N/A
82,620
1.6


1991
5,083,000
N/A
65,978
1.4


2001
5,062,011
N/A
58,652
1.2



[edit] Current distribution in Scotland




Geographic Distribution of Gaelic speakers in Scotland (2001)


The 2001 UK Census showed a total of 58,652 Gaelic speakers in Scotland (1.2% of population over three years old).[10] Compared to the 1991 Census, there has been a diminution of approximately 7,300 people (11% of the total), meaning that Gaelic decline (language shift) in Scotland is continuing. To date, attempts at language revival or reversing language shift have been met with limited success.[11]
Considering the data related to Civil Parishes (which permit a continuous study of Gaelic status since the 19th century), two new circumstances have taken place, which are related to this decline:

No parish in Scotland has a proportion of Gaelic speakers greater than 75% any more (the highest value corresponds to Barvas, Lewis, with 74.7%).

The main stronghold of the language continues to be the Western Isles (Na h-Eileanan Siar), where the overall proportion of speakers remains at 61.1% and all parishes return values over 50%. The Parish of Kilmuir in Northern Skye is also over this threshold of 50%.
Outside of the Western Isles the only areas with significant percentages of Gaelic speakers are the island of Tiree in the Inner Hebrides which is 41.4% Gaelic speaking and the island of Lismore in the central west highlands which is 28.8% Gaelic speaking.[12] Regardless of this, the weight of Gaelic in Scotland is now much reduced. From a total of almost 900 Civil Parishes in Scotland:

Only 9 of them have a proportion of Gaelic speakers greater than 50%.
Only 20 of them have a proportion of Gaelic speakers greater than 25%.
Only 39 of them have a proportion of Gaelic speakers greater than 10%.

Outside the main Gaelic-speaking areas a relatively high proportion of Gaelic-speaking people are, in effect, socially isolated from other Gaelic-speakers and as a result they obtain few opportunities to use the language.

[edit] Orthography
Further information: Scottish Gaelic alphabet




Place names in their original Gaelic are becoming increasingly common on road signs throughout the Scottish Highlands. This sign is located at the top of Salen Brae, in Ardnamurchan.


Prehistoric (or Ogham) Irish, the precursor to Old Irish, in turn the precursor to Modern Irish, Scottish Gaelic and Manx Gaelic, was written in a carved writing called Ogham. Ogham consisted of marks made above or below a horizontal line. With the advent of Christianity in the 5th century the Latin alphabet was introduced to Ireland. The Goidelic languages have historically been part of a dialect continuum stretching from the south of Ireland, the Isle of Man, to the north of Scotland.
Classical Gaelic was used as a literary language in Scotland until the 18th century. Orthographic divergence between Scottish Gaelic and Irish is the result of more recent orthographic reforms resulting in standardised pluricentric diasystems.
The 1767 New Testament historically set the standard for Scottish Gaelic. Around the time of World War II, Irish spelling was reformed and the Official Standard or Caighdeán Oifigiúil introduced. Further reform in 1957 eliminated some of the silent letters which are still used in Scottish Gaelic. The 1981 Scottish Examinations Board recommendations for Scottish Gaelic, the Gaelic Orthographic Conventions, were adopted by most publishers and agencies, although they remain controversial among some academics, most notably Ronald Black.[13]
The modern Scottish Gaelic alphabet has 18 letters:

A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, L, M, N, O, P, R, S, T, U.

The letter h, now mostly used to indicate lenition of a consonant, was in general not used in the oldest orthography, as lenition was instead indicated with a dot over the lenited consonant. The letters of the alphabet were traditionally named after trees (see Scottish Gaelic alphabet), but this custom has fallen out of use.
The quality of consonants is indicated in writing by the vowels surrounding them. So-called "slender" consonants are palatalised while "broad" consonants are velarised. The vowels e and i are classified as slender, and a, o, and u as broad. The spelling rule known as caol ri caol agus leathann ri leathann ("slender to slender and broad to broad") requires that a word-medial consonant or consonant group followed by a written i or e be also preceded by an i or e; and similarly if followed by a, o or u be also preceded by an a, o, or u. Consonant quality (palatalised or non-palatalised) is then indicated by the vowels written adjacent to a consonant, and the spelling rule gives the benefit of removing possible uncertainty about consonant quality at the expense of adding additional purely graphic vowels that may not be pronounced. For example, compare the t in slàinte [slaːntʃə] with the t in bàta [paːtə].
The rule has no effect on the pronunciation of vowels. For example, plurals in Gaelic are often formed with the suffix -an, for example, bròg [proːk] (shoe) / brògan [proːkən] (shoes). But because of the spelling rule, the suffix is spelled -ean (but pronounced the same) after a slender consonant, as in taigh [tʰɤj] (house) / taighean [tʰɤjən] (houses) where the written e is purely a graphic vowel inserted to conform with the spelling rule because an i precedes the gh.
In changes promoted by the Scottish Examination Board from 1976 onwards, certain modifications were made to this rule. For example, the suffix of the past participle is always spelled -te, even after a broad consonant, as in togte "raised" (rather than the traditional togta).




Bilingual sign at Queen Street Station in Glasgow with English and Gaelic


Where pairs of vowels occur in writing, it is sometimes unclear which vowel is to be pronounced and which vowel has been introduced to satisfy this spelling rule.
Unstressed vowels omitted in speech can be omitted in informal writing. For example:

Tha mi an dòchas. ("I hope.") > Tha mi 'n dòchas.

Once Gaelic orthographic rules have been learned, the pronunciation of the written language is in general quite predictable. However learners must be careful not to try to apply English sound-to-letter correspondences to written Gaelic, otherwise mispronunciations will result. Gaelic personal names such as Seònaid [ˈʃɔːnɛdʒ] are especially likely to be mispronounced by English speakers.
Scots English orthographic rules have also been used at various times in Gaelic writing. Notable examples of Gaelic verse composed in this manner are the Book of the Dean of Lismore and the Fernaig manuscript.

[edit] Pronunciation
Main article: Scottish Gaelic phonology

[edit] Grammar
Main article: Scottish Gaelic grammar

[edit] Official recognition




Bilingual signs in English and Gaelic are now part of the architecture in the Scottish Parliament building completed in 2004.


Gaelic has long suffered from its lack of use in educational and administrative contexts and has even been suppressed in the past[14] but it has achieved a degree of official recognition with the passage of the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005.

[edit] Media
As well as being taught in schools, including some in which it is the medium of instruction, it is also used by the local council in the Western Isles, Comhairle nan Eilean Siar. The BBC also operates a Gaelic language radio station Radio nan Gàidheal (which regularly transmits joint broadcasts with its Irish counterpart Raidió na Gaeltachta), and there are also television programmes in the language on the BBC and on the independent commercial channels, usually subtitled in English. The ITV franchise in the north of Scotland, STV North (formerly Grampian Television) produces some non-news programming in Scottish Gaelic. The ITV franchise in central Scotland, STV Central produces a number of Scottish Gaelic programmes for both BBC Alba and its own main channel. Viewers of Freeview, a non-subscription digital TV service, can receive the channel TeleG, which broadcasts for an hour every evening. On 19 September 2008 a new Gaelic TV service launched, broadcasting across Europe on the Astra 2 satellites, available to Sky Digital and Freesat viewers in the UK. Despite initial announcements to the contrary, the channel is not yet available on digital cable television. The channel BBC Alba is being operated in partnership between BBC Scotland and MG Alba - a new organisation funded by the Scottish Government, which works to promote the Gaelic language in broadcasting.

[edit] Geography
Bilingual road signs and street names (in both Gaelic and English) are gradually being introduced throughout Gaelic-speaking regions in the Highlands, Islands and Argyll. In many cases, this has simply meant re-adopting the traditional spelling of a name (such as Ràtagan or Loch Ailleart rather than the anglicised forms Ratagan or Lochailort respectively).
While this has been welcomed by many supporters of the language as a means of raising its profile, securing its future as a 'living language' (i.e. allowing people to use it to navigate from A to B in place of English) and creating a sense of place, recently revealed roadsigns for Castletown in Caithness in the Highlands indicate The Highland Council's intention to introduce bilingual signage into all areas of the Highlands have caused some controversy [15].
The Ordnance Survey has acted in recent years to correct many of the mistakes that appear on maps. They announced in 2004 that they intended to make amends for a century of Gaelic ignorance and set up a committee to determine the correct forms of Gaelic place names for their maps.

[edit] Parliament
Historically, Gaelic has not received the same degree of official recognition from the UK Government as Welsh. With the advent of devolution, however, Scottish matters have begun to receive greater attention, and the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act was enacted by the Scottish Parliament on 21 April 2005.
The key provisions of the Act are[16]:

Establishing the Gaelic development body, Bòrd na Gàidhlig, (BnG), on a statutory basis with a view to securing the status of the Gaelic language as an official language of Scotland commanding equal respect to the English language and to promote the use and understanding of Gaelic.
Requiring BnG to prepare a National Gaelic Language Plan for approval by Scottish Ministers.
Requiring BnG to produce guidance on Gaelic Education for education authorities.
Requiring public bodies in Scotland, both Scottish public bodies and cross border public bodies insofar as they carry out devolved functions, to develop Gaelic language plans in relation to the services they offer, if requested to do so by BnG.





An electronic noticeboard displaying
Fàilte gu stèisean Dùn Èideann
("Welcome to Edinburgh station")


Following a consultation period, in which the government received many submissions, the majority of which asked that the bill be strengthened, a revised bill was published with the main improvement that the guidance of the Bòrd is now statutory (rather than advisory).
In the committee stages in the Scottish Parliament, there was much debate over whether Gaelic should be given 'equal validity' with English. Due to Executive concerns about resourcing implications if this wording was used, the Education Committee settled on the concept of 'equal respect'. It is still not clear if the ambiguity of this wording will provide sufficient legal force to back up the demands of Gaelic speakers against the whims of public bodies.
The Act was passed by the Scottish Parliament unanimously, with support from all sectors of the Scottish political spectrum on the 21st of April 2005.

[edit] Education
The Education (Scotland) Act 1872, which completely ignored Gaelic, and led to generations of Gaels being forbidden to speak their native language in the classroom, is now recognised as having dealt a major blow to the language. People still living can recall being beaten for speaking Gaelic in school.[17] The first modern solely Gaelic-medium secondary school, Sgoil Ghàidhlig Ghlaschu (‘Glasgow Gaelic School’), was opened at Woodside in Glasgow in 2006 (61 partially Gaelic-medium primary schools and approximately a dozen Gaelic-medium secondary schools also exist). A total of 2,092 primary pupils are enrolled in Gaelic-medium primary education in 2006-7.
In Nova Scotia, there are somewhere between 500 and 1,000 native speakers, most of them now elderly. In May 2004, the Provincial government announced the funding of an initiative to support the language and its culture within the province.
In Prince Edward Island, the Colonel Gray High School is now offering two courses in Gaelic, an introductory and an advanced course, both language and history are taught in these classes. This is the first recorded time that Gaelic has ever been taught as an official course on Prince Edward Island.




Sgoil Ghàidhlig Ghlaschu


The UK government has ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in respect of Gaelic. Along with Irish and Welsh, Gaelic is designated under Part III of the Charter, which requires the UK Government to take a range of concrete measures in the fields of education, justice, public administration, broadcasting and culture.
The Columba Initiative, also known as colmcille (formerly Iomairt Cholm Cille), is a body that seeks to promote links between speakers of Scottish Gaelic and Irish.
However, given there are no longer any monolingual Gaelic speakers,[18] following an appeal in the court case of Taylor v Haughney (1982), involving the status of Gaelic in judicial proceedings, the High Court ruled against a general right to use Gaelic in court proceedings.[19]
Under the provisions of the 2005 Act, it will ultimately fall to BnG to secure the status of the Gaelic language as an official language of Scotland.

[edit] Church
In the Western Isles, the isles of Lewis, Harris and North Uist have a Presbyterian majority (largely Church of Scotland - Eaglais na h-Alba in Gaelic, Free Church of Scotland and Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland.) The isles of South Uist and Barra have a Catholic majority. All these churches have Gaelic-speaking congregations throughout the Western Isles.
There are Gaelic-speaking congregations in the Church of Scotland, mainly in the Highlands and Islands, but also in Edinburgh and Glasgow. Notable city congregations with regular services in Gaelic are St Columba's Church, Glasgow and Greyfriars Tolbooth & Highland Kirk, Edinburgh. Leabhar Sheirbheisean - a shorter Gaelic version of the English-language Book of Common Order - was published in 1996 by the Church of Scotland, ISBN 0-907624-12-X.
The relationship between the Church and Gaelic has not always been an easy one. The widespread use of English in worship has often been suggested as one of the historic reasons for the decline of Gaelic. Whilst the Church of Scotland is supportive today, there is, however, an increasing difficulty in being able to find Gaelic-speaking ministers. The Free Church also recently announced plans to reduce their Gaelic provision by abolishing Gaelic-language communion services, citing both a lack of ministers and a desire to have their congregations united at communion time.[20]

[edit] Sport
The most notable use of the language in sport is that of the Camanachd Association, the shinty society, who have a bilingual logo.
In the mid-1990s, the Celtic League started a campaign to have the word "Alba" on the Scottish football and rugby tops. Since 2005, the SFA have supported the use of Scots Gaelic on their teams's strip in recognition of the language's revival in Scotland.[21] However, the SRU is still being lobbied to have "Alba" on the national rugby strip. [22] [23]
Some sports coverage, albeit at a small level, takes place in Scottish Gaelic broadcasting.

[edit] Personal names
Main article: Scottish Gaelic personal names
Scottish Gaelic has a number of personal names, such as Aiden, Ailean, Aonghas, Dòmhnall, Donnchadh, Coinneach, Murchadh, for which there are traditional forms in English (Alan, Angus, Donald, Duncan, Kenneth, Murdo). There are also distinctly Scottish Gaelic forms of names that belong to the common European stock of given names, such as: Iain (John), Alasdair (Alexander), Uilleam (William), Catrìona (Catherine), Raibert (Robert), Cairistìona (Christina), Anna (Ann), Màiri (Mary), Seumas (James), Pàdraig (Patrick) and Tómas(Thomas). Some names have come into Gaelic from Old Norse, for example: Somhairle ( < Somarliðr), Tormod (< Þórmóðr), Torcuil (< Þórkell, Þórketill), Ìomhair (Ívarr). These are conventionally rendered in English as Sorley (or, historically, Somerled), Norman, Torquil, and Iver (or Evander). There are other, traditional, Gaelic names which have no direct equivalents in English: Oighrig, which is normally rendered as Euphemia (Effie) or Henrietta (Etta) (formerly also as Henny or even as Harriet), or, Diorbhal, which is "matched" with Dorothy, simply on the basis of a certain similarity in spelling; Gormul, for which there is nothing similar in English, and it is rendered as 'Gormelia' or even 'Dorothy'; Beathag, which is "matched" with Becky (> Rebecca) and even Betsy, or Sophie.
Many of these are now regarded as old-fashioned, and are no longer used (which is, of course, a feature common to many cultures: names go out of fashion). As there is only a relatively small pool of traditional Gaelic names from which to choose, some families within the Gaelic-speaking communities have in recent years made a conscious decision when naming their children to seek out names that are used within the wider English-speaking world. These names do not, of course, have an equivalent in Gaelic. What effect that practice (if it becomes popular) might have on the language remains to be seen. At this stage (2005), it is clear that some native Gaelic-speakers are willing to break with tradition. Opinion on this practice is divided; whilst some would argue that they are thereby weakening their link with their linguistic and cultural heritage, others take the opposing view that Gaelic, as with any other language, must retain a degree of flexibility and adaptability if it is to survive in the modern world at all.
The well-known name Hamish, and the recently established Mhairi (pronounced [va:ri]) come from the Gaelic for, respectively, James, and Mary, but derive from the form of the names as they appear in the vocative case: Seumas (James) (nom.) → Sheumais (voc.), and, Màiri (Mary) (nom.) → Mhàiri (voc.).
The most common class of Gaelic surnames are, of course, those beginning with mac (Gaelic for son), such as MacGillEathain (MacLean). The female form is nic (Gaelic for daughter), so Catherine MacPhee is properly called in Gaelic, Caitrìona Nic a' Phì. [Strictly, "nic" is a contraction of the Gaelic phrase "nighean mhic", meaning "daughter of the son", thus Nic Dhomhnuill, really means "daughter of MacDonald" rather than "daughter of Donald".] Although there is a common misconception that "mac" means "son of", the "of" part actually comes from the genitive form of the patronymic that follows the prefix "Mac", e.g., in the case of MacNéill, Néill (of Neil) is the genitive form of Niall (Neil).
Several colours give rise to common Scottish surnames: bàn (Bain - white), ruadh (Roy - red), dubh (Dow - black), donn (Dunn - brown), buidhe (Bowie - yellow).

[edit] Loanwords
The majority of the vocabulary of Scottish Gaelic is native Celtic. There are a large number of borrowings from Latin, (muinntir, Didòmhnaich), ancient Greek, especially in the religious domain (eaglais, Bìoball from Ekklesia and Biblia), Norse (eilean, sgeir), Hebrew (Sàbaid, Aba) and Lowland Scots (aidh, bramar).
In common with other Indo-European languages, the neologisms which are coined for modern concepts are typically based on Greek or Latin, although written in Gaelic orthography; television, for instance, becomes telebhisean (cian-dhealbh could also be used), and computer becomes coimpiùtar (aireamhadair, bocsa-fiosa or bocsa-sgrìobhaidh could also be used). Although native speakers frequently use an English word for which there is a perfectly good Gaelic equivalent, they will, without thinking, simply adopt the English word and use it, applying the rules of Gaelic grammar, as the situation requires. With verbs, for instance, they will simply add the verbal suffix (-eadh, or, in Lewis, -igeadh, as in, "Tha mi a' watcheadh (Lewis, "watchigeadh") an telly" (I am watching the television), instead of "Tha mi a' coimhead air a' chian-dhealbh". This was remarked upon by the minister who compiled the account covering the parish of Stornoway in the New Statistical Account of Scotland, published over 170 years ago. It has even gone so far as the verb Backdatigeadh. However, as Gaelic medium education grows in popularity, a newer generation of literate Gaels is becoming more familiar with modern Gaelic vocabulary.
Going in the other direction, Scottish Gaelic has influenced the Scots language (gob) and English, particularly Scottish Standard English. Loanwords include: whisky, slogan, brogue, jilt, clan, strontium (from Strontian), trousers, as well as familiar elements of Scottish geography like ben (beinn), glen (gleann) and loch. Irish has also influenced Lowland Scots and English in Scotland, but it is not always easy to distinguish its influence from that of Scottish Gaelic. See List of English words of Scottish Gaelic origin
Source: An Etymological Dictionary of the Gaelic Language, Alexander MacBain.

[edit] Common Scottish Gaelic words and phrases with Irish and Manx equivalents
Further information: Differences between Scottish Gaelic and Irish


Scottish Gaelic Phrase
Irish Equivalent
Manx Gaelic Equivalent
Rough English Translation


Fàilte
Fáilte
Failt
Welcome


Halò
Haileo or Dia dhuit (trad., lit.: "God be with you")
Hello
Hello


Latha math
Lá maith
Laa mie
Good day


Ciamar a tha thu?
Conas atá tú? (Cén chaoi a bhfuil tú? in Connacht or Cad é mar atá tú? in Ulster)
Kys t'ou?
How are you?


Ciamar a tha sibh?
Conas atá sibh? (Cén chaoi a bhfuil sibh? in Connacht or Cad é mar atá sibh? in Ulster)
Kanys ta shiu?
How are you? (plural, singular formal)


Madainn mhath
Maidin mhaith
Moghrey mie
Good morning


Feasgar math
Trathnóna maith
Fastyr mie
Good afternoon


Oidhche mhath
Oíche mhaith
Oie vie
Good night


Ma 's e do thoil e
Más é do thoil é
My saillt
If you please


Ma 's e (bh)ur toil e
Más é bhur dtoil é
My salliu
If you please (plural, singular formal)


Tapadh leat
Go raibh maith agat
Gura mie ayd
Thank you


Tapadh leibh
Go raibh maith agaibh
Gura mie eu
Thank you (plural, singular formal)


Dè an t-ainm a tha ort?
Cad é an t-ainm atá ort? or Cad is ainm duit?
Cre'n ennym t'ort?
What is your name?


Dè an t-ainm a tha oirbh?
Cad é an t-ainm atá oraibh? or Cad is ainm daoibh?
Cre'n ennym t'erriu?
What is your name?(plural, singular formal)


Is mise...
Is mise...
Mish...
I am...


Slàn leat
Slán leat
Slane lhiat
Goodbye


Slàn leibh
Slán libh
Slane lhiu
Goodbye (plural, singular formal)


Dè a tha seo?
Cad é seo?
Cre shoh?
What is this?


Slàinte
Sláinte
Slaynt
"health" (used as a toast [cf. English "cheers"] when drinking)



[edit] Gaelic in the Lowlands





Please help improve this article or section by expanding it. Further information might be found on the talk page. (January 2009)


According to a reference in The Carrick Covenanters by James Crichton, the last place in the Scottish Lowlands where Gaelic was spoken was the village of Barr on the River Stinchar in Ayrshire. Barr was once regarded as one of the most isolated places in that part of Scotland, though situated only a few miles from Girvan as the crow flies. Crichton gives neither date nor details. For further discussion on the subject of Gaelic in the South of Scotland, see articles Gàidhlig Ghallghallaibh agus Alba-a-Deas ("Gaelic of Galloway and Southern Scotland") and Gàidhlig ann an Siorramachd Inbhir-Àir ("Gaelic in Ayrshire") by Garbhan MacAoidh, published in GAIRM Numbers 101 and 106.

[edit] Qualifications in the Gaelic Language

[edit] Examinations
The Scottish Qualifications Authority offer two streams of Gaelic examination across all levels of the syllabus: Gaelic for learners (equivalent to the modern foreign languages syllabus) and Gaelic for native speakers (equivalent to the English syllabus).
An Comunn Gàidhealach performs assessment of spoken Gaelic, resulting in the issue of a Bronze Card, Silver Card or Gold Card. Syllabus details are available on An Comunn's website. These are not widely recognised as qualifications, but are required for those taking part in certain competitions at the annual mods.

[edit] Higher and further education
A number of Scottish universities offer full-time degrees including a Gaelic language element, usually graduating as Celtic Studies.
St. Francis Xavier University and Cape Breton University (formerly University College Of Cape Breton) both in Nova Scotia, Canada also offer a Celtic Studies degree, optionally with a large Gaelic language element.

[edit] Courses at the UHI Millennium Institute
UHI Millennium Institute offers a range of Gaelic courses at Cert HE, Dip HE, BA (ordinary), BA (Hons) and MA, and offers opportunities for postgraduate research through the medium of Gaelic. The majority of these courses are available as residential courses at the Sabhal Mòr Ostaig. A number of other colleges offer the one year certificate course, which is also available on-line (pending accreditation).
Lews Castle College's Benbecula campus offers an independent 1 year course in Gaelic and Traditional Music (FE, SQF level 5/6).

[edit] See also



Languages of Scotland

Scots language
Scottish English


Book of Deer
Bungee language
Scottish Gaelic in Canada
Differences between Scottish Gaelic and Irish
Gaelicization
Gàidhealtachd
Gaelic broadcasting in Scotland
Gaelic Digital Service
Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005
Gaelic medium education
Gaelic road signs in Scotland
Galwegian Gaelic
Clì Gàidhlig
List of television channels in Celtic languages
List of Celtic language media
Nancy Dorian
Lowland Scots
The Mòd
St Columba's Church, Glasgow
William J. Watson
Irish language revival





[edit] References


^ CnaG ¦ Census 2001 Scotland: Gaelic speakers by council area
^ "News Release - Scotland's Census 2001 - Gaelic Report" from General Registrar for Scotland website, 10 October 2005. Retrieved 27 December 2007
^ "Oifis Iomairtean na Gaidhlig
^ "Language by State - Scottish Gaelic" on Modern Language Association website. Retrieved 27 December 2007
^ "Languages Spoken At Home" from Australian Government Office of Multicultural Interests website. Retrieved 27 December 2007
^ Languages Spoken:Total Responses from Statistics New Zealand website. Retrieved 5 August 2008
^ W. F. H. Nicolaisen: Scottish Place-Names, B. T. Batsford, London 1986, p.133
^ Gaelic - A Past and Future Prospect. MacKinnon, Kenneth. Saltire Society Edinburgh 1991. p41
^ Mackenzie, Donald W. (1990-92). "The Worthy Translator: How the Scottish Gaels got the Scriptures in their own Tongue". Transactions of the Gaelic Society of Inverness 57: 168–202. 
^ Kenneth MacKinnon (2003). "Census 2001 Scotland: Gaelic Language – first results". http://lrrc3.sas.upenn.edu/popcult/CLPP/Census%202001%20-%20Gaelic1.htm. Retrieved on 2007-03-24. 
^ MacKinnon, Kenneth, Gaelic A Past and Future Prospect, 1991
^ Duwe,Kurt(2006:Gaidhlig(Scottish Gaelic)Local Studies Vol.20 Muile,Tiriodh & Colla page 23 2nd edition September 2006 and Duwe,Kurt(2006:Gaidhlig(Scottish Gaelic)Local Studies Vol.17 Gleann Comhann,Lios Mor & Aird Chatain page 27 2nd edition May 2006
^ The Board of Celtic Studies Scotland (1998) Computer-Assisted Learning for Gaelic: Towards a Common Teaching Core. The orthographic conventions were revised by the Scottish Qualifications Authority (SQA) in 2005: "Gaelic Orthographic Conventions 2005" (PDF). SQA publication BB1532. http://www.sqa.org.uk/sqa/controller?p_service=Content.show&p_applic=CCC&pContentID=7339. Retrieved on 2007-03-24. 
^ See Kenneth MacKinnon (1991) Gaelic: A Past and Future Prospect. Edinburgh: The Saltire Society.
^ http://www.johnogroat-journal.co.uk/news/fullstory.php/aid/5300/Dunnet_designs_reveal_Gaelic_signs_are_on_the_way.html
^ Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005.
^ Pagoeta, Mikel Morris (2001). Europe Phrasebook. Lonely Planet. pp. 416. ISBN-X. 
^ UK Ratification of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. Working Paper 10 - R.Dunbar, 2003
^ Official Status for Gaelic: Prospects and Problems
^ Free Church plans to scrap Gaelic communion service - Scotsman.com News
^ "BBC Scotland - Gaelic added to Scotland strips". http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/scotland/highlands_and_islands/5282936.stm. 
^ Scottish Rugby Union: "Put 'Alba' on Scottish Ruby Shirt" | Facebook
^ "BBC Alba - Gàidhlig air lèintean rugbaidh na h-Alba". http://www.bbc.co.uk/scotland/alba/naidheachdan/story/2008/06/080624_rugby_gaelic.shtml. 



[edit] Resources

Gillies, H. Cameron (1896) Elements of Gaelic Grammar, Vancouver: Global Language Press (reprint 2006), ISBN 1-897367-02-3 (hardcover), ISBN 1-897367-00-7 (paperback)
Gillies, William (1993) "Scottish Gaelic", in: Ball, Martin J. and Fife, James (eds) The Celtic Languages (Routledge Language Family Descriptions), London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-28080-X (paperback), p. 145–227
Lamb, William (2001) Scottish Gaelic, Munich: Lincom Europa, ISBN 3-89586-408-0
MacAoidh, Garbhan (2007) Tasgaidh - A Gaelic Thesaurus, Lulu Enterprises, N. Carolina
McLeod, Wilson (ed.) (2006) Revitalising Gaelic in Scotland: Policy, Planning and Public Discourse, Edinburgh: Dunedin Academic Press, ISBN 1-903765-59-5
Robertson, Charles M. (1906–07). "Scottish Gaelic Dialects", The Celtic Review, vol 3 pp. 97–113, 223–39, 319–32.


[edit] External links




Scottish Gaelic edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia




Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Scottish Gaelic language 



[1]Complete database of all Gaelic names' history, legends and meanings
Aberdeen University Celtic Department Classes from beginner all the way to degree and PhD level
Learn Gaelic Classes and Courses across the World
Scottish Parliament
Scottish Gaelic Broadcasting Committee
Scotsman.com News - Scottish Gaelic homepage
BBC Scotland - Scottish Gaelic homepage
BBC Scotland - Beag air Bheag
Beul Aithris - Scottish Gaelic Oral Tradition
Iomairt Cholm Cille The Columba Initiative
Comunn na Gàidhlig
St Columba Gaelic Section Gaelic Resources
Sabhal Mòr Ostaig - Gaelic-medium College on Skye.
Scottish Gaelic College of Celtic Arts and Crafts - Gaelic college in Cape Breton, Nova Scotia, Canada.
Scottish-English Dictionary
Goidelic Dictionaries
Gàidhlig (Scottish Gaelic) Local Studies Census information from 1881 to the present, 27 volumes covering all Gaelic-speaking regions
The Scottish Gaelic feature film Seachd: The Inaccessible Pinnacle
Gaelic in Scotland Information and links from the Scottish FAQ
Save Gaelic News links to most current press stories concerning Gaelic.
SaorsaMedia Resources about the history of Gaelic language and culture in Scotland and North America
Calum and Catrìona Materials about Gaelic history and culture in Scotland and North America for children
Tìr nam Blòg A focus point of the Gàidhlig blogging community (founded 16 December 2005)
Fòram na Gàidhlig International Gaelic learner's community
Abair Thusa Gaelic social network
Oi Polloi Gaelic punk music from Edinburgh
Mill a h-Uile Rud Gaelic punk music from Seattle


[edit] Scottish Gaelic for beginners

Air Splaoid! Discover Gaelic with Dwelly, a free online Gaelic language course.
BBC Learn Gaelic
CLI Gàidhlig Gaelic supporters and learners organisation that produces the bilingual magazine Cothrom
ELAcademy Gaelic language courses in Edinburgh.
AmBaile.org - Home of Highland Gaelic culture Online games for Scottish Gaelic learners
Akerbeltz - A’ Ghobhar Dhubh Gaelic Resources (grammar, pronunciation, rhymes, names ...)
Scottish Gaelic at Omniglot
Learners' material online
BBC Can Seo - Gaelic for Beginners book and videos from the 1970s








v • d • e

Celtic languages





Continental Celtic

Celtiberian · Galatian · Gaulish · Lepontic · Noric






Insular Celtic





Brythonic (Brittonic)


Breton · British · Cornish · Cumbric · Pictish · Welsh







Goidelic (Gaelic)


Irish · Manx · Scottish Gaelic









Mixed

Shelta






Celtic-speaking areas

Gaeltachtaí · Gàidhealtachd · Y Fro Gymraeg






Italics indicate extinct languages.












v • d • e

Scottish Gaelic linguistics





Variants

Primitive Gaelic · Old Gaelic · Middle Gaelic · Classical Gaelic · Scottish Gaelic






Dialects

Canadian Gaelic · Galwegian (Galloway) Gaelic






Language

Alphabet · Phonology · Grammar · Names · Dependent and independent verb forms






Culture

Highland Games · Royal National Mod · Shinty · BBC Alba · Radio nan Gaidheal













v • d • e

Celtic nations and their culture





Nations





Celtic League definition


Brittany · Cornwall · Ireland · Isle of Man · Scotland · Wales







Other claimants


Asturias · England · Galicia · Padania












Languages

Brythonic: Breton · Cornish · Welsh
Goidelic: Irish · Manx · Scottish Gaelic
Mixed: Shelta · Bungee






Culture

Brittany · Cornwall · Ireland · Isle of Man · Scotland · Wales · Celtic art






Music

Brittany · Cornwall · Ireland · Isle of Man · Scotland · Wales






Sport

Cammag · Cornish hurling · Cornish wrestling · Curling · Gaelic football · Gaelic handball · Golf · Gouren · Rounders · Highland games · Hurling · Road bowls · Shinty






Peoples

Breton · Cornish · Irish · Irish Traveller · Manx · Scottish · Ulster-Scots · Welsh













v • d • e

 Scotland topics





History

Timeline · Prehistoric · Kingdom · High Middle Ages · Davidian Revolution · Wars of Independence · Late Middle Ages · Reformation · Colonisation of the Americas · Acts of Union 1707 · Enlightenment · Jacobitism · Highland Clearances · Lowland Clearances






Geography

Geology · Climate · Demographics · Mountains and hills · Islands · Lochs · Fauna · Highlands · Lowlands · Central Belt · Anglo–Scottish border






Economy

Companies · Bank of Scotland · Royal Bank of Scotland · North Sea oil · Whisky · Tourism · Harris Tweed · Renewable energy · Transport






Law

Courts · Lord President · Crown Office · Lord Advocate · Solicitor General · Procurator Fiscal · Udal law






People

List of Scots (Actors · Inventors · Musicians · Scientists · Writers)






Politics

Political parties · Elections · Parliament · Government · First Minister · Secretary of State · Scotland Office · Local government · Monarchs · Military · Independence · Unionism






Religion

Church of Scotland · General Assembly · Roman Catholicism · Judaism · Scottish Episcopal Church · Islam · Hinduism






Languages

Scottish Gaelic · Scots · Scottish English · Highland English · Lowland English · Royal National Mod






Culture

Clans · Cuisine · Education · Flags · Coat of arms · Anthem · Hogmanay · Innovations · Literature · Music · Sport · World Heritage Sites · Nationalism






Portal








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scottish_Gaelic"
Categories: Scottish Gaelic languageHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2007 | Articles to be expanded since January 2009 | All articles to be expanded 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Anglo-Saxon
Aragonés
Arpetan
Asturianu
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Føroyskt
Français
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kernewek
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Occitan
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Sámegiella
Sardu
Scots
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
Walon
中文









 This page was last modified on 28 March 2009, at 06:08 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
