













H. G. Wells - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "H._G._Wells";
		var wgTitle = "H. G. Wells";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "13459";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281574454;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); H. G. Wells

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


H. G. Wells





Born
Herbert George Wells
21 September 1866(1866-09-21)
Bromley, Kent, England


Died
13 August 1946 (aged 79)
London, England


Occupation
Novelist, Teacher, Historian,
Journalist


Nationality
British


Genres
Science fiction


Notable work(s)
The Time Machine, The History of Mr Polly, The War of the Worlds, The Invisible Man, The Island of Doctor Moreau, "The Red Room" (short story)







Influences






Thomas Henry Huxley, Plato, Jonathan Swift















Influenced






Kevin J. Anderson, Isaac Asimov, Stephen Baxter, Ray Bradbury, Edgar Rice Burroughs, Arthur C. Clarke, Robert H. Goddard, Robert A. Heinlein, Aldous Huxley, Stan Lee, C. S. Lewis, H. P. Lovecraft, Alan Moore, George Orwell, Frank R. Paul, Carl Sagan, Olaf Stapledon, Stanley G. Weinbaum, Jack Williamson










Herbert George Wells (21 September 1866 – 13 August 1946),[1] known by his pen name H. G. Wells, was an English author, best known for his work in the science fiction genre. Wells and Jules Verne are each sometimes referred to as "The Father of Science Fiction".[2]
Wells was an outspoken socialist and a pacifist, his later works becoming increasingly political and didactic. His middle period novels (1900-1920) were more realistic; they covered lower middle class life (The History of Mr Polly) and the 'New Woman' and the Suffragettes (Ann Veronica). He was a prolific writer in many genres, including contemporary novels, history, and social commentary.




Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Early life
1.2 Teacher
1.3 Private life
1.4 Artist
1.5 Games
1.6 Writer
1.7 Politics


2 Final years
3 Legacy

3.1 In popular fiction


4 Works
5 Honours
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography

[edit] Early life
Herbert George Wells was born at Atlas House, 47 High Street, Bromley, in the county of Kent, on 21 September, 1866.[1] Nicknamed "Bertie" by the family, he was the fourth and last child of Joseph Wells (a former domestic gardener, and at the time shopkeeper and amateur cricketer) and his wife Sarah Neal (a former domestic servant). The family was of the impoverished lower-middle-class. An inheritance had allowed them to purchase a shop in which they sold china and sporting goods, although it was never prosperous: the stock was old and worn out, and the location was poor. They managed to earn a meagre income, but little of it came from the shop; Joseph received an unsteady amount of money from playing professional cricket [3] for the Kent county team.[4] Payment for skilled bowlers and batters came from voluntary donations afterwards, or from small payments from the clubs where matches were played.
A defining incident of young Wells's life was an accident he had in 1874, which left him bedridden with a broken leg.[1] To pass the time he started reading books from the local library, brought to him by his father. He soon became devoted to the other worlds and lives to which books gave him access; they also stimulated his desire to write. Later that year he entered Thomas Morley's Commercial Academy, a private school founded in 1849 following the bankruptcy of Morley's earlier school. The teaching was erratic, the curriculum mostly focused, Wells later said, on producing copperplate handwriting and doing the sort of sums useful to tradesmen. Wells continued at Morley's Academy until 1880. In 1877, his father, Joseph Wells, fractured his thigh. The accident effectively put an end to Joseph's career as a cricketer, and his earnings as a shopkeeper were not enough to compensate for the loss.
No longer able to support themselves financially, the family instead sought to place their boys as apprentices to various occupations. From 1881 to 1883, Wells had an unhappy apprenticeship as a draper at the Southsea Drapery Emporium: Hyde's. His experiences were later used as inspiration for his novels The Wheels of Chance and Kipps, which describe the life of a draper's apprentice as well as being critiques of the world's distribution of wealth.
Wells's mother and father had never got along with one another particularly well (she was a Protestant, he a freethinker), and when she went back to work as a lady's maid (at Uppark, a country house in Sussex) one of the conditions of work was that she would not have space for her husband or children. Thereafter, she and Joseph lived separate lives, though they never divorced and neither ever developed any other liaison. As for Wells, he not only failed at being a draper, he also failed as a chemist's assistant, and after each failure, he would arrive at Uppark — "the bad shilling back again!" as he said — and stay there until a fresh start could be arranged for him. Fortunately for Wells, Uppark had a magnificent library in which he immersed himself, reading many classic works, including Plato's Republic, and More's Utopia.

[edit] Teacher




H. G. Wells in 1908 at the door of his house at Sandgate


In 1883, Wells persuaded his parents to sign the papers releasing him from his draper's apprenticeship at Hyde's, seizing the opportunity to become a pupil and pupil teacher at Midhurst Grammar School in West Sussex.[4] The years in Southsea had been the most miserable of his life thus far, but his good fortune at securing a position at Midhurst Grammar School meant that Wells could continue his self-education in earnest.[4] The following year, Wells won a scholarship to the Normal School of Science (later the Royal College of Science in South Kensington, now part of Imperial College London) in London, studying biology under Thomas Henry Huxley. As an alumnus, he later helped to set up the Royal College of Science Association, of which he became the first president in 1909. Wells studied in his new school until 1887 with a weekly allowance of twenty-one shillings (a guinea) thanks to his scholarship. This ought to have been a comfortable sum of money (at the time many working class families had "round about a pound a week" as their entire household income)[5]yet in his Experiment in Autobiography, Wells speaks of constantly being hungry, and indeed, photographs of him at the time show a youth so thin as to be virtually starving.
He soon entered the Debating Society of the school. These years mark the beginning of his interest in a possible reformation of society. At first approaching the subject through The Republic by Plato, he soon turned to contemporary ideas of socialism as expressed by the recently formed Fabian Society and free lectures delivered at Kelmscott House, the home of William Morris. He was also among the founders of The Science School Journal, a school magazine which allowed him to express his views on literature and society, as well as trying his hand at fiction: the first version of his novel The Time Machine was published in the journal under the title, The Chronic Argonauts. The school year 1886-1887 was the last year of his studies. In spite of having previously successfully passed his exams in both biology and physics, his lack of interest in geology resulted in his failure to pass and the loss of his scholarship. It was not until 1890 that Wells earned a Bachelor of Science degree in zoology from the University of London External Programme.
Upon leaving the Normal School of Science, Wells was left without a source of income. His aunt Mary, a cousin of his father, invited him to stay with her for a while, so at least he did not face the problem of housing. During his stay with his aunt, he grew interested in her daughter, Isabel. In 1889-90 he managed to find a post as a teacher at Henley House School where he taught and admired A. A. Milne.[6][7]

[edit] Private life
In 1891 Wells married his cousin Isabel Mary Wells, but left her in 1894 for one of his students, Amy Catherine Robbins, whom he married in 1895. He had two sons with Amy: George Philip (known as 'Gip') in 1901 and Frank Richard in 1903.[8]
During his marriage to Amy, Wells had liaisons with a number of women, including the American birth-control activist Margaret Sanger[9] and novelist Elizabeth von Arnim. In 1909 he had a daughter, Anna-Jane, with the writer Amber Reeves,[8] whose parents, William and Maud Pember Reeves, he had met through the Fabian Society; and in 1914, a son, Anthony West, by the novelist and feminist Rebecca West, twenty-six years his junior.[10] In spite of Amy Catherine's knowledge of some of these affairs, she remained married to Wells until her death in 1927.[8] Wells also had liaisons with Odette Keun and Moura Budberg.
"I was never a great amorist," Wells wrote in Experiment in Autobiography (1934), "though I have loved several people very deeply."
He was a pantheist. [2]

[edit] Artist
As one method of self-expression, Wells tended to sketch a lot. One common location for these sketches was the endpapers and title pages of his own diaries, and they covered a wide variety of topics, from political commentary to his feelings toward his literary contemporaries and his current romantic interests. During his marriage to Amy Catherine, whom he nicknamed Jane, he sketched a considerable number of pictures, many of them being overt comments on their marriage. It was during this period, and this period only, that he called his sketches "picshuas." These picshuas have been the topic of study by Wells scholars for many years, and recently a book was published on the subject.[11]

[edit] Games
Seeking a more structured way to play war games, Wells wrote Floor Games (1911) followed by Little Wars (1913). Little Wars is recognised today as the first recreational wargame and Wells is regarded by gamers and hobbyists as "the Father of Miniature War Gaming."[12]

[edit] Writer
Wells's first non-fiction bestseller was Anticipations (1901).[13] When originally serialised in a magazine it was subtitled, "An Experiment in Prophecy", and is considered his most explicitly futuristic work. Anticipating what the world would be like in the year 2000, the book is interesting both for its hits (trains and cars resulting in the dispersion of population from cities to suburbs; moral restrictions declining as men and women seek greater sexual freedom; the defeat of German militarism, and the existence of a European Union) and its misses (he did not expect successful aircraft before 1950, and averred that "my imagination refuses to see any sort of submarine doing anything but suffocate its crew and founder at sea").




Statue of a The War of the Worlds tripod, erected as a tribute to H. G. Wells in Woking town centre, UK.


His early novels, called "scientific romances", invented a number of themes now classic in science fiction in such works as The Time Machine, The Island of Doctor Moreau, The Invisible Man, The War of the Worlds, When the Sleeper Wakes, and The First Men in the Moon (all except When the Sleeper Wakes have been made into films). He also wrote other, non-fantastic novels which have received critical acclaim, including Kipps and the satire on Edwardian advertising, Tono-Bungay.
Wells wrote several dozen short stories and novellas, the best known of which is "The Country of the Blind" (1904).
His short story "The New Accelerator" was the inspiration for the Star Trek episode Wink of an Eye.[14]
Though Tono-Bungay was not a science-fiction novel, radioactive decay plays a small but consequential role in it. Radioactive decay plays a much larger role in The World Set Free (1914). This book contains what is surely his biggest prophetic "hit." Scientists of the day were well aware that the natural decay of radium releases energy at a slow rate over thousands of years. The rate of release is too slow to have practical utility, but the total amount released is huge. Wells' novel revolves around an (unspecified) invention that accelerates the process of radioactive decay, producing bombs that explode with no more than the force of ordinary high explosive— but which "continue to explode" for days on end. "Nothing could have been more obvious to the people of the earlier twentieth century," he wrote, "than the rapidity with which war was becoming impossible... [but] they did not see it until the atomic bombs burst in their fumbling hands." Leó Szilárd acknowledged that the book inspired him to theorise the nuclear chain reaction.[15]
Wells also wrote nonfiction. His bestselling two-volume work, The Outline of History (1920), began a new era of popularised world history. It received a mixed critical response from professional historians.[16] Many other authors followed with 'Outlines' of their own in other subjects. Wells reprised his Outline in 1922 with a much shorter popular work, A Short History of the World,[17] and two long efforts, The Science of Life (1930) and The Work, Wealth and Happiness of Mankind (1931). The 'Outlines' became sufficiently common for James Thurber to parody the trend in his humorous essay, "An Outline of Scientists" — indeed, Wells's Outline of History remains in print with a new 2005 edition, while A Short History of the World has been recently reedited (2006).
From quite early in his career, he sought a better way to organise society, and wrote a number of Utopian novels. The first of these was A Modern Utopia (1905), which shows a world-wide utopia with "no imports but meteorites, and no exports at all"[18]; two travellers from our world fall into its alternate history. The others usually begin with the world rushing to catastrophe, until people realise a better way of living: whether by mysterious gases from a comet causing people to behave rationally and abandoning a European war (In the Days of the Comet (1906)), or a world council of scientists taking over, as in The Shape of Things to Come (1933, which he later adapted for the 1936 Alexander Korda film, Things to Come). This depicted, all too accurately, the impending World War, with cities being destroyed by aerial bombs. He also portrayed the rise of fascist dictators in The Autocracy of Mr Parham (1930) and The Holy Terror (1939), though in the former novel, the tale is revealed at the last to have been Mr Parham's dream vision.




H. G. Wells in 1943


Wells contemplates the ideas of nature versus nurture and questions humanity in books such as The Island of Doctor Moreau. Not all his scientific romances ended in a happy Utopia, and in fact, Wells also wrote the first dystopia novel, When the Sleeper Wakes (1899, rewritten as The Sleeper Awakes, 1910), which pictures a future society where the classes have become more and more separated, leading to a revolt of the masses against the rulers. The Island of Doctor Moreau is even darker. The narrator, having been trapped on an island of animals vivisected (unsuccessfully) into human beings, eventually returns to England; like Gulliver on his return from the Houyhnhnms, he finds himself unable to shake off the perceptions of his fellow humans as barely civilised beasts, slowly reverting back to their animal natures.
Wells also wrote the preface for the first edition of W. N. P. Barbellion's diaries, The Journal of a Disappointed Man, published in 1919. Since "Barbellion" was the real author's pen name, many reviewers believed Wells to have been the true author of the Journal; Wells always denied this, despite being full of praise for the diaries, but the rumours persisted until Barbellion's death later that year.
In 1927, Florence Deeks sued Wells for plagiarism, claiming that he had stolen much of the content of The Outline of History from a work, The Web, she had submitted to the Canadian Macmillan Company, but who held onto the manuscript for eight months before rejecting it. Despite numerous similarities in phrasing and factual errors, the court found Wells not guilty. [19]
In 1934 Wells predicted that another world war would begin in 1940, a prediction which ultimately came true.[3]
In 1936, before the Royal Institution, Wells called for the compilation of a constantly growing and changing World Encyclopedia, to be reviewed by outstanding authorities and made accessible to every human being. In 1938, he published a collection of essays on the future organisation of knowledge and education, World Brain, including the essay, "The Idea of a Permanent World Encyclopaedia."
Near the end of the second World War, Allied forces discovered that the SS had compiled lists of intellectuals and politicians slated for immediate execution upon the invasion of England in the abandoned Operation Sea Lion. The name "H. G. Wells" appeared high on the list for the "crime" of being a socialist. Wells, as president of the International PEN (Poets, Essayists, Novelists), had already angered the Nazis by overseeing the expulsion of the German PEN club from the international body in 1934 following the German PEN's refusal to admit non-Aryan writers to its membership.[20]

[edit] Politics
Wells called his political views socialist. He was for a time a member of the socialist Fabian Society, but broke with them as he intended them to be an organization far more radical than they wanted. He later grew staunchly critical of them as having a poor understanding of economics and educational reform. He ran as a Labour Party candidate for London University in the 1922 and 1923 general elections after the death of his friend W. H. R. Rivers, but at that point his faith in the party was weak or uncertain.
His most consistent political ideal was the World State. He stated in his autobiography that from 1900 onward he considered a World State inevitable. He envisioned the state to be a planned society that will advance science, end nationalism, and allow people to advance by merit rather than birth. During his work on the League of Nations charter, he opposed any mention of democracy. He feared the average citizen could never be educated or aware enough to decide major world issues. Therefore, he favoured suffrage to be limited to scientists, organisers, engineers, and others of merit, though he believed citizens should have as much freedom as possible without restricting the freedom of others.
His values and political thinking came under increasing criticism from the 1920s and afterwards.[21]
Lenin's attempts at reconstructing the shattered Russian economy, as his account of a visit (Russia in the Shadows; 1920) shows, also related towards that. This is because at first he believed Lenin might lead to the kind of planned world he envisioned. This was in spite of the fact that he was a strongly anti-Marxist socialist who would later state that it would've been better if Karl Marx was never born.
The leadership of Joseph Stalin led to a change in his view of the Soviet Union even though his initial impression of Stalin himself was mixed. He disliked what he saw as a narrow orthodoxy and obdurance to the facts in Stalin. However he did give him some praise saying in an article in the left-leaning New Statesman magazine, "I have never met a man more fair, candid, and honest" and making it clear that he felt the "sinister" image of Stalin was unfair or simply false. Nevertheless he judged Stalin's rule to be far too rigid, restrictive of independent thought, and blinkered to lead toward the Cosmopolis he hoped for.[22]
Wells believed in the theory of eugenics. In 1904 he discussed a survey paper by Francis Galton, co-founder of eugenics, saying "I believe .. It is in the sterilisation of failure, and not in the selection of successes for breeding, that the possibility of an improvement of the human stock lies." Some contemporary supporters even suggested connections between the "degenerate" man-creatures portrayed in The Time Machine and Wells's eugenic beliefs. For example, the economist Irving Fisher said in a 1912 address to the Eugenics Research Association: "The Nordic race will... vanish or lose its dominance if, in fact, the whole human race does not sink so low as to become the prey, as H. G. Wells images, of some less degenerate animal!"[23]
Wells had given some moderate unenthusiastic support for Territorialism before the First World War, but later became a bitter opponent of the Zionist movement in general. He saw Zionism as an exclusive and separatist movement which challenged the collective solidarity he advocated in his vision of a world state. No supporter of Jewish identity in general, Wells had in his utopian writings predicted the ultimate assimilation of Jewry.[24][25][26]
In the end his contemporary political impact was limited. His efforts regarding the League of Nations became a disappointment as the organisation turned out to be a weak one unable to prevent World War II. The war itself increased the pessimistic side of his nature. In his last book Mind at the End of its Tether (1945) he considered the idea that humanity being replaced by another species might not be a bad idea. He also came to call the era "The age of frustration."

[edit] Final years
He spent his final years venting this frustration at various targets which included a neighbour who erected a large sign to a servicemen's club. As he devoted his final decades toward causes which were largely rejected by contemporaries, his literary reputation declined. One critic said, "Mr. Wells is a born storyteller who has sold his birthright for a pot of message."[27]
Wells was a diabetic[28] and a co-founder in 1934 of what is now Diabetes UK, the leading charity for people living with diabetes in the UK.
He died of unspecified causes[29] on 13 August, 1946 at his home at 13 Hanover Terrace, Regent's Park, London.[30] Some reports indicate the cause of death was diabetes or liver cancer.[31] In his preface to the 1941 edition of The War in the Air, Wells had stated that his epitaph should be: "I told you so. You damned fools."[32] but his wish was not granted as he was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium on 16 August, 1946 and his ashes were later scattered at sea.[33] A commemorative blue plaque in his honour was installed at his home in Regent's Park.

[edit] Legacy
In his lifetime and after his death, Wells was considered a prominent socialist thinker. In later years, however, Wells's image has shifted and he is now regarded as one of the pioneers of science fiction.

[edit] In popular fiction





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2008)


H. G. Wells has been portrayed in a number of novels and films, including:

A teenaged HG Wells is one of the heroes with a similarly youthful GK Chesterton in The Young Chesterton Chronicles, Volume I: The Tripods Attack!, a science fiction/ alternative history adventure series, written by John McNichol and published by Imagio Catholic Fiction, an imprint of Sophia Institute Press
The novel The Time Ships, by British author Stephen Baxter, was designated by the Wells estate as an authorised sequel to The Time Machine, marking the centenary of its publication, and features characters, situations and technobabble from several of Wells's stories, as well as a representation of Wells (unnamed, and referred to as 'my friend, the Author').
In C. S. Lewis' novel That Hideous Strength, the character Jules is a caricature of Wells, and much of Lewis's science fiction was written both under the influence of Wells and as an antithesis to his work. The devoutly Christian Lewis was especially incensed at Wells's The Shape of Things to Come where a future world government systematically persecutes and completely obliterates Christianity (and all other religions), which the book presents as a positive and vitally necessary act.
Wells's photo appears on a stairway wall of time traveller Alex Hartdegen's New York brownstone, in a 2002 version of The Time Machine, directed by Wells's great-grandson Simon Wells. The 1960 movie version has a plate on the Time Machine telling that it had been manufactured by "H. George Wells" (a.k.a. George, the protagonist of the film).
Arthur Sammler, the main character of Saul Bellow's Mr. Sammler's Planet, knew Wells, and is urged by other characters to use that fact as the basis for writing a biography of Wells, a project about which Holocaust survivor and self-made philosopher Sammler has decidedly mixed feelings.
Wells appears as the protagonist in the 1979 film Time After Time, and in the novel The Martian War by Kevin J. Anderson (as "Gabriel Mesta"). Both works use the conceit that Wells's works were based upon actual adventures he had. In the film, he meets and falls in love with a woman named Amy Robbins (the name of his real-life second wife).
In an episode of Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman, titled Tempus Fugitive, a time-travelling H. G. Wells (Terry Kiser) seeks out Superman's help to stop a criminal from the future whom Wells had accidentally unleashed on the present. The concept of Wells's time machine being stolen and used for evil closely resembles the plot of Time After Time. Both H. G. Wells and the criminal Tempus returned for three later episodes.
In an adventure in the BBC's Doctor Who, the two-part, 90-minute "Timelash", the time-travelling Doctor encounters an excitable young man, Herbert, in the Scottish Highlands, taking him on an adventure that is revealed to have been inspirational when it is finally realised this is the pre-published Wells.
In the Disney Channel series Phil of the Future, the title character attends a fictional school named H. G. Wells Junior High, the name of the school possibly drawn from the show's science fiction manner.
In Ben Bova's short story "Inspiration", the narrator gets Wells to meet a young Albert Einstein and Lord Kelvin. In the end of the story he (Wells) gave a tip to a 6 year old Adolf Hitler.
The movie Librarian:Quest for The Spear, ends with the main character, Flynn Carsen, getting a mission to retrieve H. G. Wells's Time Machine.
Newt Gingrich, former Speaker of the United States House of Representatives and staunch Republican, praised Wells in his book To Renew America, writing "Our generation is still seeking its Jules Verne or H. G. Wells to dazzle our imaginations with hope and optimism".[34]
In the movie The Maltese Falcon Kasper Gutman recounts the history of the bird emphasizing that "Those are facts, historical facts, not school book history, not Mr. Wells' history, but facts nevertheless."
In the science/historical fiction novel And Having Writ..., Wells is a major character.
Wells makes an appearance in the Stargate SG-1 book Roswell.
H. G. Wells makes an appearance in Chapter 10 of The Hollow Lands by Michael Moorcock. This being the second book in The Dancers at the End of Time series. The hero has gone back in time and needs help returning to the future.
Woody Allen's comedy film Sleeper (1973) is loosely based on Wells's novel, When the Sleeper Awakes.
The Infinite Worlds of H. G. Wells is a 4hr dramatization of the origin of several of Wells' stories. Originally made for TV, the series has been released on DVD.
In Libba Bray's novel The Sweet Far Thing, H. G. Wells makes an appearance in chapter twenty-four.
Ronald Wright's 1998 novel A Scientific Romance imagines that a Wells contemporary built a working time machine, which the protagonist uses to travel 500 years into the future, where he explores England which has become overgrown with jungle, and the few remaining people live in stone age conditions with peculiar remnants of civilization.
In the popular webcomic Irregular Webcomic! H.G. Wells is described as being a time traveler.


[edit] Works
Main article: H. G. Wells bibliography







v • d • e

Works by H. G. Wells





Non-fiction:



The Fate of Man · Floor Games · The Future in America: A Search After Realities · Little Wars · The New World Order · The Open Conspiracy · The Outline of History · Russia in the Shadows · The Science of Life · A Short History of the World · Travels of a Republican Radical in Search of Hot Water · World Brain









Novels:



Ann Veronica · The First Men in the Moon · The Food of the Gods and How It Came to Earth · The History of Mr Polly · The Invisible Man · The Island of Dr Moreau · Kipps · Love and Mr Lewisham · Men Like Gods · A Modern Utopia · The Shape of Things to Come · The Sleeper Awakes · Star-Begotten · The Time Machine · Tono-Bungay · The War in the Air · The War of the Worlds · The Wheels of Chance · The World Set Free · In the Days of the Comet








Collections:



The Stolen Bacillus and Other Incidents · The Plattner Story and Others · Tales of Space and Time · Twelve Stories and a Dream · The Country of the Blind and Other Stories








Short stories:



"The Chronic Argonauts" · "The Country of the Blind" · "The Crystal Egg" · "The Star" · "Empire of the Ants" · "The Land Ironclads" · "The Man Who Could Work Miracles" · "The Truth About Pyecraft" · "Mr. Ledbetter's Vacation" · "The Red Room" · "The Stolen Body" · "A Story of the Days to Come" · "A Story of the Stone Age" · "A Vision of Judgment"








Screenplays:



Things to Come · The Man Who Could Work Miracles · The New Faust








Film
adaptations:


A Trip to the Moon · The First Men in the Moon (1919) · The Invisible Man · Island of Lost Souls · The Man Who Could Work Miracles · Things to Come · The History of Mr. Polly · The War of the Worlds (various versions) · The Time Machine (1960) · First Men in the Moon (1964) · The Island of Dr. Moreau (1977) · The Island of Dr. Moreau (1996) · The Time Machine (2002)








[edit] Honours

H. G. Wells is the name of a crater on the far side of the Moon.
H. G. Wells was a honorary fellow of the Imperial College of Science and Technology


[edit] See also



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: H. G. Wells




Wikisource has original works written by or about:
H. G. Wells



H. G. Wells bibliography
H. G. Wells Society
Science Fiction
Invasion literature
Fabian Society
Steampunk
Cosmotheism
Noosphere
Omega Point
Bolesław Prus, regarding Prus's review of Wells's Anticipations.
List of coupled cousins


[edit] References


^ a b c Parrinder, Patrick (2004). Oxford Dictionary of National Biography. Oxford University Press. 
^ Adam Charles Roberts(2000), "The History of Science Fiction": Page 48 in Science Fiction, Routledge, ISBN 0-415-19204-8. Others who are popularly called the "Fathers of Science Fiction" include Hugo Gernsback.
^ http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amateur_and_professional_cricketers
^ a b c Smith, David C. (1986) H.G. Wells: Desperately mortal. A biography. Yale University Press, New Haven and London ISBN 0-300-03672-8
^ Reeves, M.S. Round About a Pound a Week. New York: Garland Pub., 1980. ISBN 0824001192 Some of the text is available online.
^ "Hampstead: Education". A History of the County of Middlesex 9: 159–169. 1989. http://www.british-history.ac.uk/report.aspx?compid=22657. Retrieved on 2008-06-09. 
^ "A(lan) A(lexander) Milne (1882-1956)". Authors' Calendar. http://www.kirjasto.sci.fi/aamilne.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-13. 
^ a b c ThinkQuest Library. H. G. Wells Biography.
^ University of Illinois News Bureau, December 2001. New biography on H. G. Wells focuses on late-life loves.
^ Pegasos - A Literature Related Resource Site. H(erbert) G(eorge) Wells (1866-1946).
^ Rinkel, Gene and Margaret. The Picshuas of H. G. Wells : A burlesque diary. Urbana : University of Illinois Press, 2006. ISBN 0-252-03045-1 (cloth : acid-free paper).
^ The Miniatures Page. The World of Miniatures - An Overview.
^ World Transhumanist Association. Herbert George Wells.
^ Leeper, Evelyn C.. "Philcon 2003". fanac.org. http://fanac.org/Other_Cons/PhilCon/q03-rpt.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-22. 
^ Williams, Donald. "The Birth of the Bomb: Leo Szilard". The Jung Page. http://www.cgjungpage.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=809&Itemid=40. Retrieved on 2008-02-22. 
^ http://www.cs.clemson.edu/~tdoyle/hgwells/outline_hist.shtml
^ http://www.bartleby.com/86/
^ A Modern Utopia
^ [1]
^ Wells, Frank. H.G. Wells - A Pictorial Biography. London: Jupiter Books, 1977. Page 91.
^ Experiment in Autobiography 556. Also chapter four of Future as Nightmare: H. G. Wells and the Anti-Utopians by Mark Robert Hillegas.
^ Experiment in Autobiography p. 215, 687-689
^ David M. Levy and Sandra J. Peart. "Eugenics Rides a Time Machine: H. G. Wells's outline of genocide". Reason Magazine. 26 March, 2002
^ Cheyette, Bryan. Constructions of "the Jew" in English Literature and Society. Cambridge University Press, 1995. (Pages 143-148)
^ Hamerow, Theodore S. Why we watched: Europe, America, and the Holocaust. W. W. Norton & Company, 2008. (Pages 98-100, 219 )
^ "Desirable Aliens: British Men of Letters on The Jews". The Review of reviews Vol. XXXIII Jan-June 1906. (Page 378)
^ Encyclopedia Americana vol. 28 p. 616 and The Scientific Romance in Britain: 1890-1950 by Brian Stableford. Also The "pot of message" remark comes from a 1948 Theodore Sturgeon short story entitled Unite and Conquer, a character in the story was quoting a "Dr. Pierce".
^ "H. G. Wells". For Your Diabetes Life. http://www.dlife.com/dLife/do/ShowContent/inspiration_expert_advice/famous_people/wells.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-12. 
^ "H. G. Wells". NNDB. http://www.nndb.com/people/737/000043608/. Retrieved on 2008-02-12. 
^ "H. G. Wells Dies in London". St. Petersburg Times. August 13, 1946. http://news.google.com/newspapers?id=QuMKAAAAIBAJ&sjid=2U4DAAAAIBAJ&pg=7192,1092447&dq=hg+wells. Retrieved on 2008-10-29. 
^ "Calendar". Classics & Cheese. http://home.att.net/~cimmeria/calendar.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-12. 
^ "Preface to the 1941 edition of The War in the Air". http://ghostwolf.dyndns.org/words/authors/W/WellsHerbertGeorge/prose/warintheair/warinairpref1941.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-11. 
^ West, Anthony. "H. G. Wells: Aspects of a Life", p.153. London: Hutchinson & Co, 1984. ISBN 0 09 134540 5).
^ Gingrich, Newt. To Renew America. New York: HarperCollins, 1995. p. 189.



[edit] Further reading

Gilmour, David. The Long Recessional: The Imperial Life of Rudyard Kipling. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2002 (paperback, ISBN 0-374-18702-9); 2003 (paperback, ISBN 0-374-52896-9).
Gomme, A. W., Mr. Wells as Historian. Glasgow: MacLehose, Jackson, and Co., 1921.


[edit] External links

Sources - collections

Works by H. G. Wells at Project Gutenberg, pre-1923.
Works by H. G. Wells at Project Gutenberg Australia, post-1923.
Works by H. G. Wells at Internet Archive (scanned books original editions color illustrated)
H. G. Wells at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
A Short History of the World, at bartleby.com.

Sources - letters, essays and interviews

"Stephen Crane. From an English Standpoint", by Wells, 1900.
Rabindranath Tagore: In conversation with H. G. Wells. Rabindranath Tagore and Wells conversing in Geneva in 1930.
"Introduction", to W. N. P. Barbellion's The Journal of a Disappointed Man, by Wells, 1919.
"Woman and Primitive Culture", by Wells, 1895.
Letter, to M. P. Shiel, by Wells, 1937.
New Statesman - In the footsteps of H G Wells at www.newstatesman.com, H.G. Wells called for a Human Rights Act.

Biography

H. G. Wells: The Man and the Author. A biography of H. G. Wells by Roman Allemann (2000).
"H. G. Wells". In Encyclopædia Britannica Online.

Critical essays

"An Appreciation of H. G. Wells", by Mary Austin, 1911.


"Socialism and the Family" (1906) by Belfort Bax, Part 1, Part 2.
"H. G. Wells warned us how it would feel to fight a War of the Worlds", by Niall Ferguson, in The Telegraph, 24 June 2005.
"H. G. Wells's Idea of a World Brain: A Critical Re-assessment", by W. Boyd Rayward, in Journal of the American Society for Information Science 50 (15 May, 1999): 557-579
"Mr H. G. Wells and the Giants", by G. K. Chesterton, from his book Heretics (1908).
"The Internet: a world brain?", by Martin Gardner, in Skeptical Inquirer, Jan-Feb 1999.
"Science Fiction: The Shape of Things to Come", by Mark Bould, in The Socialist Review, May 2005.
"Who needs Utopia? A dialogue with my utopian self (with apologies, and thanks, to H. G. Wells)", by Gregory Claeys in Spaces of Utopia: An Electronic Journal, no 1, Spring 2006.
"When H. G. Wells Split the Atom: A 1914 Preview of 1945", by Freda Kirchwey, in The Nation, posted 4 September, 2003 (original 18 August, 1945 issue).
"Wells, Hitler and the World State", by George Orwell. First published: Horizon. — GB, London. — August 1941.
"War of the Worldviews", by John J. Miller, in The Wall Street Journal Opinion Journal, 21 June, 2005.
"Wells's Autobiography", by John Hart, from New International, Vol.2 No.2, March 1935, pp.75-76
"History in the Science Fiction of H. G. Wells", by Patrick Parrinder, Cycnos, 22.2 (2006).
"FROM THE WORLD BRAIN TO THE WORLDWIDE WEB", by Martin Campbell-Kelly, Gresham College Lecture, 9 November 2006.
"The Beginning of Wisdom: On Reading H. G. Wells", by Vivian Gornick, "Boston Review", 31.1 (2007).

Other

John Hammond, The Complete List of Short Stories of H. G. Wells
Website examining the legacy of The War Of The Worlds





Persondata


NAME
Wells, Herbert George


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Wells, H. G.


SHORT DESCRIPTION
English novelist, teacher, historian and journalist


DATE OF BIRTH
21 September 1866(1866-09-21)


PLACE OF BIRTH
Bromley, Kent, England


DATE OF DEATH
13 August 1946


PLACE OF DEATH
London, United Kingdom





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/H._G._Wells"
Categories: H. G. Wells | 1866 births | 1946 deaths | Alumni of Imperial College London | Alumni of the University of London External System | Pantheists | British socialists | English novelists | English science fiction writers | English short story writers | People from Bromley | Science Fiction Hall of Fame | Western writers about Soviet Russia | Prejudice and discriminationHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from May 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Asturianu
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Gaeilge
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Ido
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
Malti
मराठी
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 21:14.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
