













Ibn Battuta - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Ibn_Battuta";
		var wgTitle = "Ibn Battuta";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "15229";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281939944;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Ibn Battuta

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2008)



Ibn Battuta

Islamic scholar/Explorer
Medieval era





Full name
Ibn Battuta


Born
February, 1304


Died
1368 or 1369


School/tradition
Sunni Maliki


Ibn Battuta (1304 – 1368 or 1369)[1] was a Muslim Berber scholar and traveller who is known for the account of his travels and excursions called the Rihla (Voyage). His journeys lasted for a period of nearly thirty years and covered almost the entirety of the known Islamic world and beyond, extending from North Africa, West Africa, Southern Europe and Eastern Europe in the West, to the Middle East, Indian subcontinent, Central Asia, Southeast Asia and China in the East, a distance readily surpassing that of his predecessors and his near-contemporary Marco Polo.




Contents


1 Early life and his first Hajj
2 Iraq and Persia
3 East Africa
4 Byzantine Empire, Golden Horde, Anatolia, Central Asia and India
5 Southeast Asia and China
6 Return home and the Black Death
7 Andalus and North Africa
8 The Sahara Desert to Mali and Timbuktu
9 The Rihla
10 Places visited by Ibn Battuta
11 See also
12 Notes
13 References
14 Further reading
15 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early life and his first Hajj




An interactive display about Ibn Battuta in Ibn Battuta Mall in Dubai, United Arab Emirates


All that is known about Ibn Battuta's life comes from the autobiographical information included in the account of his travels. Ibn Battuta was born into a family of Muslim legal scholars in Tangier, Morocco, on February 25, 1304 during the time of the Merinid dynasty.[2] As a young man he would have studied the Sunni Maliki "school" of Muslim law which was dominant in North Africa at the time.[3] In June 1325, when he was twenty one years old, Ibn Battuta set off from his hometown on a hajj (pilgrimage) to Mecca, a journey that would take 16 months, but he would not see Morocco again for 24 years.
His journey to Mecca was by land, and followed the North African coast crossing the sultanates of Abd al-Wadid and Hafsid. His route passed through Tlemcen, Béjaïa and then to Tunis where he stayed for two months. As there was always a risk of being attacked, he usually chose to travel as part of a caravan. In Sfax, Ibn Battuta got married for the first of several occasions on his journeys.
In the early spring of 1326, after a journey of over 3,500 kms (2,000 miles), he arrived to the port of Alexandria, then part of the Bahri Mamluk empire. He spent several weeks visiting the sites and then headed inland to Cairo, a large important city and capital of the Mamluk kingdom, where he stayed for about a month. Within Mamluk territory, travelling was relatively safe and he embarked on the first of his many detours. Three commonly used routes existed to Mecca, and Ibn Battuta chose the least-travelled: a journey up the Nile, then east by land to the Red Sea port of Aydhab.[4] However, upon approaching the town he was forced to turn back due to a local rebellion.
Returning to Cairo, he took a second side trip, to Damascus (then controlled by the Mamluks), having encountered a holy man during his first trip who prophesied that Ibn Battuta would only reach Mecca after a journey through Syria. An additional advantage to the side journey was that other holy places were along the route—Hebron, Jerusalem, and Bethlehem, for example—and the Mamluk authorities put special effort into keeping the journey safe for pilgrims.
After spending the Muslim month of Ramadan in Damascus, Ibn Battuta joined up with a caravan traveling the 1,500 kms (800 miles) from Damascus to Medina, burial place of Islamic Prophet Muhammad. After four days, he journeyed on to Mecca. There he completed the usual rituals of a Muslim pilgrim, and having graduated to the status of al-Hajji as a result, now faced his return home. Upon reflection, he decided to continue journeying instead. His next destination was the Ilkhanate in modern-day Iraq and Iran.

[edit] Iraq and Persia
On 17 November 1326, after a month in Mecca, Ibn Battuta joined a large caravan of pilgrims returning across the Arabian Peninsula to Mesopotamia.[5] The caravan first went north to Medina and then, travelling at night, headed northeastwards across the Nejd plateau to al-Najaf, a journey lasting approximately 44 days. In al-Najaf he visited the mausoleum of Ali ibn Abi Talib, the fourth Caliph and son-in-law of the prophet, a site venerated by all Muslims but particularly the Shi’a community.
At this point, instead of continuing on to Baghdad with the caravan, Ibn Battuta started a 6 month detour that took him into Persia. From al-Najaf he journeyed to Wasit and then south following the Tigris to Basra. His next destination was the town of Isfahan across the Zagros Mountains in Persia. From there he headed south to Shiraz, a large flourishing city which had been spared the destruction wrought by the Mongol invasion on many more northerly towns. Finally, he headed back across the mountains to Baghdad arriving there in June 1327. Parts of the city were in ruins as it had been heavily damaged by the army of Hulagu Khan.
In Baghdad he found that Abu Sa'id, the last Mongol ruler of the unified Ilkhanid state was leaving the city and heading north with a large retinue. Ibn Battuta travelled with the royal caravan for a while, then turned north to Tabriz on the Silk Road. It had been the first major city in the region to open its gates to the Mongols and had become an important trading centre after most of its nearby rivals were razed.
On returning again to Baghdad, probably in July, he took an excursion northwards following the Tigris, visiting Mosul, then Cizre and Mardin, both in modern Turkey. On returning to Mosul he joined a "feeder" caravan of pilgrims heading south for Baghdad where they met up with the main caravan that crossed the Arabian desert to Mecca. Ibn Battuta was ill with diarrhea on this crossing and arrived back in Mecca weak and exhausted for his second hajj.

[edit] East Africa
Ibn Battuta then stayed for some time in Mecca. He suggests in the Rihla that he remained in the town for three years: from September 1327 until autumn 1330. However, because of problems with the chronology, commentators have suggested that he may have spent only one year and left after the hajj of 1328.[6] Leaving Mecca after the hajj in 1328 (or 1330) he made his way to the port of Jeddah on the coast of the Red Sea and from there caught a series of boats down the coast. His progress was slow as the vessels had to beat against the south easterly winds. Arriving in the Yemen he visited Zabid, and then the highland town of Ta'izz where he met the Rasulid king Malik Mujahid Nur al-Din Ali. Ibn Battuta also mentions visiting Sana'a, but whether he actually did is doubtful.[7] It is more likely that he went directly from Ta'izz to the port of Aden, arriving at around the beginning of 1329 (or 1331).[8] Aden was an important transit centre in the trade between India and Europe.
In Aden he embarked on a ship heading first to Zeila on the African shore of the gulf and then on around Cape Guardafui and down the East African coast. Spending about a week in each of his destinations, he visited Mogadishu, Mombassa, Zanzibar, and Kilwa, among others. With the change of the monsoon, he returned by ship to Arabia and visited Oman and the Straits of Hormuz. He then returned to Mecca for the hajj of 1330 (or 1332).

[edit] Byzantine Empire, Golden Horde, Anatolia, Central Asia and India
Spending another year there, he then resolved to seek employment with the Muslim Sultan of Delhi. Needing a guide and translator if he was to travel there, he went to Anatolia, then under the control of the Seljuqs, to join up with one of the caravans that went from there to India. A sea voyage from Damascus on a Genoese ship landed him in Alanya on the southern coast of modern-day Turkey. From there he traveled by land to Konya and then Sinope on the Black Sea coast.
Crossing the Black Sea, Ibn Battuta landed in Caffa (now Theodosia), in the Crimea, and entered the lands of the Golden Horde. There he bought a wagon and fortuitously joined the caravan of Ozbeg, the Golden Horde's Khan, on a journey as far as Astrakhan on the Volga River.
Upon reaching Astrakhan, the Khan allowed one of his pregnant wives Princess Bayalun to go give birth back in her home city—Constantinople. Ibn Battuta talked his way into this expedition, his first beyond the boundaries of the Islamic world.
Arriving there towards the end of 1332, he met the emperor Andronicus III Palaeologus and saw the outside of Hagia Sophia. After a month in the city, he retraced his route to Astrakhan, then carried on past the Caspian and Aral Seas to Bokhara and Samarkand. From there, he journeyed south to Afghanistan, the mountain passes of which he used to cross into India.
The Sultanate of Delhi was a new addition to Dar al-Islam, and Sultan Muhammed Tughlaq had resolved to import as many Muslim scholars and other functionaries as possible to consolidate his rule. On the strength of his years of studies while in Mecca, Ibn Battuta was employed as a qadi ("judge") by the sultan.
Tughlaq was erratic even by the standards of the time, and Ibn Battuta veered between living the high life of a trusted subordinate, and being under suspicion for a variety of treasons against the government. Eventually he resolved to leave on the pretext of taking another hajj, but the Sultan offered the alternative of being ambassador to China. Given the opportunity to both get away from the Sultan and visit new lands, Ibn Battuta took it.

[edit] Southeast Asia and China
En route to the coast, he and his party were attacked by Hindus, and, separated from the others, he was robbed and nearly lost his life. Nevertheless, he managed to catch up with his group within two days and continued the journey to Cambay. From there, they sailed to Calicut (two centuries later, Vasco da Gama also landed at the same place). While Ibn Battuta visited a mosque on shore, however, a storm blew up, and two of the ships of his expedition were sunk. The third then sailed away without him and ended up seized by a local king in Sumatra a few months later.
Fearful of returning to Delhi as a failure, he stayed for a time in the south of India under the protection of Jamal al-Din. Jamaluddin was ruler of a small but powerful Nawayath sultanate on the banks of the river Sharavathi on the Arabian Sea coast. This place is presently known as Hosapattana and is located in the Honnavar taluka of Uttara Kannada district. When the sultanate was overthrown, it became necessary for Ibn Battuta to leave India altogether. He resolved to carry on to China, with a detour near the beginning of the journey to the Maldives.
He spent nine months in the Maldive Islands, much longer than he had intended. As a qadi, his skills were highly desirable in these formerly Buddhist islands that had been recently converted to Islam, and he was half-bribed, half-kidnapped into staying. Appointed chief judge and marrying into the royal family, he became embroiled in local politics and ended up leaving after wearing out his welcome by imposing strict judgments in the laissez-faire island kingdom. In the Rihla he mentions his dismay at the local women going about with no clothing above the waist, and remarking his criticism of this practice, but being ignored by the locals. From there, he carried on to Ceylon for a visit to Sri Pada (Adam's Peak).
Setting sail from Ceylon, his ship nearly sank in a storm, then the ship that rescued him was attacked by pirates. Stranded on shore, Ibn Battuta once again worked his way back to Calicut, from where he then sailed to the Maldives again before getting on board a Chinese junk and trying once again to get to Yuan Dynasty China.
This time he succeeded, reaching in quick succession Chittagong, Sumatra, Vietnam, The Philippines and then finally Quanzhou in Fujian Province, China. From there, he went north to Hangzhou, not far from modern-day Shanghai. He also traveled even further north, through the Grand Canal to Beijing, although there has been some doubt about whether this actually occurred.

[edit] Return home and the Black Death
Returning to Quanzhou, Ibn Battuta decided to return home—though exactly where "home" was a bit of a problem. Returning to Calicut once again, he pondered throwing himself on the mercy of Muhammed Tughlaq but thought better of it and decided to carry on to Mecca once again. Returning via Hormuz and the Il-Khanate, he saw that state dissolved into civil war, Abu Sa'id having died since his previous trip there.
Returning to Damascus with the intention of retracing the route of his first hajj, he learned that his father had died. Death was the theme of the next year or so, for the Black Death had begun, and Ibn Battuta was on hand as it spread through Syria, Palestine, and Arabia. After reaching Mecca, he decided to return to Morocco, nearly a quarter century after leaving it. During the trip he made one last detour to Sardinia, then returned to Tangier to discover that his mother had also died, a few months before.

[edit] Andalus and North Africa
Having settled in Tangier for all of a few days, Ibn Battuta then set out for a trip to al-Andalus—Muslim Iberia. Alfonso XI of Castile was threatening the conquest of Gibraltar, and Ibn Battuta joined up with a group of Muslims leaving Tangier with the intention of defending the port. By the time he arrived, the Black Death had killed Alfonso, and the threat had receded, so Ibn Battuta decided to visit for pleasure instead. He travelled through Valencia and ended up in Granada.
Leaving al-Andalus, he decided to travel through one of the few parts of the Muslim world that he had never explored: Morocco. On his return home, he stopped for a while in Marrakesh, which was nearly a ghost town after the recent plague and the transfer of the capital to Fez.
Once more he returned to Tangier, and once more he moved on. Two years before his own first visit to Cairo, the Malian king Mansa Musa had passed through the same city on his own hajj and had caused a sensation with his extravagant riches—West Africa contained vast quantities of gold, previously unknown to the rest of the world. While Ibn Battuta never mentions this specifically, hearing of this during his own trip must have planted a seed in his mind, for he decided to set out and visit the Muslim kingdom on the far side of the Sahara Desert.

[edit] The Sahara Desert to Mali and Timbuktu




House in the Medina of Tangier perhaps lodging Ibn Battuta's grave


In the autumn of 1351, Ibn Battuta set out from Fez, reaching the Moroccan town of Sijilmasa a bit more than a week later. There he bought some camels and stayed for four months. He set out again with a caravan in February 1352 and after 25 days, arrived at the settlement of Taghaza which was situated in a dry salt lake bed. The buildings were constructed from slabs of salt by slaves of the Massufa tribe, who cut the salt in thick slabs for transport by camel. Taghaza was a profitable commercial center and awash with Malian gold, though Ibn Battuta did not have a favorable impression of the place - the water was brackish and the place was plagued with flies.
A long and difficult journey lay ahead, requiring special advance guides or takshif with local experience to arrange a passage. When the takshif became lost, the entire caravan could disappear without a trace. Traversing the open wastes of the Sahara Desert was therefore terrifying to many travelers, and Ibn Battuta noted the difficulty of navigating without landmarks, writing that there was "no visible road or track in these parts, nothing but sand blown here and there by the wind." After another 900 harrowing km through the worst part of the desert, Ibn Battuta finally arrived at the oasis town of Iwalatan (Walata) which had recently become part of the Mali Empire.
From there, he traveled southwest along a river he believed to be the Nile (it was actually the Niger River) until he reached the capital of the Mali Empire.[9] There he met Mansa Suleyman, king since 1341. Dubious about the miserly hospitality of the king, he nevertheless stayed for eight months. Ibn Battuta disapproved that female slaves, servants and even the daughters of the sultan went about stark naked. He left the capital in February and journeyed overland by camel to Timbuktu. Though in the next two centuries it would become the most important city in the region, at the time it was small and unimpressive, and Ibn Battuta soon moved on by boat to Gao where he spent a month. While at the oasis of Takedda on his journey back across the desert, he received a message from the Sultan of Morocco commanding him to return home. He set off for Sijilmasa in September 1353 accompanying a large caravan transporting 600 black female slaves. He arrived back in Morocco early in 1354.

[edit] The Rihla
After returning from his travels in 1354 and at the instigation of the Sultan of Morocco, Abu Inan Faris, Ibn Battuta dictated an account of his journeys to a scholar named Ibn Juzayy, whom he had previously met while in Granada. This account, recorded by Ibn Juzayy and interspersed with the latter's own comments, is the only source of information on his adventures. The title of the manuscript تحفة النظار في غرائب الأمصار وعجائب الأسفار may be translated as A Gift to Those Who Contemplate the Wonders of Cities and the Marvels of Travelling but is often simply referred to as the Rihla الرحلة, or "The Journey".
There is no indication that Ibn Battuta made any notes during his approximate 29 years of traveling so when he came to dictate an account of his adventures he had to rely on his memory and to make use of manuscripts produced by earlier travelers. When describing Damascus, Mecca, Medina and some other places in the Middle East, Ibn Juzayy clearly copied passages from the twelfth century account by Ibn Jubayr.[10] Similarly, most of Ibn Juzayy’s descriptions of places in Palestine were copied from an account by the thirteenth century traveler Muhammad al-Abdari.[11]
Modern commentators do not believe that Ibn Battutta visited all the places that he described and argue that in order to provide a comprehensive description of places in the Moslem world Ibn Battutta relied on hearsay evidence while Ibn Juzayy made use of accounts by earlier travelers. For example, it is considered very unlikely that Ibn Battuta made a trip up the Volga river from New Saray to visit Bolghar[12] and there are serious doubts about a number of other journeys such as his trip to Sana'a in Yemen,[13] his journey from Balkh to Bistam in Khorasan[14] and his trip around Anatolia.[15] Some commentators have also questioned whether he really visited China.[16] Nevertheless, whilst apparently fictional in places, the Rihla provides an important account of many areas of the world in the 14th century.
Ibn Batuta often experienced culture shock in regions he visited where local customs did not fit his straight-laced background. Among Turks and Mongols recently converted to Islam, he was astonished at the freedom that women had, and he felt that dress customs in the Maldives, and some sub-Saharan regions in Africa, were too revealing. He tended to be somewhat irritating to locals, and eventually to be sent on his way after a time from such regions, with gifts that seemed applicable to his social status.
After the completion of the Rihla in 1355, little is known about Ibn Battuta's life. He may have been appointed a qadi in Morocco. Ibn Battuta died in Morocco in 1368 or 1369.[17]
For centuries his book was obscure, even within the Muslim world, but in the early 1800s extracts were published in German and English based on manuscripts discovered in the Middle East containing abridged versions of Ibn Juzayy’s Arabic text. When French forces occupied Algeria in the 1830’s they discovered five manuscripts in Constantine including two that contained more complete versions of the text.[18] These manuscripts were brought back to the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris and studied by the French scholars, Charles Defrémery and Beniamino Sanguinetti. Beginning in 1853, they published a series of four volumes containing the Arabic text, extensive notes and a translation into French.[19] Defrémery and Sanguinetti’s printed text has now been translated into many other languages. Ibn Battuta has grown in fame and is now a well-known figure.

[edit] Places visited by Ibn Battuta





This article is incomplete, and may require expansion or cleanup. Please help to improve the article, or discuss the issue on the talk page.


Ibn Battuta travelled almost 75,000 miles in his lifetime. Here is a list of places he visited.



Morocco

Tangier
Fes
Marrakech

Algeria

Tlemcen (Tilimsan)
Miliana
Algiers
Djurdjura Mountains
Bejaia
Constantine, named as Qusantînah.
Annaba, also called Bona.

Tunisia

Tunis - At that time, Abu Yahya (son of Abu Zajaria) was the sultan of Tunis.
Sousse - also called Susah.
Sfax
Gabes

Egypt

Cairo

Syria

Damascus
Latakia

Arabian Peninsula

Jeddah - A major port for pilgrims to Mecca
Mecca - The original plan of his journey was to pilgrimage to Mecca.
Rabigh - Small city north of Jeddah on the Red Sea
Medina - Where Ibn Battuta visited the shrine of Prophet Muhammad.
Oman
Dhofar
Bahrain
Al-Hasa
Strait of Hormuz
Yemen

Turkey and Eastern Europe

Konya
Antalya
Bulgaria - His intention, as he mentions in his book, is that he wanted to go the Land of Darkness.
Azov
Kazan
Volga River
Istanbul - "Constantinople" as it was called in his time

Libya

Tripoli



Central Asia

Khwarezm
Khorasan (Province)
Afghanistan
Pakistan
Punjab region

India

Delhi
Calicut
Malabar

Bangladesh

Sonargaon
Sylhet - Ibn Battuta met Muslim saint Hazrat Shah Jalal Yamani, commonly known as Shah Jalal in this place.

Other places in Asia

Myanmar
Maldives
Sri Lanka - known in his time as Ceylon
Coromandel Coast- in India
Brahmaputra River - Ibn Battuta visited the area on his way to China. This place is in Bangladesh.
Meghna River - Near Dhaka
Sumatra
Malay Peninsula
Philippines

China

Quanzhou - as he called in his book the city of donkeys
Hangzhou -- Ibn Battuta referred to this city in his book as "Madinat Alkhansa" مدينة الخنساء. He also mentioned that it was the largest city in the world at that time; it took him three days to walk across the city, which is huge even by today's standards. Ibn Battuta was the first Agorhosa in the Muslim world.


Beijing - Ibn Batuta mentioned in his journey to Beijing how neat the city was.

Somalia

Mogadishu

East Africa

Kilwa
Mombasa

Mali

Walata
Timbuktu
Gao
Takedda

During most of his journey in the Mali Empire, Ibn Battuta traveled with a retinue that included slaves, most of whom carried goods for trade but would also be traded as slaves. On the return from Takedda to Morocco, his caravan transported 600 female slaves, suggesting that slavery was a substantial part of the commercial activity of the empire.[20]




[edit] See also

Islamic geography
List of explorers
Marco Polo, the Italian traveler and writer
Trade route
Ibn Battuta Mall in Dubai
Ibn Battuta (crater), the lunar landmark
Ibn Juzayy
Xuanzang, Chinese Buddhist monk, scholar, traveler, and translator, who traveled around the same region of the Silk Road and India.


[edit] Notes


^ Full name: Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Abdullah Al Lawati Al Tanji Ibn Battuta Arabic: أبو عبد الله محمد ابن عبد الله اللواتي الطنجي بن بطوطة‎
^ Dunn 2005, p. 19
^ Dunn 2005, p. 22
^ Aydhad was a port situated on the west coast of the Red Sea at 22°19′51″N 36°29′25″E﻿ / ﻿22.33083°N 36.49028°E﻿ / 22.33083; 36.49028. See Peacock, David; Peacock, Andrew (2008), "The enigma of 'Aydhab: a medieval Islamic port on the Red Sea coast", International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 37: 32-48, doi:10.1111/j.1095-9270.2007.00172.x 
^ Dunn 2005, pp. 89-103
^ Ibn Battuta states that he stayed in Mecca for the hajj of 1327, 1328, 1329 and 1330 but gives comparatively little information on his stay. After the hajj of 1330 he left for East Africa, arriving back again in Mecca before the 1332 hajj. He states that he then left for India and arrived at the Indus river on 12 September 1333. However, although he does not specify exact dates, the description of his complex itinerary and the clues in the text to the chronology suggest that this journey to India lasted around three years. He must have therefore either left Mecca two years earlier than stated or arrived in India two years later. The problems with the chronology are discussed by Gibb 1962, pp. 528-537 Vol. 2, Hrbek 1962 and Dunn 2005, pp. 132-133.
^ Dunn 2005, pp. 115-116, 134
^ Gibb 1962, p. 373 Vol. 2
^ Ibn Battuta's itinerary is uncertain as the location of the Malian capital is not known.
^ Dunn 2005, pp. 313-314
^ Dunn 2005, pp. 63-64
^ Dunn 2005, p. 179
^ Dunn 2005, p. 134 Note 17
^ Dunn 2005, p. 180 Note 3
^ Dunn 2005, p. 157 Note 13
^ Dunn 2005, p. 253 and 262 Note 20
^ Dunn 2005, p. 318
^ Defrémery & Sanguinetti 1853, p. xx
^ Defrémery & Sanguinetti 1853-1858
^ Candice Goucher, Charles LeGuin, and Linda Walton, Trade, Transport, Temples, and Tribute: The Economics of Power, in In the Balance: Themes in Global History (Boston: McGraw-Hill, 1998)



[edit] References

Defrémery, C.; Sanguinetti, B.R. trans. and eds. (1853-1858). Voyages d’Ibn Batoutah (Arabic and French text) 4 vols.. Paris: Société Asiatic. 
Dunn, Ross E. (1986). The Adventures of Ibn Battuta. University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-05771-6.  Reissued and revised in 2005. ISBN 0-520-24385-4
Gibb, H.A.R. trans. (1929). Ibn Battuta Travels in Asia and Africa (selections). London: Routledge.  Reissued several times.
Gibb, H.A.R.; Beckingham, C.F. trans. and eds. (1958, 1962, 1971, 1994, 2000). The Travels of Ibn Baṭṭūṭa, A.D. 1325–1354 (full text) 4 vols. + index. London: Hakluyt Society. ISBN 978-0904180374. 
Hrbek, Ivan (1962). "The chronology of Ibn Battuta's travels". Archiv Orientalni 30: 409-486. 
Mackintosh-Smith, Tim (ed.) (2003). The Travels of Ibn Battutah. Picador. ISBN 0-330-41879-3. 


[edit] Further reading

Gordon, Stewart. When Asia was the World: Traveling Merchants, Scholars, Warriors, and Monks who created the "Riches of the East", Da Capo Press, Perseus Books, 2008. ISBN 0-306-81556-7.


[edit] External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Ibn Battuta



A Tangerine in Delhi — Saudi Aramco World article by Tim Mackintosh-Smith (March/April 2006).
The Longest Hajj: The Journeys of Ibn Battuta — Saudi Aramco World article by Douglas Bullis (July/August 2000).
Ibn Battuta: Travels in Asia and Africa 1325-1354 — excerpts from H.A.R. Gibb's 1929 translation.
Google Books — link to a 2004 reissue of Gibb's 1929 translation.
Ibn Battuta — educational site of Harcourt School Publishers.
The Adventures of Ibn Battuta — excerpts from the book by Ross Dunn on the San Francisco Unified School District site.
Journey to Mecca: In the footsteps of Ibn Battuta — A movie on Ibn Battuta.
The Defrémery and Sanguinetti (1853-1858) French/Arabic edition is available from Google books. Volume 1, Volume 2, Volume 3, Volume 4.
French text from Defrémery and Sanguinetti (1853-1858) with an introduction and footnotes by Stéphane Yérasimos published in 1982:Volume 1, Volume 2,Volume 3.




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ibn_Battuta"
Categories: 1304 births | 14th-century deaths | People from Tangier | Moroccan writers | Moroccan travel writers | Moroccan geographers | Berber people | Explorers of Asia | Explorers of Arabia | Explorers of Africa | Islamic studies scholars | Malikis | Islamic geography | Muslim writers | Marinid dynasty | 14th century in AfricaHidden categories: Articles containing Arabic language text | Articles needing additional references from June 2008 | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
বাংলা
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Kiswahili
Kurdî / كوردی
Latviešu
Líguru
Magyar
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Soomaaliga
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Walon
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 18:39.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
