













Infrared - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Infrared";
		var wgTitle = "Infrared";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "15022";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281185558;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Infrared

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 



For other uses, see Infrared (disambiguation).




Image of two human bodies in mid-infrared ("thermal") light (false-color)


Infrared (IR) radiation is electromagnetic radiation whose wavelength is longer than that of visible light (400-700 nm), but shorter than that of terahertz radiation (100 µm - 1mm) and microwaves (~30,000 µm). Infrared radiation spans roughly three orders of magnitude (750 nm and 100 µm).
Direct sunlight has a luminous efficacy of about 93 lumens per watt of radiant flux, which includes infrared (47% share of the spectrum), visible (46%), and ultra-violet (only 6%) light. Bright sunlight provides luminance of approximately 100,000 candela per square meter at the Earth's surface.




Contents


1 Overview
2 Origins of the term
3 Different regions in the infrared

3.1 CIE division scheme
3.2 Astronomy division scheme
3.3 Sensor response division scheme
3.4 Telecommunication bands in the infrared
3.5 Heat


4 Applications

4.1 Infrared filters
4.2 Night vision
4.3 Thermography
4.4 Other imaging
4.5 Tracking
4.6 Heating
4.7 Communications
4.8 Spectroscopy
4.9 Meteorology
4.10 Climatology
4.11 Astronomy
4.12 Art history
4.13 Biological systems
4.14 Photobiomodulation
4.15 Health hazard


5 The Earth as an infrared emitter
6 History of infrared science
7 See also
8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Overview
Infrared imaging is used extensively for both military and civilian purposes. Military applications include target acquisition, surveillance, night vision, homing and tracking. Non-military uses include thermal efficiency analysis, remote temperature sensing, short-ranged wireless communication, spectroscopy, and weather forecasting. Infrared astronomy uses sensor-equipped telescopes to penetrate dusty regions of space, such as molecular clouds; detect cool objects such as planets, and to view highly red-shifted objects from the early days of the universe.[1]
Humans at normal body temperature radiate chiefly at wavelengths around 10μm (micrometers).[2]
At the atomic level, infrared energy elicits vibrational modes in a molecule through a change in the dipole moment, making it a useful frequency range for study of these energy states. Infrared spectroscopy examines absorption and transmission of photons in the infrared energy range, based on their frequency and intensity.[3]

[edit] Origins of the term
The name means below red (from the Latin infra, "below"), red being the color of the longest wavelengths of visible light. IR light has a longer wavelength (a lower frequency) than that of red light, hence below.

[edit] Different regions in the infrared





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2006)


Objects generally emit infrared radiation across a spectrum of wavelengths, but only a specific region of the spectrum is of interest because sensors are usually designed only to collect radiation within a specific bandwidth. As a result, the infrared band is often subdivided into smaller sections.

[edit] CIE division scheme
The International Commission on Illumination (CIE) recommended the division of optical radiation into the following three bands:[4]

IR-A: 700 nm–1400 nm
IR-B: 1400 nm–3000 nm
IR-C: 3000 nm–1 mm

A commonly used sub-division scheme is:[5]

Near-infrared (NIR, IR-A DIN): 0.75-1.4 µm in wavelength, defined by the water absorption, and commonly used in fiber optic telecommunication because of low attenuation losses in the SiO2 glass (silica) medium. Image intensifiers are sensitive to this area of the spectrum. Examples include night vision devices such as night vision goggles.


Short-wavelength infrared (SWIR, IR-B DIN): 1.4-3 µm, water absorption increases significantly at 1,450 nm. The 1,530 to 1,560 nm range is the dominant spectral region for long-distance telecommunications


Mid-wavelength infrared (MWIR, IR-C DIN) also called intermediate infrared (IIR): 3-8 µm. In guided missile technology the 3-5 µm portion of this band is the atmospheric window in which the homing heads of passive IR 'heat seeking' missiles are designed to work, homing on to the IR signature of the target aircraft, typically the jet engine exhaust plume.


Long-wavelength infrared (LWIR, IR-C DIN): 8–15 µm. This is the "thermal imaging" region, in which sensors can obtain a completely passive picture of the outside world based on thermal emissions only and requiring no external light or thermal source such as the sun, moon or infrared illuminator. Forward-looking infrared (FLIR) systems use this area of the spectrum. Sometimes also called the "far infrared."


Far infrared (FIR): 15-1,000 µm (see also far infrared laser)

NIR and SWIR is sometimes called "reflected infrared" while MWIR and LWIR is sometimes referred to as "thermal infrared." Due to the nature of the blackbody radiation curves, typical 'hot' objects, such as exhaust pipes, often appear brighter in the MW compared to the same object viewed in the LW.

[edit] Astronomy division scheme
Astronomers typically divide the infrared spectrum as follows:[6]

Near: (0.7-1) to 5 µm
Mid: 5 to (25-40) µm
Long: (25-40) to (200-350) µm

These divisions are not precise and can vary depending on the publication. The three regions are used for observation of different temperature ranges, and hence different environments in space.

[edit] Sensor response division scheme




Plot of atmospheric transmittance in part of the infrared region.


A third scheme divides up the band based on the response of various detectors:[7]

Near infrared: from 0.7 to 1.0 micrometers (from the approximate end of the response of the human eye to that of silicon)


Short-wave infrared: 1.0 to 3 micrometers (from the cut off of silicon to that of the MWIR atmospheric window. InGaAs covers to about 1.8 micrometers; the less sensitive lead salts cover this region


Mid-wave infrared: 3 to 5 micrometers (defined by the atmospheric window and covered by Indium antimonide [InSb] and HgCdTe and partially by lead selenide [PbSe])


Long-wave infrared: 8 to 12, or 7 to 14 micrometers: the atmospheric window (Covered by HgCdTe and microbolometers)


Very-long wave infrared (VLWIR): 12 to about 30 micrometers, covered by doped silicon

These divisions are justified by the different human response to this radiation: near infrared is the region closest in wavelength to the radiation detectable by the human eye, mid and far infrared are progressively further from the visible regime. Other definitions follow different physical mechanisms (emission peaks, vs. bands, water absorption) and the newest follow technical reasons (The common silicon detectors are sensitive to about 1,050 nm, while InGaAs' sensitivity starts around 950 nm and ends between 1,700 and 2,600 nm, depending on the specific configuration). Unfortunately, international standards for these specifications are not currently available.
The boundary between visible and infrared light is not precisely defined. The human eye is markedly less sensitive to light above 700 nm wavelength, so shorter frequencies make insignificant contributions to scenes illuminated by common light sources. But particularly intense light (e.g., from lasers, or from bright daylight with the visible light removed by colored gels) can be detected up to approximately 780 nm, and will be perceived as red light. The onset of infrared is defined (according to different standards) at various values typically between 700 nm and 800 nm.

[edit] Telecommunication bands in the infrared
In optical communications, the part of the infrared spectrum that is used is divided into several bands based on availability of light sources, transmitting/absorbing materials (fibers) and detectors:[8]


Band
Descriptor
Wavelength range


O band
Original
1260–1360 nm


E band
Extended
1360–1460 nm


S band
Short wavelength
1460–1530 nm


C band
Conventional
1530–1565 nm


L band
Long wavelength
1565–1625 nm


U band
Ultralong wavelength
1625–1675 nm


The C-band is the dominant band for long-distance telecommunication networks. The S and L bands are based on less well established technology, and are not as widely deployed.

[edit] Heat
Main article: Thermal radiation
Infrared radiation is popularly known as "heat" or sometimes "heat radiation", since many people attribute all radiant heating to infrared light and/or to all infrared radiation to being a result of heating. This is a widespread misconception, since light and electromagnetic waves of any frequency will heat surfaces that absorb them. Infrared light from the Sun only accounts for 49%[9] of the heating of the Earth, with the rest being caused by visible light that is absorbed then re-radiated at longer wavelengths. Visible light or ultraviolet-emitting lasers can char paper and incandescently hot objects emit visible radiation. It is true that objects at room temperature will emit radiation mostly concentrated in the 8 to 12 micrometer band, but this is not distinct from the emission of visible light by incandescent objects and ultraviolet by even hotter objects (see black body and Wien's displacement law).[10]
Heat is energy in transient form that flows due to temperature difference. Unlike heat transmitted by thermal conduction or thermal convection, radiation can propagate through a vacuum.
The concept of emissivity is important in understanding the infrared emissions of objects. This is a property of a surface which describes how its thermal emissions deviate from the ideal of a black body. To further explain, two objects at the same physical temperature will not 'appear' the same temperature in an infrared image if they have differing emissivities.

[edit] Applications





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2007)



[edit] Infrared filters
Main article: Night vision
Infrared (IR) filters can be made from many different materials. One type is made of polysulphone plastic that blocks over 99% of the visible light spectrum from “white” light sources such as incandescent filament bulbs. Infrared filters allow a maximum of infrared output while maintaining extreme covertness. Currently in use around the world, infrared filters are used in Military, Law Enforcement, Industrial and Commercial applications. The unique makeup of the plastic allows for maximum durability and heat resistance. IR filters provide a more cost effective and time efficient solution over the standard bulb replacement alternative. All generations of night vision devices are greatly enhanced with the use of IR filters.

[edit] Night vision
Main article: Night vision




Active-infrared night vision. Despite a dark back-lit scene, active-infrared night vision delivers identifying details, as seen on the display monitor.


Infrared is used in night vision equipment when there is insufficient visible light to see.[11] Night vision devices operate through a process involving the conversion of ambient light photons into electrons which are then amplified by a chemical and electrical process and then converted back into visible light.[11] Infrared light sources can be used to augment the available ambient light for conversion by night vision devices, increasing in-the-dark visibility without actually using a visible light source.[11]
The use of infrared light and night vision devices should not be confused with thermal imaging which creates images based on differences in surface temperature by detecting infrared radiation (heat) that emanates from objects and their surrounding environment[12]

[edit] Thermography
Main article: Thermography




A thermographic image of a dog


Infrared radiation can be used to remotely determine the temperature of objects (if the emissivity is known). This is termed thermography, or in the case of very hot objects in the NIR or visible it is termed pyrometry. Thermography (thermal imaging) is mainly used in military and industrial applications but the technology is reaching the public market in the form of infrared cameras on cars due to the massively reduced production costs.
Thermographic cameras detect radiation in the infrared range of the electromagnetic spectrum (roughly 900–14,000 nanometers or 0.9–14 µm) and produce images of that radiation. Since infrared radiation is emitted by all objects based on their temperatures, according to the black body radiation law, thermography makes it possible to "see" one's environment with or without visible illumination. The amount of radiation emitted by an object increases with temperature, therefore thermography allows one to see variations in temperature (hence the name).

[edit] Other imaging




Infrared light from the LED of an XBox 360 remote control as seen by a digital camera.


In infrared photography, infrared filters are used to capture the near-infrared spectrum. Digital cameras often use infrared blockers. Cheaper digital cameras and camera phones have less effective filters and can "see" intense near-infrared, appearing as a bright purple-white color. This is especially pronounced when taking pictures of subjects near IR-bright areas (such as near a lamp), where the resulting infrared interference can wash out the image. There is also a technique called 'T-ray' imaging, which is imaging using far infrared or terahertz radiation. Lack of bright sources makes terahertz photography technically more challenging than most other infrared imaging techniques. Recently T-ray imaging has been of considerable interest due to a number of new developments such as terahertz time-domain spectroscopy. 
[edit] Tracking
Main article: Infrared homing
Infrared tracking, also known as infrared homing, refers to a passive missile guidance system which uses the emission from a target of electromagnetic radiation in the infrared part of the spectrum to track it. Missiles which use infrared seeking are often referred to as "heat-seekers", since infrared (IR) is just below the visible spectrum of light in frequency and is radiated strongly by hot bodies. Many objects such as people, vehicle engines and aircraft generate and retain heat,and as such, are especially visible in the infra-red wavelengths of light compared to objects in the background.

[edit] Heating
Main article: Infrared heating
Infrared radiation can be used as a deliberate heating source. For example it is used in infrared saunas to heat the occupants, and also to remove ice from the wings of aircraft (de-icing). FIR is also gaining popularity as a safe method of natural health care & physiotherapy. Far infrared thermomedic therapy garments use thermal technology to provide compressive support and healing warmth to assist symptom control for arthritis, injury & pain. Infrared can be used in cooking and heating food as it predominantly heats the opaque, absorbent objects, rather than the air around them.
Infrared heating is also becoming more popular in industrial manufacturing processes, e.g. curing of coatings, forming of plastics, annealing, plastic welding, print drying. In these applications, infrared heaters replace convection ovens and contact heating. Efficiency is achieved by matching the wavelength of the infrared heater to the absorption characteristics of the material.

[edit] Communications
IR data transmission is also employed in short-range communication among computer peripherals and personal digital assistants. These devices usually conform to standards published by IrDA, the Infrared Data Association. Remote controls and IrDA devices use infrared light-emitting diodes (LEDs) to emit infrared radiation which is focused by a plastic lens into a narrow beam. The beam is modulated, i.e. switched on and off, to encode the data. The receiver uses a silicon photodiode to convert the infrared radiation to an electric current. It responds only to the rapidly pulsing signal created by the transmitter, and filters out slowly changing infrared radiation from ambient light. Infrared communications are useful for indoor use in areas of high population density. IR does not penetrate walls and so does not interfere with other devices in adjoining rooms. Infrared is the most common way for remote controls to command appliances.
Free space optical communication using infrared lasers can be a relatively inexpensive way to install a communications link in an urban area operating at up to 4 gigabit/s, compared to the cost of burying fiber optic cable.
Infrared lasers are used to provide the light for optical fiber communications systems. Infrared light with a wavelength around 1,330 nm (least dispersion) or 1,550 nm (best transmission) are the best choices for standard silica fibers.
IR data transmission of encoded audio versions of printed signs is being researched as an aid for visually impaired people through the RIAS (Remote Infrared Audible Signage) project.

[edit] Spectroscopy
Infrared vibrational spectroscopy (see also near infrared spectroscopy) is a technique which can be used to identify molecules by analysis of their constituent bonds. Each chemical bond in a molecule vibrates at a frequency which is characteristic of that bond. A group of atoms in a molecule (e.g. CH2) may have multiple modes of oscillation caused by the stretching and bending motions of the group as a whole. If an oscillation leads to a change in dipole in the molecule, then it will absorb a photon which has the same frequency. The vibrational frequencies of most molecules correspond to the frequencies of infrared light. Typically, the technique is used to study organic compounds using light radiation from 4000-400 cm-1, the mid-infrared. A spectrum of all the frequencies of absorption in a sample is recorded. This can be used to gain information about the sample composition in terms of chemical groups present and also its purity (for example a wet sample will show a broad O-H absorption around 3200 cm-1).

[edit] Meteorology




IR Satellite picture taken 1315 Z on 15th October 2006. A frontal system can be seen in the Gulf of Mexico with embedded Cumulonimbus cloud. Shallower Cumulus and Stratocumulus can be seen off the Eastern Seaboard.


Weather satellites equipped with scanning radiometers produce thermal or infrared images which can then enable a trained analyst to determine cloud heights and types, to calculate land and surface water temperatures, and to locate ocean surface features. The scanning is typically in the range 10.3-12.5 µm (IR4 and IR5 channels).
High, cold ice cloud such as Cirrus or Cumulonimbus show up bright white, lower warmer cloud such as Stratus or Stratocumulus show up as grey with intermediate clouds shaded accordingly. Hot land surfaces will show up as dark grey or black. One disadvantage of infrared imagery is that low cloud such as stratus or fog can be a similar temperature to the surrounding land or sea surface and does not show up. However, using the difference in brightness of the IR4 channel (10.3-11.5 µm) and the near-infrared channel (1.58-1.64 µm), low cloud can be distinguished, producing a fog satellite picture. The main advantage of infrared is that images can be produced at night, allowing a continuous sequence of weather to be studied.
These infrared pictures can depict ocean eddies or vortices and map currents such as the Gulf Stream which are valuable to the shipping industry. Fishermen and farmers are interested in knowing land and water temperatures to protect their crops against frost or increase their catch from the sea. Even El Niño phenomena can be spotted. Using color-digitized techniques, the gray shaded thermal images can be converted to color for easier identification of desired information.

[edit] Climatology
In the field of climatology, atmospheric infrared radiation is monitored to detect trends in the energy exchange between the earth and the atmosphere. These trends provide information on long term changes in the earth's climate. It is one of the primary parameters studied in research into global warming together with solar radiation.
A pyrgeometer is utilized in this field of research to perform continuous outdoor measurements. This is a broadband infrared radiometer with sensitivity for infrared radiation between approximately 4.5 µm and 50 µm.

[edit] Astronomy




The Spitzer Space Telescope is a dedicated infrared space observatory currently in orbit around the Sun. (Note the black side to the telescope, to maximize infrared radiation.) NASA image.


Main articles: infrared astronomy and far infrared astronomy
Astronomers observe objects in the infrared portion of the electromagnetic spectrum using optical components, including mirrors, lenses and solid state digital detectors. For this reason it is classified as part of optical astronomy. To form an image, the components of an infrared telescope need to be carefully shielded from heat sources, and the detectors are chilled using liquid helium.
The sensitivity of Earth-based infrared telescopes is significantly limited by water vapor in the atmosphere, which absorbs a portion of the infrared radiation arriving from space outside of selected atmospheric windows. This limitation can be partially alleviated by placing the telescope observatory at a high altitude, or by carrying the telescope aloft with a balloon or an aircraft. Space telescopes do not suffer from this handicap, and so outer space is considered the ideal location for infrared astronomy.
The infrared portion of the spectrum has several useful benefits for astronomers. Cold, dark molecular clouds of gas and dust in our galaxy will glow with radiated heat as they are irradiated by imbedded stars. Infrared can also be used to detect protostars before they begin to emit visible light. Stars emit a smaller portion of their energy in the infrared spectrum, so nearby cool objects such as planets can be more readily detected. (In the visible light spectrum, the glare from the star will drown out the reflected light from a planet.)
Infrared light is also useful for observing the cores of active galaxies which are often cloaked in gas and dust. Distant galaxies with a high redshift will have the peak portion of their spectrum shifted toward longer wavelengths, so they are more readily observed in the infrared.[1]

[edit] Art history




The Arnolfini Portrait by Jan van Eyck, National Gallery, London


Infra-red reflectography, as called by art historians,[13] are taken of paintings to reveal underlying layers, in particular the underdrawing or outline drawn by the artist as a guide. This often uses carbon black which shows up well in reflectograms, so long as it has not also been used in the ground underlying the whole painting. Art historians are looking to see if the visible layers of paint differ from the under-drawing or layers in between - such alterations are called pentimenti when made by the original artist. This is very useful information in deciding whether a painting is the prime version by the original artist or a copy, and whether it has been altered by over-enthusiastic restoration work. Generally the more pentimenti, the more likely a painting is to be the prime version. It also gives useful insights into working practices.[14]
Among many other changes in the Arnolfini Portrait of 1434 (right), his face was higher by about the height of his eye, hers was higher, and her eyes looked more to the front. Each of his feet was underdrawn in one position, painted in another, and then overpainted in a third. These alterations are seen in infra-red reflectograms.[15]
Similar uses of infrared are made by historians on various types of objects, especially very old written documents such as the Dead Sea Scrolls, the Roman works in the Villa of the Papyri, and the Silk Road texts found in the Dunhuang Caves.[16] Carbon black used in ink can show up extremely well.

[edit] Biological systems




Thermographic image of a snake eating a mouse






Thermographic image of a fruit bat.


The pitviper has a pair of infrared sensory pits on its head. There is uncertainty regarding the exact thermal sensitivity of this biological infrared detection system.[17][18]
Other organisms that have thermoreceptive organs are pythons (family Pythonidae), some boas (family Boidae), the Common Vampire Bat (Desmodus rotundus), a variety of jewel beetles (Melanophila acuminata),[19] darkly pigmented butterflies (Pachliopta aristolochiae and Troides rhadamantus plateni), and possibly blood-sucking bugs (Triatoma infestans).[20]

[edit] Photobiomodulation
Near infrared light, or photobiomodulation, is used for treatment of chemotherapy induced oral ulceration as well as wound healing. There is some work relating to anti herpes virus treatment.[21] Research projects include work on central nervous system healing effects via cytochrome c oxidase upregulation and other possible mechanisms.[22]

[edit] Health hazard
Strong infrared radiation in certain industry high heat settings may constitute a health hazard to the eyes and the vision. More so, since the radiation is invisible. Therefore special IR proof protective eyeglasses must be worn in such places.

[edit] The Earth as an infrared emitter
The Earth's surface and the clouds absorb visible and invisible radiation from the sun and re-emit much of the energy as infrared back to the atmosphere. Certain substances in the atmosphere, chiefly cloud droplets and water vapor, but also carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, sulfur hexafluoride, and chlorofluorocarbons,[23] absorb this infrared, and re-radiate it in all directions including back to Earth. Thus the greenhouse effect keeps the atmosphere and surface much warmer than if the infrared absorbers were absent from the atmosphere.[24]

[edit] History of infrared science





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2006)







This article may contain an inappropriate mixture of prose and timeline. Please help convert this timeline into prose or, if necessary, a list. (September 2006)


The discovery of infrared radiation is ascribed to William Herschel, the astronomer, in the early 19th century. Herschel published his results in 1800 before the Royal Society of London. Herschel used a prism to refract light from the sun and detected the infrared, beyond the red part of the spectrum, through an increase in the temperature recorded on a thermometer. He was surprised at the result and called them "Calorific Rays". The term 'Infrared' did not appear until late in the 19th century.[25]
Other important dates include:[7]

1835: Macedonio Melloni makes the first thermopile IR detector;
1860: Gustav Kirchhoff formulates the blackbody theorem E = J(T,n);
1873: Willoughby Smith discovers the photoconductivity of selenium;
1879: Stefan-Boltzmann law formulated empirically 
1880s & 1890s: Lord Rayleigh and Wilhelm Wien both solve part of the blackbody equation, but both solutions are approximations that "blow up" out of their useful ranges. This problem was called the "UV Catastrophe and Infrared Catastrophe".
1901: Max Planck published the blackbody equation and theorem. He solved the problem by quantizing the allowable energy transitions.
Early 1900s: Albert Einstein develops the theory of the photoelectric effect, determining the photon. Also William Coblentz in spectroscopy and radiometry.
1917: Theodore Case develops thallous sulfide detector; British develop the first infra-red search and track (IRST) in World War I and detect aircraft at a range of one mile (1.6 km);
1935: Lead salts-early missile guidance in World War II;
1938: Teau Ta-predicted that the pyroelectric effect could be used to detect infrared radiation.
1952: H. Welker discovers InSb;
1950s: Paul Kruse (at Honeywell) and Texas Instruments form infrared images before 1955;
1950s and 1960s: Nomenclature and radiometric units defined by Fred Nicodemenus, G.J. Zissis and R. Clark, Jones defines D*;
1958: W.D. Lawson (Royal Radar Establishment in Malvern) discovers IR detection properties of HgCdTe;
1958: Falcon & Sidewinder missiles developed using infrared and the first textbook on infrared sensors appears by Paul Kruse, et al.
1961: J. Cooper demonstrated pyroelectric detection;
1962: Kruse and ? Rodat advance HgCdTe; Signal Element and Linear Arrays available;
1965: First IR Handbook; first commercial imagers (Barnes, Agema {now part of FLIR Systems Inc.}; Richard Hudson's landmark text; F4 TRAM FLIR by Hughes; phenomenology pioneered by Fred Simmons and A.T. Stair; U.S. Army's night vision lab formed (now Night Vision and Electronic Sensors Directorate (NVESD), and Rachets develops detection, recognition and identification modeling there;
1970: Willard Boyle & George E. Smith propose CCD at Bell Labs for picture phone;
1972: Common module program started by NVESD;
1978: Infrared imaging astronomy comes of age, observatories planned, IRTF on Mauna Kea opened; 32 by 32 and 64 by 64 arrays are produced in InSb, HgCdTe and other materials.


[edit] See also



Look up infrared in
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Category:Infrared




Atmospheric window
Black body radiation
Infrared astronomy
Infrared camera
Infrared filter
Infrared homing
Infrared photography
Infrared signature
Infrared solar cells
Infrared spectroscopy
Infrared thermometer
Night vision
Pyrgeometer
Terahertz radiation
Thermographic camera
Thermography
RIAS (Remote Infrared Audible Signage)



[edit] References


^ a b "IR Astronomy: Overview". NASA Infrared Astronomy and Processing Center. http://www.ipac.caltech.edu/Outreach/Edu/importance.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-30. 
^ Dr. S. C. Liew. "Electromagnetic Waves". Centre for Remote Imaging, Sensing and Processing. http://www.crisp.nus.edu.sg/~research/tutorial/em.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-27. 
^ Reusch, William (1999). "Infrared Spectroscopy". Michigan State University. http://www.cem.msu.edu/~reusch/VirtualText/Spectrpy/InfraRed/infrared.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-27. 
^ Henderson, Roy. "Wavelength Considerations". Instituts für Umform- und Hochleistungs. http://info.tuwien.ac.at/iflt/safety/section1/1_1_1.htm. Retrieved on 2007-10-18. 
^ Byrnes, James (2009). Unexploded Ordnance Detection and Mitigation. Springer. pp. 21-22. ISBN 9781402092527. 
^ IPAC Staff. "Near, Mid and Far-Infrared". NASA ipac. http://www.ipac.caltech.edu/Outreach/Edu/Regions/irregions.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-04. 
^ a b Miller, Principles of Infrared Technology (Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1992), and Miller and Friedman, Photonic Rules of Thumb, 2004. ISBN 9780442012106
^ Ramaswami, Rajiv (May 2002). "Optical Fiber Communication: From Transmission to Networking" (PDF). IEEE. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/iel5/35/21724/01006983.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-10-18. 
^ "Introduction to Solar Energy" (DOC). Passive Solar Heating & Cooling Manual. Rodale Press, Inc.. 1980. http://www.azsolarcenter.com/design/documents/passive.DOC. Retrieved on 2007-08-12. 
^ McCreary, Jeremy (October 30, 2004). "Infrared (IR) basics for digital photographers-capturing the unseen (Sidebar: Black Body Radiation)". Digital Photography For What It's Worth. http://dpfwiw.com/ir.htm. Retrieved on 2006-11-07. 
^ a b c "How Night Vision Works". American Technologies Network Corporation. http://www.atncorp.com/HowNightVisionWorks. Retrieved on 2007-08-12. 
^ Bryant, Lynn (2007-06-11). "How does thermal imaging work?...". http://www.video-surveillance-guide.com/how-does-thermal-imaging-work.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-12. 
^ "IR Reflectography for Non-destructive Analysis of Underdrawings in Art Objects". Sensors Unlimited, Inc.. http://www.sensorsinc.com/artanalysis.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-20. 
^ "The Mass of Saint Gregory: Examining a Painting Using Infrared Reflectography". The Cleveland Museum of Art. http://www.clevelandart.org/exhibcef/ConsExhib/html/grien.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-20. 
^ National Gallery Catalogues: The Fifteenth Century Netherlandish Paintings by Lorne Campbell, 1998, ISBN 185709171
^ International Dunhuang Project An Introduction to digital infrared photography and its application within IDP -paper pdf 6.4 MB
^ B. S. Jones; W. F. Lynn; M. O. Stone (2001). "Thermal Modeling of Snake Infrared Reception: Evidence for Limited Detection Range". Journal of Theoretical Biology 209 (2): 201–211. doi:10.1006/jtbi.2000.2256. 
^ V. Gorbunov; N. Fuchigami; M. Stone; M. Grace; V. V. Tsukruk (2002). "Biological Thermal Detection: Micromechanical and Microthermal Properties of Biological Infrared Receptors". Biomacromolecules 3 (1): 106–115. doi:10.1021/bm015591f. 
^ Evans, W.G. (1966). "Infrared receptors in Melanophila acuminata De Geer". Nature 202: 211. doi:10.1038/202211a0. 
^ A.L. Campbell, A.L. Naik, L. Sowards, M.O. Stone (2002). "Biological infrared imaging and sensing". Micrometre 33 (2): 211–225. doi:10.1016/S0968-4328(01)00010-5. 
^ Hargate G. A randomised double-blind study comparing the effect of 1072-nm light against placebo for the treatment of herpes labialis. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2006 Sep;31(5):638-41.PMID 16780494
^ Desmet KD, Paz DA, Corry JJ, Eells JT, Wong-Riley MT, Henry MM, Buchmann EV, Connelly MP, Dovi JV, Liang HL, Henshel DS, Yeager RL, Millsap DS, Lim J, Gould LJ, Das R, Jett M, Hodgson BD, Margolis D, Whelan HT. Clinical and experimental applications of NIR-LED photobiomodulation. Photomed Laser Surg. 2006 Apr;24(2):121-8. PMID 16706690
^ "Global Sources of Greenhouse Gases". Emissions of Greenhouse Gases in the United States 2000. Energy Information Administration. 2002-05-02. http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/1605/gg01rpt/emission.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-13. 
^ "Clouds & Radiation". http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Library/Clouds/. Retrieved on 2007-08-12. 
^ Herschel Discovers Infrared Light



[edit] External links

Infrared Physics & Technology Journal via ScienceDirect.com
Infrared Spectroscopy NASA Open Spectrum wiki site
Infrared Waves Detailed explanation of infrared light.
Infrared a Historical Perspective








v • d • e

Electromagnetic spectrum





← shorter wavelengths       longer wavelengths →
Gamma rays · X-rays · Ultraviolet · Visible · Infrared · Terahertz radiation · Microwave · Radio





Visible (optical)

Violet · Blue · Green · Yellow · Orange · Red






Microwaves

W band · V band · Q band · Ka band · K band · Ku band · X band · S band · C band · L band






Radio

EHF · SHF · UHF · VHF · HF · MF · LF · VLF · ULF · SLF · ELF






Wavelength types

Microwave · Shortwave · Medium wave · Longwave









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infrared"
Categories: Electromagnetic spectrum | InfraredHidden categories: Wikipedia pages move-protected due to vandalism | Articles needing additional references from July 2006 | Articles needing additional references from August 2007 | Wikipedia proseline cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
مصرى
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Gaeilge
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Oromoo
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 23:59.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
