













Finno-Ugric languages - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Finno-Ugric_languages";
		var wgTitle = "Finno-Ugric languages";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "10803";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 276493714;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [""];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [""];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Finno-Ugric languages

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Finno-Ugric




Geographic
distribution:
Eastern and Northern Europe, North Asia


Genetic
classification:
Uralic
 Finno-Ugric


Subdivisions:

Ugric (Ugrian)
Finno-Permic (Permian-Finnic)



ISO 639-2 and 639-5:
fiu


Finno-Ugric (IPA: /ˌfɪnoʊˈjuːɡrɪk/) is a group of languages in the Uralic language family, comprising Finnish, Estonian, Hungarian and related languages. It comprises the Finno-Permic and Ugric language families.




Contents


1 Status
2 Origins
3 History
4 Structural features
5 Classification

5.1 Disputes


6 Common vocabulary

6.1 Numbers
6.2 Finno-Ugric Swadesh lists


7 Peoples

7.1 Population Genetics
7.2 Gallery


8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Status
The term Finno-Ugric is somewhat controversial today[citation needed], with many historical linguists[who?] feeling that the Finno-Permic languages are as distinct from the Ugric languages as they are from the Samoyedic languages spoken in Siberia. Thus it is felt that the early Finno-Permic and Ugric groups may have diffused from proto-Uralic at the same time as proto-Samoyedic. It was earlier thought that the geographically distant Samoyed had separated first, and the branching into Ugric and Finno-Permic took place later, but this does not have strong support in the linguistic data. However, some proponents of the Finno-Ugric grouping have provided extra-linguistic arguments by marshalling archaeological evidence of separate Finno-Ugric peoples originally living across a large swath of Northern Europe.
The fact that the Finno-Ugric languages, unlike most of the other languages spoken in Europe, are not part of the Indo-European family, gave some initial impetus to the Finno-Ugric grouping. Indeed, in the past, and occasionally today as well, the term Finno-Ugric was used for the entire Uralic language family.

[edit] Origins
Proto-Finno-Ugric is the reconstructed protolanguage for the Finno-Ugric languages, that is the ancestor of the Finnic languages, such as Finnish and Estonian, and the Ugric languages, whose best known example is Hungarian. The parent language is Proto-Uralic, from which Proto-Finno-Ugric and Proto-Samoyedic had split. However, this classification is not without problems; Proto-Finno-Ugric may also be interpreted as a geographical grouping of Proto-Uralic dialects, because the differences are few. It has been suggested that the area where Proto-Finno-Ugric was spoken reached between the Baltic Sea and the Ural mountains.
The Saami languages belong to the Finno-Ugric family of languages. They can be traced back to a Finnic-Saami protolanguage, which is called Early-Proto-Finnic. [1]
According to Robert Austerlitz, Proto-Finno-Ugric had about seven cases; nominative, accusative, genitive, locative, allative, ablative, and adverbial.
The birthplace of the Finno-Ugric languages cannot be located with certainty. Central and northern Russia west of the Ural mountains is generally assumed to be the most likely spot, perhaps around the 3rd millennium BC. This is suggested by the high intralinguistic family diversity around the middle Volga River where three highly distinct branches of the Uralic family, Mordvinic, Mari, and Permic are located. Also reconstructed plant and animal names (including spruce, Siberian pine, Siberian Fir, Siberian larch, brittle willow, elm, and hedgehog) are consistent with this localization. Reconstructed Proto-Finno-Ugric contains Iranic loanwords, notably the words for "honeybee", "honey" and "hatchet" (tappara in Finnish, tabar in Iranic), probably from the time when Iranic tribes (such as Scythians and Sarmatians) inhabited the Eurasian steppes.[citation needed]
There is evidence that before the arrival of the Slavic speaking tribes to the area of modern-day Russia, speakers of Finno-Ugric languages may have been scattered across the whole area between the Urals and the Baltic Sea. This was the distribution of the Comb Ceramic Culture, a stone age culture which appears to have corresponded to the Finno-Ugric speaking populations, c. 4200 BC–c. 2000 BC.[citation needed]
There have been attempts to relate the Finno-Ugric languages to the Indo-European languages, in the so called Indo-Uralic theories, but there are not enough similarities to link them with any certainty. Similar inflectional endings exist, but whether or not they are genetically related is not resolvable. A common lexicon not attestable to borrowing is thin, and no sound laws are established.[citation needed]
A portion of the Baltic-Finnic lexicon is not shared with the remaining Finno-Ugric languages and may be due to a pre-Finnic substrate, which may coincide in part with the substrate of the Indo-European Baltic languages. As far as the Sami (Lappic) languages are concerned, a hypothesis has been advanced that the ancestors of the Sami originally spoke a different language, but adopted their current tongue under the pressure of their Finnic-speaking neighbours[citation needed].
The theory that the Finno-Ugric birthplace originally covered a very large area in Northern Europe has been supported more by archaeological and genetic data than by linguistic evidence. Notably, the controversial Finnish academic Kalevi Wiik has argued that Proto-Finno-Ugric was the original language in most of Northern and Central Europe, and that the earliest Finno-Ugric speakers and their languages originated in the territory of modern Ukraine (the so-called "Ukrainian refuge") during the last glacial period, when the whole of northern Europe was covered with ice. This hypothesis, however, has been rejected by nearly all experts in Finno-Ugric comparative linguistics; Wiik's model has been criticized for confusing genetic, archaeological and linguistic concepts, and some see the theory as unscientific[citation needed].
The controversy over the Finno-Ugric grouping is politically sensitive because the foreign rulers of Finland in the 18th and 19th centuries attempted to link the Finnish to the Sami people (supposed to be culturally inferior) through the similarity of their languages.[clarification needed][citation needed] Subsequently, with the independence of Finland, the Finno-Ugric theory grew in strength there. On the other hand, the Hungarian groups have sometimes claimed relations to the Altaic languages, particularly the Turkic language family.

[edit] History
The first mention of a Uralic people is in Tacitus' Germania, mentioning the Fenni (usually interpreted as referring to the Sami) and two other possibly Finno-Ugric tribes living in the farthest reaches of Scandinavia. In the late 15th century, European scholars noted the resemblance of the names Hungaria and Yugria, the names of settlements east of the Ural. They assumed a connection, but did not look into linguistic evidence. In 1671, Swedish scholar Georg Stiernhielm commented on the similarities of Lapp, Estonian and Finnish, and also on a few similar words in Finnish and Hungarian, while the German scholar Martin Vogel tried to establish a relationship between Finnish, Lapp and Hungarian. These two authors were thus the first to outline what was to become the classification of a Finno-Ugric family. In 1717, Swedish professor Olof Rudbeck proposed about 100 etymologies connecting Finnish and Hungarian, of which about 40 are still considered valid (Collinder, 1965). In the same year, the German scholar Johann Georg von Eckhart (published in Leibniz' Collectanea Etymologica) for the first time proposed a relation to the Samoyedic languages.
By 1770, all constituents of Finno-Ugric were known, almost 20 years before the traditional starting-point of Indo-European studies. Nonetheless, these relationships were not widely accepted. Especially Hungarian intellectuals were not interested in the theory and preferred to assume connections with Turkic tribes, an attitude characterized by Ruhlen (1987) as due to "the wild unfettered Romanticism of the epoch". Still, in spite of the hostile climate, the Hungarian Jesuit János Sajnovics suggested a relationship of Hungarian and Lapp (Sami) in 1770, and in 1799, the Hungarian Sámuel Gyarmathi published the most complete work on Finno-Ugric to that date.
At the beginning of the 19th century, research on Finno-Ugric was thus more advanced than Indo-European research. But the rise of Indo-European comparative linguistics absorbed so much attention and enthusiasm that Finno-Ugric linguistics was all but eclipsed in Europe; in Hungary, the only European country that would have had a vested interest in the family (Finland and Estonia being under Russian rule), the political climate was too hostile for the development of Uralic comparative linguistics. Some progress was made, however, culminating in the work of the German Jozsef Budenz, who for 20 years was the leading Finno-Ugric specialist in Hungary. Another late-19th-century contribution is that of Hungarian linguist Ignác Halász, who published extensive comparative material of Finno-Ugric and Samoyedic in the 1890s, and whose work is at the base of the wide acceptance of the Samoyed-Finno-Ugric relationship today.
During the 1990s, linguists Kalevi Wiik, Janos Pusztay and Ago Künnap and historian Kyösti Julku announced a "breakthrough in Present-Day Uralistics", dating Proto-Finnic to 10,000 BC. The theory was almost entirely unsuccessful in the scientific community (cf. Merlijn de Smit, see external links).

[edit] Structural features

See also: Typology of Uralic languages

All Finno-Ugric languages share structural features and basic vocabulary which find their origins in the hypothetical proto-Finno-Ugric language. Around 200 basic words in this language have been suggested, including word stems for concepts related to humans such as names for relatives and body parts. This common vocabulary includes, according to Lyle Campbell, at least 55 words related to fishing, 33 related to hunting and eating animals, 12 related to reindeer, 17 related to plant foods, 31 related to technology, 26 related to building, 11 related to clothing, 18 related to climate, 4 related to society, 11 related to religion, and 3 related to commerce.
Most Finno-Ugric languages typologically belong to the agglutinative languages, which share common features like inflection by adding suffixes (instead of prepositions as in English) and syntactic coordination of suffixes. Furthermore, Finno-Ugric languages lack grammatical gender and thus use one pronoun for both he and she; for example, hän in Finnish, tämä in Votic, tema in Estonian, ő in Hungarian.
In many Finno-Ugric languages possessive adjectives and possessive pronouns, such as my and your, are rarely used. Speakers suggest possession via declension. In those that have developed further towards fusional languages, the genitive of the personal pronoun is used to express possession. Examples: Estonian mu koer 'my dog' , colloquial Finnish mun koira, Northern Sami mu beana 'my dog' (literally 'dog of me') or beatnagan 'my dog' (literally 'dog-my').
In others, a pronominal suffix is used, optionally together with the genitive case of a pronoun: thus book Finnish (minun) koirani, 'my dog' (literally 'I-gen. dog-my'), from koira "dog". Similarly, Hungarian, lacking possessive pronouns in their own right, uses possessive noun suffixes, optionally together with pronouns; cf. 'the dog' = a kutya vs. 'my dog' = az én kutyám (literally, 'the I dog-my') or simply a kutyám (literally, 'the dog-my'). Hungarian, however, does have independent possessive pronouns; for example, enyém 'mine', tiéd 'yours', etc. These are also declined; for example, nom. enyém, acc. enyémet, dat. enyémnek, etc.

[edit] Classification




Geographical span of Uralic languages. Nenets, Enets, Selkup and Nganasan are Samoyedic, the rest are Finno-Ugric.


The Finno-Ugric subfamily of the Uralic languages has the following members:
Ugric (Ugrian)

Hungarian

Hungarian


Ob Ugric (Ob Ugrian)

Khanty (Ostyak)
Mansi (Vogul)



Finno-Permic (Permian-Finnic)

Permic (Permian)

Komi (Komi-Zyrian, Zyrian)
Komi-Permyak
Udmurt (Votyak)


Finno-Volgaic (Finno-Cheremisic, Finno-Mari, Volga-Finnic)

Mari (Cheremisic)

Mari (Cheremis)


Mordvinic (Mordvin, Mordvinian, Mordva)

Erzya
Moksha


Extinct Finno-Volgaic languages of uncertain position

Merya (position uncertain, extinct)
Meshcherian (position uncertain, extinct)
Muromian (position uncertain, extinct)


Finno-Lappic (Finno-Saamic, Finno-Samic)

Sami (Samic, Saamic, Lappic, Lappish)

Western Sami (Western Samic)

Southern Sami
Ume Sami — Nearly extinct
Lule Sami
Pite Sami — Nearly extinct
Northern Sami


Eastern Sami (Eastern Samic)

Kemi Sami — Extinct
Inari Sami
Akkala Sami — Extinct
Kildin Sami
Skolt Sami
Ter Sami — Nearly extinct




Baltic-Finnic (Balto-Finnic, Balto-Fennic, Finnic, Fennic)

Estonian

South Estonian (including Mulgi and Tartu)

Võro (Voro, Võru, Voru; including Seto or Setu)




Finnish - including Meänkieli (also known as Tornedalen or Tornedalian Finnish), Kven and Ingrian Finnish
Ingrian (Izhorian) - Nearly extinct
Karelian

Karelian proper
Lude (Ludic, Ludian)
Olonets Karelian (Livvi, Aunus, Aunus Karelian, Olonetsian)


Livonian (Liv) — Nearly extinct
Veps (Vepsian)
Votic (Votian, Vod) — Nearly extinct








[edit] Disputes
The classification of Finno-Ugric within Uralic, and of Finno-Permic and Ugric within Finno-Ugric, is accepted by practically all scholars. Dispute is at present largely confined to the Finno-Permic family, surrounding different proposals for the arrangement of its subgroups and regarding the validity of the Volgaic group.
The term Volgaic denoted a branch believed to include the Mari and Mordvinic languages, but it has now become obsolete: research has shown that it was a geographic classification rather than a linguistic one. The Mordvinic languages are more closely related to the Finno-Lappic languages than they are to the Mari languages.
Another dispute surrounds the affinity of the Yukaghir languages, which is traditionally regarded as a language isolate, with some scholars proposing a strong affinity to Uralic (Collinder, 1965).
The relation of the Finno-Permic and the Ugric groups is remote by some standards. With a time depth of only 3 or 4 thousand years, it is far younger than many major families such as Indo-European or Semitic, and about the same age as, for instance, the Eastern subfamily of Nilotic. But the grouping is still far from transparent — the absence of early records constitutes an obstacle to exact reconstruction not found in, for example, Indo-European or Semitic. While much has been speculatively deduced about the Finno-Ugric Urheimat, little is certain, and, of course, the relatedness of the languages does not necessarily imply any racial or cultural unity of the peoples speaking them.
Linguists criticizing the Finno-Ugric group (especially Angela Marcantonio, see References) believe that Ugric and Finno-Permic are more distantly related than proponents advertise, and possibly no closer than, for example, the Turkic and Ugric groups. These linguists propose a Ural-Altaic supergroup and deny the validity of the Uralic node within this grouping. Such proposals do not contest the ultimate relatedness of Finno-Ugric, but rather try to include more languages (on even more tenuous grounds) into the family. However, this approach has been rejected by nearly all specialists in Uralic linguistics (for critical reviews, see e.g. Aikio 2003; Bakró-Nagy 2003, 2005; De Smit 2003; Georg 2003; Kallio 2004; Laakso 2004; Saarikivi 2004).
Other unorthodox comparisons have been advanced such as Uralo-Dravidian, Finno-Basque, Hungaro-Sumerian. These are considered spurious by specialists. For the most part these belong to the field of pseudoscientific language comparison rather than scientific comparative linguistics.

[edit] Common vocabulary
This is a small sample of cognates in basic vocabulary across Uralic, illustrating the sound laws (based on the Encyclopædia Britannica and Hakkinen 1979). Note that in general two cognates do not have the same meaning; they merely have the same origin. Thus, the English word in each row should be regarded as an approximation of the original meaning, not a translation of the other words. According to Estonian philologist Mall Hellam, the only entire sentence that is mutually intelligible is, "The living fish swims in water" (even though it isn't really mutually intelligible [1]).


English
Finnish
Estonian
North Sami
Inari Sami
Mari
Komi
Khanty
Hungarian
Finno-Ugric reconstruction


heart
sydän, sydäm-
süda, südam-
-
-
šüm
śələm
səm
szív
*śiδä(-mɜ)/*śüδä(-mɜ)


lap
syli
süli
salla, sala
solla
šəl
syl
jöl
öl
*süle/*sile


vein
suoni
soon
suotna, suona
suona
šön
sən
jan
ín 'sinew'
*sōne/*se̮ne


go
mennä, men-
minna, min-
mannat
moonnađ
mije-
mun-
mən-
menni, megy
*mene-


fish
kala
kala
guolli, guoli
kyeli
kol
kul
hal
hal
*kala


hand
käsi, käte-
gen. käden, part. kättä
käsi, kät-
gen. käe, part. kätt
giehta, gieđa
kieta
kit
ki
köt
kéz
*käte


eye
silmä
silm
čalbmi, čalmmi
čalme
šinča
śin
sem
szem
*śilmä


one
yksi, yhte-
gen. yhden, part. yhtä
üks, üht-
gen. ühe, part. üht(e)
okta, ovtta
ohta
ikte
ət'ik
ĭt
egy
*ykte


two
kaksi, kahte-
gen. kahden, part. kahta
kaks, kaht-
gen. kahe, part. kaht(e)
guokte
kyeh´ti
kokət
kyk
kät
kettő/két
*kakta/*käktä


three
kolme
kolm
golbma
kulma
kumət
kujim
koləm
három
*kolme/*kulme


ice
jää
jää
jiekŋa, jieŋa
jiena
ij
ji
jöŋk
jég
*jäŋe


louse
täi
täi
dihkki
tikke
tij
toj
tögtəm
tetű
*täje


(Orthographical notes: The hacek (š) denotes postalveolar articulation, while the accent (ś) denotes a secondary palatal articulation. The Finnish letter 'y' [y] represents the same phoneme (a rounded or centralized [i]) as the letter 'ü' in other languages. The voiced dental spirant [ð] is the origin of the standard Finnish 'd', which is realized differently in each dialect today. The same sound is marked with the letter đ in the Sami languages. The Sami 'č' is a voiceless postalveolar affricate [ʧ].)

[edit] Numbers
The numbers from 1 to 10 in Finnish, Estonian, Võro, Livonian, North Sami, Erzya, Meadow Mari, Moksha, Mansi, Hungarian, and Proto-Finno-Ugric.


Number
Finnish
Estonian
Võro
Livonian
North Sami
Inari Sami
Erzya
Meadow Mari
Moksha
Mansi
Hungarian
Proto-F-U


1
yksi
üks
ütś
ikš
okta
ohta
vejke
ikte
fkä
akva
egy
*ykte


2
kaksi
kaks
katś
kakš
guokte
kyeh´ti
kavto
kokət
kaftə
kityg
kettő
*kakte


3
kolme
kolm
kolm
kuolm
golbma
kulma
kolmo
kumət
kolmə
hurum
három, harm-
*kolme


4
neljä
neli
nelli
nēļa
njeallje
nelji
ńiľe
nələt
nilä
nila
négy
*neljä


5
viisi
viis
viiś
vīž
vihtta
vitta
veƭe
wizət
vetä
at
öt
*vitte


6
kuusi
kuus
kuuś
kūž
guhtta
kutta
koto
kuδət
kotə
hot
hat
*kutte


7
seitsemän
seitse
säidse
seis
čieža
čiččam
śiśem
šəmət
sisäm
sat
hét
N/A


8
kahdeksan
kaheksa
katõsa
kōdõks
gávcci
käävci
kavkso
kandaš(e)
kafksə
ńololov
nyolc
N/A


9
yhdeksän
üheksa
ütesä
īdõks
ovcci
oovce
vejkse
indeš(e)
veJksə
ontolov
kilenc
N/A


10
kymmenen
kümme
kümme
kim
logi
love
kemeń
lu
keməń
lov
tíz
N/A


One reconstruction for numbers 8 and 9 is *kak+teksa '10–2' and *yk+teksa '10–1', where *teksa cf. deka is an Indo-European loan; notice that the difference between /t/ and /d/ is not phonemic, unlike in Indo-European.

[edit] Finno-Ugric Swadesh lists
100-word Swadesh lists for certain Finno-Ugric languages can be compared and contrasted at the Rosetta Project website: Finnish, Estonian, Hungarian, Erzya. Notice that particularly the Finnish list is unreliable, because it contains several neologisms or formal words, for example, henkilö (from henki life + place suffix) instead of the more commonly used ihminen, which is a Baltic Finnic word. The Finnish list has also spelling errors suggesting it was compiled by a person who does not know Finnish.

[edit] Peoples




The relative numbers of Finnougric-speaking peoples


Finno-Ugric is not an ethnic group, but rather a linguistic construct. Therefore it makes little sense to speak of "Finno-Ugric people" as a group apart from the languages they speak.
The four largest ethnicities speaking Finno-Ugric languages are the Hungarians (15 million), Finns (6–7 million), Mordvins (1.2 million), and Estonians (1.1 million). Three (Hungarians, Finns, and Estonians) inhabit independent nation-states, Hungary, Finland, and Estonia, while the Mordvins have an autonomous Mordovian Republic within Russia. The traditional area of the indigenous Sámi people is in Northern Fenno-Scandinavia and the Kola Peninsula in Northwest Russia and is known as Sápmi. Some other Finno-Ugric peoples have autonomous republics in Russia: Karelians (Republic of Karelia), Komi (Komi Republic), Udmurts (Udmurt Republic), Mari (Mari El Republic), and Mordvins (Moksha and Erzya; Republic of Mordovia). Khanty and Mansi peoples live in Khanty-Mansi Autonomous Okrug of Russia, while Komi-Permyaks live in Komi-Permyak Okrug, which formerly was an autonomous okrug of Russia, but today is a territory with special status within Perm Krai.

[edit] Population Genetics
The linguistic reconstruction of the Finno-Ugric language family has lead to the postulation not just of an ancient Proto–Finno-Ugric people, but that the modern Finno-Ugric–speaking peoples are ethnically related.[2] Such hypotheses are based on the assumption that heredity can be traced though linguistic relatedness[3]. Such theories are rarely accepted by the modern scientific community: It has not been shown that any contemporary group originated from one single ancient people, barring the earliest humans. Like perhaps all populations, individual groups of Finno-Ugric speakers have a diverse array of cultural, environmental, and genetic influences. However, modern genetic studies have shown that the Y-chromosome haplogroup N3, and sometimes N2, having branched from haplogroup N, which, itself, probably spread north, then west and east from Northern China about 12,000–14,000 years before present from father haplogroup NO (haplogroup O being the most common Y-chromosome haplogroup in Southeast Asia), is almost specific, though certainly not restricted, to Uralic or Finno-Ugric speaking populations, especially as high frequency or primary paternal haplogroup.[4][5]
Some of the ethnicities speaking Finno-Ugric languages are:
(Finnic)

Besermyan
Burtas
Chud
Finns
Estonians
Karelians
Komi
Komi-Permyaks
Udmurts
Mari
Merya people
Meshchera people
Mordvins (Moksha and Erzya [2])
Muromian people
Sami (Lapps)
Setos
Izhorians
Livonians
Veps
Votes

(Ugric)

Hungarians

Székely
Csángó
Magyarab
Jász


Khanty
Mansi
Nenets people


[edit] Gallery








Hungarians dressed in national costume in Serbia









Finnish artist, Akseli Gallen-Kallela









Ingrian Finnish oral poet, Larin Paraske









Karelian women in Sammatus











From left to right: Sven-Roald Nystø, Aili Keskitalo and Ole Henrik Magga, the second, third and first president of the Norwegian Sámi Parliament









Khanty women in Man uskve nomad camp, Berezovsky, Khanty-Mansia, Russia









Hungarian Prince Árpád is crossing the Carpathians









A Székely village in Romania











A Sami family around 1900









Sami woman









Erzya women









Komi people











Nenets child









Nenets inside a tent






[edit] See also

Finnic peoples
Ugric peoples
Volga Finns
Comb Ceramic culture
Uralic languages
Uralo-Siberian languages
Old Hungarian script
Old Permic script


[edit] References


^ Kulonen, Ulla-Maija (2005). Ulla-Maija Kulonen, Irja Seurujärvi-Kari & Risto Pulkkinen. ed (in en). The Saami;A Cultural Encyclopaedia. Suomalaisen Kirjalisuuden Seuran toimituksia. 925. SKS. pp. 287–288,333. ISBN 951-746-506-8. 
^ http://books.google.com/books?id=7rmgP02a_mkC&pg=PR7&ots=BX_ZloC9mA&dq=proff+Hungarian&sig=tg85J7fSIQSnBEMkfYH1g_ujmHY
^ Where do Finns come from?
^ European Journal of Human Genetics - Abstract of article: A counter-clockwise northern route of the Y-chromosome haplogroup N from Southeast Asia towards Europe
^ http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/AJHG/journal/issues/v74n4/40783/40783.web.pdf?erFrom=-1818203271335085617Guest



[edit] Further reading

Aikio, Ante (2003). Angela Marcantonio, The Uralic Language Family: Facts, Myths and Statistics. (Book review.) In: Word - Journal of the International Linguistic Association 3/2003: 401–412.
Bakró-Nagy Marianne 2003. Az írástudók felelőssége. Angela Marcantonio, The Uralic Language Family. Facts, myths and statistics. In: Nyelvtudományi Közlemények 100: 44–62. (Downloadable: [3])
Bakró-Nagy Marianne 2005. The responsibility of literati. Angela Marcantonio, The Uralic Language Family. Facts, myths and statistics. In: Lingua 115: 1053–1062. (Downloadable: [4])
Benkő, Loránd: Etymologisches Wörterbuch des Ungarischen (Etymological Dictionary of Hungarian). Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó, 1992-1997., ISBN 963-05-6227-8.
Collinder, Björn: Fenno-Ugric Vocabulary. Uppsala, 1955, ISBN 3-87118-187-0.
Collinder, Björn: An introduction to the Uralic languages. Berkely, California.
Campbell, Lyle: Historical Linguistics: An Introduction. Edinburgh University Press 1998.
Csepregi Márta (ed.): Finnugor kalauz (Finno-Ugric Guide). Budapest: Panoráma, 1998., ISBN 963-243-862-0.
De Smit, Merlijn 2003: A. Marcantonio: The Uralic language family. Facts, myths and statistics (review). In: Linguistica Uralica 2003, 57-67.
Encyclopædia Britannica 15th ed.: Languages of the World: Uralic languages. Chicago, 1990.
Georg, Stefan 2003. Rezension: A. Marcantonio: The Uralic Language Family. Facts, Myths and Statistics. In: Finnisch-Ugrische Mitteilungen Band 26/27.
Häkkinen, Kaisa: Suomalais-ugrilaisten kielten etymologisen tutkimuksen asemasta ja ongelmista (About the situation and problems of the etymological research of the Finno-Ugric languages) (1979), in Nykysuomen rakenne ja kehitys (Structure and development of modern Finnish) volume 2, (NRJK 2) Pieksämäki 1984, ISBN 951-717-360-1.
Kallio, Petri 2004. (Review:) The Uralic Language Family: Facts, Myths, and Statistics (Angela Marcantonio). In: Anthropological Linguistics Vol. 46, no. 4: 486-489.
Laakso, Johanna: Karhunkieli. Pyyhkäisyjä suomalais-ugrilaisten kielten tutkimukseen (A Bear Tongue. Views on the Research of the Finno-Ugric Languages). Helsinki: SKS, 1999.
Laakso, Johanna (ed.): Uralilaiset kansat (Uralic Peoples). Porvoo - Helsinki - Juva: WSOY, 1992, ISBN 951-0-16485-2.
Laakso, Johanna 2004. Sprachwissenschaftliche Spiegelfechterei (Angela Marcantonio: The Uralic language family. Facts, myths and statistics). In: Finnisch-ugrische Forschungen 58: 296-307.
Marcantonio, Angela: What Is the Linguistic Evidence to Support the Uralic Theory or Theories? - In Linguistica Uralica 40, 1, pp 40-45, 2004.
Marcantonio, Angela: The Uralic Language Family: Facts, Myths and Statistics. 2003.
Marcantonio, Angela, Pirjo Nummenaho, and Michela Salvagni: The "Ugric-Turkic Battle": A Critical Review. In Linguistica Uralica 37, 2, pp 81-102, 2001. Online version.
Ruhlen, Merritt, A Guide to the World's languages, Stanford, California (1987), pp. 64–71.
Saarikivi, Janne 2004. Review of: Angela Marcantonio. Uralic Language Family: Facts, Myths and Statistics. In: Journal of Linguistics 1/2004. p. 187-191.
Sammallahti, Pekka: Historical phonology of the Uralic languages. - In: Denis Sinor (ed.), The Uralic languages. Description, history and foreign influences. Leiden - New York - København - Köln: Brill, 1998.
Sammallahti, Pekka, Matti Morottaja: Säämi - suoma - säämi škovlasänikirje (Inari Sami - Finnish - Inari Sami School Dictionary). Helsset/Helsinki: Ruovttueatnan gielaid dutkanguovddaš/Kotimaisten kielten tutkimuskeskus, 1983, ISBN 951-9475-36-2.
Sammallahti, Pekka: Sámi - suoma - sámi sátnegirji (Northern Sami - Finnish - Northern Sami Dictionary). Ohcejohka/Utsjoki: Girjegiisá, 1993, ISBN 951-8939-28-4.
Sinor, Denis (ed.): Studies in Finno-Ugric Linguistics: In Honor of Alo Raun (Indiana University Uralic and Altaic Series: Volume 131). Indiana Univ Research, 1977, ISBN 0-933070-00-4.
Vikør, Lars S. (ed.): Fenno-Ugric. In: The Nordic Languages. Their Status and Interrelations. Novus Press, pp. 62-74, 1993.
Wiik, Kalevi: Eurooppalaisten juuret, Atena Kustannus Oy. Finland, 2002.


Языки народов СССР III. Финно-угорские и самодийские языки (Languages of the Peoples in the USSR III. Finno-Ugric and Samoyedic Languages). Москва (Moscow): Наука (Nauka), 1966. (Russian)
A magyar szókészlet finnugor elemei. Etimológiai szótár (The Hungarian Vocabulary of Finno-Ugric Origin. Etymological Dictionary). Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó, 1967-1978.


[edit] External links

Some Finno-Ugrian links A more comprehensive link collection
FAQ about Finno-Ugrian Languages
Linguistic Shadow-Boxing Johanna Laakso's book review of Angela Marcantonio's "The Uralic language family. Facts, myths and statistics"
Uralic Linguistics Vs. Voodoo Science! A collection of links about the "new paradigm" debate by Merlijn de Smit
Numbers in Asian languages Counting to ten in a variety of languages
Ugri.info Finno-Ugric peoples infobase
Finno-Ugric Electronic Library by the Finno-Ugric Information Center in Syktyvkar, Komi Republic (interface in Russian and English, texts in Mari, Komi, Udmurt, Erzya and Moksha languages): http://library.finugor.ru/
The Finno-Ugrics:The dying fish swims in water The Economist, December 20, 2005
"Ethnic origins of Finno-Ugric nations and modern Finno-Ugric nationalism in the Russian Federation" by Konstantin Zamyatin








v • d • e

Uralic languages





Baltic-Finnic

Estonian (Võro) · Finnish (Savonian dialects · Kven · Meänkieli) · Ingrian · Karelian (Ludic · Olonets Karelian) · Livonian · Veps · Votic






Volga-Finnic

Mari · Erzya · Moksha · Merya · Meshcherian · Muromian






Sami

Akkala · Inari · Kemi · Kildin · Lule · Northern · Pite · Skolt · Southern · Ter · Ume






Permic

Komi · Komi-Permyak · Udmurt






Ugric

Hungarian · Khanty · Mansi






Samoyedic

Enets · Yurats · Nenets · Nganasan · Kamassian · Koibal · Mator (Taygi) · Selkup






Italics indicate extinct languages








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finno-Ugric_languages"
Categories: Finno-Ugric languages | UralicHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since February 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2009 | Articles containing Russian language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Эрзянь
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Hornjoserbsce
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latina
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
Мокшень
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Sámegiella
Scots
Seeltersk
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Suomi
Svenska
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 11 March 2009, at 11:34.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
