













Anarcho-syndicalism - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Anarcho-syndicalism";
		var wgTitle = "Anarcho-syndicalism";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "49938";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281593052;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Anarcho-syndicalism

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Part of the
Philosophy series on


Anarchism







Schools
Agorism · Buddhist · Capitalist
Christian · Collectivist · Communist
Crypto-anarchism · Feminist
Free market · Green · Individualist
Infoanarchism · Insurrectionary
Leftist · Mutualist · Pacifist
Pananarchist · Philosophical
Platformist · Post-anarchist
Post-colonial  · Post-left
Primitivist · Social · Syndicalist
Vegan · Zen · Without adjectives






Theory · Practice
Anarchy · Black bloc
Class struggle  · Communes
Consensus democracy
Decentralization · Deep ecology
Direct action · Direct democracy
Dual power · Especifismo
Horizontalidad · Illegalism
Individual reclamation · Law
Participatory politics
Permanent Autonomous Zone
Prefigurative politics
Private defense agency
Propaganda of the deed
Refusal of work · Rewilding
Social ecology
Spontaneous order






Issues
Anarcho-capitalism · Animal rights
Capitalism · Criticisms · Islam
Lifestylism · Marxism · Nationalism
Orthodox Judaism · Religion
Violence






History
Amakasu Incident
Anarchist Catalonia
Anarchist Exclusion Act
Anarchy in Somalia
Australian Anarchist Centenary
Barcelona May Days
Carnival Against Capitalism
Escuela Moderna · Hague Congress
Haymarket affair
High Treason Incident
Congress of Amsterdam
Kate Sharpley Library
Kronstadt rebellion
Labadie Collection · LIP
Manifesto of the Sixteen
May 1968  · May Day
Paris Commune
Provo · Red inverted triangle
Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine
Spanish Revolution
Third Russian Revolution
Tragic Week · Trial of the thirty
1999 WTO Conference protest






Culture
Anarcho-punk · Arts
Black anarchism · Culture jamming
DIY culture · Freeganism
Independent Media Center
Infoshop · The Internationale
Jewish anarchism · Land and liberty
Lifestylism · Popular education
Property is theft!
Radical cheerleading
Radical environmentalism
Squatting · Symbolism
Terminology · A las barricadas






Economics
Agorism · Capitalism · Collectivism
Communism · Co-operatives
Counter-economics · Free market
Free school · Free store
Geolibertarianism · Gift economy
Market abolitionism · Mutual aid
Mutualism · Participatory economics
Really Really Free Market
Self-ownership · Syndicalism
Wage slavery
Workers' self-management






By region
Africa · Austria-Hungary · Brazil
Canada · China · Cuba · England
France · Greece · India · Ireland
Israel · Italy · Japan · Korea
Mexico · Poland · Russia · Spain
Sweden · Turkey · Ukraine
United States · Vietnam






Lists
Anarcho-punk bands · Books
Communities · Fictional characters
Jewish anarchists · Musicians
Organizations · Periodicals · Poets
Russian anarchists






Related topics
Anti-capitalism · Anti-communism
Anti-consumerism · Anti-corporatism
Anti-globalization · Antimilitarism
Anti-statism · Anti-war · Autarchism
Autonomism · Labour movement
Left communism · Libertarianism
Libertarian perspectives on revolution
Libertarian socialism
Situationist International




 


Anarchism portal
Philosophy portal
Politics portal



v • d • e



Anarcho-syndicalism is a branch of anarchism which focuses on the labour movement.[1] Syndicalisme is a French word meaning "trade unionism" – hence, the "syndicalism" qualification. Syndicalism is an alternative economic system. Anarcho-syndicalists view it as a potential force for revolutionary social change, replacing capitalism and the State with a new society democratically self-managed by workers. Anarcho-syndicalists seek to abolish the wage system, regarding it as "wage slavery," and state or private ownership of the means of production, which they believe lead to class divisions. Not all seek to abolish money per se. Ralph Chaplin states that "the ultimate aim of the General Strike as regards wages is to give to each producer the full product of his labor. The demand for better wages becomes revolutionary only when it is coupled with the demand that the exploitation of labor must cease."[2]
Anarcho-syndicalism remains a popular and active school of anarchism today and has many supporters as well as many currently active organizations. Anarcho-syndicalist trade unionists, being socialist anarchists, differ on anarchist economic arrangements from a collectivist anarchism type economic system to an anarcho-communist economic system.[3] Historically most anarcho-syndicalists have identified as anarcho-communists (such as Lucy Parsons) or anarcho-collectivists (such as Buenaventura Durruti).




Contents


1 Features
2 History
3 Emergence from revolutionary syndicalism
4 Relationship with party politics
5 Criticisms and responses
6 Organizations
7 See also
8 Further reading
9 References
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Features




Flag used by Anarcho-syndicalists.


The basic principles of anarcho-syndicalism are workers' solidarity, direct action, and workers' self-management. Workers’ solidarity means that anarcho-syndicalists believe all workers, no matter what their gender or ethnic group, are in a similar situation in regard to their bosses (class consciousness). Furthermore, it means that, in a capitalist system, any gains or losses made by some workers from or to bosses will eventually affect all workers. Therefore, to liberate themselves, all workers must support one another in their class conflict. Anarcho-syndicalists believe that only direct action – that is, action concentrated on directly attaining a goal, as opposed to indirect action, such as electing a representative to a government position – will allow workers to liberate themselves.[4] Moreover, anarcho-syndicalists believe that workers’ organizations – the organizations that struggle against the wage system, and which, in anarcho-syndicalist theory, will eventually form the basis of a new society – should be self-managing. They should not have bosses or "business agents"; rather, the workers should be able to make all the decisions that affect them themselves.
Rudolf Rocker was one of the most popular voices in the anarcho-syndicalist movement. He dedicated himself to the organisation of Jewish immigrant workers in London's East End and led the 1912 garment workers strike. He outlined a view of the origins of the movement, what it sought, and why it was important to the future of labour in his 1938 pamphlet Anarcho-Syndicalism.
In his article Anarchism and Anarcho-Syndicalism, Rocker points out that the anarcho-syndicalist union has a dual purpose, "1. To enforce the demands of the producers for the safeguarding and raising of their standard of living; 2. To acquaint the workers with the technical management of production and economic life in general and prepare them to take the socio-economic organism into their own hands and shape it according to socialist principles." In short, laying the foundations of the new society "within the shell of the old." Up to the First World War and the Bolshevik Revolution, anarcho-syndicalist unions and organizations were the dominant actors in the revolutionary left.

[edit] History
Hubert Lagardelle wrote that Pierre-Joseph Proudhon laid out the fundamental theories of anarcho-syndicalism, through his repudiation of both capitalism and the state, his flouting of political government, his idea of free, autonomous economic groups, and his view of struggle, not pacifism, as the core of humanity.[5]
The earliest expressions of anarcho-syndicalist structure and methods were formulated in the International Workingmen's Association or First International, particularly in the Jura federation. The First International, however, split between two main tendencies within the organization over the question of political, parliamentary action; the libertarian wing represented by Mikhail Bakunin and the statist wing represented by Karl Marx. Adherents of the former would go on to influence the development of the labour movement in Spain, France, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Latin America (see anarchism in Brazil and anarchism in Mexico), while orthodox Marxists would form mass-based labour and social democratic parties throughout Europe (initially grouped around the Second International), with major strongholds in Germany and England. Some Marxists, notably Anton Pannekoek, would formulate positions remarkably close to anarcho-syndicalism through council communism (see main article Anarchism and Marxism).
In 1895, the Confédération Générale du Travail (CGT) in France expressed fully the organizational structure and methods of revolutionary syndicalism influencing labour movements the world over. The CGT was modelled on the development of the Bourse de Travail (labour exchange), a workers' central organization which would encourage self-education and mutual aid, and facilitate communication with local workers' syndicates. Through a general strike, workers would take control of industry and services and self-manage society and facilitate production and consumption through the labour exchanges. The Charter of Amiens, adopted by the CGT in 1906, represents a key text in the development of revolutionary syndicalism rejecting parliamentarianism and political action in favour of revolutionary class struggle. The Central Organisation of the Workers of Sweden (SAC) (in Swedish the Sveriges Arbetares Centralorganisation), formed in 1910, are a notable example of an anarcho-syndicalist union influenced by the CGT. Today, the SAC is one the largest anarcho-syndicalist unions in the world in proportion to the population, with some strongholds in the public sector.
The International Workers Association, formed in 1922, is an international anarcho-syndicalist federation of various labour unions from different countries. At its peak, the International Workers Association represented millions of workers and competed directly for the hearts and minds of the working class with social democratic unions and parties. The Spanish Confederación Nacional del Trabajo played and still plays a major role in the Spanish labour movement. It was also an important force in the Spanish Civil War, organizing worker militias and facilitating the collectivization of vast sections of the industrial, logistical, and communications infrastructure, principally in Catalonia. Another Spanish anarcho-syndicalist union, the Confederacion General del Trabajo de España, is now the third largest union in Spain and the largest anarchist union with tens of thousands of members.
The Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), although not explicitly anarcho-syndicalist, were informed by developments in the broader revolutionary syndicalist milieu at the turn of the twentieth-century. At its founding congress in 1905, influential members with strong anarchist or anarcho-syndicalist sympathies like Thomas J. Haggerty, William Trautmann, and Lucy Parsons contributed to the union's overall revolutionary syndicalist orientation[6]. Lucy Parsons, in particular, was a veteran anarchist union organizer in Chicago from a previous generation, having participated in the struggle for the 8-hour day in Chicago and subsequent series of events which came to be known as the Haymarket Affair in 1886.

[edit] Emergence from revolutionary syndicalism
Although the terms anarcho-syndicalism and revolutionary syndicalism are often used interchangeably, the anarcho-syndicalist label was not widely used until the early 1920s (some credit Sam Mainwaring with coining the term[7]). “The term ‘anarcho-syndicalist’ only came into wide use in 1921-1922 when it was applied polemically as a pejorative term by communists to any syndicalists…who opposed increased control of syndicalism by the communist parties.”[8] In fact, the original statement of aims and principles of the International Workers Association (drafted in 1922) refers not to anarcho-syndicalism, but to revolutionary syndicalism or revolutionary unionism [9][10], depending on the translation.
The use of the term "anarcho-syndicalist" signifies the increasing gap between proponents of orthodox, political Marxism and unionists who advocated complete independence from political parties following the Russian Revolution, and the shift to a more politically doctrinaire version of syndicalism. As a broad ideological heading, prior to the First World War and the Bolshevik seizure of state power in Russia, revolutionary syndicalism grouped numerous left-wing tendencies together united on a class basis with no official party affiliation, as outlined in the Charter of Amiens.

[edit] Relationship with party politics
The anarcho-syndicalist orientation of many early American labour unions arguably played an important role in the formation of the American political spectrum, most significantly of the Industrial Workers of the World. The United States is the only industrialized ("first world") country that does not have a major labour-based political party.[11] This has not always been the case. In 1912, for example, Eugene Debs (a founding member of the IWW) polled 6% of the popular vote as the Socialist Party presidential candidate - a significant portion of the popular vote considering that this was 8 years before the adoption of universal suffrage in the U.S. Some political scientists would, in part, attribute the lack of an American labour party to the single member plurality electoral system, which tends to favour a two-party system. This phenomenon is sometimes referred to as Duverger's law.
Controversially, the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo participated in the Spanish Republican Popular Front government in the Spanish Civil War. In November 1936, four anarchist ministers—Garcia Oliver, Frederica Montseny, Joan Peiró, and Juan López—accepted positions in the government. This move was criticized by rank-and-file groups like the Friends of Durruti.

[edit] Criticisms and responses
Anarcho-syndicalism has been criticised as anachronistic by some contemporary anarchists.[12] Murray Bookchin in 1992 spoke against its reliance on an outdated view of work:


“
As "practical" and "realistic" as anarcho-syndicalism may seem, it represents in my view an archaic ideology rooted in a narrowly economistic notion of bourgeois interest, indeed of a sectorial interest as such. It relies on the persistence of social forces like the factory system and the traditional class consciousness of the industrial proletariat that are waning radically in the Euro-American world in an era of indefinable social relations and ever-broadening social concerns. Broader movements and issues are now on the horizon of modern society that, while they must necessarily involve workers, require a perspective that is larger than the factory, trade union, and a proletarian orientation.[13]
”


Other anarchist tendencies have described anarcho-syndicalism as "self-managed capitalism",[citation needed] or as the primitivist John Zerzan describes it, the "self-management of alienation."[citation needed]
Syndicalists think that the anarchist and union movements can be fused into one while other anarchists would disagree, viewing unions as holding back or mediating workers' struggles with capital[citation needed]. Anarcho-syndicalist Eugene Varlin defended anarcho-syndicalism, arguing


“
"the enormous advantage of making people accustomed to group life and thus preparing them for a more extended social organisation. They accustom people not only to get along with one another and to understand one another, but also to organise themselves, to discuss, and to reason from a collective perspective." and that unions "form the natural elements of the social edifice of the future; it is they who can be easily transformed into producers associations; it is they who can make the social ingredients and the organisation of production work."[14]
”


Anarcho-syndicalism is criticized for de-emphasising the importance of explicitly anarchist, or non-workplace groups and federations, arguing that revolutionary industrial and community unions are enough in themselves[citation needed]. Few anarcho-syndicalists deny the need for political organization and many today believe that union activity would lead to federation activity amongst free workers,


“
"Revolutionary Syndicalism basing itself on the class-war, aims at the union of all manual and intellectual workers in economic fighting organisations struggling for their emancipation from the yoke of wage slavery and from the oppression of the State. Its goal consists in the re-organisation of social life on the basis of free Communism, by means of the revolutionary action of the working-class itself. It considers that the economic organisations of the proletariat are alone capable of realising this aim, and, in consequence, its appeal is addressed to workers in their capacity of producers and creators of social riches, in opposition to the modern political labour parties which can never be considered at all from the points of view of economic re-organisation."[15]
”


Direct action, being one of the main staples of anarcho-syndicalism, would extend into the political sphere according to its supporters. To them, the labour council is the federation of all workplace branches of all industries in a geographical area "territorial basis of organisation linkage brought all the workers from one area together and fomented working-class solidarity over and before corporate solidarity."[16] Rudolf Rocker argues:


“
"based on the principles of Federalism, on free combination from below upwards, putting the right of self-determination of every member above everything else and recognising only the organic agreement of all on the basis of like interests and common convictions."[17]
”


Thus, anarcho-syndicalism is not apolitical but instead sees political and economic activity as being one in the same. And, unlike some critics propose, anarcho-syndicalism is different from reformist union activity in that it aims to completely obliterate capitalism "(Anarcho-syndicalism) has a double aim: with tireless persistence, it must pursue betterment of the working class's current conditions. But, without letting themselves become obsessed with this passing concern, the workers should take care to make possible and imminent the essential act of comprehensive emancipation: the expropriation of capital."[18]
While collectivist and communist anarchists criticize syndicalism as having the potential to exclude the voices of citizens and consumers outside of the union, anarcho-syndicalists argue that labor councils will work outside of the workplace and within the community to encourage community and consumer participation in economic and political activity (even workers and consumers outside of the union or nation) and will work to form and maintain the institutions necessary in any society such as schools, libraries, homes, etc. Murray Bookchin argues


“
"[a]t the same time that syndicalism exerts this unrelenting pressure on capitalism, it tries to build the new social order within the old. The unions and the 'labour councils' are not merely means of struggle and instruments of social revolution; they are also the very structure around which to build a free society. The workers are to be educated [by their own activity within the union] in the job of destroying the old propertied order and in the task of reconstructing a stateless, libertarian society. The two go together."[19]
”



[edit] Organizations




The Barcelona offices of the CNT.



International Workers Association (IWA-AIT)
Associação Internacional dos Trabalhadores - Secção Portuguesa (AIT-SP) Portugal
Anarho-sindikalisticka inicijativa (ASI-MUR) Serbia
Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (CNT-AIT) Spain
Confédération Nationale du Travail (CNT-AIT & CNT-F) France
Direct! Switzerland
Federace Sociálních Anarchistù (FSA-MAP) Czech Rep
Federação Operária do Río Grande do Sul - Confederação Operária Brasileira (FORGS-COB-AIT) Brazil
Federación Obrera Regional Argentina (FORA-AIT) Argentina
Freie Arbeiterinnen- und Arbeiter-Union (FAU) Germany
Konfederatsiya Revolyutsionnikh Anarkho-Sindikalistov (KRAS-IWA) Russia
Федерация на Анархистите в България (FAB) Bulgaria
Mreža anarhosindikalista i anarhosindikalistkinja (MASA) Croatia
Norsk Syndikalistisk Forbund (NSF-IAA) Norway
Priama Akcia (PA-IWA) Slovakia
Solidarity Federation (SF-IWA) Britain
Unione Sindacale Italiana (USI) Italy
Workers Solidarity Alliance USA
FESAL (European Federation of Alternative Syndicalism)
Confederación General del Trabajo de España (CGT) Spain
Ελευθεριακή Συνδικαλιστική Ένωση (ESE) Greece
Freie ArbeiterInnen Union Schweiz (FAUCH) Switzerland
Workers Initiative (IP) Poland
Industrial Workers of the World (not explicitly anarcho-syndicalist: see above)
SKT Siberian Confederation of Labour
Swedish Anarcho-syndicalist Youth Federation (Syndikalistiska Ungdomsförbundet, SUF) Sweden
Central Organisation of the Workers of Sweden (Sveriges Arbetares Centralorganisation, SAC) Sweden
Antiauthoritarian Movement (Αντιεξουσιαστίκή Κίνηση) (ΑΚ) Greece
Courant Syndicaliste Revolutionnaire (CSR) France
Workers' Solidarity Federation (WSF) South Africa
Awareness League (AL) Nigeria


[edit] See also

Participatory Economics
General strike
Council Communism
Libertarian socialism
CNT
FAI
Trade unions in South Africa
List of federations of trade unions
Workers' self-management
Kronstadt Rebellion
The Dispossessed
Wildcat strike action


[edit] Further reading

Rocker, Rudolf, Anarchism and Anarcho-Syndicalism
Rocker, Rudolf, Anarcho-Syndicalism
Lenny Flank (ed), IWW: A Documentary History, Red and Black Publishers, St Petersburg, Florida, 2007. ISBN 978-0-9791813-5-1


[edit] References


^ Georges Sorel in Stuart Isaacs & Chris Sparks, Political Theorists in Context (Routledge, 2004), p. 248. ISBN 0-415-20126-8
^ Chaplin, Ralph, 1933, The General Strike for Industrial Freedom, p. 6.
^ Iain Mckay, ed (2008). "What types of anarchism are there?". An Anarchist FAQ. Stirling: AK Press. ISBN 1902593901. OCLC 182529204. 
^ Rudolf Rocker, Anarcho-Syndicalism: Theory and Practice (AK Press, 2004), p. 73, ISBN 1-902-59392-8
^ Jameson, J. F., The American Historical Review (American Historical Association, 1895), p. 731.
^ Salvatore Salerno, Red November, Black November: Culture and Community in the Industrial Workers of the World (State University of New York Press, 1989), pp. 69-90, ISBN 0-791-40089-1
^ Mainwaring, Sam, 1841-1907 | libcom.org
^ David Berry, A History of the French Anarchist Movement, 1917-1945, (Greenwood, 2002), p. 134. ISBN 0-313-32026-8
^ "Principles of Revolutionary Syndicalism", Anarcho-Syndicalist Review
^ "The Statutes of Revolutionary Unionism (IWA)", The International Workers Association (IWA)
^ Lipset, Seymour Martin and Marks, Gary, It Didn’t Happen Here: Why Socialism Failed in the United States (W. W. Norton & Company, 2001). ISBN 0-393-32254-8
^ Heider, Ulrike and Bode, Ulrike, Anarchism: Left, Right and Green (San Francisco: City Lights Books, 1994), p. 4. ISBN 0-872-86289-5
^ Murray Bookchin, The Ghost of Anarcho-Syndicalism, online at Anarchy ArchivesAccessed 27 January 2009
^ quoted by Julian P.W. Archer, The First International in France, 1864-1872: Its Origins, Theories, and Impact (University Press of America, 1997), p. 196. ISBN 0-761-80887-6
^ The Principles of Revolutionary Syndicalism, point 1, Adopted December 1922 by the Berlin Congress of the International Workers' Association
^ Romero Maura, "The Spanish Case", contained in Anarchism Today, D. Apter and J. Joll (eds.), p. 75
^ Rudolf Rocker, Anarcho-Syndicalism, op. cit., p. 53
^ Emile Pouget in No Gods, No Masters: An Anthology of Anarchism, edited by Daniel Guerin (AK Press, 2005), p. 71. ISBN 1-904-85925-9
^ Murray Bookchin in No Gods, No Masters: An Anthology of Anarchism, ibid., p. 121. ISBN 1-904-85925-9



[edit] External links





This section may contain lists of external links or see also entries discouraged by Wikipedia's Manual of Style. Please help integrate this content into the body of the article using in-text citations.



A comprehensive list of Anarcho-syndicalist organizations
What is revolutionary syndicalism? An on-going historical series on anarcho-syndicalism and revolutionary syndicalism from a communist perspective
Anarcho-Syndicalism 101
Anarcho-Syndicalist Review
Syndicalism: Myth and Reality
Revolutionary Unionism: Yesterday, Today, Tommorrow by Dan Jakopovich
The Bourgeois Roots of Anarcho-syndicalism by Feral Faun
What is anarcho-syndicalism? A support by An Anarchist FAQ




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anarcho-syndicalism"
Categories: Anarchism by form | Labor | Syndicalism | Political ideologies | Economic ideologies | History of anarchism | History of social movements | Industrial Workers of the World | Anarchist economic schoolsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Aragonés
Asturianu
Bân-lâm-gú
Български
Català
Česky
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Français
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
עברית
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 23:10.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
