













Bone - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Bone";
		var wgTitle = "Bone";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "4099";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280634150;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Bone

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the skeletal organs.  For the tissue, see Osseous tissue. For other uses, see Bone (disambiguation).




Drawing of a human femur.


Bones are rigid organs that form part of the endoskeleton of vertebrates. They function to move, support, and protect the various organs of the body, produce red and white blood cells and store minerals. Bone tissue is a type of dense connective tissue. Because bones come in a variety of shapes and have a complex internal and external structure they are lightweight, yet strong and hard, in addition to fulfilling their many other functions. One of the types of tissue that makes up bone is the mineralized osseous tissue, also called bone tissue, that gives it rigidity and a honeycomb-like three-dimensional internal structure. Other types of tissue found in bones include marrow, endosteum and periosteum, nerves, blood vessels and cartilage. There are 206 bones in the adult human body[1] and about 300 in an infant.[2]




Contents


1 Functions
2 Characteristics
3 Structure

3.1 Gross anatomy
3.2 Individual bone structure

3.2.1 Compact bone or (Cortical bone)
3.2.2 Trabecular bone




4 Cellular structure
5 Molecular structure

5.1 Matrix

5.1.1 Inorganic
5.1.2 Organic


5.2 Woven or lamellar


6 Types
7 Formation

7.1 Endochondral ossification
7.2 Bone marrow


8 Remodeling

8.1 Purpose

8.1.1 Calcium balance
8.1.2 Repair




9 Paracrine cell signalling

9.1 Osteoblast stimulation
9.2 Osteoclast inhibition


10 Disorders

10.1 Osteoporosis
10.2 Other


11 Osteology
12 Alternatives to bony endoskeletons
13 Exposed bone
14 Terminology
15 See also
16 Footnotes
17 References
18 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Functions
Bones have nine main functions:
Mechanical

Protection — Bones can serve to protect internal organs, such as the skull protecting the brain or the ribs protecting the heart and lungs.
Shape — Bones provide a frame to keep the body supported.
Movement — Bones, skeletal muscles, tendons, ligaments and joints function together to generate and transfer forces so that individual body parts or the whole body can be manipulated in three-dimensional space. The interaction between bone and muscle is studied in biomechanics.
Sound transduction — Bones are important in the mechanical aspect of hearing.

Synthetic

Blood production — The marrow, located within the medullary cavity of long bones and interstices of cancellous bone, produces blood cells in a process called haematopoiesis.

Metabolic

Mineral storage — Bones act as reserves of minerals important for the body, most notably calcium and phosphorus.
Growth factor storage — Mineralized bone matrix stores important growth factors such as insulin-like growth factors, transforming growth factor, bone morphogenic proteins and others.
Fat Storage — The yellow bone marrow acts as a storage reserve of fatty acids
Acid-base balance — Bone buffers the blood against excessive pH changes by absorbing or releasing alkaline salts.
Detoxification — Bone tissues can also store heavy metals and other foreign elements, removing them from the blood and reducing their effects on other tissues. These can later be gradually released for excretion.[citation needed]


[edit] Characteristics
The primary tissue of bone, osseous tissue, is a relatively hard and lightweight composite material, formed mostly of calcium phosphate in the chemical arrangement termed calcium hydroxylapatite (this is the osseous tissue that gives bones their rigidity). It has relatively high compressive strength but poor tensile strength of 104-121 MPa, meaning it resists pushing forces well, but not pulling forces. While bone is essentially brittle, it does have a significant degree of elasticity, contributed chiefly by collagen. All bones consist of living and dead cells embedded in the mineralized organic matrix that makes up the osseous tissue.

[edit] Structure

[edit] Gross anatomy
See also: Human skeleton and List of bones of the human skeleton







v • d • e

Bones (Axial skeleton, Appendicular skeleton)





VERTEBRAL COLUMN

vertebrae (cervical, thoracic, lumbar) · sacrum · coccyx






THORAX

sternum · rib






cranial bones of SKULL

occipital · parietal · frontal · temporal  · sphenoid · ethmoid






facial bones of SKULL

nasal · maxilla · lacrimal · zygomatic · palatine · inferior nasal conchae · vomer · mandible · THROAT: hyoid (greater cornu, lesser cornu, body)






UPPER EXTREMITY

SHOULDER GIRDLE:clavicle · scapula · ARM: humerus · ulna · radius- HAND:carpals (scaphoid · lunate bone · triquetral · pisiform · trapezium · trapezoid · capitate · hamate) · metacarpals · phalanges (prox, int, dist)






LOWER EXTREMITY

PELVIS:pelvis (ilium, ischium, pubis) · LEG: femur · patella · fibula · tibia · FOOT: tarsals (calcaneus, talus, navicular, cuneiform, cuboid ) · metatarsals · phalanges (prox, int, dist)






MIDDLE EAR OSSICLES

malleus · incus · stapes













v • d • e

Bones of head and neck: the facial bones of the skull





Maxilla





Surfaces


Anterior: fossae (Incisive fossa, Canine fossa) · Infraorbital foramen · Anterior nasal spine
Infratemporal: Alveolar canals · Maxillary tuberosity
Orbital: Infraorbital groove · Infraorbital canal
Nasal: Pterygopalatine canal







Processes


Zygomatic process
Frontal process (Agger nasi, Anterior lacrimal crest)
Alveolar process
Palatine process (Incisive foramen, Incisive canals, Foramina of Scarpa, Incisive bone, Anterior nasal spine)







Other


Body of maxilla · Maxillary sinus









Zygomatic

Orbital process (Zygomatico-orbital) · Temporal process (Zygomaticotemporal) · Lateral process (Zygomaticofacial)






Palatine





Fossae


Pterygopalatine fossa · Pterygoid fossa







Plates


Horizontal plate (Posterior nasal spine) · Perpendicular plate (Pterygopalatine canal, Sphenopalatine foramen, Pyramidal process)







Processes


Orbital · Sphenoidal









Mandible





Body


external surface (Symphysis menti, Mental protuberance, Mental foramen) · internal surface (Mental spine, Mylohyoid line, Sublingual fovea, Submandibular fovea) · Alveolar part of mandible







Ramus


Mylohyoid groove (Mandibular canal, Lingula) · Mandibular foramen · Angle
Coronoid process · Mandibular notch · Condyloid process · Pterygoid fovea









Minor/
nose

Nasal bone: Internasal suture · Nasal foramina
Inferior nasal concha: Ethmoidal process · Maxillary process
Vomer: Wing
Lacrimal: Posterior lacrimal crest · Lacrimal groove · Lacrimal hamulus













v • d • e

Bones of head and neck: the cranium of the skull





Occipital





Squama


external (Inion/External occipital protuberance, Nuchal lines) · planes (Occipital, Nuchal) · internal (Cruciform eminence, Internal occipital protuberance, Sagittal sulcus, Internal occipital crest)







Lateral parts


Condyle (Condyloid fossa, Condylar canal) · Hypoglossal canal · jugular (Jugular process, Jugular tubercle)







Basilar part


Pharyngeal tubercle







Other


Foramen magnum









Parietal

Parietal eminence · Temporal line · Parietal foramen






Frontal





Squama


Frontal suture · Frontal eminence · external (Superciliary arches, Glabella) · foramina (Supraorbital, Cecum) · Zygomatic process · internal (Sagittal sulcus, Frontal crest)







Orbital part


Ethmoidal notch · Lacrimal fossa · Trochlear fovea · Frontal sinus · Frontonasal duct









Temporal





Squama


Articular tubercle · Suprameatal triangle · Mandibular fossa · Petrotympanic fissure · Zygomatic process







Mastoid part


Mastoid foramen · Mastoid process (Mastoid cells) · Mastoid notch · Occipital groove · Sigmoid sulcus · Mastoid antrum (Entrance)







Petrous part


Carotid canal · Facial canal (Hiatus) · Internal auditory meatus · Aqueduct of cochlea · Stylomastoid foramen
fossae (Subarcuate fossa, Jugular fossa) · canaliculi (Inferior tympanic, Mastoid) · Styloid process · Petrosquamous suture
(note: ossicles in petrous part, but not part of temporal bone)







Tympanic part


Suprameatal spine









Sphenoid





Surfaces


Superior surface: Sella turcica (Dorsum sellae, Tuberculum sellae, Hypophysial fossa, Posterior clinoid processes) · Ethmoidal spine · Chiasmatic groove · Middle clinoid process · Petrosal process · Clivus
Lateral surface: Carotid groove · Sphenoidal lingula
Anterior surface: Sphenoidal sinuses







Great wings


foramina (Rotundum, Ovale, Vesalii, Spinosum) · Spine · Infratemporal crest · Sulcus for auditory tube







Small wings


Superior orbital fissure · Anterior clinoid process · Optic canal







Pterygoid
processes


fossae (Pterygoid, Scaphoid) · pterygoid plates (Lateral, Medial) · Pterygoid canal · Hamulus







Other


Body · Sphenoidal conchae









Ethmoid





Plates


Cribriform plate (Crista galli, Olfactory foramina) · Perpendicular plate







Surfaces


Lateral surface Orbital lamina · Uncinate process
Medial surface Superior nasal concha · Superior meatus · Middle nasal concha · Middle meatus







Labyrinth


Ethmoid sinus · ethmoidal foramina (Posterior, Anterior)
















v • d • e

Bones of head and neck: cranial sutures, fontanelles, and related regions





Cranial sutures

Cranial: frontoethmoidal – frontal or metopic (frontal/frontal) – coronal (frontal/parietal) – occipitomastoid (occipital/temporal) – lambdoid (parietal/temporal) – sagittal (parietal/parietal) – sphenoethmoidal – sphenofrontal – sphenoparietal – sphenosquamosal (sphenoid/temporal) – sphenopetrosal (sphenoid/temporal) – squamosal (temporal/parietal) – petrosquamous (temporal/temporal)
Facial: palatomaxillary suture
Cranial–facial: sphenozygomatic – zygomaticotemporal – zygomaticofrontal






Fontanelles

anterior – posterior – sphenoidal – mastoid






Foramina of multiple bones

inferior orbital fissure – foramen lacerum – jugular foramen – nasolacrimal canal






Fossae

anterior cranial fossa – middle cranial fossa – posterior cranial fossa – cranial cavity






Other compound structures

Cranial: asterion – pterion – calvaria – stephanion – bregma – lambda
Facial: nasion
Cranial–facial: dacryon – zygomatic arch – temporal fossa – infratemporal fossa – pterygomaxillary fissure – pterygopalatine fossa













v • d • e

Bones of upper limbs





Pectoral girdle,
clavicle

conoid tubercle – trapezoid line – costal tuberosity – subclavian groove






Scapula

fossae (subscapular, supraspinatous, infraspinatous) – suprascapular notch – glenoid cavity
tubercles (infraglenoid, supraglenoid) – spine of scapula – acromion – coracoid process
borders (superior, lateral/axillary, medial/vertebral) – angles (superior, inferior, lateral)






Humerus

upper extremity: necks (anatomical, surgical) – tubercles (greater, lesser) – intertubercular sulcus
body: radial sulcus – deltoid tuberosity
lower extremity: capitulum – trochlea – epicondyles (lateral, medial) – supracondylar ridges (lateral, medial) – fossae (radial, coronoid, olecranon)






Forearm

radius: upper extremity (head, tuberosity) – body – lower extremity (ulnar notch, styloid process)
ulna: upper extremity (tuberosity, olecranon, coronoid process, radial notch, trochlear notch) – body – lower extremity (head, styloid process)






Hand

carpus: scaphoid – lunate – triquetral – pisiform – trapezium – trapezoid – capitate – hamate (hamulus)
metacarpus: 1st metacarpal – 2nd – 3rd – 4th – 5th
phalanges of the hand: proximal – intermediate – distal













v • d • e

Bones of torso





Sternum

Suprasternal notch, Manubrium, Sternal angle, Body of sternum, Xiphisternal joint, Xiphoid process






Rib

specific ribs (1, 2, 9, 10, 11, 12, false – 8–12, floating – 11–12) – parts (Angle, Tubercle, Costal groove, Neck, Head)






Vertebra





General structures


body of vertebra, vertebral arch (pedicle, lamina, vertebral notch), foramina (vertebral, intervertebral), processes (transverse, articular/zygapophysis, spinous), spinal canal







Cervical vertebrae


C1 (anterior arch, posterior arch, lateral mass), C2 (dens), C3, C4, C5, C6, C7
anterior tubercle, posterior tubercle, foramen transversarium







Thoracic vertebrae


T1, T2, T3, T4, T5, T6, T7, T8, T9, T10, T11, T12
costal facets (superior, inferior, transverse)







Lumbar vertebrae


accessory process, mammillary process, L5







Sacrum


pelvic surface (anterior sacral foramina), dorsal surface (posterior sacral foramina, median sacral crest, medial sacral crest, lateral sacral crest), lateral surface (sacral tuberosity), base, sacral hiatus – presacral space – sacral promontory – sacral canal  – ala of sacrum – sacrovertebral angle







Coccyx


 
















v • d • e

Bones of lower limbs





Femur





upper extremity


head (fovea) · neck · greater trochanter (trochanteric fossa) · lesser trochanter · intertrochanteric line · intertrochanteric crest







body


linea aspera · gluteal tuberosity / third trochanter · pectineal line







lower extremity


adductor tubercle · patellar surface · epicondyles (lateral, medial) · condyles (lateral, medial) · intercondylar fossa









Crus





Tibia






upper extremity


condyles (lateral, medial) · intercondylar eminence (lateral/medial intercondylar tubercle) · posterior/anterior intercondylar area







body


tuberosity · soleal line







lower extremity


medial malleolus · fibular notch










Fibula


head · body · lateral malleolus







Other


patella









Foot





Tarsus


calcaneus (sustentaculum tali, trochlear process) · talus (body, neck, head) · navicular · cuboid · cuneiform (medial, intermediate, lateral)







Metatarsus


1st metatarsal · 2nd · 3rd · 4th · 5th







Other


phalanges of the foot
















v • d • e

Bones of pelvis / pelvic cavity





General

sacrum · coccyx · hip bone






Ilium





body


arcuate line







wing


gluteal lines (posterior, anterior, inferior)
iliac spines (anterior superior, anterior inferior, posterior superior, posterior inferior)
other: crest · tuberosity · fossa









Ischium





body


ischial spine · lesser sciatic notch







superior ramus


tuberosity of the ischium







inferior ramus


no substructures









Pubis





body


pubic crest







superior ramus


pubic tubercle · obturator crest







inferior ramus


pectineal line









Compound

acetabulum (acetabular notch) · iliopubic eminence / iliopectineal line · linea terminalis · ischiopubic ramus / pubic arch
obturator foramen · greater sciatic foramen / greater sciatic notch · lesser sciatic foramen
lesser pelvis (pelvic inlet, pelvic brim, pelvic outlet) · greater pelvis







[edit] Individual bone structure











A femur with a cortex of compact bone and medulla of trabecular bone


Bone is not a uniformly solid material, but rather has some spaces between its hard elements.

[edit] Compact bone or (Cortical bone)
The hard outer layer of bones is composed of compact bone tissue, so-called due to its minimal gaps and spaces. This tissue gives bones their smooth, white, and solid appearance, and accounts for 80% of the total bone mass of an adult skeleton. Compact bone may also be referred to as dense bone.

[edit] Trabecular bone
Filling the interior of the organ is the trabecular bone tissue (an open cell porous network also called cancellous or spongy bone) which is composed of a network of rod- and plate-like elements that make the overall organ lighter and allowing room for blood vessels and marrow. Trabecular bone accounts for the remaining 20% of total bone mass, but has nearly ten times the surface area of compact bone.

[edit] Cellular structure
There are several types of cells constituting the bone;

Osteoblasts are mononucleate bone-forming cells which descend from osteoprogenitor cells. They are located on the surface of osteoid seams and make a protein mixture known as osteoid, which mineralizes to become bone. Osteoid is primarily composed of Type I collagen. Osteoblasts also manufacture hormones, such as prostaglandins, to act on the bone itself. They robustly produce alkaline phosphatase, an enzyme that has a role in the mineralisation of bone, as well as many matrix proteins. Osteoblasts are the immature bone cells.


Bone lining cells are essentially inactive osteoblasts. They cover all of the available bone surface and function as a barrier for certain ions.
Osteocytes originate from osteoblasts which have migrated into and become trapped and surrounded by bone matrix which they themselves produce. The spaces which they occupy are known as lacunae. Osteocytes have many processes which reach out to meet osteoblasts and other osteocytes probably for the purposes of communication. Their functions include to varying degrees: formation of bone, matrix maintenance and calcium homeostasis. They have also been shown to act as mechano-sensory receptors—regulating the bone's response to stress and mechanical load. They are mature bone cells.


Osteoclasts are the cells responsible for bone resorption (remodeling of bone to reduce its volume). Osteoclasts are large, multinucleated cells located on bone surfaces in what are called Howship's lacunae or resorption pits. These lacunae, or resorption pits, are left behind after the breakdown of the bone surface. Because the osteoclasts are derived from a monocyte stem-cell lineage, they are equipped with phagocytic like mechanisms similar to circulating macrophages. Osteoclasts mature and/or migrate to discrete bone surfaces. Upon arrival, active enzymes, such as tartrate resistant acid phosphatase, are secreted against the mineral substrate.


[edit] Molecular structure

[edit] Matrix
The majority of bone is made of the bone matrix. It has inorganic and organic parts. Bone is formed by the hardening of this matrix entrapping the cells. When these cells become entrapped from osteoblasts they become osteocytes.

[edit] Inorganic
The inorganic is mainly crystalline mineral salts and calcium, which is present in the form of hydroxylapatite. The matrix is initially laid down as unmineralised osteoid (manufactured by osteoblasts). Mineralisation involves osteoblasts secreting vesicles containing alkaline phosphatase. This cleaves the phosphate groups and acts as the foci for calcium and phosphate deposition. The vesicles then rupture and act as a centre for crystals to grow on.

[edit] Organic
The organic part of matrix is mainly composed of Type I collagen. This is synthesised intracellularly as tropocollagen and then exported, forming fibrils. The organic part is also composed of various growth factors, the functions of which are not fully known. These factors present include glycosaminoglycans, osteocalcin, osteonectin, bone sialo protein and Cell Attachment Factor. One of the main things that distinguishes the matrix of a bone from that of another cell is that the matrix in bone is hard.

[edit] Woven or lamellar




Collagen fibres of woven bone


Bone is first deposited as woven bone, in a disorganized structure with a high proportion of osteocytes in young and in healing injuries. Woven bone is weaker, with a small number of randomly oriented collagen fibers, but forms quickly. It is replaced by lamellar bone, which is highly organized in concentric sheets with a low proportion of osteocytes. Lamellar bone is stronger and filled with many collagen fibers parallel to other fibers in the same layer (these parallel columns are called osteons). The fibers run in opposite directions in alternating layers, much like plywood, assisting in the bone's ability to resist torsion forces. After a break, woven bone quickly forms and is gradually replaced by slow-growing lamellar bone on pre-existing calcified hyaline cartilage through a process known as "bony substitution."

[edit] Types







There are five types of bones in the human body: long, short, flat, irregular and sesamoid.

Long bones are characterized by a shaft, the diaphysis, that is much greater in length than width. They are comprised mostly of compact bone and lesser amounts of marrow, which is located within the medullary cavity, and spongy bone. Most bones of the limbs, including those of the fingers and toes, are long bones. The exceptions are those of the wrist, ankle and kneecap.
Short bones are roughly cube-shaped, and have only a thin layer of compact bone surrounding a spongy interior. The bones of the wrist and ankle are short bones, as are the sesamoid bones.
Flat bones are thin and generally curved, with two parallel layers of compact bones sandwiching a layer of spongy bone. Most of the bones of the skull are flat bones, as is the sternum.
Irregular bones do not fit into the above categories. They consist of thin layers of compact bone surrounding a spongy interior. As implied by the name, their shapes are irregular and complicated. The bones of the spine and hips are irregular bones.
Sesamoid bones are bones embedded in tendons. Since they act to hold the tendon further away from the joint, the angle of the tendon is increased and thus the leverage of the muscle is increased. Examples of sesamoid bones are the patella and the pisiform.


[edit] Formation
The formation of bone during the fetal stage of development occurs by two processes: Intramembranous ossification and endochondral ossification.
Intramembranous ossification mainly occurs during formation of the flat bones of the skull; the bone is formed from mesenchyme tissue. The steps in intramembranous ossification are:

Development of ossification center
Calcification
Formation of trabeculae
Development of periosteum


[edit] Endochondral ossification




Endochondrial ossification


Endochondral ossification, on the other hand, occurs in long bones, such as limbs; the bone is formed from cartilage. The steps in endochondral ossification are:

Development of cartilage model
Growth of cartilage model
Development of the primary ossification center
Development of the secondary ossification center
Formation of articular cartilage and epiphyseal plate

Endochondral ossification begins with points in the cartilage called "primary ossification centers." They mostly appear during fetal development, though a few short bones begin their primary ossification after birth. They are responsible for the formation of the diaphyses of long bones, short bones and certain parts of irregular bones. Secondary ossification occurs after birth, and forms the epiphyses of long bones and the extremities of irregular and flat bones. The diaphysis and both epiphyses of a long bone are separated by a growing zone of cartilage (the epiphyseal plate). When the child reaches skeletal maturity (18 to 25 years of age), all of the cartilage is replaced by bone, fusing the diaphysis and both epiphyses together (epiphyseal closure).

[edit] Bone marrow
Bone marrow can be found in almost any bone that holds cancellous tissue. In newborns, all such bones are filled exclusively with red marrow , but as the child ages it is mostly replaced by yellow, or fatty marrow. In adults, red marrow is mostly found in the marrow bones of the femur, the ribs, the vertebrae and pelvic bones.

[edit] Remodeling
Remodeling or bone turnover is the process of resorption followed by replacement of bone with little change in shape and occurs throughout a person's life. Osteoblasts and osteoclasts, coupled together via paracrine cell signalling, are referred to as bone remodeling units.

[edit] Purpose
The purpose of remodeling is to regulate calcium homeostasis, repair micro-damaged bones (from everyday stress) but also to shape and sculpture the skeleton during growth.

[edit] Calcium balance
The process of bone resorption by the osteoclasts releases stored calcium into the systemic circulation and is an important process in regulating calcium balance. As bone formation actively fixes circulating calcium in its mineral form, removing it from the bloodstream, resorption actively unfixes it thereby increasing circulating calcium levels. These processes occur in tandem at site-specific locations.

[edit] Repair
Repeated stress, such as weight-bearing exercise or bone healing, results in the bone thickening at the points of maximum stress (Wolff's law). It has been hypothesized that this is a result of bone's piezoelectric properties, which cause bone to generate small electrical potentials under stress.[3]

[edit] Paracrine cell signalling
The action of osteoblasts and osteoclasts are controlled by a number of chemical factors which either promote or inhibit the activity of the bone remodelling cells, controlling the rate at which bone is made, destroyed or changed in shape. The cells also use paracrine signalling to control the activity of each other.

[edit] Osteoblast stimulation
Osteoblasts can be stimulated to increase bone mass through increased secretion of osteoid and by inhibiting the ability of osteoclasts to break down osseous tissue.
Bone building through increased secretion of osteoid is stimulated by the secretion of growth hormone by the pituitary, thyroid hormone and the sex hormones (estrogens and androgens). These hormones also promote increased secretion of osteoprotegerin.[4] Osteoblasts can also be induced to secrete a number of cytokines that promote reabsorbtion of bone by stimulating osteoclast activity and differentiation from progenitor cells. Vitamin D, parathyroid hormone and stimulation from osteocytes induce osteoblasts to increase secretion of RANK-ligand and interleukin 6, which cytokines then stimulate increased reabsorbtion of bone by osteoclasts. These same compounds also increase secretion of macrophage colony-stimulating factor by osteoblasts, which promotes the differentiation of progenitor cells into osteoclasts, and decrease secretion of osteoprotegerin.

[edit] Osteoclast inhibition
The rate at which osteoclasts resorb bone is inhibited by calcitonin and osteoprotegerin. Calcitonin is produced by parafollicular cells in the thyroid gland, and can bind to receptors on osteoclasts to directly inhibit osteoclast activity. Osteoprotegerin is secreted by osteoblasts and is able to bind RANK-L, inhibiting osteoclast stimulation.[4]

[edit] Disorders
See also: List of skeletal disorders
There are many disorders of the skeleton. One of the more prominent is osteoporosis.

[edit] Osteoporosis
Main article: Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis is a disease of bone - leading to an increased risk of fracture. In osteoporosis, the bone mineral density (BMD) is reduced, bone microarchitecture is disrupted, and the amount and variety of non-collagenous proteins in bone is altered. Osteoporosis is defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) in women as a bone mineral density 2.5 standard deviations below peak bone mass (20-year-old sex-matched healthy person average) as measured by DXA; the term "established osteoporosis" includes the presence of a fragility fracture.[5] Osteoporosis is most common in women after the menopause, when it is called postmenopausal osteoporosis, but may develop in men and premenopausal women in the presence of particular hormonal disorders and other chronic diseases or as a result of smoking and medications, specifically glucocorticoids, when the disease is called steroid- or glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis (SIOP or GIOP).
Osteoporosis can be prevented with lifestyle advice and medication, and preventing falls in people with known or suspected osteoporosis is an established way to prevent fractures. Osteoporosis can be treated with bisphosphonates and various other medical treatments.

[edit] Other
Other disorders of bone include:

Bone fracture
Osteomyelitis
Osteosarcoma
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Osteochondritis Dissecans


[edit] Osteology
The study of bones and teeth is referred to as osteology. It is frequently used in anthropology, archeology and forensic science for a variety of tasks. This can include determining the nutritional, health, age or injury status of the individual the bones were taken from. Preparing fleshed bones for these types of studies can involve maceration - boiling fleshed bones to remove large particles, then hand-cleaning.
Typically anthropologists and archeologists study bone tools made by Homo sapiens and Homo neanderthalensis. Bones can serve a number of uses such as projectile points or artistic pigments, and can be made from endoskeletal or external bones such as antler or tusk.

[edit] Alternatives to bony endoskeletons
There are several evolutionary alternatives to mammilary bone; though they have some similar functions, they are not completely functionally analogous to bone.

Exoskeletons offer support, protection and levers for movement similar to endoskeletal bone. Different types of exoskeletons include shells, carapaces (consisting of calcium compounds or silica) and chitinous exoskeletons.
A true endoskeleton (that is, protective tissue derived from mesoderm) is also present in Echinoderms. Porifera (sponges) possess simple endoskeletons that consist of calcareous or siliceous spicules and a spongin fiber network.


[edit] Exposed bone
Bone penetrating the skin and being exposed to the outside can be both a natural process in some animals, and due to injury:

A deer's antlers are composed of bone.[6]
Instead of teeth, the extinct predatory fish Dunkleosteus had sharp edges of hard exposed bone along its jaws.
A compound fracture occurs when the edges of a broken bone puncture the skin.
Though not strictly speaking exposed, a bird's beak is primarily bone covered in a layer of keratin over a vascular layer containing blood vessels and nerve endings.


[edit] Terminology
Several terms are used to refer to features and components of bones throughout the body:


Bone feature
Definition


articular process
A projection that contacts an adjacent bone.


articulation
The region where adjacent bones contact each other—a joint.


canal
A long, tunnel-like foramen, usually a passage for notable nerves or blood vessels.


condyle
A large, rounded articular process.


crest
A prominent ridge.


eminence
A relatively small projection or bump.


epicondyle
A projection near to a condyle but not part of the joint.


facet
A small, flattened articular surface.


foramen
An opening through a bone.


fossa
A broad, shallow depressed area.


fovea
A small pit on the head of a bone.


labyrinth
A cavity within a bone.


line
A long, thin projection, often with a rough surface. Also known as a ridge.


malleolus
One of two specific protuberances of bones in the ankle.


meatus
A short canal.


process
A relatively large projection or prominent bump.(gen.)


ramus
An arm-like branch off the body of a bone.


sinus
A cavity within a cranial bone.


spine
A relatively long, thin projection or bump.


suture
Articulation between cranial bones.


trochanter
One of two specific tuberosities located on the femur.


tubercle
A projection or bump with a roughened surface, generally smaller than a tuberosity.


tuberosity
A projection or bump with a roughened surface.


Several terms are used to refer to specific features of long bones:


Bone feature
Definition


diaphysis
The long, relatively straight main body of a long bone; region of primary ossification. Also known as the shaft.


epiphysis
The end regions of a long bone; regions of secondary ossification.


epiphyseal plate
Also known as the growth plate or physis. In a long bone it is a thin disc of hyaline cartilage that is positioned transversely between the epiphysis and metaphysis. In the long bones of humans, the epiphyseal plate disappears by twenty years of age.


head
The proximal articular end of the bone.


metaphysis
The region of a long bone lying between the epiphysis and diaphysis.


neck
The region of bone between the head and the shaft.



[edit] See also



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Bones 



List of bones of the human skeleton
Terms for anatomical location
Orthopaedics


[edit] Footnotes


^ Steele, D. Gentry; Claud A. Bramblett (1988). The Anatomy and Biology of the Human Skeleton. Texas A&M University Press. p. 4. 
^ Schmiedeler, Edgar; Mary Rosa McDonough (1934). Parent and Child: An Introductory Study of Parent Education. D. Appleton-Century. p. 31. 
^ Netter, p. 187-189, A scholarly review and also if you exercise it makes the bone stronger and it repairs its self.
^ a b Boulpaep, Emile L.; Boron, Walter F. (2005). Medical physiology: a cellular and molecular approach. Philadelphia: Saunders. pp. p.1089–1091. ISBN 1416023283. 
^ WHO (1994). "Assessment of fracture risk and its application to screening for postmenopausal osteoporosis. Report of a WHO Study Group". World Health Organization technical report series 843: 1–129. PMID 7941614. 
^ Hans J. Rolf; Alfred Enderle. "Hard fallow deer antler: a living bone till antler casting?". The Anatomical Record 255 (1): 69–77. PMID 10321994. http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/cgi-bin/fulltext/67500212/HTMLSTART. Retrieved on 2008-08-20. 



[edit] References

Katja Hoehn; Marieb, Elaine Nicpon. Human Anatomy & Physiology (7th Edition). San Francisco: Benjamin Cummings. ISBN 0805359095. 
Netter, Frank H. (1987), Musculoskeletal system: anatomy, physiology, and metabolic disorders. Summit, New Jersey: Ciba-Geigy Corporation ISBN 0914168886
Bryan H. Derrickson; Tortora, Gerard J. (2005). Principles of anatomy and physiology. New York: Wiley. ISBN 0471689343. 


[edit] External links

Review (including references) of piezoelectricity and bone remodelling
A good basic overview of bone biology from the Science Creative Quarterly
Bone Health at Got Bones?
Osteopathic physicians








v • d • e

Musculoskeletal system, connective tissue: bone and cartilage





Cartilage

perichondrium, fibrocartilage callus, metaphysis
cells (chondroblast, chondrocyte)
types (hyaline, elastic, fibrous)






Bone





Ossification


intramembranous, endochondral







Cycle


osteoblast, osteoid, osteocyte, osteoclast







Types


cancellous, cortical







Regions


subchondral bone, epiphysis, epiphyseal plate/metaphysis, diaphysis







Structure


osteon / Haversian system, Haversian canals, Volkmann's canals, connective tissue (endosteum, periosteum), Sharpey's fibres, enthesis, lacunae, canaliculi, trabeculae, medullary cavity, bone marrow







Shapes


long, short, flat, irregular, sesamoid
















v • d • e

Bones (Axial skeleton, Appendicular skeleton)





VERTEBRAL COLUMN

vertebrae (cervical, thoracic, lumbar) · sacrum · coccyx






THORAX

sternum · rib






cranial bones of SKULL

occipital · parietal · frontal · temporal  · sphenoid · ethmoid






facial bones of SKULL

nasal · maxilla · lacrimal · zygomatic · palatine · inferior nasal conchae · vomer · mandible · THROAT: hyoid (greater cornu, lesser cornu, body)






UPPER EXTREMITY

SHOULDER GIRDLE:clavicle · scapula · ARM: humerus · ulna · radius- HAND:carpals (scaphoid · lunate bone · triquetral · pisiform · trapezium · trapezoid · capitate · hamate) · metacarpals · phalanges (prox, int, dist)






LOWER EXTREMITY

PELVIS:pelvis (ilium, ischium, pubis) · LEG: femur · patella · fibula · tibia · FOOT: tarsals (calcaneus, talus, navicular, cuneiform, cuboid ) · metatarsals · phalanges (prox, int, dist)






MIDDLE EAR OSSICLES

malleus · incus · stapes













v • d • e

Bones of head and neck: the facial bones of the skull





Maxilla





Surfaces


Anterior: fossae (Incisive fossa, Canine fossa) · Infraorbital foramen · Anterior nasal spine
Infratemporal: Alveolar canals · Maxillary tuberosity
Orbital: Infraorbital groove · Infraorbital canal
Nasal: Pterygopalatine canal







Processes


Zygomatic process
Frontal process (Agger nasi, Anterior lacrimal crest)
Alveolar process
Palatine process (Incisive foramen, Incisive canals, Foramina of Scarpa, Incisive bone, Anterior nasal spine)







Other


Body of maxilla · Maxillary sinus









Zygomatic

Orbital process (Zygomatico-orbital) · Temporal process (Zygomaticotemporal) · Lateral process (Zygomaticofacial)






Palatine





Fossae


Pterygopalatine fossa · Pterygoid fossa







Plates


Horizontal plate (Posterior nasal spine) · Perpendicular plate (Pterygopalatine canal, Sphenopalatine foramen, Pyramidal process)







Processes


Orbital · Sphenoidal









Mandible





Body


external surface (Symphysis menti, Mental protuberance, Mental foramen) · internal surface (Mental spine, Mylohyoid line, Sublingual fovea, Submandibular fovea) · Alveolar part of mandible







Ramus


Mylohyoid groove (Mandibular canal, Lingula) · Mandibular foramen · Angle
Coronoid process · Mandibular notch · Condyloid process · Pterygoid fovea









Minor/
nose

Nasal bone: Internasal suture · Nasal foramina
Inferior nasal concha: Ethmoidal process · Maxillary process
Vomer: Wing
Lacrimal: Posterior lacrimal crest · Lacrimal groove · Lacrimal hamulus













v • d • e

Bones of head and neck: the cranium of the skull





Occipital





Squama


external (Inion/External occipital protuberance, Nuchal lines) · planes (Occipital, Nuchal) · internal (Cruciform eminence, Internal occipital protuberance, Sagittal sulcus, Internal occipital crest)







Lateral parts


Condyle (Condyloid fossa, Condylar canal) · Hypoglossal canal · jugular (Jugular process, Jugular tubercle)







Basilar part


Pharyngeal tubercle







Other


Foramen magnum









Parietal

Parietal eminence · Temporal line · Parietal foramen






Frontal





Squama


Frontal suture · Frontal eminence · external (Superciliary arches, Glabella) · foramina (Supraorbital, Cecum) · Zygomatic process · internal (Sagittal sulcus, Frontal crest)







Orbital part


Ethmoidal notch · Lacrimal fossa · Trochlear fovea · Frontal sinus · Frontonasal duct









Temporal





Squama


Articular tubercle · Suprameatal triangle · Mandibular fossa · Petrotympanic fissure · Zygomatic process







Mastoid part


Mastoid foramen · Mastoid process (Mastoid cells) · Mastoid notch · Occipital groove · Sigmoid sulcus · Mastoid antrum (Entrance)







Petrous part


Carotid canal · Facial canal (Hiatus) · Internal auditory meatus · Aqueduct of cochlea · Stylomastoid foramen
fossae (Subarcuate fossa, Jugular fossa) · canaliculi (Inferior tympanic, Mastoid) · Styloid process · Petrosquamous suture
(note: ossicles in petrous part, but not part of temporal bone)







Tympanic part


Suprameatal spine









Sphenoid





Surfaces


Superior surface: Sella turcica (Dorsum sellae, Tuberculum sellae, Hypophysial fossa, Posterior clinoid processes) · Ethmoidal spine · Chiasmatic groove · Middle clinoid process · Petrosal process · Clivus
Lateral surface: Carotid groove · Sphenoidal lingula
Anterior surface: Sphenoidal sinuses







Great wings


foramina (Rotundum, Ovale, Vesalii, Spinosum) · Spine · Infratemporal crest · Sulcus for auditory tube







Small wings


Superior orbital fissure · Anterior clinoid process · Optic canal







Pterygoid
processes


fossae (Pterygoid, Scaphoid) · pterygoid plates (Lateral, Medial) · Pterygoid canal · Hamulus







Other


Body · Sphenoidal conchae









Ethmoid





Plates


Cribriform plate (Crista galli, Olfactory foramina) · Perpendicular plate







Surfaces


Lateral surface Orbital lamina · Uncinate process
Medial surface Superior nasal concha · Superior meatus · Middle nasal concha · Middle meatus







Labyrinth


Ethmoid sinus · ethmoidal foramina (Posterior, Anterior)












Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bone"
Categories: Skull | Bones of the upper limb | Pelvis | Anatomy | Bone products | Osteology | Skeletal systemHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Aymar aru
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Lingála
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
Pangasinan
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Shqip
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
Zazaki
中文









 This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 12:26.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
