













Colossus computer - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Colossus_computer";
		var wgTitle = "Colossus computer";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "6229";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281305277;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Colossus computer

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 




A Colossus Mark 2 computer. The slanted control panel on the left was used to set the pin patterns on the Lorenz; the paper tape transport is on the right.


The Colossus machines were electronic computing devices used by British codebreakers to read encrypted German messages during World War II. These were the world's first programmable, digital, electronic, computing devices. They used vacuum tubes (thermionic valves) to perform the calculations.
Colossus was designed by engineer Tommy Flowers with input from Allen Coombs, Sid Broadhurst and Bill Chandler at the Post Office Research Station, Dollis Hill to solve a problem posed by mathematician Max Newman at Bletchley Park. The prototype, Colossus Mark 1, was shown to be working in December 1943 and was operational at Bletchley Park by February 1944. An improved Colossus Mark 2 first worked on 1 June 1944, just in time for the Normandy Landings. Ten Colossi were in use by the end of the war.
The Colossus computers were used to help decipher teleprinter messages which had been encrypted using the Lorenz SZ40/42 machine—British codebreakers referred to encrypted German teleprinter traffic as "Fish" and called the SZ40/42 machine and its traffic "Tunny". Colossus compared two data streams, counting each match based on a programmable Boolean function. The encrypted message was read at high speed from a paper tape. The other stream was generated internally, and was an electronic simulation of the Lorenz machine at various trial settings. If the match count for a setting was above a certain threshold, it would be sent as output to an electric typewriter.
In spite of the destruction of the Colossus hardware and blueprints as part of the effort to maintain a project secrecy that was kept up into the 1970s—a secrecy that deprived some of the Colossus creators of credit for their pioneering advancements in electronic digital computing during their lifetimes—a functional replica of a Colossus computer was completed in 2007.




Contents


1 Purpose and origins
2 The construction of Colossus
3 Design and operation
4 Influence and fate
5 Reconstruction
6 See also
7 Footnotes
8 References
9 Further reading
10 Other meanings
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Purpose and origins




The Lorenz machine was used by the Germans to encrypt high-level teleprinter communications. It contained 12 wheels with a total of 501 pins.


The Colossus computers were used in the cryptanalysis of high-level German communications, messages which had been encrypted using the Lorenz SZ 40/42 cipher machine; part of the operation of Colossus was to emulate the mechanical Lorenz machine electronically. To encrypt a message with the Lorenz machine, the plaintext was combined with a stream of key bits, grouped in fives. The keystream was generated using twelve pinwheels: five were termed (by the British) χ ("chi") wheels, another five ψ ("psi") wheels, and the remaining two the "motor wheels". The χ wheels stepped regularly with each letter that was encrypted, while the ψ wheels stepped irregularly, controlled by the motor wheels.
Bill Tutte, a cryptanalyst at Bletchley Park, discovered that the keystream produced by the machine exhibited statistical biases deviating from random, and that these biases could be used to break the cipher and read messages. In order to read messages, there were two tasks that needed to be performed. The first task was wheel breaking, which was discovering the pin patterns for all the wheels. These patterns were set up once on the Lorenz machine and then used for a fixed period of time and for a number of different messages. The second task was wheel setting, which could be attempted once the pin patterns were known. Each message encrypted using Lorenz was enciphered at a different start position for the wheels. The process of wheel setting found the start position for a message. Initially Colossus was used to help with wheel setting, but later it was found it could also be adapted to the process of wheel breaking as well.
Colossus was developed for the Newmanry, the section at Bletchley Park responsible for machine methods against the Lorenz machine, headed by the mathematician Max Newman. It arose out of a prior project which produced a special purpose opto-mechanical comparator and counting machine called "Heath Robinson".
The main problems with the Heath Robinson were the relative slowness of electro-mechanical relays and the difficulty of synchronising two paper tapes, one punched with the enciphered message, the other representing the patterns produced by the wheels of the Lorenz machine. The tapes tended to stretch when being read at some 2000 characters per second, resulting in unreliable counts. Tommy Flowers of the Post Office Research Station at Dollis Hill was called in to look into the design of the Robinson’s combining unit. He was not impressed with the machines and, at his own initiative, designed an electronic machine which stored the data from one of the tapes internally. He presented this design to Max Newman in February 1943, but the idea that the one to two thousand thermionic valves (vacuum tubes) proposed, could work together reliably was greeted with scepticism, so more Robinsons were ordered from Dollis Hill. Flowers, however, persisted with the idea and obtained support from the Director of the Research Station.

[edit] The construction of Colossus
Tommy Flowers spent eleven months (early February 1943 to early January 1944) designing and building Colossus at the Post Office Research Station, Dollis Hill, in northwest London. After a functional test in December 1943, Colossus was dismantled and shipped north to Bletchley Park, where it was delivered on 18 January 1944, and attacked its first message on 5 February.[1]
The Mark 1 was followed by nine Mark 2 Colossus machines, the first being commissioned in June 1944, and the original Mark 1 machine was converted into a Mark 2. An eleventh Colossus was essentially finished at the end of the war. Colossus Mark 1 contained 1,500 electronic valves (tubes). Colossus Mark 2 with 2,400 valves was both 5 times faster and simpler to operate than Mark 1, greatly speeding the decoding process. Mark 2 was designed while Mark 1 was being constructed. Allen Coombs took over leadership of the Colossus Mark 2 project when Tommy Flowers moved on to other projects. For comparison, later stored-program computers like the Manchester Mark 1 of 1949 used about 4,200 valves. In comparison, ENIAC (1946) used 17,468 valves, but, unlike Colossus, was not a software programmable machine.
Colossus dispensed with the second tape of the Heath Robinson design by generating the wheel patterns electronically, and processing 5,000 characters per second with the paper tape moving at 40 ft/s (12.2 m/s or 27.3 mph). The circuits were synchronized by a clock signal generated by the sprocket holes of the punched tape. The speed of calculation was thus limited by the mechanics of the tape reader. Tommy Flowers tested the tape reader up to 9,700 characters per second (53 mph) before the tape disintegrated. He settled on 5,000 characters/second as the desirable speed for regular operation. Sometimes, two or more Colossus computers tried different possibilities simultaneously in what now is called parallel computing, speeding the decoding process by perhaps as much as doubling the rate of comparison.
Colossus included the first ever use of shift registers and systolic arrays, enabling five simultaneous tests, each involving up to 100 Boolean calculations, on each of the five channels on the punched tape (although in normal operation only one or two channels were examined in any run).
Initially Colossus was only used to determine the initial wheel positions used for a particular message (termed wheel setting). The Mark 2 included mechanisms intended to help determine pin patterns (wheel breaking). Both models were programmable using switches and plug panels in a way the Robinsons had not been.

[edit] Design and operation




In 1994, a team led by Tony Sale (right) began a reconstruction of a Colossus at Bletchley Park. Here, in 2006, Sale supervises the breaking of an enciphered message with the completed machine.


Colossus used state-of-the-art vacuum tubes (thermionic valves), thyratrons and photomultipliers to optically read a paper tape and then applied a programmable logical function to every character, counting how often this function returned "true". Although machines with many valves were known to have high failure rates, it was recognised that valve failures occurred most frequently with the current surge when powering up, so the Colossus machines, once turned on, were never powered down unless they malfunctioned.
Colossus was the first of the electronic digital machines with programmability, albeit limited in modern terms. It was not, however, a fully general Turing-complete computer, even though Alan Turing worked at Bletchley Park. It was not then realized that Turing completeness was significant; most of the other pioneering modern computing machines were also not Turing complete (e.g. the Atanasoff–Berry Computer, the Harvard Mark I electro-mechanical relay machine, the Bell Labs relay machines (by George Stibitz et al), or the first designs of Konrad Zuse). The notion of a computer as a general purpose machine--that is, as more than a calculator devoted to solving difficult but specific problems--would not become prominent for several years.
Colossus was preceded by several computers, many of them first in some category. Zuse's Z3 was the first functional fully program-controlled computer, and was based on electromechanical relays, as were the (less advanced) Bell Labs machines of the late 1930s (George Stibitz, et al). The Atanasoff–Berry Computer was electronic and binary (digital) but not programmable. Assorted analog computers were semiprogrammable; some of these much predated the 1930s (e.g., Vannevar Bush). Babbage's Analytical engine design predated all these (in the mid-1800s), it was a decimal, programmable, entirely mechanical construction - but was only partially built and never functioned during Babbage's lifetime (the first full mechanical Difference engine No. 2, built in 1991, does work however). Colossus was the first combining digital, (partially) programmable, and electronic. The first fully programmable digital electronic computer was the 1948 Manchester Small Scale Experimental Machine.

Defining characteristics of some early digital computers of the 1940s (In the history of computing hardware)

Name
First operational
Numeral system
Computing mechanism
Programming
Turing complete


Zuse Z3 (Germany)
May 1941
Binary
Electro-mechanical
Program-controlled by punched film stock
Yes (1998)


Atanasoff–Berry Computer (US)
1942
Binary
Electronic
Not programmable—single purpose
No


Colossus Mark 1 (UK)
February 1944
Binary
Electronic
Program-controlled by patch cables and switches
No


Harvard Mark I – IBM ASCC (US)
May 1944
Decimal
Electro-mechanical
Program-controlled by 24-channel punched paper tape (but no conditional branch)
No


Colossus Mark 2 (UK)
June 1944
Binary
Electronic
Program-controlled by patch cables and switches
No


ENIAC (US)
July 1946
Decimal
Electronic
Program-controlled by patch cables and switches
Yes


Manchester Small-Scale Experimental Machine (UK)
June 1948
Binary
Electronic
Stored-program in Williams cathode ray tube memory
Yes


Modified ENIAC (US)
September 1948
Decimal
Electronic
Program-controlled by patch cables and switches plus a primitive read-only stored programming mechanism using the Function Tables as program ROM
Yes


EDSAC (UK)
May 1949
Binary
Electronic
Stored-program in mercury delay line memory
Yes


Manchester Mark 1 (UK)
October 1949
Binary
Electronic
Stored-program in Williams cathode ray tube memory and magnetic drum memory
Yes


CSIRAC (Australia)
November 1949
Binary
Electronic
Stored-program in mercury delay line memory
Yes



[edit] Influence and fate
The use to which the Colossi were put was of the highest secrecy, and the Colossus itself was highly secret, and remained so for many years after the War. Thus, Colossus could not be included in the history of computing hardware for many years, and Flowers and his associates also were deprived of the recognition they were due.
Being not widely known, it therefore had little direct influence on the development of later computers; EDVAC was the early design which had the most influence on subsequent computer architecture.
However, the technology of Colossus, and the knowledge that reliable high-speed electronic digital computing devices were feasible, had a significant influence on the development of early computers in Britain and probably in the US. A number of people who were associated with the project and knew all about Colossus played significant roles in early computer work in Britain. In 1972, Herman Goldstine wrote that:

"Britain had such vitality that it could immediately after the war embark on so many well-conceived and well-executed projects in the computer field".[2]

In writing that, Goldstine was unaware of Colossus, and its legacy to those projects of people such as Alan Turing (with the Pilot ACE and ACE), and Max Newman and I. J. Good (with the Manchester Mark 1 and other early Manchester computers). Brian Randell later wrote that:

"the COLOSSUS project was an important source of this vitality, one that has been largely unappreciated, as has the significance of its places in the chronology of the invention of the digital computer".[3]

Colossus documentation and hardware were classified from the moment of their creation and remained so after the War, when Winston Churchill specifically ordered the destruction of most of the Colossus machines into 'pieces no bigger than a man's hand'; Tommy Flowers personally burned blueprints in a furnace at Dollis Hill. Some parts, sanitised as to their original use, were taken to Newman's Computing Machine Laboratory at Manchester University. The Colossus Mark 1 was dismantled and parts returned to the Post Office. Two Colossus computers, along with two replica Tunny machines, were retained, moving to GCHQ's new headquarters at Eastcote in April 1946, and moving again with GCHQ to Cheltenham between 1952 and 1954.[4] One of the Colossi, known as Colossus Blue, was dismantled in 1959; the other in 1960.[4] In their later years, the Colossi were used for training, but before that, there had been attempts to adapt them, with varying success, to other purposes.[5] Jack Good relates how he was the first to use it after the war, persuading NSA that Colossus could be used to perform a function for which they were planning to build a special purpose machine.[4] Colossus was also used to perform character counts on one-time pad tape to ensure their randomness.[4]
Throughout this period the Colossus remained secret, long after any of its technical details were of any importance. This was due to the UK's intelligence agencies use of Enigma-like machines which they promoted and sold to other governments, and then broke the codes using a variety of methods. Had the knowledge of the codebreaking machines been widely known, no one would accept these machines and would have developed their own methods for encryption, ones the UK services might not be able to break. The need for such secrecy ebbed away as communications moved to digital transmission and all-digital encryption systems became common in the 1960s.
Information about Colossus began to emerge publicly in the late 1970s, after the secrecy imposed was broken when Colonel Winterbotham published his book The Ultra Secret. More recently, a 500-page technical report on the Tunny cipher and its cryptanalysis – entitled General Report on Tunny – was released by GCHQ to the national Public Record Office in October 2000; the complete report is available online,[6] and it contains a fascinating paean to Colossus by the cryptographers who worked with it:

It is regretted that it is not possible to give an adequate idea of the fascination of a Colossus at work; its sheer bulk and apparent complexity; the fantastic speed of thin paper tape round the glittering pulleys; the childish pleasure of not-not, span, print main header and other gadgets; the wizardry of purely mechanical decoding letter by letter (one novice thought she was being hoaxed); the uncanny action of the typewriter in printing the correct scores without and beyond human aid; the stepping of the display; periods of eager expectation culminating in the sudden appearance of the longed-for score; and the strange rhythms characterizing every type of run: the stately break-in, the erratic short run, the regularity of wheel-breaking, the stolid rectangle interrupted by the wild leaps of the carriage-return, the frantic chatter of a motor run, even the ludicrous frenzy of hosts of bogus scores.[7]


[edit] Reconstruction




The Colossus rebuild seen from the rear.


Construction of a fully-functional replica[8] of a Colossus Mark 2 has been undertaken by a team led by Tony Sale. In spite of the blueprints and hardware being destroyed, a surprising amount of material survived, mainly in engineers' notebooks, but a considerable amount of it in the U.S. The optical tape reader might have posed the biggest problem, but Dr. Arnold Lynch its original designer was able to redesign it to his own original specification. The reconstruction is on display, in the historically correct place for Colossus No. 9, at The National Museum of Computing, in H Block Bletchley Park in Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire.
In November 2007, to celebrate the project completion and to mark the start of a fundraising initiative for the The National Museum of Computing, a Cipher Challenge[9] pitted the rebuilt Colossus against radio amateurs worldwide in being first to receive and decode 3 messages enciphered using the Lorenz SZ42 and transmitted from radio station DL0HNF in the Heinz Nixdorf MuseumsForum computer museum. The challenge was easily won by radio amateur Joachim Schüth who had carefully prepared[10] for the event and developed his own signal processing and decrypt code using Ada[11]. The Colossus team were hampered by their wish to use World War II radio equipment,[12] delaying them by a day because of poor reception conditions. Nevertheless the victor's 1.4 GHz laptop, running his own code, took less than a minute to find the settings for all 12 wheels. The German codebreaker said: “My laptop digested ciphertext at a speed of 1.2 million characters per second – 240 times faster than Colossus. If you scale the CPU frequency by that factor, you get an equivalent clock of 5.8 MHz for Colossus. That is a remarkable speed for a computer built in 1944."[13]
The Cipher Challenge verified the successful completion of the rebuild project. "On the strength of today's performance Colossus is as good as it was six decades ago", commented Tony Sale. "We are delighted to have produced a fitting tribute to the people who worked at Bletchley Park and whose brainpower devised these fantastic machines which broke these ciphers and shortened the war by many months."[14]

[edit] See also

History of computing hardware
Z3
Supercomputer
Enigma Machine
Lorentz Cipher


[edit] Footnotes

^ Jack Copeland, "Machine against Machine", p. 75 (entire article pp. 64-77) in B. Jack Copeland, ed., Colossus: The Secrets of Bletchley Park's Codebreaking Computers, Oxford University Press, 2006
^ The Computer from Pascal to von Neuman (pp. 321)
^ B. Randell, "The Colossus", in A History of Computing in the Twentieth Century (N. Metropolis, J. Howlett and G. C. Rota, Eds.), pp.47-92, Academic Press, New York, 1980., p. 87
^ a b c d Copeland, 2006, p. 173-175
^ Horwood, 1973
^ Jack Good; Donald Michie, and Geoffrey Timms (1945). "General Report on Tunny". http://www.ellsbury.com/tunny/tunny-000.htm. 
^ "http://www.alanturing.net/turing_archive/archive/t/t17/TR17-003.html". http://www.alanturing.net/turing_archive/archive/t/t17/TR17-003.html. 
^ "Colossus Rebuild Project". http://www.tnmoc.org/ColRbd.htm. 
^ "Cipher Challenge". http://www.tnmoc.org/cipher1.htm. 
^ "SZ42 Codebreaking Software". http://www.schlaupelz.de/SZ42/SZ42_software.html. 
^ "Cracking the Lorenz Code (interview with Schüth)". http://www.adacore.com/home/ada_answers/lorenz-code/. 
^ "BBC News Article". http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/7098005.stm. 
^ "German Codebreaker receives Bletchley Park Honours". http://www.bletchleypark.org.uk/news/docview.rhtm/487682. 
^ "Latest Cipher Challenge News 16.11.2007". http://www.tnmoc.org/cipher7.htm. 


[edit] References

W. W. Chandler, The Installation and Maintenance of Colossus (IEEE Annals of the History of Computing, Vol. 5 (No. 3), 1983, pp. 260–262)
Allen W. M. Coombs, The Making of Colossus (Annals of the History of Computing, Vol. 5 (No. 3), 1983, pp.253-259)
Jack Copeland, Colossus: Its Origins and Originators (IEEE Annals of the History of Computing, 26(4), October–December 2004, pp. 38–45).
Jack Copeland, Colossus and the Dawning of the Computer Age, in Action This Day, 2001, ISBN 0-593-04982-9.
Copeland, B. Jack, ed. (2006), Colossus: The Secrets of Bletchley Park's Codebreaking Computers, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-284055-4 
I. J. Good, Early Work on Computers at Bletchley (IEEE Annals of the History of Computing, Vol. 1 (No. 1), 1979, pp. 38–48)
I. J. Good, Pioneering Work on Computers at Bletchley (in Nicholas Metropolis, J. Howlett, Gian-Carlo Rota, (editors), A History of Computing in the Twentieth Century, Academic Press, New York, 1980)
T. H. Flowers, The Design of Colossus (Annals of the History of Computing, Vol. 5 (No. 3), 1983, pp. 239–252)
D C Horwood, A technical description of COLOSSUS I, August 1973, PRO HW 25/24.
Brian Randell, Colossus: Godfather of the Computer, 1977 (reprinted in The Origins of Digital Computers: Selected Papers, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1982)
Brian Randell, The COLOSSUS (in A History of Computing in the Twentieth Century)
Albert W. Small, The Special Fish Report (December, 1944) describe the operation of Colossus to break Tunny messages


[edit] Further reading

Harvey G. Cragon, From Fish to Colossus: How the German Lorenz Cipher was Broken at Bletchley Park (Cragon Books, Dallas, 2003; ISBN 0-9743045-0-6) – A detailed description of the cryptanalysis of Tunny, and some details of Colossus (contains some minor errors)
Ted Enever, Britain's Best Kept Secret: Ultra's Base at Bletchley Park (Sutton Publishing, Gloucestershire, 1999; ISBN 0-7509-2355-5) – A guided tour of the history and geography of the Park, written by one of the founder members of the Bletchley Park Trust
Tony Sale, The Colossus Computer 1943–1996: How It Helped to Break the German Lorenz Cipher in WWII (M.&M. Baldwin, Kidderminster, 2004; ISBN 0-947712-36-4) – A slender (20 page) booklet, containing the same material as Tony Sale's website (see below)
Michael Smith, Station X, 1998. ISBN 0-330-41929-3.
Paul Gannon, "Colossus Bletchley Park's Greatest Secret" 2006 Atlantic Books; ISBN 1-84354-330-3.
Jack Copeland: Colossus. The Secrets of Bletchley Park's Codebreaking Computers. Oxford University Press 2006. ISBN 0-19-284055-X


[edit] Other meanings
There was a fictional computer named Colossus in the movie Colossus: The Forbin Project. Also see List of fictional computers.
But the most important fictional treatment of the historical connections between cryptanalysis, code-breaking, and the development of the digital computer design during World War II--including the role played by Turing and Bletchley Park-- is Neal Stephenson's novel Cryptonomicon (1999).

[edit] External links

The National Museum of Computing
Tony Sale's Codes and Ciphers Contains a great deal of information, including:

Colossus, the revolution in code breaking
Lorenz Cipher and the Colossus

The machine age comes to Fish codebreaking
The Colossus Rebuild Project
The Colossus Rebuild Project: Evolving to the Colossus Mk 2
Walk around Colossus A detailed tour of the replica Colossus – make sure to click on the "More Text" links on each image to see the informative detailed text about that part of Colossus


IEEE lecture – Transcript of a lecture Tony Sale gave describing the reconstruction project


BBC news article reporting on the replica Colossus
BBC news article: Colossus cracks codes once more
Was the Manchester Baby conceived at Bletchley Park?




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colossus_computer"
Categories: Bletchley Park | Cryptanalytic devices | World War II British electronics | Early computers | English inventions 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Français
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Lietuvių
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe









 This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 15:32.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
