













French and Indian War - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "French_and_Indian_War";
		var wgTitle = "French and Indian War";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "39062";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281519286;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); French and Indian War

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





French and Indian War


Part of the Seven Years' War



Map of the scene of operations of the French and Indian War





Date
1754–1763


Location
North America


Result
British Victory,
Treaty of Paris


Territorial
changes
New France east of the Mississippi River ceded to Great Britain; Louisiana ceded to Spain; Spanish Florida ceded to Great Britain





Belligerents


 France
 Spain
 New France
First Nations allies:

Algonquin
Lenape
Wyandot
Ojibwa
Ottawa
Shawnee
Mi'kmaq


 Great Britain
 British American Colonies
 Iroquois Confederacy


Strength


3,900 regulars
7,900 militia
2,200 natives (1759)[citation needed]
50,000 regulars and militia (1759)[citation needed]


Casualties and losses


At least 5,700 killed, wounded or captured[citation needed]
At least 11,100 killed, wounded or captured[citation needed]













v • d • e

Seven Years' War in
North America:
The French and Indian War







Jumonville Glen – Fort Necessity – Fort Beauséjour – Monongahela – Lake George – Fort Bull – Fort Oswego – Kittanning – Fort William Henry – Bloody Creek – German Flatts – Louisbourg – Fort Carillon – Fort Frontenac – Fort Duquesne – Fort Ligonier – La Belle-Famille – Fort Niagara – Ticonderoga – Beauport – Quebec – Sainte-Foy – Restigouche – Thousand Islands – Signal Hill









The French and Indian War (1754–1763) was the North American chapter of the Seven Years' War, known in parts of Canada (particularly in Quebec) as the War of the Conquest (French: Guerre de la Conquête). The name refers to the two main enemies of the British: the royal French forces and the various American Indian forces allied with them. The conflict, the fourth such colonial war between the kingdoms of France and Great Britain, resulted in the British conquest of Canada. The outcome was one of the most significant developments in a century of Anglo-French conflict. To compensate its ally, Spain, for its loss of Florida, France ceded its control of French Louisiana west of the Mississippi. France's colonial presence north of the Caribbean was reduced to the tiny islands of Saint Pierre and Miquelon.




Contents


1 Naming the war
2 Impetus for war

2.1 Territorial expansion
2.2 Religious ideology
2.3 Céloron's expedition
2.4 Langlade's expedition
2.5 Marin's expedition
2.6 Tanaghrisson's proclamation
2.7 Dinwiddie's reaction


3 War
4 Outcome
5 Timeline
6 Battles and expeditions
7 Footnotes
8 References
9 Further reading
10 See also
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Naming the war
The conflict is known by several names. In British North America, wars were often named after the sitting British monarch, such as King William's War or Queen Anne's War. Because there had already been a King George's War in the 1740s, British colonists named the second war in King George's reign after their opponents, and thus it became known as the French and Indian War.[1] This traditional name remains standard in the United States, although it obscures the fact that American Indians fought on both sides of the conflict.[2] American historians generally use the traditional name or the European title (the Seven Years' War). Other, less frequently used names for the war include the Fourth Intercolonial War and the Great War for the Empire.[1]
In Europe, the North American theatre of the Seven Years' War usually has no special name, and so the entire worldwide conflict is known as the Seven Years' War (or the Guerre de sept ans). The "Seven Years" refers to events in Europe, from the official declaration of war in 1756 to the signing of the peace treaty in 1763. These dates do not correspond with the actual fighting in North America, where the fighting between the two colonial powers was largely concluded in six years, from the Jumonville Glen skirmish in 1754 to the capture of Montreal in 1760.[1]
In Canada, both French- and English-speaking Canadians refer to it as the Seven Years' War[citation needed] (Guerre de Sept Ans). French Canadians may use the term "War of the Conquest" (Guerre de la Conquête), since it is the war in which New France was conquered by the British and became part of the British Empire, but that usage is never employed by English Canadians.
This war was also known as the Forgotten War by Americans.

[edit] Impetus for war

[edit] Territorial expansion
There were numerous causes for the French and Indian War, which began less than a decade after France and Britain had fought on opposing sides in the War of the Austrian Succession (1740–1748). Both New France and New England wanted to expand their territories with respect to fur trading and other pursuits that matched their economic interests. Using trading posts and forts, both the British and the French claimed the vast territory between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River, from the Great Lakes to the Gulf of Mexico, known as the Ohio Country. English claims resulted from royal grants which had no definite western boundaries. The French claims resulted from La Salle's claiming the Mississippi River for France—its drainage area includes the Ohio River Valley. In order to secure these claims, both European powers took advantage of Native American factions to protect their territories and to keep each other from growing too strong.
Newfoundland's Grand Banks were fertile fishing grounds and coveted by both sides. The conclusion of this war would see France keeping only the islands of Saint Pierre and Miquelon, allowing them access to the Grand Banks to this day.

[edit] Religious ideology
The English colonists also feared papal influence in North America, as New France was administered by French governors and Roman Catholic hierarchy, and missionaries such as Armand de La Richardie were active during this period. For the predominantly Protestant British settlers, French control over North America could have represented a threat to their religious and other freedoms provided by English law.[clarification needed] Likewise, the French feared the anti-Catholicism prevalent among English holdings. In this period, Catholicism was still enduring persecution under English law.

[edit] Céloron's expedition




Map showing the 1750 possessions of Britain (pink), France (blue), and Spain (orange) in contemporary Canada and the United States.


In June 1747, Roland-Michel Barrin de La Galissonière, the Governor-General of New France, ordered Pierre-Joseph Céloron to lead an expedition to the Ohio Country with the objective of removing British influence from the area. Céloron was also to confirm the allegiance of the Native Americans inhabiting the territory to the French crown.
Céloron's expedition consisted of 213 soldiers of the Troupes de la marine (French Marines), who were transported by 23 canoes. The expedition left Lachine, on June 15, 1749, and two days later reached Fort Frontenac. The expedition then continued along the shoreline of present-day Lake Erie. At Chautauqua Portage (Barcelona, New York), the expedition moved inland to the Allegheny River.
The expedition headed south to the Ohio River at present-day Pittsburgh, and Céloron buried lead plates engraved with the French claim to the Ohio Country. Whenever British merchants or fur-traders were encountered by the French, they were informed of the illegality of being on French territory and told to leave the Ohio Country.
When Céloron's expedition arrived at Logstown, the Native Americans in the area informed Céloron that they owned the Ohio Country and that they would trade with the British regardless of what the French told them to do.[3]
The French continued their expedition. At its farthest point south, Céloron's expedition reached the junction between the Ohio River and the Miami River. The junction lay just south of the village of Pickawillany, where the Miami Chief, "Old Britain" (as styled by Céloron), lived.
When Céloron arrived at Pickawillany, he informed "Old Britain" of the "dire consequences" of the elderly chief continuing to trade with the British. "Old Britain" ignored the warning. After his meeting with Old Britain, Céloron and his expedition began the trip home. They did not reach Montreal, Canada until November 10, 1749.
The best summary of the expedition's findings came from none other than Céloron himself. In his report, Céloron wrote: "All I can say is that the Natives of these localities are very badly disposed towards the French, and are entirely devoted to the English. I don't know in what way they could be brought back."[3]

[edit] Langlade's expedition
On March 17, 1752, the Governor-General of New France, Marquis de la Jonquière died. His temporary replacement was Charles le Moyne de Longueuil. It was not until July 1, 1752 that Ange Duquesne de Menneville arrived in New France to take over the post.
In the spring of 1752, Longueuil dispatched an expedition to the Ohio River area. The expedition was led by Charles Michel de Langlade, an officer in the Troupes de la marine. Langlade was given 300 men comprising members of the Ottawa and French-Canadians. His objective was to punish the Miami people of Pickawillany for not following Céloron's orders to cease trading with the British.
At dawn on June 21, 1752, the French war party attacked the British trading centre at Pickawillany, killing fourteen people of the Miami nation, including Old Britain. The expedition then returned home.

[edit] Marin's expedition
In the spring of 1753, Paul Marin de la Malgue was given command of a 2,000 man force of Troupes de la Marine and Aboriginals. His orders were to protect the King's land in the Ohio Valley from the British.
Marin followed the route that Céloron had mapped out four years previously. The main difference in the two expeditions was that, whereas Céloron had buried lead plates, Marin was constructing and garrisoning forts.
The first fort that was constructed by Paul Marin was Fort Presque Isle (Erie, Pennsylvania) on Lake Erie's south shore. He then had a road built to the headwaters of LeBoeuf Creek. Marin then constructed a second fort at Fort Le Boeuf (Waterford, Pennsylvania). This fort was designed to guard the headwaters of the LeBoeuf Creek.

[edit] Tanaghrisson's proclamation
On September 3, 1753, Tanaghrisson (d. 1754), Chief of the Mingo, arrived at Fort Le Boeuf. Tanaghrisson hated the French because, as legend had it, the French had killed and eaten his father. Tanaghrisson told Marin, "I shall strike at whoever...",[4] threatening the French.
The show of force by the French had alarmed the Iroquois in the area. They sent Mohawk runners to William Johnson's manor in Upper New York. Johnson, known to the Iroquois as "Warraghiggey", meaning "He who does big business", had become a respected member of the Iroquois Confederacy in the area. In 1746, Johnson was made a colonel of the Iroquois, and later a colonel of the Western New York Militia.
At Albany, New York, there was a meeting between Governor Clinton of New York and Chief Hendrick, as well as other officials from a handful of American colonies. Chief Hendrick insisted that the British abide by their obligations and block French expansion. When an unsatisfactory response was offered by Clinton, Chief Hendrick proclaimed that the "Covenant Chain", a long-standing friendly relationship between the Iroquois Confederacy and the British Crown, was broken.

[edit] Dinwiddie's reaction




The earliest authenticated portrait of George Washington shows him wearing his colonel's uniform of the Virginia Regiment from the French and Indian War. However, this portrait was painted years after the war in 1772.


Governor Robert Dinwiddie of Virginia found himself in a predicament. Many merchants had invested heavily in fur trading in Ohio. If the French made good on their claim to the Ohio Country and drove out the British, then the Virginian merchants would lose a lot of money.
Dinwiddie could not possibly allow the loss of the Ohio Country to France. To counter the French military presence in Ohio, in October 1753 Dinwiddie ordered Major George Washington of the Virginia militia to deliver a message to the commander of the French forces in the Ohio Country, Jacques Legardeur de Saint-Pierre. Washington, along with his interpreter Jacob Van Braam and several other men, left for Fort Le Boeuf on the 31st of October.
A few days later, Washington and his party arrived at Wills Creek (Cumberland, Maryland). Here Washington enlisted the help of Christopher Gist, a surveyor who was familiar with the area.
Washington and his party arrived at Logstown on November 24, 1753. At Logstown, Washington met with Tanaghrisson, an Iroquois Chieftan, who was angry over the encroachment by the French military of his land. Washington convinced Tanaghrisson to accompany his small group to Fort Le Boeuf.




Washington's map of the Ohio River and surrounding region containing notes on French intentions, 1753 or 1754.


On December 12, 1753, Washington and his men reached Fort Le Boeuf. Jacques Legardeur de Saint-Pierre invited Washington to dine with him that evening. Over dinner, Washington presented Saint-Pierre with the letter from Dinwiddie that demanded an immediate French withdrawal from the Ohio Country. Saint-Pierre was quite civil in his response, saying, "As to the Summons you send me to retire, I do not think myself obliged to obey it."[5] The French explained to Washington that France's claim to the region was superior to that of the British, since René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle (1643–1687) had explored the Ohio Country nearly a century earlier.[6]
Washington's party left Fort Le Boeuf early on December 16, 1753. By January 16, 1754, they had arrived in Williamsburg, Virginia. In his report, Washington stated, "The French had swept south."[7] They had constructed and garrisoned forts at Presque Isle, Le Boeuf and Venango.

[edit] War




The Victory of Montcalm's Troops at Carillon by Henry Alexander Ogden.


The French and Indian War was the last of four major colonial wars between the British, the French, and their Native American allies. Unlike the previous three wars, the French and Indian War began on North American soil and then spread to Europe, where Britain and France continued fighting. Native Americans fought for both sides, but primarily alongside the French (with one exception being the Iroquois Confederacy, which sided with the American colonies and Britain). The first major event of the war was in 1754. Major George Washington, then twenty-one years of age, was sent to negotiate boundaries with the French, who did not give up their forts. Washington led a group of Virginian (colonial) troops to confront the French at Fort Duquesne (present day Pittsburgh). Washington stumbled upon the French at the Battle of Jumonville Glen (about six miles (10 km) NW of soon-to-be-established Fort Necessity [see below]), and in the ensuing skirmish, a French Officer (Joseph Coulon de Jumonville) was killed, news of which would have certainly provoked a strong French response. Washington pulled back a few miles and established Fort Necessity. The French forced Washington and his men to retreat. Meanwhile, the Albany Congress was taking place as means to discuss further action.
This stunning British defeat heralded a string of major French victories over the next few years, at Fort Oswego, Fort William Henry, Fort Duquesne, and Carillon, where veteran Montcalm famously defeated five times his number. The sole British successes in the early years of the war came in 1755, at the Battle of Lake George, which secured the Hudson Valley; and in the taking of Fort Beauséjour (which protected the Nova Scotia frontier) by Lieutenant Colonel Robert Monckton. An unfortunate consequence of the latter was the subsequent forced deportation of the Acadian population of Nova Scotia and the Beaubassin region of Acadia.
The year 1756 brought with it William Pitt, Secretary of State of Great Britain. His leadership, and France's continued neglect of the North American theater (due in part to British domination of the seas), eventually turned the tide in favor of the British. The French were driven from many frontier posts such as Fort Niagara, and the key Fortress Louisbourg fell to the British in 1758. In 1759, Ticonderoga fell, and the Battle of the Plains of Abraham gave Quebec City to the British, who then had to withstand a siege there after the Battle of Sainte-Foy a year later. The siege was effectively broken when the British thwarted French attempts at resupply in the Battle of Restigouche. In September of 1760, Pierre François de Rigaud, Marquis de Vaudreuil-Cavagnal, the King's Governor of New France, negotiated a surrender with British General Jeffrey Amherst. General Amherst granted Vaudreuil's request that any French residents who chose to remain in the colony would be given freedom to continue worshiping in their Roman Catholic tradition, continued ownership of their property, and the right to remain undisturbed in their homes. The British provided medical treatment for the sick and wounded French soldiers and French regular troops were returned to France aboard British ships with an agreement that they were not to serve again in the present war.

[edit] Outcome




The descent of the French on St. John's, Newfoundland, 1762


Though most of the North American fighting ended when the Marquis de Vaudreuil surrendered Montreal — and effectively all of Canada — to Britain (one notable late battle allowed the capture of Spanish Havana by British and colonial forces in 1762), the war officially ended with the signing of the Treaty of Paris on February 10, 1763. The treaty resulted in France's loss of all its North American possessions east of the Mississippi (all of Canada was ceded to Britain) except Saint Pierre and Miquelon, two small islands off Newfoundland. France regained the Caribbean islands of Guadeloupe and Martinique, which had been occupied by the British. The economic value of these islands to France was greater than that of Canada at the time, because of their rich sugar crops, and the islands were easier to defend. The British, however, were happy to take New France, as defence was not an issue, and they already had many sources of sugar. Spain gained Louisiana, including New Orleans, in compensation for its loss of Florida to the British.




Map showing British territorial gains following the Treaty of Paris in pink, and Spanish territorial gains after the Treaty of Fontainebleau in yellow.


Britain also gained control of French Canada, a colony containing approximately 65,000 French, Roman Catholic residents. Early in the war, in 1755, the British had expelled French settlers from Acadia (some of whom eventually fled to Louisiana, creating the Cajun population). Now at peace, and eager to secure control of its hard-won colony, Great Britain found itself obliged to make concessions to its newly conquered subjects; this was achieved with the Quebec Act of 1774. The history of the Seven Years' War, particularly the siege of Québec and the death of British Brigadier General James Wolfe, generated a vast number of ballads, broadsides, images, maps and other printed materials, which testify to how this event continued to capture the imagination of the British public long after Wolfe's death in 1759.[8]
The European theatre of the war was settled by the Treaty of Hubertusburg on February 15, 1763. The war changed economic, political, and social relations between Britain and its colonies. It plunged Britain into debt, which the Crown chose to pay off with increased tax money from its colonies. The British were also keen on keeping the peace in North America, especially on the colonies' western frontiers, so in an effort to appease the various Indian tribes the Royal Proclamation of 1763 was issued, prohibiting colonists from engaging in further expansion west of the Appalachian Mountains. In taking these measures the British government failed to appreciate that by eliminating the French threat in North America the British had in fact removed one of the strongest incentives the colonies had for retaining their links with Great Britain. Unpopular taxes, restrictions on colonial expansion and concessions given to Quebec's Catholic population all contributed to the beginning the American Revolutionary War.

[edit] Timeline


Year
Dates
Event
Location


1754
May 28
July 3
Battle of Jumonville Glen
Battle of the Great Meadows (Fort Necessity)
Uniontown, Pennsylvania
Uniontown, Pennsylvania


1755
May 29 – July 9
June 3 – 16th
July 9
September 8
Braddock expedition
Battle of Fort Beauséjour
Battle of the Monongahela
Battle of Lake George
Western Pennsylvania
Sackville, New Brunswick
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Lake George, New York


1756
March 27
August 10 – 10th
September 8
Battle of Fort Bull
Battle of Fort Oswego
Kittanning Expedition
Rome, New York
Oswego, New York
Kittanning, Pennsylvania


1757
August 2 – 9th
December 8
Battle of Fort William Henry
Second Battle of Bloody Creek
Lake George, New York
Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia


1758
June 8 - July 26
July 7 – 8th
August 25
September 14
October 12
Second Battle of Louisbourg
Battle of Carillon (Fort Ticonderoga)
Battle of Fort Frontenac
Battle of Fort Duquesne
Battle of Fort Ligonier
Louisbourg, Nova Scotia
Ticonderoga, New York
Kingston, Ontario
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Western Pennsylvania


1759

July 6 – 26th
July 31
September 13
Battle of Ticonderoga (1759)
Battle of Fort Niagara
Battle of Beauport
Battle of the Plains of Abraham
Ticonderoga, New York
Fort Niagara, New York
Quebec City
Quebec City


1760
April 28
July 3-8th
August 16 – 24th
Battle of Sainte-Foy
Battle of Restigouche
Battle of the Thousand Islands
Quebec City
Pointe-a-la-Croix, Quebec
Ogdensburg, New York


1762
September 15
Battle of Signal Hill
St. John's, Newfoundland


1763
February 10
Treaty of Paris
Paris, France



[edit] Battles and expeditions

United States




Battle of Jumonville Glen (May 28, 1754)
Battle of Fort Necessity, aka the Battle of Great Meadows (July 3, 1754)
Braddock Expedition (Battle of the Monongahela aka Battle of the Wilderness) (July 9, 1755)
Kittanning Expedition (climax September 8, 1756)
Battle of Fort Duquesne (September 14, 1758)
Battle of Fort Ligonier (October 12, 1758)
Forbes Expedition (climax November 25, 1758)




Province of New York

Battle of Lake George (1755)
Battle of Fort Oswego (August, 1756)
Battle on Snowshoes (January 21, 1757)
Battle of Fort Bull (March 27, 1756)
Battle of Sabbath Day Point (July 26, 1757)
Battle of Fort William Henry (August 9, 1757)
Attack on German Flatts (1757) (November 12, 1757)
Battle of Carillon (July 8, 1758)
Battle of Ticonderoga (1759)
Battle of La Belle-Famille (July 24, 1759)
Battle of Fort Niagara (1759)
Battle of the Thousand Islands, 16-August 25, 1760




West Virginia

Battle of Great Cacapon (April 18, 1756)




Canada


New Brunswick

Battle of Fort Beauséjour (June 16, 1755)




Nova Scotia

Siege of Louisbourg (June 8 - July 26, 1758)




Ontario

Battle of Fort Frontenac (August 25, 1758)
Battle of the Thousand Islands, 16-August 25, 1760




Quebec

Battle of Beauport (July 31, 1759)
Battle of the Plains of Abraham (September 13, 1759)
Battle of Sainte-Foy (April 28, 1760)
Battle of Restigouche, July 3-8, (1760)




Newfoundland

Battle of Signal Hill September 15, 1762




[edit] Footnotes


^ a b c Anderson, Crucible of War, 747.
^ Jennings, Empire of Fortune, xv.
^ a b Fowler, Empires at War, 14.
^ Fowler, Empires at War, 31.
^ Fowler, Empires at War, 35.
^ Ellis, His Excellency George Washington, 5.
^ Fowler, Empires at War, 36.
^ Virtual Vault, an online exhibition of Canadian historical art at Library and Archives Canada



[edit] References


Anderson, Fred (2000). Crucible of War: The Seven Years' War and the Fate of Empire in British North America, 1754-1766. New York: Knopf. ISBN 0375406425. 
Anderson, Fred (2005). The War that Made America: A Short History of the French and Indian War. New York: Viking. ISBN 0670034541.  Released in conjunction with the 2006 PBS miniseries The War that Made America.
Ellis, Joseph J. (2004). His Excellency George Washington. New York: Vintage Books. ISBN 1400032539. 
Fowler, W. M. (2005). Empires at War: The French and Indian War and the Struggle for North America, 1754-1763. New York: Walker. ISBN 0802714110. 
Jennings, Francis (1988). Empire of Fortune: Crowns, Colonies, and Tribes in the Seven Years War in America. New York: Norton. ISBN 0393306402. 
Virtual Vault, an online exhibition of Canadian historical art at Library and Archives Canada



[edit] Further reading

Eckert, Allan W. Wilderness Empire. Bantam Books, 1994, originally published 1969. ISBN 0-553-26488-5. Second volume in a series of historical narratives, with emphasis on Sir William Johnson. Academic historians often regard Eckert's books, which are written in the style of novels, to be fiction.
Parkman, Francis. Montcalm and Wolfe: The French and Indian War. Originally published 1884. New York: Da Capo, 1984. ISBN 0-306-81077-8.


[edit] See also

Fort at Number 4
French and Indian Wars (article includes King William's War, Queen Anne's War, King George's War, and the French and Indian War.)
Great Upheaval
Military history
New Hampshire Provincial Regiment
Join, or Die, the famous cartoon by Benjamin Franklin
Pontiac's Rebellion
Rogers' Rangers
Mitchell Map
List of conflicts in Canada
List of conflicts in the United States
List of historical novels, under United States - Colonial


[edit] External links

The French and Indian War Website
Historical Preservation Archive: Transcribed Articles & Documents
Georgia Tech documents
The War That Made America from PBS




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_and_Indian_War"
Categories: Wars involving the states and peoples of North America | French and Indian War | 18th century in France | 18th century in the United Kingdom | Anglo-French WarsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Euskara
Français
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Simple English
Slovenščina
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 15:55.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
