













1950s - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "1950s";
		var wgTitle = "1950s";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "34573";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281489653;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); 1950s

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss these issues on the talk page.

It needs additional references or sources for verification. Tagged since April 2007.
It may contain original research or unverifiable claims. Tagged since July 2008.
It may not present a worldwide view of the subject. Tagged since July 2008.







Millennium:
2nd millennium


Centuries:
19th century - 20th century - 21st century


Decades:
1920s 1930s 1940s - 1950s - 1960s 1970s 1980s


Years:
1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959


Categories:
Births - Deaths - Architecture
Establishments - Disestablishments






Contents


1 Social and political movements

1.1 Korean War
1.2 Suez Crisis
1.3 European Common Market
1.4 Civil rights
1.5 Cuban Revolution


2 Domestic Policy
3 Culture

3.1 Popular music
3.2 Drama and musical theater
3.3 Film
3.4 Television
3.5 Comics

3.5.1 Public disapproval and the 1954 Senate subcommittee hearings

3.5.1.1 Comics trivia




3.6 Toys
3.7 Vehicles
3.8 Literature
3.9 Art Movements
3.10 Prizes
3.11 Sports

3.11.1 Olympics
3.11.2 FIFA World Cups




4 Science and technology
5 International issues

5.1 Africa
5.2 Americas
5.3 Asia
5.4 Europe
5.5 Oceania


6 People

6.1 Entertainers
6.2 World leaders
6.3 Others


7 External links
8 References





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Social and political movements

[edit] Korean War
The Korean War, which lasted from June 25, 1950 until a cease-fire on July 27, 1953 (as of 2009, there has been no peace signed), started as a civil war between communist North Korea and the Republic of South Korea. When it began, North and South Korea existed as provisional governments competing for control over the Korean peninsula, due to the division of Korea by outside powers. While originally a civil war, it quickly escalated into a proxy war between the capitalist powers of the United States and its allies and the Communist powers of the People's Republic of China and the Soviet Union.
On September 15, General Douglas MacArthur planned a grand strategy to dissect North Korean-occupied Korea at the city of Incheon (Song Do port) to cut off further invasion by the North Korean army. Within a few days, MacArthur's army took back Seoul (South Korea's capital). The plan succeeded, which allowed American and South Korean forces to cut off further expansion by the North Koreans. The war continued until a cease-fire was agreed to by both sides on July 27, 1953. The war left 33,742 American soldiers dead, 92,134 wounded, and 80,000 MIA or POW.

[edit] Suez Crisis




Israeli conquest of Sinai during the Suez Crisis


The Suez Crisis was a war fought on Egyptian territory in 1956. Following the nationalisation of the Suez Canal in 1956 by Gamal Abdel Nasser, the United Kingdom, France and Israel subsequently invaded. The operation was a military success, but after the United States and Soviet Union united in opposition to the invasion, the invaders were forced to withdraw. This was seen as a major humiliation, especially for the two Western European countries, and symbolizes the beginning of the end of colonialism and the weakening of European global importance, specifically the collapse of the British Empire.

[edit] European Common Market
The European Community (or Common Market), the precursor of the European Union, was established with the Treaty of Rome in 1957.

[edit] Civil rights
During this time, black people were subject to racial segregation, but the Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s was soon to be brewing. Key figures like Martin Luther King, Malcolm X and Rosa Parks highlighted and challenged those who were against Black American rights and freedom. The Little Rock Nine integrated Central High School, which was a key event in the fight to end segregation in schools and other public places.

[edit] Cuban Revolution
The overthrow of Fulgencio Batista by Fidel Castro, Che Guevara and other forces in 1959 resulted in the creation of the first communist government in the Americas. The revolution marks the end of Cuban alignment with the western world and begins its association with the eastern world, especially the Soviet Union, and raises the specter of the rise of communism in the Americas.

[edit] Domestic Policy

The 1950s saw fairly high rates of unionization, government social spending, taxes, and the like in the United States and European countries. Most Western governments were liberal or moderate, though domestic politics were also affected by reactions to communism and the Cold War.
The US federal government authorized the Interstate Highway System in June 1956, and construction had begun by the fall of that same year. The originally planned set of highways took decades to complete.


[edit] Culture

Juvenile delinquency was said to be at unprecedented epidemic proportions in the United States, though some[who?] see this era as relatively low in crime compared to today.
Continuing poverty in some regions during recessions later on in this decade. The 1950s is often mistakenly painted as the pinnacle of American prosperity. To some, it also may be considered the peak of the modern American civilization[citation needed]. The '50s was supposed to be a time of the "Affluent Society".
Beatniks, a culture of teenage and young adults who were seen as rebels and against the social norms, were popularized towards the end of the decade and criticised by older generations. They are seen as a predecessor for the counterculture and hippie movements.
Optimistic visions of a semi-utopian technological future, including such devices as the flying car, were popular.
The Day the Earth Stood Still hits movie theaters launching a cycle of Hollywood films in which Cold War fears are manifested through scenarios of alien invasion or mutation.
Considerable racial tension arose with military and school desegregation in mostly the southern part of the United States, though major controversy and uproar did not truly erupt until the 1960s.
Resurgence of evangelical Christianity including Youth for Christ (1943); the National Association of Evangelicals, the American Council of Christian Churches, the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association (1950), Conservative Baptist Association of America (1947); and Campus Crusade for Christ (1951). Christianity Today was first published in 1956. 1956 also marked the beginning of Bethany Fellowship, a small press that would grow to be a leading evangelical press.
Carl Stuart Hamblen, a religious radio broadcaster, hosted the popular show "The Cowboy Church of the Air".
The Kinsey Reports were published.
Hugh Hefner launched Playboy magazine. [1][2]


[edit] Popular music
See also: Timeline of musical events#1950s
Popular music in the early half of the 1950s featured vocalists like Frank Sinatra, Frankie Laine, Patti Page, Johnnie Ray, Kay Starr, Perry Como, Georgia Gibbs, Eddie Fisher, Darin Kerns, Teresa Brewer, Guy Mitchell and vocal groups like The Four Lads, The Four Aces, The Chordettes and The Ames Brothers. Jazz stars who came into prominence in their genre at this time included Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie, Miles Davis, John Coltrane, and Thelonious Monk. Rock and roll emerged in the middle of the decade as the teen music of choice with Pat Boone, Chuck Berry, Fats Domino, Little Richard and Buddy Holly being notable exponents. Elvis Presley was the musical superstar of the period with rock, rockabilly, gospel, and romantic balladeering being his signatures. Bill Haley, Jerry Lee Lewis and Johnny Cash were rockabilly musicians. Doo Wop was another popular genre at the time. Calypso enjoyed popularity with Jamaican Harry Belafonte being dubbed the "King of Calypso". The Kingston Trio was instrumental in launching the folk music revival of the fifties and sixties. On March 14, 1958, the RIAA certified crooner Perry Como's single, "Catch A Falling Star" its first ever Gold Record.

[edit] Drama and musical theater
Dramas included William Inge's Come Back, Little Sheba (1950), the Pulitzer Prize-winning Picnic (1953), Bus Stop (1955) and The Dark at the Top of the Stairs (1957). Tennessee Williams won a Tony Award for The Rose Tattoo (1952) and the Pulitzer Prize for Cat on a Hot Tin Roof (1955). Arthur Miller followed his 1949 success Death of a Salesman with The Crucible (1953) and A View from the Bridge (1955). Eugene O'Neill's Long Day's Journey Into Night, written 1941, was first performed 1956 and A Touch of the Poet, completed in 1942, was first performed 1958.
Musicals of the period included Guys and Dolls (1950), Rogers and Hammerstein's The King and I (1951), The Pajama Game (1954), Peter Pan (1954), Damn Yankees (1955), Lerner and Loewe's My Fair Lady (1956), Meredith Willson's The Music Man (1957), Leonard Bernstein's West Side Story (1957), Lerner and Loewe's musical film adaptation of the stage play Gigi (1958), and Rogers and Hammerstein's The Sound of Music (1959).

[edit] Film

See also: 1950s in film

With television's rapidly growing popularity producing a marked decline in fifties movie-goings, Hollywood was prompted to seek ways to draw its former audience back to the theaters. New film techniques were developed (Cinemascope, VistaVision, Cinerama, and 3-D film) that were ideally suited for the big budget sword and sandal epics The Robe, Demetrius and the Gladiators, The Ten Commandments, Ben-Hur and Cleopatra (1963). Hercules (1958) and its follow-up Hercules Unchained launched internationally popular low budget epics with bodybuilders Steve Reeves, Gordon Scott, and others cast as the heroes of Greco-Roman mythology.
The spectacle approach to film-making, Cold War paranoia, public fascination with Outer Space, and a renewed interest in science sparked by the atom bomb lent itself well to science fiction films. Martians and other alien menaces were metaphors for Communism, foreign ideologies, and the misfits threatening democracy and the American way of life. The Day the Earth Stood Still (1951 film), Invaders from Mars, Them!, The War of the Worlds, The Time Machine, It Came from Outer Space, Creature from the Black Lagoon, The Thing from Another World, This Island Earth, Earth vs. the Flying Saucers, and Forbidden Planet were popular. Queen of Outer Space (1958) with Zsa Zsa Gabor brought sex to the genre. There were also Earth-based subjects, such as 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea (1954) and When Worlds Collide (1951). Companies such as American International Pictures, Japan's Toho, and Britain's Hammer Film Productions were created to solely produce films of the fantastique genres. Japanese films included Godzilla (1954), Godzilla Raids Again (1955), and Rodan (1956), The Mysterians (1957), Varan the Unbelievable (1958), and Battle in Outer Space (1959).

Teen films came into their own during the decade, beginning with The Wild One, starring Marlon Brando as an outlaw biker. MGM's Blackboard Jungle (1955) examined race and class dynamics in an inner-city high school, and is regarded by some as the spark that lit the Rock and Roll revolution by featuring Bill Haley & His Comets' Rock Around the Clock over the opening credits. Screenings of the film occasionally led to teen violence and vandalism, and, for some, the film marks the start of visible teen rebellion in the 20th century. Rebel Without a Cause (1955) thrust its angst-ridden star James Dean to international stardom, and, unlike Blackboard Jungle, told its story from the viewpoint of its teen characters. Gidget (1959) set off a tsunami of light-hearted teen beach party and surfing movies that flirted with sex but respected fifties morality, conformism, and traditional values. Love, sex, marriage, divorce, alcoholism, dysfunctional families, and adultery were themes of A Summer Place featuring Sandra Dee and Troy Donahue as teen lovers and Dorothy McGuire and Richard Egan as their adulterous parents. Low budget teen films punctuated with rock and roll soundtracks were produced through the decade with provocative titles such as High School Hellcats, High School Confidential, Girls in the Night, Girls Town, Hound-Dog Man, Lost, Lonely, and Vicious, Running Wild, Hot Rod Girl, Juvenile Jungle, Teenage Devil Dolls, and the Ed Wood-scripted The Violent Years. Teen and sci-fi genres were wedded in B-film The Blob with Steve McQueen in his first starring role while teen horror flick I Was a Teenage Werewolf launched Michael Landon's Hollywood career.
The Walt Disney Studios enjoyed a decade of prosperity with animated feature-length films Cinderella, Alice in Wonderland, Peter Pan, Lady and the Tramp (Disney's first wide-screen animated film), and Sleeping Beauty. The studio began producing live-action period and historical films such as The Sword and the Rose, Davy Crockett, King of the Wild Frontier, Johnny Tremain, Old Yeller, Light in the Forest, Tonka, and Darby O'Gill and the Little People. The studio produced its first live-action contemporary comedy The Shaggy Dog in 1959 with Disney teen stars Annette Funicello and Tommy Kirk.
Established stars appeared in films that have come to be regarded as classics such as Sunset Boulevard (Gloria Swanson), All About Eve (Bette Davis), Some Like It Hot (Marilyn Monroe, Tony Curtis, and Jack Lemmon), High Noon (Gary Cooper and Grace Kelly), The Searchers (John Wayne), North by Northwest (Cary Grant), The Bridge on the River Kwai (Alec Guinness), Singin' in the Rain (Gene Kelly and Donald O'Connor), White Christmas (Bing Crosby), and Ben-Hur (Charlton Heston), a film which holds (with Titanic and Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King) a record for most Academy Awards. The Stanislavski method's natural approach to acting was exemplified in screen stars Marlon Brando and Paul Newman. Brando's performances in The Wild One and A Streetcar Named Desire influenced sales of T-shirts and motorcycles.
European cinema experienced a renaissance in the fifties following the deprivations of World War II. Italian director Federico Fellini won the first foreign language film Academy Award with La strada and garnered another Academy Award with Nights of Cabiria. In 1955, Swedish director Ingmar Bergman earned a Jury Prize at the Cannes Film Festival with Smiles of a Summer Night and followed the film with masterpieces The Seventh Seal and Wild Strawberries. Jean Cocteau's Orphée, a film central to his Orphic Trilogy, starred Jean Marais and was released in 1950. French director Claude Chabrol's Le Beau Serge is now widely considered the first film of the French New Wave. Notable European film stars of the period include Brigitte Bardot, Sophia Loren, Marcello Mastroianni, Max von Sydow, and Jean-Paul Belmondo. Japanese cinema reached its zenith with films from director Akira Kurosawa including Rashomon, Ikiru, Seven Samurai, Throne of Blood, and The Hidden Fortress. Other distinguished Japanese directors of the period were Yasujiro Ozu and Kenji Mizoguchi. Russian fantasy director Aleksandr Ptushko's mythological epics Sadko, Ilya Muromets, and Sampo were internationally acclaimed.

[edit] Television
Sales of television sets boomed in the fifties. Shows aired monochromatically. Popular programs included Your Show of Shows, a live 90-minute weekly sketch comedy television series (1950-1954) with Sid Caesar and Imogene Coca, and Producers' Showcase (1954-1957), a 37-episode, multi-Emmy Award-winning, 90-minute NBC anthology series that featured A-list talent such as Margot Fonteyn in The Sleeping Beauty Ballet, Helen Hayes in The Skin of Our Teeth, and The Fourposter with original Broadway cast members Hume Cronyn and Jessica Tandy. Other anthology series included Lux Video Theatre, Fireside Theater. and Kraft Television Theater.
Sitcoms offered a romanticized vision of traditional middle class American life with The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet (1952-1966), Father Knows Best (1954-1960), and ABC's The Donna Reed Show (1958-1966) exemplifying the genre. Emmy-winning comedy I Love Lucy (1952-1957) starred husband and wife Desi Arnaz and Lucille Ball and enjoyed such popularity that some businesses closed early on Monday nights in order to allow employees to hurry home for the show. In Life of Riley (1953-1958), blue collar Chester A. Riley (William Bendix) became the protype for a long line of bumbling television patriarchs that included Fred Flintstone and Archie Bunker. The show's first incarnation for the DuMont Television Network lasted a season (1949-1950) and won an Emmy during the first Emmy Awards in 1949. The Honeymooners (1955-1956) followed bus driver Ralph Kramden (Jackie Gleason) and his sewer-working sidekick Ed Norton (Art Carney) while archetypal suburban life was limned in Leave It to Beaver (1957-1963), purportedly the first sitcom to be told from a child's point of view and the first to strike a blow for television realism by displaying a toilet in an early episode. Genre series were popular with Dragnet (1952) starring Jack Webb representing police procedural drama, British syndicated series The Adventures of Robin Hood (1955) starring Richard Greene representing historical drama, and Gunsmoke (1955) with James Arness and Amanda Blake representing the western. Mid-decade, Warner Bros. produced a clutch of five westerns with Maverick starring James Garner and Cheyenne starring Clint Walker leading the group in popularity.
Musical programs distinguished the decade. Gian Carlo Menotti's Amahl and the Night Visitors, the first opera written for television, was performed on December 24, 1951 at the NBC studios in New York City, where it was telecast as the debut production of the Hallmark Hall of Fame. The opera was performed live on or near Christmas Eve annually until the mid-sixties when a production starring Teresa Stratas was filmed and telecast for several years. The Broadway musical Peter Pan was televised in 1955 on NBC with Mary Martin and Cyril Ritchard in their original roles as Peter Pan and Captain Hook. The telecast drew the largest ratings for a single television program up to that time, and was restaged in 1956 and 1960. On January 28, 1956, Elvis Presley made his first televised appearance on Stage Show, while, the same year, musical film The Wizard of Oz starring Judy Garland saw its first telecast on November 3 on CBS. Rogers and Hammerstein's Cinderella was written for a live television broadcast in 1957 and starred Julie Andrews.
Children's programs included the 19-season, Emmy-winning CBS dramatic series Lassie (1954-1973), sci-fi series Adventures of Superman (1952), variety show The Mickey Mouse Club (1955), anthology series Disneyland (1955), and live-action fairy tale anthology series Shirley Temple's Storybook (1958). Bozo the Clown enjoyed widespread franchising in early television, making him the best-known clown character in the United States. Ding Dong School (1952), Captain Kangaroo (1955) and Romper Room were aimed at pre-schoolers. Howdy Doody (1947-1960) was a pioneer in early color production during the period. Fury, Sky King, The Roy Rogers Show, Heckle and Jeckle, Mighty Mouse and similar live-action and animated half-hour shows held sway on Saturday mornings.
Quiz and panel shows included The $64,000 Question, What's My Line, I've Got a Secret, The Price is Right, Beat the Clock, Truth or Consequences, Queen for a Day, and Name That Tune. The quiz show scandals of the period rocked the nation and were the result of the revelation that contestants were secretly given assistance by the producers to arrange the outcome of a supposedly fair competition.
Newscasting and journalism were distinguished by NBC's Chet Huntley and David Brinkley, and CBS' Walter Cronkite. On July 7, 1952, the term "anchor" was coined to describe Cronkite's role at both the Democratic and Republican National Conventions, which marked the first nationally-televised convention coverage. Talk shows had their genesis in the decade with NBC's Today creating the much-sopied genre format. The Tonight Show debuted in 1954 with Steve Allen as host. The coronation of Elizabeth II was televised on June 2, 1953, highlighting the start of pan-European cooperation with regards to the exchange of TV programs. The Academy Awards show was first televised in 1953 on NBC, and the show holds the distinction of having won the most Emmys in history, with 38 wins and 167 nominations.

[edit] Comics

See also: 1950s in comics

Comic book audiences grew during and after World War II, with young adult males and returning GIs preferring material depicting sex and violence. Newspaper comic strip reprint books such as Ace Comics and King Comics ended their decade-long runs while caped crimefighters and superheroes declined in popularity. Attempts to bring out single character comic strip reprints, such as Flash Gordon, Steve Canyon, and Terry and the Pirates were unsuccessful. The Golden Age of Comic Books gave way to the Silver Age with romance comics, horror comics, western comics, science fiction comics, and crime comics in demand.
Romance comics kicked-off in 1947 with Joe Simon and Jack Kirby's Young Romance and its companion title Young Love. While both titles generally featured innocuous stories about youthful relationships, other romance comics of the period ventured into grim tales of alcoholic spouses, two-timing, and wife-beating. The genre was hugely successful with more than 150 series published during the early 1950s. Good girl comics of the period depicted the exploits of voluptuous women in bosom-hugging sweaters or jungle heroines clad in animal skin bikinis. 'Headlight' covers featured young women bound with ropes or chains, their ample breasts swelling against torn clothing.
Horror comics enjoyed a heyday during the same period. While superheroes had been menaced by warlocks, zombies, and vampires in the employ of Nazis and the Japanese through the war years, it wasn't until 1947 that the horror genre was established with Avon Periodicals' Eerie Comics, the first out-and-out horror comic. Marvel, Harvey Comics, and American Comics Group hopped aboard with the latter's Adventures Into the Unknown (1948) enjoying a twenty year run. In 1950, EC Comics published The Haunt of Fear, Tales from the Crypt, and The Vault of Horror with characters meeting gruesomely violent ends. Horror titles numbered in the dozens in the early years of the decade, most crudely scripted and drawn.
Western comics were fueled by popular television westerns. Dell Comics ate his ear, dedicated to sheep such as Roy Rogers, Gabby Hayes, The Lone Ranger, and Gene Autry. The Lone Ranger's pal, Tonto, had his own title. Dell also published titles based on popular television shows and films such as I Love Lucy and Davy Crockett, King of the Wild Frontier. DC published several western titles while Marvel saw fifty different titles including The Rawhide Kid, The Arizona Kid, Kid Colt, and The Ringo Kid.
Science fiction comics were published in abundance. DC Comics picked-up on the public's interest in science and Outer Space with Strange Adventures and Mystery in Space. EC Comics published Weird Science and Weird Fantasy.

[edit] Public disapproval and the 1954 Senate subcommittee hearings
The Cold War era seemed to encourage witch-hunting and comics found themselves blamed for the alarming increase in juvenile delinquency and other social ills. In 1948, American children across the country piled their comic book collections in schoolyards, and, encouraged by parents, teachers, and clergymen, set them ablaze. In the same year, the media began kicking comic books around. John Mason Brown of the Saturday Review of Literature described comics as the "marijuana of the nursery; the bane of the bassinet; the horror of the house; the curse of kids, and a threat to the future." Dr. Fredric Wertham's book Seduction of the Innocent rallied opposition to violence, gore, and sex in comics, arguing that it was harmful to the children who made up a large segment of the comic book audience.
The Senate Subcommittee on Juvenile Delinquency hearings in April and June 1954, focused specifically on graphic crime and horror comic books. When publisher William Gaines contended that he sold only comic books of good taste, one of Gaines' comics cover was entered into evidence which showed an axe-wielding man holding aloft a severed woman's head. When asked if he considered the cover in "good taste", Gaines replied: "Yes, I do -- for the cover of a horror comic."
Because of the unfavorable press coverage resulting from the hearings, the comic book industry adopted the Comics Code Authority (CCA), a self-regulatory ratings code that is still used by some publishers today in a modified form. In the immediate aftermath of the hearings, several publishers were forced to revamp their schedules and drastically censor or even cancel many popular long-standing comic series.

[edit] Comics trivia

Charles Schulz's Peanuts appeared for the first time on October 2, 1950 in seven US newspapers.
Superman's sweetheart Lois Lane received her own title.
Classics Illustrated continued its literary adaptations, ending its run in the early 1970s after 169 titles. In 1953, Classics Illustrated Junior debuted with fairy tale adaptations for the younger set.


[edit] Toys




Barbie, 1959


Popular toys of the period included Wham-O's Hula Hoop and its flying disc Frisbee, both introduced in 1957. Kids got around on Schwinn bicycles and Radio Flyer wagons. Nomura's 9" tall, tin, remote-controlled Robbie the Robot walked, moved his arms, and sported moving lighted pistols. Girls wanted Ohio Art Company's tin lithographed tea sets and Little Chefs Stoves, Ideal Toy Company's diaper-wetting Betsy Wetsy, and Mattel's 1959 adult-bodied fashion doll Barbie first produced on March 9,1959. Boys wanted Daisy BB guns, Lincoln Logs, and miniature Matchbox vehicles. In 1955, Walt Disney's Davy Crockett, King of the Wild Frontier saw the production of 'coonskin caps' and other frontier-themed toys. View-Masters, Silly Putty, and Slinky were bestsellers. Mr. Potato Head, a toy of plastic face parts that could be stuck into a potato, was the first toy to be advertised on network television, and in its first year of production (1952) made over $4 million. Television shows and films generated show-related toys and books. Popular board games included Milton Bradley's Candyland (1949), Chutes and Ladders, and Careers (1955).

[edit] Vehicles
This decade many auto companies produced large luxury cars designed to appear to flow through the air. Considered the "Jet Age", the new aircraft and rockets had an influence on vehicles. All Detroit manufacturers built cars with "Tail fins" and "bullet lights" --- for this reason the 1950s are referred to as the "Finned Fifties". The Cadillac Eldorado is an example of this. Cadillac is considered the epitome of luxury at this time.

[edit] Literature
See also: List of years in literature#1950s
Beatniks and the beat generation, an anti-materialistic literary movement that began with Jack Kerouac in 1948 and stretched on into the early-mid 1960s, was at its zenith in the 1950s. Such groundbreaking literature as William S. Burroughs' Naked Lunch, Allen Ginsberg's Howl, William Golding's Lord of the Flies, Jack Kerouac's On the Road, and J.D. Salinger's The Catcher in the Rye were published. Also published in this decade was J. R. R. Tolkien's epic The Lord of the Rings as well as C.S. Lewis' The Chronicles of Narnia. This decade is also marked by some of the most famous works of science fiction by science fiction writers Isaac Asimov, Arthur C. Clarke, Theodore Sturgeon, A. E. van Vogt, and Robert A. Heinlein. Other significant literary works included James Jones' From Here to Eternity, Ernest Hemingway's The Old Man and the Sea, John Cheever's The Wapshot Chronicle, Tennessee Williams' Cat on a Hot Tin Roof, Arthur Miller's The Crucible, Lorraine Hansberry's A Raisin in the Sun, Ralph Ellison's Invisible Man, Saul Bellow's The Adventures of Augie March, Ray Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451, Richard Matheson's I Am Legend, John Knowles' A Separate Peace, Ayn Rand's Atlas Shrugged, Vladimir Nabokov's Lolita, Grace Metalious' Peyton Place, C.S. Lewis' Till We Have Faces, and Boris Pasternak's Doctor Zhivago. Agatha Christie was also at a stage where she published at an average rate of one book every year.

[edit] Art Movements
Abstract expressionism, the first specifically American art movement to gain worldwide influence, was responsible for putting New York City in the centre on the artistic world, a place previously owned by Paris, France. This movement acquired its name for combining the German expressionism's emotional intensity with the anti-figurative aesthetic of the European abstract schools such as Futurism, Bauhaus and Synthetic Cubism. Jackson Pollock was one of the most influential painters of this movement, creating famous works such as No. 5, 1948.
Color Field painting and Hard-edge painting followed close on the heels of Abstract expressionism, and became the idiom for new abstraction in painting during the late 1950s. The term second generation was applied to many abstract artists who were related to but following different painterly directions than the earliest abstract expressionists. In the early 1950s Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning were enormously influential. However by the late 1950s Barnett Newman and Mark Rothko's paintings became more in focus to the next generation.
Pop art used the iconography of television, photography, comics, cinema and advertising. With its roots in dadaism, it started to take form towards the end of the 1950s when some European artists started to make the symbols and products of the world of advertising and propaganda the main subject of their artistic work. This return of figurative art, in opposition to the abstract expressionism that dominated the aesthetic scene since the end of World War II was dominated by Great Britain until the early 1960s when Andy Warhol, the most known artist of this movement began to show Pop Art in galleries in the United States.

[edit] Prizes
Albert Schweitzer is awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1952. In 1953 Churchill is given the Nobel Prize for literature. In 1955 Laxness is awarded the Nobel Prize for literature for his work with Icelandic literature. Pulitzer Prize

[edit] Sports




Paavo Nurmi and the Olympic Flame in the opening ceremony of the 1952 Summer Olympics.



Alberto Ascari (Italian racing driver)
Roger Bannister (English track and field athlete)
Yogi Berra (American baseball player)
Maureen Connolly (American tennis player)
Colin Cowdrey (English cricketer)
Alfredo Di Stéfano (Argentinian footballer)
Juan Manuel Fangio (Argentinian racing driver)
Tom Finney (English footballer)
Garrincha (Brazilian footballer)
Neil Harvey (Australian cricketer)
Sepp Herberger (German football manager)
Gordie Howe (Canadian ice hockey player)
Len Hutton (England cricketer)
Mickey Mantle (American baseball player)
Rocky Marciano (American boxer)
Stanley Matthews (English footballer)
Willie Mays (American baseball player)
Pelé (Brazilian footballer)
Ferenc Puskás (Hungarian footballer)
Helmut Rahn (German footballer)
Real Madrid (Hegemony over European soccer)
Maurice Richard (Canadian ice hockey player)
Jackie Robinson (American baseball player)
Sugar Ray Robinson (American boxer)
Bill Russell (American basketball player)
Gary Sobers (West Indies cricketer)
Brian Statham (England cricketer)
Eduard Streltsov (Russian footballer)
Frank Tyson (England cricketer)
Frank Worrell (West Indies cricketer)
Billy Wright (English footballer)
Lev Yashin (Russian footballer)
Emil Zátopek (Czech runner)


[edit] Olympics

1952 Summer Olympics held in Helsinki, Finland
1952 Winter Olympics held in Oslo, Norway
1956 Summer Olympics held in Melbourne, Australia
1956 Winter Olympics held in Cortina d'Ampezzo, Italy


[edit] FIFA World Cups

1950 World Cup hosted by Brazil, won by Uruguay
1954 World Cup hosted by Switzerland, won by West Germany
1958 World Cup hosted by Sweden, won by Brazil


[edit] Science and technology

The Miller-Urey experiment showed in 1953 that under simulated conditions resembling those thought to be possible to have existed shortly after Earth was first created, many of the basic organic molecules that form the building blocks of life are able to spontaneously form.
Francis Crick, James D. Watson, and discovered the helical structure of DNA at the Cavendish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge in 1953.
Bruce C. Heezen discovered the Mid-Atlantic Ridge.
The first polio vaccine, developed by Jonas Salk, was introduced to the general public in 1955.
The first organ transplants were done in Boston and Paris in 1954.
The term artificial intelligence was coined in 1956 by John McCarthy.
Sputnik 1 was launched in 1957.
BOAC brings into service the de Havilland Comet, the world's first commercial jet airliner to reach production.
Fortran, perhaps the single most important milestone in the development of programming languages, was developed at IBM.
The popularity of television skyrocketed, particularly in the US, where 77% of households purchased their first TV set during the fifties.[1]


[edit] International issues

Cold War and proxy wars involving the influence of the rival superpowers of the Soviet Union and the United States.
Decolonization
Establishment of the Non-aligned Movement.


[edit] Africa

Large-scale decolonization in Africa first began in the 1950s. In 1951, Libya became the first African country to gain independence in the decade, and in 1954 guerrillas began the Algerian Civil War. 1956 saw Sudan, Morocco, and Tunisia all become independent, and the next year Ghana became the first sub-saharan African nation to gain independence.
The Mau Mau began their terrorist attacks against the British in Kenya. This led to concentration camps in Kenya, the retreat of the British, and the election of former terrorist Kenyatta as leader of Kenya.
Africa experienced the beginning of large-scale top-down economic interventions in the 1950s that failed to cause improvement and led to charitable exhaustion by the West as the century went on. The widespread corruption was not dealt with and war, disease, and famine continue to be constant problems in this region.
Egyptian general Gamal Nasser overthrows the Egyptian monarchy, establishing himself as President of Egypt. Nasser becomes an influential leader in the Middle East in the 1950s, leads Arab states into war with Israel, is a major leader of the Non-Aligned Movement and promotes pan-Arab unification.


[edit] Americas

In the 1950s Latin America was the center of covert and overt conflict between the Soviet Union and the United States. Their varying collusion with national, populist, and elitist interests destabilized the region. The United States CIA orchestrated the overthrow of the Guatemalan government in 1952. In 1957 the military dictatorship of Venezuela was overthrown. This continued a pattern of regional revolution and warfare making extensive use of ground forces.
In 1957, Dr. François Duvalier came to power in an election in Haiti. He later declared himself president for life, and ruled until his death in 1971.
In 1959 Fidel Castro overthrew the regime of Fulgencio Batista in Cuba, establishing a communist government in the country. The popularity of the revolution, and such leaders as the Argentinian Che Guevara gave it global appeal and recognition. The United States however, opposed the new government led by Castro and sought to isolate it and overthrow it, resulting in Cuba moving closer to the Soviet Union.
NORAD signed in 1959 by Canada and the United States creating a unified North American aerial defense system.


[edit] Asia

Reconstruction continues in Japan in the 1950s, funded by the United States which continued its occupation of Japan since World War II. Social changes took place, including democratic elections and universal suffrage.
Korean War from 1950 to 1953. Communist forces in North Korea were supported by the People's Republic of China and the Soviet Union while South Korea was supported by the United States and other western countries. This war resulted in a permanent division between the north and south sections of Korea along political lines.
In 1953 the French colonial rulers of Indochina tried to contain a growing communist insurgency against their rule led by Ho Chi Minh. After their defeat at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 they were forced to cede independence to the nations of Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam. The Geneva Conference of 1954 separated French supporters and communist nationalists for the purposes of the ceasefire, and mandated nationwide elections by 1956; Ngo Dinh Diem established a government in the south, and refused to hold elections. Conflict then resumed between the communist north and American-supported south.


[edit] Europe
With the help of the Marshall Plan, post-war reconstruction succeeded, with some countries (including West Germany) preferring free market capitalism while others preferred Keynesian-policy welfare states. Europe continued to be divided into Western and Soviet bloc countries. The geographical point of this division came to be called the Iron Curtain. It divided Germany into East and West Germany. In 1955 West Germany joined NATO. In 1956 Soviet troops marched into Hungary.
The Soviet Union continued its domination of the territories it conquered during World War II. In 1953 Joseph Stalin, the leader of the Soviet Union, died and in the resulting power struggle, head of the KGB Lavrenti Beria was denounced and executed. Popular rebellions in East Germany in 1953 and Hungary in 1956 were brutally put down.
In 1957 the Treaty of Rome was part of the beginning of the process that led to the European Union.

[edit] Oceania
well would someone put something up please!

[edit] People

[edit] Entertainers
Actors: Marilyn Monroe, Montgomery Clift, Dorothy Dandridge, James Dean, Sandra Dee, Troy Donahue, Audrey Hepburn, Charlton Heston, Bob Hope, Rock Hudson, Grace Kelly, Jerry Lewis, Sophia Loren, Sal Mineo, Jayne Mansfield, Jerry Mathers, Hayley Mills, Paul Newman, Kim Novak, Jon Provost, Debbie Reynolds, George Reeves, Steve Reeves, William Holden, Gregory Peck, and Van Johnson.
Musicians: Perry Como, Paul Anka, Maria Callas, Bo Diddley, Charles Mingus, Ella Fitzgerald, Buddy Holly, Little Richard, Jerry Lee Lewis, Thelonious Monk, Elvis Presley, Joan Sutherland, Buddy Rich, and Andy Williams.
Others: Hugh Hefner (publisher), film directors Jacques Tati and Raj Kapoor, comics Ernie Kovacs and Steve Allen, television personalities Jack Paar, Dave Garroway, Gary Moore, and Johnny Carson,




Desi Arnaz
Lucille Ball
Jack Benny
Chuck Berry
Pat Boone
Marlon Brando
Yul Brynner
June Carter
Johnny Cash
Clay Cole
John Coltrane
Tony Curtis
Peter Cushing
Dalida
Miles Davis
Diana Dors
Kirk Douglas




Ava Gardner
John Gregson
Dizzy Gillespie
The Goons
Lionel Hampton
Tony Hancock
William Holden
Jerry Lewis
Dean Martin
Charles Mingus
Charlie Parker
Patti Page
Art Pepper
James Dean
Carl Perkins
Jimmie Rodgers
Gale Storm
Jack Webb
P.Ramlee





[edit] World leaders




President Arturo Frondizi (Argentina)
Prime Minister Robert Menzies (Australia)
President Getúlio Vargas (Brazil)
President Juscelino Kubitschek (Brazil)
Prime Minister Louis St. Laurent (Canada)
Prime Minister John Diefenbaker (Canada)
Chairman Mao Zedong (People's Republic of China)
President Chiang Kai-shek (Republic of China on Taiwan)
King George VI (Commonwealth realms)
Queen Elizabeth II (Commonwealth realms)
President Gamal Abdel Nasser (Egypt)
Emperor Haile Selassie (Ethiopia)
President Vincent Auriol (France)
President René Coty (France)
President Charles de Gaulle (France)
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru (India)
President Sukarno (Indonesia)
Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion (Israel)
Taoiseach John A. Costello (Ireland)
Taoiseach Éamon de Valera (Ireland)
Taoiseach Seán Lemass (Ireland)




Emperor Hirohito (Japan)
Prime Minister George Borg Olivier (Malta)
Prime Minister António de Oliveira Salazar (Portugal)
Francisco Franco (Spain)
Joseph Stalin (Soviet Union)
Nikita Khrushchev (Soviet Union)
Prime Minister Tage Erlander (Sweden)
President Celal Bayar (Turkey)
Prime Minister Adnan Menderes (Turkey)
Prime Minister Sir Winston Churchill (United Kingdom)
Prime Minister Sir Anthony Eden (United Kingdom)
Prime Minister Harold Macmillan (United Kingdom)
President Harry S. Truman (United States)
President Dwight D. Eisenhower (United States)
Pope Pius XII (Vatican)
Pope John XXIII (Vatican)
Chancellor Konrad Adenauer (West Germany)
President Josip Broz Tito (Yugoslavia)
Tuanku Abd Rahman Putra Al Haj (Malaya)





[edit] Others
history of the 1950s

[edit] External links

Atomic Monsters.com - B-movie reviews featuring the best and worst sci-fi monster movies of the atomic age. Video clips, monsterous animations, letters page, more!
FiftiesWeb - History, fashion, music, classic TV and more
WWW-VL: 1950s History
The 1950s Week-By-Week includes news, trends & pop culture
Hollywood and The Movies During the 1950s
The Literature & Culture of the American 1950s
Remembering The 50s: Take a trip back to yesteryear and those fabulous fifties
"The Golden Age of Couture: Paris and London 1947-57, exhibition about 1950s fashion". Victoria and Albert Museum. http://www.vam.ac.uk/vastatic/microsites/1486_couture/. 
THE FIFTIES (German)


[edit] References


^ http://www.tvhistory.tv/Annual_TV_Households_50-78.JPG





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1950s"
Categories: 1950sHidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from April 2007 | Articles that may contain original research since July 2008 | Articles with limited geographic scope | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since March 2009 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Asturianu
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Gaeilge
Gàidhlig
贛語
한국어
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ქართული
Қазақша
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
O'zbek
Polski
Português
Ripoarisch
Română
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
Tatarça/Татарча
Українська
Walon
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 12:34.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
