











Saudi Arabia - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Saudi_Arabia";
		var wgTitle = "Saudi Arabia";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "349303";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282305263;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Saudi Arabia

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"KSA" redirects here. For other uses, see KSA (disambiguation).





Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
المملكة العربية السعودية
al-Mamlaka al-ʻArabiyya as-Suʻūdiyya










Flag
Coat of arms





Motto: "There is no god but Allah, Muhammad is the messenger of Allah" (the Kalimah)


Anthem: "Aash Al Maleek"
"Long live the King"










Capital
(and largest city)
Riyadh
24°39′N 46°46′E﻿ / ﻿24.65°N 46.767°E﻿ / 24.65; 46.767


Official languages
Arabic


Demonym
Saudi, Saudi Arabian


Government
Islamic absolute monarchy


 - 
King
Abdullah bin Abdul Aziz


 - 
First Crown Prince
Sultan bin Abdul Aziz


 - 
Second Crown Prince
Nayef bin Abdul Aziz


Legislature
Council of Ministers
(Appointed by the King of Saudi Arabia)


Establishment


 - 
First Saudi State established
1744 


 - 
Second Saudi State established
1824 


 - 
Third Saudi State declared
January 8, 1926 


 - 
Recognized
May 20, 1927 


 - 
Kingdom Unified
September 23, 1932 


Area


 - 
Total
2,149,690 km2 (14th)
829,996 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
negligible


Population


 - 
2007 estimate
27,601,038[1] (46th)


 - 
Density
11/km2 (205th)
29/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$555.055 billion[2] (22nd)


 - 
Per capita
$22,851[2] (38th)


GDP (nominal)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$381.938 billion[2] (25th)


 - 
Per capita
$15,724[2] (39th)


HDI (2004)
▲ 0.812 (high) (61st)


Currency
Riyal (SAR)


Time zone
AST (UTC+3)


 - 
Summer (DST)
(not observed) (UTC+3)


Drives on the
right


Internet TLD
.sa


Calling code
966


1
Population estimate includes 5,576,076 non-nationals.


The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, KSA (Arabic: المملكة العربية السعودية‎, al-Mamlaka al-ʻArabiyya as-Suʻūdiyya), is an Arab country and the largest country of the Arabian Peninsula. It is bordered by Jordan on the northwest, Iraq on the north and northeast, Kuwait, Qatar, Bahrain, and the United Arab Emirates on the east, Oman on the southeast, and Yemen on the south. The Persian Gulf lies to the northeast and the Red Sea to its west. It has an estimated population of 27.6 million, and its size is approximately 2,150,000 square kilometres (830,000 sq mi).
The Kingdom is sometimes called "The Land of the Two Holy Mosques" in reference to Makkah and Medinah, the two holiest places in Islam. In English, it is most commonly referred to as Saudi Arabia (pronounced /ˈsɔːdɪ/ or /ˈsaʊdɪ əˈreɪbɪə/). The current Kingdom was founded by Abdul-Aziz bin Saud, whose efforts began in 1902 when he captured the Al-Saud’s ancestral home of Riyadh, and culminated in 1932 with the proclamation and recognition of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, though its national origins go back as far as 1744 with the establishment of the First Saudi State.
Saudi Arabia is the world's leading petroleum exporter. Petroleum exports fuel the Saudi economy.[3] Oil accounts for more than 90 percent of exports and nearly 75 percent of government revenues, facilitating the creation of a welfare state,[4][5] which the government has found difficult to fund during periods of low oil prices.[6] Saudi Arabia is often called, along with Russia, an energy superpower. Human rights groups such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have repeatedly expressed concern about the state of human rights in Saudi Arabia, although these concerns have been dismissed by the Saudi government.




Contents


1 History
2 Geography

2.1 Climate


3 Government

3.1 Law
3.2 Human rights


4 Emirates
5 Economy

5.1 Development
5.2 Foreign labour


6 Demographics
7 Education
8 Sports
9 Culture

9.1 Music and dance
9.2 Dress
9.3 Food
9.4 Film and theatre
9.5 Literature
9.6 Religion


10 Military
11 Foreign relations
12 Cities
13 International rankings
14 See also

14.1 Lists


15 Notes and references
16 Bibliography
17 Further reading
18 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


History
Main article: History of Saudi Arabia




The founder of modern Saudi Arabia, King Abdul Aziz, converses with U.S. President Franklin Delano Roosevelt on board a ship returning from the Yalta Conference in 1945


Although the region in which the country stands today has an ancient history, the emergence of the Saudi dynasty began in central Arabia in 1744. That year, Muhammad ibn Saud, the ruler of the town of Ad-Dir'iyyah near Riyadh, joined forces with a cleric, Muhammad ibn Abd-al-Wahhab, to create a new political entity. This alliance formed in the 18th century and remains the basis of Saudi Arabian dynastic rule today. Over the next 150 years, the fortunes of the Saud family rose and fell several times as Saudi rulers contended with Egypt, the Ottoman Empire, and other Arabian families for control on the peninsula (see First Saudi State and Second Saudi State). The third and current Saudi state was founded in the early 20th century by King Abdul Aziz Al-Saud (known internationally as Abdul Aziz Ibn Saud).
In 1902, at the age of only 22, Abdul Aziz Ibn Saud re-captured Riyadh, the Al-Saud dynasty's ancestral capital, from the rival Al Rashid family. Continuing his conquests, Abdul Aziz subdued Al-Hasa, Al-Qatif, the rest of Nejd, and Hejaz between 1913 and 1926. On January 8, 1926, Abdul Aziz bin Saud became the King of Hejaz. On January 29, 1927, he took the title King of Nejd (his previous Nejdi title was Sultan). By the Treaty of Jeddah, signed on May 20, 1927, the United Kingdom recognized the independence of Abdul Aziz's realm, then known as the Kingdom of Hejaz and Nejd. In 1932, the principal regions of Al-Hasa, Qatif, Nejd and Hejaz were unified to form the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Abdul Aziz's military and political successes were not mirrored economically until vast reserves of oil were discovered in March 1938. Development programmes, which were delayed due to the onset of the Second World War in 1939, began in earnest in 1946 and by 1949 production was in full swing. Oil has provided Saudi Arabia with economic prosperity and a great deal of leverage in the international community.
Prior to his death in 1953, Abdul Aziz, aware of the difficulties facing other regional absolute rulers reliant on extended family networks, attempted to regulate the succession.
Saud succeeded to the throne on his father's death in 1953. However, by the early 1960s the Kingdom was in jeopardy due to Saud's economic mismanagement and failure to deal effectively with a regional challenge from Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser. As a consequence, Saud was deposed in favour of Faisal in 1964.
Intra-family rivalry was one of the factors that led to the assassination of Faisal by his nephew, Prince Faisal bin Musa'id, in 1975. He was succeeded by King Khalid until 1982 and then by King Fahd. When Fahd died in 2005, his half-brother, Abdullah, ascended to the throne.

Geography
Main article: Geography of Saudi Arabia




Map of Saudi Arabia


The Kingdom occupies about 80 percent of the Arabian peninsula. In 2000 Saudi Arabia and Yemen signed an agreement to settle their long-running border dispute.[7] A significant length of the country's southern borders with the United Arab Emirates, and Oman, are not precisely defined or marked, so the exact size of the country remains unknown. The Saudi government's estimate is 2,217,949 km² (856,356 sq mi). Other reputable estimates vary between 1,960,582 km²[8] (756,934 mi) and 2,240,000 km² (864,869 mi²). The kingdom is commonly listed as the world's 14th largest state.
Saudi Arabia's geography is varied. From the western coastal region (Tihamah), the land rises from sea level to a peninsula-long mountain range (Jabal al-Hejaz) beyond which lies the plateau of Nejd in the center. The southwestern 'Asir region has mountains as high as 3,000 m (9,840 ft) and is known for having the greenest and freshest climate in all of the country, one that attracts many Saudis to resorts such as Abha in the summer months. The east is primarily rocky or sandy lowland continuing to the shores of the Persian Gulf. The geographically hostile Rub' al Khali ("Empty Quarter") desert along the country's imprecisely defined southern borders contains almost no life.




Desert view in Saudi Arabia. The reddish color of sand and rocky hills in the background indicate this image was taken in the middle/western part of the kingdom


Mostly uninhabited, much of the nation's landmass consists of desert and semi-arid regions, with a dwindling traditional Bedouin population. In these parts of the country, vegetation is limited to weeds, xerophytic herbs and shrubs. Less than two percent of the kingdom's total area is arable land. Population centers are mainly located along the eastern and western coasts and densely populated interior oases such as Hofuf and Buraydah. In some extended areas, primarily the Rub' al-Khali and the Arabian Desert, there is no population whatsoever, although the petroleum industry is constructing a few planned communities there. Saudi Arabia has no permanent year-round rivers or lakes; however, its coastline extends for 2,640 km (1,640 mi) and, along the Red Sea, harbors world-class coral reefs, including the Gulf of Aqaba.
Native animals include the ibex, wildcats, baboons, wolves, and hyenas in the mountainous highlands. Small birds are found in the oases. The coastal area on the Red Sea with its coral reefs has a rich marine life.

Climate
Extreme heat and aridity are characteristic of most of Saudi Arabia. It is one of the few places in the world where summer temperatures above 50 °C (122 °F) have been recorded,[citation needed] 51.7 °C (124 °F) being the highest ever recorded temperature. In winter, frost or snow can occur in the interior and the higher mountains, although this only occurs once or twice in a decade. The lowest recorded temperature is −12.0 °C (10.4 °F), recorded at Turaif. The average winter temperature ranges from 8° to 20 °C (47° to 68 °F) in January in interior cities such as Riyadh and 19° to 29 °C (66° to 83 °F) in Jeddah, on the Red Sea coast. The average summer temperature range (in July) is 27° to 43 °C (81° to 109 °F) in Riyadh and 27° to 38 °C (80° to 100 °F) in Jeddah. Nighttime temperatures in the central deserts can be famously chilly even in summer, as the sand gives up daytime heat rapidly once the sun has set. Annual precipitation is usually sparse (up to 100 mm or 4 in in most regions), although sudden downpours can lead to violent flash floods in wadis. Annual rainfall in Riyadh averages 100 mm (4 inches) and falls almost exclusively between January and May; the average in Jeddah is 54 mm (2.1 in) and occurs between November and January.

Government
Main article: Politics of Saudi Arabia




King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia


The central institution of the Saudi Arabian government is the Saudi monarchy. The Basic Law of Government adopted in 1992 declared that Saudi Arabia is a monarchy ruled by the sons and grandsons of the first king, Abd Al Aziz Al Saud. It also claims that the Qur'an is the constitution of the country, which is governed on the basis of the Sharia (Islamic Law). According to The Economist's Democracy Index, the Saudi government is the ninth most authoritarian regime in the world.
There are no recognized political parties or national elections, except the local elections which were held in the year 2005 when participation was reserved for male citizens only.[9] The king's powers are theoretically limited within the bounds of Shari'a and other Saudi traditions. He also must retain a consensus of the Saudi royal family, religious leaders (ulema), and other important elements in Saudi society. The Saudi government spreads Islam by funding construction of mosques and Qur'an schools around the world. The leading members of the royal family choose the king from among themselves with the subsequent approval of the ulema.
Saudi kings have gradually developed a central government. Since 1953, the Council of Ministers, appointed by the king, has advised on the formulation of general policy and directed the activities of the growing bureaucracy. This council consists of a prime minister, the first prime minister and twenty ministers.
Legislation is by resolution of the Council of Ministers, ratified by royal decree, and must be compatible with the Shari'a. A 150-member Consultative Assembly, appointed by the King, has limited legislative rights. Justice is administered according to the Shari'a by a system of religious courts whose judges are appointed by the king on the recommendation of the Supreme Judicial Council, composed of twelve senior jurists. Independence of the judiciary is protected by law. The king acts as the highest court of appeal and has the power to pardon. Access to high officials (usually at a majlis; a public audience) and the right to petition them directly are well-established traditions.
The combination of relatively high oil prices and exports led to a revenues windfall for Saudi Arabia during 2004 and early 2005. For 2004 as a whole, Saudi Arabia earned about $116 billion in net oil export revenues, up 35 percent from 2003 revenue levels. Saudi net oil export revenues are forecast to increase in 2005 and 2006, to $150 billion and $154 billion, respectively, mainly due to higher oil prices. Increased oil prices and consequent revenues since the price collapse of 1998 have significantly improved Saudi Arabia's economic situation, with real GDP growth of 5.2 percent in 2004, and forecasts of 5.7% and 4.8% growth for 2005 and 2006, respectively.
For fiscal year 2004, Saudi Arabia originally had been expecting a budget deficit. However, this was based on an extremely conservative price assumption of $19 per barrel for Saudi oil and an assumed production of 7.7 Mbbl/d (1,220,000 m³/d). Both of these estimates turned out to be far below actual levels. As a result, as of mid-December 2004, the Saudi Finance Ministry was expecting a huge budget surplus of $26.1 billion, on budget revenues of $104.8 billion (nearly double the country's original estimate) and expenditures of $78.6 billion (28 percent above the approved budget levels). This surplus is being used for several purposes, including: paying down the Kingdom's public debt (to $164 billion from $176 billion at the start of 2004); extra spending on education and development projects; increased security expenditures (possibly an additional $2.5 billion dollars in 2004; see below) due to threats from terrorists; and higher payments to Saudi citizens through subsidies (for housing, education, health care, etc.). For 2005, Saudi Arabia is assuming a balanced budget, with revenues and expenditures of $74.6 billion each.
In spite of the recent surge in its oil income, Saudi Arabia continues to face serious long-term economic challenges, including high rates of unemployment (12 percent of Saudi nationals),[10] one of the world's fastest population growth rates, and the consequent need for increased government spending. All of these place pressures on Saudi oil revenues. The Kingdom also is facing serious security threats, including a number of terrorist attacks (on foreign workers, primarily) in 2003 and 2004. In response, the Saudis reportedly have ramped up spending in the security area (reportedly by 50 percent in 2004, from $5.5 billion in 2003). Saudi Arabia's per capita oil export revenues remain far below high levels reached during the 1970s and early 1980s. In 2007, Saudi Arabia's citizens earned around $20,700 per person, versus $22,589 in 1980, but it is catching up. This 80 percent decline in real per capita oil export revenues since 1980 is in large part because Saudi Arabia's young population has nearly tripled since 1980, while oil export revenues in real terms have fallen by over 40 percent (despite recent increases). Meanwhile, Saudi Arabia has faced nearly two decades of heavy budget and trade deficits, the expensive 1990-1991 war with Iraq, and total public debt of around $175 billion. On the other hand, Saudi Arabia does have extensive foreign assets (around $110 billion) which provide a substantial fiscal "cushion."
Saudi municipal elections took place in 2005 and some commentators saw this as a first tentative step towards the introduction of democratic processes in the Kingdom, including the legalization of political parties. Other analysts of the Saudi political scene were more skeptical.[11]
Saudi Arabia has been the subject of widespread allegations of corruption, for example that BAE Systems bribed government officials and the Saudi Royal Family in order to win the Al Yamamah arms contract.[12]

Law
The Basic Law, in 1992, declared that Saudi Arabia is a monarchy ruled by the progeny of King Abd Al Aziz Al Saud. It also declared the Qur'an as the constitution of the country, governed on the basis of Islamic law.[13]
Criminal cases are tried under Sharia courts in the country. These courts exercise authority over the entire population including foreigners (regardless of religion). Cases involving small penalties are tried in Shari'a summary courts. More serious crimes are adjudicated in Shari'a courts of common pleas. Courts of appeal handle appeals from Shari'a courts.[13]
Civil cases may also be tried under Sharia courts with one exception: Shia may try such cases in their own courts. Other civil proceedings, including those involving claims against the Government and enforcement of foreign judgments, are held before specialized administrative tribunals, such as the Commission for the Settlement of Labor Disputes and the Board of Grievances.[13]
Main sources of Saudi law are Hanbali fiqh as set out in a number of specified scholarly treatises by authoritative jurists, other schools of law, state regulations and royal decrees (where these are relevant), and custom and practice.[14]
The Saudi legal system prescribes capital punishment or corporal punishment, including amputations of hands and feet for certain crimes such as murder, robbery, rape, drug smuggling, homosexual activity, and adultery. The courts may impose less severe punishments, such as floggings, for less serious crimes against public morality such as drunkenness.[15] Murder, accidental death and bodily harm are open to punishment from the victim's family. Retribution may be sought in kind or through blood money. The blood money payable for a woman's accidental death is half as much as that for a man.[16] The main reason for this is that, according to Islamic law, men are expected to be providers for their families and therefore are expected to earn more money in their lifetimes. The blood money from a man would be expected to sustain his family, for at least a short time. Honor killings are also not punished as severely as murder. This generally stems from the fact that honor killings are within a family, and done to compensate for some dishonorable act committed. Slavery was abolished in 1962.[17][18]

Human rights
Main article: Human rights in Saudi Arabia
Several international human rights organizations, such as Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International and the United Nations Human Rights Committee have issued reports critical of the Saudi legal system and its human rights record in various political, legal, and social areas, especially its severe limitations on the rights of women. The Saudi government typically dismisses such reports as being outright lies or asserts that its actions are based on its adherence to Islamic law.
In 2002, the United Nations Committee against Torture criticized Saudi Arabia over the amputations and floggings it carries out under the Shari'a. The Saudi delegation responded defending its legal traditions held since the inception of Islam in the region 1300 years ago and rejected "interference" in its legal system.[19]
Saudi Arabia is also the only country in the world where women are banned from driving on public roads. Women may drive off-road and in private housing compounds - some of which extend to many square miles.[20] The ban may be lifted soon, although with certain conditions.[21]
The Government views its interpretation of Islamic law as its sole source of guidance on human rights. In 2000, the Government approved the October legislation, which the Government claimed would address some of its obligations under the Convention Against Torture or Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.[13]

"The state protects human rights in accordance with the Islamic Shari'ah."
– Basic Law, Chapter 5, Article 26.[22]

The first independent human rights organization, the National Society for Human Rights was established in 2004. The Saudi Government is an active censor of Internet reception within its borders.[23] A Saudi blogger, Fouad al-Farhan, was jailed for five months in solitary confinement in December, 2007, without charges, after criticizing Saudi religious, business and media figures.[24]

Emirates
Main articles: Emirates of Saudi Arabia and Governorates of Saudi Arabia
Saudi Arabia is divided into 13 emirates[25] (manatiq, - singular mintaqah). The emirates are further divided into governorates.


Emirate
Capital
L. Map


Al Bahah
Al Bahah city




Ar Riyadh
Al Bahah
Jizan
Asir
Najran
Makkah
Eastern Province
Al Qasim
Al Madinah
Northern Border
Ha'il
Tabuk
Al Jawf





Northern Border
Arar


Al Jawf
Al Jawf city


Medina
Medina


Al Qasim
Buraidah


Ha'il
Ha'il city


Asir
Abha


Eastern Province
Dammam


Al Riyadh
Riyadh city


Tabuk
Tabuk city


Najran
Najran city


Makkah
Mecca


Jizan
Jizan city



Economy
Main article: Economy of Saudi Arabia




Aramco, the Saudi national oil company, whose main offices are in Dhahran






Saudi Arabia is the largest exporter of petroleum in the world


Saudi Arabia's economy is petroleum-based; roughly 75% of budget revenues and 90% of export earnings come from the oil industry. The oil industry comprises about 45% of Saudi Arabia's gross domestic product, compared with 40% from the private sector (see below). Saudi Arabia officially has about 260 billion barrels (4.1×1010 m3) of oil reserves, comprising about 24% of the world's proven total petroleum reserves.[26]
The government is attempting to promote growth in the private sector by privatizing industries such as power and telecom. Saudi Arabia announced plans to begin privatizing the electricity companies in 1999, which followed the ongoing privatization of the telecommunications company. Shortages of water and rapid population growth may constrain government efforts to increase self-sufficiency in agricultural products.
In the 1990s, Saudi Arabia experienced a significant contraction of oil revenues combined with a high rate of population growth. Per capita income fell from a high of $11,700 at the height of the oil boom in 1981 to $6,300 in 1998.[27] Recent oil price increases have helped boost per capita GDP to $17,000 in 2007 dollars,[28] or about $7,400 adjusted for inflation.[29]
Recent oil price increases have triggered a second oil boom, pushing Saudi Arabia's budget surplus to $28 billion (110SR billion) in 2005. Tadawul (the Saudi stock market index) finished 2004 with a massive 76.23% to close at 4437.58 points. Market capitalization was up 110.14% from a year earlier to stand at $157.3 billion (589.93SR billion), which makes it the biggest stock market in the Middle East.‏
OPEC limits its members' oil production based on their "proven reserves." The higher their reserves, the more OPEC allows them to produce.[citation needed] Saudi Arabia's published reserves have shown little change since 1980, with the main exception being an increase of about 100 billion barrels (1.6×1010 m3) between 1987 and 1988.[30] Matthew Simmons has suggested that Saudi Arabia is greatly exaggerating its reserves and may soon show production declines (see peak oil).[31] To diversify the economy, Saudi Arabia launched a new city on the western coast with investments exceeding $26.6 billion. The city, which is named "King Abdullah Economic City", will be built near al-Rabegh industrial city north to Jeddah. The new city, where construction work started in December 2005, includes a port which is the largest port of the kingdom. Extending along a coastline of 35 km, the city will also include petrochemical, pharmaceutical, tourism, finance and education and research areas. Saudi Arabia officially became a World Trade Organization member in December 2005.

Development
Saudi Arabia is one of the few fastest growing countries in the world with a high per capita income of $20,700 (2007), Saudi Arabia will be launching six economic cities (King Abdullah Economic City)[32] which will be completed by the year 2020. These six new industrialized cities will diversify the economy of Saudi Arabia, and will also increase the per capita income to a high level. The King of Saudi Arabia has announced that the per capita income is forecast, to rise from $15,000 in 2006 to $33,500 in 2020.[33] The cities will be spread around Saudi Arabia to promote diversification for each region and their economy, and the cities will contribute $150 billion to the GDP.
However the urban areas of Riyadh and Jeddah will contribute $287 billion dollars by the year 2020.[34]

Foreign labour
Despite the government's efforts to promote Saudization, the country draws a significant portion of its labour force from foreign countries, especially from South and Southeast Asia (notably India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Indonesia, the Philippines, Nepal, Sri Lanka), East Asia, East Africa and from other Middle Eastern countries.[35] There are also some people from North America, South America, and Europe. Hundreds of thousands of low-skilled workers and skilled workers from regions of the developing world migrate to Saudi Arabia, sometimes only for a short period of time, to work. Although exact figures are not known, skilled experts in the banking and services professions seek work in the Kingdom.

Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Saudi Arabia
Further information: Bedouin and Tribes of Arabia




Demographics of Saudi Arabia, FAO data, 2005; Number of inhabitants in thousands


Saudi Arabia's population as of July 2006 is estimated to be about 27,019,731, including an estimated 5,576,076 resident foreigners.[36] Until the 1960s, a majority of the population was nomadic; but presently more than 95% of the population is settled, due to rapid economic and urban growth. As recently as the 1950s, the Saudi Arabia’s slave population was estimated at 450,000 — about 20% of the population.[37][38] Slavery was officially abolished in 1962.[17][18] The birth rate is 29.56 births per 1,000 people. The death rate is 2.62 deaths per 1,000 people. Some cities and oases have densities of more than 1,000 people per square kilometer (2,600/sq mi).
About 23% of the population is made up of foreign nationals living in Saudi Arabia.[39] Approximately 12% of the population is South Asian or of South Asian ancestry, including Indians, Pakistanis, and Bangladeshis. In addition, there are some citizens of Asian, Northeast African, and Sub-Saharan ancestry. Many Arabs from nearby countries are employed in the kingdom. There are over eight million migrants from countries all around the world, (including non-Muslims):[40] Indian: 1.4 million, Bangladeshi: 1 million, Filipino: 950,000, Pakistani: 900,000, Egyptian: 900,000, Yemeni: 800,000, Indonesian: 500,000, Sri Lankan: 350,000, Sudanese: 250,000, Syrian: 100,000 and Turkish: 80,000.[41] There are around 100,000 Westerners in Saudi Arabia, most of whom live in compounds or gated communities.
Saudi Arabia expelled 800,000 Yemenis in 1990 and 1991 to punish Yemen for its opposition to the Gulf War against Iraq. An estimated 240,000 Palestinians are living in Saudi Arabia. They are not allowed to hold or even apply for Saudi citizenship, because of Arab League instructions barring the Arab states from granting them citizenship in order "to avoid dissolution of their identity and protect their right to return to their homeland". Palestinians are the sole foreign group that cannot benefit from a 2004 law passed by Saudi Arabia's Council of Ministers, which entitles expatriates of all nationalities who have resided in the kingdom for ten years to apply for citizenship with priority being given to holders of degrees in various scientific fields.[42] The Articles 12.4 and 14.1 of the Executive Regulation of Saudi Citizenship System can be interpreted as requiring applicants to be Muslim.[43]
The majority of the population adheres to a theological interpretation within Islam most commonly known as Salafism or Wahhabism. Writing in 2006 for the Council on Foreign Relations Lionel Beehner estimated the Shia population of the country at 15 percent.[44] Shia in Saudi Arabia reside primarily in the eastern provinces on the Gulf, southwestern provinces bordering Yemen, Mecca and particularly, Medina, as well as other larger cities in the kingdom.[citation needed]
The Saudi government does not recognize any religions other than Islam, and does not grant non-Muslims the right to practice their faith. Though the government officially claims to guarantee the right of private worship of non-Muslims, this right is not always respected in practice and is not defined in law[45]Comprehensive statistics for the denominations of foreigners are not available, but they include Muslims from the various branches and schools of Islam, Christians, Hindus, Buddhists, and Jews. An estimated 90 percent of the Filipino community is Christian, and private Christian religious gatherings reportedly take place throughout the country[46].

Education
Main article: Education in Saudi Arabia
When the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was founded in 1932, education was not accessible to everyone and limited to individualized instruction at religious schools in mosques in urban areas. These schools taught Islamic law and basic literacy skills. By the end of the century, Saudi Arabia had a nationwide educational system providing free training from preschool through university to all citizens.
The primary education system began in Saudi Arabia in the 1930s. By 1945, King Abdulaziz bin Abdelrahman Al-Saud, the country's founder, had initiated an extensive program to establish schools in the Kingdom. Six years later, in 1951, the country had 226 schools with 29,887 students. In 1954, the Ministry of Education was established, headed by then Prince Fahd bin Abdulaziz as the first Minister of Education. The first university, now known as King Saud University, was founded in Riyadh in 1957.
Today, Saudi Arabia's nationwide public educational system comprises twenty universities, more than 24,000 schools, and a large number of colleges and other educational and training institutions. The system provides students with free education, books and health services and is open to every Saudi. Over 25 percent of the annual State budget is for education including vocational training. The Kingdom has also worked on scholarship programs to send students overseas to the United States, Canada, France, the United Kingdom, Australia, Japan, Malaysia and other nations. Currently thousands of students are being sent to higher-educations programs every year.
The study of Islam remains at the core of the Saudi educational system. The Islamic aspect of the Saudi national curriculum is examined in a 2006 report by Freedom House.[47] The report found that in religious education classes (in any religious school), children are taught to deprecate other religions, in addition to other branches of Islam.[48] The Saudi religious studies curriculum is taught outside the Kingdom in madrasah throughout the world.

Sports
Men can often be found playing sports. Women rarely participate in sports, and always away from the presence of men; this often leads to indoor gyms. Even though football is the most popular sport, Saudi Arabia has recently participated in the Summer Olympic Games and in international competitions in volleyball and other sports. The Saudi Arabian national youth baseball team has also participated in the Little League World Series. The Saudi Arabia national football team is often most known for being in four consecutive times in the FIFA World Cup and six times in the AFC Asian Cup, which the team won three times and was runner-up three times. Some popular football players include Majed Abdullah, Mohamed Al-Deayea, Sami Al-Jaber, and Saeed Al-Owairan.

Culture




Street view of Mecca






A recreation park in Riyadh


Saudi Arabian culture mainly revolves around the religion of Islam. Islam's two holiest sites, Mecca and Medina, are located in the country. Five times every day, Muslims are called to prayer from the minarets of mosques which are scattered around the country. The weekend begins on Thursday due to Friday being the holiest day for Muslims. All Muslim countries have a Thursday-Friday or Friday-Saturday weekend.[49] The public practice of any religion other than Islam, including Christianity and Judaism, the presence of churches, and possession of non-Islamic religious materials is not allowed except in Aramco compounds in which many expatriates, ?? attend church services.[citation needed] Saudi Arabia's cultural heritage is celebrated at the annual Jenadriyah cultural festival.
However, secret negotiations are rumored to be taking place between the Vatican and Saudi Arabia regarding authorization to build Catholic Churches in the Kingdom.[50]

Music and dance
One of Saudi Arabia's most compelling folk rituals is the Al Ardha, the country's national dance. This sword dance is based on ancient Bedouin traditions: drummers beat out a rhythm and a poet chants verses while sword-carrying men dance shoulder to shoulder. Al-sihba folk music, from the Hejaz, has its origins in al-Andalus. In Mecca, Medina and Jeddah, dance and song incorporate the sound of the mizmar, an oboe-like woodwind instrument in the performance of the mizmar dance. The drum is also an important instrument according to traditional and tribal customs. Samri is a popular traditional form of music and dance in which poetry is sung.

Dress
Saudi Arabian dress follows strictly the principles of hijab (the Islamic principle of modesty, especially in dress). The predominantly loose and flowing but covering garments are helpful in Saudi Arabia's desert climate. Traditionally, men usually wear an ankle-length shirt woven from wool or cotton (known as a thawb), with a keffiyeh (a large checkered square of cotton held in place by a cord coil) or a ghutra (a plain white square made of finer cotton, also held in place by a cord coil) worn on the head. For rare chilly days, Saudi men wear a camel-hair cloak (bisht) over the top. Women's clothes are decorated with tribal motifs, coins, sequins, metallic thread, and appliques. Women are required to wear an abaya or modest clothing when in public.

Food
Islamic dietary laws forbid the eating of pork and the drinking of alcohol, and this law is enforced strictly throughout Saudi Arabia. Arabic unleavened bread, or khobz, is eaten with almost all meals. Other staples include lamb, grilled chicken, falafel (deep-fried chickpea balls), shawarma (spit-cooked sliced lamb), and Ful medames (a paste of fava beans, garlic and lemon). Traditional coffeehouses used to be ubiquitous, but are now being displaced by food-hall style cafes. Arabic tea is also a famous custom, which is used in both casual and formal meetings between friends, family and even strangers. The tea is black (without milk) and has herbal flavoring that comes in many variations.

Film and theatre
Public theatres and cinemas are prohibited, as Wahhabi tradition deems those institutions to be incompatible with Islam. However, an IMAX theatre is available,[51] and in private compounds such as Dhahran and Ras Tanura public theaters can be found, but often are more popular for local music, arts, and theatre productions rather than the exhibition of motion pictures. DVDs, including American and British movies, are legal and widely available.

Literature
Some Saudi novelists have had their books published in Beirut, Lebanon, because of censorship in Saudi Arabia. Despite signs of increasing openness, Saudi novelists and artists in film, theatre, and the visual arts face greater restrictions on their freedom of expression than in the West. Contemporary Saudi novelists include:

Abdul Rahman Munif (exiled, now deceased)
Yousef Al-Mohaimeed
Abdu Khal
Turki al-Hamad (subject of a fatwā and death threats)
Ali al-Domaini (in jail)
Ahmed Abodehman (now writes in French)
Raja'a Alem
Abdullah Al-Qasemi
Rajaa Al Sanie, author of best-selling novel Girls of Riyadh


Religion
Due to the legal framework of the country, which does not provide legal protection for freedom of religion, the public practice of non-Muslim religions is prohibited. Indeed, the Government enforces a strict and conservative version of Sunni Islam. Muslims who do not follow the official interpretation, can face severe repercussions at the hands of Mutawwa'in (religious police).
For this reason, Saudi culture lacks the diversity of religious expression, buildings, annual festivals and public events that is seen in countries where religious freedom is permitted.[40] Christianity in Saudi Arabia faces persecution.

Military
Main article: Military of Saudi Arabia
Further information: Al Yamamah




SANG V150






Saudi Tornado during Gulf War


Saudi military was founded as the Ikhwan army, the tribal army of Ibn Saud. The Ikhwan had helped King Ibn Saud conquer the Arabian peninsula during the First World War. By expanding the military forces years later, Saudi Arabia today has many military branches.

Military branches of Ministry of Defence:

Army
Air Force
Navy
Air Defense




Independent Military branches:

National Guard
Royal Guard
General Intelligence
Military Police
Saudi Lightning Force




Military branches of Ministry of Interior:

Saudi Arabian Police Force
Saudi Arabian Border Guard

Saudi Border Guard
Saudi Coast Guard


Al-Mujahidoon
Saudi Emergency Force




Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of Saudi Arabia
Saudi Arabia is one of the largest contributors of development aid, both in term of volume of aid and in the ratio of aid volume to GDP.[52][53]
Much of Saudi Arabia's aid has gone to poorer Islamic countries or Islamic communities in non-Islamic countries. This aid has contributed to the spreading of Islam of the sort found in Saudi Arabia, rather than fostering the traditions of the receiving ethnic groups. The effect has been the erosion of regional Islamic cultures through standardization. Examples of the acculturizing effect of Saudi aid can be seen among the Minangkabau and the Acehnese in Indonesia, as well as among the people of the Maldives.[54][55][56][57]
On the 18 December 2008, the William J. Clinton Foundation released a list of all contributors. It included The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which gave between US$10-25 million.[58]

Cities
Main article: List of cities and towns in Saudi Arabia



Largest Cities by Population
(2007)

mill.


Riyadh
4.7


Jeddah
3.6


Mecca
1.7


Medina
1.3


Dammam
1.3


Qatif
0.8


Ta’if
0.7


Buraydah
0.6


Tabuk
0.5


Khamis Mushait
0.4




International rankings
Main article: International rankings of Saudi Arabia


Organization
Survey
Ranking


Heritage Foundation/The Wall Street Journal
Index of Economic Freedom
62 out of 157


The Economist
Worldwide Quality-of-life Index, 2005
72 out of 111


The Economist
Democracy Index
159 out of 167


Reporters Without Borders
Worldwide Press Freedom Index
161 out of 167


Transparency International
Corruption Perceptions Index
70 out of 163


United Nations Development Programme
Human Development Index
61 out of 177


A. T. Kearney/Foreign Policy Magazine
Globalization Index 2005
45 out of 62


Fund for Peace
Failed States Index
84 out of 177



See also




Saudi Arabia portal







Communications in Saudi Arabia
Foreign relations of Saudi Arabia
Public holidays in Saudi Arabia
Human trafficking in Saudi Arabia
Irrigation in Saudi Arabia
Law of Saudi Arabia, Basic
Military of Saudi Arabia
Mutaween
Nuclear program of Saudi Arabia





Saudi Arabian Boy Scouts Association
Saudi Aramco
Saudi riyal
Pre-Islamic Arabia
Arab diaspora
Transport in Saudi Arabia
Water supply and sanitation in Saudi Arabia
Energy policy of Saudi Arabia











Lists

List of Arabian Houses
List of Ambassadors from the United Kingdom to Saudi Arabia
List of cities and towns in Saudi Arabia
List of companies of Saudi Arabia
List of universities in Saudi Arabia


Notes and references


^ CIA - The World Factbook - Saudi Arabia
^ a b c d "Saudi Arabia". International Monetary Fund. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?pr.x=57&pr.y=21&sy=2004&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=456&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&grp=0&a=. Retrieved on 2008-10-09. 
^ U.S. Energy Information Administration - Saudi Arabia Country Energy Profile
^ Social Services 2
^ Royal Embassy of Saudi Arabia-London: The Kingdom Of Saudi Arabia - A Welfare State
^ Gulf Daily News
^ Yemen, Saudi Arabia sign border deal, BBC News, June 12, 2000. Accessed June 25, 2008.
^ CIA World Factbook - Rank Order: Area
^ Saudi women barred from voting, BBC News, October 11, 2004. Accessed June 25, 2008.
^ Ghafour, P.K. Abdul. 470,000 Saudis Are Jobless, Says Study, Arab News, April 15, 2007. Accessed June 25, 2008.
^ 'Islamist win' in key Saudi poll, BBC News, February 11, 2005. Accessed June 25, 2008.
^ "US subpoenas BAE director in bribery inquiry", The Guardian, June 5, 2008.
^ a b c d Saudi Arabia. JURIST
^ Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of
^ Human Rights in Saudi Arabia: A Deafening Silence
^ Saudi Arabian Government and Law
^ a b BBC - Religion & Ethics - Islam and slavery: Abolition
^ a b Welcome to Encyclopædia Britannica's Guide to Black History
^ Saudi 'torture' condemned by UN, BBC News, May 16, 2002. Accessed June 25, 2008.
^ Hassan, Ibtihal; Hammond, Andrew. Car makers target Saudi women despite driving ban, Reuters, December 10, 2007. Accessed June 25, 2008.
^ "Saudi Arabia to Allow Women to Drive - With Conditions" by Assyrian International News Agency, March 17, 2008
^ Saudi Arabia: Basic Law of Government
^ "Documentation of Internet Filtering in Saudi Arabia"
^ Robertson, Nic; Drash, Wayne. "No freedom for 'dean of Saudi bloggers'", CNN, February 28, 2008. Accessed June 25, 2008.
^ Saudi Arabia: Administrative divisions, arab.net, http://www.arab.net/saudi/sa_admindivisions.htm, retrieved on 2008-09-21 
^ World Proved Reserves of Oil and Natural Gas, Most Recent Estimates
^ Country Profile Study on Poverty: Saudi Arabia (archived from the original on 2008-02-26)
^ List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita
^ CPI Inflation Calculator
^ Crude Oil Reserves
^ Simmons, Matthew (2005). Twilight in the Desert: The Coming Saudi Oil Shock and the World Economy. Wiley. ISBN 978-0471738763. 
^ Six New Economic cities in Saudi Arabia[dead link]
^ Construction boom of Saudi Arabia and the UAE
^ Riyadh's Urban area will contribute $ 167 B and Jeddah's will contribute $ 111 Billion
^ "Bad Dreams: Exploitation and Abuse of Migrant Workers in Saudi Arabia (PDF)". Human Rights Watch. July 2004. http://hrw.org/reports/2004/saudi0704/saudi0704.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-04-20. [dead link]
^ http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/3584.htm
^ Slavery in Islam
^ £400 for a Slave
^ Saudi Arabia
^ a b Saudi Arabia: International Religious Freedom Report 2008
^ Arab versus Asian migrant workers in the GCC countries
^ Expatriates Can Apply for Saudi Citizenship in Two-to-Three Months
^ 1954 Saudi Arabian Citizenship System
^ Beehner, Lionel. Shia Muslims in the Mideast, Council on Foreign Relations, June 16, 2006. Accessed June 25, 2008.
^ http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2008/108492.htm
^ http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2008/108492.htm
^ Shea, Nona, et.al. (2006), Saudi Arabia's Curriculem of Intolerence, Center for Religious Freedom, Freedom House, http://www.freedomhouse.org/uploads/special_report/48.pdf, retrieved on 2008-09-21 
^ Press Release: Revised Saudi Government Textbooks Still Demonize Christians, Jews, Non-Wahhabi Muslims and, Freedom House, May 23, 2006, http://www.freedomhouse.org/template.cfm?page=70&release=379, retrieved on 2008-09-21 
^ Sulaiman, Tosin. Bahrain changes the weekend in efficiency drive, The Times, August 2, 2006. Accessed June 25, 2008.
^ Adnkronos International, March 17, 2008, "Vatican: Secret talks for churches in Saudi Arabia, says report"
^ IMAX Arabic
^ Saudi Aid to the Developing World
^ Arab Aid
^ Ricklefs, M.C. A history of modern Indonesia since c.1200. Stanford. 2001 Stanford University Press.
^ Abdullah, Taufik. Adat and Islam: An Examination of Conflict in Minangkabau. 1966.
^ Indonesia's Population: Ethnicity and Religion in a Changing Political Landscape. 2003. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
^ Xavier Romero-Frias, The Maldive Islanders, A Study of the Popular Culture of an Ancient Ocean Kingdom. 1999, ISBN 84 7254 801 5
^ Contributor Information to the William J. Clinton Foundation



Bibliography

Jones, John Paul. If Olaya Street Could Talk: Saudi Arabia- The Heartland of Oil and Islam. The Taza Press (2007). ISBN 0-97904-360-3
Lippman, Thomas W. "Inside the Mirage: America's Fragile Partnership with Saudi Arabia" (Westview 2004) ISBN 0813340527
Mackey, Sandra, The Saudis: Inside the Desert Kingdom (Houghton Mifflin, 1987) ISBN 0395411653
Matthew R. Simmons, Twilight in the Desert The Coming Saudi Oil Shock and the World Economy, John Wiley & Sons, 2005, ISBN 047173876X
Ménoret, Pascal, The Saudi Enigma: A History (Zed Books, 2005) ISBN 1842776053
al-Rasheed, Madawi, A History of Saudi Arabia (Cambridge University Press, 2002) ISBN 052164335X
Robert Lacey, THE KINGDOM: Arabia & The House of Sa'ud, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc, 1981 (Hard Cover) and Avon Books, 1981 (Soft Cover. Library of Congress: 81-83741 ISBN 0-380-61762-5
Roger Owen, State, Power and Politics in the Making of the Modern Middle East, 3rd Edition (Routledge, 2006) ISBN 0415297133
T R McHale, A Prospect of Saudi Arabia, International Affairs Vol. 56 No 4 Autumn 1980 pp622-647
Turchin, P. 2007. Scientific Prediction in Historical Sociology: Ibn Khaldun meets Al Saud. History & Mathematics: Historical Dynamics and Development of Complex Societies. Moscow: KomKniga, 2007. ISBN 5484010020


Further reading

Carmen Bin Laden, Inside the Kingdom: My Life in Saudi Arabia, Grand Central Publishing, 2005, SBN 0446694886


External links

Find more about Saudi Arabia on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Government


Saudi Arabian Information Resource, Saudi Ministry Education
Saudi Arabian Information Resource, Saudi Ministry of Culture and Information
Royal Embassy of Saudi Arabia in Washington, DC
Chief of State and Cabinet Members


General


Saudi Arabia entry at The World Factbook
Saudi Arabia at UCB Libraries GovPubs
Understanding Saudi Arabia, Kamal Nawash
Saudi Arabia from al-Bab
Country Profile from BBC News
Congressional Research Service (CRS) Reports regarding Saudi Arabia
Saudi Arabia from the United States Department of State includes Background Notes, Country Study and major reports
Country Energy Profile from the United States Energy Information Administration


Directories


Saudi Arabia at the Open Directory Project
Datarabia
SAMIRAD
Yahoo!


Other links


Online Newspapers in Saudi Arabia
Arab versus Asian migrant workers in the GCC countries
The New York Times "Asterisk Aside, First National Vote for Saudis" 2005-02-10
BBC "Q&A: Saudi municipal elections"
BBC "Saudis' first exercise in democracy"
Hesbah.com site of Authority for the Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice Forum for Saudis to anonymously report "un-Islamic" activities to the Mutaween.
"Saudi says US human trafficking criticism unfounded"[dead link]
"Documentation of Internet Filtering in Saudi Arabia"
The Ideology of Terrorism and Violence in Saudi Arabia: Origins, Reasons and Solution
Does Saudi Arabia Preach Intolerance in the UK and US?PDF (844 KB)
Mark Steel: Why does Saudi Arabia need military aid?
Saudi Arabia: Historical Demographic Data Factsheet
Saudi Match Point[dead link] - a novel set in contemporary Saudi Arabia
Asinah - Saudi Arabia[dead link]
British Business Group, Jeddah
eSaudi.info Information about Saudi Arabia Historical
U.S. Department of Justice: Foreign Agents Registration Act (archived from the original on 2005-08-26)
Saudi Arabia travel guide from Wikitravel








v • d • e

 Saudi Arabia topics





History

Ancient Arabia · Early Islamic State · Rashidun Caliphate · Umayyad Empire · Abbasid Empire · Ottoman Empire · First Saudi State · Second Saudi State · Saudi Arabia






Geography

Regions (Emirates) · Cities






Politics

Basic Law · Kings · Foreign relations · Consultative Assembly · Military






Economy

OPEC · World Trade Organization (WTO) · Energy policy






Culture

Music · Language · Islam · Universities












 
Geographic locale














v • d • e

Countries and territories of the Middle East and Greater Middle East





Middle East

Bahrain · Egypt · Gaza Strip · Iraq · Iran · Israel · Jordan · Kuwait · Lebanon · Oman · Qatar · Saudi Arabia · Syria · United Arab Emirates · West Bank · Yemen






Greater Middle East

Afghanistan · Algeria · Cyprus · Djibouti · Eritrea · Libya · Morocco · Northern Cyprus1 · Pakistan · Somalia · Sudan · Tunisia · Turkey · Western Sahara (SADR)






1 Only recognized by Turkey; see Cyprus dispute.












v • d • e

Countries of Southwest Asia








Armenia · Azerbaijan1 · Bahrain · Cyprus · Georgia1 · Iran · Iraq · Israel · Jordan · Kuwait · Lebanon · Oman · Qatar · Saudi Arabia · Syria · Turkey1 · United Arab Emirates · Yemen
1 Has part of its territory in Europe. 















v • d • e

Countries of Asia








Afghanistan · Armenia · Azerbaijan1 · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Bhutan · Brunei · Burma · Cambodia · People's Republic of China · Republic of China (Taiwan)2 · Cyprus · Egypt3 · Georgia1 · India · Indonesia4 · Iran · Iraq · Israel · Japan · Jordan · Kazakhstan1 · North Korea · South Korea · Kuwait · Kyrgyzstan · Laos · Lebanon · Malaysia · Maldives · Mongolia · Nepal · Oman · Pakistan · Philippines · Qatar · Russia1 · Saudi Arabia · Singapore · Sri Lanka · Syria · Tajikistan · Thailand · East Timor (Timor-Leste)4 · Turkey1 · Turkmenistan · United Arab Emirates · Uzbekistan · Vietnam · Yemen3

For dependent and other territories, see Dependent territory.

1 Partly or significantly in Europe.  2 The Republic of China (Taiwan) is not officially recognized by the United Nations; see Political status of Taiwan.
3 Partly or significantly in Africa.  4 Partly or wholly reckoned in Oceania.















v • d • e

Countries bordering the Red Sea






 Djibouti ·  Egypt ·  Eritrea ·  Israel
 Jordan ·  Saudi Arabia ·  Somalia ·  Sudan ·  Yemen













v • d • e

Countries and territories bordering the Indian Ocean





Africa

Comoros · Djibouti · Eritrea · Kenya · Madagascar · Mauritius · Mayotte · Mozambique · Réunion · Seychelles · Somalia · South Africa · Sudan · Tanzania







Asia

Bahrain · Bangladesh · Burma · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands · India · Indonesia · Iran · Iraq · Kuwait · Malaysia · Maldives · Oman · Pakistan · Qatar · Saudi Arabia · Sri Lanka · Thailand · United Arab Emirates · Yemen






Oceania

Australia · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands






Islands

Bahrain · British Indian Ocean Territory · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands · Madagascar · Maldives · Mauritius · Mayotte · Réunion · Seychelles · Sri Lanka



















 
International membership














v • d • e

Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the (Persian) Gulf (CCASG)






Bahrain · Kuwait · Oman · Qatar · Saudi Arabia · United Arab Emirates














v • d • e

Members of the Arab League





Members

Algeria · Bahrain · Comoros · Djibouti · Egypt · Iraq · Jordan · Kuwait · Lebanon · Libya · Mauritania · Morocco · Oman · Palestine · Qatar · Saudi Arabia · Sudan · Somalia · Syria · Tunisia · United Arab Emirates · Yemen







Observers

Brazil · Eritrea · India · Venezuela






Diplomacy

Arab Peace Initiative













v • d • e

Members of the World Trade Organization (WTO)








Albania · Angola · Antigua and Barbuda · Argentina · Armenia · Australia · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Barbados · Belize · Benin · Bolivia · Botswana · Brazil · Brunei · Burkina Faso · Burma · Burundi · Cambodia · Cameroon · Canada · Cape Verde · Central African Republic · Chad · Chile · PR China · Colombia · Democratic Republic of the Congo · Republic of the Congo · Costa Rica · Côte d'Ivoire · Croatia · Cuba · Djibouti · Dominica · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · Egypt · El Salvador · European Union¹ · Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) · Fiji · Gabon · The Gambia · Georgia · Ghana · Grenada · Guatemala · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Guyana · Haiti · Honduras · Hong Kong² · Iceland · India · Indonesia · Israel · Jamaica · Japan · Jordan · Kenya · South Korea · Kuwait · Kyrgyzstan · Lesotho · Liechtenstein · Macau² · Madagascar · Malawi · Malaysia · Maldives · Mali · Mauritania · Mauritius · Mexico · Moldova · Mongolia · Morocco · Mozambique · Namibia · Nepal · New Zealand · Nicaragua · Niger · Nigeria · Norway · Oman · Pakistan · Panama · Papua New Guinea · Paraguay · Peru · Philippines · Qatar · Rwanda · St. Kitts and Nevis · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · Saudi Arabia · Senegal · Sierra Leone · Singapore · Solomon Islands · South Africa · Sri Lanka · Suriname · Swaziland · Switzerland · Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, and Matsu³ · Tanzania · Thailand · Togo · Tonga · Trinidad and Tobago · Tunisia · Turkey · Uganda · Ukraine · United Arab Emirates · United States · Uruguay · Venezuela · Vietnam · Zambia · Zimbabwe


All twenty-seven member states of the European Union are also members of the WTO in their own right: Austria • Belgium • Bulgaria • Cyprus • Czech Republic • Denmark • Estonia • Finland • France • Germany • Greece • Hungary • Ireland • Italy • Latvia • Lithuania • Luxembourg • Malta • Netherlands and Netherlands Antilles • Poland • Portugal • Romania • Slovakia • Slovenia • Spain • Sweden • United Kingdom.
Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China.
Designated name for the Republic of China (Commonly Known as Taiwan)















v • d • e

Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC)





Members

Afghanistan · Albania · Algeria · Azerbaijan · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Benin · Burkina Faso · Brunei · Cameroon · Chad · Comoros · Côte d'Ivoire · Djibouti · Egypt · Gabon · Gambia · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Guyana · Indonesia · Iran · Iraq · Jordan · Kuwait · Kazakhstan · Kyrgyzstan · Lebanon · Libya · Maldives · Malaysia · Mali · Mauritania · Morocco · Mozambique · Niger · Nigeria · Oman · Pakistan · Palestine · Qatar · Saudi Arabia · Senegal · Sierra Leone · Somalia · Sudan · Suriname · Syria · Tajikistan · Turkey · Tunisia · Togo · Turkmenistan · Uganda · Uzbekistan · United Arab Emirates · Yemen









Observers





Countries and territories


Bosnia and Herzegovina · Central African Republic · Russia · Thailand · Northern Cyprus (as Turkish Cypriot State)







Muslim communities


Moro National Liberation Front







International organizations


Economic Cooperation Organization · African Union · Arab League · Non-Aligned Movement · United Nations
















v • d • e

Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)






Algeria • Angola • Ecuador • Iran • Iraq • Kuwait • Libya • Nigeria • Qatar • Saudi Arabia • United Arab Emirates • Venezuela














v • d • e

Monarchies





Geography

Africa · Americas · Europe · Oceania









Absolute

Brunei · Saudi Arabia · Swaziland · Vatican City






Constitutional

Antigua and Barbuda · Australia · Andorra · Bahamas · Bahrain · Barbados · Belize · Belgium · Bhutan · Cambodia · Canada · Denmark · Grenada · Jamaica · Japan1 · Jordan · Kuwait · Liechtenstein · Lesotho · Luxembourg · Malaysia · Monaco · Morocco · Netherlands · New Zealand · Norway · Oman2 · Papua New Guinea · Qatar2 · Spain · Saint Kitts and Nevis · Saint Lucia · Saint Vincent and the Grenadines · Solomon Islands · Sweden · Thailand · Tonga · Tuvalu · United Arab Emirates3 · United Kingdom






Elective

Andorra · Cambodia · Kuwait · Malaysia · Swaziland · United Arab Emirates3 · Vatican City






Subnational





Ghana


Ashanti · Dagbon







Malaysia


Johor · Kedah · Kelantan · Negeri Sembilan · Pahang · Perak · Perlis · Selangor · Terengganu







Nigeria


Ibadan · Nri · Kano · Sokoto Caliphate · Lagos







Uganda


Ankole · Buganda · Bunyoro · Busoga · Toro







United Arab Emirates


Abu Dhabi · Ajman · Dubai · Fujairah · Ras al-Khaimah · Sharjah · Umm al-Qaiwain







Wallis and Futuna


Alo · Sigave · Uvea







Others


Māori (New Zealand) · Yogyakarta (Indonesia) · Zululand (South Africa) · Barotseland (Zambia)









Italics indicate Commonwealth realms, which each share the same monarch as head of state.
1 Monarch debatable as Head of State.   2 Technically constitutional, but effectively absolute.   3 Uses the title President.












v • d • e

Afro-Asiatic-speaking nations











v • d • e

Berber









   


 Algeria
 Egypt




 Libya
 Mali




 Mauritania
 Morocco




 Niger
 Tunisia




















v • d • e

Chadic









   


 Cameroon
 Central African Republic
 Chad




 Niger
 Nigeria




















v • d • e

Cushitic









   


Cushitic
 Djibouti
 Eritrea





 Ethiopia
 Kenya





 Somalia




Beja
 Egypt
 Eritrea





 Sudan




















v • d • e

Egyptian






   Egypt















v • d • e

Omotic






 Ethiopia















v • d • e

Semitic









   


Arabic / Maltese
 Algeria
 Bahrain
 Djibouti
 Egypt
 Iraq
 Israel





 Jordan
 Kuwait
 Lebanon
 Libya
 Malta
 Mauritania
 Morocco





 Oman
 PNA
 Qatar
 Saudi Arabia
 Somalia
 Sudan1





 Syria
 Tunisia
 UAE
 W. Sahara
 Yemen




Northwest Semitic2
 Iraq
 Israel
 Syria




South Semitic
 Eritrea
 Ethiopia
 Oman
 Yemen











1 excluding Southern Sudan.    2 Aramaic and Hebrew.


















Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saudi_Arabia"
Categories: Countries bordering the Red Sea | 1932 establishments | Arab states of the Persian Gulf | Arab League member states | Arabia | Arabic-speaking countries | Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf member states | Countries with alcohol prohibition | OPEC member states | Organization of the Islamic Conference members | Saudi Arabia | Saudi Arabia articles needing attention | Constitutional monarchiesHidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead external links since January 2009 | Wikipedia semi-protected pages | Articles containing Arabic language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
Arpetan
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Boarisch
བོད་ཡིག
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deitsch
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Dolnoserbski
ཇོང་ཁ
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Føroyskt
Fiji Hindi
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
文言
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Hawai`i
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kapampangan
ქართული
कश्मीरी - (كشميري)
Kaszëbsczi
Қазақша
Kernewek
ಕನ್ನಡ
Kiswahili
Коми
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lingála
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
مصرى
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
नेपाली
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
ଓଡ଼ିଆ
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
O'zbek
پښتو
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
संस्कृत
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Удмурт
Українська
اردو
Volapük
Võro
Winaray
吴语
Yorùbá
粵語
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 09:25.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
