













Braille - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Braille";
		var wgTitle = "Braille";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "3933";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281486761;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 


wgOggPlayer.msg = {"ogg-play": "Play", "ogg-pause": "Pause", "ogg-stop": "Stop", "ogg-no-player": "Sorry, your system does not appear to have any supported player software.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload a player\x3c/a\x3e.", "ogg-player-videoElement": "Native browser support", "ogg-player-oggPlugin": "Browser plugin", "ogg-player-cortado": "Cortado (Java)", "ogg-player-vlc-mozilla": "VLC", "ogg-player-vlc-activex": "VLC (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-quicktime-mozilla": "QuickTime", "ogg-player-quicktime-activex": "QuickTime (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-totem": "Totem", "ogg-player-kaffeine": "Kaffeine", "ogg-player-kmplayer": "KMPlayer", "ogg-player-mplayerplug-in": "mplayerplug-in", "ogg-player-thumbnail": "Still image only", "ogg-player-selected": "(selected)", "ogg-use-player": "Use player:", "ogg-more": "More…", "ogg-download": "Download file", "ogg-desc-link": "About this file", "ogg-dismiss": "Close", "ogg-player-soundthumb": "No player", "ogg-no-xiphqt": "You do not appear to have the XiphQT component for QuickTime.\nQuickTime cannot play Ogg files without this component.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload XiphQT\x3c/a\x3e or choose another player."};
wgOggPlayer.cortadoUrl = "http://upload.wikimedia.org/jars/cortado.jar";
wgOggPlayer.extPathUrl = "/w/extensions/OggHandler";


.ogg-player-options {
	border: solid 1px #ccc;
	padding: 2pt;
	text-align: left;
	font-size: 10pt;
}
 <!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Braille

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For the asteroid named after Louis Braille see 9969 Braille.


Braille


Type
Alphabet (non-linear writing)


Spoken languages
Several


Created by
Louis Braille


Time period
1821 to the present


Parent systems


Night writing
→ Braille




Unicode range
U+2800 to U+28FF


ISO 15924
Brai


Note: This page may contain IPA phonetic symbols in Unicode.



Listen to this article (info/dl)











This audio file was created from a revision dated 2006-09-06, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles






Braille code where the word ⠏⠗⠑⠍⠊⠑⠗ (premier, French for "first") can be read.


The Braille system is a method that is widely used by blind people to read and write. Braille was devised in 1821 by Louis Braille, a Frenchman. Each Braille character or cell is made up of six dot positions, arranged in a rectangle containing two columns of three dots each. A dot may be raised at any of the six positions to form sixty-four (26) permutations, including the arrangement in which no dots are raised. For reference purposes, a particular permutation may be described by naming the positions where dots are raised, the positions being universally numbered 1 to 3, from top to bottom, on the left, and 4 to 6, from top to bottom, on the right. For example, dots 1-3-4 would describe a cell with three dots raised, at the top and bottom in the left column and on top of the right column, i.e., the letter m. The lines of horizontal Braille text are separated by a space, much like visible printed text, so that the dots of one line can be differentiated from the Braille text above and below. Punctuation is represented by its own unique set of characters.
The Braille system was based on a method of communication originally developed by Charles Barbier in response to Napoleon's demand for a code that soldiers could use to communicate silently and without light at night called night writing. Barbier's system was too complex for soldiers to learn, and was rejected by the military. In 1821 he visited the National Institute for the Blind in Paris, France, where he met Louis Braille. Braille identified the major failing of the code, which was that the human finger could not encompass the whole symbol without moving, and so could not move rapidly from one symbol to another. His modification was to use a 6 dot cell — the Braille system — which revolutionized written communication for the blind. Braille has also become a popular synonym for failure or an inability to withstand the affects of drugs or alcohol in Northern England, particularly Manchester and Newcastle




Contents


1 The Braille alphabet
2 The Braille cell

2.1 Encoding


3 Writing Braille

3.1 Letters and numbers
3.2 Other symbols
3.3 Grade 2 Braille contractions
3.4 Unicode rendering table


4 Braille transcription
5 Braille for other scripts
6 See also
7 External links

7.1 Organizations

7.1.1 Libraries


7.2 Learning
7.3 History
7.4 Documents
7.5 Legal
7.6 Language specific resources
7.7 Computer resources







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] The Braille alphabet
Braille can be seen as the world's first binary encoding scheme for representing the characters of a writing system. The system as originally invented by Braille consists of two parts:

A character encoding for mapping characters of the French language to tuples of six bits or dots.
A way of representing six-bit characters as raised dots in a Braille cell.

Today different Braille codes (or code pages) are used to map character sets of different languages to the six bit cells. Different Braille codes are also used for different uses like mathematics and music. However, because the six-dot Braille cell only offers 64 possible combinations (26 = 64), of which some are omitted because they feel the same (having the same dots pattern in a different position), many Braille characters have different meanings based on their context. Therefore, character mapping is not one-to-one.
In addition to simple encoding, modern Braille transcription uses contractions to increase reading speed. (See: Grade 2 Braille)

[edit] The Braille cell




Braille cell


Braille generally consists of cells of six raised dots arranged in a grid of two dots horizontally by three dots vertically. The dots are conventionally numbered 1, 2, and 3 from the top of the left column and 4, 5, and 6 from the top of the right column.
The presence or absence of dots gives the coding for the symbol. Dot height is approximately 0.02 inches (0.5 mm); the horizontal and vertical spacing between dot centers within a Braille cell is approximately 0.1 inches (2.5 mm); the blank space between dots on adjacent cells is approximately 0.15 inches (3.75 mm) horizontally and 0.2 inches (5.0 mm) vertically.[citation needed] A standard Braille page is 11 inches by 11.5 inches and typically has a maximum of 40 to 43 Braille cells per line and 25 lines.

[edit] Encoding
As originally conceived by Louis Braille, a sequence of characters, using the top four dots of the Braille cell, represents letters a through j. Dot 3 is added to each of the a through j symbols to give letters k through t. Both of the bottom dots (dots 3 and 6) are added to the symbols for "a" through e to give letters u, v, x, y, and z. The letter w is an exception to the pattern because French did not make use of the letter "w" at the time Louis Braille devised his alphabet, and thus he had no need to encode the letter "w".
English Braille codes the letters and punctuation, and some double letter signs and word signs directly, but capitalization and numbers are dealt with by using a prefix symbol. In practice, Braille produced in the United Kingdom does not have capital letters.
There are Braille codes for representing shorthand (produced on a machine which embosses a paper tape) and for representing mathematics (Nemeth Braille code) and musical notation (Braille music).

[edit] Writing Braille
Braille may be produced using a slate and stylus in which each dot is created from the back of the page, writing in mirror image, by hand, or it may be produced on a Braille typewriter or Perkins Brailler, or produced by a Braille embosser attached to a computer. It may also be rendered using a refreshable Braille display.
Braille has been extended to an 8-dot code, particularly for use with Braille embossers and refreshable Braille displays. In 8-dot Braille the additional dots are added at the bottom of the cell, giving a matrix 4 dots high by 2 dots wide. The additional dots are given the numbers 7 (for the lower-left dot) and 8 (for the lower-right dot). Eight-dot Braille has the advantages that the case of an individual letter is directly coded in the cell containing the letter and that all the printable ASCII characters can be represented in a single cell. All 256 (28) possible combination of 8 dots are encoded by the Unicode standard. Braille with six dots is frequently stored as Braille ASCII.
The first ten letters of the alphabet and the numbers 1 through 0 are formed using only the top four dots (1, 2, 4, and 5). Adding dot 3 forms the next ten letters, and adding dot 6 forms the last five letters (except w) and the words and, for, of, the, and with. Omitting dot 3 forms the letters U-Z and the five word symbols form nine digraphs (ch, gh, sh, th, wh, ed, er, ou, and ow) and the letter w.

Braille has also become a popular synonym for failure or an inability to withstand the affects of drugs of alcohol in Northen England, particularly Manchester and Newcastle

[edit] Letters and numbers








A, 1









B, 2









C, 3









D, 4











E, 5









F, 6









G, 7









H, 8











I, 9









J, 0









K









L











M









N









O









P











Q









R









S









T











U









V









W









X











Y









Z






[edit] Other symbols








Capital letter follows









Number follows









Apostrophe









Full stop (Period)











Comma









Semicolon









Exclamation point









Opening quotation mark











Closing quotation mark









Bracket (Parentheses)









Hyphen





The question mark is represented by dots 2-3-6—the same as the opening quotation mark. Therefore the placement of the dots—before a word or after a word—will determine which symbol it is.
Opening and closing parentheses are shown with the same symbol. Therefore, the placement context will determine whether the parentheses is opening or closing.

[edit] Grade 2 Braille contractions








The word AND









The letters CH









The letters SH









The letters ST











The letters TH





This is just a small sample of some of the contractions that are used in Grade 2 Braille. More information about Grade 2 Braille is below in the section on Braille transcription.
Braille also includes a number of whole word contractions, for example the word Braille becomes a three cell word brl.

[edit] Unicode rendering table


This article contains special characters. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols.


The Unicode standard encodes 8-dot Braille glyphs according to their binary appearance, rather than following the alphabetic order of any particular convention. Unicode defines the "Braille Patterns" character block in the hex codepoint range from 2800 to 28FF.





Braille
Letter


⠁
A 1


⠃
B 2


⠉
C 3


⠙
D 4


⠑
E 5


⠋
F 6


⠛
G 7


⠓
H 8


⠊
I 9


⠚
J 0


⠅
K


⠇
L


⠍
M


⠝
N


⠕
O


⠏
P


⠟
Q


⠗
R


⠎
S






Braille
Letter


⠞
T


⠥
U


⠧
V


⠺
W


⠭
X


⠽
Y


⠵
Z


⠠
Capital sign


⠼
Number sign


⠲
Period


⠂
Comma


⠦
Question mark


⠆
Semicolon


⠖
Exclamation point


⠦
Opening quote


⠴
Closing quote


⠶
Bracket


⠤
Hyphen


⠄
Apostrophe






[edit] Braille transcription




Braille Writer






Braille on a box of tablets


Although it is possible to transcribe Braille by simply substituting the equivalent Braille character for its printed equivalent, such a character-by-character transcription (known as Grade 1 Braille) is used only by beginners.
Braille characters are much larger than their printed equivalents, and the standard 11" by 11.5" (28 cm × 30 cm) page has room for only 25 lines of 43 characters. To reduce space and increase reading speed, virtually all Braille books are transcribed in what is known as Grade 2 Braille, which uses a system of contractions to reduce space and speed the process of reading. As with most human linguistic activities, Grade 2 Braille embodies a complex system of customs, styles, and practices. The Library of Congress's Instruction Manual for Braille Transcribing runs to nearly 200 pages. Braille transcription is skilled work, and Braille transcribers need to pass certification tests.
In English, the system of Grade 2 Braille contractions begins with a set of 23 words which are contracted to single characters. Thus the word but is contracted to the single letter b, can to c, do to d, and so on. Even this simple rule creates issues requiring special cases; for example, d is, specifically, an abbreviation of the verb do; the noun do representing the note of the musical scale is a different word, and must be spelled out.
Portions of words may be contracted, and many rules govern this process. For example, the character with dots 2-3-5 (the letter "f" lowered in the Braille cell) stands for "ff" when used in the middle of a word. At the beginning of a word, this same character stands for the word "to" although the character is written in Braille with no space following it. At the end of a word, the same character represents an exclamation point.
The contraction rules take into account the linguistic structure of the word; thus, contractions are not to be used when their use would alter the usual Braille form of a base word to which a prefix or suffix has been added. And some portions of the transcription rules are not fully codified and rely on the judgment of the transcriber. Thus, when the contraction rules permit the same word in more than one way, preference is given to "the contraction that more nearly approximates correct pronunciation."
Grade 3 Braille is a system that includes many additional contractions, almost a shorthand; it is not used for publication, but is used mostly for individuals for their personal convenience.
The current series of Canadian banknotes have raised dots on the banknotes that indicate the denomination and can be easily identified by visually impaired people; this 'tactile feature' does not use standard Braille but, instead, a system developed in consultation with blind and visually impaired Canadians after research indicated that not all potential users read Braille.
Mexican bank notes also have special raised symbols to make them identifiable by the visually impaired.
Though Braille is thought to be the main way blind people read and write, in Britain (for example) out of the reported two-million visually impaired population, it is estimated that only around 15-20 thousand people use Braille. Younger people are turning to electronic text on computers with screen reader software instead, a more portable communication method that they can also use with their friends. A debate has started on how to make Braille more attractive and for more teachers to be available to teach it.
In India there are instances where the parliament acts have been published in Braille too. For example 'The Right to Information Act'

[edit] Braille for other scripts

See main articles: Hebrew braille, Japanese braille, Korean braille, Vietnamese braille, Tibetan braille, and Chinese braille.





The information about the historic site of Safdarjung’s tomb in Delhi, India. The Braille plate is installed near the English version of the same.






The English version of the Braille plate.


There are many extensions of Braille for additional letters with diacritics, such as ç, ô, é.
When Braille is adapted to languages which do not use the Latin alphabet, the blocks are generally assigned to the new alphabet according to how it is transliterated into the Latin alphabet, and the alphabetic order of the national script (and therefore the natural order of Latin Braille) is disregarded. Such is the case with Russian, Greek, Hebrew, Arabic, and Chinese. In Greek, for example, gamma is written as Latin g, despite the fact that it has the alphabetic position of c; Hebrew bet, the second letter of the alphabet and cognate with the Latin letter b, is sometimes pronounced /b/ and sometimes /v/, and is written b or v accordingly; Russian ts is written as c, which is the usual letter for /ts/ in those Slavic languages that use the Latin alphabet; and Arabic f is written as f, despite being historically p, and occurring in that part of the Arabic alphabet (between historic o and q). Esperanto letters with circumflexes, ĉ, ĝ, ĥ, ĵ and ŝ, are written as those letters without circumflexes with a filled sixth dot. Therefore the letter ĵ has the same representation as the English w and to write a w in Esperanto, the dot 3 is filled (dots 2-3-4-5-6 are used for w instead of dots 2-4-5-6) The ŭ, used in Esperanto also, is as the u but the first dot is moved to the fourth place.
Greater differences occur in Chinese Braille. In the case of Mandarin Braille, which is based on Zhuyin rather than the Latin Pinyin alphabet, the traditional Latin Braille values are used for initial consonants and the simple vowels. However, on Latin Braille for many of the initial consonants and simple vowels (based on romanizations of a century ago), but the blocks pull double duty, with different values depending on whether they're placed in syllable-initial or syllable-final position. For instance, the block for Latin k represents old-style Cantonese k (g in Yale and other modern romanizations) when initial, but aak when final, while Latin j represents Cantonese initial j but final oei.
However, at least three adaptations of Braille have completely reassigned the Latin sound values of the blocks. These are, Japanese Braille, Korean Braille, and Tibetan Braille. In Japanese Braille, alphabetic signs for a consonant and vowel are combined into a single syllabic block; in Korean Braille, the consonants have different syllable-initial and syllable-final forms. These modifications made Braille much more compatible with Japanese kana and Korean hangul, but meant that the Latin sound values could not be maintained.

[edit] See also



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Braille 



Refreshable Braille display
Braille Watch
Moon type
Unified English Braille Code
List of binary codes
Braille ASCII
Hebrew braille
Japanese Braille
Chinese braille
Vietnamese braille
Korean braille
Needle punch
Accessible publishing


[edit] External links

[edit] Organizations

Braille Authority of North America
Braille - American Foundation for the Blind
National Braille Week
Scottish Braille Press
Royal National Institute For The Blind
Perkins School for the Blind
National Braille Press - offers a free Braille alphabet card
Alternate Text Production Center
Accessible Media Center
National Braille Association, Inc.


[edit] Libraries

The National Library for the Blind
Libraries Australia - catalog of Braille in 800+ Australian libraries
Washington Talking Book & Braille Library - serving residents of the State of Washington, USA


[edit] Learning

Learn Braille on the Internet For Free
Braille Bug - an educational site for kids, from the American Foundation for the Blind
BRL: Braille Through Remote Learning
On-line Braille Course of University of São Paulo
Online Braille Generator
A Braille alphabet card
Learn Braille online, change own text to Braille, Braille Writer Simulator and more


[edit] History

Celebrating 200 Years of Braille
Happy Birthday Louis! RNIB celebrates the bicentenary of the birth of Louis Braille
Louis Braille Online Museum -- An all-new illustrated exhibit traces the history of braille and the life of this remarkable inventor.
How Braille Began -- a detailed history of Braille's origins and the people who supported and opposed the system.
Robert B. Irwin's As I Saw It, 1955, gives a history of the "War of the Dots" that ultimately led to the adoption of the English form of the Braille literary code in the United States and the demise of American Braille and New York Point, its main competitors.
Making a Newspaper For Sightless Readers: By means of raised dots and lines embossed on manila paper, news of the world is conveyed to the fingertips of the blind Popular Science( monthly, January 1919, page 24-25, Scanned by Google Books )


[edit] Documents

English Braille: American Edition
Library of Congress Instructional Manual for Braille Transcribing
Details on Braille cell representation
Unified (English) Braille Code (including information specific to British Braille)
Braille code for Russian and transliteration of Cyrillic


[edit] Legal

India-Right to Information Act in Braille
US copyright exemption for Braille


[edit] Language specific resources

Devanagari to (Bharati) Braille Converter Download or use online.
Bharati Braille for Indian Languages
Braille Without Borders - Braille for Tibetans
Greek Braille System


[edit] Computer resources

Braille for various scripts
Free Braille fonts
Free Unicode Braille TTF font (supports all Braille scripts)
Free Unicode fonts which include Braille










v • d • e

Writing systems





Overview

History of writing · History of the alphabet · Graphemes






Lists

Writing systems · Languages by writing system / by first written account · Undeciphered writing systems · Inventors of writing systems






Types

Alphabets · Abjads · Abugidas · Syllabaries · Ideogrammic · Pictographic · Logographic









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Braille"
Categories: Scripts with ISO 15924 four-letter codes | Spoken articles | Assistive technology | Blindness | Braille | Character encoding | Latin alphabet representations | Tactile alphabets | French inventionsHidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | Articles containing French language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2008 | Articles with citations to Popular Science archive | Articles with verifiable citations via Google Books 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Galego
हिन्दी
文言
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 12:08.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
