













Periodic table - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Periodic_table";
		var wgTitle = "Periodic table";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "23053";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282171192;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Periodic table

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"The Periodic Table" redirects here. For the book by Primo Levi, see The Periodic Table (book).
For a diagram of the periodic table, see standard periodic table below.
The periodic table of the chemical elements is a tabular method of displaying the chemical elements. Although precursors to this table exist, its invention is generally credited to Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev in 1869. Mendeleev intended the table to illustrate recurring ("periodic") trends in the properties of the elements. The layout of the table has been refined and extended over time, as new elements have been discovered, and new theoretical models have been developed to explain chemical behavior.[1]
The periodic table is now ubiquitous within the academic discipline of chemistry, providing an extremely useful framework to classify, systematize and compare all of the many different forms of chemical behavior. The table has found wide application in chemistry, physics, biology, and engineering, especially chemical engineering. The current standard table contains 117 elements as of March 10, 2009 (elements 1-116 and element 118).




Contents


1 Methods for displaying the periodic table

1.1 Standard periodic table
1.2 Alternative versions (layout/view of the table)


2 Arrangement
3 Periodicity of chemical properties

3.1 Groups and periods

3.1.1 Periodic trends of groups
3.1.2 Periodic trends of periods


3.2 Examples

3.2.1 Noble gases
3.2.2 Halogens
3.2.3 Transition metals
3.2.4 Lanthanides and actinides




4 Structure of the periodic table
5 History
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Methods for displaying the periodic table

[edit] Standard periodic table



Group #
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18


Period



1
1
H

2
He


2
3
Li
4
Be

5
B
6
C
7
N
8
O
9
F
10
Ne


3
11
Na
12
Mg

13
Al
14
Si
15
P
16
S
17
Cl
18
Ar


4
19
K
20
Ca
21
Sc
22
Ti
23
V
24
Cr
25
Mn
26
Fe
27
Co
28
Ni
29
Cu
30
Zn
31
Ga
32
Ge
33
As
34
Se
35
Br
36
Kr


5
37
Rb
38
Sr
39
Y
40
Zr
41
Nb
42
Mo
43
Tc
44
Ru
45
Rh
46
Pd
47
Ag
48
Cd
49
In
50
Sn
51
Sb
52
Te
53
I
54
Xe


6
55
Cs
56
Ba
*

72
Hf
73
Ta
74
W
75
Re
76
Os
77
Ir
78
Pt
79
Au
80
Hg
81
Tl
82
Pb
83
Bi
84
Po
85
At
86
Rn


7
87
Fr
88
Ra
**

104
Rf
105
Db
106
Sg
107
Bh
108
Hs
109
Mt
110
Ds
111
Rg
112
Uub
113
Uut
114
Uuq
115
Uup
116
Uuh
(117)
(Uus)
118
Uuo





* Lanthanides
57
La
58
Ce
59
Pr
60
Nd
61
Pm
62
Sm
63
Eu
64
Gd
65
Tb
66
Dy
67
Ho
68
Er
69
Tm
70
Yb
71
Lu


** Actinides
89
Ac
90
Th
91
Pa
92
U
93
Np
94
Pu
95
Am
96
Cm
97
Bk
98
Cf
99
Es
100
Fm
101
Md
102
No
103
Lr



This common arrangement of the periodic table separates the lanthanides and actinides from other elements. The wide periodic table incorporates the f-block. The extended periodic table adds the 8th and 9th periods, incorporating the f-block and adding the theoretical g-block.




Element categories in the periodic table


Metals
Metalloids
Nonmetals
Unknown


Alkali metals
Alkaline earth metals
Inner transition elements
Transition elements
Other metals
Other nonmetals
Halogens
Noble gases


Lanthanides
Actinides








Atomic number colors show state at standard temperature and pressure (0 °C and 1 atm)

Solids
Liquids
Gases
Unknown





Borders show natural occurrence

Primordial
From decay
Synthetic
Undiscovered






[edit] Alternative versions (layout/view of the table)

The wide table sets inline the f-block of lanthanides and actinides.
An alternate wide table sets Sc, Y, La, Ac in the same column.
The standard table (same as above) provides the basics.
A vertical table scrolls down for narrow pages.
The big table provides the basics and full element names.
The large table provides the above and atomic masses.
The detailed table provides a smaller version of the huge table.
The electronegativity table provides electronegativities.
Electron configurations
Metals and non-metals
The blocks are shaded instead of series.
The valences are shaded instead of series.

Other alternative periodic tables exist.
Some versions of the table show a dark stair-step line along the metalloids. Metals are to the left of the line and non-metals to the right.[2]

[edit] Arrangement
The layout of the periodic table demonstrates recurring ("periodic") chemical properties. Elements are listed in order of increasing atomic number (i.e., the number of protons in the atomic nucleus). Rows are arranged so that elements with similar properties fall into the same columns (groups or families). According to quantum mechanical theories of electron configuration within atoms, each row (period) in the table corresponded to the filling of a quantum shell of electrons. There are progressively longer periods further down the table, grouping the elements into s-, p-, d- and f-blocks to reflect their electron configuration.
In printed tables, each element is usually listed with its element symbol and atomic number; many versions of the table also list the element's atomic mass and other information, such as its abbreviated electron configuration, electronegativity and most common valence numbers.
As of 2006, the table contains 117 chemical elements whose discoveries have been confirmed. Ninety-four are found naturally on Earth, and the rest are synthetic elements that have been produced artificially in particle accelerators. Elements 43 (technetium), 61 (promethium), 93 (neptunium) and 94 (plutonium) have no stable isotopes and were first discovered synthetically; however, they were later discovered in trace amounts on earth as products of natural radioactive decay processes.

[edit] Periodicity of chemical properties
The main value of the periodic table is the ability to predict the chemical properties of an element based on its location on the table. It should be noted that the properties vary differently when moving vertically along the columns of the table than when moving horizontally along the rows.

[edit] Groups and periods

A group is a column in the periodic table of the elements.

Groups are considered the most important method of classifying the elements. In some groups, the elements have very similar properties and exhibit a clear trend in properties down the group — these groups tend to be given trivial (unsystematic) names, e.g., the alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, halogens and noble gases. Some other groups in the periodic table display fewer similarities and/or vertical trends (for example Groups 14 and 15), and these have no trivial names and are referred to simply by their group numbers.

A period is a row in the periodic table of the elements.

Although groups are the most common way of classifying elements, there are some regions of the periodic table where the horizontal trends and similarities in properties are more significant than vertical group trends. This can be true in the d-block (or "transition metals"), and especially for the f-block, where the lanthanides and actinides form two substantial horizontal series of elements.

[edit] Periodic trends of groups
Modern quantum mechanical theories of atomic structure explain group trends by proposing that elements within the same group have the same electron configurations in their valence shell, which is the most important factor in accounting for their similar properties. Elements in the same group also show patterns in their atomic radius, ionization energy, and electronegativity. From top to bottom in a group, the atomic radii of the elements increase. Since there are more filled energy levels, valence electrons are found farther from the nucleus. From the top, each successive element has a lower ionization energy because it is easier to remove an electron since the atoms are less tightly bound. Similarly, a group will also see a top to bottom decrease in electronegativity due to an increasing distance between valence electrons and the nucleus.

[edit] Periodic trends of periods




Periodic trend for ionization energy. Each period begins at a minimum for the alkali metals, and ends at a maximum for the noble gases.


Elements in the same period show trends in atomic radius, ionization energy, electron affinity, and electronegativity. Moving left to right across a period, atomic radius usually decreases. This occurs because each successive element has an added proton and electron which causes the electron to be drawn closer to the nucleus. This decrease in atomic radius also causes the ionization energy to increase when moving from left to right across a period. The more tightly bound an element is, the more energy is required to remove an electron. Similarly, electronegativity will increase in the same manner as ionization energy because of the amount of pull that is exerted on the electrons by the nucleus. Electron affinity also shows a slight trend across a period. Metals (left side of a period) generally have a lower electron affinity than nonmetals (right side of a period) with the exception of the noble gases. 
[edit] Examples

[edit] Noble gases
All the elements of Group 18, the noble gases, have full valence shells. This means they do not need to react with other elements to attain a full shell, and are therefore much less reactive than other groups. Neon followed by helium are the most inert elements among noble gases, since reactivity, in this group, increases with the periods: it is possible to make heavy noble gases react since they have much larger electron shells. However, their reactivity remains very low in absolute terms.

[edit] Halogens
In Group 17, known as the halogens, elements are missing just one electron each to fill their shells. Therefore, in chemical reactions they tend to acquire electrons (the tendency to acquire electrons is called electronegativity). This property is most evident for fluorine (the most electronegative element of the whole table), and it diminishes with increasing period.
As a result, all halogens form acids with hydrogen, such as hydrofluoric acid, hydrochloric acid, hydrobromic acid and hydroiodic acid, all in the form HX. Their acidity increases with higher period, for example, with regard to iodine and fluorine, since a large I− ion is more stable in solution than a small F−, there is less volume in which to disperse the charge.

[edit] Transition metals
For the transition metals (Groups 3 to 12), horizontal trends across periods are often important as well as vertical trends down groups; the differences between groups adjacent are usually not dramatic. Transition metal reactions often involve coordinated species.

[edit] Lanthanides and actinides
The chemical properties of the lanthanides (elements 57–71) and the actinides (elements 89–103) are even more similar to each other than the transition metals, and separating a mixture of these can be very difficult. This is important in the chemical purification of uranium concerning nuclear power.

[edit] Structure of the periodic table
The primary determinant of an element's chemical properties is its electron configuration, particularly the valence shell electrons. For instance, any atoms with four valence electrons occupying p orbitals will exhibit some similarity. The type of orbital in which the atom's outermost electrons reside determines the "block" to which it belongs. The number of valence shell electrons determines the family, or group, to which the element belongs.
The total number of electron shells an atom has determines the period to which it belongs. Each shell is divided into different subshells, which as atomic number increases are filled in roughly this order (the Aufbau principle):


Subshell:
S
G
F
D
P


Period







1
1s






2
2s



2p


3
3s



3p


4
4s


3d
4p


5
5s


4d
5p


6
6s

4f
5d
6p


7
7s

5f
6d
7p


8
8s
5g
6f
7d
8p


Hence the structure of the table. Since the outermost electrons determine chemical properties, those with the same number of valence electrons are grouped together.
Progressing through a group from lightest element to heaviest element, the outer-shell electrons (those most readily accessible for participation in chemical reactions) are all in the same type of orbital, with a similar shape, but with increasingly higher energy and average distance from the nucleus. For instance, the outer-shell (or "valence") electrons of the first group, headed by hydrogen, all have one electron in an s orbital. In hydrogen, that s orbital is in the lowest possible energy state of any atom, the first-shell orbital (and represented by hydrogen's position in the first period of the table). In francium, the heaviest element of the group, the outer-shell electron is in the seventh-shell orbital, significantly further out on average from the nucleus than those electrons filling all the shells below it in energy. As another example, both carbon and lead have four electrons in their outer shell orbitals.
Note that as atomic number (i.e., charge on the atomic nucleus) increases, this leads to greater spin-orbit coupling between the nucleus and the electrons, reducing the validity of the quantum mechanical orbital approximation model, which considers each atomic orbital as a separate entity.
Because of the importance of the outermost shell, the different regions of the periodic table are sometimes referred to as periodic table blocks, named according to the sub-shell in which the "last" electron resides, e.g., the s-block, the p-block, the d-block, etc.
The elements ununbium, ununtrium, ununquadium, etc. are elements that have been discovered, but so far have not received a trivial name yet. There is a system for naming them temporarily.



[edit] History
Main article: History of the periodic table
In Ancient Greece, the influential Greek philosopher Aristotle proposed that there were four main elements: air, fire, earth and water. All of these elements could be reacted to create another one; e.g., earth and fire combined to form lava. However, this theory was dismissed when the real chemical elements started being discovered. Scientists needed an easily accessible, well organized database with which information about the elements could be recorded and accessed. This was to be known as the periodic table.

Some triads

Element
Molar mass
(g/mol)
Density
(g/cm³)


chlorine
35.453
0.0032


bromine
79.904
3.1028


iodine
126.90447
4.933


 


calcium
40.078
1.55


strontium
87.62
2.54


barium
137.327
3.594


The original table was created before the discovery of subatomic particles or the formulation of current quantum mechanical theories of atomic structure. If one orders the elements by atomic mass, and then plots certain other properties against atomic mass, one sees an undulation or periodicity to these properties as a function of atomic mass. The first to recognize these regularities was the German chemist Johann Wolfgang Döbereiner who, in 1829, noticed a number of triads of similar elements:
In 1829 Döbereiner proposed the Law of Triads: The middle element in the triad had atomic weight that was the average of the other two members. The densities of some triads followed a similar pattern. Soon other scientists found chemical relationships extended beyond triads. Fluorine was added to Cl/Br/I group; sulfur, oxygen, selenium and tellurium were grouped into a family; nitrogen, phosphorus, arsenic, antimony, and bismuth were classified as another group.
This was followed by the English chemist John Newlands, who noticed in 1865 that when placed in order of increasing atomic weight, elements of similar physical and chemical properties recurred at intervals of eight, which he likened to the octaves of music, though his law of octaves was ridiculed by his contemporaries.[3] However, while successful for some elements, Newlands' law of octaves failed for two reasons:

It was not valid for elements that had atomic masses higher than Ca.
When further elements were discovered, such as the noble gases (He, Ne, Ar), they could not be accommodated in his table.





Dmitri Mendeleev, father of the periodic table


Finally, in 1869 the Russian chemistry professor Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev and four months later the German Julius Lothar Meyer independently developed the first periodic table, arranging the elements by mass. However, Mendeleev plotted a few elements out of strict mass sequence in order to make a better match to the properties of their neighbors in the table, corrected mistakes in the values of several atomic masses, and predicted the existence and properties of a few new elements in the empty cells of his table. Mendeleev was later vindicated by the discovery of the electronic structure of the elements in the late 19th and early 20th century.
Earlier attempts to list the elements to show the relationships between them (for example by Newlands) had usually involved putting them in order of atomic mass. Mendeleev's key insight in devising the periodic table was to lay out the elements to illustrate recurring ("periodic") chemical properties (even if this meant some of them were not in mass order), and to leave gaps for "missing" elements. Mendeleev used his table to predict the properties of these "missing elements", and many of them were indeed discovered and fit the predictions well.
With the development of theories of atomic structure (for instance by Henry Moseley) it became apparent that Mendeleev had listed the elements in order of increasing atomic number (i.e., the net amount of positive charge on the atomic nucleus). This sequence is nearly identical to that resulting from ascending atomic mass.
In order to illustrate recurring properties, Mendeleev began new rows in his table so that elements with similar properties fell into the same columns ("groups").
With the development of modern quantum mechanical theories of electron configuration within atoms, it became apparent that each row ("period") in the table corresponded to the filling of a quantum shell of electrons. In Mendeleev's original table, each period was the same length. Modern tables have progressively longer periods further down the table, and group the elements into s-, p-, d- and f-blocks to reflect our understanding of their electron configuration.
In the 1940s, research groups led by Edwin Mattison McMillan and Glenn T. Seaborg (see transuranium elements) identified the transuranic lanthanides and the actinides, which may be placed within the table, or below (as shown above).

[edit] See also


Abundance of the chemical elements
Atomic electron configuration table
Cosmochemical Periodic Table of the Elements in the Solar System
Discoveries of the chemical elements
Extended periodic table
History of the periodic table
IUPAC's systematic element names
Periodic group
Table in Chinese
Table of chemical elements
Table of nuclides
Tom Lehrer's song "The Elements"



[edit] References


^ IUPAC article on periodic table
^ Science Standards of Learning Cirriculum Framework
^ Bryson, Bill (2004). A Short History of Nearly Everything. London: Black Swan. pp. 687. ISBN 9780552151740.  pp141–2



Theodore L. Brown, H. Eugene LeMay, and Bruce E. Bursten (2005). Chemistry:The Central Science (10th edition ed.). Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-109686-9. 
Helmenstine, Marie (2007). "Trends in the Periodic Table". About, Inc.. http://chemistry.about.com/od/periodictableelements/a/periodictrends.htm. Retrieved on 2007-01-27. 


[edit] Further reading

Mazurs, E.G., "Graphical Representations of the Periodic System During One Hundred Years". University of Alabama Press, Alabama. 1974.
Bouma, J., "An Application-Oriented Periodic Table of the Elements", J. Chem. Ed., 66, 741 (1989).
Eric R. Scerri, The Periodic Table: Its Story and Its Significance, Oxford University Press, 2006.
Imyanitov, N.S., "Mathematical description of dialectic regular trends in the periodic system", Russ. J. Gen. Chem., 69, 509 (1999) [Eng].
Imyanitov, N.S., "Modification of Various Functions for Description of Periodic Dependences", Russ. J. Coord. Chem., 29, 46 (2003) [Eng].


[edit] External links

UC Berkeley video lecture on the Periodic table
Interactive periodic table


Find more about Periodic table on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity







v • d • e

Periodic tables





Layouts

Standard · Vertical · Full names · Names and atomic weights · Text for last · Large table · Metals and nonmetals · Blocks · Valences · Inline f-block · 210 elements · Electron configurations · Atomic weights · Electronegativities · Alternatives · Crystal structure






Lists of elements by

Name · Atomic symbol · Atomic number · Atomic weight · Name etymology (after places, after people) · Discovery
Boiling point · Melting point · Density · Oxidation state · Abundance (in humans) · Nuclear stability · Hardness






Groups

1 (Alkali metals) · 2 (Alkaline earth metals) · 3 · 4 · 5 · 6 · 7 · 8 · 9 · 10 · 11 · 12 · 13 (Boron group) · 14 (Carbon group) · 15 (Pnictogens) · 16 (Chalcogens) · 17 (Halogens) · 18 (Noble gases)






Periods

1 · 2 · 3 · 4 · 5 · 6 · 7 · 8






Other element categories

Metals · Transition metals · Metalloids · Nonmetals · Lanthanoids · Actinoids · Rare earth elements · Platinum group metals (PGMs) · Post-transition metals






Blocks

s-block · p-block · d-block · f-block · g-block













v • d • e

Chemistry






Analytical chemistry • Biochemistry • Bioinorganic chemistry • Bioorganic chemistry • Chemical biology • Chemistry education • Click chemistry • Cluster chemistry • Computational chemistry • Electrochemistry • Environmental chemistry • Green chemistry • Inorganic chemistry • Materials science • Medicinal chemistry • Nuclear chemistry • Organic chemistry • Organometallic chemistry • Pharmacy • Physical chemistry • Photochemistry • Polymer chemistry • Solid-state chemistry • Supramolecular chemistry • Theoretical chemistry • Thermochemistry • Wet chemistry






List of biomolecules • List of inorganic compounds • List of organic compounds • Periodic table








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Periodic_table"
Categories: Periodic table | Classification systems | Russian inventions | Chemistry 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
العربية
Aragonés
مصرى
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
贛語
Gaelg
Galego
ગુજરાતી
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Kiswahili
Коми
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Limburgs
Lingála
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Malti
Māori
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
O'zbek
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Ripoarisch
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sesotho
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Tarandíne
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
Vèneto
Walon
West-Vlams
吴语
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
粵語
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 19:18.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
