













Joseph Stiglitz - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Joseph_Stiglitz";
		var wgTitle = "Joseph Stiglitz";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "63092";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281502034;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Joseph Stiglitz

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 

Joseph E. Stiglitz

Neo-Keynesian economics





Birth
February 9, 1943 (1943-02-09) (age 66)


Nationality
United States


Field
Macroeconomics,Public Economics,Information Economics


Influences
Robert Solow


Influenced
Jason Furman


Contributions
Screening,Taxation,Unemployment











17th Chair of the Council of Economic Advisors



In office
1995 – 1997


President
Bill Clinton


Preceded by
Laura Tyson


Succeeded by
Janet Yellen






Joseph Eugene Stiglitz (born February 9, 1943) is an American economist and a professor at Columbia University. He is a recipient of the John Bates Clark Medal (1979) and the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences (2001). He is also the former Senior Vice President and Chief Economist of the World Bank. He is known for his critical view of the management of globalization, free-market economists (whom he calls "free market fundamentalists") and some international institutions like the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. In 2000, Stiglitz founded the Initiative for Policy Dialogue (IPD), a think tank on international development based at Columbia University. Since 2001, he has been a member of the Columbia faculty, and has held the rank of University Professor since 2003. He also chairs the University of Manchester's Brooks World Poverty Institute and is a member of the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences.




Contents


1 Biography
2 Contributions to economics

2.1 Information asymmetry
2.2 Efficiency wages: the Shapiro-Stiglitz model
2.3 Some possible practical implications of Stiglitz theorems


3 Politics

3.1 Clinton administration, 1993 - 1997
3.2 Initiative for Policy Dialogue


4 Books

4.1 Stability with Growth: Macroeconomics, Liberalization and Development
4.2 Making Globalization Work
4.3 The Roaring Nineties
4.4 Globalization and Its Discontents
4.5 Whither Socialism?
4.6 Papers and conferences


5 Personal Information
6 Publications
7 References
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography
Stiglitz was born in Gary, Indiana, to Jewish parents, Charlotte and Nathaniel Stiglitz. From 1960 to 1963, he studied at Amherst College, where he was a highly active member of the debate team and President of the Student Government. He went to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) for his fourth year as an undergraduate, where he later pursued graduate work. His undergraduate degree was awarded from Amherst College. From 1965 to 1966, he moved to the University of Chicago to do research under Hirofumi Uzawa who had received an NSF grant. He studied for his PhD from MIT from 1966 to 1967, during which time he also held an MIT assistant professorship. The particular style of MIT economics suited him well - simple and concrete models, directed at answering important and relevant questions.[1] From 1969 to 1970, he was a Fulbright research fellow at the University of Cambridge. In subsequent years, he held professorships at Yale University, Stanford University, Oxford University and Princeton University. Stiglitz is now a Professor at Columbia University, with appointments at the Business School, the Department of Economics and the School of International and Public Affairs (SIPA), and is editor of The Economists' Voice journal with J. Bradford DeLong and Aaron Edlin. He also gives classes for a double-degree program between Sciences Po Paris and Ecole Polytechnique in 'Economics and Public Policy'.[2] Stiglitz is generally considered to be a New-Keynesian economist.
In addition to making numerous influential contributions to microeconomics, Stiglitz has played a number of policy roles. He served in the Clinton Administration as the chair of the President's Council of Economic Advisors (1995 – 1997). At the World Bank, he served as Senior Vice President and Chief Economist (1997 – 2000), in the time when unprecedented protest against international economic organizations started, most prominently with the Seattle WTO meeting of 1999. He was fired by the World Bank for expressing dissent with its policies.[3] He was a lead author for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Stiglitz has advised American President Barack Obama, but has also been sharply critical of the Obama Administration's financial-industry rescue plan.[4]

[edit] Contributions to economics

[edit] Information asymmetry





This section cites its sources but does not provide page references. You can help to improve it by introducing citations that are more precise.


Stiglitz's most famous research was on screening, a technique used by one economic agent to extract otherwise private information from another. It was for this contribution to the theory of information asymmetry that he shared the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics[1] in 2001 "for laying the foundations for the theory of markets with asymmetric information" with George A. Akerlof and A. Michael Spence.
Traditional neoclassical economics literature assumes that markets are always efficient except for some limited and well defined market failures; Stiglitz et al. more recent studies reverse that presumption: it is only under exceptional circumstances that markets are efficient. Stiglitz (and Greenwald)[5] have shown that "whenever markets are incomplete and /or information is imperfect (which are true in virtually all economies), even competitive market allocation is not constrained Pareto efficient". In other words, there almost always exists schemes of government intervention which can induce Pareto superior outcomes, thus making everyone better off.[5] Empirical evidence on the pervasiveness of these market failures is lacking.[citation needed] Although these conclusions and the pervasiveness of market failures do not necessarily warrant the state intervening broadly in the economy, it makes clear that the "optimal" range of government recommendable interventions is definitely much larger than the traditional "market failure" school recognizes[6] For Stiglitz there is no such thing as an "invisible hand".[7]



Whenever there are “externalities”—where the actions of an individual have impacts on others for which they do not pay or for which they are not compensated—markets will not work well. But recent research has shown that these externalities are pervasive, whenever there is imperfect information or imperfect risk markets—that is always.






The real debate today is about finding the right balance between the market and government. Both are needed. They can each complement each other. This balance will differ from time to time and place to place.[8]



In the opening remarks for his prize acceptance "Aula Magna",[9] Stiglitz said:



"I hope to show that Information Economics represents a fundamental change in the prevailing paradigm within economics. Problems of information are central to understanding not only market economics but also political economy, and in the last section of this lecture, I explore some of the implications of information imperfections for political processes." Stiglitz, Aula Magna



In an interview, Stiglitz explained further:



"The theories that I (and others) helped develop explained why unfettered markets often not only do not lead to social justice, but do not even produce efficient outcomes. Interestingly, there has been no intellectual challenge to the refutation of Adam Smith’s invisible hand: individuals and firms, in the pursuit of their self-interest, are not necessarily, or in general, led as if by an invisible hand, to economic efficiency".[10]




[edit] Efficiency wages: the Shapiro-Stiglitz model
Stiglitz also did some research on efficiency wages, and helped create what became know as the "Shapiro-Stiglitz model" to explain why there is unemployment, why wages are not bid down sufficiently by job seekers (in the absence of minimum wages) so that everyone who wants a job finds one, and to question whether the neoclassical paradigm could explain involuntary unemployment.[11] The answer to these puzzles was proposed by Shapiro and Stiglitz in 1984: "Unemployment is driven by the information structure of employment".[11] Two basic observations undergird their analysis:

Unlike other forms of capital, humans can choose their level of effort.
It is costly for firms to determine how much effort workers are exerting.

A full description of this model can be found at the links provided.[12] Some key implications of this model are:

Wages do not fall enough during recessions to prevent unemployment from rising. If the demand for labour falls, this lowers wages. But because wages have fallen, the probability of 'shirking' (workers not exerting effort) has risen. If employment levels are to be maintained, through a sufficient lowering of wages, workers will be less productive than before through the shirking effect. As a consequence, in the model wages do not fall enough to maintain employment levels at the previous state, because firms want to avoid excessive shirking by their workers. So, unemployment must rise during recessions, because wages are kept 'too high'.
Possible corollary: Wage sluggishness. Moving from one private cost of hiring <w∗> to another private cost of hiring <w∗∗> will require each firm to repeatedly re-optimize wages in response to shifting unemployment rate. Firms cannot cut wages until unemployment rises sufficiently (a coordination problem).

The outcome is never Pareto efficient.





This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please improve this article if you can. (December 2008)



Each firm employs too few workers because it faces private cost of hiring <w∗> rather than the social cost — which is equal to <e> and [ w∗ > e' ] in all cases.[clarification needed]
There are also negative externalities. Each firm increases the asset value of unemployment <Vu> for all other firms by hiring.[clarification needed] But the first problem clearly dominates since the 'natural rate of unemployment' is always too high.

Main article: Efficiency wages

[edit] Some possible practical implications of Stiglitz theorems
While the mathematical validity of Stiglitz et al. theorems are not in question, their practical implications in political economy and their application in real life economic policies have been subject to considerable debates and disagreements[13]. Stiglitz himself seems to be continuously adapting his own political-economic discourse,[14] as we can see from the evolution in his positions as initially stated in Whither Socialism? (1994) to his own new positions held on his most recent publications.



Once incomplete and imperfect information are introduced, Chicago-school defenders of the market system cannot sustain descriptive claims of the Pareto efficiency of the real world. Thus, Stiglitz's use of rational-expectations equilibrium assumptions to achieve a more realistic understanding of capitalism than is usual among rational-expectations theorists leads, paradoxically, to the conclusion that capitalism deviates from the model in a way that justifies state action—socialism—as a remedy.[15]






The effect of Stiglitz's influence is to make economics even more presumptively interventionist than Samuelson preferred. Samuelson treated market failure as the exception to the general rule of efficient markets. But the Greenwald-Stiglitz theorem posits market failure as the norm, establishing "that government could potentially almost always improve upon the market's resource allocation." And the Sappington-Stiglitz theorem "establishes that an ideal government could do better running an enterprise itself than it could through privatization"[16] (Stiglitz 1994, 179).[15]



The objections to the wide adoption of these positions suggested by Stiglitz's discoveries do not come from economics itself but mostly from political scientists and are in the fields of sociology. As David L. Prychitko discusses in his "critique" to Whither Socialism? (see below), although Stiglitz's main economic insight seems generally correct, it still leaves open great constitutional questions such as how the coercive institutions of the government should be constrained and what the relation is between the government and civil society.[17]

[edit] Politics

[edit] Clinton administration, 1993 - 1997
Stiglitz joined the Clinton Administration in 1993[18], serving first as a member during 1993-1995, and then as Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers during 1995-1997, in which capacity he also served as a member of the cabinet. He became deeply involved in environmental issues, which included serving on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and helping draft a new law for toxic wastes (which was never passed).
Stiglitz's most important contribution in this period was helping define a new economic philosophy, a "third way", which recognized the important, but limited, role of government, that unfettered markets often did not work well, but that government was not always able to correct the limitations of markets. The academic research that he had been conducting over the preceding 25 years provided the intellectual foundations for this "third way".
When President Bill Clinton was re-elected, he asked Stiglitz to continue to serve as Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers for another term. But he had already been approached by the World Bank, to be its senior vice president for development policy and its chief economist.
As the World Bank began its ten-year review of the transition of the former Communist countries to the market economy it unveiled failures of the countries that had followed the International Monetary Fund (IMF) shock therapy policies - both in terms of the declines in GDP and increases in poverty - that were even worse than the worst that most of its critics had envisioned at the onset of the transition. Clear links existed between the dismal performances and the policies that the IMF had advocated, such as the voucher privatization schemes and excessive monetary stringency. Meanwhile, the success of a few countries that had followed quite different strategies suggested that there were alternatives that could have been followed. The U.S. Treasury had put enormous pressure on the World Bank to silence his criticisms of the policies which they and the IMF had pushed.[19][20]
Stiglitz always had a poor relationship with Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers. In 2000, Summers successfully petitioned for Stiglitz's removal, supposedly in exchange for World Bank President James Wolfensohn's re-appointment – an exchange that Wolfensohn denies took place. Whether Summers ever made such a blunt demand is questionable – Wolfensohn claims he would "have told him to fuck himself".[21]
Stiglitz resigned from the World Bank in January 2000, a month before his term expired at.[20] The Bank's president, James Wolfensohn, announced Stiglitz's resignation in November 1999 and also announced that Stiglitz would stay on as "special advisor to the president", and would chair the search committee for a successor.

"Joseph E. Stiglitz said today [Nov. 24, 1999] that he would resign as the World Bank's chief economist after using the position for nearly three years to raise pointed questions about the effectiveness of conventional approaches to helping poor countries."[22]

In this role, he continued criticism of the IMF, and, by implication, the US Treasury Department. In April 2000, in an article for The New Republic, he wrote:

"They’ll say the IMF is arrogant. They’ll say the IMF doesn’t really listen to the developing countries it is supposed to help. They’ll say the IMF is secretive and insulated from democratic accountability. They’ll say the IMF’s economic ‘remedies’ often make things worse – turning slowdowns into recessions and recessions into depressions. And they’ll have a point. I was chief economist at the World Bank from 1996 until last November, during the gravest global economic crisis in a half-century. I saw how the IMF, in tandem with the U.S. Treasury Department, responded. And I was appalled."

The article was published a week before the annual meetings of the World Bank and IMF and provoked a strong response. It proved too strong for Summers and, yet more lethally, Stiglitz's protector-of-sorts at the World Bank, Wolfensohn. Wolfensohn had privately empathised with Stiglitz's views, but this time was worried for his second term, which Summers had threatened to veto.[citation needed] Stanley Fisher, deputy managing director of the IMF, called a special staff meeting and informed at that gathering that Wolfensohn had agreed to fire Stiglitz. Meanwhile, the Bank's External Affairs department told the press that Stiglitz had not been fired, his post had merely been abolished.[23]
In a September 19, 2008 radio interview with Aimee Allison and Philip Maldari on Pacifica Radio's KPFA 94.1 FM in Berkeley, California, Stiglitz implied that President Clinton and his economic advisors would not have backed the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) had they been aware of stealth provisions, inserted by lobbyists, that they overlooked.

[edit] Initiative for Policy Dialogue
In July 2000 Stiglitz founded the Initiative for Policy Dialogue (IPD), with support of the Ford, Rockefeller, McArthur, and Mott Foundations and the Canadian and Swedish government, to enhance democratic processes for decision-making in developing countries, to ensure that a broader range of alternatives are on the table and more stakeholders are at the table.
Main article: Initiative for Policy Dialogue

[edit] Books
Along with his technical economic publications (he has published over 300 technical articles), Stiglitz is the author of books on issues from patent law to abuses in international trade.

[edit] Stability with Growth: Macroeconomics, Liberalization and Development
In Stability with Growth: Macroeconomics, Liberalization and Development (2006), Stiglitz, José Antoni Ocampo (United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs) Shari Spiegel (Managing Director, Initiative for Policy Dialogue - IPD ) Ricardo Ffrench-Davis (Main Adviser, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean - ECLAC ) and Deepak Nayyar (Vice Chancellor, University of Delhi) discuss the current debates on macroeconomics, capital market liberalization, and development, and develop a new framework within which one can assess alternative policies. They explain their belief that the Washington Consensus has advocated narrow goals for development (with a focus on price stability) and prescribed too few policy instruments (emphasizing monetary and fiscal policies), and places unwarranted faith in the role of markets. The new framework focuses on real stability and long-term sustainable and equitable growth, offers a variety of non-standard ways to stabilize the economy and promote growth, and accepts that market imperfections necessitate government interventions. Policy-makers have pursued stabilization goals with little concern for growth consequences, while trying to increase growth through structural reforms focused on improving economic efficiency. Moreover, structural policies, such as capital market liberalization, have had major consequences for economic stability. This book challenges these policies by arguing that stabilization policy has important consequences for long-term growth and has often been implemented with adverse consequences. The first part of the book introduces the key questions and looks at the objectives of economic policy from different perspectives.The third part presents a similar analysis for capital market liberalization.

[edit] Making Globalization Work
Making Globalization Work (2006) surveys the inequities of the global economy, and the mechanisms by which developed countries exert an excessive influence over developing nations. Dr. Stiglitz argues that through tariffs, subsidies, an overly-complex patent system and pollution, the world is being both economically and politically destabilised. Stiglitz argues that strong, transparent institutions are needed to address these problems. He shows how an examination of incomplete markets can make corrective government policies desirable.
Stiglitz argues that economic opportunities are not widely enough available, that financial crises are too costly and too frequent, and that the rich countries have done too little to address these problems. Making Globalization Work[24] had sold more than two million copies.

[edit] The Roaring Nineties
In 2003, Stiglitz published The Roaring Nineties, his analysis of the boom and bust of the 1990s. In 2004 he published New Paradigm for Monetary Economics (Cambridge University Press) and in 2005, Oxford University Press published his book Fair Trade for All.

[edit] Globalization and Its Discontents
In Globalization and Its Discontents (2002), Stiglitz argues that what are often called "developing economies" are, in fact, not developing at all, and puts much of the blame on the IMF.
Stiglitz bases his argument on the themes that his decades of theoretical work have emphasized: namely, what happens when people lack the key information that bears on the decisions they have to make, or when markets for important kinds of transactions are inadequate or don't exist, or when other institutions that standard economic thinking takes for granted are absent or flawed. Stiglitz stresses the point: "Recent advances in economic theory" (in part referring to his own work) "have shown that whenever information is imperfect and markets incomplete, which is to say always, and especially in developing countries, then the invisible hand works most imperfectly." As a result, Stiglitz continues, governments can improve the outcome by well-chosen interventions. Stiglitz argues that when families and firms seek to buy too little compared to what the economy can produce, governments can fight recessions and depressions by using expansionary monetary and fiscal policies to spur the demand for goods and services. At the microeconomic level, governments can regulate banks and other financial institutions to keep them sound. They can also use tax policy to steer investment into more productive industries and trade policies to allow new industries to mature to the point at which they can survive foreign competition. And governments can use a variety of devices, ranging from job creation to manpower training to welfare assistance, to put unemployed labor back to work and cushion human hardship.
Stiglitz complains bitterly that the IMF has done great damage through the economic policies it has prescribed that countries must follow in order to qualify for IMF loans, or for loans from banks and other private-sector lenders that look to the IMF to indicate whether a borrower is creditworthy. The organization and its officials, he argues, have ignored the implications of incomplete information, inadequate markets, and unworkable institutions—all of which are especially characteristic of newly developing countries. As a result, Stiglitz argues, the IMF has often called for policies that conform to textbook economics but do not make sense for the countries to which the IMF is recommending them. Stiglitz seeks to show that these policies have been disastrous for the countries that have followed them.

[edit] Whither Socialism?
Whither Socialism? is based on Stiglitz's Wicksell Lectures, presented at the Stockholm School of Economics in 1990 and presents a summary of information economics and the theory of markets with imperfect information and imperfect competition, as well as being a critique of both free market and market socialist approaches (see Roemer critique, op. cit.). Stiglitz explains how the neoclassical, or Walrasian model ("Walrasian economics" refers to the result of the process which has given birth to a formal representation of Adam Smith's notion of the "invisible hand", along the lines put forward by Leon Walras and encapsulated in the general equilibrium model of Arrow-Debreu), may have wrongly encouraged the belief that market socialism could work. Stiglitz proposes an alternative model, based on the information economics established by the Greenwald-Stiglitz theorems.
One of the reasons Stiglitz sees for the critical failing in the standard neoclassical model, on which market socialism was built, is its failure to consider the problems that arise from lack of perfect information and from the costs of acquiring information. He also identifies problems arising from its assumptions concerning completeness.[25]

Critique

Whither Socialism? has been subject to various critiques such as those of the Yale professor John E. Roemer,[26] Peter Boettke, the Deputy Director of the James M. Buchanan Center for Political Economy (1996),[27] as well as David L. Prychitko, a professor of economics at Northern Michigan University.[17] According to Prychitko:

"Stiglitz's main insight is generally correct – that the state cannot be ruled out or that it should be ruled in --, but leaves open the grand constitutional questions: How will the coercive institutions of the state be constrained? What is the relation between the state and civil society? His book fails on these political aspects because it has not addressed the broader constitutional concerns that James McGill Buchanan Jr.[28] (1975) and other economists have raised."


[edit] Papers and conferences
Dr. Stiglitz wrote a series of papers and held a series of conferences explaining how such information uncertainties may have influence on everything from unemployment to lending shortages. As the chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers during the Clinton Administration and former chief economist at the World Bank, Dr. Stiglitz was able to put some of his views into action. For example, he was an outspoken critic of quickly opening up financial markets in developing countries. These markets rely on access to good financial data and sound bankruptcy laws, but he argued that many of these countries didn't have the regulatory institutions needed to ensure that the markets would operate soundly. In addition, Dr. Stiglitz spoke at Global China Connection's "A Glimpse of China's Future" conference regarding the potential for future investment in China.

[edit] Personal Information
Stiglitz married for the third time on October 28, 2004, to Anya Schiffrin, who works at the School of International and Public Affairs at Columbia University.

[edit] Publications

Books


2008, The Three Trillion Dollar War ISBN 978-0-39-306701-9; by Joseph Stiglitz and Linda Bilmes, W. W. Norton.


2006, Making Globalization Work ISBN 0-393-06122-1, Penguin Books, August 2006.


2006, Stability with Growth: Macroeconomics, Liberalization, and Development ISBN 0-19-928814-3 (Initiative for Policy Dialogue Series C); by Joseph E. Stiglitz, Jose Antonio Ocampo, Shari Spiegel, Ricardo Ffrench-Davis, and Deepak Nayyar; Oxford University Press 2006


1996, Whither Socialism ? STIGLITZ, Joseph E., (Wicksell Lectures), MIT Press, January 1996.


2000, Frontiers of Development Economics: The Future in Perspective, edited with Gerald M. Meier, World Bank, May 2000.


2002, Principles of Macroeconomics, third edition, with Carl E. Walsh, W.W. Norton & Company, March 2002.


2002, Economics, Third Edition, with Carl E. Walsh, W.W. Norton & Company, April 2002.


2002, Peasants Versus City-Dwellers: Taxation and the Burden of Economic Development, with Raaj K. Sah, Oxford University Press, April 2002.


2002, Globalization and Its Discontents, W.W. Norton & Company, June 2002.


Towards a New Paradigm in Monetary Economics, with Bruce Greenwald, Cambridge University Press.


2003, The Roaring Nineties, W.W. Norton & Company, forthcoming in October 2003.


Fair Trade for All: How Trade Can Promote Development (Initiative for Policy Dialogue Series C) – by Joseph E. Stiglitz, Andrew Charlton; Hardcover


Economics of the Public Sector. by Joseph E. Stiglitz


2002, The Rebel Within: Joseph Stiglitz and the World Bank by Joseph E. Stiglitz (Editor), Ha-Joon Chang (Editor), ISBN 1-898855-91-9, Anthem Press, Wimbledon Publishing Company (Paperback - February 25, 2002)


2005, The Development Round Of Trade Negotiations In The Aftermath Of Cancun by Joseph E. Stiglitz, Andrew Charlton (Paperback - January 30, 2005)


2005, A Chance For The World Bank by Joseph P Stiglitz (Foreword), Jozef Ritzen, ISBN 1-84331-162-3, Anthem Press, Wimbledon Publishing Company (Paperback - May 30, 2005)


1986, 'Economics of the Public Sector' by J.E.Stiglitz ISBN 0-393-96651-8, W.W.Norton, New York. (Re-printed 1988, 2000)


1981, 'Theory of Commodity Price Stabilization' by David M.G. Newbery and Joseph E. Stiglitz ISBN-10: 0198284179 ISBN-13: 978-0198284178, Oxford University Press [Hardcover: 512 pages]


Readings in the Modern Theory of Economic Growth by Joseph E. Stiglitz (Editor), Hirofumi Uzawa (Editor)


Articles, conferences, papers, videos


2007, The Economic Consequences of Mr. Bush, Vanity Fair, December 2007 Issue
2007, Where is the World Going To, Mr. Stiglitz? directed by Jacques Sarasin, First Run Features.
2001, New Ideas About Old Age Security: Toward Sustainable Pension Systems in the 21st Century , edited with Robert Holzmann, World Bank, January 2001.
1998 Redefining the Role of the State - What should it do ? How should it do it ? And how should these decisions be made? Paper presented at the Tenth Anniversary of MITI Research Institute, Tokyo, March 1998.
1996, The World Bank Research Observer: No 2: August 1996 by Joseph Stiglitz
1993, “Post Walrasian and post Marxian economics,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 7, pp. 109-14
1993, “Market socialism and neoclassical economics,” in Bardhan, P. K. and Roemer, J. E. (eds.), Market Socialism. The Current Debate, New York: Oxford University Press
1989, “Principal and agent,” in J. Eatwell, M. Milgate and P. Newman (eds.), The New Palgrave. Allocation, Information and Markets. New York: W. W. Norton
1987, “The causes and consequences of the dependence of quality on prices,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 25, pp. 1-48
1981, Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information, The American Economic Review, Vol. 71, No.3 (June 1981),pp.393-410, by Joseph E. Stiglitz and Andrew Weiss
1974, Incentives and Risk Sharing in Sharecropping, The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 41, No. 2, 219-255.
World Bank Video presentation
Online access to Stiglitz published papers, at his own website
The Three Trillion Dollar War, a panel discussion with Joseph Stiglitz and Linda Bilmes regarding their new book, `The Three Trillion Dollar War: The True Cost of the Iraq Conflict.` Feb 28, 2008 at Columbia University.
I Dissent: Uncommon Economic Wisdom. A monthly column for Project Syndicate.

This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it.

[edit] References


^ a b Joseph E. Stiglitz: The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 2001
^ http://www.sciences-po.fr/formation/master_scpo/mentions/economics/index.htm
^ multi-day interview with Greg Palast
^ "Obama’s Ersatz Capitalism". The New York Times. 2009-03-31. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/01/opinion/01stiglitz.html. Retrieved on 2009-04-02. 
^ a b GREENWALD, Bruce and STIGLITZ, Joseph E. 1986 Externalities in Economies with Imperfect Information and Incomplete Markets, Quarterly Journal of Economics, no. 90.
^ WANG, Shaoguang. The State, Market Economy, and Transition. Department of Political Science, Yale University.
^ STIGLITZ, Joseph E. There is no invisible hand. London: The Guardian Comment, December 20, 2002.
^ ALTMAN, Daniel. Managing Globalization. In: Q & Answers with Joseph E. Stiglitz, Columbia University and The International Herald Tribune, Oct 11, 2006 05:03AM.
^ STIGLITZ, Joseph E. Prize Lecture: Information and the Change in the Paradigm in Economics. Joseph E. Stiglitz held his Prize Lecture December 8, 2001, at Aula Magna, Stockholm University. He was presented by Lars E.O. Svensson, Chairman of the Prize Committee.
^ STIGLITZ, Joseph E. The pact with the devil. Beppe Grillo's Friends interview
^ a b SHAPIRO, Carl and STIGLITZ, Joseph E. Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline Device. The American Economic Review, Vol. 74, No. 3 (Jun., 1984), pp. 433-444.
^ Efficiency wages, the Shapiro-Stiglitz Model
^ SANAHUJA, José Antonio. Consensus, dissensus, confusion: the "Stiglitz Debate" in perspective. Development in Practice, Vol 14, 2004
^ FRIEDMAN, Benjamin M. Globalization: Stiglitz's Case. The New York Review of Books, Volume 49, Number 13 · August 15, 2002
^ a b BOETTKE, Peter J. What Went Wrong with Economics?, Critical Review Vol. 11, No. 1, P. 35. p. 58
^ SAPPINGTON, David E. M. e STIGLITZ, Joseph E. Privatization, Information and Incentives. Columbia University; National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) June 1988; NBER Working Paper No. W2196
^ a b PRYCHITKO, David L. Book Reviews, Whither Socialism?, The Cato Journal, Cato Institute, vol. 16, no. 2. David L. Prychitko is the Head of the Department of Economics (Northern Michigan University), a Faculty Affiliate in the Program on Markets and Institutions at the James M. Buchanan Center for Political Economy (George Mason University) and the author of over a dozen socio-economic books mainly on Marxism and socialism
^ "http://www2.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/jstiglitz/bio.cfm"
^ Wade, Robert. Showdown at the World Bank, New Left Review 7, January-February 2001
^ a b Hage, Dave.. Joseph Stiglitz : A Dangerous Man, A World Bank Insider Who Defected, Published on Wednesday, October 11, 2000 in the Minneapolis Star-Tribune
^ Mallaby, The World's Banker, p. 266
^ Richard W. Stevenson, Outspoken chief economist leaving World Bank, New York Times (November 25, 1999).
^ WADE, Robert. U.S. Hegemony and the World Bank: Stiglitz's Firing And Kanbur's Resignation., New Left Review, 9 Oct 2000, pp 9-10.
^ see Stiglitz discuss his book on Youtube
^ ZAPIA, Carlo. The economics of information, market socialism and Hayek's legacy., Dipartimento di Economia Politica, Università di Siena
^ ROEMER, John E. An Anti-Hayekian Manifesto., New Left Review I/211, May-June 1995
^ Whither Socialism? by Joseph E. Stiglitz, Author(s) of Review: Peter J. Boettke, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 34, No. 1 (Mar., 1996), pp. 189-191
^ BUCHANAN, James M. Public Finance and Public Choice, National Tax Journal,1975.



[edit] External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Joseph Stiglitz



Joseph Stiglitz's homepage
Chair Profile, Committee on Global Thought at Columbia University
ThreeTrillionDollarWar.org
STIGLITZ, Joseph E. Prize Lecture: Information and the Change in the Paradigm in Economics. Joseph E. Stiglitz held his Prize Lecture December 8, 2001, at Aula Magna, Stockholm University. He was presented by Lars E.O. Svensson, Chairman of the Prize Committee.
Joseph Stiglitz – A Dangerous Man, A World Bank Insider Who Defected., HAGE, Dave, Minneapolis Star-Tribune, October 11, 2000
Audio of Stglitz's lecture in The Hindu Public Lecture Series at Chennai
Efficiency wages, the Shapiro-Stiglitz Model a lecture by Leszek Wincenciak, Ph.D., Warsaw University, May 22, 2007
Initiative for Policy Dialogue (IPD) official website
The Brooks World Poverty Institute at the University of Manchester
Stiglitz explains how the IMF destroys nations
An Open Letter to Joseph Stiglitz, by Kenneth Rogoff, Economic Counsellor and Director of the Research Department, IMF
The Economists' Voice
Autobiographical essay in acceptance of the Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel
Joseph E. Stiglitz's syndicated monthly op/ed column for Project Syndicate
"More instruments and broader goals: Moving toward the post-Washington Consensus" (PDF 287KB) The (freely) published UNU-WIDER 1998 Annual Lecture
Critical review of Globalization and its Discontents by Tony Smith
Critical View of Stiglitz's Externality Model, From A Free Market Perspective
"The Economic Costs of the Iraq War: An Appraisal Three Years After the Beginning of the Conflict" - A paper that estimates the total cost to the U.S. of the second Iraq War to be $1-2 trillion. Co-authored with Linda Bilmes.
The 2 Trillion Dollar War December-2006 @ Rolling Stone
Download MP3 Joseph Stiglitz interview by The Progressive magazine on Nov. 1, 2006
Gloomy About Globalization Robert Skidelsky review of Stiglitz's Making Globalization Work from The New York Review of Books
IDEAS/RePEc
« The Free Market Does Not Work » Joseph E. Stiglitz (2006)


Video lectures


Joseph Stiglitz on Google Video, Google Video
The Roaring Nineties by Joseph Stiglitz, World Bank
Joseph Stiglitz and Kenneth Rogoff discuss: Globalization and Its Discontents, World Bank
Information and the Change in the Paradigm in Economics - Nobel lecture, Nobelprize.org
The Future of Globalization: Lessons from Cancun and Recent Financial Crises, Globalization research group, Duke
Social responsible investment, Norwegian Ministry of Finance



Government offices


Preceded by
Laura D'Andrea Tyson
Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers
1995-1997
Succeeded by
Janet Yellen


Business positions


Preceded by
Michael Bruno
World Bank Chief Economist
1997-2000
Succeeded by
Nicholas Stern









v • d • e

Nobel Laureates in Economics








George Akerlof / Michael Spence / Joseph E. Stiglitz (2001) · Daniel Kahneman / Vernon L. Smith (2002) · Robert F. Engle / Clive Granger (2003) · Finn E. Kydland / Edward C. Prescott (2004) · Robert Aumann / Thomas Schelling (2005) · Edmund Phelps (2006) · Leonid Hurwicz / Eric Maskin / Roger Myerson (2007) · Paul Krugman (2008)










Complete roster · 1969–1975 · 1976–2000 · 2001–present














v • d • e

Chairs of the Council of Economic Advisers






Nourse · Keyserling · Burns · Saulnier · Heller · Ackley · Okun · McCracken · Stein · Greenspan · Schultze · Weidenbaum · Feldstein · Sprinkel · Boskin · Tyson · Stiglitz · Yellen · Baily · Hubbard · Mankiw · Rosen · Bernanke · Lazear · Romer








Persondata


NAME
Stiglitz, Joseph E.


ALTERNATIVE NAMES



SHORT DESCRIPTION
Economist


DATE OF BIRTH
February 9, 1943


PLACE OF BIRTH
Gary, Indiana


DATE OF DEATH



PLACE OF DEATH






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Stiglitz"
Categories: 1943 births | Living people | Academics of the University of Oxford | American anti-globalization writers | American economists | Amherst College alumni | Ashkenazi Jews | Clinton Administration personnel | Columbia University faculty | Development economists | Development specialists | Economists | Fellows of All Souls College, Oxford | Fellows of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge | Fellows of the Econometric Society | Information economists | International development | IPCC lead authors | Jewish American social scientists | Jewish American writers | Massachusetts Institute of Technology alumni | Members of the National Academy of Sciences | Members of the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences | Nobel laureates in Economics | People from Gary, Indiana | Princeton University faculty | Public economists | Stanford University faculty | United States Council of Economic Advisors | World Bank Chief Economists | Yale University facultyHidden categories: Articles lacking page references | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 | Cleanup from December 2008 | All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 | Incomplete lists 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
বাংলা
Български
Català
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
Français
Gàidhlig
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Latina
Lietuvių
Македонски
मराठी
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Suomi
Svenska
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 14:06.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
