













Open Source Intelligence - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Open_Source_Intelligence";
		var wgTitle = "Open Source Intelligence";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "387199";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280467498;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Open Source Intelligence

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. Please improve this article or discuss the issue on the talk page.


Open Source Intelligence (OSINT) is form of intelligence collection management that involves finding, selecting, and acquiring information from publicly available sources and analyzing it to produce actionable intelligence. In the Intelligence Community (IC), the term "open" refers to overt, publicly available sources (as opposed to covert or classified sources); it is not related to open-source software.




Contents


1 Open sources for intelligence
2 Definers for OSINT
3 Competitive intelligence
4 Risks for practictioners
5 Value
6 Process
7 History
8 OSINT Communities

8.1 Government
8.2 Intelligence
8.3 Military
8.4 Homeland Security
8.5 Law enforcement
8.6 Academia
8.7 Business


9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Open sources for intelligence
OSINT includes a wide variety of information and sources:

Media - newspapers, magazines, radio, television, and computer-based information.
Web-based communities and user generated content - social-networking sites, video sharing sites, wikis, blogs, and folksonomies.
Public data - government reports, official data such as budgets, demographics, hearings, legislative debates, press conferences, speeches, marine and aeronautical safety warnings, environmental impact statements and contract awards.
Observation and reporting - Amateur airplane spotters, radio monitors and satellite observers among many others have provided significant information not otherwise available. The availability of worldwide satellite photography, often of high resolution, on the Web (e.g., Google Earth) has expanded open source capabilities into areas formerly available only to major intelligence services.
Professional and academic - conferences, symposia, professional associations, academic papers, and subject matter experts.[1]
Most information has geospatial dimensions, but many often overlook the geospatial side of OSINT: not all open source data is unstructured text. Examples of geospatial open source include hard and softcopy maps, atlases, gazetteers, port plans, gravity data, aeronautical data, navigation data, geodetic data, human terrain data (cultural and economic), environmental data, commercial imagery, LIDAR, hyper and multi-spectral data, airborne imagery, geo-names, geo-features, urban terrain, vertical obstruction data, boundary marker data, geospatial mashups, spatial databases, and web services. Most of the geospatial data mentioned above is integrated, analyzed, and syndicated using geospatial software like a Geographic Information System (GIS) not a browser per se.

OSINT is distinguished from research in that it applies the process of intelligence to create tailored knowledge supportive of a specific decision by a specific individual or group.[2]

[edit] Definers for OSINT
OSINT is defined by both the U.S. Director of National Intelligence and the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD), as "produced from publicly available information that is collected, exploited, and disseminated in a timely manner to an appropriate audience for the purpose of addressing a specific intelligence requirement."[3]
OSINT is, as of 2005, defined by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget under the category of "Forces And Direct Support" and specifically for the DoD under Commercial Code M320 as [4]

Open Source Intelligence (OSINT) Collection/Processing

A wide variety of vendors sell information products specifically within this category.
Open Source Intelligence under one name or another has been around for hundreds of years. The significance today of OSINT in the USA is the conflict between military, government and the private sector as to how the bulk of intelligence should be obtained. With the Internet, instant communications, and advanced media search the bulk of actionable and predictive intelligence can be obtained from public, unclassified sources. Government Agencies have been slow to embrace OSINT, or believe they already have suitable information feeds from the media, academia and public records.
OSINT is especially helpful in addressing Global coverage, a term encompassing all of the countries and topics that are not considered by the secret or national security worlds to be "vital." Until recently, that included terrorism.[citation needed]

[edit] Competitive intelligence
In the private sector Competitive Intelligence, focused and directed to specific industries still has opportunities for small and medium businesses to compete in niche markets, but that too is being consolidated by the major information providers. In the media OSINT is considered as nothing new, the everyday operation of a traditional newsroom. Investigative Journalists use searches, databases, primary interviews, sources, and leaks to write every feature.

[edit] Risks for practictioners
Accredited journalists have some protection in asking questions, and researching for recognized media outlets. Even so they can be imprisoned, even executed, for seeking out OSINT. Private individuals illegally collecting data for a foreign military or intelligence agency is considered espionage in most countries. Of course, espionage that is not treason (i.e. betraying one's country of citizenship) has been a tool of statecraft since ancient times, is widely engaged in by nearly all countries, and is considered an honorable trade. Most countries recognize this, and if their counterintelligence agencies capture a foreign spy, that spy is usually unceremoniously deported or traded back to their homeland (for other spies) after a hostile debriefing; actual execution or refusal to trade back foreign spies with non-official cover would result in consequences in bilateral relations of the gravest possible magnitude, being an extraordinarily hostile act, even if those consequences were unofficially and extrajudicially imposed.[citation needed]

[edit] Value
According to the Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction report submitted in March 2005, OSINT must be included in the all-source intelligence process for the following reasons (as stated in the report):

The ever-shifting nature of our intelligence needs compels the IC to quickly and easily understand a wide range of foreign countries and cultures. - … today’s threats are rapidly changing and geographically diffuse; it is a fact of life that an intelligence analyst may be forced to shift rapidly from one topic to the next. Increasingly, IC professionals need to quickly assimilate social, economic, and cultural information about a country—information often detailed in open sources.
Open source information provides a base for understanding classified materials. Despite large quantities of classified material produced by the IC, the amount of classified information produced on any one topic can be quite limited, and may be taken out of context if viewed only from a classified-source perspective. Perhaps the most important example today relates to terrorism, where open source information can fill gaps and create links that allow analysts to better understand fragmented intelligence, rumored terrorist plans, possible means of attack, and potential targets.
Open source materials can protect sources and methods. Sometimes an intelligence judgment that is actually informed with sensitive, classified information can be defended on the basis of open source reporting. This can prove useful when policymakers need to explain policy decisions or communicate with foreign officials without compromising classified sources.
Only open source can store history. A robust open source program can, in effect, gather data to monitor the world’s cultures and how they change with time. This is difficult, if not impossible, using the snapshots provided by classified collection methods.[5]


[edit] Process
Information collection in OSINT is generally a different problem from collection in other intelligence disciplines where obtaining the raw information to be analyzed may be the major difficulty, particularly if it is to be obtained from non-cooperative targets. In OSINT, the chief difficulty is in identifying relevant, reliable sources from the vast amount of publicly available information. However, this is not as great a challenge for those who know how to access local knowledge and how to leverage human experts who can create new tailored knowledge on the fly.

[edit] History
The Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS) was created in 1941 to access and exploit OSINT in relation to World War II. A classic example of their value and success is reflected in the price of oranges in Paris as an indicator of whether railroad bridges had been bombed successfully.
The recent history of OSINT began in 1988 when General Alfred M. Gray, Jr., Commandant of the Marine Corps, called for a redirection of US intelligence away from the collapsing Soviet Union and toward non-state actors and Third World zones of instability. Additionally, he pointed out that most of the intelligence which needs to be known could be obtained via OSINT, and recommended a substantive increase in resources for this aspect of the intelligence collection spectrum of sources. [6]
In the fall of 1992, Senator David Boren, then Chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, sponsored the National Security Act of 1992, attempting to achieve modest reform in the U.S. Intelligence Community. His counterpart on the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence was Congressman Dave McCurdy. The House version of the legislation included a separate Open Source Office, at the suggestion of Larry Prior, a Marine Reservist familiar with the MCIC experience and then serving on the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence staff.
The Aspin-Brown Commission stated in 1996 that US access to open sources was "severely deficient" and that this should be a "top priority" for both funding and DCI attention.
In issuing its July 2004 report, the 9/11 Commission recommended the creation of an open-source intelligence agency, but without further detail or comment.[7] Subsequently, the WMD Commission (also known as the Robb-Silberman Commission) report in March 2005 recommended the creation of an Open Source Directorate at the CIA.
Following these recommendations, in November 2005 the Director of National Intelligence announced the creation of the DNI Open Source Center. The Center was established to collect information available from "the Internet, databases, press, radio, television, video, geospatial data, photos and commercial imagery."[8] In addition to collecting openly available information, it would train analysts to make better use of this information. The Center absorbed the CIA's previously existing Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS), originally established in 1941, with FBIS head Douglas Naquin named as director of the Center.[9]
In December 2005, the Director of National Intelligence appointed Eliot A. Jardines as the Assistant Deputy Director of National Intelligence for Open Source to serve as the Intelligence Community's senior intelligence officer for open source and to provide strategy, guidance and oversight for the National Open Source Enterprise. [10] Mr. Jardines has established the National Open Source Enterprise [11] and authored Intelligence Community Directive 301. In 2008, Mr. Jardines returned to the private sector and was succeeded by Dan Butler (civil servant) who is ADDNI/OS (Acting)[12] and previously Mr. Jardines' Senior Advisor for Policy.[13]

[edit] OSINT Communities

[edit] Government
There are a large number of open source activities taking place throughout the US Government. Frequently, these open source activities are described as "media monitoring", "media analysis", "internet research" and "public surveys" but are open source nonetheless.
The Library of Congress sponsors the Federal Research Division (FRD) which conducts a great deal of tailored open source research on a fee-for-service basis for the executive branch.

[edit] Intelligence
The US Intelligence Community's open source activities (known as the National Open Source Enterprise) are dictated by Intelligence Community Directive 301 promulgated by the Director of National Intelligence.[14] The Directive establishes the authorities and responsibilities of the Assistant Deputy Director of National Intelligence for Open Source (ADDNI/OS), the DNI's Open Source Center and the National Open Source Committee.
Prior to the establishment of the National Open Source Enterprise, the Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS), established in 1941, was the government's primary open source unit, transcribing and translating foreign broadcasts. It absorbed the Defense Department's Joint Publications Research Service (JPRS), which did a similar function with foreign printed materials, including newspapers, magazines, and technical journals.

[edit] Military
The former Under-Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, Dr. Stephen Cambone encouraged in part by the Defense Science Board reports on Strategic Communication and Transition to and From Hostilities, created the Defense Open Source Program (DOSP). The current Under-Secretary of Defense for Intelligence assigned executive agency for this program to the Defense Intelligence Agency.
U.S. military offices that engage in OSINT activities include:

Defense Intelligence Agency
National Geospatial Intelligence Agency
US Army Foreign Military Studies Office
US Army Asian Studies Detachment
EUCOM JAC Molesworth
Open Source Branch, Joint Intelligence Center, U.S. Special Operations Command
Foreign Media Monitoring in Support of Information Operations, U.S. Strategic Command


[edit] Homeland Security
The Department of Homeland Security has an active open source intelligence unit. In congressional testimony before the House Homeland Security Committee's Intelligence, Information Sharing and Terrorism Risk Assessment Subcommittee the Undersecretary of Homeland Security Charles Allen indicated on February 14, 2007, that he had established the "Domestic Open Source Enterprise" to support the Department's OSINT needs and that of State, Local and Tribal partners.

[edit] Law enforcement
The law enforcement OSINT community applies Open source intelligence (OSINT) to the prediction, prevention, investigation, and prosecution of criminals including terrorists.
Examples of successful law enforcement OSINT include Scotland Yard OSINT; Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) OSINT.
INTERPOL and EUROPOL experimented with OSINT units for a time, but they appear to have atrophied with the departure of their individual champions.
New York Police Department (NYPD) is known to have an OSINT unit.

[edit] Academia
The Institute of Intelligence Studies at Mercyhurst College, OSINT centers at Auburn University, Sam Houston State University, and University of Maryland are notable examples of the academic OSINT community.
Increasingly, universities are finding that, in addition to traditional research into the frontiers of science and social science, they can compete for contracts and grants to produce Open source intelligence. An example of one successful academic OSINT enterprise focused on agricultural insurance fraud and other detectable patterns of abuse is the Center for Agribusiness Excellence at Tarleton State University in Texas.

[edit] Business
Business OSINT encompasses Commercial Intelligence, Competitor Intelligence, and Business Intelligence, and is often a chief area of practice of Private Intelligence Agencies.
Businesses may use information brokers and private investigators to collect and analyze relevant information for business purposes.

[edit] See also

Open Source Center
Private Intelligence Agency
Special Libraries Association
Strategic intelligence
ROSIDS


[edit] References

^ Lowenthal, Mark M. "Intelligence: From Secrets to Policy," 2nd Ed. (Washington D.C.: CQ Press, 2003) p. 79.
^ "Spy Agencies Turn to Newspapers, NPR, and Wikipedia for Information: The intelligence community is learning to value "open-source" information". http://www.usnews.com/articles/news/national/2008/09/12/spy-agencies-turn-to-newspapers-npr-and-wikipedia-for-information.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-15. 
^ As defined in Sec. 931 of Public Law 109-163, entitled, "National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006."
^ FAIR Act Inventory Commercial Activities Inventory Function Codes
^ (The Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities, 378-379). Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction
^ General Alfred M. Gray, "Global Intelligence Challenges in the 1990's", American Intelligence Journal (Winter 1989-1990)
^ See page 413 of the 9-11 Commission Report (pdf).
^ Office of the Director of National Intelligence. "ODNI Announces Establishment of Open Source Center". Press release, 8 November 2005.
^ Ensor, David. "The Situation Report: Open source intelligence center". CNN, 8 November 2005.
^ Office of the Director of National Intelligence "ODNI Senior Leadership Announcement". Press release, 7 December 2005.
^ "National Open Source Entreprise Vision Statement" May 2006
^ DNI Open Source Conference 2008 "Decision Advantage" agenda, Office of the Director of National Intelligence, July 2008.
^ DNI Open Source Conference 2007 "Expanding the Horizons" agenda, Office of the Director of National Intelligence, July 2007.
^ DNI Intelligence Community Directive 301 - "National Open Source Enterprise" 11 July 2006.


[edit] Further reading





This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links.



General


Defense Consulting & Outsourcing - Integrating Open Source Intelligence
The New Craft of Intelligence: Making the Most of Open Private Sector Knowledge
Actual Intelligence Case Studies Leveraging Open Source Intelligence (OSINT)
Sailing the Sea of OSINT in the Information Age
The Intelligence Network
OSINT discussion group at Yahoo!
Open Source Center - U.S. government arm focusing on open source intelligence under the DNI
Collection and Use of Open-Source Intelligence - A to Z
Naval Open Source Intelligence
C4I.org
Webintel Tools, Tips & News For Early Warning, Crisis Management & OSINT Practitioners
EUROSINT FORUM not-for-profit association aiming to promote OSINT in EU institutions and Member States
Open Source Intelligence (OSINT): Issues for Congress, Congressional Research Service, December 5, 2007
"Freeing knowledge, telling secrets: Open source intelligence and development" Cody Burke, Bond University, May 2007


Open Source Intelligence Training


reuser's information services OSINT Training for government / military organisations. (http://www.reuser.biz).


Advocacy and analysis of OSINT


DNI OPEN SOURCE CONFERENCE 2007, Expanding the Horizons, 16-17 July 2007 - Description of Sessions, including PowerPoint presentations made - Official blog of conference proceedings
FMSO-JRIC and Open Source Intelligence: speaking prose in a world of verse Military Intelligence Professional Bulletin, Oct-Dec, 2005 by Jacob W. Kipp


News and commentary


Washington Times - CIA mines 'rich' content from blogs 19 April 2006
Government Computer News - Intelligence units mine the benefits of public sources 20 March 2006
Signal Magazine - Intelligence Center Mines Open Sources March 2006
Military Intelligence Professional Bulletin Oct-Dec, 2005 by Barbara G. Fast
Congressional Testimony on OSINT and Homeland Security 21 June 2005
Open Source Intelligence by Stalder and Hirsh, 15 May 2002
Interviews from an Open Source Intelligence Conference
A blog providing wealth of OSINT information
Jihad Monitor. An example of OSINT on Radical Islam and Jihadism
Open-Source Spying article from the New York times , about open sources and wikis








v • d • e

Intelligence cycle management





Intelligence
collection
management




HUMINT/
Human Intelligence

Clandestine HUMINT (recruiting · operational techniques · Covert action · Direct action · Clandestine cell system)
Special reconnaissance (organizations)
Espionage (Agent handling · Black bag operation · Concealment device · Cryptography · Cut-out · Dead drop · Eavesdropping · False flag operations · Honeypot · Non-official cover · Interrogation · Numbers messaging · One-way voice link · Steganography · Surveillance)






SIGINT/
Signals Intelligence

SIGINT by Alliances, Nations and Industries · SIGINT Operational Platforms by Nation · SIGINT in Modern History · TEMPEST · Direction finding · Traffic analysis






MASINT/
Measurement and
Signature Intelligence

Electro-optical · Nuclear · Geophysical · Radar · Radiofrequency · Materials · Casualty estimation






Others

OSINT/Open Source Intelligence · IMINT/Imagery Intelligence · FININT/Financial Intelligence · TECHINT/Technical intelligence









Intelligence
analysis
management

Intelligence analysis · Cognitive traps for intelligence analysis · Words of Estimative Probability · Analysis of Competing Hypotheses · Intelligence cycle (target-centric approach)






Intelligence
dissemination
management

Intelligence cycle security · Counter-intelligence · Counter-intelligence and counter-terrorism organizations · List of counterintelligence organizations · Counterintelligence failures









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Source_Intelligence"
Categories: Open source intelligence | Data mining | Intelligence gathering disciplines | Collective intelligenceHidden categories: Articles with limited geographic scope | USA-centric | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 | Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
Français
Italiano
עברית
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Português
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe









 This page was last modified on 29 March 2009, at 18:38.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
