













Great Old One - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Great_Old_One";
		var wgTitle = "Great Old One";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "249130";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281516382;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Great Old One

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
A Great Old One is a type of fictional being in the Cthulhu Mythos based in the stories of H. P. Lovecraft. Though Lovecraft created the most famous of these fictional deities, the vast majority of them were created by other writers, many after Lovecraft's death. Collectively, the Great Old Ones (sometimes referred to as the Old Ones[1] by some authors or the Cthulhu Cycle Deities by Brian Lumley in his Titus Crow stories) are not as powerful as the Outer Gods, nor do they have as much influence. Nonetheless, they are served in the stories by devoted congregations of worshippers, made up of both human and non-human cults.




Contents


1 Summary
2 Table of Great Old Ones

2.1 Overview
2.2 Table


3 Father Set
4 In popular culture
5 References

5.1 Books
5.2 Notes


6 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Summary

That is not dead which can eternal lie,
And with strange aeons even death may die.
—Abdul Alhazred, The Necronomicon

The Great Old Ones are ancient extraterrestrial beings of immense power, and most are also colossal in size. These entities seem to have a physical shape, but being cosmic lifeforms from beyond our space-time continuum means they are not based on matter in our definition of the concept, yet their forms are built on principles similar enough to those of true matter that they appear to be material in their nature. They are worshipped by deranged human cults, as well as by most of the non-human races of the mythos. The Great Old Ones are currently imprisoned—a few beneath the sea, some inside the Earth, and still others in distant planetary systems and beyond. The reason for their captivity is not known, though there are two prevailing theories:

They were sequestered by the Elder Gods for using black magic transgressions, or
They are sealed off somehow from the rest of the Universe of their own volition.[2]

According to the first theory, the Great Old Ones were once related to the Elder Gods. When they committed some unknown blasphemy, they were cast out and imprisoned in various places in the Universe. The Great Old Ones impatiently await the time of their release, eager to seek retribution against their jailors.
The second theory holds that the Great Old Ones are intentionally dormant. To account for this, it is possible that the Universe experiences cosmic cycles, similar to the natural seasons which occur on Earth. Just as some animals hibernate during the winter, so too must the Great Old Ones rest in a death-like sleep during the present cosmic cycle.[3] If this is so, the Great Old Ones are currently trapped by powerful cosmic forces and must remain so until such time as the planets are in a certain alignment... or "the stars are right"—the event upon which they may be released and can revel once more across the cosmos.[4]

[edit] Table of Great Old Ones

[edit] Overview
This table is organized as follows:

Name. This is the commonly accepted name of the Great Old One.
Epithet(s), other name(s). This field lists any epithets or alternate names for the Great Old One. These are names that often appear in books of arcane literature, but may also be the names preferred by cults.
Description. This entry gives a brief description of the Great Old One.
References. This field lists the stories in which the Great Old One makes a significant appearance or otherwise receives important mention. Sources are denoted by a simple two-letter code—the key to the codes is found here. A code appearing in bold means that the story introduces the Great Old One. If the code is given as rpg it means that the Great Old One first appeared in the Call of Cthulhu Roleplaying Game.


[edit] Table

Great Old Ones

Name
Epithet(s),
other name(s)
Description
References


Aphoom-Zhah
The Cold Flame,
Lord of the Pole
Appears as a vast, cold, grey flame.
AF, HG, LP


Arwassa
The Silent Shouter on the Hill
A vast, wailing, floating monstrosity.
rpg


Atlach-Nacha
The Spider God,
Spinner in Darkness
A giant spider with a human-like face.
PS, AT,SG


Baoht Z'uqqa-Mogg
The Bringer of Pestilence
A huge, flying, scorpion-like beast.
rpg[5]


Basatan
Master of the Crabs
Self Explanatory
MC


Bokrug
The Great Water Lizard,
The Doom of Sarnath
Appears as a giant lizard.
DC, SC


Bugg-Shash[6]
The Black One,
The Filler of Space,
He Who Comes in the Dark
Appears as a slimy mass covered with eyes and mouths.
DI, EL, KB, RS


Byatis
The Berkeley Toad,
The Serpent-Bearded
Appears as a gigantic, spider-like crab with a proboscis.
BY, RC, SF


Chaugnar Faugn
Horror from the Hills,
The Feeder,
Caug-Narfagn
An elephant-headed humanoid.
HF, HM, FO, RH


Cthugha
The Living Flame,
The Burning One
Appears as a living ball of fire.
DD, EL, HC, LM


Cthulhu
The Sleeping God, Master of R'lyeh, The Great Priest, Kthulhut, Tulu
A gigantic, winged, octopus-headed humanoid.
AM, BI, CC, FH, GU, HC, HM, LY, MO, PS, RH, SE, TU, YT?


Cthylla
Secret Daughter of Cthulhu
Appears as a huge, octopus-like creature.
ID, TC


Cxaxukluth

—

Probably appears similar to Azathoth.
FT, TA


Cyäegha
The Destroying Eye,
The Waiting Dark
Appears as a gigantic eye covered with tentacles.
DM


Cynothoglys
The Mortician God, She Whose Hand Embalms
Appears as a shapeless, mutating entity with a single arm.
PR


The Dweller in the Gulf
Eidolon of the Blind
Appears as a huge, eyeless reptilian creature with whip-like tails.
WL


Eihort
The Pale Beast,
God of the Labyrinth
Appears as a huge, pallid, gelatinous oval with a myriad legs and multiple eyes.
BS, FP


Father Dagon and Mother Hydra

—

Both appear as abnormally large Deep Ones.
DA, DB, RD, SI


Ghadamon
A Seed of Azathoth
A shapeless, inky, protoplasmic mass.
rpg


Ghatanothoa
The Usurper,
God of the Volcano
Amorphous with multifarious appendages and grotesque members; too horrid to behold, viewing causes petrification.
HT, OE, RL, SX, TP


Ghisguth
The Sound of the Deep Waters
Appears as a monstrous whale, sixty feet long, with two massive tentacles replacing its tongue.
FT


Glaaki
The Inhabitant of the Lake,
Lord of Dead Dreams
Appears as a giant slug with metallic spines.
GL, IB, IL


Ghluun
The Corrupter of Flesh,
Master of the Temple
Manifests through a Dionysian sculpture; resembles a monstrous sea slug.
TE


Gol-goroth
Golgoroth,
Gol-Goroth,
The Forgotten Old One,
God of the Black Stone
Appears as a gigantic, black, toad-like creature with an impossibly malevolent glare.
FO, FR, GB


Hastur
The Unspeakable,
He Who is Not to be Named,
Lord of Interstellar Spaces,
The King in Yellow
"True" form remains a mystery; said to be amorphous, possibly octopoid.
FA, HS, LT, RH, SS, WD, YS


Hziulquoigmnzhah

—

Has spheroid body, elongated arms, short legs, and a pendulum-like head dangling underneath.
DS, FT, TA


Idh-yaa

—


—

OA


Iod
The Shining Hunter
A levitating, sinuous, glowing creature.
HU, IN, SZ


Ithaqua
The Wind Walker,
The Wendigo,
God of the Cold White Silence
A horrifying frozen giant.
BW, CD, IM, IQ, SW, TW, WE


Juk-Shabb
God of Yekub
Appears as a great ball of energy.
CF


Kag’Naru of the Air[7]
 ?
 ?
 ?


Kassogtha
 ?
 ?
 ?


Lloigor
See Zhar and Lloigor below.


M'Nagalah the Eternal[8]
The Great God Cancer,
The All-Consuming
A massive, tumorous, blob-like thing.
TU


Mnomquah
Lord of the Black Lake
A very large and eyeless lizard-creature with a "crown" of feelers.
MD, MQ, SB


Mordiggian
The Charnel God,
The Great Ghoul,
Lord of Zul-Bha-Sair
A horrifying giant with eyeless head and limbless body, much like a worm.
CG, IC, RE


Nug and Yeb
The Twin Blasphemies
Appear similar to Shub-Niggurath.
BF, EH, LA, OA, TO


Nyogtha
The Thing which Should Not Be,
Haunter of the Red Abyss
Appears as an inky shadow.
AF, HG, SH, SR


Oorn
 ?
Appears as a huge, tentacled mollusc.
MD


Othuum
Deep Slumberer in Green,
Great Master of Those-Who-Wait-Without
Black, cyclops-like demon with two pairs of legs.
OT, RS


Othuyeg
The Doom-Walker
Appears as a great, tentacled eye (similar to Cyäegha).
DF, VC, SP


Quachil Uttaus
Treader of the Dust
Appears as a miniature, wrinkled mummy with ankylosed, outstretched claws.
KU, RU


Q'yth-az
 ?
A crystalline entity.
EF


Rh’Thulla of the Wind[9]
 ?
 ?
 ?


Rhan-Tegoth
He of the Ivory Throne
A tall humanoid with crab-like appendages; hard to describe in a few words.
HM, AF, LT, RR, PD


Rlim Shaikorth
The White Worm
A gigantic, whitish worm with a huge maw and eyes made of dripping globules of blood.
CW, HG, LP


Saa'itii
The Hogge
A giant, spectral hog.
[citation needed]


Sfatlicllp

—


—

FT


Shathak
Mistress of the Abyssmal Slime, Death Reborn, Mother of the Kraken
Appears as a seventy-foot long kraken with twenty-foot-long massive tentacles
FT


Shudde M'ell
The Burrower Beneath,
The Great Chthonian
Appears as a colossal worm with anterior tentacles.
BU, CS, TC, WU


Summanus
Monarch of Night,
The Terror that Walketh in Darkness
A mouthless, grotesque human with tentacles.
FH, WG


Tsathoggua
The Sleeper of N'kai,
The Toad-God,
Zhothaqqua, Sadagowah
Appears as a huge, furry, almost humanoid toad.
BC, DS, FT, IU, OL, RT, SG, TS


Ut'ulls-Hr'her
 ?
 ?
 ?


Vulthoom
The Sleeper of Ravermos,
Gsarthotegga
May appear as a monstrous plant with an enormous, elf-like blossom.
VU


The Worm that Gnaws in the Night
Doom of Shaggai
A massive, worm-like fiend.
AG


X'chll'at-aa
Lord of the Great Old Ones,
The Unborn God,
Enemy of All That Live
Appears as a large, black or translucent-skinned creature somewhat like a humanoid embryo with enormous eyes, six arms, and a set of octopoid tentacles in place of legs.
rpg


Y'golonac
The Defiler
Appears as a naked, headless human with a mouth in the palm of each hand; other features are nebulous.
CP


Yhoundeh
The Elk Goddess
Perhaps an elk-like humanoid.
DS, LE


Yibb-Tstll
The Patient One,
The Watcher in the Glade
Gigantic, bat-winged humanoid with detached eyes; truly horrible to behold.
CB, OK, SC


Yig
Father of Serpents
A scaly, serpent-like humanoid.
CY, SJ, VY


Ythogtha
The Thing in the Pit
Appears as a colossal, cyclops-like Deep One.
OA, PD, TC, TP


Zathog
The Confuser, the Tempter of Those Who Search in Envy
Appears as a dark, purple-orange humanoid with a foot-long proboscis, muscular arms, antelope horns and a glowing green aura
FB, WZ


Zhar and Lloigor
The Twin Obscenities
Both appear as a colossal mass of tentacles (have a rumoured triplet).
SA, LS, TP, SX


Zoth-Ommog
Dweller in the Deeps
A gigantic entity with a cone-shaped body, a reptilian head, and starfish-like arms.
HG, OA, TC


Zstylzhemghi
Matriarch of Swarms,
Zystulzhemgni
 ?
FT, TA


Zushakon
Dark Silent One,
Old Night,
Zul-Che-Quon,
Zuchequon
Appears as a swirling, black vortex.
BH, KD


Zvilpogghua
Feaster from the Stars,
The Sky-Devil,
Ossadagowah
Winged, tentacle-faced, toad-like giant.
LT, RM, SV


Maelknocke
Ancient; the taker of flesh
An ancient god of cruelty
MS, KKNSS



[edit] Father Set
The works of Robert E. Howard, a friend of Lovecraft, feature a malign serpent god named Father Set who is worshipped by the villainous Thoth-Amon. Named after a character from Egyptian mythology and based on the Egyptian demon, Apophis, Set is implied to be one of the Great Old Ones from Lovecraft's mythos which sometimes overlaps with Howard's.

[edit] In popular culture

The boss C'Thun in the MMORPG World of Warcraft is one of the "Old Gods", a group of beings within the game, and is a reference with a similar name like Cthulhu and Cthugha and is a giant fanged mouth with dozens of eyes and tentacles.
In the Justice League episode "The Terror Beyond," it is learned that in ancient times, the people of Thanagar worshiped The Great Old Ones. At that time, Thanagar was a hard world with a primitive and savage culture; in return for offerings made to Ixthultu, the Old Ones' leader, they received agriculture, mathematics, and philosophy—the foundations of their entire culture. As they matured, however, the Thanagarians stopped worshiping them; modern Thanagarians bow down to no higher power. Their knowledge of the Great Old Ones was used in the creation of their personal weaponry.
The Great Old Ones have inspired many other demonic gods in Lovecraftian works of fiction such as the Faceless Ones from Skulduggery Pleasant, the Ogdru Jahad from Hellboy and the Dark Ones from Super Robot Monkey Team Hyperforce Go.
The Haunting of Alaizabel Cray by Chris Wooding is based on many of HP Lovecraft's stories. The dark gods known as the Glau Meska appear to be an amalgamation of the Great Old Ones and the Deep Ones.
The Outsiders from The Dresden Files are similar to the Great Old Ones.
The Power of Five series by Anthony Horowitz features dark gods known as the Old Ones as the main antagonists.
The song The Ascension by the Swedish death metal band Bloodbath has references to Cthulhu and the Necronomicon.
The game Eternal Darkness: Sanity's Requiem by Silicon Knights tells the story of humanity fighting against the "Ancients", three powerful, bizarre looking godlike beings similar in context to the Great old ones.
The Old Ones of Joss Whedon's Buffyverse, including the major character Illyria, are very similar to the Great Old Ones.
American thrash metal band Metallica references Lovecraft's works in their lyrics and song titles, such as The Call of Ktulu (Ride The Lightning) and The Thing That Should Not Be (Master of Puppets).


[edit] References

[edit] Books

Harms, Daniel (1998). The Encyclopedia Cthulhiana (21nd edition ed.). Oakland, CA: Chaosium. ISBN 1-56882-119-0. 


Lovecraft, H.P. (1982). The Best of H. P. Lovecraft: Bloodcurdling Tales of Horror and the Macabre (1st edition ed.). Ballantine Books. ISBN 0-345-35080-4. 


Price, Robert M. (1996). "Introduction". in Robert M. Price (ed.). The New Lovecraft Circle. New York, N.Y.: Random House. ISBN 0-345-44406-X. 


[edit] Notes


^ "Old Ones" has variable meanings in Lovecraft's stories. Although it is synonymous with Great Old Ones, Old Ones can also refer to the Elder Things. (Harms, "Old Ones", The Encyclopedia Cthulhiana, pp. 228–9).
^ Harms, "Great Old Ones", pp. 126–7.
^ Ibid. While the first theory, which proposes that the Great Old Ones were forcibly imprisoned by the Elder Gods, is delineated by the writings of August Derleth, the second theory (relating to "cosmic cycles") is debatable.
^ Lovecraft, "The Call of Cthulhu" (1928), The Best of H. P. Lovecraft, p. 88.
^ Scott D. Aniolowski, "Mysterious Manuscripts" in The Unspeakable Oath #3, John Tynes (ed.), Seattle, WA: Pagan Publishing, August 1991. Periodical (role-playing game material). Baoht Z'uqqa-Mogg first appeared in this gaming supplement.
^ When Brian Lumley read David Sutton's short story "Demoniacal", he wrote a sequel entitled "The Kiss of Bugg-Shash". Lumley expanded Sutton's tale and gave his unnamed entity its name—Bugg-Shash—which effectively tied Sutton's creation to the mythos. (Price, "Introduction", The New Lovecraft Circle, pp. xx–xxi). The name "Bugg-Shash", however, appeared earlier in Lumley's short story "Rising with Surtsey" (Harms, "Bugg-Shash", Encyclopedia Cthulhiana, p. 41).
^ Kag’Naru of the Air, the sibling of M'Nagalah the Eternal (from Swamp Thing fame) and Rh’Thulla of the Wind, debuted in Challengers of the Unknown #83.
^ M'Nagalah first appeared in the comic book Swamp Thing #8 (1974) in a story by Len Wein and Bernie Wrightson (Harms, "M'nagalah", Encyclopedia Cthulhiana, p. 196). The being has since shown up in stories in Challengers of the Unknown, The Trenchcoat Brigade, and The All-New Atom. His siblings, Rh’Thulla of the Wind and Kag’Naru of the Air, debuted in Challengers of the Unknown #83 (which also added "the Eternal" to M'Nagalah's name).
^ Rh’Thulla of the Wind, the sibling of M'Nagalah the Eternal (from Swamp Thing fame) and Kag’Naru of the Air, debuted in Challengers of the Unknown #83.



[edit] External links

The Book of Alternative Dead Names An open database of alternate names for Cthulhu Mythos entities








v • d • e

H. P. Lovecraft





Works

List of works · Cthulhu Mythos · Dream Cycle






Locations

Arkham · Dunwich · Innsmouth · Kingsport · Miskatonic University · Dreamlands · Lovecraft Country






Characters

Randolph Carter · Herbert West · Abdul Alhazred · Kuranes · Robert Harrison Blake






Cthulhu Mythos Deities

Great Old Ones: Cthulhu · Ithaqua · Shub-Niggurath · Y'golonac · Outer Gods: Azathoth · Nyarlathotep · Yog-Sothoth






Legacy and Influence

Lovecraftian Horror · Cultural references to the Cthulhu Mythos






Film Adaptations

The Haunted Palace (1963) · Re-Animator (1985) · From Beyond (1986) · The Resurrected (1992) · Necronomicon (1994) · Cthulhu (2000) · Dagon (2001) · The Call of Cthulhu (2005) · H. P. Lovecraft's Dreams in the Witch-House (2005) · Cthulhu (2007) · The Whisperer in Darkness (2009) · At the Mountains of Madness






Other media adaptations

The Call of Cthulhu RPG (1981) · Shadow of the Comet (1993) · Prisoner of Ice (1995) · Necronomicon (album) (2004) · Arkham Horror (2005) · Call of Cthulhu: Dark Corners of the Earth (2005) · Unspeakable Vault (of Doom)






Associated names

August Derleth · S. T. Joshi · Robert W. Chambers · Robert M. Price · Lin Carter · Ramsey Campbell






Related Miscellanea

Cthulhu Mythos celestial bodies · Necronomicon · Cthulhu Mythos arcane literature









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Old_One"
Categories: Cthulhu Mythos deities | Fictional demonsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Français
Italiano
한국어
日本語
Polski
Русский
Español
ไทย









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 15:37 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
