













Montauk Project - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Montauk_Project";
		var wgTitle = "Montauk Project";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "877615";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283105248;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Montauk Project

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





The neutrality of this article is disputed. Please see the discussion on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until the dispute is resolved. (December 2007)







This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (February 2008)


This article is about the military experiments.  For the book series, see Montauk Project (book).


AN/FPS-35 Radar at Camp Hero



This AN/FPS-35 Radar at Camp Hero State Park in Montauk, New York State in Long Island, and is the centerpiece of the "Montauk Project Conspiracy". The decommissioned AN/FPS-35 Radar is still behind a fence but one can walk around the grounds in the state park. The radar is the only one of its kind still in existence and was not torn down because boaters on Long Island Sound preferred the massive AN/FPS-35 Radar as a daymark rather than the Montauk Lighthouse nearby.



Background information


The Montauk Project was alleged to be a series of secret United States government projects conducted at Camp Hero or Montauk Air Force Station on Montauk, Long Island for the purpose of developing psychological warfare techniques and exotic research including time travel.
Due to scant verifiable evidence to support its existence, critics argue the Montauk Experiment is an unverified conspiracy theory, urban legend or possibly a hoax.
No longer used as a military facility, the Montauk Air Force Station has been open to the public for several years. However, public access to the old military building is prohibited.




Contents


1 Overview
2 Montauk Project in the media

2.1 News
2.2 Film and television
2.3 Music
2.4 Games
2.5 Books


3 Notes
4 See also
5 Further reading
6 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Overview
The earliest citation of the Montauk Project is uncertain, but elements of the story have circulated since at least the early 1980s. According to astrophysicist and UFO researcher Jacques Vallee, the Montauk Experiment stories seem to have originated with the account of Preston Nichols, who claimed to have recovered repressed memories of involvement. [1]
There is no definitive version of the Montauk Project narrative, but some accounts describe it as an extension or continuation of the Philadelphia Experiment.


Montauk Project


Associated Projects


Operation Paperclip


Project Rainbow


Philadelphia Experiment


Project Stargate


People



Nikola Tesla
Preston Nichols
John von Neumann
Russell Targ
Duncan Cameron [disambiguation needed]



<edit>


In 1943, the Philadelphia Experiment supposedly aimed to render the USS Eldridge optically invisible, with disastrous results. Though the story has circulated since the 1950s, skeptics note that Philadelphia Experiment accounts are unverified, and that the story was initially based largely on testimony of the mentally unstable Carl Allen.
According to proponents of the Montauk Project, surviving researchers from the Philadelphia Experiment met in 1952-1953. The researchers aimed to continue their earlier work on manipulating the "electromagnetic shielding" that had been used to make the USS Eldridge invisible, and investigating possible military applications magnetic field manipulation as a psychological warfare device.
Researchers purportedly created a report about their proposals, which was presented to the United States Congress and rejected as far too dangerous. By resubmitting their project directly to the United States Department of Defense and bypassing congressional approval, the researchers promised a powerful new weapon that could induce the symptoms of psychotic disorders and schizophrenia at the touch of a button. The Department of Defense approved. Funding supposedly came from a cache of US$10 billion in Nazi gold recovered from a train found by U.S. Army soldiers in a train tunnel in France, near the Swiss border. The train was blown up and all the soldiers involved were killed. When those funds ran out, additional funding was secured from ITT Corporation and Krupp AG in Germany.
Work began at Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) on Long Island, New York under the name of the "Phoenix Project", but it was soon realized that the "project" required a large and advanced radar dish, and installing one at Brookhaven National Laboratory would compromise the security of the project. Luckily, the United States Air Force had a decommissioned base at Montauk, New York, not far from BNL, which had a complete SAGE radar installation. The site was large and remote and Montauk Point was not yet a tourist attraction. Water access would allow equipment to be moved in and out undetected. More importantly, the SAGE radar worked on a frequency of 400 MHz - 425 MHz, right in the range of 410 MHz - 420 MHz signal that was said to influence the human mind.
Equipment was moved to Camp Hero at Montauk AFS in 1967-1968, and installed in a "Deep Underground Military Base" that the National Security Agency (NSA) and the Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI) were redeveloping and expanding beneath Montauk AFS on the surface at Montauk Point. According to conspiracy theorists, to mask the nature of the project the site was closed in 1969 and donated as a wildlife refuge/park, with the provision that everything underground within the "D1 Base" would remain the property of the United States Air Force, although technically, in reality, Montauk AFS remained in operation until 1987. The park has never been opened to the public, under the excuse of "environmental contamination". (see Addendum below)





This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2007)


Various conspiracy theorists claim that experiments began in earnest from 1982 through to 1987-1988. They claim that during this time one, some or all of the following occurred at the site. The following claims are entirely unverified:

Experiments were conducted in teleportation, parallel dimensions and time travel.
On or about August 12, 1983 the time travel project at Camp Hero interlocked in hyperspace with the original Project Rainbow back in 1943. The USS Eldridge was drawn into hyperspace and trapped there. Two men, Al Bielek and Duncan Cameron both claim to have leaped from the deck of the USS Eldridge while it was in hyperspace and ended up after a period of severe disorientation at Camp Hero in the year 1983 at Montauk Point. Here they claim to have met John von Neumann, a famous physicist and mathematician, even though he died in 1957. Von Neumann had supposedly worked on the original Philadelphia Experiment, but the United States Navy denies this.
A "porthole (portal) in time" was created which allowed researchers to travel anywhere in time or space. This was developed into a stable "Time Tunnel." Underground tunnels with abandoned cultural archives were explored on Mars using this technique where apparently some kind of "Martians" had once lived many thousands of years earlier.
Contact was made with alien extraterrestrials through the Time Tunnel and advanced kinds of "etheric technology" was exchanged with them which enhanced the Montauk Project. This allowed broader access to hyperspace. Stewart Swerdlow also developed the "language of hyperspace", utilizing archetypes and glyphs as well as color and tone, in other words, a "non-linguistic language", the language of the Creator, that is God itself. However many researchers have questioned the validity of Swerdlow and what he actually did within the Montauk Project.
Enrico Chekov, a Spanish-Russian dissident, reported in 1988, after defecting to America, that satellite surveillance captured during the 1970s showed the formation of a large bubble of space-time centered on the site, lending further support to the D1 Base Time Tunnel research. After Chekov shared photographs with a reporter from the The New York Times, his apartment in Manhattan was burgled and the photos were all that was taken.
People had their psychic abilities enhanced to the point where they could materialize objects out of thin air. Stewart Swerdlow claims to have been involved in the Montauk Project, and as a result, he says, his "psionic" faculties were boosted, but at the cost of emotional and psychological instability, post-traumatic stress disorder, and other issues, including being programmed with microchips, and also through the use of "psychotronic mind control". An alien supposedly designed a chair, which an individual could sit in to boost his mental and precipatory powers. A prototype duplicate was given to Britain and put in a facility on the River Thames.
The facility was expanded to as many as twelve levels and several hundred workers. Some reports have the facility extending under the town of Montauk itself and interconnected with vast maglev train tunnel networks to other "Deep Underground Military Bases", also known as "D1 Bases".
Nikola Tesla, whose death was faked in a conspiracy, was the chief director of operations at the base (which, if they started in the 1980s would make him over 120 years old).
Mass psychological experiments, such as the use of enormous subliminal messages projects and the creation of a "Men in Black" corps to confuse and frighten the public, were invented there.

The site was opened to the public on September 18, 2002 as Camp Hero State Park. The radar tower has been placed on the State and National Register of Historic Places. There are plans for a museum and interpretive center, focusing on World War II and Cold War-era history.

[edit] Montauk Project in the media

[edit] News

In late July 2008, the body of an unidentified creature washed up on a Montauk beach. Photographs of the "Montauk Monster" were posted online, leading the national media to speculate on its origin. Several sources considered it to be the bloated carcass of a dog or racoon, but the creature has yet to be identified. Some conspiracy theorists believe it may be a transdimensional being brought about by the government programs conducted in the locality.[citation needed]


[edit] Film and television
The Montauk Project has appeared in a number of television shows and films, including:

A 2005 issue of the Pulse[2] notes that the film Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind, which starred Jim Carrey and featured manipulation of memory as a key plot element, was filmed in Montauk, New York. The issue claims an effort was made to film at Camp Hero State Park, but officials tried to discourage them with higher filming fees.
The Philadelphia Experiment film follows the adventures of the two United States Navy sailors through space-time, which touches on the Montauk Project even if the details differ.


The television show Stargate SG-1 contains a number of similarities to this, including space and time travel using energy portals in a secret military location; Aliens attacking through said portals; Earth being at war with aliens without public knowledge; and the city of Atlantis being discovered in another galaxy.


The "alien designed chair" for boosting mental powers recalls a similar device in the 1956 science fiction film Forbidden Planet.


The 2007 film, The Signal, focuses on a strange signal being sent out through television and telephones. The signal causes people to acquire paranoid schizophrenia, and they feel like they have to kill or be killed, with no real provocation.


[edit] Music

The album Strange Cargo Hinterland by electronic composer William Orbit includes a song called "Montauk Point" which is apparently inspired by the Montauk Project myth.


The album Of One Blood by the band Shadows Fall includes a song called "Montauk" which deals with the conspiracy.


The band Brand New references "the shallows off the tip of Montauk Point" in the song, "Play Crack the Sky".


The song "Memory Motel" by The Rolling Stones refers to the Memory Motel in Montauk on Long Island. It is near The Church Estate, which Andy Warhol bought in 1972. According to Arthur Schneider, who owns the Memory Motel, The Stones stayed at Warhol's estate when they were on tour in 1975-1976. (They were good friends with Warhol, who designed the Sticky Fingers album cover.) Since the Memory Motel was the only place in the area with a pool table and a piano, The Stones would occasionally come by and hang out at the bar. The owners at the time were not impressed — they hated The Stones.


The Chicago band, "The Montauks," features Paul Priest and Andy Levenberg on guitars, Larry Knox on keys, Eric Rickerson on bass, and Jeff Belcher on drums.


[edit] Games

The popular computer game Half-Life features an extensive underground facility called the Black Mesa Research Facility, which suffers from a similar fate as the Montauk facility when interdimensional creatures attack through a portal.


The D20 Menace Manual, a sourcebook for the D20 Modern role-playing game (RPG) by Wizards of the Coast contains a creature called the Montauk Monster. It is an elemental composed of living energy that can cause its victims to fatally fuse with nearby matter.


In Call of Cthulhu RPG, there is an extensive scenario regarding a congressional investigation following an attack from an alien during Montauk Project testing.


In Fear 2, the climax of the game involves a chair in a converted nuclear plant that amplifies telepathic energy.


[edit] Books

Preston B. Nichols and Peter Moon have written a series of books based on Nichols' claims of involvement in the Montauk Project.



[edit] Notes


^ abstract of "Anatomy of a Hoax: The Philadelphia Experiment Fifty Years Later" by Jacques F. Vallee, URL accessed February 21, 2007
^ [1] at www.skybooksusa.com



[edit] See also

List of conspiracy theories


[edit] Further reading
Many books have been published on this subject, in particular the Montauk Project book series. There is also considerable crossover with the Philadelphia Experiment, so see that entry for more books on wider setting. Books that discuss aspects of the Montauk Project include:

Berlitz, Charles; William Moore (1979). The Philadelphia Experiment - Project Invisibility. Souvenir Press. pp. 288 pages. ISBN 0-285-62999-9. 
Steiger, Brad; Alfred Bielek and Sherry Hanson Steiger (1990). The Philadelphia Experiment and Other UFO Conspiracies. Inner Light Publications & Global Communications. pp. 160 pages. ISBN 0-938294-97-0. 
Nichols, Preston B.; Peter Moon (1992). The Montauk Project: Experiments in Time. New York: Sky Books. pp. 160 pages. ISBN 0-9631889-0-9. 
Nichols, Preston B.; Peter Moon (1993). Montauk Revisited: Adventures in Synchronicity. New York: Sky Books. pp. 254 pages. ISBN 0-9631889-1-7. 
X, Commander (1994). The Philadelphia Experiment Chronicles: Exploring the Strange Case of Alfred Bielek and Dr.M.K.Jessup. Inner Light Publications & Global Communications. pp. 137 pages. ISBN 0-938294-00-8. 
Nichols, Preston B.; Peter Moon (1995). Pyramids of Montauk: Explorations in Consciousness. New York: Sky Books. pp. 257 pages. ISBN 0-9631889-2-5. 
Moon, Peter (1997). The Black Sun: Montauk's Nazi-Tibetan Connection. New York: Sky Books. pp. 295 pages. ISBN 0-9631889-4-1. 
Swerdlow, Stewart (1998). Peter Moon. ed. Montauk: The Alien Connection. New York: Sky Books. pp. 250 pages. ISBN 0-9631889-8-4. 
Wells, K.B. (1998). The Montauk Files: Unearthing the Phoenix Conspiracy. New Falcon Publications. pp. 220 pages. ISBN 1-56184-134-X. 
Nichols, Preston B.; Peter Moon (2000). Music of Time. New York: Sky Books. pp. 234 pages. ISBN 0-9678162-0-3. 
Bruce, Alexandra (2001). Peter Moon. ed. The Philadelphia Experiment Murder: Parallel Universes and the Physics of Insanity. New York: Sky Books. pp. 244 pages. ISBN 0-9631889-4-1. 
Gordon, Wade (2002). Peter Moon. ed. Brookhaven Connection. New York: Sky Books. pp. 250 pages. ISBN 0-9678162-1-1. 
Moon, Peter (2005). The Montauk Book Of The Dead. New York: Sky Books. pp. 456 pages. ISBN 0-9678162-3-8. 


[edit] External links

Link catalogue for the Philadelphia Experiment and the Montauk Project
Website of Stewart Swerdlow
Website of Janet Swerdlow
Site debunking the claims of one Albert Bielek, allegedly an eyewitness and survivor of the Philadelphia Experiment an Montauk Project
The Montauk Project and the Philadelphia Experiment
About.com: The Montauk Project
Disinformation: The Montauk Project — links
www.lioddities.com
Montauk Air Force Station website, including the debunking of Montauk Myths
Google Maps Satellite Photo

Coordinates: 41°03′44″N 71°52′27″W﻿ / ﻿41.06222°N 71.87417°W﻿ / 41.06222; -71.87417



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Montauk_Project"
Categories: Conspiracy theories | East Hampton (town), New York | Military projects | Psychological warfare | Urban legendsHidden categories: NPOV disputes from December 2007 | All NPOV disputes | Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2008 | Articles with links needing disambiguation | Articles lacking sources from March 2007 | All articles lacking sources | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
Italiano
Русский









 This page was last modified on 11 April 2009, at 02:57 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
