













Yi Sun-sin - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Yi_Sun-sin";
		var wgTitle = "Yi Sun-sin";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "224416";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282386352;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Yi Sun-sin

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 

This is a Korean name; the family name is Yi.



Yi Sun-sin



The statue of Admiral Yi overlooking central Seoul.



Korean name





Hangul
이순신


Hanja
李舜臣


Revised
Romanization
I Sun-sin


McCune-
Reischauer
I Sun-shin





Courtesy name





Hangul
여해


Hanja
汝諧


Revised
Romanization
yeohae


McCune-
Reischauer
yŏhae





Posthumous name





Hangul
충무


Hanja
忠武


Revised
Romanization
Chung-mu


McCune-
Reischauer
Ch'ung-mu





Yi Sun-sin (April 28, 1545 – December 16, 1598), also commonly transliterated Yi Soon-shin or Lee Sun-shin, Korean: 이순신) was a Korean naval commander noted for his victories against the Japanese navy during the Japanese invasions of Korea (1592-1598) during the Joseon Dynasty. His title of Samdo Sugun Tongjesa (Hangul : 삼도수군통제사, Hanja :三道水軍統制使), literally meaning "Naval Commander of the Three Provinces" was to remain as the title of the commander of the operating arm of the Korean navy until 1896. Yi is also known for his innovative use of the turtle ship (거북선). He is reputed to be one of the few admirals to have been victorious in every naval battle (at least 23) in which he commanded.[1]
Yi was killed by a single bullet in the Battle of Noryang Point on December 16, 1598. The royal court eventually bestowed various honors upon him, including a posthumous title of Chungmugong (충무공, 忠武公, Martial Lord of Loyalty), an enrollment as a Seonmu Ildeung Gongsin (선무일등공신, 宣武一等功臣, First-class military order of merit during the reign of Seonjo), and two posthumous offices, Yeongijeong (영의정, 領議政, Prime Minister), and the Deokpung Buwongun (덕풍부원군, 德豊府院君, The Prince of the Court from Deokpung). He also received the title of Yumyeong Sugun Dodok (Admiral of the Fleet of Ming China) posthumously, by the Emperor of Ming. Yi remains as a venerated hero among Koreans today.




Contents


1 Early life
2 Japanese invasions of Korea(1592-1598)

2.1 Four Campaigns of Admiral Yi
2.2 Turtle Ships
2.3 Japanese double agent plot
2.4 Reinstatement and the Final Campaign
2.5 The Final Battle and Admiral Yi's Death


3 Joseon Government Reaction
4 Legacy
5 Modern depiction
6 See also
7 References
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early life
Yi was born in Geoncheon-dong Street (Hangul: 건천동, Hanja: 乾川洞), Hanseong ( then capital, present-day Inhyeon-dong, Jung-gu District, Seoul). His family was part of the Deoksu Yi clan, near present-day Daejeon. In 1552, after his father, Yi Jeong, was convicted and punished for committing illegal rites for deceased criminals, the family moved from Seoul to Asan, in South Chungcheong province. King Seonjo later cleared his father's name in 1567.
One of the most important events of his early life was when Yi met and became friends with Yu Seong-ryong, a prominent scholar who held a key official position of Dochaechalsa(Hangul: 도체찰사, Hanja: 都體察) in command of the military during the Japanese invasions of Korea (1592-1598). During the war, Yu's support of Admiral Yi was extremely important to Yi's achievements.
As a young boy, Yi played war games with other local boys, showing excellent leadership talent at an early age. Yi also learned reading and writing in Chinese, constructed and fletched his own bow and arrows as a teenager.
In 1576, Yi passed the annual military examination (무과; 武科). Yi is said to have impressed the judges with his swordsmanship and archery, but failed to pass the test when he broke a leg during the cavalry examination. After he re-entered and passed the examination, Yi was posted to the "Bukbyeong" ("northern frontier army") military district in Hamgyeong province. However he was the oldest junior officer at the age of thirty-two. There, Yi experienced battles defending the border settlements against the Jurchen marauders. Yi quickly became known for his strategy and leadership.
In 1583, he lured the Jurchen into battle, defeated the marauders, and captured their chief, Mu Pai Nai. According to a contemporary tradition, Yi then spent three years out of the army after hearing of his father's death. After his return to the front line, Yi led a string of successful campaigns against the Jurchen nomads.
However, his brilliance and accomplishments so soon in his career made his superiors jealous, and they falsely accused him of desertion during battle. The conspiracy was led by General Yi Il, who would later fail to repel the Japanese invasion at the Battle of Sangju. This tendency to downplay people was very common in the later years of the Joseon military and government. His military rank was stripped, and he was imprisoned and tortured. After his release, Yi was allowed to fight as a common soldier. After a short period of time, however, he was appointed as the commander of the Seoul Hunryeonweon (military training center) and was later transferred to a small county, to be its military magistrate.
Yi's efforts in northern Korea was rewarded when Yi was assigned as Commander of the Left Jeolla Province (전라 좌도; 全羅左道) naval district. Within the span of a few months in late 1590, he received four military appointments, in rapid succession, with each subsequent post carrying greater responsibility than the last—Commander of the Kosarijin Garrison in Pyeongan province, Commander of the Manpo Garrison, also in Pyeongan province, and the Commander of the Wando Garrison, in Jeolla Province, before finally receiving the appointment as Commander of the Left Jeolla Naval District. The royal court was in a state of confusion over the possibility of a war with Japan, now unified under the rule of Toyotomi Hideyoshi, and the unstable situation in Manchuria where a young Jurchen chieftain named Nurhaci was gathering strength—Nurhaci's descendants would become masters of China as founders of the Qing Dynasty in a few decades' time, after invading Korea in 1627 and 1637—and was scrambling to place experienced military men in key positions. Yi assumed his new post at Yeosu on the 13th day of the 2nd lunar month of 1591 (March 13, 1591). From there, he was able to undertake a buildup of the regional navy, which was later used to confront the Japanese invasion force. He subsequently began to strengthen the province's navy with a series of reforms, including the construction of the turtle ship.

[edit] Japanese invasions of Korea(1592-1598)
Main article: Japanese invasions of Korea (1592-1598)
Yi is remembered for his numerous victories fighting the Japanese during the Japanese invasions of Korea (1592-1598). In 1592, Toyotomi Hideyoshi gave the order to invade Korea and use it as a forward base to conquer Ming China. After the Japanese attacked Busan, Yi began his naval operations from Yeosu, his headquarters. Quickly, he won the Battle of Okpo, Battle of Sacheon, and several others. The string of victories made the Japanese generals suddenly wary of the threat at sea. Twenty-three battles took place during the war, with Admiral Yi taking victory in all of them.
Hideyoshi was fully aware of the need to control the seas during the invasion. Having failed to hire two Portuguese galleons to help him, he increased the size of his own fleet to 1700 vessels, assuming that the Joseon navy would fight hand-to-hand and be easily overwhelmed.
There were several reasons for Yi's success in fighting the Japanese fleets. First, Yi had prepared for the war that he saw as inevitable by checking the status of his soldiers, granaries and supplies and replacing them constantly. As part of this preparation, Yi successfully planned and built the turtle ship, which was a considerable factor in his victories. Second, Yi had a secure knowledge of the southern coast, and he planned his battles using the sea tides and narrow straits to his advantage. He also demonstrated his loyalty to the people by treating them with respect and fighting amongst them even when endangered. In some records, it stated that he showed deep regret and fulfilled his dying soldiers' requests. This was one of the reasons he came to be loved by the people. Furthermore, Yi showed strength of character as a leader, keeping his soldiers' morale up even when news of losses on land came. Another reason the Joseon navy outperformed the Japanese fleet was that Joseon panokseons were structurally stronger than Japanese ships at the time. Panokseons had stronger hulls and could carry at least 20 cannons, compared to the Japanese 1 or 2. Japanese ship-mounted cannons were inferior in both range and power. Cannon development had been neglected by the government, so Yi developed longer-range and more powerful cannons for the navy. He prepared an assault using different types of cannons for specific purposes.
Yi's brilliance as a strategist emerged during the war and his leadership broadened. For example, at the Battle of Myeongnyang, Yi proved victorious in the battle with 13 panokseons, while the Japanese had at least 333 ships (133 warships, at least 200 logistical). Yi also personally exercised command over his fleets, making the attack on Japanese ships coordinated and decisive.
It is largely due to Yi's command that the Japanese were eventually forced to retreat, keeping Joseon and Ming China safe from another Japanese invasion.
In 1593, Admiral Yi was appointed to command of the southern navies, with the title Naval Commander of the Three Provinces (Hangul : 삼도수군통제사, Hanja :三道水軍統制使) which gave him command over the Jeolla Right and Left Navies, the Gyeongsang Right and Left Navies, and the Chungcheong Navy.

[edit] Four Campaigns of Admiral Yi
Main article: Joseon naval campaigns of 1592
A Japanese invasion force landed at Busan and Dadaejin, port cities on the southern tip of Joseon. The Japanese, without meeting any naval resistance, quickly captured these ports and began a lightning march north. They reached Seoul in just nineteen days on May 2, 1592 due to the military inefficiency of the Joseon army, especially at the Battle of Sangju and the failure to defend Joryeong Pass.
The four campaigns of Admiral Yi included every single operation and at least 23 major battles, in all of which Yi was the victor. His campaigns resulted in hundreds of sunken Japanese warships, transports, supply ships and thousands of Japanese naval casualties.

[edit] Turtle Ships
Main article: Turtle Ship




Drawing of a 16th century turtle ship


Yi's most memorable accomplishment today is resurrecting and improving the turtle ship (거북선). With his creative mind and the support of his subordinates, Yi was able to devise the geobukseon, or turtle ship. Contrary to popular belief, the turtle ship was not actually invented by Admiral Yi, rather, he improved upon an older design that had been suggested during the reign of King Taejong.
The turtle ships designed by Yi held eleven cannons on each side of the ship, with two each at the stern and the bow. The ship's figurehead was in the shape of a dragon. The figurehead itself held up to four cannons, and emitted a smokescreen that, in combination with its fierce appearance, was meant to be used as psychological warfare. The sides of the turtle ship were dotted with smaller holes from which arrows, guns, and mortars could be fired. The roof was covered with planks and spikes.[2] The purpose of the spikes was to prevent the ship from being boarded by the enemy. The larger Japanese ships' sides were higher than the turtle ships' and thus, the spikes prevented boarders from jumping down onto the roof without risking impalement. There were two masts that held two large sails. The turtle ship was also steered and powered by twenty oars, which were pulled by two men during fair conditions and five in combat situations.
There is an ongoing debate as to whether the turtle ship had two decks or three; historians still have no definitive answer. Whichever is the case, it is clear that the turtle ship employed multiple decks to separate the rowers from the combat compartment. This enabled the turtle ship to be very mobile since wind and manpower could be used simultaneously. Most support the argument of two decks since that was what was drawn out in the first and second designs of the turtle ships. Some historians maintain that, since Yi was a unique individual and often pursued innovative ideas (contrary to the established wisdom of his peers), it is possible that he had the turtle ship built with three decks. It is known that his flag ship, a panokseon, had three decks during his campaigns, so there is support for the belief that the turtle ship had three decks.
Turtle ships are the most famous part of Admiral Yi's fleet; however, he never deployed more than five in any one battle. The reason for this was not that the cost or construction time of the ship was prohibitive; rather, it was the naval strategy employed at the time. Unlike anywhere else in the world at the time (with the exception of England), the Joseon Dynasty used cannons as the primary offensive naval weapon. Historically, they had often used guns and cannons against Japanese pirates, from as early on as the 1390s. The Joseon navy did not implement the ship-boarding strategy that the Japanese navy did, so it was imperative that their warships remain "stand off" from Japanese vessels. Admiral Yi warned his sailors to avoid hand-to-hand combat, in which the Japanese navy specialized, at all costs, and to fire at enemies from a distance. The turtle ship was developed to support this tactic.
Turtle ships were first used in the Battle of Sacheon (1592) and were used in nearly every battle until the devastating Battle of Chilchonryang, when a Japanese double agent plot nearly succeeded resulting in every turtle ship and all but 13 panokseons being sunk. The turtle ships did not re-appear in battle until the Battle of Myeongnyang, the second turning point of the war.
Turtle ships were mostly used to spearhead attacks. They were best used in tight areas and around islands rather than the open sea.

[edit] Japanese double agent plot
As Yi won battle after battle, Hideyoshi and his commanders became anxious as they neared Busan. They feared their supply ships would come under attack. Also, Yi delayed supply ships bringing food and weapons to Japanese soldiers. Ships also brought reinforcements. At one point, the entire invasion was halted just before attacking Pyongyang when supplies and troops failed to reach the First and Second Divisions.
But Hideyoshi soon adjusted. At Busan, the Japanese warships were reinforced and some cannons added to larger ships, and clustered beneath the harbor's defenses of heavy shore-mounted cannons that were acquired from the armory. But above all, the Japanese knew that for a successful invasion of Joseon, Yi had to be eliminated. No Japanese fleet would be safe as long as his presence was commanding the sea.
Taking advantage of the many internal court rivalries of the Joseon Dynasty, the Japanese devised a plan. A Japanese double agent named Yoshira was sent to the Joseon general Kim Eung-su, and convinced the general that he would spy on the Japanese. Yoshira played this role until began believing anything he would say.
One day, he told General Kim Eung-su that the Japanese general Katō Kiyomasa would be coming on a certain date with a great Japanese fleet on another attack on the south shores and insisted that Admiral Yi be sent to lay an ambush. General Kim agreed and sent the message to Field Marshal Gwon Yul, Commander-in-Chief (도원수, 導元帥) of the Joseon military, who in, turn sent the message to King Seonjo. King Seonjo, who was desperate for victories to loosen the Japanese grip on his kingdom, gave permission for the attack. When General Kim gave Admiral Yi his orders, the admiral refused to carry them out, for he knew that the location given by the spy was studded with sunken rocks and was thus extremely dangerous. The weather and tides were also unsuitable for combat. Admiral Yi also refused because he did not trust the words of spies.
When General Kim informed the king of Admiral Yi's refusal, the admiral's enemies at court quickly insisted on his replacement by General Won Gyun, former commander of the Gyeongsang Province Western Fleet & Commander of the Jeolla Province Ground Forces. They advised that Admiral Yi be arrested. To worsen Admiral Yi's fate, Won Gyun claimed Yi was a drinker and idler.
As a result, in 1597, Yi was relieved of command, placed under arrest, and taken to Seoul in chains to be tortured and imprisoned. Yi was tortured almost to the point of death by using simple torture tactics such as whipping, flogging, burning, the cudgel, or even the classic technique of leg breaking torture.[citation needed] King Seonjo wanted to have Admiral Yi killed, but the admiral's supporters at court, chiefly the minister Jeong Tak, convinced the king to spare him due to his past service record. The prime minister, Yu Seong-ryong, who was Yi's childhood friend and the his main supporter, remained silent during this deadly hour. Spared the death penalty, Admiral Yi was again demoted to the rank of a common infantry soldier under General Gwon Yul. This penalty was worse than death for Joseon generals at that time, since they lived by honor. However, Yi responded to this humiliation as a most obedient subject, going quietly about his work as if his rank and orders were appropriate. Despite his low rank, many officers treated him with respect, since they knew that the admiral was right and did nothing wrong. Yi would stay under General Gwon Yul's command for a short while until Won Gyun's death at the Battle of Chilchonryang, which would lead to his reinstatement.

[edit] Reinstatement and the Final Campaign
With Yi stripped of any influence, and negotiations breaking down in 1596, Hideyoshi again ordered his army to attack Joseon. The second invasion came in the first month of 1597 with a Japanese force of 140,000 men transported to Korea in 1000 ships. Unfortunately for the Japanese, Ming China had sent down thousands of reinforcements to aid Joseon. With the help of Ming China, the Joseon army was able to push the Japanese south during the winter of 1597. The Japanese failed to reach Seoul.
But in the naval arena, Joseon was doomed. Won Gyun again failed to respond quickly and allowed the Japanese to land. Had Admiral Yi been in command of the Joseon navy at that time, the Japanese would most likely never have landed on any shore again. Instead, the Japanese fleet landed safely at Sosang Harbor and began their activities.
Yi's successor, Won Gyun, decided to attack with the entire naval force of Joseon; a fleet consisting of 150 battleships operated by 30,000 men that had been carefully built by Admiral Yi. Won Gyun left his headquarters at Yeosu with few apparent plans. The next morning, Won Gyun met the Japanese near Busan. At the Chilchon Straits on August 28, 1597, Won Gyun's fleet was massacred. As the tired-from-rowing soldiers stumbled, the Japanese launched a surprise attack. Grappling hooks were thrown and Japanese sailors jumped aboard the Joseon ships, engaged in melee combat, and began a wholesale slaughter. It was the kind of battle Admiral Yi had always won, with careful coordination of enemy movements and strategic moves. But Won Gyun allowed the Japanese to gain the upper hand, board his ships and fight hand-to-hand combat, which was their primary strategy.
At the end of the battle, the Joseon navy was completely annihilated except for 13 battleships, which were saved by a general named Bae Seol. Bae Seol fled before the battle to save the ships because he predicted the outcome of the battle. After the destruction, Won Gyun and Yi Eok-gi, another Joseon commander, fled to an island with a straggling band of survivors, but were killed by waiting Japanese soldiers from the nearby fort. The Battle of Chilchonryang was the only naval battle the Japanese won during the war.
King Seonjo heard the terrible news and quickly reassigned Admiral Yi to his post. Yi found the abandoned 12 battleships and rallied the 200 surviving sailors. Adding his flagship, Admiral Yi's entire fleet totaled 13 ships, which would be the number for a while. At that time, King Seonjo, who judged that the Joseon navy had lost their power and would never be restored again, sent a letter to abolish the navy and join the ground forces under General Gwon Yul. Admiral Yi responded with a letter written "...I still own thirteen ships. As I am alive, the enemies will never gain the Western Sea (a.k.a., the Yellow Sea, the closest sea to Hanseong, or Seoul)." The Japanese navy made up their mind to eliminate the 13 battleships under Yi on their way to the capital. Encouraged by their great victory, Kurushima Michifusa, Todo Takatora, Kato Yoshiaki, and Wakisaka Yasuharu hopefully sailed out of Busan harbor to squash this minor annoyance.
Admiral Yi responded powerfully. In October 1597, Yi lured the Japanese fleet into the Myeongnyang Strait.[3] Using his traditional tactics of peppering cannonballs and fire arrows into Japanese ships, Admiral Yi kept the Japanese fleet at a distance giving no chance to board. 31 Japanese ships were sunk and thousands of Japanese sailors were killed or drowned trying to escape. The Japanese general, Kurushima Michifusa, was killed by archers who got close to his flagship. Admiral Yi's victory at the Battle of Myeongnyang demonstrated his effectiveness as a strategic commander. Today, the Battle of Myeongnyang is celebrated in Korea as one of Admiral Yi's greatest victories.

[edit] The Final Battle and Admiral Yi's Death




A map showing the movements of the navies in the battle.


On December 15, 1598, a huge Japanese fleet under the command of Shimazu Yoshihiro, was massed in Sachon Bay, on the east end of Noryang Strait. Shimazu's goal was to break the allied forces's blockade on Konishi Yukinaga's fleet, join the two fleets, and sail home to Japan. Admiral Yi, meanwhile, knew exactly where Shimazu was after receiving reports from scouts and local fisherman.
At this time, the Joseon fleet consisted of 82 panokseon and three turtle ships, with 8,000 soldiers under Admiral Yi.[4] The Ming fleet consisted of six large war junks, 57 lighter war galleys [5] and two panokseon given to Chen Lin by Admiral Yi, with 5,000 Ming soldiers of the Guangdong squadron and 2,600 Ming marines who fought aboard Joseon ships.[6][5]
The battle began at two o'clock in the early morning of December 16, 1598. Like Admiral Yi's previous battles, the Japanese were unable to respond effectively as the cannons prevented them from moving. The tightness of Noryang Strait also prevented any maneuverability.
As the Japanese retreated, Admiral Yi ordered a vigorous pursuit. During this time, a stray arquebus bullet from an enemy ship struck Admiral Yi,[7] near his left armpit.[8] Sensing that the wound was fatal, the admiral uttered, "The battle is at its height; do not announce my death. .."[7] He died moments later.
Only three people witnessed his death, including Yi Hoe, Admiral Yi's eldest son, and Yi Wan, his nephew.[7] Admiral Yi's son and nephew struggled to regain their composure and carried the admiral's body into his cabin before others could notice. For the remainder of the battle, Yi Wan wore his uncle's armor and continued to beat the war drum to encourage the pursuit.[7]
During the battle, Chen Lin found himself in trouble and Yi's flagship rowed to his rescue. When Chen Lin called for Yi to thank him for coming to his aid, he was met by Yi Wan, who announced that his uncle was dead.[9] It is said that Chen himself was so shocked that he fell to the ground three times, beating his chest and crying.[10] News of Admiral Yi's death spread quickly throughout the allied fleet and both Joseon and Ming sailors and fighting men wailed in grief.[9]
Admiral Yi's body was brought back to his hometown in Asan to be buried next to his father, Yi Jeong (in accordance to Korean tradition). Shrines, both official and unofficial, were constructed in his honor all throughout the land."[11]

[edit] Joseon Government Reaction
Admiral Yi was annihilating Japanese invasion forces, while preserving and respecting his soldiers and their families. Yi was supported by many peasants for not only his victories, but his kindness and gratitude towards citizens negatively affected by the war. They had much faith in Admiral Yi, and he was regarded as more than just an admiral.
On the other hand, King Seonjo had accomplished nothing to save his kingdom. At his greatest need, the Joseon Dynasty's king had failed to defend the kingdom, and his rapid retreat to Uiju left his reputation in ruins. It is feasible to believe that King Seonjo and his royal court looked towards Admiral Yi's victories and rising support as the foundations for a revolt. King Seonjo, who feared that Admiral Yi may hold political power and instigate a revolt against him, arrested and tortured him. Defended by his loyal friend, Yu Seong-ryong, Admiral Yi was spared the death sentence twice.
Nearly all awards to Admiral Yi and his deeds were awarded posthumously.
Many royal advisors of the king played an important part in manipulating the king's opinion of Admiral Yi. The Joseon government was plagued by factional fighting, jealousy, and hatred. The ministers feared and hated the successful admiral, while the royal court sulked in despair and ingratitude. Along with other jealous contemporaries, the sporadic conspiracies against Yi succeeded in restricting his true capabilities to completely destroy the Japanese invasion forces and supply routes.
It should also be noted that according to a recent Choson Ilbo article, historians have discovered written government recordings of the Joseon government's reaction to Admiral Yi's death. The records show that King Seonjo expressed a 'blank expression', offering no signs of sadness or shock.
Entwined with the history of the Joseon Dynasty, extreme factional fighting eventually disrupted the peace and stability of the government, resulting in its eventual collapse to Imperial Japan in 1910.

[edit] Legacy




"If we are willing to fight to the death, we shall live, and if we are not, we will Perish." --Admiral Yi.


Today, Admiral Yi is considered one of Korea's greatest heroes of all time. Koreans look upon Yi as a man of courage, perseverance, strength, self-sacrifice, and loyalty to his country.
Admiral George Alexander Ballard of the Royal Navy considered Yi a great naval commander, and compared him to Lord Nelson of England:

It is always difficult for Englishmen to admit that Nelson ever had an equal in his profession, but if any man is entitled to be so regarded, it should be this great naval commander of asiatic race who never knew defeat and died in the presence of the enemy; of whose movements a track-chart might be compiled from the wrecks of hundreds of Japanese ships lying with their valiant crews at the bottom of the sea, off the coasts of the korean peninsula... and it seems, in truth, no exaggeration to assert that from first to last he never made a mistake, for his work was so complete under each variety of circumstances as to defy criticism... His whole career might be summarized by saying that, although he had no lessons from past history to serve as a guide, he waged war on the sea as it should be waged if it is to produce definite results, and ended by making the supreme sacrifice of a defender of his country. (The Influence of the Sea on The Political History of Japan, pp. 66–67.)

Admiral Tetsutaro Sato of the Imperial Japanese Navy mentioned the Korean admiral in his book published in 1908:

Throughout history there have been few generals accomplished at the tactics of frontal attack, sudden attack, concentration and dilation. Napoleon, who mastered the art of conquering the part with the whole, can be held to have been such a general, and among admirals, two further tactical geniuses may be named: in the East, Yi Sun-sin of Korea, and in the West, Horatio Nelson of England. Undoubtedly, Yi is a supreme naval commander even on the basis of the limited literature of the Seven-Year War, and despite the fact that his bravery and brilliance are not known to the West, since he had the misfortune to be born in Joseon Dynasty. Anyone who can be compared to Yi should be better than Michiel de Ruyter from Netherlands. Nelson is far behind Yi in terms of personal character and integrity. Yi was the inventor of the covered warship known as the turtle ship (geobukseon). He was a truly great commander and a master of the naval tactics of three hundred years ago. (A Military History of the Empire (Japanese: 帝國國防史論), p. 399)

During the time of the invasion, it was up to the admiral to supply his fleet. Yi's fleet was cut off from any helping hand from the king's court and had to fend for itself. The admiral often wrote in his war diary, Nanjung Ilgi War Diary of Admiral Yi Sun-sin, about how concerned he was about the food supply during winters. His enemy was fully supplied, and always outnumbered him.
Yi himself had never been trained as a naval commander. Korea, called Joseon at the time, did not have any naval training facilities. Although Yi passed the military exams when he was young, he was never trained at an academy. Yi's only military experiences came from fighting foreign Jurchen tribes invading from Manchuria. In fact, the Battle of Okpo, his first victory against the Japanese fleet, was also his first sea battle ever. None of his subordinates, including his own staff, had ever fought at sea before.
One reason Admiral Yi was successful in his battles was because his cannons had longer range and power than the enemy's, with the Japanese heavily favoring troop transport over naval combat. His turtle ship, which had first set sail the day before the invasion, was very effective in leading the attack and breaking the enemy's formation. Yi won all of at least 23 naval battles fought while suffering very minimal losses, destroying over a thousand Japanese ships and killing hundreds of thousands of Japanese soldiers.
He used many different formations according to the situation, and capitalized on tides and ocean currents. Admiral Yi also took advantage of his knowledge of the surrounding sea. Many times he lured the enemy to a place where his fleet would have the upper hand.
At the Battle of Hansando, the Japanese commander broke ranks and routed his fleet. Yi's expertise on naval strategy is apparent in the fact that his successor, Won Gyun, even with all of Yi's ships and trained crew, could not defeat an enemy fleet of similar might. One of the greatest legacies of the admiral was the disruption of the Japanese supply line. Through his calculated attacks, he successfully burdened the Japanese navy and the supplies trying to reach their lines near the Chinese border.
Yi's naval reforms did not persist and disappeared soon after his death. The turtle ships faded into the annals of Korean history, reaching iconic legendary status today. The Joseon royal court decided on a reduced military, especially after the Manchu invasions in the 1630s.
Yi kept a careful record of daily events in his diary, and it is from these entries, along with the reports he sent to the throne during the war, that much about him has been learned. Also, much information about the turtle ships are written in his diaries. These works have been published in English as Nanjung Ilgi: War Diary of Admiral Yi Sun-sin, and Imjin Jangcho: Admiral Yi Sun-sin's Memorials to Court.
Among his direct male descendants, more than two hundred passed the military examination and pursued military careers, hence constituting a prominent family or military yangban of late Joseon. Although many of his male descendants did not play the kind of a vital role in the tumultuous factional politics of late Joseon, as did those of the Pyeongsan Shin and Neungseong Gu military yangban lines, the court seems to have treated them with respect. Many attained important high-level posts in the administration. Moreover, at the end of the Joseon Dynasty, at least several descendants are known to have become anti-Japanese independence activists. Today, most of Yi's descendants live in or near Seoul and Asan.




Rear view of the statue of Admiral Yi at Busan Tower, in Busan, South Korea.


In Korea, Admiral Yi is not only famous for the turtle ship, but also for his last words before his death. He told his nephew to wear his armor and to hide his death until the battle is over to avoid demoralizing his men in the middle of battle. His last words were, "Do not let my death be known" ("나의 죽음을 알리지마라").
Admiral Yi's posthumous title, Lord of Loyalty and Chivalry (Chungmugong, 충무공; 忠武公) is used as Korea's third highest military honor, known as The Cordon of Chungmu of the Order of Military Merit and Valor. He was posthumously granted the title of Prince of Deokpung. Chungmuro (충무로; 忠武路) — a street in downtown Seoul — is also named after him. The city Chungmu, now renamed Tongyeong, on the southern coast of Korea is named in honor of his posthumous title and the site of his headquarters. There is a prominent statue of Admiral Yi in the middle of Sejongno in central Seoul. Korea's new KDX-II naval destroyer is named "Chungmugong Yi Sun-sin".

[edit] Modern depiction
Yi's life has been depicted in two motion pictures, both entitled Seong-ung Yi Sun-sin or "Seongwoong Lee Sun-shin" ("The Saintly Hero Yi Sun-sin"), the first a 1962 black & white movie, and the second, based upon his war diaries, in color in 1971 and a TV-drama-series in 2004, titled "Bulmyeolui Lee Soon-shin", means "Immortal Admiral Yi Soon-shin".
Yi and his turtle ships appear in the game Age of Empires II: The Conquerors. However, for the purposes of balance, the turtle ships are wrong in two areas of the game: They are slow (in reality they were incredibly quick) and they can only fire the cannon out of the dragon's mouth/bow (the turtle ships actually fired broadsides and used the front mostly as a sulfur smoke blower and ram).
A 2005 Korean film, Cheongun (천군; 天軍) or "Heaven's Soldiers", directed by Min Joon Gi, portrayed a young Yi Sun-sin, played by Park Joong-hoon, fighting the Jurchen tribes, along with local villagers and North and South Korean soldiers who traveled in time, from 2005 to 1572, with Halley's Comet. Unusually, the film presented Yi as a cunning, slightly eccentric young man, rather than a distinguished austere hero, a couple of decades before Hideyoshi's Invasions of Korea. Some historical events were also distorted: most notably Yi's campaign against the Jurchens, which did not happen in 1572 but a few years later, after his 1576 military examination. The film, financed with a comfortable budget by Korean standards ($7-8 million), was a relative commercial success in 2005. The film's theme clearly uses the figure of Yi, venerated as a hero in both parts of contemporary Korea, to plead for Korean Reunification.
From September 4, 2004 to August 28, 2005, a 104 episode drama series was aired on KBS. The show, titled Immortal Yi Soon-shin (불멸의 이순신) in English, dealt mostly with the events related to the Japanese invasions of Korea, as well as the life of the admiral, played by Kim Myung-min, who later received the Best Actor's Award for this role. It became a popular drama in China and was re-aired in certain ethnic channels in the United States as well. The drama was criticized for the many artistic licenses taken, such as depicting Yi as weak and lonely in his early life and taking liberties with the events surrounding his death. On the other hand, many people complimented the way the drama portrayed the whole drama with a more human touch. It described the admiral as a true man who had to overcome many dangers and difficulties quite frequently alone, not just a hero among the clouds. This drama was a heated topic at the time since it overlapped with the time when the Koreans were offended by Japan declaring that Dokdo Island was theirs.
Yi also inspired literary works. In 2001, Kim Hoon's first novel, Song of the Sword, was a commercial and critical success in South Korea. For this poetic first-person narrative written from Yi's perspective, he received the Dongin Literature Award, the most prestigious literary prize in the nation.
Yi Sun Sin has an ITF style Tae Kwon Do pattern named after his posthumous name of Chung-mu

[edit] See also

History of Korea
Naval history of Korea
Turtle ship
Immortal Admiral Yi Sun-shin
The Great Hero, Lee Sun-shin at the Internet Movie Database
Admiral Lee Sun-shin at the Internet Movie Database
Immortal Admiral Yi Sun-shin at the Internet Movie Database
List of Korea-related topics


[edit] References


^ Korean Hero Yi Sunsin
^ Hawley, Samuel: The Imjin War. Japan's Sixteenth-Century Invasion of Korea and Attempt to Conquer China, The Royal Asiatic Society, Korea Branch, Seoul 2005, ISBN 89-954424-2-5, p.195f.
^ War Diary (亂中日記), the autobiographical diary of Admiral Yi Sun-Sin
^ Hawley (2005), p. 552
^ a b Hawley (2005), p. 553
^ Choi (2002), p. 213
^ a b c d Ha (1979), p. 237
^ Hawley (2005), pp. 549-550
^ a b Choi (2002), p. 222
^ Hawley (2005), p. 555
^ Hawley (2005), p. 557



The Influence of the Sea on The Political History of Japan (1921) ISBN 0-8371-5435-9
War Diary (Nan Jung Il Gi), the autobiographical diary of Admiral Yi Sun-Sin
Choson Joong-Gi, Noon-Eu-Ro Bo-Nen Han-Gook-Yuk-Sa #7. Joong-Ang-Gyo-Yook-Yun-Goo-Won, Ltd. Copyright 1998.
Katano, Tsugio yi Sun Shin and Hideyoshi (1996)
Hawley, Samuel 2005 The Imjin War: Japan's Sixteenth-Century Invasion of Korea and Attempt to Conquer China. Republic of Korea and U.S.A.: Co-Published by The Royal Asiatic Society and The Institute of East Asian Studies, University of California, Berkeley.


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Yi, Sunsin 



Hyeonchungsa Shrine Management Office
Admiral Yi Sun-sin - A Korean Hero (includes clips from the drama Immortal Admiral Yi Sun-shin)
Choong-mu
Biography of Admiral Yi Sun Shin
Yi-Sunshin
Heaven's Soldiers
YiSunsin.com: Yi Sunsin information portal.
Yi Sun-sin at Find A Grave




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yi_Sun-sin"
Categories: 1545 births | 1598 deaths | Korean admirals | Korean generals | Military history of Korea | Joseon Dynasty people | Military personnel killed in action | Japanese invasions of Korea (1592-1598)Hidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Français
文言
한국어
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Português
Русский
Simple English
Svenska
ไทย
吴语
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 18:05.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
