













1632 series - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "1632_series";
		var wgTitle = "1632 series";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "1878256";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 285924940;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); 1632 series

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article may be too long to comfortably read and navigate. Please consider splitting content into sub-articles and using this article for a summary of the key points of the subject.









Cover of the lead novel painted by Larry Elmore










Map of the Holy Roman Empire (Germany) divisions (c. 1512)










Europe of the times











Map of today's Germany where the dark green shows Thuringia (compare with Holy Roman Empire map above).






The 1632 series, also known as the 1632-verse or Ring of Fire series, is an alternate history book series, created, primarily co-written, and coordinated by historian Eric Flint. It is, excepting the lead novel and the serialized e-novel The Anaconda Project (2007), virtually all collaboratively written, including some "main works" with multiple co-authors (1634: The Ram Rebellion ). However, Flint has mentioned contracts with the publisher for at least two additional solo novels he has in planning on his website. Flint, whose bibliography is dominated by collaborative work, claims that this approach encourages the cross-fertilization of ideas and styles, stimulating the creative process and preventing stale, formulaic works.[1] This series is the first example of and the inspiration for the Assiti Shards series.
The 1632 series began with Flint's stand alone novel 1632 (released as recently as February 2000) and now includes twenty-six works of all kinds including e-published only works (e-books) of which twelve are standard trade printed books (Three [of eighteen of the bi-monthly Gazettes, and counting] are the printed canonical Grantville Gazettes (I , II , and III , the first of which is almost entirely longer fiction Flint couldn't put in the already lengthy Ring of Fire shared universe collection, the de facto first sequel antedating collaborative work on 1633, and of which two have been best sellers) As needed historic research, a common timeline, and character information have been established (from 2000-2004, culminating with the release of 1633 and Ring of Fire sequels, but ongoing), additional titles are being added to the series at a rate of three to five per year, not counting The Grantville Gazettes — which hit stride and overcame growing pains in mid-2006 and now are produced bi-monthly in a volume varying 120,000-150,000 words (long novel length). There are currently twenty-six works in the series, of which eighteen are the Grantville Gazettes' e-zines (e-books) leaving twelve works in print (three of which are Gazettes). Flint and his collaborators are targeting publishing 2-4 titles per year, not counting the bi-monthly Gazettes. The printed matter published in the canonical Gazettes eclipsed the in print materials in the series during 2006.




Contents


1 Series overview
2 Collective collaborative effort
3 The beginning
4 Works in the series

4.1 Published books

4.1.1 Main/North-Central and Western European thread
4.1.2 South European thread
4.1.3 Eastern European thread




5 Short fiction in the series

5.1 The Grantville Gazettes


6 1632-verse Glossary of Terminology
7 1632 Tech Manual, Slush and Slush Comments
8 The 1632 Slushpile
9 Historical connections

9.1 Historical characters
9.2 1632 places

9.2.1 A, B to F,G
9.2.2 H,I to L,M
9.2.3 R to Z


9.3 Historical events and organizations


10 Fiction

10.1 Fictional characters
10.2 Fictional places


11 Known publishing schedules
12 See also
13 External links
14 References





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Series overview
As stated in the first Grantville Gazette and on his site, Flint's novel 1632 was an experiment[2] wherein he explores the effect of transporting a mass of people through time — in the case of this series, the small fictional town of Grantville, West Virginia from the United States in the year 2000 to central Germany in the year 1631.
1631-32 occurs in the midst of the Thirty Years' War (1618—1648). The plot situation allows pragmatic American union-oriented political thought to grind against the authoritarian religion-driven societies of an unconsolidated Germany barely out of the Middle Ages. Flint explores examples of suffering due to the petty politics of self-aggrandizement and self-interest on the one hand, and the irreconcilable differences of the schism in Christianity called the Protestant Reformation and the Counter-Reformation on the other. Despite the fact that the shift puts Grantville in May 1631 initially, because of the ongoing war and the primitive transportation networks of the day Grantville's arrival has something of a delayed impact, so the bulk of the book's action takes place in 1632, hence the name.
The series was initially continued with two collaborative works that were more or less written concurrently: 1633 (with best selling novelist David Weber) and an anthology called Ring of Fire (with other established science-fiction writers, including long "deep background" stories by both Weber and Flint).
Overall, the narratives are not oriented on one group of protagonists with a strong lead character, but instead is carried by an ensemble cast — though most books or short stories do have several strong characters who carry the action and plot forward. Flint had intended from the outset that the whole town would be the collective protagonist; a reflection of his philosophy that historic forces are not centered in the main on the actions of one or two key individuals, but on the many small independent actions of the many going about their daily lives and coping as best they can.
By late in 1632, the New United States-led coalition of the Confederated Principalities of Europe had become the arsenal and financier (through Jewish connections of real historical interest) for King Gustavus Adolphus. This leads the scheming Cardinal Richelieu, who'd been previously financing him to spite and weaken the Habsburgs, to turn on the Swedes. Various books from uptime Grantville, especially history books, had found avid readers amongst Europe's ruling elites, changing the plans and strategies of major players of the time.
Richelieu forms a four way alliance, the League of Ostend, to oppose the New United States, Gustavus' expeditionary army, and allied princes of the German states. After the first book, the series begins multiple plot lines or story threads reflecting this independence of action by a multitude of characters. The sequel 1633 spreads the Americans out geographically over Northern Europe. Next, the novel 1634: The Galileo Affair, and the first of the anthologies called the Grantville Gazettes introduced new strong characters. The former begins what is called the South European thread, and some of the stories in the latter and Ring of Fire began the Eastern European thread (Austria-Hungary northwards to Poland).
Co-author of 1633, New York Times best-selling author David Weber is contracted for no less than five books in the series in what is called the Central European or Main thread of the series, but there was a lengthy delay before the two busy authors could synchronize schedules to write that next mainline sequel together, 1634: The Baltic War, released in May 2007.
Without waiting for Weber, other sequels such as 1634: The Ram Rebellion, 1635: The Cannon Law, and the Grantville Gazettes continue in one thread or another with in-depth looks at societal ramifications from technology, religion, and social unrest as Europe deals with the outlandish ideas of Grantville's influential presence, to machinations of Europe's elites trying to maintain their hold on power, or leverage off of Grantville triggered events or knowledge for reasons of self-interest.

[edit] Collective collaborative effort
Fans are encouraged to contribute to the series though an online message board known as Baen's Bar. The entire Grantville Gazette and large portions of the Ring of Fire anthology, both of which are considered canonical, are paid, fan-written (albeit edited by Flint) works, and have directly contributed material to the main novels. The author also worked with other established authors to develop new stories and plot lines for further novels which are also published in the two Ring of Fire anthologies.
"Ring of Fire" has several levels of meaning: First it is the eponymous reference to what the town-folk themselves (and the few outside German witnesses) have come to call the observed phenomenon of their time-space juxtaposition. Secondly, it is a disparaging reference to the effects on the population of Germany at large, suffering under the war's environment outside American-controlled territory, used by Mike Stearns addressing a town meeting:


“
Then to the crowd: "According to Melissa Mailey, we now live in a world where kings and noblemen rule the roost. And they've turned all of central Europe—our home, now, ours and our children's to come—into a raging inferno. We are surrounded by a Ring of Fire. Well, I've fought forest fires before. So have lots of other men in this room. The best way to fight [such] a fire is to start a counterfire. So my position is simple. I say we start the American Revolution—a hundred and fifty years ahead of schedule!"
”



[edit] The beginning
Main articles: 1632 plot threads, 1632 Editorial Board, 1632 Tech Manual, and The Grantville Gazettes
1632 is the lead novel in the 1632 series. It is a science fiction (alternate history) novel originally released in November 2000, but atypically, continues to actually increase in quarterly sales, as are most of the sequels[3]. Originally a single stand-alone story, the novel is now the first of an open-ended series with over twenty-six works of all kinds including e-published only works (e-books) of which twelve are standard trade printed books (Three [of eighteen of the bi-monthly Gazettes, and counting] are the printed canonical Grantville Gazettes (I , II , and III , the first of which is almost entirely longer fiction Flint couldn't put in the already lengthy Ring of Fire shared universe collection, the de facto first sequel antedating collaborative work on 1633, and of which two have been best sellers) published in print and an additional rapidly growing number related Grantville Gazettes e-books or e-zines (not in print).
In writing 1632, Flint's web forum "Shadow of Demons" at Baen's Bar was soon taken over by exploratory posts as captivated readers commented on the E-ARC released book, creating a ground swell of interest ("internet Buzz") in the months before its hardcover release. So strong was the response, especially after the release of the printed work, that a new sub-forum 1632 Tech Manual was created for discussions about it in early 2000, for the discussions had also spilled over into Weber's "Bu-ships" tech forum, and Weber joined the bandwagon by suggesting a sequel was in order. In the event, the two co-wrote 1633 and collaborated further on integrating the short fiction (much of it, unsolicited) into the de facto Ring of Fire sequel[4]. It was followed by two other related forums: 1632 Slush and 1632 Comments within the next two years. (See 1632 Editorial Board on those.)
The Grantville Gazettes are a series of short stories in the collaborative fiction experiment, which started life as an online serialized magazine with an inconsistent and sporadic publication history. After the death of Jim Baen and with the publication of Grantville Gazette X by Baen Books, the last under contract with Baen, the Gazettes were again reconstituted as a subscription e-zine, now published regularly at six per year (bi-monthly) and paying above standard rates for submissions. They are a "boiler room" powering the collaborative synergy by the people involved with the 1632 Tech Manual and have developed into a repository for new ideas and themes in the series, although most explore the personal experiences of minor characters in the series or examine in depth some aspect (e.g a multi-part serial explores and details Grantville's impact on public health in general, and the establishment of twin teaching hospitals as a joint project of the University of Jena and Grantville's new hospital, the Lahey Clinic.) In general, the anthologies in the series depict deep background canonical to future tales, but which are not in the main stream "action" of the novels focus. A group of stories have on several occasions produced a new plot thread.

[edit] Works in the series
In order of publication (includes e-book releases): 1632, 1633, Ring of Fire, The Grantville Gazette (I), 1634: The Galileo Affair, Grantville Gazette II, Grantville Gazette III, Grantville Gazette IV, Grantville Gazette V, Grantville Gazette VI, Grantville Gazette VII, 1634: The Ram Rebellion, 1635: Cannon Law, 1634: The Baltic War, 1634: The Bavarian Crisis
In order of print publication: 1632, 1633, Ring of Fire, The Grantville Gazette (I), 1634: The Galileo Affair, Grantville Gazette II.

[edit] Published books
See also: 1632 plot threads

[edit] Main/North-Central and Western European thread
Geographical scope: Austria, Denmark, England, Scotland, Spain, France, The Low Countries (Belgium, Luxembourg, Spanish Netherlands, French Netherlands), Germany (Badenburg, Bavaria, Bohemia, Prussia, Duchy of Saxony), Switzerland (Swabia), Swedish Empire (Finland, Lapland, Norway, Sweden)
Note: In the neohistorical setting, Nation States were more often than not small parts of today's nations, and by today's thinking geo-political regions of modern countries.)

Novel: 1632 (February 2000)
Novel: 1633 (August 2002) with David Weber
Anthology: Ring of Fire (January 2004)

includes the "The Wallenstein Gambit" with Mike Spehar which begins the Eastern Europe thread, "In the Navy" by David Weber and other stories annedating 1633 in the neohistory.


Novel: 1634: The Ram Rebellion (April 2006) with Virginia DeMarce, crafted as a collection of related 'key developmental events'. This is structured more as an anthology and includes substantial material from Paula Goodlett and other authors, but classed as a novel by the publishing trade since the stories all come together as having a related overall story arch (theme). This book deals with the NUS administration of Franconia and foreshadows attitudes of common folk who come to grips with the new concepts introduced by the up-timers.

Mostly written from non-American perspective, explores in-depth native reactions to the stimulus of what Grantville is doing inside local societies, in particular in Southern Germany.


Novel: 1634: The Baltic War (May 2007) with David Weber, the direct main thread novel sequel to 1633; this book ties up matters left hanging in 1633 such as the fate of the embassy in London, Eddie Cantrell's experiences as a Prisoner of War, and the siege of Lubeck. Admiral Simpson and the navy he built earns its keep and Mike Stearns as Prime Minister of the United States of Europe continues to run rings around European leaders.
Novel: 1634: The Bavarian Crisis (October 2007) with Virginia DeMarce

Chronological sequel to 1632, but continues the Eastern European thread Seeded in Ring of Fire, stoked in several different Grantville Gazettes, and brought to a boil in The Ram Rebellion.


Anthology: Ring of Fire II (January 2008)


[edit] South European thread

Novel: 1634: The Galileo Affair (April 2004) with Andrew Dennis, begins the Italian-French or Southern Europe thread.
Novel: 1635: The Cannon Law (September 2006) sequel to 1634: The Galileo Affair.

Returns to Italy and France - explores the influence knowledge from the future has on the internal politics of the Roman Catholic church and the Papacy.




[edit] Eastern European thread
This thread could possibly be named "South eastern Europe thread" with separate works dealing with Poland, the Baltic and Russia

Novelette: "The Wallenstein Gambit" in the anthology  Ring of Fire, which continues from two plot-line suggested in Ring of Fire and Ring of Fire in the same anthology.
Serialized Novel: The Anaconda Project, published in the new format (own website re-organized) Grantville Gazettes in volumes 11 – 15 (2007 – January 2008), the solo-written book authored by Flint is available through Webscriptions, and directly continues "The Wallenstein Gambit" and is the first long work in the South eastern Europe thread and serves as a prequel to the 1635: Soldier of Bohemia.


[edit] Short fiction in the series
When the novel 1632 was written in 1999, it was conceived as an experiment in the literary genre alternate history by Flint, without intentions of writing any immediate sequel. He had in fact, several other years of writing projects planned, which subsequent developments were to delay as late as publication in 2006-2007. Flint—as a relatively new writer at the time, following the popular demand for a sequel elected to invite other established authors in the Baen's stable of writers to share the universe in order to rapidly develop its potential—in this he traded on his experience as an editor. This went on concurrently with a great deal of reader input in what became the 1632 Tech sub-forum on Baen's bar. In this initiative, he became the editor (He was already a Baen editor for the Baen Free Library) and together with fan input on Baen's Bar, and collaboration with established best-selling author David Weber on the first long sequel, 1633, concurrently put together the Ring of Fire anthology to inaugurate the short fiction in the series.
The novel and anthology shaped one another, all filtered through and also shaped by the discussions on Baen's website. This process continues to this day, primarily in the form of The Grantville Gazettes. Initially an experimental e-magazine of fan fiction, the first volume was successful enough to be released as a paperback. Subsequent Gazettes have also been released in print form.
Flint, as editor of all the short fiction, also maintains the series canon (co-ordinated by the 1632.org Web site) and all copyrights to the alternate history universe per se, and with Flint as the controlling editor, the consequence is semi-pro or professional payment rates aside, Baen doesn't publish anything in the series which is not canonical.
In point of fact, the short fiction in the series frequently provides a more in-depth background and foreshadows larger events that are the meat of the long fiction in the series. The longer works are replete with mentions to events covered in the shorter works, and with characters and the history and events unfolded in such materials. Flint always publishes one of his own stories within the short fiction collections, or in the case of 1634: The Ram Rebellion, considerably more, as it introduces several important background factors that are central to further series developments as the altered history is to unfold to the reader.

[edit] The Grantville Gazettes
Main articles: The Grantville Gazettes and 1632 Editorial Board
The Gazettes began as an experimental semi-professional online magazine featuring fan fiction and non-fiction edited by Flint and (eventually) a volunteer editorial board. At the time of Jim Baen's death in the summer of 2006 ten Grantville Gazettes were under contract and they had (with some fits and starts) settled into a new version roughly and irregularly three times a year. Baen's production staff was somewhat over worked by the deadline and the serialized magazine gave way to an E-book release from the sixth volume onward—though this was explained by Flint as primarily being due to Flint's other commitments, such as editing the new science fiction magazine Jim Baen's Universe. Earlier on, he'd explained the production delays in terms of overworked proof readers, executive editors, and so forth. Issues VI through X, after being released as E-books seem likely to not see print, where Jim Baen has been releasing (all but the first) issues some months later as hardcover books, the last he bought has yet to appear. Flint has explained that the market for anthologies is always very soft, no matter the genre, and it seems likely that any new print version from the Gazettes will be a "Best of The Grantville Gazettes".
In the meanwhile, Grantville Gazette X was jointly published as an e-book by Baen, but also as the first foray of "Eric Flint Enterprises" at www.grantvillegazette.com/ which looks to be a joint venture of Baen Books and Flint where the new incarnation of the e-zine also pays SFWA rates and maintains a bi-monthly (six per year) publishing schedule. It is modeled very much on the same lines as Jim Baen's Universe, which is edited by Flint.
Beginning in early 2007, the Gazette's publishers added an online web-based edition published quarterly and moved the paper series to an annual "best of" volumne.[citation needed] Additionally, the publishers moved to paying full professional rates instead of the semi-pro rates that had been paid. After one year, the Gazette expects to be an SFWA qualifying market.
The web based version is available at http://www.grantvillegazette.com

[edit] 1632-verse Glossary of Terminology
The main article 1632 institutions recaps many of these terms and gives a broader picture of their mutual contexts.

Advisory to Readers: 1632 was a standalone novel. Events since its release have led to a unprecedented shared universe experiment in the writing of collaborative fiction. This has led to certain needs and means of discussion, which accounts for the prominence of this section.

Some of the terminology below is more common to the active and popular discussion forums about the 1632 neohistory, vice being used explicitly in the various main works kept under the tight creative control of Eric Flint as direct collaborations. The terms are however well represented in the larger body of writing in the Grantville Gazettes for which he serves as final arbiter of canon and managing editor, which as of May 2007 has become an independent online publication semi-sundered from Baen Books under Eric Flint Enterprises, which will continue to produce the printed versions.

1632-verse/1632 universe— a way of referring to and clarify the distinction between entities or new time lines in science-fiction, its sub-genre alternate history, and discussions in science involving such esoteric physics as the Many world's hypothesis and Parallel universes in Quantum Mechanics.


Badenburg — A fictional walled town or small city located within five to six miles (10 km) of the locus of Grantville's new home. Citizens of the town were witnesses to the Ring of Fire, and have places in many of the short stories building the societal canvas of the works. For example, some of its people owned lands supplanted by the territory of Grantville within the Ring of Fire. A series of stories in Grantville Gazette III and 1634: The Ram Rebellion explores how the economic and personal effects of such circumstances were worked out and settled between the down-timer and up-timers. Second state in the New US (NUS).


CPoE or CPE, (October 1632—10 October 1633 NTL) — Confederated Principalities of Europe. Formed at the end of 1632 (novel) in the aftermath of the Battle of Grantville, with Gustavus II Adolphus as Captain General of the 'New United States', but not its monarch.


Down-timer* — Any native born in Early Modern Europe.


Emperor of the United States of Europe — see United States of Europe (USE).


Gazettes / Grantville Gazettes—an experimental Online Magazine launched by Baen Books with (See: main article: The Grantville Gazettes, and 1632 Editorial Board)


Grantville — a West Virginia town containing a cast of about 3,500 of the 'collective protagonists' exploring the 'what if' theme of what sort of changes might come about in the chaotic history of the Thirty Years' War and the resulting social and political development of Europe (and the world) if such a community of modern rural Americans landed in Europe one fine afternoon. The up-timer Americans possess advanced technology, are experienced at organizing and recruiting as well as walking around with a chip on their shoulders and are limited to the town's small stocks and industrial resource base but showed up with its libraries, industries, electricity, an educated motivated populace, 'can-do' attitudes, a smattering of modern combat knowledge and modern thought patterns in the heart of disorganized, unled, war-torn central Early Modern Europe.
OTL — Our Time Line, or the history of our world sans a Ring of Fire.


NTL — New Time Line, or the history of our world from May 1631 after the Ring of Fire. NTL and OTL are long standing abbreviations with wide acceptance amongst science fiction circles.[citation needed] New Time Line was coined to handle comparison of events in Parallel World discussions.[citation needed]


NUS or "New US", (by late Fall 1631—Fall 1632 NTL) — The New United States located in southern and western Thuringia — a loose collection of territories, towns and free cities lead by its first state, the up-timers (Americans) of Grantville, that Mike Stearns put together in the winter of 1631-32 to oppose the effects of "the wars" raging through Central Europe.


Ring of Fire — the label or name given to the three mile (5 km) in radius spherical space-time bubble caused by the Assiti shard that exchanged part of Thuringia with Grantville, West Virginia. While in the main faint and translucent, at ground level, the sphere appeared as an ephemeral (perhaps 15 seconds) wall of shimmering flames from the outside. Within, those near the edge also perceived something of the flames, but the effect was swamped and overwhelmed by the thunder-like sound blast that shook walls and rattled windows and fixtures like a mini-earthquake and the overwhelming blast of bright white light that was believed by many to be a huge display of sheet-lightning.


The Prince of all Germans, or 'The Prince of Germany', or just 'The Prince' (perhaps most common) —a popular unofficial title bestowed gratefully and spontaneously by the populace at large in the areas of Germany which have benefited from the advent of the Mike Stearns influence under the NUS, CPoE, and USE governments. The title began to become widespread circa the end of the novel 1633 in the unrest that lead to the USE, is mentioned a few times in The Ram Rebellion and becomes very obvious in the early chapters of The Baltic War.


Up-timer* — Any 20th century American from Grantville, WV.


The United States of Europe (USE), (10 October 1633— present NTL); the successor to the Confederated Principalities of Europe, a Monarchial Constitutional Republic the United States of Europe formed at the end of the novel 1633 during a demonstrative outbreak of nationalism triggered by news of the Battle of Wismar circa October 9 and 10th during protracted radio negotiations between Mike Stearns, who was appointed its first Prime Minister, and Gustavus II Adolphus Vasa, who became the new Emperor of the United States of Europe in the agreement.

* The hyphen is considered canonical by the 1632 Tech forum, 1632 Editorial Board, and 1632.org.

[edit] 1632 Tech Manual, Slush and Slush Comments


Cover of the Grantville Gazette II e-magazine.


1632 Tech Manual, 1632 Slush, and 1632 Slush Comments are each specialized sub-forums of a specific sub-community of the general online community known as Baen's Bar which is a web site focused on the publishers works and forums to let fans interact with writers. The first sub-form, 1632 Tech Manual (from early 2000—generally known just as "1632 Tech") is dedicated to developing the background for collaborative fiction in the first Assiti Shards type fictional universe — 1632 universe or "1632-verse" — that began in the novel 1632 by Eric Flint, and the second two are spin-offs related to the fact that the series generated a lot of solicited fan-fiction, which has become a hallmark of the series, when such is accepted as canon. That process is ongoing at grantvillegazettes.com and in part explains the synergy of the series as literally hundreds of well educated people and experienced people have worked together to put together a logical and likely chain of events and societal impacts given the departure point postulated in the initial novel—a town of thirty-five hundred from a blue-collar rural community characteristic of the town where Eric Flint's mother called home.
The later two forums were eventually created and set aside as a submission venue and talk forum about such submitted work for the initial anthology Ring of Fire and the eventual series of serialized e-zines, The Grantville Gazettes all of which resulted from (originally) unsolicited manuscripts plus Flint's decision to make the milieu a Shared universe by inviting in other writers. About that time, Flint was contributing a short story and contracting for a novella to the Honorverse spin-off series "Crown of Slaves" and had become good friends with David Weber, who has opened that sub-series in similar fashion to other writers. Weber expressed an interest in writing within 1632-verse, and that discussion may have given Flint the idea of soliciting manuscripts from other writers on the huge infant canvas. It is certain, he had no plans for a sequel beyond the initial novel.
As the collaborative effort evolved, the Grantville Gazettes — along with 1632 Tech where technical aspects are hammered out and discussed to a surprising thoroughness — became a seed stock of new ideas and developments which give the rich verisimilitude to the background and plotting of the longer fiction in the series. Another distinction (sometimes very indistinct) is that stories in the Gazettes are normally told from the viewpoint of the common resident living through the international repercussions that the influence of Grantville's knowledge has caused on the larger stage. In seeming contradiction, about half the fiction in the Gazettes is merely emotive—amusing, tragic or dramatic, sometimes taking on many aspects of the popular soap opera—which is to say commercially successful and desirably entertaining to its subscribers. Even though those kinds of tales have little importance save as "color" or deep background, they serve to gradually illuminate the society coming into being and are valuable to the reader in illuminating the dissonances between our modern era and the emerging Europe of the fictional neohistory, as well as the practices and life of the Europe in our real history. Quite frequently a character developed in a minor soap opera-ish story will appear elsewhere in the series in a more important role, including as main protagonist anchoring a major work. (e.g. Nowell Murphy and others in about half the book 1634: The Ram Rebellion )

[edit] The 1632 Slushpile
"Slushpile" is publishing trade jargon referring to the pile(s) of unsolicited submissions to a periodical. In the "Continuing adventure"[5] of the Grantville Gazettes According to Flint, the unsolicted stories began shaping the background thought in the series milieu, and the magazine "idea" was born whilst he tried to recoup some of the time costs involved in examining the fan-fiction.[6] Also, he judged some of the tales to be professional quality, and indeed, incorporated many of them into about half of Ring of Fire . The flagship novel was written as a stand-alone literary work, an experiment with the new Assiti Shards story premise, and was but one of three such universes planned by Flint in 2000. However, the sensation and interest engendered by the 1632 novel's publication subsequently caused the other works to be delayed while the 1632 series was developed. The other books in the overall Assiti Shard series currently under contract are

Timespike, with Marilyn Kosmatka, in production, publication scheduled for May 2008.[7]


By Any Other Name, with Sarah Hoyt, first draft completed; Eric Flint scheduled his part of the writing for 2007-2008 in October website announcement.[8]


1776, a solo novel, original name was 1781; production overdue and delayed.

1776 supposes George Washington and Frederick the Great are transposed to ancient Rome's Crisis of the Third Century; By Any Other Name, takes place in several different time frames including a transposition of the Assiti themselves into Elizabethan England; and Timespike involves transpositions of various populations into the unpopulated late Cretaceous era (145-65.5 million years ago).
The "1632 Tech Manual" forum has had a large role in developing the overall series as its discussions revolve around the course of likely events, reactions and developments as the fictional town of 3,000 souls transplanted into the middle of the religious based Thirty Years' War.

[edit] Historical connections




Notice This section has largely been supplanted (i.e. is being subsumed and moved) by the articles:
Main articles: 1632 characters, 1632 places, 1632 institutions, and 1632 series battles
all of which are under construction.





[edit] Historical characters
For more detail of the role of these historical figures in the series, see the main article 1632 characters
Alphabetical list (by surname) of (some of the most plot important) real historical characters that appear in the many books and stories of 1632-verse. A more complete list is present in the above link, as well as more detailed descriptions of their roles in the neo-historical new time line (NTL). Pictures (portraits usually) and Authors annotated comments can be reached by this link.

Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden (1594–1632)
King of Sweden, died at Battle of Lützen.
In the 1632-verse:  survives the year 1632, becomes the Emperor of the United States of Europe.


Albrecht VI von Bayern (1584–1666)
Landgraf of Leuchtenberg.
In the 1632-verse:  During 1634: The Bavarian Crisis, he and his family get trampled under during the 'witch hunt' for traitors by his brother the reigning duke Maximilian, such that he loses both younger children during the flight, his wife and oldest son are killed, and he flees to exile in the NTL Bohemia ruled by Wallenstein.


Alfonso de la Cueva, marqués de Bedmar (1572–1655)
Spanish diplomat, bishop and cardinal
In the 1632-verse:  becomes chancellor of the new kingdom in the Low Countries


Jeremias Drexel (1581–1638)
Jesuit writer at the Munich court of Maximilian I, Elector of Bavaria
In the 1632-verse:  ?


Cardinal-Infante Ferdinand (1609–1641)
also known as Fernando and as Ferdinand von Österreich; Governor of the Habsburg Netherlands, Cardinal, Infante, Archbishop of Toledo and military commander
In the 1632-verse:  conquers the Dutch and becomes an independent king of the Low Countries, marries his first cousin 'Maria Anna of Austria' who escapes the intended marriage to her aged uncle 'Maximilian of Bavaria'


Archduchess Cecilia Renata of Austria (1611–1643)
Queen of Poland from 1637; daughter of Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor
In the 1632-verse:  ?


Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor (1578–1637)
Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire; married to Eleonore Gonzaga; father of Maria Anna of Austria, Cecylia Renata and Ferdinand III
In the 1632-verse:  dies already in 1634 as broken man, after being deposed in Bohemia by Wallenstein and remaining without any success in Germany


Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia of Spain (1566–1633)
Infanta of Spain, Archduchess of Austria and the joint sovereign of the Seventeen Provinces
In the 1632-verse:  lives a bit longer and bequeathes her appanage, the Low Countries, to her nephew don Fernando (whom the books erroneously call her great-nephew)


Johann Gerhard (1582–1637)
Lutheran theologian
In the 1632-verse:  ?


Athanasius Kircher (1601–1680)
German Jesuit scholar
In the 1632-verse:  Father Kircher takes the position of curate for Saint Mary's Parish in Grantville where he'd been helping for some time, once he was attracted to town by the new knowledge of science brought down-time by the Americans. His "posting" serves to free the newly appointed Ambassador to the Most Serene Republic of Venice, Fr. Lawrence Mazarre, who has become well known in Europe and so is desperately needed to form ties in Venice for the Confederated Principalities of Europe technological edge is limited by the inability to get in raw materials due to the ongoing war with other potential trading partners given the war with the League of Ostend.


Princess Kristin (1626–1689)
Sole heiress to Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden
In the 1632-verse:  Willful child, raised among Americans, who grows to accept responsibility and to prefer the company of Americans


Maria Anna of Austria (1610–1655)
married Maximilian I, Elector of Bavaria on 15 July 1635
In the 1632-verse:  escapes the intended marriage to her aged uncle Max and instead marries her first cousin don Fernando, king of the Low Countries


Maximilian of Bavaria (1573–1651)
called "the Great"; Wittelsbach ruler of Bavaria and a prince-elector (Kurfürst) of the Holy Roman Empire, and founder and head of Catholic League and therefore de facto head of its armies
In the 1632-verse:  becomes very paranoid after losing his intended fiancée and starts terror and witch hunts in Bavaria, kills his sister-in-law duchess Mechtild, his brother Albrecht gets exiled


Jules Cardinal Mazarin (1602–1661)
served as the chief minister of France from 1642, until his death. Mazarin succeeded his mentor, Cardinal Richelieu
In the 1632-verse:  Becomes embroiled in a three way contest for his loyalty; the USE, to whom he was a diplomat during the NUS period, and with which he has become familiar; France, whose leader, Richelieu, has read OTL history and wants to assure the value of his heir; and the Papacy, of which he is a part of the hierarchy.


Armand Jean Du Plessis, Cardinal et Duc de Richelieu (1585–1642)
French politician, cardinal, King Louis XIII's chief minister
In the 1632-verse:  Openly declares himself an enemy of the USE


Johan Tzerclaes, Count of Tilly (1559–1632)
general in Bavarian and Imperial service
In the 1632-verse:  Dies from wounds sustained in action against Gustavus Aldophus.


Turenne (1611–1675)
Marshal of France
In the 1632-verse:  Achieves greatness early, as a result of Richelieu studying the near future of France in stolen history books


Albrecht von Wallenstein (1583–1634)
Czech soldier and politician who gave his services (an army of 30,000 to 100,000 men) during the Danish Period of the Thirty Years' War to Ferdinand II for no charge except the right to plunder the territories that he conquered
In the 1632-verse:  Becomes an ally of Gustavus Adolphus and ruler of Bohemia after a successful coup d'état.


Wilhelm of Saxe-Weimar (Wilhelm Wettin) (1598–1662)
5th Duke of Saxe-Weimar, key ally of Gustavus Adolphus through much of the Thirty Years' War but shunned by Axel Oxenstierna after Gustavus' death
In the 1632-verse:  abdicates his duchy, takes the name Wilhelm Wettin and becomes the leader of the opposition party against Mike Stearns, actively seeking to become the next Prime Minister of the USE


[edit] 1632 places
Main article: 1632 places
This section is an alphabetical list of fictional and real historical "major places" that appear in the 1632 universe. With the excellent historical background of the series, references are made to many regions and municipalities that figure in a more minor role in the series, but which have some influence on the events in the twenty-plus works of the series. Most of those will not be linked or covered below, but make for a great travelog of interesting places in Europe. The main article details significant events around these and other places and their importance to the series plotlines.

[edit] A, B to F,G




Badenburg










Düsseldorf










Badenburg— A fictional walled small city or large town and nearest large neighbor to the Ring of Fire, has a population circa 6,000. MacKay's cavalry detachment was scouting around the outside of the city when it discovered the farmhouse mass grave and the UMWA message.


In the 1632-verse:
People saw the phenomenon from the streets. Badenburg is located roughly south-south-west from Grantville and about six miles or so from the town fringes. Some of the lands now holding the environs of the town belonged to the small city. The first planned battle (called the Battle of the Crapper) between the Mike Stearns lead forces of MacKay's cavalry detachment and Grantville's (Pre-NUS) forces took place outside the city walls "about a half-mile north of the cities walls", during which an unsavory mercenary leader was deposed as well. This led to the wedding of Gretchen Richter and Jeff Higgins.
Part of the books: ' 1633, Ring of Fire, and various stories in The Grantville Gazettes
First mentioned in: '1632'.



Düsseldorf— Capital of the Duchy of Berg.


In the 1632-verse:
French cavalry headquarters of Viscount of Turenne
Part of the books: '1634: The Baltic War, 1634: The Bavarian Crisis'.






Location of Eisenach.






"The Wartburg" (castle) in Eisenach



Eisenach— The history of Eisenach is linked with the Wartburg castle, which was built according to legend in 1067. There were at least three settlements below the castle, that merged to a common city in the second half of the 12th century. This town, Eisenach, was first mentioned in 1180.

Several now legendary events took place on the Wartburg in the following decades, best known is the "Singers' Contest on the Wartburg" (Sängerkrieg, which is part of the Tannhäuser legend). After the Thuringian War of Succession (1247–1264) Eisenach became subject to the Wettin dynasty of Meissen. Later several mini states were established in what is now Thuringia, and Eisenach became a principality on its own in 1521. In 1751 Eisenach lost its independency and became part of the duchy of Saxe-Weimar.

Martin Luther stayed there from May 1521 to March 1522, receiving protection by Frederick the Wise after having been pursued for his religious views. It was while he was staying at Wartburg Castle that he translated the New Testament into German. The town is famous as the birthplace of Johann Sebastian Bach as well.


In the 1632-verse:
Eisenach is one of the territories spirited away from the four brother Dukes of Saxe-Weimer and becomes one of the sketchily mentioned states in the 'New United States' in the novel 1632. Like the rest of the New United States it becomes part of the Confederated Principalities of Europe at the end of the lead novel in the fall and winter of 1632–1633.


In the two day Battle of Eisenach-Wartburg (ca. October 1632) NUS forces lead by Mike Stearns first decimate an Spanish army of 10-12,000 invading from the Spanish Netherlands along the Spanish Road, first breaking them and chasing them into taking shelter in the Wartburg, then use psychological warfare and Napalm for force the complete surrender of the remaining army. The entire affair was a feint however, setting up the deep cavalry raid (Battle of Grantville) that convinces Stearns he must ally with Gustavus thus birthing the CPoE.
Part of the books: '1632 (novel), and The Grantville Gazettes
First mentioned in: '1632'.



[edit] H,I to L,M

Ingolstadt— a city located along the banks of the Danube River in the center of Bavaria.


In the 1632-verse:
just mentioned in expected role or as background, not a plot setting in the 1632-verse neohistory.
Part of the books: Ring of Fire, and The Grantville Gazettes.



Ingolstadt, University of— p/o ?


In the 1632-verse:
just mentioned in expected role or as background, not a plot setting in the 1632-verse neohistory.



Jena— a university town in Thuringia.


In the 1632-verse:
Jena is protected against one of Tilly's companies by the NUS forces and MacKay's cavalry in the summer of 1631 in the Battle of Jena, during which time the main army of Gustavus II Adolphus passes south of the Harz range and Southern Thuringia and invades Bavaria and Franconia.
Part of the books: Ring of Fire, and The Grantville Gazettes
First mentioned in: '1632'.



Magdeburg— a major Hanseatic German city on the Elbe well river upriver from its North Sea outlet near Hamburg. It was infamously subjected to the Sack of Magdeburg in 1631 in both timelines. In OTL, the city took a long long time to be repopulated and regain its vigor, and some argue it never regained its importance.


In the 1632-verse:
Over the first two novels, Magdeburg becomes the capital of the Confederated Principalities of Europe and later its successor federation and republic, the United States of Europe. Its ascension begun was begun initially as a symbolic and morale building gesture by Gustavus Adolphus II angry and outraged at the Sack of Magdeburg by the putative Catholic army lead by Johann Tserclaes, Count of Tilly and his cavalry leader, General Pappenheim.

Thereafter, Magdeburg plays more and more of a central role being both centrally located, and in a much better locale as the impact of American thoughts and ideas begin to rip through the social fabric of German states. Beginning centered in the small town of Grantville, West Virginia, which becomes displaced in time into May 1631 into southern Thuringia, the series books and action drift northward over time into Magdeburg as the collaborative writings in long and short fiction explore the cultural, sociological, religious, and developmental impact that might occur if a town of no-nonsense coal miner tough Hillbillies found themselves with the limited material resources of a small town, but modern arms and an alarmed energized populous armed with modern political, social and religious developments in the heart of the war torn Germany in the middle of the Thirty Years' War.An angry Gustavus Adophus vows to rebuild the sacked and destroyed city and eventually makes it the capital of the short-lived Empire the CPoE and of the successor republic, the USE. In 1631, during the Thirty Years' War, imperial troops stormed the city and commit a massacre, killing about 20,000 inhabitants and burning the town of Magdeburg. The city had withstood a first siege in 1629 by Albrecht von Wallenstein. After the war only a population of 400 remained (see Sack of Magdeburg). According to the Peace of Westphalia (1648), Magdeburg was assigned to Brandenburg-Prussia after the death of the current administrator (a Saxon prince), as a semi-autonomous Duchy of Magdeburg. This occurred in 1680.
Part of the books: 'essentially all, including most of the The Grantville Gazettes. If nothing else, Magdeburg's prominence as Gustavus' Capital of the CPoE draws a mention, or is involved in radio messaging with parties elsewhere in the various threads by winter of 1633-34.'
First mentioned in: '1632'.



Magedeburg, Cathedral of Saints Catherine and Maurice— A famous landmark, that took 300+ years to build, and having the tallest spires in Germany and about the only structure which survived the Sack of Magdeburg under Tilly's forces.


In the 1632-verse:
Magdeburg's most impressive building, the Cathedral of Saints Catherine and Maurice, has a height of 104 m: the highest church building of eastern Germany. It is notable for its beautiful and unique sculptures, especially the "Twelve Virgins" at the Northern Gate, the depictions of Otto I the Great and his wife Editha as well as the statues of St Maurice and St Catherine. The statue of St Maurice (ca. 1250) is one of the few where Maurice is displayed as a black man with African features holding a sword and wearing chainmail and is in fact, the oldest depiction of a black person in Europe.



Munich, City of— a major German city located on the river Isar, capital of Bavaria.


In the 1632-verse:
p/o?



[edit] R to Z

Suhl, a town in Thuringia.— Suhl is an important Brass, bronze, iron, iron working, and weapons producing city that early on becomes allied with the NUS.


In the 1632-verse:
Many of the Rifled Cannons the NUS produces for Gustavus' army over the winter of 1631-32 are cast in Suhl before being shipped to Grantville for finishing.
Part of the books: Ring of Fire, and The Grantville Gazettes.



[edit] Historical events and organizations
Main articles: 1632 institutions and 1632 series battles
Alphabetical list of real historical events that are mentioned in the 1632 verse.

Catholic League was a confederation of Catholic German states formed in order to counteract the Protestant Union. Tension between these two groups would eventually ignite into the first phase of the Thirty Years War.
Edict of Restitution from 1629 was Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor’s attempt to restore the religious and territorial settlement after the Peace of Augsburg (1555). The "Ecclesiastical Reservation" forbade the secularization of Catholic land (i.e. being converted to some form of Protestant belief) after 1555. However, during the decades of weak emperors, princes had secularized Catholic land simply because it was so valuable and they had got away with it as no emperor was powerful enough to enforce the "Ecclesiastical Reservation".
Protestant Union or Evangelical Union was a coalition of Protestant German states that formed in the 1600s. Tensions between Protestants and Catholics in Germany escalated, leading to the outbreak of the Thirty Years' War.
Thirty Years' War was a conflict fought between the years 1618 and 1648, principally in the Central European territory of the Holy Roman Empire, but also involving most of the major continental powers. It occurred for a number of reasons. Although it was from its outset a religious conflict between Protestants and Catholics, the self-preservation of the Habsburg dynasty was also a central motive. 163x: the TYW is changed by the arrival of uptimers, the strengthening of Sweden and France allying with England, Spain, Denmark and Austria against the USE, Sweden and the Low Countries.


[edit] Fiction

[edit] Fictional characters
Main article: 1632 characters
Alphabetical list (by surname) of fictional historical characters that appeared in the 1632 verse.

Cardinal Lawrence Mazzare, originally the local Catholic priest of Grantville, later the USE ambassador to the Most Serene Republic of Venice, and then His Eminence the Cardinal-Protector of the United States of Europe.
Mike Stearns, head of the Grantville Emergency Committee, elected president of the New United States (NUS), prime minister to Gustavus under both the Confederated Principalities of Europe and United States of Europe (USE) successor governments.
Rebecca Stearns, née Abrabanel, wife of Mike Stearns, daughter of Balthazar Abrabanel. Former National Security Adviser, the sole Senator of the New United States, in the novels 1633 and 1634: The Baltic War caught up in the Siege of Amsterdam.
Hans Richter, Captain US Air Force. Originally a native born German printer's son (and apprentice) pressed into the service of Count Tilly's mercenaries. Wounded at the Battle of the Outhouse, possibly by New United States (NUS) forces M60 fire. In 1633, commissioned USAF. Killed in Action during the Battle of Wismar, 7 OCT 1633. Posthumously awarded the first Distinguished Flying Cross for heroism while mortally wounded at the controls of the damaged Belle II.


[edit] Fictional places
Alphabetical list of fictional places that appeared in the 1632 verse.

Grantville,




The key setting, a small town that traveled in time within a circular region about 6–7 miles in diameter within which are a coal mine, some railways, and a coal fired power plant. Based on the real city of Mannington, West Virginia and its nearby power station. Flint sets the power station and Grantville near a tributary of the Saale river.




Badenburg,




A nearby walled town near the East Bank of the Thuringian Saale river. It was defended by Grantville's population during the 'second military encounter', but first major war action. Badenburg is located at the center of a triangle formed by the actual municipalities of Arnstadt, Saalfeld, and Jena, and became the second town to enter the new (fictional) United States of Europe.




[edit] Known publishing schedules
This section is compiled from off site web materials and there is no guarantee it's up to date.
Baen Books has finished scheduling for the October 2007 through January 2008 period. Here's what's scheduled in terms of the 1632 series:

January 2008: Ring of Fire II
Overall, 2008 is shaping up to be a similar drought year to 2005, when major works in the series lagged demand and interest due to unavailability of co-authors or inability of authors to co-ordinate schedules for the 3-4 months necessary to get a draft to the publisher.

June 2008: 1635: Soldier of Bohemia — Delayed by military service of co-author Mike Spehar in the Iraq-Afghanistan theater.
Unknown 2008: Hardcover (delayed) release of Grantville Gazette IV
Unknown: 1635: The Eastern Front -- Eric Flint, the sole author —Bavaria-Austro-Hungry perhaps, Gustavus versus Brandenburg and Saxony for certain.




[edit] See also

Wartburg Castle
1632 institutions
1632 characters
1632 places
1632 series battles
1632 universe background history


[edit] External links

Official 1632 Fan Site
Assiti Shards series listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database


BAEN Free e-library


Grantville Gazette Volume 1 free e-book
1633 free e-book
1632 free e-book


[edit] References


^ Flint, Eric (March 2006). "forward and afterwords". in Eric Flint (in English) (hardcover). Grantville Gazette II. 1632 (1st, Hardcover ed.). afterword: Baen books. p. 324. ISBN 978-0-4165-2051-1.  "pp316-317 beginning with "Which is the way I intended things, from the moment I decided to turn 1632 from a stand-alone novel it was originally written to be into a series." ... through "where revolutions have typically been depicted as the product of magical hand waving by a handful of big-shot heros. They decree, and therefore it is done."" 
^ Flint, Eric (March 2006). "afterword". in Eric Flint (in English) (hardcover). Grantville Gazette II. 1632 (1st, Hardcover ed.). afterword: Baen books. p. 324. ISBN 978-0-4165-2051-1.  "pp316: "...which has to do with the way I see this entire story in the first place—and did from the beginning. 1632 was written as much as an American novel as a science fiction or alternate history novel. More precisely, as a novel that fits within that loosely defined literary category known as Americana. In particular, it was written from a desire on my part to make a relatively ordinary small American town the collective protagonist of the story. And then, as the story unfolded, to keep the focus as uch as possible on what you might call the level of the common man and woman—understanding that, as the story unfolded, more and more seventeenth-century Europeans would become an integral part of that collective protagonist." (hyper links added herein)" 
^ Flint, see footnote table in Eric Flint
^ Flint, in "Editors Forward" to Ring of Fire
^ "Grantville Gazette homepage". http://www.grantvillegazette.com. Retrieved on 2007-10-17. 
^ Flint, Eric, (ed.); and various others. The Grantville Gazette (anthology, volume I). pp. 2 (of 361).  "But, in the meantime, the fan-fic kept getting written, and people kept nudging me—okay, pestering me, but I try to be polite about such things—to give them my feedback on their stories. ... Once I realized how many stories were being written—a number of them of publishable quality—I raised with Jim Baen the idea of producing an online magazine which would pay for fiction and factual articles set in the 1632 universe and would be sold through Baen Books' Webscriptions service. Jim was willing to try it, to see what happens." 
^ "Forthcoming" at ericflint.net (accessed 26 October 2007). "May 2008 will see the publication of TIMESPIKE by Eric and Marilyn Kosmatka, a different branch of the "Assiti Shards" universe."
^ "Known scheduled for writing during 2007". http://www.ericflint.net/index.php/forthcoming/. Retrieved on 2007-10-26.  "[Eric has scheduled his writing for and the] "First draft is in Eric’s hands from Collaborators... By any other name (with Sarah Hoyt" 









v • d • e

Assiti Shards series by Eric Flint





1632/Ring of Fire series




Main plot threads
(Settings of predominant
neohistorical activity)

• West Central European thread • Western European thread • Southern European thread • East Central European thread • Eastern European thread • Southeastern European thread • Northern European thread • Naval thread • The Americas thread






Main series works

• 1632 • 1633 • Ring of Fire • 1634: The Galileo Affair • 1634: The Ram Rebellion • 1635: The Cannon Law • 1634: The Baltic War • 1634: The Bavarian Crisis • The Anaconda Project • Ring of Fire II • 1635: The Dreeson Incident • 1635: The Eastern Front • 1635: Soldier of Bohemia






The Grantville Gazettes
(Backplot "local" stories
canonically support main series)

• Grantville Gazette I • Grantville Gazette II • Grantville Gazette III • Grantville Gazette IV • Gazette V • Gazette VI • Gazette VII • Gazette VIII • Gazette IX • Gazette X • Gazette XI • Gazette XII • Gazette XIII • Gazette XIV • Gazette XV • Gazette XVI • Gazette XVII • Gazette XVIII • Gazette XIX • Gazette XX • Gazette XXI






1632 Editorial Board •  Ring of Fire (anthology series)








Other Assiti Shards novels

Time Spike •  By Any Other Name









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1632_series"
Categories: 1632 series | Assiti Shards multiverse | Literary collaborationsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch









 This page was last modified on 24 April 2009, at 20:50 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
