













Occupational therapy - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Occupational_therapy";
		var wgTitle = "Occupational therapy";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "334037";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282019778;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Occupational therapy

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate.







It has been suggested that occupational therapist be merged into this article or section. (Discuss)






Occupational therapy. Toy making in psychiatric hospital. World War 1 era.


Occupational Therapy, often abbreviated as "OT", incorporates meaningful and purposeful occupation to enable people with limitations or impairments to participate in everyday life. Occupational therapists work with individuals, families, groups and populations to facilitate health and well-being through engagement or re-engagement in occupation. Occupational therapists are becoming increasingly involved in addressing the impact of social and environmental factors that contribute to exclusion and occupational deprivation.[1][2]




Contents


1 Defining occupational therapy
2 History of occupational therapy
3 Evolution of the philosophy of occupational therapy
4 Occupation, occupational form and occupational performance
5 Occupational therapy process
6 Areas of practice in occupational therapy

6.1 Physical health
6.2 Mental health
6.3 Community


7 Occupational therapy approaches

7.1 Activity analysis
7.2 Therapeutic activity


8 Theoretical Frameworks

8.1 Frames of Reference/Generic models
8.2 Approaches/Intervention models


9 Education Requirements in United States
10 United States Employment and Earnings
11 Challenges for occupational therapy
12 Occupational therapy and the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF)
13 See also
14 References





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Defining occupational therapy
The World Federation of Occupational Therapistsdefines occupational therapy as a profession concerned with promoting health and well-being through occupation. The primary goal of occupational therapy is to enable people to participate in the activities of everyday life. Occupational therapists achieve this outcome by enhancing the individual's ability to participate, by modifying the environment, or by adapting the activity to better support participation.[3]
Another way of thinking about the ideas contained in these definitions could be: occupational therapy is about understanding the importance of an activity to an individual, being able to analyze the physical, mental and social components of the activity and then adapting the activity, the environment and/or the person to enable them to resume the activity. Occupational therapists would ask, "Why does this person have difficulties managing his or her daily activities (or occupations), and what can we adapt to make it possible for him or her to manage better and how will this then impact his or her health and well-being?”
Occupational therapy gives people the "skills for the job of living" necessary for "living life to its fullest."[4]
The College of Occupational Therapists (2004) describes OT as follows: Occupational Therapy enables people to achieve health, well-being and life satisfaction through participation in occupation.
Occupational Therapy draws from the field of occupational science to provide an evidence base to practice and develop academic and practice links to other related disciplines such as social science and anthropology, and also utilises a range of generic models to guide the practice of OT.

[edit] History of occupational therapy
The earliest evidence of using occupations as a therapeutic modality can be found in ancient times. One-hundred years before the birth of Christ, Greek physician Asclepiades initiated humane treatment of patients with mental illness via the use of therapeutic baths, massage, exercise, and music. Later, the Roman Celsus prescribed music, travel, conversation and exercise to his patients. Unfortunately, by medieval times, the concept of humane treatment of people considered to be insane was rare, if not nonexistent (Quiroga, 1995).
In eighteenth century Europe, revolutionaries such as Philippe Pinel and Johann Christian Reil reformed the hospital system. Instead of the use of metal chains and restraint, their institutions utilized rigorous work and leisure activities in the late 1700s. Although it was thriving abroad, interest in the reform movement waxed and waned in the United States throughout the nineteeth century. At the turn of the 20th century, as physicians became increasingly interested in chronic disease, enthusiasm for the reform of the mental healthcare system was revived in the states. Work therapy found its way to America (Quiroga, 1995).
The health profession of occupational therapy as we know it was conceived in the early 1910s. Focus was on promoting health in “invalids.” Early professionals merged highly valued ideals, such as having a strong work ethic and the importance of crafting with one’s own hands, with scientific and medical principles. Early adversaries viewed wood carving and crafting by ill patients trivial (Quiroga, 1995).
The emergence of occupational therapy challenged the views of mainstream scientific medicine. Instead of focusing on purely physical etiologies, they argued that a complex combination of social, economic, and biological reasons cause dysfunction. Principles and techniques were borrowed from many disciplines—including but not limited to nursing, psychiatry, rehabilitation, self-help, orthopedics, and social work—to enrich the profession’s scope. Between 1900 and 1930, the founders defined the realm of practice and developed theories of practice. In a short 20-year span, they successfully convinced the public and medical world of the value of occupational therapy and established standards for the profession (Quiroga, 1995).
A substantial lack of primary sources of information has left today’s occupational therapists with many questions concerning the founders of the field. Information is collected from early training institutions and hospitals, professional writings of practitioners, World War I records from government agencies, newspaper articles, and personal testimonials (Quiroga, 1995).
One of the most notable figures in the infancy of occupational therapy was Eleanor Clark Slagle. Slagle was part of the generation of women who challenged women’s “rightful” place as a volunteer and strived for females to have a place in the professional world. At age forty, she was trained in curative occupations and recreations at the Chicago School of Civics and Philanthropy and later took a position at Hull House, where crafts were used to promote mental health (Quiroga, 1995).
It is speculated that Slagle’s interest in healthcare stemmed from her personal life, as her father, brother, and nephew all suffered from various disabilities. Seeing the daily struggles of people with disabilities and illnesses may have sparked Slagle to enroll in the Chicago School in 1911. In 1912, renowned psychiatrist Adolph Meyer appointed Slagle to direct a new department of occupational therapy at John Hopkins Hospital. There, she learned habit training—a method of re-educating patients on decent habits of living via substituting healthful habits for bad habits (Quiroga, 1995).
Another psychiatrist, William Rush Dunton, Jr., worked diligently to raise the status of psychiatry in medicine in the first decades of the 20th century. He viewed occupational therapy as complementary to psychiatry, as it had the promise of meshing humanitarian values with science. Dunton became interested in the work of European moral therapy advocates. He accepted a position at the Sheppard Asylum, where it was standard practice in the early 1900s for patients to participate in activities such as bowling, gymnastics, art, etc. Dunton and his contemporaries called for the development of a theory to underlie the treatment known as “moral therapy” and “diversional occupation,” among other names. He called for therapists to devise outcome measures so that the neophyte profession would be given the attention and respect he felt it deserved (Quiroga, 1995).
Another important figure in the early days of occupational therapy was Susan Tracy, a nurse by trade, who organized activity-oriented classes for nurses at the Adams Nervine Asylum. In 1910, she published a textbook that was widely used for over 30 years. She is credited with expanding the realm of occupational therapy from psychiatric institutions to the homes of patients, which is an important setting in which today’s occupational therapists work. Upon breaking ties with the asylum, she set up her own institution, entitled the Experiment Station for the Study of Invalid Occupations. This training center educated nurses so they could gain control over their practice and not default to being dominated by physicians. By practicing privately in patients’ homes, this batch of occupational therapists expanded the domain of occupational therapy and began using OT to treat physical ailments as well as mental illness (Quiroga, 1995).
Herbert J. Hall was a physician with a strong work ethic and practical vision. He believed we could retract social ills by adapting the arts and crafts movement for medical purposes. A graduate of Harvard Medical School, he advised the government on wartime standards for occupational therapy during WWI. He introduced the concept of grading activities—now a hallmark of occupational therapy—to avoid exacerbating patient’s frustration and fatigue (Quiroga, 1995).
George Edward Barton, an architect, also aided in promoting the occupational therapy profession. Diagnosed with tuberculosis in 1901, Barton later contracted gangrene and had a partial amputation, after which he was left paralyzed on his left side. He opened Consolation House, a sanctuary for people with physical disabilities, in 1914. There, intensive self-administered occupational therapy “cured” his ailments. He played an integral part in gathering the profession’s leaders and forming the first national society (Quiroga, 1995).
The first meeting of the National Society for the Promotion of Occupational Therapy was held in March of 1917. Barton (along with his secretary), Eleanor Clark Slagle, William Rush Dunton Jr., Thomas B. Kinder, and Susan Cox Johnson were the only six in attendance. In the fall of 1919, at the third meeting, 300 attendees participated. In 1921, the name of the organization was changed to the American Occupational Therapy Association and the Archives of Occupational Therapy, the first professional journal, began publication (Quiroga, 1995).
World War I forced the new profession to clarify its role in the medical domain and to standardize training and practice. In addition to clarifying its public image, OT also established clinics, workshops, and training schools nationwide. Due to the overwhelming number of wartime injuries, “reconstruction aides” (an umbrella term for physical therapists and occupational therapists) were recruited by the Surgeon General. Between 1917 and 1920, nearly 148,000 wounded men were placed in hospitals upon their return to the states. This number does not account for those wounded abroad. The success of the reconstruction aides, largely made up of women trying to “do their bit” to help with the war effort, was a great accomplishment. Post-war, however, there was a struggle to keep people in the profession. Emphasis was shifted from the altruistic war-time mentality to the financial, professional, and personal satisfaction that comes with being a therapist. To make the profession more appealing, practice was standardized, as was the curriculum. Entry and exit criterion were established, and AOTA advocated for steady employment, decent wages, and fair working conditions. Via these methods, occupational therapy sought and obtained medical legitimacy in the 1920s. By the time Slagle retired from the profession in 1937, the profession’s medical identity was well on its way to being established (Quiroga, 1995).

[edit] Evolution of the philosophy of occupational therapy
The philosophy of occupational therapy has evolved over the history of the profession. The philosophy articulated by the founders that have owed much to the ideals of romanticism[5] , pragmatism[6] and humanism which are collectively considered the fundamental ideologies of the past century[7][8][9].
William Rush Dunton, the creator of the National Society for the Promotion of Occupational Therapy, now the American Occupational Therapy Association, sought to promote the ideas that occupation is a basic human need, and that occupation was therapeutic. From his statements, came some of the basic assumptions of occupational therapy, which include:

Occupation has an effect on health and well-being.
Occupation creates structure and organizes time.
Occupation brings meaning to life, culturally and personally.
Occupations are individual. People value different occupations[1].

These have been elaborated over time to form the values which underpin the Codes of Ethics issued by each national association. However, the relevance of occupation to health and well-being remains the central theme. Influenced by criticism from medicine and the multitude of physical disabilities resulting from World War II , occupational therapy adopted a more reductionistic philosophy for a time. While this approach lead to developments in technical knowledge about occupational performance, clinicians became increasingly disillusioned and re-considered these beliefs[10][11]. As a result, client centeredness and occupation are re-emerging as dominant themes in the profession, perhaps indicating growing maturity and self confidence[12][13][14]. Over the past century, the underlying philosophy of occupational therapy has evolved from being a diversion from illness, to treatment, to enablement through meaningful occupation[1]. This became evident through the development and widespread adoption of the Canadian Model of Occupational Performance.
The two most commonly mentioned values are that occupation is essential for health and the concept of holism. However, there have been some dissenting voices. Mocellin in particular advocated abandoning the notion of health through occupation as obsolete in the modern world and questioned the appropriateness of advocating holism when practice rarely supports it[15][16][17]. The values formulated by the American Association of Occupational Therapists have also been critiqued as being therapist centred and not reflecting the modern reality of multicultural practice[18][19].
Central to the philosophy of occupational therapy is the concept of occupational performance. In considering occupational performance the therapist must consider the many factors which comprise overall performance. This concept is made more tangible using models such as the person-environment-occupation model proposed by Law et al. (1996)[20]. This approach highlights the importance of satisfactions in one's occupations, broadening the aim of occupational therapy beyond the mere completion of tasks to the holistic achievement of personal wellbeing.
In recent times occupational therapists have challenged themselves to think more broadly about the potential scope of the profession, and expanded it to include working with groups experiencing occupational deprivation which stems from sources other than disability[21]. Examples of new and emerging practice areas would include therapists working with refugees[22], and with people experiencing homelessness[23]

[edit] Occupation, occupational form and occupational performance
Occupation
Occupation is the dynamic relationship between the occupational form and occupational performance.[24][25]
Many people see the term occupation as a job one does. However, the meaning of occupation is seen in a much wider context by an Occupational Therapist. A human being can be engaged in a wide range of occupations: leisure, self-care or educational activities are just a few examples of occupation.[26]
Occupational Form
Wu and Lin (1999) stated that the occupational form was the “...objective pre-existing structure or environmental context that elicits or guides subsequent human performance”. The occupational form consists of objective features. These may include materials, human context and socio-cultural dimensions.[27]
Occupational Performance
Occupational performance is the active voluntary human doing of the occupational form.[28]

[edit] Occupational therapy process
An Occupational Therapist works systematically through a sequence of actions known as the occupational therapy process. There are several versions of this process as described by numerous writers. Creek (2003)[29] has sought to provide a comprehensive version based on extensive research. This version has 11 stages, which for the experienced therapist may not be linear in nature. The stages are:

Referral
Information gathering
Initial assessment
Needs identification/problem formation
Goal setting
Action planning
Action
Ongoing assessment and revision of action
Outcome and outcome measurement
End of intervention or discharge
Review


[edit] Areas of practice in occupational therapy
The role of Occupational Therapy allows OT’s to work in many different settings, work with many different populations and acquire many different specialties. This broad spectrum of practice lends itself to difficulty categorizing the areas of practice that exist, especially because each country, each with a different healthcare system. In this section, the categorization from the American Occupational Therapy Association is used. However there are other ways to categorize areas of practice in OT, such as physical, mental, and community practice (AOTA, 2009). These divisions occur when the setting is defined by the population it serves for example acute physical or mental health settings (e.g.: hospitals), sub-acute settings (e.g.: aged care facilities), outpatient clinics and community settings.
In each area of practice below, and OT can work with different populations, diagnosis, specialities, and in different settings.

[edit] Physical health




Occupational therapy during WWI: bedridden wounded are knitting.



Pediatrics - Schools, Community, inpatient hospital based child OT: Often, children need OT services for the same reasons an adult needs OT services. However, OTs approach intervention in a different way with children. OT delivers approaches treatment through occupation, and the occupations of a child are different from those of an adult; and include play, chores, self-care and schoolwork (Case-Smith, 2005). Common conditions that are specific to or more common in the pediatric population creating a need for OT services include: developmental disorders, sensory regulation or sensory processing deficits, fine motor developmental delays or deficits, autism (Case-Smith, 2005), emotional and behavioral disturbances (Lambert, 2005), among others. In addition, children are seen for every injury, illness or chronic condition that may cause a person of any age to have performance deficits in their daily life and thus benefit from OT services (Case-Smith, 2005).
Acute care hospitals
Inpatient rehabilitation (e.g., Spinal Cord Injuries):People with disabilities have the right and the privilege to live meaningful purposeful lives. When a disability occurs it is sometimes possible to recover – when it is not it is important to learn the skills to adapt capacity and environmental supports to be able to participate. OTs use their knowledge to help both with recovery and adaptation.
Rehabilitation centers (e.g., Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI), Stroke (CVA), Spinal Cord Injuries, Head Injuries)
Skilled nursing facilities: An occupational therapists role in a skilled nursing facility is centered on each client’s individual needs. Many of the skills an OT works on are known as activities of daily living or self-care such as feeding or dressing. OTs can provide equipment to assist with activities or offer expertise in modifying the environment to maximize independence and facilitate independence. Other OT roles include education in adaptive equipment (shower bench), energy conservation, or task simplification (Hofmann, 2008).
Home Health
Outpatient clinics (e.g., Hand Therapy, orthopaedics)
Specialist assessment centres (e.g., Electronic assistive technology, Posture and Mobility services)
Hospices: An occupational therapists common role in hospice care is modifying and preventing. Modifying the demands of the activity to fit with the abilities of the client. The intervention may be directly with the client or with the client and the client’s caregivers. OT can offer the caregivers support an education. Progress is defined as improved quality of life in hospice care. (Hasselkaus, 1998)
Assisted Living Facilities: In an assisted living facility OT services are provided by a home health agency, rehab agency, or a private practice. Medicare and some private insurance plans cover OT services in ALFs. Areas of treatment intervention often include: bathing, dressing, grooming, toileting, mobility, money management, laundry, and community participation. Can treat persons with occupational performance decline or at risk for a decline. Increase quality of life so less residents need the services of a long-term SNF. Special areas include mobility device assessment (scooter), continence training, psychosocial needs and low vision programs (Fagan, 2001).
Productive Aging: An OT practicing in this area would provide skills and services to older adults to maximize independence, participation, and quality of life. Typical issues addressed: Any impairment or condition that would limit their ability to carry out meaningful occupations and tasks that are necessary for daily life. Skills taught include: energy conservation, education in adaptive equipment (such as a shower bench), task simplification, adapting and modifying activities to progress with a client’s changing abilities (Opp Hoffman, 2008), caregiver education and support (AOTA, 2004), safety, social interactions and communication, memory skills training (Glantz & Richman, 2007), mobility device assessment and training (i.e. scooters, wheelchairs, walkers), low vision interventions, continence training, and facilitating performance in basic ADL and IADL (Fagan, 2001).


[edit] Mental health
According to Medicare (2005) guidance, “Only a qualified occupational therapist has the knowledge, training, and experience required to evaluate and, as necessary, re-evaluate a patient’s level of function, determine whether an occupational therapy program could reasonably be expected to improve, restore, or compensate for lost function, and where appropriate, recommend to the physician a plan of treatment.”
According to the American Occupational Therapy Association (AOTA), occupational therapists work with the Mental Health population throughout the life span and across many treatment settings where mental health services and psychiatric rehabilitation are provided (AOTA, 2009). Just as with other clients, the OT facilitates maximum independence in activities of daily living (dressing, grooming, etc) and instrumental activities of daily living (medication management, grocery shopping, etc). According to the American Occupational Therapy Association, OT improves functional capacity and quality of life for people with mental illness in the areas of employment, education, community living, and home and personal care through the use of real life activities in therapy treatments (AOTA, 2005).
Geriatric, Adult, Adolescents, and Children with any kind of mental illness or mental health issues. These conditions include but are not limited to: Schizophrenia, substance abuse, addiction, dementia, Alzheimer’s, mood disorders, personality disorders, psychoses, eating disorders, anxiety disorders (including post-traumatic stress disorder, separation anxiety disorder) (Cara & MacRae, 2005), and reactive attachment disorder (children only) (Lambert, 2005).
Typical issues that are addressed are as follows: Helping people acquire the skills to care for themselves or others including; keeping a schedule, medication management, employment, education, increasing community participation, community access (grocery store, library, bank, etc.), money management skills, engaging in productive activities to fill the day, coping skills, routine building, building social skills, and childcare (Cara & MacRae, 2005).

Areas that Mental Health OT's could work in are as follows:

Mental health inpatient units

Adolescent, adult and older people's acute mental health wards
Adult and older people's rehabilitation wards
Prisons/secure units (Forensic psychiatry)
Psychiatric intensive care unit
Specialist units for Eating Disorders, Learning disabilities


Community based mental health teams

Child and adolescent mental health teams
Adult and older people's community mental health teams
Rehabilitation and recovery and Assertive Outreach community teams
Primary care services in GP practices
Home treatment teams
early psychosis teams
Specialist learning disability, eating disorder community services
Day services
Vocational Services
Dementia & Alzheimer Care: OTs focus on adapting activities as the client progresses through the illness (Hofmann, 2008) OT also works with caregivers to teach them how to grade activities to the client’s ability. Interventions are based on using the client’s strengths to increase their quality of life and their relationships with caregivers. Use of social interactions, communication, memory, safety and self maintenance. (Glantz & Richman, 2007)




[edit] Community
Community based practice involves working with people in their own environment rather than in a hospital setting. It often combines the knowledge and skills related to physical and mental health. It can also involve working with atypical populations such as the homeless or at-risk populations. Examples of community-based practice settings:

Health promotion and lifestyle change: Remaining healthy is the goal of all people in a society, including people with chronic disabling or health conditions. Achieving health requires skills to self-manage conditions that might limit their ability to function in daily life. The occupational therapist helps people acquire these skills (Wilcock, 2005).
Private Practice
Aging in place: Occupational therapists implement environmental modifications in senior housing, assisted living, long-term-care facilities, and homes (Yamkovenko, 2008) Environmental modifications can include rearranging furniture, building ramps, widening doorways, grab bars, special toilet seats, and other safety equipment to use performance capabilities to their fullest (Moyers & Christiansen, 2004).
Low Vision: Occupational therapists help clients use their remaining vision to complete their daily routines with compensation, remediation, disability prevention and health promotion. Compensations or that modifications to the environment may include proper lighting, color contrast, reducing clutter and education on adaptive equipment (Golembiewski, 2004).
Intermediate care services
Driving Centers: Driving is an instrumental activity of daily living and an occupational therapist may evaluate and treat skills needed to drive such as vision, executive function or memory. If a client needs more skilled assessment and training they would refer them to an OT Driver Rehabilitation Specialist which could do on the road assessment, training in adaptive equipment and make more specific recommendations.
Day centres
Schools
Child development centres
People's own homes, carrying out therapy and providing equipment and adaptations
Work and Industry: To be a healthy successful worker there must be a person environment fit between the task, the equipment, and the person’s skills. Occupational therapists work to achieve that fit (Ellexson, 2000; Clinger, Dodson, Maltchev, & Page, 2007). Populations, conditions, and diagnoses: People of working age and ability who have been born with or developed a condition, injury, or illness that compromises their ability to work (Ellexson, 2000; Clinger, Dodson, Maltchev, & Page, 2007). Settings: Return to work programs, large organizations, consultants to large organizations, work hardening programs, work conditioning programs, transitional return to work programs (Ellexson, 2000; Clinger, Dodson, Maltchev, & Page, 2007). Typical issues addressed: assessment of ability to work, interventions to enhancing work performance by means of work hardening, work conditioning, and improvement of ergonomics in the workplace, identification of accommodations necessary to return-to-work following illness or injury, prevention of work related injury, illness, or disability (Ellexson, 2000; Clinger, Dodson, Maltchev, & Page, 2007).
Homeless Shelters
Educational Settings
Refugee Camps[22]


[edit] Occupational therapy approaches
Services typically include:

Teaching new ways of approaching tasks[30]
How to break down activities into achievable components eg sequencing a complex task like cooking a complex meal[30]
Comprehensive home and job site evaluations with adaptation recommendations.
Performance skills assessments and treatment.
Adaptive equipment recommendations and usage training.
Environmental adaptation including provision of equipment or designing adaptations to remove obstacles or make them manageable[30]
Guidance to family members and caregivers.[31]

The use of creative media as therapeutic activity

[edit] Activity analysis
Activity analysis has been defined as a process of dissecting an activity into its component parts and task sequence in order to identify its inherent properties and the skills required for its performance, thus allowing the therapist to evaluate its therapeutic potential[32]

[edit] Therapeutic activity
Occupational therapists use therapeutic activity or therapeutic occupation to improve an individual's occupational performance and increase function in activities of daily living (ADLs).
A core and unique feature of occupational therapy practice is the use of occupation as a therapeutic medium[33]. An occupational therapy core skill as defined by The College of Occupational Therapists (COT) is the use of activity as a therapeutic tool[34].
Occupational therapists have utilized activities, such as crafts, since the profession was founded[35]. The arts and crafts movement in the very early 20th century had ascertained that goal directed activity had a curative effect on the social problems inherent in the newly industrialized societies. The founders of the occupational therapy profession extended this thinking to the treatment of individuals' with mental health problems and as a consequence between 1920 and 1940 much of occupational therapy practice concentrated around the use of crafts as purposeful activities[36]. The emergence of occupational therapy in physical medicine began during World War II and craft activities were utilized to rehabilitate injured soldiers[37]. This method of practice was later termed by Mosey[38] as activity synthesis.
Activity synthesis or occupational synthesis is the core of occupational therapy practice; occupational therapists, in collaboration with clients, design occupational forms to produce a therapeutic occupation or activity, that is meaningful and purposeful to the client[39]. The therapeutic activity or occupation may be used to assess the client’s occupational needs or to achieve a therapeutic goal. The component parts of an activity or occupation are matched with the required occupational performance outcomes. For example, the muscle movements elicited by pottery may address fine motor and gross motor skills to improve shoulder flexion and extension, range of movement and elbow extension and flexion.[40].
Other therapeutic activities or occupations may include cookery activities, such as making a smoothie or a healthy soup. The components of this activity such as planning and following a recipe may address cognitive components of occupational performance such as problem solving, sequencing and learning. Health may be promoted through this occupation, enabling clients to consider healthy eating issues[41]. Occupational therapists may further use therapeutic activities or occupations to assess occupational performance. For example, an occupational therapist may ask a client to make a cup of tea or prepare a simple meal to assess performance in activities of daily living (ADLs). An occupational therapist may use a board or card game to assess cognitive components of occupational performance. This application of therapeutic activity/occupation involves use of the core skills of the occupational therapist, chiefly assessment and problem solving[42].

[edit] Theoretical Frameworks
Occupational Therapists use a number of theoretical frameworks to frame their practice. Note that terminology has differed between scholars. Theoretical bases for framing a human and their occupation being include the following:

[edit] Frames of Reference/Generic models
Frames of reference or generic models are the overarching title given to a collation of compatible knowledge, research and theories that form conceptual practice[43]. More generally they can be defined as "those aspects which influence our perceptions, decisions and practice"[44].
Frames of reference have generally been a precursor to the design of theoretical models of practice. As such, through the development of such models, different terminology exists to define different frames of reference. Some broad terms as defined by Foster[45] include: Developmental, Biomechanical, Learning and Compensatory.

[edit] Approaches/Intervention models
These are the methods of carrying out the Frames of Reference. Again, terminology differs depending on your viewpoint and literature base. Using the above author ([45]), approaches can include the Adaptive (based on the compensatory Frame of Reference),

[edit] Education Requirements in United States
In many countries, occupational therapists are educated at the baccalaureate level, however currently in United States and Canada entry level is at the master’s level. This change occurred in 2004, requiring all occupational therapists who started their educational program after 2004 to continue their education beyond a four-year degree. Currently, six schools in the US offer a clinical doctorate for those who would like to further their education past the Master’s level.
All occupational therapists have a well-rounded knowledge of biomedical, behavioral, environmental and occupational scientists. Occupational therapist base their interventions on the knowledge based on neuroscience, anatomy, applied technology, policy and environmental strategies.
These schools are currently accredited for Master’s level education: http://www.aota.org/Students/Schools/EntryLevelOT/40572.aspx
These schools are currently accredited for Doctoral level education: http://www.aota.org/Students/Schools/EntryLevelOT/Doctoral.aspx

[edit] United States Employment and Earnings
Employment: 	According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, occupational therapists held 99,000 positions in 2006 (2009). States with the most licensed and employed occupational therapists are California, New York, Pennsylvania and Ohio. In 2006, 52.6% of occupational therapists worked in hospitals, early intervention facilities and schools (American Occupational Therapy Association, 2006). The Bureau of Labor statistics reported that 78% of occupational therapists worked full-time in 2006 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2009). In addition, the median number of years of experience for occupational therapists was 13 years (American Occupational Therapy Association, 2006). Occupational therapists can work in many different settings, some examples include: o	Hospitals o	Schools o	Early intervention facilities o	Skilled nursing facilities o	Home health care services o	Outpatient care centers o	Government agencies o	Private practice
The field of occupational therapy is projected to see faster growth than other careers. The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that the number of jobs will grow to 122,000 in 2016 (2009). Areas of occupational therapy that involve helping older adults will see the most growth. This expansion is due to the large need to provide health care services to the aging baby boom generation (American Occupational Therapy Association, n.d.; Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2009). In addition, the area of school-based occupational therapy will see growth as well. In light of a troubled economy the future of occupational therapy appears to be very promising.
Earnings: According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, in 2006 the average salary was $60,470 for occupational therapists (2009). The average starting entry-level salary for occupational therapists was $46,300 (American Occupational Therapy Association, n.d.). In 2006, the salaries of occupational therapists in the 50% percentile ranged from $50,450 to $73,710 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, n.d.). Salary varies according to the setting and the following represents average salaries for some practice areas: o	Hospitals							$61,610 o	School setting						$54,260 o	Nursing care services					$64,750 o	Home Health care					$67,600 o	Facilities of physical, occupational Speech therapists						$62,290 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2009)
In addition, according to the Work Force Survey conducted by the American Occupational Therapy Association in 2006, average salaries for some other areas include: o	Mental Health						$53,750 o	Academic							$66,000 (American Occupational Therapy Association, 2006)

[edit] Challenges for occupational therapy
A key challenge for occupational therapy is to develop and maintain a definition of its nature and scope. Cara and MacRae (2002) [46] assert that whilst this presents a challenge, it also results in a unique flexibility which allows the discipline to move with the flow of social, cultural and environmental change. This difficulty in definition may be a cause of chronic strain for practitioners [47] and may also contribute to a lack of role definition and subsequent blurring [48].
Recent literature has also called for occupational therapy to address the political nature of who we are and what we do (Kronenberg & Pollard, 2005).

[edit] Occupational therapy and the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF)
The International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) is an outcome measure for health and occupation and illustrates how these components impact one’s function. This relates very closely to the Occupational Therapy Practice Framework as it is stated, “The profession’s core beliefs are in the positive relationship between occupation and health and its view of people as occupational beings” (2008). The ICF is also built into the 2nd edition of the practice framework. Activities and participation examples from the ICF overlap Areas of Occupation, Performance Skills, and Performance Patterns in the framework. The ICF also includes contextual factors (environmental and personal factors) that relate to the context in the framework. In addition, Body functions and structures classified within the ICF help describe the client factors as described in the OT framework (AOTA, 2002).
Further exploration of the relationship between occupational therapy and the components of the ICIDH-2 (revision of the original International Classification of Impairments, Disabilities, and Handicaps (ICIDH); later becoming the ICF) was conducted by McLaughlin Gray (2001). First, the ICF is an international framework and provides an opportunity for the occupational therapy field to become better known across the globe. Second, the ICF provides occupational therapists with a global language to describe their expertise to the larger international health care community. The ICF uses a positive, holistic language emphasizing skills, capacities, and strengths of an individual rather than focusing on one’s deficits and disabilities. This is similar to the outlook of occupational therapists. Third, the ICF includes environmental and personal contextual factors which are incorporated into the theory behind occupational therapy. It is important to take into consideration an individual’s personal, environmental, and occupational factors to develop an effective intervention (Christiansen & Baum, 2005). The last notable application of the ICF to occupational therapy is the recognition of cultural patterns in occupation. Culture has significance on an individual’s activities and participation and it is important to keep this in mind when treating an individual.
Although the ICF can be very useful for occupational therapists, it is noted in the literature that occupational therapists should use specific occupational therapy vocabulary along with the ICF in order to ensure correct communication about specific concepts (Stamm, Cieza, Machold, Smolen, & Stucki, 2006). The ICF might lack certain categories to describe what occupational therapists need to communicate to clients and colleagues. It also may not be possible to exactly match the connotations of the ICF categories to occupational therapy terms. The ICF is not an assessment and specialized occupational therapy vocabulary should not be replaced with ICF terminology. (Haglund & Henriksson, 2003). The ICF is an overarching framework on which to hang current therapy practices.

[edit] See also

Occupational apartheid


[edit] References


^ a b c Townsend, Elizabeth A. and Helene J Polatajko. (2007). Enabling Occupation II: Advancing an Occupational Therapy Vision for Health, Well-Being & Justice Through Occupation. Ottawa: CAOT Publications ACE.
^ Occupational Deprivation: Global Challenge in the New Millennium, Whiteford (2000), British Journal of Occupational Therapy Volume 63, Number 5, pp. 200-204(5)
^ http://www.wfot.org/information.asp
^ AOTA http://www.aota.org
^ Hocking, C (2004). Making a difference: The romance of occupational therapy. South African Journal of Occupational Therapy, 34(2), 3-5.
^ Breines, E (1990). Genesis of occupation: A philosophical model for therapy and theory. Australian Occupational Therapy Journal, 37(1), 45-49.
^ McColl, M A, Law, M., Stewart D., Doubt, L., Pollack, N and Krupa, T (2003). Theoretical basis of occupational therapy (2nd Ed). New Jersey, SLACK Incorporated.
^ Chapparo, C. and Ranka. J. (2000). Clinical reasoning in occupational therapy in Higgs J and Jones M (2000) Clinical reasoning in the health professions. 2nd ed. Oxford, Butterworth Heinemann Ltd.
^ Yerxa, E J (1983). Audacious values: the energy source for occupational therapy practice in G. Kielhofner (1983) Health though occupation: Theory and practice in occupational therapy. Philadelphia, FA Davis.
^ Turner, A. (2002). History and Philosophy of Occupational Therapy in Turner, A., Foster, M. and Johnson, S. (eds) Occupational Therapy and Physical Dysfunction, Principles, Skills and Practice. 5th Edition. Edinburgh, Churchill Livingstone, 3-24..
^ Punwar, A.J. (1994). Philosophy of Occupational Therapy in Occupational Therapy, Principles and practice. 2nd Ed. Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, 7-20.
^ Douglas, F M (2004). Occupational still matters: A tribute to a pioneer. British Journal of Occupational Therapy, 67(6), 239.
^ Whiteford, G. and Fossey, E. (2002). Occupation: The essential nexus between philosophy, theory and practice. Australian Occupational Therapy Journal, 49(1), 1-2.
^ Polatajko, H (2001). The evolution of our occupational perspective: The journey from diversion through therapeutic use to enablement. Canadian Journal of Occupational Therapy, 68(4), 203-207.
^ Mocellin, G. (1988). A perspective on the principles and practice of occupational therapy. Generally they need to eat loads of bananas and chocolate. British Journal of Occupational Therapy, 51(1), 4-7.
^ Mocellin, G. (1995). Occupational therapy: A critical overview, Part 1. British Journal of Occupational Therapy, 58(12), 502-506.
^ Mocellin, G. (1996). Occupational therapy: A critical overview, Part 2. British Journal of Occupational Therapy, 59(1), 11-16.
^ Kielhofner, G. (1997). Conceptual Foundations of Occupational Therapy. 2nd Ed. Philadelphia, F.A.Davis.
^ Hocking, C and Whiteford, G (1995). Multiculturalism in occupational therapy: A time for reflection on core values. Australian Occupational Therapy Journal, 42(4), 172-175.
^ The Person-Environment-Occupation Model, Law et al (1996), Canadian Journal of Occupational Therapy, vol 63 n1 p9-23 Apr 1996
^ Occupational Therapy without borders:learning from the spirit of survivors, Kronenburg et al, Churchill Livingstone 2004
^ a b Occupation for Occupational Therapists, Matthew Molineux, Blackwell Publishing, 2004
^ The Process and Outcomes of a Multimethod needs assessment at a homeless shelter, Finlayson et et al (2002), American Journal of Occupational Therapy
^ Nelson, D., L. (1988)Occupation: Form and Performance. American Journal of Occupational Therapy. 42 (10) pp, 633-641
^ Nelson, D., L. (1996) Therapeutic Occupation: A Definition. American Journal of Occupational Therapy. 50 (10), pp. 775-782
^ Richards, S. (2003) Occupational Therapy: Comment. The Independent
^ Wu, C and Lin, K. (1999) Defining Occupation: A Comparative Analysis. Journal of Occupational Science. 6 (1), pp. 5-12
^ Kramer, P. and Hinojosa, J and Royeen, C. R. (2003) Perspectives in Human Occupation: Participation in Life. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins
^ Creek 2003 Occupational Therapy Defined as a Complex Intervention, London COT
^ a b c The Independent Thursday 26th June 2003 Comment
^ American Occupational Therapy Association, Inc. (2005).
^ Creek 2003 Occupational Therapy defined as a complex intervention. London. COT
^ Golledge, J. (1998) Distinguishing between Occupation, Purposeful Activity and Activity, Part 2: Why is the Distinction Important? British Journal of Occupational Therapy, 61(4), pp.157-160.
^ COT (2006) COT/BAOT Briefings: Definitions and Core Skills for Occupational Therapists. London: College of Occupational Therapists.
^ Griffiths, S. and Corr, S. (2007) The Use of Creative Activities with People with Mental Health Problems: a Survey of Occupational Therapists. British Journal of Occupational Therapy, 70(3), pp.107-114.
^ Taylor, E. and Manguno, J. (1990) Use of Treatment Activities in Occupational Therapy. American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 45(4), pp.317-322.
^ Turner, A., Foster, M. and Johnson, S.E. (1997) Occupational Therapy and Physical Dysfunction: Principles, Skills and Practice. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
^ Mosey, A.C. (1985) Psychosocial Components of Occupational Therapy. New York: Raven Press.
^ Nelson, D. (1996) Therapeutic Occupation: A Definition. American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 50(10), pp.775-782.
^ Tubbs, C. and Drake, M. (2007) Crafts and Creative Media in Therapy. 3rd ed. Thorofare: Slack Incorporated.
^ COT (2008) Health promotion in occupational therapy. London: College of Occupational Therapists.
^ Creek, J. (2003) Occupational therapy defined as a complex intervention. London: College of Occupational Therapists.
^ Foster, M. (2002) "Theoretical Frameworks", In: Occupational Therapy and Physical Dysfunction, Eds. Turner, Foster & Johnson.
^ Rogers JC (1983), Eleanor Clarke Slagle Lecture. Clinical Reasoning; the ethics, science and art. American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 37(9):601-616
^ a b Foster, M. (2002), Theoretical Frameworks, in Occupational Therapy and Physical Dysfunction. Churchill Livingstone
^ Psychosocial Occupational Therapy, Cara and MacRae (2002), Thompson Delmar
^ Occupational Therapy in Community Mental Health Teams: a Continuing Dilemma? Role Theory offers an Explanation, Hughes (2001), British Journal of Occupational Therapy, Volume 64, Number 1,pp. 34-40(7)
^ Role overlap between occupational therapy and physiotherapy during in-patient stroke rehabilitation: an exploratory study, Booth and Hewison (2002) Journal of Interprofessional Care





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Occupational therapy 


American Occupational Therapy Association. (2008). Occupational therapy practice framework: Domain and process (2nd ed). American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 62, 625-683.
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2006). 2006 AOTA workforce and compensation survey: Occupational therapy salaries and job opportunities continue to improve. [Electronic Version]. OT Practice, 11(17), 10-12.
American Occupational Therapy Association. (2002). Occupational therapy practice framework: Domain and process. American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 56, 609–639.
American Occupational Therapy Association. (n.d.). Workforce trends in occupational therapy. Retrieved February 26, 2009 from http://www.aota.org /Educate/EdRes/StuRecruit/Working/ 38381.aspx

AOTA, 2009. The American Occupational Therapy Association. Retrieved March 24, 2009 from http://www.aota.org/Practitioners/PracticeAreas.aspx.


AOTA, 2004. “Occupational Therapy and hospice care”. AOTA Official Documents (web page). Retrieved March 30, 2009 from http://www.aota.org/Practitioners/Official.aspx.


Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Outlook Handbook, 2008-09 Edition, Occupational Therapists, on the Internet at http://www.bls.gov/oco/ocos078.htm (visited July 11, 2008).


Baum C., & Christiansen, C., (1997), The occupational therapy context: Philosophy - Principles - Practice. In C. Christiansen & C. Baum (Eds.), Occupational Therapy: Enabling Function and Well Being. p. 36. Thorofare, NJ: SLACK
Bing, R.K. (1981) Occupational therapy revisited: A paraphrastic journey. American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 35(8):499-518.

Case-Smith, J. (2005). Occupational Therapy for Children. St. Louis: Elsevier.
Cara, E. & MacRae, A. (2005). Psychosocial Occupational Therapy. Canada: Thompson Delmar Learning.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. (2005). Medicare benefit policy manual (CMS Publication No. 100-02). Practice of occupational therapy, Chapter 15, Sec. 230.2.
Christiansen, C.H., & Baum, C.M. (2005). Occupational therapy: performance, participation, and well-being. New Jersey: Slack Inc.
Clinger, J., Dodson, M., Maltchev, K., Page, J. (2007). OT Services in Work Rehabilitation. Work and Industry SIS: American Occupational Therapy 	Association. Retrieved: 2/3/09
Ellexson, M. (2000). Blueprint for ergonomics. Work, 15(2), 107–112.
Fagan, L.A., (2001). OTs role in assisted living facility. OT Practice Online. Retrieved http://www.aota.org/Pubs/OTP/1997-2007/Features/2001/f-021901.aspx
Lambert, W. L. (2005). Mental health of children. In Cara, E. & MacRae, A. Psychosocial Occupational Therapy: A Clinical Practice, 2nd Edition. New York: Thompson Delmar Learning.

Low, J. (1992). The reconstruction aides. American Journal of Occupational Therapy. Jan;46(1):38-43,
Meyer, A. (1922). The philosophy of occupation therapy. Archives of Occupational Therapy, 1, 1-10.

Buchanan, M. (1941). "letter " Journal of Occupational Therapy 3(2): 12.
Glantz, C. & Richman, N. (2007). Occupation-based, ability-centered care for people with dementia. [Electronic Version]. OT Practice, 12(2), 10-16.
Golembiewski, D., (2004). Living with low vision. In C.H. Chrisitiansen & K.M. Matuska (Eds.) Ways of Living: Adaptive Strategies for Special Needs, (pp. 359-382) Bethesda, MD: AOTA Press.
Haglund, L., & Henriksson, C. (2003). Concepts in occupational therapy. Occupational Therapy International, 10, 253-268.
Hasselkus, B. R., & Jacques, N. D. (1998). Occupational therapy and hospice. American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 52,872–873.
Hobcroft, N. (1949). "Life in the Occupational Therapy Department at Porirua." New Zealand Occupational therapy Newsletter Number Two. (May).
Hofmann, A.O., (2008 June 24). Living life to its fullest: occupational therapy in skilled nursing facility. Retrieved February 2009, from http://www.aota.org/News/Consumer/42008.aspx
McLaughlin Gray, J. (2001). Discussion of the ICIDH-2 in relation to occupational therapy and occupational science. Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy, 8, 19-30.
Moyers, P.A. & Christiansen, C.H., (2004). Planning intervention. In C.H. Christiansen & K.M. Matuska (Eds.) Ways of Living: Adaptive Strategies for Special Needs, (pp.78) Bethesda, MD: AOTA Press.
New Zealand Occupational Therapy Registration Board (1950). "Minutes of the New Zealand Occupational Therapy Registration Board." 20 June.
New Zealand Occupational Therapy Registration Board (1970b 17 July). "Minutes of the New Zealand Occupational Therapy Registration Board."
New Zealand Registered Occupational Therapists Association (1949). "AGM Minutes."
NZJOT (1996). New Zealand Journal of Occupational Therapy 47(1): 19.
NZNJ (1940). "Editorial " New Zealand Nursing Journal 33(11): 346.
Opp Hoffman, A. (2008). “Living life to its fullest: Occupational therapy in skilled nursing facilities.” Retrieved March 30, 2009 from http://www.aota.org/News/Consumer/42008.aspx.
Packer, T., & Stickney, Jan (1991). "Advanced Diploma in Occupational Therapy: A comparison of therapists before and after." Journal of New Zealand Association of Occupational Therapists Inc. 42(1): 3-7.
Quiroga, V. A. M. (1995). Occupational Therapy: The First 30 Years, 1900-1930. Bethesda, Maryland: American Occupational Therapy Association, Inc.
Skilton, H. (1981). Work for your life - the story of the beginning and early years of occupational therapy in New Zealand. Hamilton, Hudlo Printers.
Stamm, T.A., Cieza, A., Machold, K., Smolen, J.S., & Stucki, G. (2006). Exploration of the link between conceptual occupational therapy models and the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health. Australian Occupational Therapy Journal, 53, 9-17.
Wilcock, A. A. (2005). Relationship of occupations to health and well-being. In C.H. Christiansen, C. M. Baum, and J. Bass-Haugen (Eds.), Occupational therapy: Performance, participation, and well-being (3rd ed.). Thorofare, NJ: SLACK Incorporated.
Wilson, L. H. (2004). Role differentiation in a professionalising occupation: the case of occupational therapy, New Zealand Department of Management Dunedin University of Otago PhD.
Yamkovenko, S., (2008, December 4). Occupational therapy: helping america age in place. Retrieved February 2009, from http://www.aota.org/News/Centennial/40313/Aging/Aging-in-Place.aspx









v • d • e

Allied health professions






Athletic training · Audiology · Chiropractic · Dental hygiene · Dietetics · Electrocardiographic technicians · Emergency medical services · Hemodialysis technicians · Massage therapy · Medical assistants · Medical physics · Medical technologist · Medical transcription · Music therapy · Nuclear medicine technology · Nutrition · Occupational therapy · Optometry · Pharmacy · Phlebotomy · Orthotics/Prosthetics · Physical therapy · Psychology · Public health · Radiation therapy · Radiography · Radiologic technologist · Respiratory therapy · Speech and language pathology · Social work · Ultrasonography






Ucoslaviskibutonhoetuyi



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Occupational_therapy"
Categories: Occupational therapy | Special education | Rehabilitation medicine | Therapy | Robot-aided rehabilitationHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations | Articles to be merged since November 2008 | All articles to be merged 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


বাংলা
Català
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Français
Hrvatski
Italiano
עברית
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 02:40.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
