













List of German expressions in English - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "List_of_German_expressions_in_English";
		var wgTitle = "List of German expressions in English";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "217284";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280963997;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); List of German expressions in English

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please improve this article if you can. (August 2007)




This is an incomplete list, which may never be able to satisfy certain standards for completeness. You can help by expanding it with sourced additions.


This is a list of German expressions used in English; some relatively common (e.g. hamburger), most comparatively rare. In many cases, the German borrowing in English has assumed a meaning substantially different from its German forebear.
English and German both descended from the West Germanic language, though their relationship has been obscured by the great influx of Norman French words to English as a consequence of the Norman Conquest in 1066, and the second Germanic sound shift. In recent years, however, many English words have been borrowed directly from German. Typically, English spellings of German loanwords suppress any umlauts (the superscript, double-dot diacritic in Ä, Ö, Ü, ä, ö and ü) of the original word or replace the umlaut letters with Ae, Oe, Ue, ae, oe, ue, respectively (influenced by Latin: æ, œ.)
German words have been incorporated into English usage for many reasons: common cultural artefacts, especially foods, have spread to English-speaking nations and often are identified either by their original German names or by German-sounding English names; the history of academic excellence of the German-speaking nations in science, scholarship, and classical music has led to the academic adoption of much German for use in English context; discussion of German history and culture requires knowing German words. Lastly, some German words are used simply to a fictionalise an English narrative passage, implying that the subject expressed is in German, i.e. using Frau, Reich, and so on, although sometimes usage of German words holds no German implication, as in doppelgänger or angst.
As languages, English and German descend from the common ancestor language West Germanic and further back to Proto-Germanic; because of this, some English words are identical to their German lexical counterparts, either in the spelling (Hand, Sand, Finger) or in the pronunciation (Fish = Fisch, Mouse = Maus), or both (Arm, Ring); these are excluded from this words list.




Contents


1 German terms commonly used in English

1.1 Food and drink
1.2 Sports and recreation
1.3 Other aspects of everyday life


2 German terms common in English academic context

2.1 Academia
2.2 Architecture
2.3 Arts

2.3.1 Music

2.3.1.1 Meanings of German band names
2.3.1.2 Genres
2.3.1.3 Selected works in classical music
2.3.1.4 Carols and hymns
2.3.1.5 Modern songs


2.3.2 Theatre
2.3.3 Typography


2.4 Biology
2.5 Chess
2.6 Economics
2.7 Geography
2.8 Geology
2.9 History

2.9.1 The Third Reich
2.9.2 Other historical periods


2.10 Military terms
2.11 Linguistics
2.12 Literature
2.13 Mathematics and formal logic
2.14 Medicine
2.15 Philosophy
2.16 Physical sciences
2.17 Politics
2.18 Psychology
2.19 Sociology
2.20 Theology


3 German terms mostly used for literary effect
4 German terms rarely used in English
5 Quotations
6 See also
7 References
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] German terms commonly used in English
The German words of this category will easily be recognized by many English speakers; they are commonly used in English contexts. Some, such as wurst or pumpernickel, still retain German connotations, while others, such as lager and hamburger, retain none. Not every word is recognizable outside its relevant context.

[edit] Food and drink

Berliner Weisse, Sour beer infused with fruit syrup often found in American German restaurants
Biergarten, open–air drinking establishment
Bratwurst (sometimes abbv. brat), type of sausage
Delikatessen, specialty small food store and also fine (specialty) food in Canada
Hamburger, sandwich with a meat patty and garnishments
Hasenpfeffer, type of rabbit (or hare) stew
Hefeweizen, Wheat beer popular in the Northwest United States
Frankfurter, pork sausage
Kirschwasser, spirit drink made from cherries
Kohlrabi, type of cabbage
Kraut, cabbage; derisive term for Germans
Lager, beer made with bottom-fermenting yeast and stored for some time before serving
Leberwurst, pork liver sausage
Muesli, breakfast cereal (Swiss German diminutive of "mues"; related to English "mush".)
Pilsener (or Pils, Pilsner), pale lager beer
Bretzel, flour and yeast based pastry
Pumpernickel, type of sourdough rye bread, strongly flavoured, dense, and dark in colour
Rollmops, rolled, pickled herring fillet
Sauerkraut, fermented cabbage
Schnaps, distilled beverage
Spritzer, chilled drink from white wine and soda water
Stein, large drinking mug, usually for beer (from "Steingut" = earthenware, referencing the mug material)
Strudel (e. g. Apfelstrudel), a filled pastry
Wiener, hot dog (from "Wiener Würstchen" = sausage from vienna)
Wiener schnitzel, crumbed veal cutlet
Wurst, sausage, cold cuts
Zwieback, a "twice baked" bread; variants: German hard biscuits; Mennonite double yeast roll.


[edit] Sports and recreation

Abseil (German spelling: sich abseilen, a reflexive verb, to rope (seil) oneself (sich) down (ab)) is also commonly called "rappelling" in America, "abseiling" in Australia, "roping (down)" in various English settings, and "snapling" by Israelis.
Blitz, taken from Blitzkrieg (lightning war). It is a team defensive play in American or Canadian football in which the defense sends more players than the offense can block.
Karabiner, snaplink, a metal loop with a sprung or screwed gate, used in climbing and mountaineering; modern short form/derivation of the older word 'Karabinerhaken'; translates to 'riflehook'. The German word can also mean Carbine.
Fahrvergnügen meaning "driving pleasure"; originally, the word was introduced in a Volkswagen advertising campaign in the U.S., one tag line was: "Are we having Fahrvergnügen yet?").
Kletterschuh, climbing shoe (mountaineering)
Rucksack (more commonly called a backpack in U.S. English)
Schuss, literally: shot (ski) down a slope at high speed
Turnverein, a gymnastics club or society
Volksmarsch / Volkssport, non-competitive fitness walking
Volkswanderung
Wunderbar


[edit] Other aspects of everyday life

–bahn as a suffix, e.g. Infobahn, after Autobahn
Blucher, a half-boot named after Prussian General Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher
Dachshund, literally badger dog, a dog breed
Doberman Pinscher, a dog breed
Doppelgänger, "double-goer"; also spelled in English as doppelganger
Dreck, literally dirt or smut, but now means trashy, awful (through Yiddish, OED s.v.)
Dummkopf, dumm=dumb/not intelligent + Kopf=head; a stupid, ignorant person
Ersatz, replacement
Fest, festival
Flak, Flugabwehrkanone, literally: air-defence cannon, for anti-aircraft artillery or their shells, also used in flak jacket; or in the figurative sense: "drawing flak" = being heavily criticized
Gesundheit, literally: health; an exclamation used in place of "bless you!" after someone has sneezed
Kaffeeklatsch, afternoon meeting where people (most times referring to women) chitchat while drinking coffee or tea; Kaffee = coffee, Klatsch = gossip, klatschen = chitchatting
kaput (German spelling: kaputt), out-of-order
Kindergarten, children’s garden, day-care centre, playschool, preschool
Kitsch, cheap, sentimental, gaudy items of popular culture
Kraut, a derogatory term for a German
Lebensraum, space to live
Meister, Master, also as a suffix: –meister
Nazi, short form for National Socialist
Neanderthal (modern German spelling: Neandertal), of, from, and or pertaining to the "Neander Valley", site near Düsseldorf where early Homo neanderthalensis fossils were found
Oktoberfest, Bavarian Folk Festival held annually in Munich during late September and early October
Poltergeist, mischievous, noisy ghost; cases of haunting, involving spontaneous psychokinesis
Rottweiler, breed of dog
Schadenfreude, delight at the misfortune of others
Schnauzer, breed of dog
Spitz, a breed of dog
uber, über, over; used to indicate that something or someone is of better or superior magnitude, e.g. Übermensch
Ur– (German prefix), original or prototypical; e.g. Ur–feminist, Ursprache, Urtext
verboten, prohibited, forbidden
Volkswagen, brand of automobile
Wanderlust, the yearning to travel
Weltanschauung, world view
Wunderkind, wonder child, a child prodigy
Zeitgeist, spirit of the time
Zeppelin, type of airship named after its inventor


[edit] German terms common in English academic context
German terms sometimes appear in English academic disciplines, e.g. history, psychology, philosophy, music, and the physical sciences; laypeople in a given field may or may not be familiar with a given German term.

[edit] Academia

Ansatz, basic approach
Festschrift, book prepared by colleagues to honor a scholar, traditionally presented sixty years after the first major work by the individual being thus honored.
Leitfaden, guidelines
Methodenstreit, disagreement on methodology
Privatdozent


[edit] Architecture

Jugendstil
Plattenbau
Biedermeier


[edit] Arts

Gesamtkunstwerk, "the whole of a work of art", also "total work of art" or "complete artwork"
Gestalt "The Whole is greater than the sum of the parts"


[edit] Music

Fach, method of classifying singers, primarily opera singers, by the range, weight, and color of their voices
Flugelhorn (German spelling: Flügelhorn), a type of brass musical instrument
Glockenspiel, a percussion instrument
Heldentenor, "heroic tenor"
Hammerklavier, "hammer-keyboard", an archaic term for piano or the name of a specific kind of piano; most commonly used in English to refer to Beethoven's Hammerklavier Sonata
Kapellmeister, "music director"
Leitmotif (German spelling: Leitmotiv) a musical phrase that associates with a specific person, thing, or idea
Lied (pronounced "leet"), "song"; specifically in English, "art song"
Lieder ohne Worte, "songs without words"
Liederkranz, male singing club[1]
Liedermacher, Singer-songwriter
Meistersinger, Master-singer
Minnesinger (German spelling: Minnesänger), "Love poet" or minstrel
Schlager, "a hit" (German "schlagen", to hit or beat)
Schuhplattler, a regional dance from Upper Bavaria and Austria
Singspiel, German musical drama with spoken dialogue
Sitzprobe, rehearsal of a musical stage work where singers are sitting and without costumes
Sprechgesang, form of musical delivery between speech and singing
Sturm und Drang, "storm and stress", a brief esthetic movement in German literature, just before Weimar Classicism
Urtext, "original text (of the composer)"
Volksmusik, traditional German music
Walzer (Waltz)


[edit] Meanings of German band names

2raumwohnung = 2 room apartment
Böhse Onkelz = this is the correct but idiosyncratic spelling of the name of the German band (the correct plural would be "Onkel" without the z or an s, and "böse" for the correct German word for 'evil') "evil uncles," a term used in German as a euphemism for child molesters. The peculiar spelling of the band is intended to "harden" the appearance of the name (h in this context amplifies the ö; z is pronounced ts in German, and sounds sharper than s). The umlaut over the o in Böhse is not a heavy metal umlaut.
Deichkind = dike (or levee) child
Deutsch-Amerikanische Freundschaft (or D.A.F.) = German-American Friendship
Die Ärzte = the (medical) doctors, a German Punkrock band.
Die Fantastischen Vier = the fantastic four
Die Sterne = the stars (celestial body)
Die Toten Hosen = literally the dead trousers. A slang expression for a boring place to be (phrase: "Hier ist total tote Hose.") (commonly used in the northern parts of Germany), it can also refer to impotence.
Dschinghis Khan = The German spelling of Genghis Khan.
Einstürzende Neubauten = "collapsing new buildings". For the band this evokes the image of buildings built during the postwar era, which were very hastily erected, hence supposedly prone to collapse.
Eisbrecher = Ice breaker
Erste Allgemeine Verunsicherung = "First Public/General Uncertainty/Un-Insurance"
Fettes Brot = literally fat bread, but "fett" is also a Slang expression for cool
Freundeskreis = circle of friends
Juli = July.
Kettcar = the trademark name of a line of toy cars propelled by pedals and a chain. The name is a play on the name of the firm that produces the cars, Kettler, as well as the word for "chain", Kette.
Klee = not only the painter Paul Klee, but also German for clover.
KMFDM = "Kein Mehrheit Für Die Mitleid" [sic] (literally "no majority for the pity," which is a grammatically incorrect "headline clipping" style rearrangement of "Kein Mitleid für die Mehrheit" or "no pity for the masses.")
Kraftwerk = power plant
Massive Töne = massive sounds
Neu! = new!
Rammstein = "ramming stone" (literal) or "battering ram" (figurative), does not refer to the Ramstein airshow disaster. Some translate it as "[stone] hammerhead"
Rosenstolz = "pride of roses"
Silbermond = literally silver moon. A German Popband.
Virginia Jetzt! = Virginia now!
Wir sind Helden = we are heroes


[edit] Genres

Romantische Oper: genre of early nineteenth-century German opera
Krautrock: "Kraut (= cabbage) rock". A German-like English name for a variety of German rock music.
Neue Deutsche Welle (NDW): "New German Wave". A genre of German music originally derived from punk rock and New Wave music.


[edit] Selected works in classical music

Johann Sebastian Bach's Das wohltemperierte Klavier (Well-Tempered Clavier); Jesus bleibet meine Freude (Jesu, Joy of Man's Desiring)
Brahms's Schicksalslied (Song of Destiny)
Kreisler's Liebesleid (Pain of Love), Liebesfreud (Joy of Love)
Liszt's Liebesträume (Dreams of Love)
Mozart's Eine kleine Nachtmusik (A Little Night Music); Die Zauberflöte (The Magic Flute)
Gustav Mahler's Kindertotenlieder (Songs on the Death of Children)
Schubert's Winterreise (Winter Journey)
Schumann's Dichterliebe (The Poet's Love)
Richard Strauss's Der Rosenkavalier (Cavalier of the Rose); Also sprach Zarathustra (Thus Spoke Zarathustra); "Vier letzte Lieder" (Four last songs)
Johann Strauss II's Die Fledermaus (The Bat); An der Schönen Blauen Donau (On The Beautiful Blue Danube)
Richard Wagner's Die Walküre (The Valkyrie); Götterdämmerung (Twilight of the Gods); both from his opera cycle "Der Ring des Nibelungen" (The Ring of the Nibelung)


[edit] Carols and hymns

Stille Nacht: "Silent Night"
O Tannenbaum: "O Christmas Tree"


[edit] Modern songs

99 Luftballons: "99 Balloons" (English title: "99 Red Balloons") by Nena


[edit] Theatre

Verfremdungseffekt


[edit] Typography

Fraktur, a style of blackletter typeface


[edit] Biology

Anlage
Bauplan
Bereitschaftspotential
Einkorn
Kraken


[edit] Chess

Fingerfehler: slip of the finger
Luft
Zeitnot
Zugzwang
Zwischenzug


[edit] Economics

Freigeld
Freiwirtschaft
K In economics, the letter K — from the German word "Kapital" — is used to denote Capital[2][3][4][5]
Lumpenproletariat
Takt
Wirtschaftswunder



[edit] Geography

Hinterland
Inselberg
Mitteleuropa
Thalweg (written "Talweg" in Germany today)


[edit] Geology

Gneiss (German Gneis)
Graben
Karst
Dreikanter

Minerals including:

Quartz (German Quarz)
Feldspar (German Feldspat)
Meerschaum


[edit] History
(Some terms are listed in multiple categories if they are important to each.)

[edit] The Third Reich
See Glossary of the Weimar Republic and Glossary of the Third Reich.

[edit] Other historical periods

Junker
Kaiser, "emperor" (derived from the title "Caesar")
Kulturkampf, literally the 'struggle for culture'; Bismarck's campaign for secularity which mostly went against Catholics in the newly formed German state, ostensibly a result of Bismarck's suspicion of Catholic loyalty
Landflucht
Ostflucht
Ostpolitik
Ostalgie (nostalgia for the former Eastern Bloc, specifically for the DDR)
Realpolitik (Political science: "real politics"); usually implies the way politics really works, i.e. via the influence of power and money, rather than a principled approach that the public might expect to be aligned with a party's or nation's values, or rather than a political party's given interpretation.
Reichstag (Imperial Diet; see Reichstag (building) and Reichstag (institution))
Sammlungspolitik
Völkerschlacht — the Battle of Nations
Völkerwanderung — the Migration (and Invasions) of the Germanic peoples in the 4th cent.
Weltpolitik — the politics of global domination; contemporarily, "the current climate in global politics".
Biedermeier, era in early 19th century Germany


[edit] Military terms

Blitzkrieg, Lightning war. Phrase invented by a Spanish journalist to describe mobile combined arms methods used by Nazis in 1939–1940.
Flak (Flugabwehrkanone), anti-aircraft gun (for derived meanings see under Other aspects of everyday life)
Fliegerhorst, another word for a military airport
Karabiner type of a gun. For the climbing hardware, see carabiner above
Kriegsspiel, in English also written "Kriegspiel", war game (different meanings)
Luftwaffe, air force
Panzer refers to tanks and other armoured vehicles, or formations of such vehicles
Panzerfaust, tank fist anti-tank weapon, a small recoilless gun.
Strafe, punishment
U-Boot (abbreviated form of Unterseeboot — submarine, but commonly called U-Boot in Germany as well)
Vernichtungsgedanke (thought of annihilation)


[edit] Linguistics

Ablaut
Abstandsprache
Aktionsart
Ausbausprache
Dachsprache
Dreimorengesetz, "three-mora law", the rule for placing stress in Latin
Grenzsignal, "boundary signal"
Loanword (ironically not a loanword but rather a calque from German Lehnwort)
Leitmotiv, a recurring theme
Sitz im Leben (Biblical linguistics mainly; the study of Pragmatics has a similar approach)
Sprachbund, "language union", a group of languages that have become similar because of geographical proximity
Sprachgefühl, the intuitive sense of what is appropriate in a language
Sprachraum
Suffixaufnahme
Umlaut
Urheimat
Ursprache, "proto-language"
Wanderwort


[edit] Literature

Bildungsroman
Künstlerroman
Sturm und Drang, an 18th century literary movement; "storm and stress" in English, although the literal translation is closer to "storm and urge".
Urtext, "original text"
Vorlage, original or mastercopy of a text on which derivates are based
Wahlverwandtschaft (pronounced with a v) (from Goethe's Die Wahlverwandtschaften)
Q, abbreviation for Quelle ("source"), a postulated lost document in Biblical criticism


[edit] Mathematics and formal logic

Ansatz (lit. "set down," roughly equivalent to "approach" or "where to begin", a starting assumption)
"Eigen-" in composita such as eigenfunction, eigenvector, eigenvalue, eigenform; in English "self-" or "own-".
Entscheidungsproblem
Grossencharakter (German spelling: Größencharakter)
Hilbert's Nullstellensatz (Without apostrophe in German)
Ideal (Originally "ideale Zahlen", defined by Ernst Kummer)
Kernel (ger.: Kern, translated as core)
Krull's Hauptidealsatz (Without apostrophe in German)
Möbius band (ger.: Möbiusband)
quadratfrei
Stützgerade
Vierergruppe (also known as Klein four-group)
"Neben-" in composita such as Nebentype
 from (ganze) Zahlen ((whole) numbers), the integers


[edit] Medicine

Kernicterus (German spelling: Kernikterus)
Mittelschmerz ("middle pain", used to refer to ovulation pain)
Rinderpest
Spinnbarkeit
Witzelsucht


[edit] Philosophy

An sich, in itself
Dasein
Ding an sich, thing in itself from Kant
Geist, mind, spirit or ghost
Gott ist tot!, a popular phrase from Nietzsche; more commonly rendered "God is dead!" in English.
Übermensch, also from Nietzsche; the ideal of a Superhuman or Overman.
Weltanschauung, Worldview or View of the world
Weltschmerz, World-weariness/World-pain, angst; despair with the World (often used ironically in German)
Wertfreiheit, Freedom from value judgements; ethical neutrality (in a post-modernistic philosophy sense)
Wille zur Macht, a central concept of Nietzsche's philosophy; it means "the Will to Power."


[edit] Physical sciences

Ansatz, an assumption for a function that is not based on an underlying theory
Aufbau principle (physical chemistry)
Bauplan, body plan of animals
Bremsstrahlung
Entgegen and its opposite zusammen (organic chemistry)
Föhn, also foehn, a warm wind which sometimes appears on the northern side of the alps in south Germany and Austria.
Gedanken experiment (German spelling: Gedankenexperiment; more commonly referred to as a "thought experiment" in English.)
Gegenschein
Gerade and its opposite ungerade (quantum mechanics)
Heiligenschein
Hohlraum, a radiation cavity used in thermonuclear weapons design
Lagerstätten, repositories
Mischmetall, alloy.
Rocks and minerals like Quartz (German spelling: Quarz), Gneiss and Feldspar (originally "Gneis" respectively "Feldspat"), Meerschaum
Reststrahlen (residual rays)
Schiefspiegler, special type of telescope
Sollbruchstelle, predetermined breaking point
Spiegeleisen
Umpolung (organic chemistry)
Vierbein, and variations such as vielbein
Zitterbewegung
Zwitterion


[edit] Politics

Machtpolitik, power politics
Putsch, overthrow of those in power by a small group, coup d'etat. (Although commonly understood and used in contemporary High German, too, the word putsch originates from Swiss German and is etymologically related to English "push".)
Realpolitik, "politics of reality": foreign politics based on practical concerns rather than ideology or ethics.
Rechtsstaat, concept of a state based on law and human rights
Berufsverbot
Vergangenheitsbewältigung


[edit] Psychology

Angst, feeling of fear, but more deeply and without concrete object.


(Many think the meaning is much more specific in English and the German Angst equals "fear". Yet, this is not true, as the German Furcht means fear. The difference is that Furcht is provoked by a specific object or occurrence, while Angst is a more general state of being that does not need to be initiated by anything concrete. It can happen autonomously, e. g. influenced by prior experience of Furcht without reason. Angst is more appropriately equated to the English concept of "anxiety.")


Sorge, a state of worry, but (like Angst) in a less concrete, more general sense, worry about the world, one's future, etc.
Gestalt (psychology); much narrower meaning than in German, where it is a generic word with meanings like shape, form, likeness, figure
Schadenfreude, gloating, a malicious satisfaction obtained from the misfortunes of others
Umwelt, environment
Zeitgeber (lit. time-giver), something that resets the circadian clock found in the Suprachiasmatic nucleus
Weltschmerz, world-pain or world-weariness
Wunderkind, child prodigy


[edit] Sociology

Gemeinschaft, community
Gesellschaft, society
Verstehen, understanding
Weltanschauung, world view
Zeitgeist, spirit of the times or age


[edit] Theology

Heilsgeschichte (salvation history, God's positive saving actions throughout history)
Sitz im Leben (setting in life, context)


[edit] German terms mostly used for literary effect
There are a few terms which are recognised by many English speakers but are usually only used to deliberately evoke a German context:

Autobahn — particularly common in British English and American English referring specifically to German motorways which have no general speed limit.
Achtung — Literally, "attention" in English.
Frau and Fräulein — Woman and young woman or girl, respectively in English. Indicating marital state, with Frau — Mrs. and Fräulein — Ms.; in Germany, however, the diminutive Fräulein lapsed from common usage in the late 1960s. Regardless of marital status, a woman is now commonly referred to as Frau, and Fräulein has come to be perceived as insulting.
Führer (umlaut is usually dropped in English) — always used in English to denote Hitler or to connote a Fascistic leader — never used, as is possible in German, simply and unironically to denote a (non-Fascist) leader or guide, (i.e. Bergführer: mountain guide, Stadtführer: city guide (book), Führerschein: driving licence, Flugzeugführer: Pilot in command, etc.)
Gott mit uns, (in German means "God be with us"), the motto of the Prussian king, it was used as a morale slogan amongst soldiers in both World Wars. It was bastardized as "Got mittens" by American and British soldiers, and is usually used nowadays, because of the German defeat in both wars, derisively to mean that wars are not won on religious grounds.
Hände hoch — hands up
Herr — evokes German context; In modern German either the equivalent of Mr./Mister, used to directly address an adult male person or used in the of "master" over something or someone. (ex.: Sein eigener Herr sein: to be his own master) Derived from the adjective hehr, meaning "honourable" or "senior", it was historically a title noblemen were entitled to, equivalent to the english word Lord. (ex.: Herr der Fliegen is the German title of Lord of the Flies) In a religious environment used to denote God, there in a colloquial context often - and especially among Catholics - contracted into Herrgott (Lord-God).
Lederhosen (Singular Lederhose in German denotes one pair of leather short pants or trousers. The original Bavarian word is Lederhosn, which is both singular and plural.)
Leitmotif (German spelling: Leitmotiv) Any sort of recurring theme, whether in music, literature, or the life of a fictional character or a real person.
Meister — used as a suffix to mean expert (Maurermeister), or master; in Germany it means also champion in sports (Weltmeister, Europameister, Landesmeister)
Nein — no
Raus — meaning Out! — shortened (colloquial) (depending on where the speaker is, if on the inside "get out!" = hinaus, if on the outside "come out!" = heraus). It is the imperative form of the german verb herauskommen (coming out (of a room/house/etc.) as in the imperative "komm' raus"!). [6]
Reich — from the Middle High German "rich", as a noun it means "empire" and "realm", which may still be seen in the English word "bishopric". To English speakers, Reich does not denote its literal meanings, "empire" or "rich", but strongly connotes Nazism and is often used to suggest Fascism or authoritarianism, e.g., "Herr Reichsminister" used as a title for a disliked politician.'
Ja — yes
Jawohl a German term that connotes an emphatic yes — "Yes, Indeed!" in English. It is often equated to "yes sir" in Anglo-American military films, since it is also a term typically used as an acknowledgement for military commands in the German military.
Schnell! — Quick! or Quickly!
Kommandant — commander (in the sense of person in command or Commanding officer, regardless of military rank), used often in the military in general (Standortkommandant: Base commander), on battleships and U-Boats (Schiffskommandant or U-Boot-Kommandant), sometimes used on civilian ships and aircraft.
Schweinhund (German spelling: Schweinehund) — literally: Schwein = pig, Hund = dog, vulgarism like in der verdammte Schweinehund (the damned pig-dog). But also used to describe the lack of motivation (for example to quit a bad habit) Den inneren Schweinehund bekämpfen. = to battle the inner pig-dog.


[edit] German terms rarely used in English
This is the unsorted, original list. If a term is common in a particular academic discipline, and there is no more commonly used English equivalent, then please move it to the list above.

Aha-Erlebnis literally "aha experience" eg "Eureka".
Besserwisser[7]
Fahrvergnugen (German spelling: Fahrvergnügen, literally pleasure of driving. Coined for a Volkswagen advertising campaign; caused widespread puzzlement in America when it was used in television commercials with no explanation.)
Gastarbeiter — a German "guest worker" or foreign-born worker
Kobold — a small mischievous fairy creature, traditionally translated as "Goblin", "Hobgoblin, and "Imp"; the roleplaying game Dungeons & Dragons has included reptilian Kobolds (as well as creatures called "Goblins", "Imps" and "Hobgoblins" in completely separate forms) as part of the bestiary for a number of editions, including the current edition, D&D 4th Edition. Kobold is also the origin of the name of the metal cobalt.
Schmutz (smut, dirt, filth). This term is, however, particularly popular in New York, reflecting the influence of the Yiddish language.
... über alles (originally "Deutschland über alles" (this sentence was meant originally to propagate a united Germany instead of small separated German Territories only); now used by extension in other cases, as in the Dead Kennedys song California Über Alles). This part (or rather, the whole first stanza) of the Deutschlandlied (Song of the Germans) is not part of the national anthem today, as it is thought to have been used to propagate the attitude of racial and national superiority in Nazi Germany, as in the phrase "Germany over all".
Vorsprung durch Technik ('headstart through technology'): used in an advertising campaign by Audi, to suggest technical excellence
Zweihander (German spelling: Zweihänder)


[edit] Quotations
Many famous English quotations are translations from German[citation needed]. On rare occasions an author will quote the original German as a sign of erudition.

Muss es sein? Es muss sein!: "Must it be? It must be!" —Beethoven
Der Krieg ist eine bloße Fortsetzung der Politik mit anderen Mitteln: "War is politics by other means" (literally: "War is a mere continuation of politics by other means") — Clausewitz
Ein Gespenst geht um in Europa — das Gespenst des Kommunismus: "A spectre is haunting Europe — the spectre of communism" — the Communist Manifesto
Proletarier aller Länder, vereinigt euch!: "Workers of the world, unite!" — the Communist Manifesto
Gott würfelt nicht: "God does not play dice" — Einstein
Raffiniert ist der Herrgott, aber boshaft ist er nicht: "Subtle is the Lord, but malicious He is not" — Einstein
Wir müssen wissen, wir werden wissen: "We must know, we will know" — David Hilbert
Was kann ich wissen? Was soll ich tun? Was darf ich hoffen?: "What can I know? What shall I do? What may I hope?" — Kant
Die ganzen Zahlen hat der liebe Gott gemacht, alles andere ist Menschenwerk: "God made the integers, all the rest is the work of man" — Leopold Kronecker
Hier stehe ich, ich kann nicht anders. Gott helfe mir. Amen!: "Here I stand, I cannot do differently. God help me. Amen!" — attributed to Martin Luther
Wovon man nicht sprechen kann, darüber muss man schweigen: "Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent" — Wittgenstein
Einmal ist keinmal: "What happens once might as well never have happened." literally "once is never"; theme of The Unbearable Lightness of Being by Milan Kundera


[edit] See also

Germish (English loanwords in German)
List of Portuguese words of Germanic origin
List of Spanish words of Germanic origin
List of French phrases
List of Latin words with English derivatives
List of Latin phrases
List of Greek phrases
Wiktionary:Transwiki:List of German words and phrases
List of French phrases used by English speakers
Wiktionary:Transwiki:List of Spanish expressions in common English
Yiddish
Yinglish
List of English words of Yiddish origin
List of English words of Dutch origin
Jerrycan
List of pseudo-German words adapted to English
nl:Lijst van Duitse woorden en uitdrukkingen in de Nederlandse taal


[edit] References

^ http://germanenglishwords.com/rlgl.htm liederkranz
^ "Productivity Measures: Business Sector and Major Subsectors". BLS Handbook of Methods. U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2007. http://www.bls.gov/opub/hom/homch10_e.htm. Retrieved on 10 April 2008. 
^ Rutherford, Prof. Thomas F.. "Modeling Unanticipated Shocks: An Illustrative GAMS/MCP Model". MPSGE Forum. http://www.gamsworld.org/mpsge/debreu/shock/. Retrieved on 10 April 2008. 
^ "Drude" (9 February 2006). "Economic Curiosity. [Solow model"]. PhysOrg.com. http://lofi.forum.physorg.com/Economic-Curiosity.-%5BSolow-model%5D_4864.html. Retrieved on 10 April 2008. 
^ Lequiller, François; Derek Blades (2006). "ch. 6" (PDF (4MB)). Understanding National Accounts. Economica. Translator: F. Wells. Paris: OECD. pp. 160. ISBN 92-64-02566-9. http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/37/12/38451313.pdf. Retrieved on 11 April 2008.  "“K” (for the German word “kapital”) indicates capital accumulation items." 
^ http://dictionary.reverso.net/english-german/out%20+%20hand Hinaus or Heraus
^ Urban Dictionary: besserwisser


[edit] External links

Dictionary of Germanisms
User-generated collection of Germanisms, including images of spottings.




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_German_expressions_in_English"
Categories: Germany-related lists | German language | Glossaries | German loanwordsHidden categories: Cleanup from August 2007 | All pages needing cleanup | Dynamic lists | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Hrvatski
日本語
Nederlands
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Русский









 This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 23:08 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
