













Watts Towers - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Watts_Towers";
		var wgTitle = "Watts Towers";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "409761";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281348893;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Watts Towers

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







This article or section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss these issues on the talk page.

It is missing citations or footnotes. Please help improve it by adding inline citations. Tagged since August 2008.
It needs additional references or sources for verification. Tagged since August 2008.







Watts Towers of Simon Rodia


U.S. National Register of Historic Places


U.S. National Historic Landmark


L.A. Historic-Cultural Monument #15




Watts Towers, 1765 East 107th St., Los Angeles
















Location:
10618-10626 Graham Avenue, and 1711-1765 E. 107th Street, Los Angeles, CA


Coordinates:
33°56′19.46″N 118°14′27.77″W﻿ / ﻿33.9387389°N 118.2410472°W﻿ / 33.9387389; -118.2410472


Built/Founded:
1921–1954


Architect:
Simon Rodia


Governing body:
Local


Added to NRHP:
April 13, 1977[1]


Designated NHL:
December 14, 1990[2]


Designated LAHCM:
March 1, 1963[3]


NRHP Reference#:
77000297


LAHCM #:
15


The Watts Towers or Towers of Simon Rodia in the Watts district of Los Angeles, California, is a collection of 17 interconnected structures, two of which reach heights of over 99 feet (30 m). The Towers were built by Italian immigrant construction worker Sabato ("Sam" or "Simon") Rodia in his spare time over a period of 33 years, from 1921 to 1954. The work is a superb example of non-traditional vernacular architecture and American Naïve art[2][4] The Towers are located near (and visible from) the 103rd Street-Kenneth Hahn Station of the Metro Rail LACMTA Blue Line.
They were designated a National Historic Landmark in 1990[2]




Contents


1 Design and construction
2 After Rodia

2.1 Damage
2.2 Watts Towers Arts Center


3 References in popular culture
4 See also

4.1 People and places
4.2 Lists


5 References
6 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Design and construction




Doorway detail featuring broken bottles, pottery sherds, tile fragments, and seashells. Note flower-like imprints in mortar (lower right) made with a faucet handle."1765" and "SR" are repeatedly seen, referring to the street number and to Simon Rodia, the builder.




“
I had in mind to do something big and I did it.
”



—Simon Rodia



The sculptures' armatures are constructed from steel pipes and rods, wrapped with wire mesh, coated with mortar. The main supports are embedded with pieces of porcelain, tile, and glass. They are decorated with found objects: bed frames, bottles, ceramic tiles, scrap metal and sea shells. Rodia called the towers Nuestro Pueblo, meaning "our town." Rodia built them with no special equipment or (so far as is known) predetermined design, working alone with hand tools and window-washer's equipment. Neighborhood children brought pieces of broken glass and pottery to Rodia in hopes they would be added to the project, but the majority of Rodia's material consisted of damaged pieces from the Malibu Pottery, where he worked for many years. Green glass includes recognizable soft drink bottles, some still bearing the logos of 7 Up, Squirt, Bubble Up, and Canada Dry; blue glass appears to be from milk of magnesia bottles.




Closeup view of the mosaic decoration


Rodia bent up much of the Towers' framework from scrap rebar, using nearby railroad tracks as a sort of makeshift vise.
Other items came from alongside the Pacific Electric Railway right of way between Watts and Wilmington. Rodia often walked the right of way all the way to Wilmington in search of material, a distance of nearly 20 miles (32 km).
Rodia reportedly did not get along with his neighbors, some of whom allowed their children to vandalize his work. Rumors that the towers were antennae for communicating with enemy Japanese forces, or contained buried treasure, caused suspicion and further vandalism.
In 1955, Rodia gave the property away and left, reportedly tired of the abuse he had received. He retired to Martinez, California, and never came back. He died a decade later.

[edit] After Rodia
The property changed hands, Rodia's bungalow inside the enclosure was burned down, and the city of Los Angeles condemned the structure and ordered it razed. An actor, Nicholas King, and a film editor, William Cartwright, visited the site in 1959, saw the neglect, and decided to buy the property for $3,000 in order to preserve it. When the city found out about the transfer, it decided to perform the demolition before the transfer went through. The towers had already become famous and there was opposition from around the world. King, Cartwright, and a curator of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, along with area architects, artists, and community activists formed the Committee for Simon Rodia's Towers in Watts. The Committee negotiated with the city to allow for an engineering test to establish the safety of the structures.
For the test, steel cable was attached to each tower and a crane was used to exert lateral force. The crane was unable to topple or even shift the towers with the forces applied, and the test was concluded when the crane experienced mechanical failure.
The committee preserved the towers independently until 1975, when it deeded the site to the City of Los Angeles, which deeded it to the State of California in 1978. It is now designated the Watts Towers of Simon Rodia State Historic Park. It is operated by the City of Los Angeles Cultural Affairs Department. The towers are one of nine folk art sites listed in the National Register of Historic Places, and were designated a National Historic Landmark in 1990.[2][5][6]

[edit] Damage
The structures suffered minor damage in the Northridge Earthquake in 1994, after which they were repaired and reopened in 2001. The towers were damaged during a 2008 windstorm and were closed to the public. They are scheduled to reopen in March 2009.

[edit] Watts Towers Arts Center
The Watts Towers Arts Center is an adjacent community arts center that was opened in 1970.

[edit] References in popular culture





This article contains too many minor or trivial fictional references. Mere trivia, or references unimportant to the overall plot of a work of fiction, should be deleted. See also what Wikipedia is not.






The towers in silhouette



The Watts Towers, and their creator Simon Rodia's friendship with a 10-year-old boy, are a major focus of Daniel and The Towers, a 1987 made-for-television movie.
The plot of E.L. Konigsburg's The Outcasts of 19 Shuyler Place involves a young girl's efforts to save the three towers made from metal pipes and broken glass, china, etc. from demolition planned by the city's council which claims that the towers pose a safety hazard. The reason those towers were built was that the builders wanted to do something big, just like Rodia.
The Towers are mentioned in the Dragnet '67, Season 3, Episode DR-11 "Management Services." The episode discusses LA as being a center of art culture and the Towers are used as a prime example.
The Towers are featured in the opening scene of Wattstax, a 1973 documentary film by Mel Stuart that focused on the 1972 Wattstax music festival and the African American community of Watts in Los Angeles.
Ambient musical group Porn Sword Tobacco recorded a song called "Watts Towers".
The towers are celebrated in Episode 3 of Jacob Bronowski's TV documentary Ascent of Man.
The Watts Towers play a significant role in the 1991 crime-thriller film Ricochet.
In Solomania!: A Festival of one-man(woman) shows (2006), Roger Guenveur Smith's The Watts Towers Project relates to the audience his fascination of the Watts Towers as he attempts to discover his own personal mark as an artist.
Menace II Society has a flyover shot of the towers.
Charles Mingus' autobiography, Beneath the Underdog makes reference to the towers as a part of Mingus' upbringing.[7]
Don DeLillo's novel Underworld refers to the towers.
An episode of the HBO original series Six Feet Under features the towers, (series 3, episode 4, timecode 33.17).
Colors features a car chase scene that ends when the Crips' car being chased crashes into one of the towers.
The Towers were once used to film (or videotape) a brief location segment that appeared on the Donny & Marie variety show. In the segment, the Osmonds sang, then briefly described the Towers.
The 1976 blaxploitation horror film Dr. Black, Mr. Hyde climaxes with the title villain confronted by police outside the towers. The police refuse to fire on him because he is standing in front of the mosaic walls surrounding the towers. He escapes inside the structure and climbs one of the towers until he is shot down by the police. The towers were even featured prominently in the poster art for the film.
The towers make a brief appearance in the car racing video game, LA Rush, on which the city is based on Los Angeles
Robert Duncan wrote a poem entitled "Nel Mezzo Del Cammin Di Nostra Vita," published in Roots and Branches in 1964. This poem uses the Watts Towers as the focal image, discussing them as "art dedicated to itself" and as a kind of celebration of the individual, comparing the towers to the church and suggesting that they are a kind of church of the creative self.
One scene in Andy Warhol & Taylor Meade's 1964 film entitled "Tarzan and Jane Regained... Sort of" was shot in the towers.
The towers appear on the original cover of the 1975 album Brown Rice, by jazz trumpeter Don Cherry and the 1958 album Harold in the Land of Jazz by saxophonist Harold Land.
On the Red Hot Chili Peppers song "Good Time Boys" found on the album Mother's Milk, frontman Anthony Kiedis sings "Building up our brains with the supernatural powers/We take it from the trees and the mighty Watts Towers."
The towers appear in the show on BET called Baldwin Hills.
The towers briefly appear in the music video for "Hate It or Love It" by The Game featuring 50 Cent.
The towers feature heavily in an episode of the short-lived science fiction series Dark Skies, with the strong suggestion being that Rodia was inspired to build them by a telepathic vision of the human DNA helix.
Los Angeles underground MC MURS references the towers in the song "LA" from his 2006 album Murray's Revenge : "From the Towers in Watts, to the hills of Altadena."
The towers appear in the video game Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas in the Ballas-controlled Jefferson area in east Los Santos, San Andreas, the game's fictional take on Los Angeles.
An episode of Sanford and Son called "Tower Power" involves Fred Sanford building a structure from his own junk that was obviously inspired by the Watts towers, although they are not mentioned by name.
Appear in Rize, a documentary about a dance style called Krumping in South Central Los Angeles.
The towers appear on the cover of 2001 album 2000 Watts, by R&B artist Tyrese.
The story " Beautiful Junk," is a fictional story about the artist of the towers and a boy. The book's author is Jon Madian and is copyrighted in 1968.


[edit] See also

[edit] People and places

Antoni Gaudí, a Catalan architect with a similar style, particularly La Sagrada Família in Barcelona.
Qutub Minar, including a similarly shaped ancient Indian tower.
Baldasare Forestiere, another Italian immigrant in California born the same year as Rodia who built the Forestiere Underground Gardens.
Hermit House, a unique residence located in Herzliya, Israel, with intricate mosaics entirely constructed by one man over thirty years.
Mystery Castle, a house in Phoenix, Arizona, built in the 1930s in a similar style.
Nitt Witt Ridge, a house in Cambria, California, constructed in a similar style.
Rubel Castle, a house in Glendora, California, constructed in a similar style.
Ferdinand Cheval, a French postman who constructed an "ideal palace" out of rocks in his spare time.
Justo Gallego Martínez, a Spaniard who built his own cathedral.


[edit] Lists

List of Registered Historic Places in Los Angeles.
List of Los Angeles Historic-Cultural Monuments in South Los Angeles.


[edit] References


^ "National Register Information System". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. 2007-01-23. http://www.nr.nps.gov/. 
^ a b c d "Watts Towers". National Historic Landmark summary listing. National Park Service. 2007-09-18. http://tps.cr.nps.gov/nhl/detail.cfm?ResourceId=1718&ResourceType=Site. 
^ Los Angeles Department of City Planning (2007-09-07), Historic - Cultural Monuments (HCM) Listing: City Declared Monuments, City of Los Angeles, http://www.cityprojectca.org/ourwork/documents/HCMDatabase090707.pdf, retrieved on 2008-05-28 
^ NHL Writeup
^ ["The Towers of Simon Rodia", June 18, 1990, by Arloa Paquin Goldstone "National Register of Historic Places Registration"]. National Park Service. 1990-06-18. "The Towers of Simon Rodia", June 18, 1990, by Arloa Paquin Goldstone. 
^ [The Towers of Simon Rodia--Accompanying 8 photos, from 1967-1989. "National Register of Historic Places Registration"]. National Park Service. 1990-06-18. The Towers of Simon Rodia--Accompanying 8 photos, from 1967-1989.. 
^ Mingus: Towers





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Watts Towers 



[edit] External links

I Build the Tower, a feature-length documentary film about Simon Rodia and the Watts Towers
www.wattstowers.org
KCET Life & Times. History of the Towers
Official State Park Website
The website dedicated entirely to Sam Rodia's Watts Towers and their impact on international art
Spherical panoramas of Rodia's work
Most Everything That Ever Mentioned, Showed, Documented or Featured the Watts Towers
The Towers, A 1957 documentary
Rodia's Watts Towers Photodocumentary with ruins of Rodia's house, plus surprising new biographical information
Library of Congress: America's Memory
Watts Towers on Great Buildings www.greatbuildings.com








v • d • e

Protected Areas of California





National Park System



National Parks: Channel Islands · Death Valley · Joshua Tree · Kings Canyon · Lassen Volcanic · Redwood · Sequoia · Yosemite
National Monuments: Cabrillo · Devils Postpile · Lava Beds · Muir Woods · Pinnacles
National Seashores: Point Reyes
National Preserves: Mojave
National Historical Parks: Rosie the Riveter/World War II Home Front · San Francisco Maritime
National Historic Sites: Eugene O'Neill · Fort Point · John Muir · Manzanar
National Recreation Areas: Golden Gate · Santa Monica Mountains · Whiskeytown








State Parks



State Parks: Ahjumawi Lava Springs · Andrew Molera · Angel Island · Annadel · Año Nuevo · Anza-Borrego Desert · Arthur B. Ripley Desert Woodland · Bidwell-Sacramento River · Big Basin Redwoods · Big River · Border Field · Bothe-Napa Valley · Burton Creek · Butano · Calaveras Big Trees · Castle Crags · Castle Rock · Caswell Memorial · China Camp · Chino Hills · Clear Lake · Crystal Cove · Cuyamaca Rancho · D. L. Bliss · Del Norte Coast Redwoods · Donner Memorial · Eastshore · El Escorpion · Emerald Bay · Fort Ord Dunes · Fremont Peak · Garrapata · Gaviota · Great Valley Grasslands · Grizzly Creek Redwoods · Grover Hot Springs · Hendy Woods · Henry Cowell Redwoods · Henry W. Coe · Humboldt Lagoons · Humboldt Redwoods · Jedediah Smith Redwoods · Julia Pfeiffer Burns · Leo Carrillo · Limekiln · MacKerricher · Malibu Creek · Manchester · McArthur-Burney Falls Memorial · Mendocino Headlands · Mendocino Woodlands · Montaña de Oro · Morro Bay · Mount Diablo · Mount San Jacinto · Mount Tamalpais · Navarro River Redwoods · Pacheco · Palomar Mountain · Patrick's Point · Pfeiffer Big Sur · Placerita Canyon · Plumas-Eureka · Point Mugu · Portola Redwoods · Prairie Creek Redwoods · Red Rock Canyon · Richardson Grove · Rio de Los Angeles · Robert Louis Stevenson · Russian Gulch · Saddleback Butte · Salt Point · Samuel P. Taylor · San Bruno Mountain · San Simeon · Sinkyone Wilderness · South Yuba River · Sugar Pine Point · Sugarloaf Ridge · Sutter Buttes · The Forest of Nisene Marks · Tolowa Dunes · Tomales Bay · Topanga · Van Damme · Washoe Meadows · Wilder Ranch

State Reserves: Año Nuevo · Antelope Valley California Poppy · Armstrong Redwoods · Azalea · Caspar Headlands · John B. Dewitt · John Little · Jug Handle · Kruse Rhododendron · Los Osos Oaks · Mailliard Redwoods · Mono Lake Tufa · Montgomery Woods · Point Lobos · Smithe Redwoods · Torrey Pines · Tule Elk
State Marine Reserves: Albany · Emeryville Crescent

State Historic Parks: Anderson Marsh · Antelope Valley Indian Museum · Bale Grist Mill · Benicia Capitol · Bidwell Mansion · Bodie · California Citrus · California State Indian Museum · Chumash Painted Cave · Colonel Allensworth · Columbia · Cowell Ranch/John Marsh · El Presidio de Santa Barbara · Empire Mine · Folsom Powerhouse · Fort Humboldt · Fort Ross · Fort Tejon · Governor's Mansion · Hearst San Simeon · Indian Grinding Rock · Jack London · La Purísima Mission · Leland Stanford Mansion · Los Angeles · Los Encinos · Malakoff Diggins · Marconi Conference Center · Marshall Gold Discovery · Monterey · Old Sacramento · Old Town San Diego · Olompali · Petaluma Adobe · Pigeon Point Light Station · Pío Pico · Point Sur · Railtown 1897 · San Juan Bautista · San Pasqual Battlefield · Santa Cruz Mission · Santa Susana Pass · Shasta · Sonoma · Sutter's Fort · Tomo-Kahni · Wassama Round House · Watts Towers of Simon Rodia · Weaverville Joss House · Will Rogers · William B. Ide Adobe · Woodland Opera House

State Beaches: Asilomar · Bean Hollow · Bolsa Chica · Cardiff · Carlsbad · Carmel River · Carpinteria · Caspar Headlands · Cayucos · Corona del Mar · Dockweiler · Doheny · El Capitán · Emma Wood · Gray Whale Cove · Greenwood · Half Moon Bay · Huntington · Leucadia · Lighthouse Field · Little River · Malibu Lagoon · Mandalay · Manresa · Marina · McGrath · Montara · Monterey · Moonlight · Morro Strand · Moss Landing · Natural Bridges · New Brighton · Pacifica · Pelican · Pescadero · Pismo · Point Dume · Point Sal · Pomponio · Refugio · Robert H. Meyer Memorial · Robert W. Crown Memorial · Salinas River · San Buenaventura · San Clemente · San Elijo · San Gregorio · San Onofre · Santa Monica · Schooner Gulch · Seacliff · Silver Strand · Sonoma Coast · South Carlsbad · Sunset · Thornton · Torrey Pines · Trinidad · Twin Lakes · Westport-Union Landing · Will Rogers · William Randolph Hearst Memorial · Zmudowski

State Recreation Areas: Admiral William Standley · Auburn · Austin Creek · Benbow Lake · Benicia · Bethany Reservoir · Brannan Island · Candlestick Point · Castaic Lake · Colusa-Sacramento River · Folsom Lake · Franks Tract · George J. Hatfield · Harry A. Merlo · Kenneth Hahn · Kings Beach · Lake Del Valle · Lake Oroville · Lake Perris · Lake Valley · McConnell · Millerton Lake · Picacho · Providence Mountains · Salton Sea · San Luis Reservoir · Silverwood Lake · Standish-Hickey · Tahoe · Turlock Lake · Woodson Bridge
State Vehicular Recreation Areas: Carnegie · Clay Pit · Heber Dunes · Hollister Hills · Hungry Valley · Oceano Dunes · Ocotillo Wells · Prairie City

Other: Burleigh H. Murray Ranch · California Mining and Mineral Museum · California State Capitol Museum · California State Railroad Museum · Castro Adobe · Delta Meadows · Estero Bay · Hatton Canyon · Indio Hills Palms · Marital Cottle Project · Point Cabrillo Light Station · Point Lobos Ranch · Point Montara Light Station · Reynolds Wayside Campground · San Timoteo Canyon · Stone Lake · Verdugo Mountains · Ward Creek · Wildwood Canyon








National Forests



National Forests: Angeles · Cleveland · Eldorado · Inyo · Klamath · Lassen · Los Padres · Mendocino · Modoc · Plumas · San Bernardino · Sequoia · Shasta-Trinity · Sierra · Six Rivers · Stanislaus · Tahoe
National Wilderness Preservation System: Ansel Adams · Bucks Lake · Caribou · Carson-Iceberg · Castle Crags · Desolation · Dick Smith · Dinkey Lakes · Emigrant · Golden Trout · Hoover · Ishi · Jennie Lakes · John Muir · Kaiser · Marble Mountain · Mokelumne · Mount Shasta Wilderness · North Fork · San Gabriel · Sanhedrin · San Jacinto · San Rafael · Sespe · Siskuyou · Snow Mountain · South Fork Eel River · South Sierra · South Warner · Thousand Lakes · Trinity Alps · Ventana · Yolla Bolly-Middle Eel · Yuki
Other: Butte Valley National Grassland · Giant Sequoia National Monument · Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains National Monument · Smith River National Recreation Area · Shasta-Trinity National Recreation Area








State Forests



Boggs Mountain Demonstration · Ellen Pickett · Jackson Demonstration · Las Posadas · LaTour Demonstration · Mount Zion · Mountain Home Demonstration · Soquel Demonstration








National Wildlife Refuges



Antioch Dunes · Bitter Creek · Blue Ridge · Butte Sink · Castle Rock · Clear Lake · Coachella Valley · Colusa · Delevan · Don Edwards San Francisco Bay · Ellicott Slough · Farallon · Guadalupe-Nipomo Dunes · Hopper Mountain · Humboldt Bay · Kern · Lower Klamath · Marin Islands · Merced · Modoc · Pixley · Sacramento · Sacramento River · Salinas River · San Diego Bay · San Diego · San Joaquin River · San Luis · San Pablo Bay · Seal Beach · Sonny Bono Salton Sea · Stone Lakes · Sutter · Tijuana Slough · Tule Lake








State Wildlife Areas



Wildlife Areas: Antelope Valley · Ash Creek · Bass Hill · Battle Creek · Big Lagoon · Big Sandy · Biscar · Butte Valley · Buttermilk Country · Cache Creek · Camp Cady · Cantara/Ney Springs · Cedar Roughs · Cinder Flats · Collins Eddy · Colusa Bypass · Coon Hollow · Cottonwood Creek · Crescent City Marsh · Crocker Meadows · Daugherty Hill · Decker Island · Doyle · Dutch Flat · Eastlker River · Eel River · Elk Creek Wetlands · Elk River · Fay Slough · Feather River · Fitzhugh Creek · Fremont Weir · Grass Lake · Gray Lodge · Green Creek · Grizzly Island · Hallelujah Junction · Heenan Lake · Hill Slough · Hollenbeck Canyon · Honey Lake · Hope Valley · Horseshoe Ranch · Imperial · Indian Valley · Kelso Peak and Old Dad Mountains · Kinsman Flat · Knoxville · Laguna · Lake Berryessa · Lake Earl · Lake Sonoma · Little Panoche Reservoir · Los Banos · Lower Sherman Island · Mad River Slough · Marble Mountains · Mendota · Merrill's Landing · Miner Slough · Monache Meadows · Morro Bay · Moss Landing · Mouth of Cottonwood Creek · Napa-Sonoma Marshes · North Grasslands · O'Neill Forebay · Oroville · Petaluma Marsh · Pickel Meadow · Pine Creek · Point Edith · Putah Creek · Rector Reservoir · Red Lake · Rhode Island · Sacramento River · San Felipe Valley · San Jacinto · San Luis Obispo · San Luis Reservoir · San Pablo Bay · Santa Rosa · Shasta Valley · Silver Creek · Slinkard/Little Antelope · Smithneck Creek · South Fork · Spenceville · Surprise Valley · Sutter Bypass · Tehama · Truckee River · Upper Butte Basin · Volta · Warner Valley · Waukell Creek · West Hilmar · Westlker River · White Slough · Willow Creek · Yolo Bypass
Ecological Reserves: Albany Mudflats · Alkali Sink · Allensworth · Atascadero Creek Marsh · Bair Island · Baldwin Lake · Batiquitos Lagoon · Blue Sky · Boden Canyon · Boggs Lake · Bolsa Chica · Bonny Doon · Buena Vista Lagoon · Butler Slough · Butte Creek Canyon · Butte Creek House · Buttonwillow · By Day Creek · Calhoun Cut · Canebrake · Carlsbad Highlands · Carmel Bay · Carrizo Canyon · Carrizo Plains · China Point · Clover Creek · Coachella Valley · Coal Canyon · Corte Madera Marsh · Crestridge · Dairy Mart Ponds · Dales Lake · Del Mar Landing · Elkhorn Slough · Estelle Mountain · Fall River Mills · Fish Slough · Fremont Valley · Goleta Slough · Indian Joe Spring · Kaweah · Kerman · King Clone · Laguna Laurel · Loch Lomond Vernal Pool · Lokern · Magnesia Spring · Marin Islands · Mattole River · McGinty Mountain · Morro Dunes · Morro Rock · Napa River · North Table Mountain · Oasis Spring · Panoche Hills · Peytonia Slough · Piute Creek · Pleasant Valley · Point Lobos · Rancho Jamul · Redwood Shores · River Springs Lakes · Saline Valley · San Dieguito Lagoon · San Elijo Lagoon · San Felipe Creek · San Joaquin River · Santa Rosa Plateau · Springville · Stone Corral · Sycamore Canyon · Sycuan Peak · Thomes Creek · Tomales Bay · Upper Newport Bay · Watsonville Slough · West Mojave Desert · Woodbridge · Yaudanchi
Marine Protected Areas: Abalone Cove · Agua Hedionda Lagoon · Albany Mudflats · Anacapa · Anacapa · Año Nuevo · Asilomar · Atascadero Beach · Bair Island · Batiquitos Lagoon · Big Creek · Big Creek · Big Sycamore Canyon · Bodega · Bolsa Chica · Buena Vista Lagoon · Cambria · Cardiff and San Elijo · Carmel Bay · Carmel Pinnacles · Carrington Point · Catalina Marine Science Center · Corte Madera Marsh · Crystal Cove · Dana Point · Del Mar Landing · Doheny · Doheny · Duxbury Reef · Edward F. Ricketts · Elkhorn Slough · Elkhorn Slough · Encinitas · Estero de Limantour · Fagan Marsh · Farallon Islands · Farnsworth Bank · Fort Ross · Gerstle Cove · Goleta Slough · Greyhound Rock · Gull Island · Harris Point · Heisler Park · Hopkins · Irvine Coast · James V. Fitzgerald · Judith Rock · Julia Pfeiffer Burns · La Jolla · Laguna Beach · Lovers Cove (Catalina Island) · Lovers Point · MacKerricher · Manchester and Arena Rock · Marin Islands · Mia J. Tegner · Moro Cojo Slough · Morro Bay · Morro Bay · Morro Beach · Natural Bridges · Niguel · Pacific Grove Marine Gardens · Painted Cave · Peytonia Slough · Piedras Blancas · Piedras Blancas · Pismo · Pismo-Oceano Beach · Point Buchon · Point Buchon · Point Cabrillo · Point Fermin · Point Lobos · Point Reyes Headlands · Point Sur · Point Sur · Portuguese Ledge · Punta Gorda · Redwood Shores · Refugio · Richardson Rock · Robert E. Badham · Robert W. Crown · Russian Gulch · Salt Point · San Diego-Scripps · San Dieguito Lagoon · San Elijo Lagoon · Santa Barbara Island · Scorpion · Skunk Point · Sonoma Coast · Soquel Canyon · South Laguna Beach · South Point · Tomales Bay · Upper Newport Bay · Van Damme · Vandenberg · White Rock (Cambria)








National Landscape
Conservation System



National Monuments: California Coastal · Carrizo Plain · Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains
National Conservation Areas: California Desert · King Range
Wilderness Areas: Argus Range · Big Maria Mountains · Bigelow Cholla Garden · Bighorn Mountain · Black Mountain · Bright Star · Bristol Mountains · Cadiz Dunes · Carrizo Gorge · Chemehuevi Mountains · Chimney Peak · Chuckwalla Mountains · Chumash · Cleghorn Lakes · Clipper Mountain · Coso Range · Coyote Mountains · Darwin Falls · Dead Mountains · Dick Smith · El Paso Mountains · Fish Creek Mountains · Funeral Mountains · Golden Valley · Grass Valley · Hollow Hills · Ibex · Indian Pass · Inyo Mountains · Jacumba · Kelso Dunes · Kiavah · Kingston Range · Little Chuckwalla Mountains · Little Picacho · Machesna Mountain · Matilija · Malpais Mesa · Manly Peak · Mecca Hills · Mesquite · Newberry Mountains · Nopah Range · North Algodones Dunes · North Mesquite Mountains · Old Woman Mountains · Orocopia Mountains · Otay Mountain · Owens Peak · Pahrump Valley · Palen/McCoy · Palo Verde Mountains · Picacho Peak · Piper Mountain · Piute Mountains · Red Buttes · Resting Spring Range · Rice Valley · Riverside Mountains · Rodman Mountains · Sacatar Trail · Saddle Peak Hills · San Gorgonio · Santa Lucia · Santa Rosa · Sawtooth Mountains · Sespe · Sheephole Valley · South Nopah Range · Stateline · Stepladder Mountains · Surprise Canyon · Sylvania Mountains · Trilobite · Turtle Mountains · Whipple Mountains ·








National Marine
Sanctuaries



Channel Islands · Cordell Bank · Gulf of the Farallones · Monterey Bay








National Estuarine
Research Reserves



Elkhorn Slough · San Francisco Bay · Tijuana River








University of California
Natural Reserve System



Año Nuevo Island · Bodega Marine · Box Springs · Boyd Deep Canyon Desert Research Center · Burns Piñon Ridge · Carpinteria Salt Marsh · Chickering American River · Coal Oil Point · Dawson Los Monos Canyon · Eagle Lake Field Station · Elliott Chaparral · Emerson Oaks · Fort Ord · Hastings · James San Jacinto Mountains · Jenny Pygmy Forest · Jepson Prairie · Kendall-Frost Mission Bay Marsh · Kenneth S. Norris Rancho Marino · Landels-Hill Big Creek · McLaughlin · Motte Rimrock · Quail Ridge · Sagehen Creek Field Station · San Joaquin Freshwater Marsh · Santa Cruz Island · Scripps Coastal · Sedgwick · Stebbins Cold Canyon · Stunt Ranch Santa Monica Mountains · Sweeney Granite Mountains Desert Research Center · Valentine Eastern Sierra · Younger Lagoon










Heritage registers: World Heritage Sites · World Network of Biosphere Reserves · National Register of Historic Places · National Historic Landmarks · National Natural Landmarks · California Historical Landmarks · California Points of Historical Interest · California Register of Historical Resources














v • d • e

U.S. National Register of Historic Places






Keeper of the Register · History of the National Register of Historic Places · Property types · Historic district · Contributing property








List of entries
National Park Service · National Historic Landmarks · National Battlefields · National Historic Sites · National Historical Parks · National Memorials · National Monuments









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Watts_Towers"
Categories: Visionary environments | California State Historic Parks | Los Angeles Historic-Cultural Monuments | Outdoor sculptures in California | National Historic Landmarks in California | 1954 works | 1954 architecture | Towers in California | Art in the Greater Los Angeles AreaHidden categories: Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles lacking reliable references from August 2008 | Articles with fictioncruft 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
Français









 This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 19:34 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
