













Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Tiananmen_Square_protests_of_1989";
		var wgTitle = "Tiananmen Square protests of 1989";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "44534";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282474274;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Tiananmen Square protests of 1989

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







This article contains Chinese text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Chinese characters.




Tiananmen Square protests of 1989







The Unknown Rebel — This famous photo, taken on 5 June 1989 by photographer Jeff Widener, depicts an unknown man halting the PLA's advancing tanks near Tiananmen Square.





Chinese:
六四事件


Literal meaning:
June Fourth Incident





Transliterations


Mandarin


- Hanyu Pinyin:
Liù-Sì Shìjiàn





alternative Chinese name


Traditional Chinese:
天安門事件


Simplified Chinese:
天安门事件


Literal meaning:
Tiananmen Incident





Transliterations


Mandarin


- Hanyu Pinyin:
Tiān'ānmén Shìjiàn





The Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 culminating in the Tiananmen Square Massacre (referred to in Chinese as the June Fourth Incident, to avoid confusion with two other Tiananmen Square protests) were a series of demonstrations in and near Tiananmen Square in Beijing in the People's Republic of China (PRC) beginning on April 14. Led mainly by students and intellectuals, the protests occurred in a year that saw the collapse of a number of communist governments around the world.
The protests were sparked by the death of pro-market and pro-democracy official, Hu Yaobang, whom protesters wanted to mourn. By the eve of Hu's funeral, it had reached 100,000 people on the Tiananmen square. While the protests lacked a unified cause or leadership, participants were generally against the government's authoritarianism and voiced calls for economic change [1][2] and democratic reform[2] within the structure of the government. The demonstrations centered on Tiananmen Square in Beijing, but large-scale protests also occurred in cities throughout China, including Shanghai, which stayed peaceful throughout the protests.
The movement lasted seven weeks from Hu's death on 15 April until tanks cleared Tiananmen Square on 4 June. In Beijing, the resulting military response to the protesters by the PRC government left many civilians dead or injured. The official death toll according to the Chinese government was 200 to 300, but Chinese student associations and the Chinese Red Cross reported 2,000 to 3,000 deaths[3].
Following the violence, the government conducted widespread arrests to suppress protesters and their supporters, cracked down on other protests around China, banned the foreign press from the country and strictly controlled coverage of the events in the PRC press. Members of the Party who had publicly sympathized with the protesters were purged, with several high-ranking members placed under house arrest, such as General Secretary Zhao Ziyang. The violent suppression of the Tiananmen Square protest caused widespread international condemnation of the PRC government.[2]





Contents


1 Naming of incident
2 Background
3 Protest development
4 Protests escalate

4.1 Nationwide and outside mainland China


5 Government crackdown and deaths

5.1 Number of deaths


6 International reaction

6.1 Organizations
6.2 Countries


7 Aftermath

7.1 Arrests and purges
7.2 Media coverage
7.3 Impact on domestic political trends
7.4 Economic impact


8 Continuing issues

8.1 Forbidden topic in mainland China
8.2 History deleted inside mainland China
8.3 EU-US arms embargo
8.4 Compensation
8.5 UN report


9 List of the famous participants
10 Cultural references

10.1 Censored books, films and TV shows in mainland China
10.2 Songs
10.3 Television
10.4 Movies


11 See also
12 Notes
13 Further reading
14 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Naming of incident



History of the
People's Republic of China





    1949–1976, The Mao Era
        Revolution
        Korean War
        Hundred Flowers Campaign
        Anti-Rightist Movement
        Great Leap Forward
            Three Years of Natural Disasters
        Cultural Revolution
            Lin Biao
            Gang of Four
            Tiananmen Incident
    1976–1989, Era of Reconstruction
        Economic reform
        Sino-Vietnamese War
        Tiananmen protests
    1989–2002, A Rising Power
        One Country, Two Systems
            Hong Kong (post 1997)
            Macau (post 1999)
        Chinese reunification
    2002–present, China Today




   See also:
        Constitutional history         History of China         History of Beijing         History of Shanghai




Prominent leaders




Mao - Deng - Jiang - Hu




Other China topics




Culture - Economy
Geography - Politics - Education
China Portal




This box: view • talk • edit



In the Chinese language, the incident is most commonly known as the June Fourth Movement (simplified Chinese: 六四运动; traditional Chinese: 六四運動), the June Fourth Incident (Chinese: 六四事件), or colloquially, simply Six-four (June 4) (Chinese: 六四). The nomenclature of the former is consistent with the customary names of the other two great protest actions that occurred in Tiananmen Square: the May Fourth Movement of 1919, and the April Fifth Movement of 1976. Other names which have been used in the Chinese language include June Fourth Massacre (Chinese: 六四屠城; pinyin: Liù-Sì Túchéng or Chinese: 六四屠杀; pinyin: Liù-Sì Túshā). The government of the People's Republic of China has referred to the event as the Political Turmoil between Spring and Summer of 1989 (Chinese: 春夏之交的政治風波).

[edit] Background




Tiananmen Square as seen from the Tiananmen gate in 2004.


Since 1978, Deng Xiaoping had led a series of economic and political reforms which had led to the gradual implementation of a market economy and some political liberalization that relaxed the system set up by Mao Zedong.
Some students and intellectuals believed that the reforms had not gone far enough and that China needed to reform its political system. They were also concerned about the social and iron-fist controls that the Communist Party of China still had. This group had also seen the political liberalization that had been undertaken in the name of glasnost by Mikhail Gorbachev, so they had been hoping for comparable reform. Many workers who took part in the protests also wanted democratic reform, but opposed the new economic policies.
The Tiananmen Square protests in 1989 were in large measure sparked by the death of former Secretary General Hu Yaobang: Hu Yaobang's resignation from the position of Secretary General of the CPC had been announced on 16 January 1987. His forthright calls for "rapid reform" and his almost open contempt of "Maoist excesses" had made him a suitable scapegoat in the eyes of Deng Xiaoping and others, after the pro-democracy student protests of 1986–1987.[4] Included in his resignation was also a "humiliating self-criticism", which he was forced to issue by the Central Committee of the Communist Party. Hu Yaobang's sudden death, due to heart attack, on 15 April 1989 provided a perfect opportunity for the students to gather once again, not only to mourn the deceased Secretary General, but also to have their voices heard in "demanding a reversal of the verdict against him" and bringing renewed attention to the important issues of the 1986–1987 pro-democracy protests and possibly also to those of the Democracy Wall protests in 1978–1979.[5]

[edit] Protest development
Small voluntary civilian gatherings started on 15 April around Monument to the People's Heroes in the middle of the Tiananmen Square in the form of mourning for Hu Yaobang.




An anonymous drawing posted in a pedestrian walkway underneath Chang'an Avenue caricatures Deng Xiaoping (simplified Chinese: 邓小平; traditional Chinese: 鄧小平) (seated behind the lectern) as an old Chinese emperor


On the same date of 15 April, many students in Peking University and Tsinghua University expressed their sorrow and mourning for Hu Yaobang by posting eulogies inside the campus and erecting shrines, some students joined the civilian mourning in Tiananmen Square in a piecemeal fashion. Organized student gatherings started outside of Beijing on a small scale in Xian and Shanghai on 16 April.
On the afternoon of 17 April, in Beijing, 500 students from China University of Political Science and Law marched to the eastern gate of the Great Hall of the People, which is part of the Tiananmen Square, and commenced the mourning activities for Hu Yaobang. The gathering in front of the Great Hall of the People was soon deemed obstructive to the normal operation of the building, police intervened and attempted to disperse the students by persuasion. But the attempts failed. By nightfall, more students from various universities and more civilians in Beijing had joined the mourning activities. The gathering featured speakers of various background giving public speeches (mostly anonymous) commemorating Hu Yaobang, expressing their concerns of social problems.
Starting midnight on 17 April, 3000 students from Peking University marched from the campus towards Tiananmen Square, and soon nearly a thousand students from Tsinghua University joined the ranks. Upon arrival, they soon joined forces with students and civilians who were in the Square earlier. As its size grew, the gathering of mourning was gradually evolving into a "petition" nature, as students were now drafting a list of pleas and suggestions (list of seven demands) they would like the government to listen to and carry through.
In the morning of 18 April, students remained in the square. Some gathered around the Monument to the People's Heroes singing patriotic songs and listening to impromptu speeches by the student organizers. There were another portion of students sitting-in in front of the Great Hall of the People, the office of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress; they demanded to see members of the Standing Committee and offered the list of seven demands. Meanwhile, a few thousand students gathered in front of the Zhongnanhai building complex, the residence of the government, demanding to see government leaders and answers to their earlier demands. Students tried to muscle their way through the gate by pushing, but security and police locking arms formed a meat shield that eventually deterred students' attempts to enter through the gate. Students then staged a sit-in. Some government officials did unofficially meet with student representatives. Unable to see an official response, there was a growing frustration amongst students.
On 20 April, police finally dispersed the students in front of the Zhongnanhai with force, ostensibly to ensure proper function of the building complex. The police employed batons and minor clashes were reported. The protests in Tiananmen Square gained momentum after news of the confrontation between students and police spread; the belief by students that the Chinese media was distorting the nature of their activities also led to increased support. One national newspaper, the Science and Technology Daily [6] (simplified Chinese: 科技日报; traditional Chinese: 科技日報), published, in its issue dated 19 April, an account of the 18 April sit-in.
On the night of 21 April, the day before Hu's funeral, some 100,000 students marched on Tiananmen square, gathering there before the square could be closed off for the funeral. On April 22, they requested, in vain, to meet premier Li Peng, widely regarded to be Hu's political rival. On the same day, protests happened in Xi'an and Changsha.
From 21 April to 23 April, students from Beijing called for a strike at universities, which included teachers and students boycotting classes. The government, which was well aware of the political storm caused by the now-legitimized 1976 Tiananmen Incident, was alarmed. On 26 April, following an internal speech made by Deng Xiaoping, the CPC's official newspaper People's Daily issued a front-page editorial titled Uphold the flag to clearly oppose any turmoil, attempting to rally the public behind the government, and accused "extremely small segments of opportunists" of plotting civil unrest.[7] The statement enraged the students, and on 27 April about 50,000 students assembled on the streets of Beijing, disregarding the warning of a crackdown made by authorities, and demanded that the government retract the statement.
In Beijing, a majority of students from the city's numerous colleges and universities participated with support of their instructors and other intellectuals. The students rejected official Communist Party-controlled student associations and set up their own autonomous associations. The students viewed themselves as Chinese patriots, as the heirs of the May Fourth Movement for "science and democracy" of 1919. The protests also evoked memories of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1976 which had eventually led to the ousting of the Gang of Four. From its origins as a memorial to Hu Yaobang, who was seen by the students as an advocate of democracy, the students' activity gradually developed over the course of their demonstration from protests against corruption into demands for freedom of the press and an end to, or the reform of, the rule of the PRC by the Communist Party of China and Deng Xiaoping, the de facto paramount Chinese leader. Partially successful attempts were made to reach out and network with students in other cities and with workers.[citation needed]
While the protests lacked a unified cause or leadership, participants were generally against the authoritarianism and voiced calls for democratic reform[2] within the structure of the government. Unlike the Tiananmen protests of 1987, which consisted mainly of students and intellectuals, the protests in 1989 commanded widespread support from the urban workers who were alarmed by the new economic reforms, growing inflation and corruption. In Beijing, they were supported by a large number of people. Similar numbers were found in major cities throughout mainland China such as Urumqi, Shanghai and Chongqing; and later in Hong Kong, Taiwan and Chinese communities in North America and Europe.

[edit] Protests escalate




"The Goddess of Democracy" carved by students from the Central Academy of Fine Arts and erected in the Square during the protest.


On 4 May, approximately 100,000 students and workers marched in Beijing making demands for free media and a formal dialogue between the authorities and student-elected representatives. A declaration demanded the government to accelerate political reform.[2]
The government rejected the proposed dialogue, only agreeing to talk to members of appointed student organizations. On 13 May, two days prior to the highly-publicized state visit by the reform-minded Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, huge groups of students occupied Tiananmen Square and started a hunger strike, insisting the government withdraw the accusation made in the People's Daily editorial and begin talks with the designated student representatives. Hundreds of students went on hunger strikes and were supported by hundreds of thousands of protesting students and part of the population of Beijing, for one week.
Protests and strikes began at colleges in other cities, with many students traveling to Beijing to join the demonstration. Generally, the demonstration at Tiananmen Square was well-ordered, with daily marches of students from various Beijing area colleges displaying their solidarity with the boycott of college classes and with the developing demands of the protest. The students sang The Internationale, the world socialist anthem, on their way to and within the square.[8] The students even showed a surprising gesture of respect to the government by helping police arrest three men from Hunan Province, including Yu Dongyue, Yu Zhijian, and Lu Decheng who had thrown ink on the large portrait of Mao that hangs from Tiananmen, just north of the square.[9][10]


Zhao Ziyang speaks on 19 May 1989. Behind him, the State Council Premier, Wen Jiabao, is present (2nd from right in black). This was Zhao's last public appearance before he was placed under house-arrest, where he remained until his death


The students ultimately decided that in order to sustain their movement and impede any loss of momentum a hunger strike would need to be enacted. The students' decision to undertake the hunger strike was a defining moment in their movement. The hunger strike began in May 1989 and grew to include "more than one thousand persons".[11] The hunger strike brought widespread support for the students and "the ordinary people of Beijing rallied to protect the hunger strikers...because the act of refusing sustenance and courting government reprisals convinced onlookers that the students were not just seeking personal gains but (were) sacrificing themselves for the Chinese people as a whole".[12]
On 19 May at 4:50 am, General Secretary Zhao Ziyang (simplified Chinese: 赵紫阳; traditional Chinese: 趙紫陽) went to the Square and made a speech urging the students to end the hunger strike. Part of his speech was to become a famous quote, when he said, referring to the older generation of people in China "We are already old, it doesn't matter to us any more." In contrast, the students were young and he urged them to stay healthy and not to sacrifice themselves so easily. Zhao's visit to the Square was his last public appearance.
Partially successful attempts were made to negotiate with the PRC government, who were located nearby in Zhongnanhai, the Communist Party headquarters and leadership compound. Because of the visit of Mikhail Gorbachev, foreign media were present in China in large numbers. Their coverage of the protests was extensive and generally favorable towards the protesters, but pessimistic that they would attain their goals. Toward the end of the demonstration, on 30 May, a statue of the Goddess of Democracy was erected in the Square and came to symbolize the protest to television viewers worldwide.
The Standing Committee of the Politburo, along with the party elders (retired but still-influential former officials of the government and Party), were, at first, hopeful that the demonstrations would be short-lived or that cosmetic reforms and investigations would satisfy the protesters. They wished to avoid violence if possible, and relied at first on their far-reaching Party apparatus in attempts to persuade the students to abandon the protest and return to their studies. One barrier to effective action was that the leadership itself supported many of the demands of the students, especially the concern with corruption. However, one large problem was that the protests contained many people with varying agendas, and hence it was unclear with whom the government could negotiate, and what the exact demands of the protesters were. The confusion and indecision among the protesters was also mirrored by confusion and indecision within the government. The official media mirrored this indecision as headlines in the People's Daily alternated between sympathy with the demonstrators and denouncing them.
Among the top leadership, General Secretary Zhao Ziyang was strongly in favour of a soft approach to the demonstrations while Li Peng was seen to argue in favour of a crackdown. Ultimately, the decision to forcefully intervene on the demonstrations was made by a group of Party elders who saw abandonment of single-party rule as a return of the chaos of the Cultural Revolution.[citation needed] Although most of these people had no official position, they were able to control the military. Deng Xiaoping was chairman of the Central Military Commission and was able to declare martial law; Yang Shangkun (simplified Chinese: 杨尚昆) was President of the People's Republic of China, which, although a symbolic position under the 1982 Constitution, was legally the commander-in-chief of the armed forces. The Party elders believed that lengthy demonstrations were a threat to the stability of the country. The demonstrators were seen as tools of advocates of "bourgeois liberalism" who were pulling the strings behind the scenes, as well as tools of elements within the party who wished to further their personal ambitions.[13]

[edit] Nationwide and outside mainland China
At the beginning of the movement, the Chinese news media had a rare opportunity to broadcast the news freely and truly. Most of the news media were free to write and report however they wanted due to lack of control from the central and local governments. The news was spread quickly across the land. According to Chinese news media's report, students and workers in over 400 cities, including cities in Inner Mongolia, also organized and started to protest.[14] People also traveled to the capital to join the protest in the Square.
University students in Shanghai also took to the streets to commemorate the death of Hu Yaobang and protest against certain policies of the government. In many cases, these were supported by the universities' Party committees. Jiang Zemin (simplified Chinese: 江泽民; traditional Chinese: 江澤民), then-Municipal Party Secretary, addressed the student protesters in a bandage and expressed his understanding, as he was a former student agitator before 1949. At the same time, he moved swiftly to send in police forces to control the streets and to purge Communist Party leaders who had supported the students.
On 19 April, the editors of the World Economic Herald, a magazine close to reformists, decided to publish, in their 24 April #439 issue, a commemorative section on Hu. Inside was an article by Yan Jiaqi, which commented favourably on the Beijing student protests on 18 April and called for a reassessment of Hu's purge in 1987. On 21 April, a party official of Shanghai asked the editor in chief, Qin Benli, to change some passages. Qin Benli refused, so Chen turned to Jiang Zemin, who demanded that the article be censored. By that time, a first batch of copies of the paper had already been delivered. The remaining copies were published with a blank page.[15] On 26 April, the "People's Daily" published its editorial condemning the student protest. Jiang followed this cue and suspended Qin Benli. His quick rise to power following the 1989 protests has been attributed to his decisive handling of these two events.
In Hong Kong, on 27 May 1989, over 300,000 people gathered at Happy Valley Racecourse for a gathering called "Democratic songs dedicated for China." Many famous Hong Kong and Taiwanese celebrities sang songs and expressed their support for the students in Beijing. The following day, a procession of 1.5 million people, one fourth of Hong Kong's population, led by Martin Lee, Szeto Wah and other organization leaders, paraded through Hong Kong Island.
Across the world, especially where Chinese lived, people gathered and protested. Many governments, such as those of the USA, Japan, etc., also issued warnings advising their own citizens not to go to the PRC.

[edit] Government crackdown and deaths
Although the government declared martial law on the 20 May, the military's entry into Beijing was blocked by throngs of protesters, and the army was eventually ordered to withdraw.[16] Meanwhile, the demonstrations continued. The hunger strike was approaching the end of the third week, and the government resolved to end the matter before deaths occurred. After deliberation among Communist party leaders, the use of military force to resolve the crisis was ordered, and a deep divide in the politburo resulted. General Secretary Zhao Ziyang was ousted from political leadership as a result of his support for the demonstrators. The military also lacked unity on the issue, and purportedly did not indicate immediate support for a crackdown, leaving the central leadership scrambling to search for individual divisions willing to comply with their orders.[citation needed]
Soldiers and tanks from the 27th and 28th Armies of the People's Liberation Army were sent to take control of the city. The 27th Army was led by a commander related to Yang Shangkun. In a press conference, US President George H. W. Bush announced sanctions on the People's Republic of China, following calls to action from members of Congress such as US Senator Jesse Helms. The President suggested intelligence he had received indicated some disunity in China's military ranks, and even the possibility of clashes within the military during those days. Intelligence reports also indicated that 27th and 28th units were brought in from outside provinces because the local PLA were considered to be sympathetic to the protest and to the people of the city. Reporters described elements of the 27th as having been most responsible for civilian deaths. After their attack on the square, the 27th reportedly established defensive positions in Beijing - not of the sort designed to counter a civilian uprising, but as if to defend against attacks by other military units. Entry of the troops into the city was actively opposed by many citizens of Beijing. Protesters burned public buses and used them as roadblocks to stop the military's progress. The battle continued on the streets surrounding the Square, with protesters repeatedly advancing toward the People's Liberation Army (PLA) and constructing barricades with vehicles, while the PLA attempted to clear the streets using tear gas, rifles, and tanks. Many injured citizens were saved by rickshaw drivers who ventured into the no-man's-land between the soldiers and crowds and carried the wounded off to hospitals. After the attack on the square, live television coverage showed many people wearing black armbands in protest of the government's action, crowding various boulevards or congregating by burnt out and smoking barricades. Meanwhile, the PLA systematically established checkpoints around the city, chasing after protesters and blocking off the university district.
Within the Square itself, there was a debate between those who wished to withdraw peacefully, including Han Dongfang, and those who wished to stand within the square, such as Chai Ling.
The assault on the square began at 10:30 p.m. on 3 June, as armored personnel carriers (APCs) and armed troops with fixed bayonets approached from various positions. These APCs rolled on up the roads, firing ahead and off to the sides, perhaps killing or wounding their own soldiers in the process. BBC reporter Kate Adie spoke of "indiscriminate fire" within the square. Eyewitness reporter Charlie Cole also saw Chinese soldiers firing AK-47's into the crowd near an APC which had just been torched and its crew killed, killing and wounding many that night.[17] Students who sought refuge in buses were pulled out by groups of soldiers and beaten with heavy sticks. Even students attempting to leave the square were beset by soldiers and beaten. Leaders of the protest inside the square, where some had attempted to erect flimsy barricades ahead of the APCs, were said to have "implored" the students not to use weapons (such as molotov cocktails) against the oncoming soldiers. Meanwhile, many students apparently were shouting, "Why are you killing us?" Around four or five the following morning, June 4, Charlie Cole reports to have seen tanks smashing into the square, crushing vehicles and people with their tank treads.[17] By 5:40 a.m. June 4, the Square had been cleared.
The suppression of the protest was immortalized in Western media by the famous video footage and photographs of a lone man in a white shirt standing in front of a column of tanks which were attempting to drive out of Tiananmen Square. Taken on 5 June as the column approached an intersection on the Avenue of Eternal Peace, the footage depicted the unarmed man standing in the center of the street, halting the tanks' progress. As the tank driver attempted to go around him, the "Tank Man" moved into the tank's path. He continued to stand defiantly in front of the tanks for some time, then climbed up onto the turret of the lead tank to speak to the soldiers inside. He reportedly said, "Why are you here? You have caused nothing but misery." After returning to his position blocking the tanks, the man was pulled aside by secret police. Eyewitness reporter Charlie Cole believes that "Tank Man" was probably executed after being taken from the tank by secret police, since the Chinese government could not ever produce him to hush the outcry from many countries.[17] Time Magazine dubbed him The Unknown Rebel and later named him one of the 100 most influential people of the 20th century. British tabloid the Sunday Express reported that the man was 19-year-old student Wang Weilin; however, the veracity of this claim is dubious. What happened to the 'Tank Man' following the demonstration is not known for certain. In a speech to the President's Club in 1999, Bruce Herschensohn — former deputy special assistant to President Richard Nixon — reported that he was executed 14 days later. In Red China Blues: My Long March from Mao to Now, Jan Wong writes that the man is still alive and hiding in mainland China. In Forbidden City, Canadian children's author William Bell, claims the man was named Wang Ai-min and was killed on 9 June after being taken into custody. The last official statement from the PRC government about the "Tank Man" came from Jiang Zemin in a 1990 interview with Barbara Walters. When asked about the whereabouts of the "Tank Man", Jiang responded that the young man was "I think never killed".[18]
After the crackdown in Beijing on 4 June, protests continued in much of mainland China for several days. There were large protests in Hong Kong, where people again wore black in protest. There were protests in Guangzhou, and large-scale protests in Shanghai with a general strike. There were also protests in other countries, many adopting the use of black arm bands as well. However, the government soon regained control. Although no large-scale loss of life was reported in ending the protests in other cities, a political purge followed in which officials responsible for organizing or condoning the protests were removed, and protest leaders jailed.

[edit] Number of deaths
The number of dead and wounded remains unclear because of the large discrepancies between the different estimates. According to initial reports from the Chinese Red Cross, there were 2,600 casualties.[19] Following pressure from the Chinese government this number was soon revised. The Chinese government released a casualty count of 241, but did not release a list of the deceased.
According to Nicholas D. Kristof; "The true number of deaths will probably never be known, and it is possible that thousands of people were killed without leaving evidence behind. But based on the evidence that is now available, it seems plausible that about a dozen soldiers and policemen were killed, along with 400 to 800 civilians." One reason the number may never be known is suspicion that Chinese troops may have quickly removed and disposed of bodies.[20]
The Chinese government has maintained that there were no deaths within the square itself, although videos taken there at the time recorded the sound of gunshots. Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and State Council claimed that "hundreds of PLA soldiers died and more were injured."[citation needed] Yuan Mu, the spokesman of the State Council, said that a total of 23 people died, most of them students, along with a number of people he described as "ruffians".[21] According to Chen Xitong, Beijing mayor, 200 civilians and several dozen soldiers died.[22] Other sources stated that 3,000 civilians and 6,000 soldiers were injured.[23] In May 2007, CPPCC member from Hong Kong, Chang Ka-mun said 300 to 600 people were killed in Tiananmen Square. He echoed that "there were armed thugs who weren't students."[24]
However, foreign journalists who witnessed the incident have claimed that at least 3,000 people died. Some lists of casualties were created from underground sources with numbers as high as 5,000.[25]
US ambassador James Lilley's account of the massacre notes that US State Department diplomats witnessed Chinese troops opening fire on unarmed people and based on visits to hospitals around Beijing a minimum of hundreds had been killed.[26]
A strict focus on the number of deaths within Tiananmen Square itself does not give an accurate picture of the carnage and overall death count since Chinese civilians were fired on in the streets surrounding Tiananmen Square. And students are reported to have been fired on after they left the Square, especially in the area near the Beijing concert hall.[20]
Statistics and estimates generated from different groups of sources would indicate:

7,000 deaths (including civilians and soldiers) - NATO intelligence[27]
4,000 to 6,000 civilians killed, but no one really knows - Edward Timperlake.[28]
2,600 had officially died by the morning of June 4 (later denied) - the Chinese Red Cross.[22] An unnamed Chinese Red Cross official estimated that, in total, 5,000 people were killed and 30,000 injured.[29]
1,000 deaths - Amnesty International[22]
in excess of 3,700 killed, excluding disappearance or secret deaths and those denied of medical treatment - PLA defector citing a document circulating among officers.[28]
186 named individuals confirmed dead as at the end of June 2006 - Professor Ding Zilin.[30]. But note that the cause of deaths of some of the individuals on Ding's list not are directly at the hands of the army. For example, at least one person had committed suicide after the June 4th incident (please see detailed list on article regarding Professor Ding).

According to the Chinese government, the "official figure is 241 dead, including soldiers, and 7,000 wounded".[19]
A declassified NSA document indicated early casualty estimates of 180-500.[31]

[edit] International reaction
The events at Tiananmen were the first of its type shown in detail on Western television.[32] International reaction denounced the Chinese government's response, particularly by Western governments and media.[33] Criticism came from both Western and Eastern Europe, North America and some east Asian and Latin American countries. Notably, many African and Asian countries remained silent throughout the protests. North Korea, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, East Germany and Pakistan, among others, supported the Chinese government and denounced the protests.[33]

[edit] Organizations
 UN: Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar was concerned at the incident, adding that the government should uphold the utmost restraint, but also noted that the UN Charter prohibits interference in member states' internal affairs (especially member states with a Security Council veto).[34]
 The European Economic Community condemned the government response and cancelled all high level contacts and loans. They planned a resolution at the UNHCR criticising China's human rights record.[35][36]

[edit] Countries
 Australia: The Prime Minister, Bob Hawke, wept at a memorial service in the Great Hall in Parliament. The Australian government granted Chinese students a four year amnesty to stay in Australia.[32]
 Burma: The junta supported the actions of the Chinese government, while opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi condemned them, saying: "We deplore it. It happened in Burma and we wanted the world to stand by Burma, so we stand by the Chinese students."[37]
 Czechoslovakia: The government of Czechoslovakia supported the Chinese governments response, expressing the idea that China would overcome its problems and further develop socialism. In response, the Chinese side "highly valued the understanding shown by the Czechoslovak Communist Party and people" for suppressing the "anti-socialist" riots in Beijing.[38]
 France: The French Foreign Minister, Roland Dumas, said he was "dismayed by the bloody repression" of "an unarmed crowd of demonstrators."[38]
 West Germany: The West German Foreign Ministry urged China "to return to its universally welcomed policies of reform and openness."[38]
 Hong Kong: The crackdown severely affected perceptions of the mainland, with some calling for independence. 200,000 people protested against the Chinese government's response, with the latter considering the protests as "subversive". The Sino-British Joint Declaration was also called into question. [39][40]
 Hungary: The Hungarian government, which was undergoing political reform, reacted strongly to the incident. The Foreign Minister described the events as a "horrible tragedy", and the government expressed "shock", adding that "“fundamental human rights could not be exclusively confined to the internal affairs of any country." Demonstrations were held outside the Chinese embassy. Hungary was the only country in Europe to have substantially reduced relations with China in the aftermath of the events.[41]
 Japan: The Japanese government called the response "intolerable" and froze loans to China. Japan was also the first member of the G7 to restore high level relations with China in the following months.[42][43]
 Kuwait: Kuwait voiced understanding of the measures taken by the Chinese authorities to protect social stability.[44]
 Macao: 150,000 protested in Macao.[45]
 Philippines: The KMU government initially supported the action taken by Chinese authorities, though later issued a "rectified position" which blamed "insufficient information and improper decision making process".[46]
 Poland: The Polish government criticised the response of the Chinese government but not the government itself. A government spokesman called the incident "tragic", with "sincere sympathy for the families of those killed and injured." Daily protests and hunger strikes took place outside the Chinese embassy in Warsaw, often encouraged by exaggerated reporting in newspapers.[41] The government also expressed hope that it did not affect Sino-Polish relations.[41]
 Taiwan: President Lee Teng-hui issued a statement on June 4 strongly condemning the Chinese response: "Early this morning, Chinese communist troops finally used military force to attack the students and others demonstrating peacefully for democracy and freedom in Tiananmen Square in Peking, resulting in heavy casualties and loss of life. Although we anticipated this mad action of the Chinese communists before-hand, it still has moved us to incomparable grief, indignation, and shock."[47]
 Singapore: The government offered no comment on the incident, but criticized Western calls for economic sanctions against China, dismissing them as interfering in China’s internal affairs.[48]
 Soviet Union: Gorbachev did not explicitly condemn the actions, but called for reform. There was an interest on building relations on a recent summit in Beijing, but the events fueled discussion on human rights and Soviet foreign policy. There was some private criticism of the Chinese response.[33] Newly formed opposition groups condemned the crackdown. 10 days after the incident the government expressed regret, calling for political dialogue. Public demonstrations occurred at the Chinese embassy in Moscow. A spokesman on June 10 said the Kremlin was "extremely dismayed" at the incident.[49][50]
 South Korea: The Foreign Ministry expressed "grave concern" and hoped for no further deterioration of the situation. The statement also encouraged dialogue to resolve the issue peacefully.[51]
 Thailand: The Thai government had the warmest relations with Beijing out of all ASEAN members, and expressed confidence that the "fluid situation" in China had passed its "critical point", though it was concerned that it could delay a settlement in the Cambodian–Vietnamese War.[37]
 United Kingdom: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher expressed "utter revulsion and outrage", and was "appalled by the indiscriminate shooting of unarmed people." She promised to relax immigration laws for Hong Kong residents.[52]
 United States: The United States Congress and media responded indignantly to the unfolding situation. President George H. W. Bush suspended military sales and visits. Large scale protests took place around the country.[38]
 Vatican City: The Vatican has no official diplomatic relations with China, but Pope John Paul II expressed hope that the events in China would bring change.[38]
 Vietnam: Vietnam and China had a history of strained relations, but the Vietnamese government quietly supported the Chinese government's position. Media reported on the protests but offered no commentary, and state radio added that the PLA could not have stopped the action after "hooligans and ruffians insulted or beat up soldiers" and destroyed military vehicles. The government expressed that it wanted better relations with China, but did not want to go to the "extremes of Eastern Europe or Tiananmen" - referring to its own stability.[53]

[edit] Aftermath

[edit] Arrests and purges
Chinese authorities summarily tried and executed many of the workers they arrested in Beijing. In contrast, the students - many of whom came from relatively affluent backgrounds and were well-connected - received much lighter sentences. Wang Dan, the student leader who topped the most wanted list, spent seven years in prison. Many of the students and university staff implicated were permanently politically stigmatized, some never to be employed again.
Smaller protest actions continued in other cities for a few days. Some university staff and students who had witnessed the killings in Beijing organised or spurred commemorative events upon their return to school. At Shanghai's prestigious Jiaotong University, for example, the party secretary organised a public commemoration event, with engineering students producing a large, metal wreath. However, these were quickly put down, with those responsible being purged.
During and after the demonstration, the authorities attempted to arrest and prosecute the student leaders of the Chinese democracy movement, notably Wang Dan, Chai Ling, Zhao Changqing and Wuer Kaixi. Wang Dan was arrested, convicted, and sent to prison, then allowed to emigrate to the United States on the grounds of medical parole. As a lesser figure in the demonstrations, Zhao was released after six months in prison. However, he was once again incarcerated for continuing to petition for political reform in China. Wuer Kaixi escaped to Taiwan. He is married and holds a job as a political commentator on Taiwanese national radio.[54] Chai Ling escaped to France, and then to the United States. In a recent public speech given at the University of Michigan,[55] Wang Dan commented on the current status of former student leaders: Chai Ling started a hi-tech company in the US and was permitted to return to China and do business, while Li Lu became an investment banker in Wall Street and started a company. Wang Dan said his plan was to find an academic job in the US after receiving his PhD from Harvard University, although he was eager to return to China if permitted.
The Party leadership expelled Zhao Ziyang from the Politburo Standing Committee of the Communist Party of China (PSC), because he opposed martial law, and Zhao remained under house arrest until his death. Hu Qili, the other member of the PSC who opposed the martial law but abstained from voting, was also removed from the committee. He was, however, able to retain his party membership, and after "changing his opinion", was reassigned as deputy minister of Machine-Building and Electronics Industry. Another reform-minded Chinese leader, Wan Li, was also put under house arrest immediately after he stepped out of an airplane at Beijing Capital International Airport upon returning from his shortened trip abroad, with the official excuse of "health reasons." When Wan Li was released from his house arrest after he finally "changed his opinion" he, like Qiao Shi, was transferred to a different position with equal rank but mostly ceremonial role. Several Chinese ambassadors abroad claimed political asylum.[56][57]
The event elevated Jiang Zemin - then Mayor of Shanghai - to become the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China. Jiang's decisive actions in Shanghai, in closing down reform-leaning publications and preventing deadly violence, won him support from party elders in Beijing. Members of the government prepared a white paper explaining the government's viewpoint on the protests. An anonymous source within the PRC government smuggled the document out of China, and Public Affairs published it in January 2001 as the Tiananmen Papers. The papers include a quote by Communist Party elder Wang Zhen which alludes to the government's response to the demonstrations.
State media mostly gave reports sympathetic to the students in the immediate aftermath. As a result, those responsible were all later removed. Two news anchors who reported this event on 4 June in the daily 1900 hours (7:00 pm) news report on China Central Television were fired because they showed their sad emotions. Wu Xiaoyong, the son of a Communist Party of China Central Committee member, and former PRC foreign minister and vice premier Wu Xueqian were removed from the English Program Department of Chinese Radio International. Editors and other staff at the People's Daily (the newspaper of the Communist Party of China), including its director Qian Liren and Editor-in-Chief Tan Wenrui, were also removed from their posts because of reports in the paper which were sympathetic towards the students. Several editors were arrested, with Wu Xuecan, who organised the publication of an unauthorised Extra edition, sentenced to four years' imprisonment.
Rob Gifford, a National Public Radio journalist, said that much of the political freedoms and debate that occurred post-Mao and pre-Tiananmen ended after Tiananmen. For instance, some of the authors of the film River Elegy (He Shang) were arrested, and some of the authors fled Mainland China. Gifford concluded that "China the concept, China the empire, China the construct of two thousand years of imperial thinking" has forbidden and may always forbid "independent thinking" as that would lead to the questioning of China's political system. Gifford added that people under the age of 37 as of 2007 had "near-complete depoliticization" while older intellectuals no longer focus on political change and instead focus on economic reform.[58]

[edit] Media coverage
The Tiananmen Square protests damaged the reputation of the PRC in the West. Western media had been invited to cover the visit of Mikhail Gorbachev in May, and were thus in an excellent position to cover some of the government crackdown live through networks such as the BBC and CNN. Protestors seized this opportunity, creating signs and banners designed for international television audiences. Coverage was further facilitated by the sharp conflicts within the Chinese government about how to handle the protests. Thus, broadcasting was not immediately stopped.
All international networks were eventually ordered to terminate broadcasts from the city during the crackdown, with the government shutting down the satellite transmissions. Broadcasters attempted to defy these orders by reporting via telephone. Footage was quickly smuggled out of the country, including the image of "the unknown rebel." The only network which was able to record some images during the night was TVE.[59][60]
CBS correspondent Richard Roth and his cameraman were imprisoned during the crackdown. Roth was taken into custody while in the midst of filing a report from the Square via mobile phone. In a frantic voice, he could be heard repeatedly yelling what sounded like "Oh, no! Oh, no!" before the phone was disconnected. He was later released, suffering a slight injury to his face in a scuffle with Chinese authorities attempting to confiscate his phone. Roth later explained he had actually been saying, "Let go!"
Images of the protests would strongly shape Western views and policy toward the PRC throughout the 1990s and into the 21st century. There was considerable sympathy for the student protests among Chinese students in the West. Almost immediately, both the United States and the European Economic Community announced an arms embargo, and China's image as a reforming country and a valuable ally against the Soviet Union was replaced by that of a repressive authoritarian regime. The Tiananmen protests were frequently invoked to argue against trade liberalization with mainland China and by the United States' Blue Team as evidence that the PRC government was an aggressive threat to world peace and US interests.
Meanwhile, state media was ordered to focus on dead soldiers, screening images often on television.[61] Among overseas Chinese students, the Tiananmen Square protests triggered the formation of Internet news services such as the China News Digest and the NGO China Support Network. In the aftermath of Tiananmen, organizations such as the China Alliance for Democracy and the Independent Federation of Chinese Students and Scholars were formed, although these organizations would have limited political impact beyond the mid-1990s.

[edit] Impact on domestic political trends
The Tiananmen square protests dampened the growing concept of political liberalization in communist countries that was popular in the late 1980s; as a result, many democratic reforms that were proposed during the 1980s were swept under the carpet. Although there has been an increase in personal freedom since then, discussions on structural changes to the PRC government and the role of the Communist Party of China remain largely taboo.
Despite early expectations in the West that PRC government would soon collapse and be replaced by the Chinese democracy movement, by the early 21st century the Communist Party of China remained in firm control of the People's Republic of China, and the student movement which started at Tiananmen was in complete disarray.
In Hong Kong, the Tiananmen square protests led to fears that the PRC would not honour its commitments under one country, two systems in the impending handover in 1997. One consequence of this was that the new governor Chris Patten attempted to expand the franchise for the Legislative Council of Hong Kong which led to friction with the PRC. There have been large candlelight vigils attended by tens of thousands in Hong Kong every year since 1989 and these vigils have continued following the transfer of power to the PRC in 1997.
The protests also marked a shift in the political conventions which governed politics in the People's Republic. Prior to the protests, under the 1982 Constitution, the President was a largely symbolic role. By convention, power was distributed between the positions of President, Premier, and General Secretary of the Communist Party of China, all of whom were intended to be different people, in order to prevent the excesses of Mao-style dictatorship. However, after Yang Shangkun used his reserve powers as head of state to mobilize the military, the Presidency again became a position imbued with real power. Subsequently, the President became the same person as the General Secretary of the CPC, and wielded paramount power.
In 1989, neither the Chinese military nor the Beijing police had adequate anti-riot gear, such as rubber bullets and tear gas commonly used in Western nations to break up riots.[62] After the Tiananmen Square protests, riot police in Chinese cities were equipped with non-lethal equipment for riot control.




A memorial depicting a destroyed bicycle and a tank track — symbol of the Tiananmen Square protests — in the Polish city of Wrocław



[edit] Economic impact
There was a significant impact on the Chinese economy after the incident. Foreign loans to China were suspended by the World Bank, Asian Development Bank, and governments;[63] tourism revenue decreased from US$2.2 billion to US$1.8 billion; foreign direct investment commitments were cancelled and there was a rise in defence spending from 8.6% in 1986, to 15.5% in 1990, reversing a previous 10 year decline.[64] The Chinese Premier Li Peng visited the United Nations Security Council on January 31, 1992, and argued that the economic and arms embargoes on China were a violation of national sovereignty.[65]
In the immediate aftermath of the protests, some within the Chinese government attempted to curtail free market reforms that had been undertaken as part of Chinese economic reform and reinstitute administrative economic controls. However, these efforts met with stiff resistance from provincial governors and broke down completely in the early 1990s as a result of the collapse of the Soviet Union and Deng Xiaoping's trip to the south. The continuance of economic reform led to economic growth in the 1990s,[citation needed] which allowed the government to regain much of the support that it had lost in 1989. In addition, none of the current PRC leadership played any active role in the decision to move against the demonstrators, and one major leadership figure Premier Wen Jiabao was an aide to Zhao Ziyang and accompanied him to meet the demonstrators.
The protest leaders at Tiananmen were unable to produce a coherent movement or ideology that would last past the mid-1990s. Many of the student leaders came from relatively well-off sectors of society and were seen as out of touch with common people. A number of them were socialists. Many of the organizations which were started in the aftermath of Tiananmen soon fell apart due to personal infighting. Several overseas democracy activists were supportive of limiting trade with mainland China which significantly decreased their popularity both within China and among the overseas Chinese community. A number of NGOs based in the US, which aim to bring democratic reform to China and relentlessly protest human rights violations that occur in China, remain. One of the oldest and most prominent of them, the China Support Network (CSN), was founded in 1989 by a group of concerned US and Chinese activists in response to Tiananmen Square.

[edit] Continuing issues

[edit] Forbidden topic in mainland China
Unlike the Cultural Revolution, about which people can still easily find information through government-approved books, magazines, web sites, et cetera, this topic is forbidden by the government and accordingly generally cannot be found in mainland Chinese media or web sites.
The official media in mainland China views the crackdown as a necessary reaction to ensure stability. As the incident is not part of any education curriculum in China, usually Chinese youth born after the crackdown learn of the protests from hearsay, family, and foreign media.[66] Every year there is a large rally in Victoria Park, Causeway Bay, Hong Kong, where people remember the victims and demand that the CPC's official view be changed. In 2008, this vigil was reported for the first time in the mainstream Chinese press, but was attributed to be in support of the victims of the recent earthquake in south-east China, and no mention of Tiananmen Square was made.
Petition letters over the incident have emerged from time to time, notably from Dr. Jiang Yanyong and Tiananmen Mothers, an organization founded by a mother of one of the victims killed in 1989 where the families seek vindication, compensation for their lost sons, and the right to receive donations, particularly from abroad.[67] Tiananmen Square is tightly patrolled on the anniversary of 4 June to prevent any commemoration on the Square.
After the PRC Central Government reshuffle in 2004, several cabinet members mentioned Tiananmen. In October 2004, during President Hu Jintao's visit to France, he reiterated that "the government took determined action to calm the political storm of 1989, and enabled China to enjoy a stable development." He insisted that the government's view on the incident would not change.
In March 2004, Premier Wen Jiabao said in a press conference that during the 1990s there was a severe political storm in the PRC, amid the breakdown of the Soviet Union and radical changes in Eastern Europe. He stated that the Communist Central Committee successfully stabilized the open-door policy and protected the "Career of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics."
For 2009, the 20 anniversary of the event, there are growing will by Chinese people to talk openly about the event, and to start an inquiry.[68] It seems that the Chinese government will remain repressive on the issue. Zhang Shijun, an ex-soldier who was 18 in 1989, has been arrested after publishing an open letter to Hu Jintao, to encourage open talk on the issue.[68]

[edit] History deleted inside mainland China
Following the protests, officials banned controversial films, books and shut down a large number of newspapers. Within one year, 12 percent of all newspapers, 7.6 percent of publishing companies, 13 percent of social science periodicals and more than 150 films were banned or shut down. In addition to this, the government also announced it had seized 32 million contraband books and 2.4 million video and audio cassettes.[69]
Currently, due to strong Chinese government censorship including Internet censorship, the news media is forbidden to report anything related to the protests. Websites related to the protest are blocked on the mainland.[70] A search for Tiananmen Square protest information on the Internet in Mainland China largely returns no results apart from the government-mandated version of the events and the official view, which are mostly found on Websites of People's Daily and other heavily-controlled media.[71]
In January 2006, Google agreed to censor their mainland China site, Google.cn, to remove information about the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre,[72] as well as other topics such as Tibetan independence, the banned spiritual practice Falun Gong and the political status of Taiwan. When people search for those censored topics, it will list the following at the bottom of the page in Chinese, "According to the local laws, regulations and policies, part of the searching result is not shown." The uncensored Wikipedia articles on the 1989 protests, both in English and Chinese Wikipedia, have been attributed as a cause of the blocking of Wikipedia by the government in mainland China. The ban of Wikipedia in mainland China was lifted recently, but the link to this incident in Chinese Wikipedia remained dead.
In 2006, the American PBS program "Frontline" broadcast a segment filmed at Peking University, many of whose students participated in the 1989 protests. Four students were shown a picture of the Tank Man, but none of them could identify what was happening in the photo. Some responded that it was a military parade, or an artwork.
On May 15, 2007, the leader of the pro-Beijing Democratic Alliance for Betterment of Hong Kong, Ma Lik, provoked much criticism when he said that "there was not a massacre" during the protests, as there was "no intentional and indiscriminate shooting." He said Hong Kong was "not mature enough" due to believing foreigners' rash claims that a massacre took place. He said that Hong Kong showed through its lack of patriotism and national identity that it would thus "not be ready for democracy until 2022."[73] His remarks were met with wide condemnation from the public.[74] He later acknowledged he might have been "rash and frivolous" with his comments but insisted a it was not a massacre.[74]
On June 4, 2007, the anniversary of the massacre, a notice reading, "Paying tribute to the strongwilled mothers of June 4 victims" was published in the Chengdu Evening News newspaper.[75] The matter is currently being investigated by the Chinese government, and three editors have since been fired from the paper.[76][77] The clerk who approved the ad had reportedly never heard of the June 4 crackdown and had been told that the date was a reference to a mining disaster.[78]

[edit] EU-US arms embargo
Main article: European Union arms embargo on the People's Republic of China
The European Union and United States embargo on weapons sales to the PRC, put in place as a result of the violent suppression of the Tiananmen Square pro-democracy protests, still remains in place. The PRC has been calling for a lifting of the ban for many years and has had a varying amount of support from members of the Council of the European Union. In early 2004, France spearheaded a movement within the EU to lift the ban. Former German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder publicly added his voice to that of former French President Jacques Chirac to have the embargo lifted.
The arms embargo was discussed at a PRC-EU summit in the Netherlands between December 7 and 9, 2004. In the run-up to the summit, the PRC had attempted to increase pressure on the EU Council to lift the ban by warning that the ban could hurt PRC-EU relations. PRC Vice Foreign Minister Zhang Yesui had called the ban "outdated", and he told reporters, "If the ban is maintained, bilateral relations will definitely be affected." In the end, the EU Council did not lift the ban. EU spokeswoman Françoise le Bail said there were still concerns about the PRC's commitment to human rights. But at the time, the EU did state a commitment to work towards lifting the ban.
The PRC continued to press for the embargo to be lifted, and some member states began to drop their opposition. Jacques Chirac pledged to have the ban lifted by mid-2005. However, the Anti-Secession Law of the People's Republic of China passing in March 2005 increased cross-strait tensions, damaging attempts to lift the ban, and several EU Council members changed their minds. Members of the U.S. Congress had also proposed restrictions on the transfer of military technology to the EU if they lifted the ban. Thus the EU Council failed to reach a consensus, and although France and Germany pushed to have the embargo lifted, the embargo was maintained.
Britain took charge of the EU Presidency in July 2005, making the lifting of the embargo all but impossible for the duration of that period. Britain had always had some reservations on lifting the ban and wished to put it to the side, rather than sour EU-US relations further. Other issues such as the failure of the European Constitution and the ensuing disagreement over the European Budget and Common Agricultural Policy superseded the matter of the embargo in importance. Britain wanted to use its presidency to push for wholesale reform of the EU, so the lifting of the ban became even more unlikely. The election of José Manuel Barroso as European Commission President also made a lifting of the ban more difficult. At a meeting with Chinese leaders in mid-July 2005, he said that China's poor record on human rights would slow any changes to the EU's ban on arms sales to China.[79]
Political will also changed in countries that had previously been more in favor of lifting the embargo. Schröder lost the 2005 German federal election to Angela Merkel, who became chancellor on 22 November 2005 - Merkel made her position clear that she was strongly against lifting the ban. Jacques Chirac declared he would not stand again as a candidate for the French Presidency in 2007. His successor, Nicolas Sarkozy, is also in favour of lifting the embargo like Chirac. That is, the French government has changed, but not the French foreign policy on this matter. In addition, the European Parliament has consistently opposed the lifting of the arms embargo to the PRC. Though its agreement is not necessary for lifting the ban, many argue it reflects the will of the European people better as it is the only directly elected European body—the EU Council is appointed by member states. The European Parliament has repeatedly opposed any lifting of the arms embargo on the PRC:

The resolution of 28 April 2005, on the Annual Report on Human Rights in the World 2004 and the EU's policy on the matter,
The resolution of 23 October 2003, on the annual report from the Council to the European Parliament on the main aspects and basic choices of CFSP, it insisted on a peaceful resolution of the Taiwan issue through dialogue across the Taiwan Straits and called on China to withdraw missiles in the coastal provinces adjacent to the Taiwan Straits, and
The resolution on relations between the EU, China and Taiwan and security in the Far East of 7 July 2005. The EP has noted several times that the current human rights situation in China, with regards to fundamental civil, cultural and political freedoms does not meet even the international standards recognized by China.

The arms embargo has limited China's options from where it may seek military hardware. Among the sources that were sought included the former Soviet bloc that it had a strained relationship with as a result of the Sino-Soviet split. Other willing suppliers have previously included Israel and South Africa, but American pressure has restricted future co-operation. [80]

[edit] Compensation
Although the Chinese government never officially acknowledged wrongdoing when it came to the incident, in April 2006 a payment was made to the family of one of the victims, the first publicized case of the government offering redress to a Tiananmen-related victim's family. The payment was termed a "hardship assistance", given to Tang Deying (唐德英) whose son, Zhou Guocong (simplified Chinese: 周国聪; traditional Chinese: 周國聰) died at the age of 15 while in police custody in Chengdu on 6 June 1989, two days after the Chinese Army dispersed the Tiananmen protestors. The woman was reportedly paid 70,000 yuan (approximately $10,250 USD). This has been welcomed by various Chinese activists, but was regarded by some as a measure to maintain social stability and not believed to herald a changing of the Party's official position.[81]

[edit] UN report
On 21 November, 2008, the U.N. Committee against Torture urged China to apologize for the incident, release dissidents still held, and conduct an investigation of the events surrounding the protest. [82][83]

[edit] List of the famous participants

Zhao Ziyang, former General Secretary of the Communist Party of China
Li Peng, former Premier of the Communist Party of China
Wen Jiabao, current Premier of the Communist Party of China
Liu Xiaobo, famous Chinese dissident
Yu Dongyue, former Chinese journalist who threw paint-filled eggs onto the Mao Zedong portrait on the Square
Bei Dao, poet (ideological influence, during the protests was participating at a conference in Berlin)
Cui Jian, the so-called "father of Chinese rock," whose song "Nothing To My Name" was considered an unofficial "anthem" for students and protesters there[84][85]
"Tank Man", the unknown rebel who stood in front of the line of approaching military tanks
"Tank Driver", the unknown tank driver


[edit] Cultural references




Execution, a painting inspired by the event became the most expensive Chinese contemporary art sold in 2007



[edit] Censored books, films and TV shows in mainland China

Political Struggles in China's Reform Era by Yang Jisheng, for featuring secret interviews with Zhao Ziyang and rejecting the Chinese government's position on the protests.[86]
In 2006, the novel Forbidden City, by William Bell, a fictionalised version of the protests, was banned.[citation needed]
Summer Palace was banned in 2006, ostensibly because it was screened without permission, but likely also because of its mention of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989.[87]
Collection of June Fourth Poems, a collection of poems about the protests.[88]
Writings or interviews with Zhao Ziyang or Bao Tong are banned.[89] [90] As such, Conversations with Zhao Ziyang in House Arrest by Zong Fengmin was not published due to government pressure.[91]
International media programmes, such as CNN, are blacked out when the anniversary on June 4 every year is mentioned on televisions in Chinese hotels and homes for foreigners.[92]


[edit] Songs
This event has inspired many references within lyrics and album art - both in political and non-political usages.
The song "Tin Omen" by the Canadian industrial band Skinny Puppy is a reference to this uprising and massacre. Also song refers to the tumultuous years around 1968 where there were uprisings around the world and the Kent State uprising and massacre in the United States.
The British rock band The Cure, during a concert in Rome on 4 June 1989, dedicated their last encore, "Faith," to "everyone that died today in China." Singer Robert Smith extended the song with improvised lyrics about a person who has a gun held to their mouth and urged to say "Yes" to the question "Do you love me?", but finally refuses to do so. The bootlegged recording of this 15 minute version is known as "Tiananmen Faith". In the same year, Joan Baez wrote and recorded her folk anthem "China" to commemorate the democratic revolt. Billy Joel's history-themed single "We Didn't Start the Fire", released late 1989, mentions the event in the line "China's under martial law."
Progressive rock group Marillion wrote a song titled "The King of Sunset Town" that uses imagery from the Tiananmen Square incidents, such as "a puppet king on the Fourth of June" and "before the Twenty-Seventh came". The song was released on their album Seasons End in September 1989.
The band System of a Down referenced the event in the opening lines to the song "Hypnotize", which are, "Why don't you ask the kids at Tiananmen Square, was fashion the reason why they were there?"
Shiny Happy People by REM is supposedly an ironic reference to a piece of roughly translated Chinese propaganda regarding the massacre, two years before the song was released.[93] The inference apparently relates to how politics is controlled by those with children in powerful positions, not idealistic revolting unhappy students on the ground in Tiananmen Square. The idea that propaganda is often used to cover up stark weaknesses in political systems. The song is mockingly played to encourage unknown political candidates to be upbeat even under fire.
American thrash metal band Slayer released a song "Blood Red" on their 1990 album titled "Seasons in the Abyss", which was inspired by the Tiananmen Square incident. The song includes the lines: "Peaceful confrontation meets war machine, Seizing all civil liberties... No disguise can deface evil, The massacre of innocent people." The same year, another American thrash metal band Testament released the song "Seven Days in May" protesting the Beijing massacre (though the assault on Tiananmen Square took place on 3 June, not in May) on their "Souls of Black" album, including the words: "In the square they play the game, That's when the tanks and the army came... They called the murders minimal, Described their victims as criminals... Dead souls like you and me, Who only wanted free society".
British anarchist pop band Chumbawamba released a song called "Tiananmen Square" on their 1990 album Slap!. The lyrics are built around the fact the People's Liberation Army murdered the people. The Tank Man is also referenced ("You must've seen it, the boy in the white shirt").
Sinéad O'Connor, on her 1990 album I Do Not Want What I Haven't Got, referenced the killings in her song "Black Boys on Mopeds" with the following opening lines: "Margaret Thatcher on TV, Shocked by the deaths that took place in Beijing".
British goth rock outfit Siouxsie and the Banshees recorded the song "The Ghost in You" for their album Superstition in 1991. It is about a person who witnessed the massacre returning to Tiananmen Square and remembering the terrible emotions he/she experienced there.
Roger Waters referred to the massacre on the song "Watching TV" from his 1992 album Amused to Death. In 1996, Nevermore released the track titled "The Tiananmen Man" on their The Politics of Ecstasy album. The song is about the Tank Man who famously stood in front of the tanks in the Square. The song "Hypnotize" on the 2005 album Hypnotize by System Of A Down is based on the event.
In 2006 a Chinese folk singer Li Zhi wrote a song titled "The Square", where the sound of bullets and ambulance and voice of TAM mother Mrs. Ding were sampled.[94] In 2007 Hed PE wrote a song entitled "Tiananmen Squared" on their Insomnia album.
Calogero (French singer) also has a song called Tien An Men.
Portuguese band Kalashnikov has a song called Tiananmen Tiananmen. The chorus of the song says "Tiananmen Tiananmen, kill another yellow men"

[edit] Television
CNN news anchor Kyra Phillips drew criticism in March 2006 when she compared the 2006 youth protests in France, in which it was later determined that no one was killed, to the Tiananmen Square protests, saying "Sort of brings back memories of Tiananmen Square, when you saw these activists in front of tanks."[95] CNN's Chris Burns told French Foreign Minister Philippe Douste-Blazy that her comments were "regrettable" and would receive some disciplinary actions.[96]
In April 2006, the PBS series Frontline produced an episode titled "The Tank Man", which examined his role in the 1989 Tiananmen Square Protests and the change that has overtaken the P.R.C. economically and politically since.
In The Simpsons episode Goo Goo Gai Pan when the family visits Beijing, there is a plaque reading, "On this spot in 1989, nothing happened", in Tiananmen Square, a reference to the Chinese Government's denial of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989.

[edit] Movies
The movie "Rapid Fire" Starring Brandon Lee depicts images of the Tiananman square Killings

[edit] See also

Bonus Army
Executive Order 12711
Canton-Hong Kong strike
Human rights in the People's Republic of China
Kent State shootings
Pillar of Shame
Sharpeville massacre
Tank Man
Tlatelolco massacre
Zhang Zhixin


[edit] Notes


^ http://www.economicexpert.com/a/Tiananmen:Square:protests:of:1989.htm
^ a b c d e Nathan, Andrew J. (January/February 2001). "The Tiananmen Papers". Foreign Affairs. http://www.foreignaffairs.org/20010101faessay4257-p0/andrew-j-nathan/the-tiananmen-papers.html. 
^ http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tankman/cron/
^ Spence, Jonathan D. The Search for Modern China. New York: Norton, 1999, p685
^ Spence, Jonathan D. The Search for Modern China. New York: Norton, 1999, p697
^ Science and Techonolgy Daily - China website
^ "Xinhua: Full text of the 4-26 Editorial". http://news.xinhuanet.com/ziliao/2005-02/23/content_2609426.htm. 
^ Amnesty International, 30 August 1989. Preliminary Findings on Killings of Unarmed Civilians, Arbitrary Arrests and Summary Executions Since 3 June 1989, p.19
^ The Gate of Heavenly Peace, movie script, 1995
^ "Interview with Liu Binyan (June 1999)". http://www.hrw.org/campaigns/china-99/liubinyan.htm. 
^ (Liu 1994, 315)
^ Craig C. Calhoun, "Popular Protest and Political Culture in Modern China", 1994, 113
^ Miles, J. A. R., The Legacy of Tiananmen: China in Disarray. University of Michigan Press, 1997. ISBN 978-0472084517.
^ "Hundreads of Billions of Protesters". Frontline. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tankman/view/. 
^ Kate Wright, the Political Fortunes of the World Economic Herald, Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs, nr 23, pp 121-132 (1990)
^ "Secretary of State's Morning Summary for June 3, 1989". US State Dept Documents. George Washington University. http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB16/documents/09-01.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-04. 
^ a b c Picture Power:Tiananmen Standoff BBC News. Last updated 7 October 2005.
^ "TIME 100: The Unknown Rebel". http://www.time.com/time/time100/leaders/profile/rebel.html. 
^ a b http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tankman/cron/ BBC Frontline - The Memory of Tiananmen 1989
^ a b "A Reassessment of How Many Died In the Military Crackdown in Beijing, The New York Times, June 21, 1989". http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=950DE0DC143EF932A15755C0A96F948260&sec=&spon=&pagewanted=all. 
^ China Makes Zhao Purge Formal, But He Still Gets to Be a Comrade, New York Times, 1 July 1989
^ a b c How Many Really Died? Time magazine, June 04, 1990
^ "六四民運 (June4th 1989 Archive)" (in Chinese). http://www.sokamonline.com/indexPage/64-Kill.cfm. Retrieved on 2008-08-04. 
^ Damon Pang, `Massacre' remarks trigger sharp exchange at City Forum, The Standard, May 21, 2007
^ CSN warns Americans about the AP's "climb down" on Tiananmen numbers, CSN, 18 May 2004
^ Lilley, James, China Hands, 322.
^ Langley, A. Tiananmen Square: Massacre Crushes China's Democracy Movement. Compass Point Books, 2009. ISBN 978-0756541019.
^ a b Timperlake, Edward. 1999 (1999). Red Dragon Rising. Regnery Publishing. ISBN 0895262584
^ Sino-American Relations: One Year After the Massacre at Tiananmen Square. 2005 (1991). US congress publishing. No ISBN digitized archive via Stanford University
^ List of casualties, Ding Zilin, Retrieved 2007-05-21 (Chinese)
^ "Secretary of State's Morning Summary for June 4, 1989". George Washington University. http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB16/documents/13-01.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-04. 
^ a b Strahan, A. Australia's China: Changing Perceptions from the 1930s to the 1990s. Cambridge University Press, 1996. p.302. ISBN 978-0521484978.
^ a b c http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB16/documents/36-04.htm State Department Bureau of Intelligence and Research, "China: Aftermath of the Crisis" (July 27, 1989)
^ Bush halts arms sales to China. Chicago Tribune, June 6, 1989.
^ Youngs, R. The European Union and the Promotion of Democracy. Oxford University Press, 2002. ISBN 978-0199249794.
^ Los Angeles Times, June 19, 1989.
^ a b Turmoil in China; Asian Diplomats Express Concern, New York Times, June 8, 1989.
^ a b c d e The West Condemns the Crackdown, New York Times, June 5, 1989.
^ Mansfield, Y. & Pizam, A. Tourism and safety in the PRC. Tourism, Security and Safety: From Theory to Practice. 2006. p. 197. ISBN 978-0750678988.
^ Yahuda, M. B. Hong Kong: China's Challenge. Routledge, 1996. ISBN 978-0415140713.
^ a b c Columbus, F. A. Central and Eastern Europe in Transition. Nova Publishers, 1998. p. 22-23. ISBN 978-1560725961.
^ Klien, S. Rethinking Japan's Identity and International Role: An Intercultural Perspective. Routledge, 2002. p. 89. ISBN 978-0415934381.
^ China rips US for halting arms flow, aiding dissident, Chicago Sun Times, June 8, 1989.
^ Huwaidin, M. B. China's Relations with Arabia and the Gulf, 1949-1999. Routledge, 2002. p. 196. ISBN 978-0700717309.
^ Carroll, J. M. "A Concise History of Hong Kong." Rowman & Littlefield, 2007. ISBN 978-0742534223.
^ West, L. A. Militant Labor in the Philippines. Temple University Press, 1997. p. 178. ISBN 978-1566394918.
^ Events In Beijing (Senate - June 07, 1989)
^ Non Intervention and State Soveriegnity in the Asia-Pacific, Dickens, D. & Wilson-Roberts, G. Centre for Strategic Studies.
^ Wishnick E. Mending Fences: The Evolution of Moscow's China Policy, from Brezhnev to Yeltsin. University of Washington Press, 2001. p.106-107. ISBN 978-0295981284.
^ TURMOIL IN CHINA; Kremlin Dismayed, Aide Says, New York Times, June 10, 1989.
^ Zhang, L., Nathan, A. J., Link, P. & Schell O. The Tiananmen Papers: The Chinese Leadership's Decision to Use Force Against Their Own People - In Their Own Words. PublicAffairs, 2002. ISBN 978-1586481223.
^ Carroll, J. M. A Concise History of Hong Kong. Rowman & Littlefield, 2007. ISBN 978-0742534223.
^ Jeshurun, C. China, India, Japan and the Security of Southeast Asia. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 1993. ISBN 978-9813016613.
^ Listening to China's Dissidents, Business Week, December 17, 2001.
^ Blog: A talk by Wang Dan (Chinese) (2007-11-20)
^ Beijing Orders Its Ambassadors Home for a Meeting, New York Times, June 29, 1989.
^ Washington Post, June 17, 1989
^ Gifford, Rob. "No Longer Relying on Heaven." China Road. 167-168.
^ Interview with Eugenio Bregolat, Spanish ambassador in Beijing during the Tiananmen Square protests (Spanish) (2007-08-09)
^ Eugenio Bregolat (2007-06-04). "TVE in Tiananmen" (in Spanish). La Vanguardia. http://www.lavanguardia.es/premium/publica/publica?COMPID=51357369255&ID_PAGINA=3746&ID_FORMATO=9&turbourl=false. Retrieved on 2007-09-04. 
^ The Nuclear Age: TimeFrame AD 1950-1990. Time-Life Books, 1990.
^ Chinese human rights official says the crackdown 'completely correct' Rebecca MacKinnon, "Tiananmen Ten Years Later." CNN, 2 June 1999.
^ Thakur, M., Burton, G. E. & Srivastava, B. N. International Management: Concepts and Cases. Tata McGraw-Hill, 1997. p.404-405. ISBN 978-0074633953.
^ Kelley, N. L. & Shenkar, O. International Business in China. Routledge, 1993. p.120-122. ISBN 978-0415053457.
^ Gordon, W. C. The United Nations at the Crossroads of Reform. M. E. Sharpe, 1994. p.167. ISBN 978-1563244001.
^ [1], Human Rights Watch, June 2, 2004
^ Relatives of dead at Tiananmen seek review, The Associated Press, International Herald Tribune, May 31, 2006
^ a b Les déboires de Zhang Shijun, ancien soldat trop bavard de la répression de Tienanmen, Le Monde, 2009/03/23
^ Pei, M. (1994). From Reform to Revolution: The Demise of Communism in China and the Soviet Union. Harvard University Press. pp. 152. ISBN 978-0674325630.
^ China lifts ban on Tiananmen sites, The Guardian, August 3, 2008.
^ The Tank Man, Part 6:The Struggle to Control Information, Frontline, 11 April 2006
^ Google censors itself for China, BBC News, January 25, 2006
^ Ambrose Leung, "Fury at DAB chief's Tiananmen tirade", Page 1, South China Morning Post, May 16, 2007
^ a b Hundreds march to mark Tiananmen Square massacre, Independent.ie, May 27, 2007.
^ "No title". Archived from the original on 2007-06-20. http://web.archive.org/web/20070620222407/http://www.zonaeuropa.com/20070616_05.jpg. 
^ "China investigates Tiananmen ad". Reuters. 2007-06-05. http://news.brisbanetimes.com.au/world/china-investigates-tiananmen-ad-20070605-guf.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-05. 
^ "Chengdu Evening News editors fired over Tiananmen ad". Reuters. 2007-06-07. http://www.reuters.com/article/oddlyEnoughNews/idUSPEK17464820070607. Retrieved on 2008-08-05. 
^ "Young clerk let Tiananmen ad slip past censors: paper". Reuters. 2007-06-06. http://www.reuters.com/article/worldNews/idUSHKG14616220070606. Retrieved on 2008-08-05. 
^ Daniel Griffiths, EC leader urges China to reform, BBC News, 15 July 2005
^ "Japan concerned by call to lift China embargo - official", Forbes, November 27, 2008.
^ "China makes 1989 Tiananmen payout". BBC News. 2006-04-30. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/asia-pacific/4960762.stm. 
^ UN Report - "Concluding observations of the Committee against Torture: China", 21 November, 2008.
^ "UN panel urges China apology to 1989 protesters", Associated Press, 21 November, 2008.
^ Matusitz, Jonathan (23 May 2007). Semiotics of Music: Analysis of Cui Jian’s ‘Nothing to My Name;' The Anthem for the Chinese Youths in the Post-Cultural Revolution Era. International Communication Association. http://www.allacademic.com/meta/p_mla_apa_research_citation/1/6/8/5/2/p168523_index.html. Retrieved on 28 February 2009. 
^ "Cui Jian: The man who rocks China". The Independent. 14 November 2005. http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/music/features/cui-jian-the-man-who-rocks-china-515208.html. Retrieved on 28 February 2009. 
^ In China, Two Books but One Party, Washington Post, March 12, 2005.
^ Director hailed at Cannes faces five-year film ban in China, The Guardian, September 5, 2006.
^ China : ban on anthology of poems about Tiananmen Square movement, Reporters Without Borders, September 7, 2007.
^ The fading of Jiang's 'Three Represents', Asia Times, November 7, 2002.
^ Reporter seeking secret documents arrested, Independent Online, May 31, 2005.
^ Trying times for journalists in China, Asia Times, August 29, 2006.
^ Fifteenth anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre, Reporters Without Borders, June 2, 2004.
^ The 111 Wussiest Songs of All Time (No. 1) - AOL Music
^ "°Ù¶ÈËÑË÷_ÀîÖ¾ ¡¶¹ã³¡¡· Ìì°²ÃÅ". http://www.baidu.com/s?ie=gb2312&bs=%C0%EE%D6%BE+%B9%E3%B3%A1+%E8%F3%B8%DF%CF%C8%C9%FA+%CC%EC%B0%B2%C3%C5&sr=&z=&cl=3&f=8&wd=%C0%EE%D6%BE+%A1%B6%B9%E3%B3%A1%A1%B7+%CC%EC%B0%B2%C3%C5&ct=0. 
^ "French protests 'Tiananmen'". FIN24. 2006-03-28. http://www.fin24.com/articles/default/display_article.aspx?ArticleId=1518-1783_1906730. Retrieved on 2007-03-29. 
^ "Observer: Just a little comment". Financial Times. 2006-03-30. pp. p 14. http://search.ft.com/iab?queryText=%22Chris%20Burns%22&y=11&aje=true&x=14&id=060330000834&location=http%3A%2F%2Fsearch.ft.com%2FftArticle%3FqueryText%3D%2522Chris+Burns%2522%26y%3D11%26aje%3Dtrue%26x%3D14%26id%3D060330000834&referer=http%3A%2F%2Fsearch.ft.com%2Fsearch%3FqueryText%3D%22Chris+Burns%22. Retrieved on 2008-08-05. 



[edit] Further reading


Binyan, Liu; Ruan Ming and Xu Gang (1989). Tell the World: What happened in China and Why. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0394583709. OCLC 20392647. 
Black, George; Robin Munro (1993). Black Hands of Beijing: Lives of Defiance in China's Democracy Movement. New York: John Wiley. ISBN 978-0471579779. OCLC 243766880 27186722. 
Calhoun, Craig C; Jeffrey N. Wasserstrom and Elizabeth Perry (Editors) (1994). "Science, Democracy, and the Politics of Identity". Popular Protest and Political Culture in Modern China. Westview Press. pp. 140–7. ISBN 978-0813320427. OCLC 30623957. 
Salisbury, Harrison (1992). The New Emperors: China in the Era of Mao and Deng. New York: Avon. ISBN 978-0380720255. OCLC 28306886. 
Spence, Jonathan D (1999). "Testing the Limits". The Search for Modern China. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0393973518. OCLC 39143093 59383489. 
Wong, Jan (1997). Red China Blues: My Long March from Mao to Now (Trade paperback, 416 pages ed.). Doubleday. ISBN 978-0385482325. OCLC 37690446. 
Xiaobo, Liu; Jeffrey N Wasserstrom and Elizabeth Perry (Editors) (1994). "That Holy Word, "Revolution"". Popular Protest and Political Culture in Modern China. Westview Press. ISBN 978-0813320427. OCLC 30623957. 
Zhang, Liang (pseudonym) (2001) (in Chinese). June Fourth: The True Story. Xianggang: Ming jing chu ban she. ISBN 978-1586481223. OCLC 243498894 46859114 50791624 60716940. 
Zhang, Liang (pseudonym) (Compiler) (2002). The Tiananmen Papers (Andrew J. Nathan and Perry Link (Editors) ed.). New York: PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1586480127. OCLC 186473494 223096511 237407905 45087023 59551415.  Review and synopis of the book is in the journal Foreign Affairs at The Tiananmen Papers



[edit] External links

Find more about Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Condolence Book for Victims of Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 June 4th
Video-1 detailing the Tiananmen Square Massacre in 1989
Video-2 detailing the Tiananmen Square Massacre in 1989
Hong Kong Alliance In Support Of Patriotic Democratic Movements Of China
BBC report about Tiananmen Protests
BBC's "Witnessing Tiananmen: Clearing the square" with eyewitness accounts of Tiananmen
Eyeballing Tiananmen Square Massacre - Photo Gallery
Eyewitness account of events on the night of June 4
Eyewitness account of the massacre from a Marxist's Perspective
Human Rights in China's Section on 1989 Democracy movement
The Gate of Heavenly Peace - Feature-length Documentary
The Myth of Tiananmen And the Price of a Passive Press Columbia Journalism Review
"The Tank Man", 2006 PBS documentary
The Tiananmen Square Confrontation, Alternative Insight
The Tiananmen Square massacre myth
The U.S. "Tiananmen Papers" - US Perceptions of the crisis
The Virtual Museum of China '89
Tiananmen Square, 1989 The Declassified History
Victims of June 4 Massacre
"Tiananmen: Love Squared", an educational romantic comedy on the subject.








v • d • e

Cold War






Participants   NATO · Non-Aligned Movement · People's Republic of China · Warsaw Pact





1940s

Yalta Conference · Operation Unthinkable · Potsdam Conference · Gouzenko Affair · Iran crisis of 1946 · Chinese Civil War · Greek Civil War · Restatement of Policy on Germany · Truman Doctrine · Marshall Plan · Czechoslovak coup d'état of 1948 · Tito–Stalin split · Berlin Blockade · Western betrayal · Iron Curtain · Eastern Bloc






1950s

Korean War · First Indochina War · 1953 Iranian coup d'état · Uprising of 1953 in East Germany · 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état · First Taiwan Strait Crisis · Geneva Summit (1955) · Poznań 1956 protests · Hungarian Revolution of 1956 · Suez Crisis · Sputnik crisis · Second Taiwan Strait Crisis · Cuban Revolution · Kitchen Debate · Asian-African Conference · Bricker Amendment · McCarthyism · Operation Gladio · Hallstein Doctrine






1960s

Congo Crisis · Sino-Soviet split · 1960 U-2 incident · Bay of Pigs Invasion · Cuban Missile Crisis · Berlin Wall · Vietnam War · 1964 Brazilian coup d'état · U.S. invasion of the Dominican Republic · South African Border War · Transition to the New Order · Domino theory · Bangkok Declaration · Laotian Civil War · Greek military junta of 1967–1974 · Cultural Revolution · 1962 Sino-Indian War · Prague Spring · Goulash Communism · Sino-Soviet border conflict






1970s

Détente · Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty · Black September in Jordan · Cambodian Civil War · Ping Pong Diplomacy · Four Power Agreement on Berlin · 1972 Nixon visit to China · 1973 Chilean coup d'état · Yom Kippur War · Strategic Arms Limitation Talks · Angolan Civil War · Mozambican Civil War · Ogaden War · Cambodian-Vietnamese War · Sino-Vietnamese War · Iranian Revolution · Operation Condor · Bangladesh Liberation War  · Korean Air Lines Flight 902






1980s

Soviet war in Afghanistan · Olympic boycotts · History of Solidarity · Contras · Central American Crisis · RYAN · Korean Air Lines Flight 007 · Able Archer 83 · Strategic Defense Initiative · Invasion of Grenada · Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 · Singing Revolution · Invasion of Panama · Fall of the Berlin Wall · Revolutions of 1989 · Glasnost · Perestroika






1990s

Breakup of Yugoslavia · Dissolution of the USSR · Dissolution of Czechoslovakia






See also

Soviet and Russian espionage in U.S. · Soviet Union–United States relations · NATO-Russia relations






Establishments

ASEAN · Central Intelligence Agency · Comecon · European Community · KGB · Stasi






Races

Arms race · Nuclear arms race · Space Race






Ideologies

Capitalism · Liberal democracy · Communism · Stalinism · Trotskyism · Maoism






Propaganda

Pravda · Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty · Red Scare · Voice of America · Voice of Russia






Foreign policy

Truman Doctrine · Marshall Plan · Containment · Eisenhower Doctrine · Domino theory · Kennedy Doctrine · Peaceful coexistence · Ostpolitik · Johnson Doctrine · Brezhnev Doctrine · Nixon Doctrine · Ulbricht Doctrine · Carter Doctrine · Reagan Doctrine · Rollback






Timeline of events · Portal · Category






  



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tiananmen_Square_protests_of_1989"
Categories: Protests in China | 1989 in China | Conflicts in 1989 | History of Beijing | History of the People's Republic of China | Massacres in China | Protests in the People's Republic of China | Tiananmen Square protests of 1989Hidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | Articles containing Chinese language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | China articles missing geocoordinate data 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Simple English
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Türkçe
Tiếng Việt
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 02:21 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
