













Terraforming - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Terraforming";
		var wgTitle = "Terraforming";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "29824";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283068523;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Terraforming

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the hypothetical planetary engineering process.  For the Shellac album, see Terraform (Shellac). For the Knut album, see Terraformer (album).




Artist's conception of a terraformed Mars in four stages of development.


Terraforming (literally, "Earth-shaping") of a planet, moon, or other body is the hypothetical process of deliberately modifying its atmosphere, temperature, surface topography or ecology to be similar to those of Earth to make it habitable by humans.
The term is sometimes used more generally as a synonym for planetary engineering. The concept of terraforming developed from both science fiction and actual science. The term was coined by Jack Williamson in a science-fiction story ("Collision Orbit") published during 1942 in Astounding Science Fiction,[1] but the concept may pre-date this work.[citation needed]
Based on experiences with Earth, the environment of a planet can be altered deliberately: however the feasibility of creating an unconstrained planetary biosphere that mimics Earth on another planet has yet to be verified. Mars is considered by many to be the most likely candidate for terraformation. Much study has been done concerning the possibility of heating the planet and altering its atmosphere, and NASA has even hosted debates on the subject. Several potential methods of altering the climate of Mars may fall within humanity's technological capabilities, but at present the economic resources required to do so are far beyond that which any government or society is willing to allocate to the purpose. The long timescales and practicality of terraforming are the subject of debate. Other unanswered questions relate to the ethics, logistics, economics, politics and methodology of altering the environment of an extraterrestrial world.




Contents


1 History of scholarly study
2 Requirements for sustaining terrestrial life
3 Further stages of terraforming
4 Prospective planets

4.1 Mars
4.2 Venus
4.3 Europa (moon)
4.4 Other planets and solar system entities


5 Paraterraforming
6 Resources
7 Ethical issues
8 Economic issues
9 Political issues
10 Popular culture
11 See also
12 References
13 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History of scholarly study





It has been suggested that Ecopoiesis and Planetary ecosynthesis be merged into this article or section. (Discuss)


Carl Sagan, an astronomer, proposed the planetary engineering of Venus in a 1961 article published in the journal Science titled, "The Planet Venus."[2] Sagan imagined seeding the atmosphere of Venus with algae, which would remove carbon dioxide and reduce the greenhouse effect until surface temperatures dropped to "comfortable" levels. Three billion years ago, the Earth had a carbon dioxide atmosphere. Blue-green algae and water evaporation changed the earth's atmosphere into oxygen and nitrogen gas. Later discoveries about the conditions on Venus made this particular approach impossible since Venus has too much atmosphere to process and sequester. Even if atmospheric algae could thrive in the hostile and arid environment of Venus' upper atmosphere, any carbon that was fixed in organic form would be liberated as carbon dioxide again as soon as it fell into the hot lower regions.
Sagan also visualized making Mars habitable for human life in "Planetary Engineering on Mars," a 1973 article published in the journal Icarus.[3] Three years later, NASA addressed the issue of planetary engineering officially in a study, but used the term planetary ecosynthesis instead.[4] The study concluded that it was possible for Mars to support life and be made into a habitable planet. That same year 1976, one researcher, Joel Levine, organized the first conference session on terraforming, which at the time was called "Planetary Modeling."
In March 1979, NASA engineer and author James Oberg organized the "First Terraforming Colloquium," a special session on terraforming held at the Lunar and Planetary Science Conference in Houston. Oberg popularized the terraforming concepts discussed at the colloquium to the general public in his 1981 book, New Earths.[5] Not until 1982 was the word terraforming used in the title of a published journal article. Planetologist Christopher McKay wrote "Terraforming Mars," a paper for the Journal of the British Interplanetary Society.[6] The paper discussed the prospects of a self-regulating Martian biosphere, and McKay's use of the word has since become the preferred term. During 1984, James Lovelock and Michael Allaby published The Greening of Mars.[7] Lovelock's book was one of the first to describe a novel method of warming Mars, where chlorofluorocarbons are added to the atmosphere. Motivated by Lovelock's book, biophysicist Robert Haynes worked behind the scenes to promote terraforming, and contributed the word ecopoiesis to its lexicon.
Beginning in 1985, Martyn J. Fogg began publishing several articles on terraforming. He also served as editor for a full issue on terraforming for the Journal of the British Interplanetary Society in 1991, and in 1995 published the book Terraforming: Engineering Planetary Environments.[8] Fogg also maintains an active website called The Terraforming Information Pages.[9]
Fogg used the following definitions for different aspects related to terraforming:

Planetary Engineering: the application of technology for the purpose of influencing the global properties of a planet.
Geoengineering: planetary engineering applied specifically to the Earth. It includes only those macroengineering concepts that deal with the alteration of some global parameter, such as the greenhouse effect, atmospheric composition, insolation or impact flux.
Terraforming: a process of planetary engineering, specifically directed at enhancing the capacity of an extraterrestrial planetary environment to support life as we know it. The ultimate in terraforming would be to create an open planetary biosphere emulating all the functions of the biosphere of the Earth, one that would be fully habitable for human beings.
Astrophysical Engineering: taken to represent proposed activities, relating to future habitation, that are envisaged to occur on a scale greater than that of "conventional" planetary engineering.

Fogg also devised definitions for candidate planets of varying degrees of human compatibility:

Habitable Planet (HP): A world with an environment sufficiently similar to the Earth as to allow comfortable and free human habitation.
Biocompatible Planet (BP): A planet possessing the necessary physical parameters for life to flourish on its surface. If initially lifeless, then such a world could host a biosphere of considerable complexity without the need for terraforming.
Easily Terraformable Planet (ETP): A planet that might be rendered biocompatible, or possibly habitable, and maintained so by modest planetary engineering techniques and with the limited resources of a starship or robot precursor mission.

Fogg designates Mars as having been a biologically compatible planet in its youth, but not being in any of these three categories in its present state, since it could only be terraformed with relatively greater difficulty. Mars Society founder Robert Zubrin produced a plan for a Mars return mission called Mars Direct that would set up a permanent human presence on Mars and steer efforts towards eventual terraformation.[10]
The principal reason given to pursue terraforming is the creation of an ecology to support a world suitable for habitation by humans. However, some researchers believe that space habitats will provide a more economical means for supporting space colonization. If research in nanotechnology and other advanced chemical processes continues apace, it may become feasible to terraform planets in centuries rather than millennia. On the other hand, it may become reasonable to modify humans so that they do not require an oxygen/nitrogen atmosphere in a 1 g gravity field to live comfortably. That would then reduce the need to terraform worlds, or at least the degree to which other worlds' environments would need to be altered.

[edit] Requirements for sustaining terrestrial life
Main article: Planetary habitability
An absolute requirement for life is an energy source, but the notion of planetary habitability implies that many other geophysical, geochemical, and astrophysical criteria must be met before the surface of an astronomical body is able to support life. Of particular interest is the set of factors that has sustained complex, multicellular animals in addition to simpler organisms on this planet. Research and theory in this regard is a component of planetary science and the emerging discipline of astrobiology.




Artist's conception of a terraformed Mars. This realistic portrayal is approximately centered on the prime meridian, 30 degrees north latitude. The hypothesized oceans are depicted with sea level at approximately two kilometers below average surface elevation. The ocean submerges what are now Vastitas Borealis, Acidalia Planitia, Chryse Planitia, and Xanthe Terra; the visible landmasses are Tempe Terra at left, Aonia Terra at bottom, Terra Meridiani at lower right, and Arabia Terra at upper right. Rivers that feed the ocean at lower right occupy what are now Valles Marineris and Ares Vallis, while the large lake at lower right occupies what is now Aram Chaos.






Photorealistic conception of a terraformed Mars. In the middle is the hypothesized Mariner Bay, currently part of the Mariner Valleys, up in the extreme north part of the Arctic is the Acidalia Planitia Sea.


In its astrobiology roadmap, NASA has defined the principal habitability criteria as "extended regions of liquid water, conditions favorable for the assembly of complex organic molecules, and energy sources to sustain metabolism."[11] 
[edit] Further stages of terraforming
Main article: Ecopoiesis
Once conditions become more suitable to life, the importation of microbial life could begin.[8] As conditions approach that of Earth, plant life could also be brought in. This would accelerate the production of oxygen, which theoretically would make the planet eventually able to support animal and human life.

[edit] Prospective planets

[edit] Mars
Main article: Terraforming of Mars
See also: Colonization of Mars
There is some scientific debate over whether it would even be possible to terraform Mars, or how stable its climate would be once terraformed. It is possible that over geological timescales—tens or hundreds of millions of years—Mars could lose its water and atmosphere again, possibly to the same processes that reduced it to its current state. Indeed, it is thought that Mars once did have a relatively Earth-like environment early in its history, with a thicker atmosphere and abundant water that was lost over the course of hundreds of millions of years.
The exact mechanism of this loss is still unclear, though several mechanisms have been proposed. The lack of a magnetosphere surrounding Mars may have allowed the solar wind to erode the atmosphere, the relatively low gravity of Mars helping to accelerate the loss of lighter gases to space. The lack of plate tectonics on Mars is another possibility, preventing the recycling of gases locked up in sediments back into the atmosphere.
The core of Mars, which is made mostly of iron, originally held up the magnetic field of Mars. However, once the core cooled down, the magnetic field weakened. The lack of magnetic field and geologic activity may both be a result of Mars' smaller size allowing its interior to cool more quickly than Earth's, though the details of such processes are still unrealized. Re-heating the core of Mars is considered an impractical solution; one only theoretically possible (but still impractical) method would be to hold some sort of giant 'magnifying glass' over the planet to melt it, and possibly re-liquefy the core. However, none of these processes are likely to be significant over the typical lifespan of most animal species, or even on the timescale of human civilization, and the slow loss of atmosphere could possibly be counteracted with ongoing low-level artificial terraforming activities.
Terraforming Mars would entail two major interlaced changes: building the atmosphere and heating it. A thicker atmosphere of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide would trap incoming solar radiation. Because the raised temperature would add greenhouse gases to the atmosphere, the two processes would augment each other.[12]

[edit] Venus




Artist's conception of a terraformed Venus.


Main article: Terraforming of Venus
See also: Colonization of Venus
Terraforming Venus requires two major changes; removing most of the planet's dense 9 MPa carbon dioxide atmosphere and reducing the planet's 500 °C (770 K) surface temperature. These goals are closely interrelated, since Venus' extreme temperature is thought to be due to the greenhouse effect caused by its dense atmosphere. Sequestering the atmospheric carbon would likely solve the temperature problem as well.

[edit] Europa (moon)
Europa, a moon of Jupiter, is a potential candidate for terraforming. One advantage to Europa is the presence of liquid water which could be extremely helpful for the introduction of any form of life.[13] The difficulties are numerous; Europa is in the middle of a huge radiation belt around Jupiter,[14] and a human would die from the radiation within ten minutes on the surface. This would require the building of massive radiation deflectors, which is currently impractical. Additionally, this satellite is covered in ice and would have to be heated, and there would need to be a supply of oxygen,[15] though this could, at sufficient energy cost, be manufactured in situ by electrolysis of the copious water available.

[edit] Other planets and solar system entities




Artist's conception of what the Moon might look like terraformed, as seen from Earth.


See also: Colonization of the Moon, Colonization of Mercury, Colonization of Callisto, Colonization of Titan, Colonization of the outer solar system, and Colonization of Ceres
Other possible candidates for terraformation (possibly only partial or paraterraforming) include Titan, Callisto, Ganymede, Europa, Luna (the Moon), and even Mercury, Saturn's moon Enceladus and the dwarf planet Ceres. Most, however, have too little mass and gravity to hold an atmosphere indefinitely (although it is possible, but not certain, that an atmosphere could remain for tens of thousands of years or be replenished as needed). In addition, aside from the Moon and Mercury, most of these worlds are so far from the Sun that adding sufficient heat would be much more difficult than even Mars would be. Terraforming Mercury is a different type of challenge but in certain aspects, it's even easier than Venus. There are discussions about settling on Mercury's poles, which seems realistic by some. Saturn's Titan offers advantages, which other places don't - close to Terran atmospheric pressure and abundance of nitrogen and frozen water. Jupiter's Europa, Ganymede and Callisto also have an abundance of water ice.

[edit] Paraterraforming
Also known as the "worldhouse" concept, or domes in smaller versions, paraterraforming involves the construction of a habitable enclosure on a planet which eventually grows to encompass most of the planet's usable area. The enclosure would consist of a transparent roof held one or more kilometers above the surface, pressurized with a breathable atmosphere, and anchored with tension towers and cables at regular intervals. Proponents claim worldhouses can be constructed with technology known since the 1960s. The Biosphere 2 project built a dome on Earth that contained a habitable environment. The project encountered difficulties in construction and operation.
Paraterraforming has several advantages over the traditional approach to terraforming. For example, it provides an immediate payback to investors (assuming a capitalistic financing model); the worldhouse starts out small in area (a domed city for example), but those areas provide habitable space from the start. The paraterraforming approach also allows for a modular approach that can be tailored to the needs of the planet's population, growing only as fast and only in those areas where it is required. Finally, paraterraforming greatly reduces the amount of atmosphere that one would need to add to planets like Mars to provide Earth-like atmospheric pressures. By using a solid envelope in this manner, even bodies which would otherwise be unable to retain an atmosphere at all (such as asteroids) could be given a habitable environment. The environment under an artificial worldhouse roof would also likely be more amenable to artificial manipulation.
It has the disadvantage of requiring massive amounts of construction and maintenance activity. The extra cost might be off-set somewhat by automated manufacturing and repair mechanisms. A worldhouse might also be more susceptible to catastrophic failure if a major breach occurred, though this risk might be reduced by compartmentalization and other active safety precautions. Meteor strikes are a particular concern because without any external atmosphere they would reach the surface before burning up.

[edit] Resources
For the three most likely objects of terraforming -- Mars, Earth's moon and Venus, volatiles to provide an atmosphere and seas would be most necessary. That is, a source of water, followed perhaps by oxygen and nitrogen or other inert gas. At the present time, the Kuiper belt or perhaps the Oort Cloud appear to be the most likely source of those volatiles in accessible form.

[edit] Ethical issues
Main article: Ethics of terraforming
There is a philosophical debate within biology and ecology as to whether terraforming other worlds is an ethical endeavor. On the pro-terraforming side of the argument, there are those like Robert Zubrin, Martyn J. Fogg, Richard L. S. Taylor and Carl Sagan who believe that it is humanity's moral obligation to make other worlds suitable for life, as a continuation of the history of life transforming the environments around it on Earth.[16][17] They also point out that Earth would eventually be destroyed if nature takes its course, so that humanity faces a very long-term choice between terraforming other worlds or allowing all terrestrial life to become extinct. Terraforming totally barren planets, it is asserted, is not morally wrong as it does not affect any other life. Some more cautious thinkers believe terraforming would be an unethical interference in nature, and that given humanity's past treatment of the Earth, other planets may be better off without human interference. Still others strike a middle ground, such as Christopher McKay, who argues that terraforming is ethically sound only once we have completely assured that an alien planet does not harbor life of its own; but that if it does, while we should not try to reshape the planet to our own use, we should engineer the planet's environment to artificially nurture the alien life and help it thrive and co-evolve, or even co-exist with humans.[18]

[edit] Economic issues
The initial cost of such projects as planetary terraforming would be gargantuan, and the infrastructure of such an enterprise would have to be built from scratch. Such technology is not yet developed, let alone financially feasible at the moment. John Hickman has pointed out that almost none of the current schemes for terraforming incorporate economic strategies, and most of their models and expectations seem highly optimistic.[19] Access to the vast resources of space may make such projects more economically feasible, though the initial investment required to enable easy access to space will likely be tremendous (see Asteroid mining, solar power satellites, In-Situ Resource Utilization, bootstrapping, space elevator).
Some advocates of space colonization have argued that the same financial investment required to terraform Mars or Venus could produce a larger area of "land" if used to build space habitats instead. They argue that a civilization that knows how to live in space can survive anywhere in the solar system, whereas terraforming Mars will only help us to live in one place.[citation needed] Some view terraforming as planetary chauvinism.

[edit] Political issues
Further information: Outer Space Treaty
There are many potential political issues arising from terraforming a planet, such as who gets to own the extraterrestrial land on the new planet, with contenders being national governments, trans-national organizations like the United Nations, corporations or individual settlers themselves. Such settlements may become national disputes as countries try to make portions of other planets part of their own national territory. Rivalries between nations continue to be a primary motivation for shaping space projects.[20]

[edit] Popular culture
Main article: Terraforming in popular culture





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2009)


Terraforming is a common concept in science fiction, ranging from television, movies and novels to video games. The concept of changing a planet for habitation precedes the use of the word 'terraforming', with H. G. Wells describing a reverse-terraforming, where aliens in his story The War of the Worlds change Earth for their own benefit. Also, Olaf Stapledon's Last and First Men (1930) provides the first example in fiction in which Venus is modified, after a long and destructive war with the original inhabitants, who naturally object to the process. Recent works involving terraforming of Mars includes the novels in the Mars trilogy, by Kim Stanley Robinson.
Terraforming has also been explored on television and in feature films, most prominently and famously in the Star Trek universe. In the Star Trek movie The Wrath of Khan, the film's antagonist Khan steals the "Genesis device", a device developed to quickly terraform barren planets, and wields it as a weapon. A similar device exists in the animated feature film Titan A.E. which depicts the eponymous ship Titan, capable of creating a planet.
Also in the Star Trek television series, humans terraformed Mars in the 22nd century by redirecting comets towards Mars' north and south poles. In the episode "Terra Prime" the Starship Enterprise crew uses a comet to avoid being detected by the antagonist.
In Firefly, and its feature film sequel Serenity, giant "terraformers" (ships or factories designed to generate atmosphere and perform other functions of terraforming) were used to transform the ecosystems of dozens of planets and hundreds of moons across a huge solar system into human-livable environments.
It is shown in the movies Alien and Aliens. In the first film, the atmosphere of LV-426 is unbreathable and John Hurt's character must wear an environmental suit; 60 years later an atmospheric factory has been used to withdraw sulphur and replace it with oxygen; producing a stormy but breathable atmosphere.
In the anime Cowboy Bebop humanity has terraformed dozens of moons and planets after a hyperspace gate accident fractured the Moon, raining debris on Earth. Asteroids have also been colonized to sustain human life. Also, the manga and anime series Aria takes place on a terraformed Mars. In Dragon Ball Z movie 4, the evil "Lord Slug" terraforms the Earth to make it suitable for his soldiers and to kill humanity. As well as the video game Armored Core 2, which takes place on a newly terraformed Mars.
In Stargate SG1 episode "Scorched Earth" an alien ship xenoforms a planet recently inhabited by Enkarans with the help of humans. The movie Blade Runner alludes to the existence of "Off-World Colonies" which are advertised as having a more suitable living atmosphere than the polluted Earth: the story is based on the escape of individuals designed as labor forces for the new colonists. In the movie Total Recall an alien device is activated to transform the atmosphere of Mars.
In the series Red Dwarf, the crew have to rescue Rimmer from a planet terraformed to match his own disturbed sub-conscious, and in the episode Rimmerworld, Rimmer sets off two "Eco-Accelerator Rockets" which after six days and nights transforms the planet into a "lush and verdant" world.
In the video game Escape Velocity Nova, there are several missions you can undertake where you deliver equipment to a team that is terraforming a planet. Each time you do so, you see the planet steadily, but surely, change to where life is more and more sustainable.
In the movie Red Planet humanity has partially terraformed Mars by putting algae on the planet's surface. As a result, the crew that crash lands on Mars can breathe. Also, in the Halo series there exist multiple colony planets that were made suitable for human habitation through terraforming.
On the TV series Futurama (set 1000 years in the future), in the episode Mars University it is discovered that Mars in the year 3000 is habitable, and there is a university there. It is discussed that when Mars University was established, they planted "traditional college foliage" including trees and hemp and that soon after the whole planet was terraformed. There are also native Martians, who are revealed in the episode Where the Buggalo Roam. The Martians however, sold their land to a Chinese man named Sir Reginold Wong for a single bead (an enormous diamond)- a play on the sale of the isle of Manhattan.
On the 2008 series of Doctor Who ("Doctor Who (series 4)"), in the sixth episode "The Doctor's Daughter", the Doctor and his companions stumble across the "Source", a terraforming device in the shape of a globe with metallic rings built around it, which is the reason for the generation-long war between the human and Hath colonizations on the planet Messaline. The Doctor shatters this globe releasing the terraforming chemicals and thus beginning the terraforming process of the planet and 'declaring the war to be over'. In the end of this particular episode, prior to Jenny's reanimation, she exhales a cloud of golden-green mist resembling the terraforming gas contained within the Source from earlier.
David Gerrold's currently incomplete novel series The War Against The Chtorr takes a twist with the terraforming concept and has the Earth being invaded by an unseen alien species which is Chtoraforming the Earth to match their own world. The species from Chtorr are estimated to be a half a billion years older than those on Earth, and thus evolved to a higher level of competition and trickery. The Earth's species are steadily losing the battle as they are unable to compete. Humans are steadily losing the battle, as well, as the different species interfere with and overpower their best technologies which they are not designed to work against.
Terraforming played a role in the simulation computer game Sim Earth designed by Will Wright and published in 1990. Similarly, in the final phase of Wright's creature simulation computer game Spore contains a vast amount of terraforming, including the placement of animals, plants, and terrain features. This is done both through machinery and energy rays that your ship eventually possesses.
In Star Wars, terraforming exists. The Yuuzhan Vong from Star Wars novels often "Vongformed" planets to jungles to get rid of technology. There are also other instances of terraforming in the Star Wars universe.
The planet on which the most recent Turok game occurs is in the process of terraforming, which causes an increase in evolutionary activity, which creates dinosaurs.
The Spore (game) allows you to terraform. Once reaching the space stage you can unlock different tools allowing you to terraform planets so your civilization may thrive on them. Or you can use the terraforming tools to completely destroy the infamous Grox. They live on planets where their T Level (terraforming level) is 0. All you must do is simply raise their T Level to 1 and you immediatly destroy them on that planet.

[edit] See also

Planetary habitability
Globus Cassus
Extrasolar planets
Project Genesis
Weather control
Space colonization
Futurology
Megascale engineering
Applied planetology
Astrobiology
Dr. Who


[edit] References


^ "Science Fiction Citations: terraforming" (html). http://www.jessesword.com/sf/view/125. Retrieved on 2006-06-16. 
^ Sagan, Carl (1961). "The Planet Venus". Science. 
^ Sagan, Carl (1973). "Planetary Engineering on Mars". Icarus 20: 513. doi:10.1016/0019-1035(73)90026-2. 
^ Averner, M; MacElroy, R. D. (1976). "On the Habitability of Mars: An Approach to Planetary Ecosynthesis". Nasa Sp-414. 
^ Oberg, James Edward (1981). New Earths: Restructuring Earth and Other Planets. Stackpole Books, Harrisburg, PA. 
^ McKay, Christopher (1982). "Terraforming Mars". Journal of the British Interplanetary Society. 
^ Lovelock, James and Allaby, Michael (1984). The Greening of Mars. 
^ a b Fogg, Martyn J. (1995). Terraforming: Engineering Planetary Environments. SAE International, Warrendale, PA. ISBN 1560916095. 
^ Fogg, Martyn J.. "The Terraforming Information Pages". http://www.users.globalnet.co.uk/~mfogg/. Retrieved on 2006-12-24. 
^ "Building a Solid Case". SpaceViews. November 1, 1996. http://www.seds.org/spaceviews/9611/bookrev.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-26. 
^ "Goal 1: Understand the nature and distribution of habitable environments in the Universe". Astrobiology: Roadmap. NASA. http://astrobiology.arc.nasa.gov/roadmap/g1.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-11. 
^ "Technological Requirements for Terraforming Mars" (html). http://www.users.globalnet.co.uk/~mfogg/zubrin.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-21. 
^ "Terraforming: Human Destiny or Hubris?" (html). http://www.space.com/adastra/adastra_terraforming_brody-1.html. Retrieved on 2006-04-28. 
^ Jupiter Radiation Belts Harsher Than Expected
^ "Humans on Europa: A Plan for Colonies on the Icy Moon" (html). http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/missions/europa_colonies_010606-1.html. Retrieved on 2006-04-28. 
^ Robert Zubrin, The Case for Mars: The Plan to Settle the Red Planet and Why We Must, pp. 248-249, Simon & Schuster/Touchstone, 1996, ISBN 0-684-83550-9
^ "The Ethical Dimensions of Space Settlement" (pdf). http://www.users.globalnet.co.uk/~mfogg/EthicsDTP.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-05-15. 
^ Christopher McKay and Robert Zubrin, "Do Indigenous Martian Bacteria have Precedence over Human Exploration?", pp. 177-182, in On to Mars: Colonizing a New World, Apogee Books Space Series, 2002, ISBN 1-896522-90-4
^ "The Political Economy of Very Large Space Projects" (htm). http://www.jetpress.org/volume4/space.htm. Retrieved on 2006-04-28. 
^ "China's Moon Quest Has U.S. Lawmakers Seeking New Space Race" (htm). http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=10000080&sid=a5elzidanocM&refer=asia. Retrieved on 2006-04-28. 



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Terraforming 



Red Colony
New Mars forum
Terraformers Society of Canada
Visualizing the steps of solar system terraforming
Research Paper: Technological Requirements for Terraforming Mars
Terraformers Australia
Terraformers UK
The Terraforming of Worlds
Terraformation de Mars




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terraforming"
Categories: Planetary engineering | Science fiction themes | Space colonization | FuturologyHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles to be merged since January 2008 | All articles to be merged | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 | Articles needing additional references from January 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Brezhoneg
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Suomi
Svenska
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
中文









 This page was last modified on 10 April 2009, at 22:45 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
