













Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Pre-Raphaelite_Brotherhood";
		var wgTitle = "Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "103326";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280577098;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 




Persephone, by Dante Gabriel Rossetti.


The Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood (also known as the Pre-Raphaelites) was a group of English painters, poets, and critics, founded in 1848 by Dante Gabriel Rossetti, William Michael Rossetti, James Collinson, John Everett Millais, Frederic George Stephens, Thomas Woolner and William Holman Hunt.
The group's intention was to reform art by rejecting what they considered to be the mechanistic approach first adopted by the Mannerist artists who succeeded Raphael and Michelangelo. They believed that the Classical poses and elegant compositions of Raphael in particular had been a corrupting influence on the academic teaching of art. Hence the name "Pre-Raphaelite". In particular, they objected to the influence of Sir Joshua Reynolds, the founder of the English Royal Academy of Arts. They called him "Sir Sloshua", believing that his broad technique was a sloppy and formulaic form of academic Mannerism. In contrast, they wanted to return to the abundant detail, intense colours, and complex compositions of Quattrocento Italian and Flemish art.
The Pre-Raphaelites have been considered the first avant-garde movement in art, though they have also been denied that status, because they continued to accept both the concepts of history painting and of mimesis, or imitation of nature, as central to the purpose of art. However, the Pre-Raphaelites undoubtedly defined themselves as a reform-movement, created a distinct name for their form of art, and published a periodical, The Germ, to promote their ideas. Their debates were recorded in the Pre-Raphaelite Journal.




Contents


1 Beginnings of the Brotherhood
2 Early doctrines
3 Public controversies
4 Later developments and influence
5 List of artists

5.1 The Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood
5.2 Associated artists and figures
5.3 Loosely associated artists
5.4 Models


6 Collections
7 Books
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Beginnings of the Brotherhood




Illustration by Holman Hunt of Thomas Woolner's poem "My Beautiful Lady", published in The Germ, 1850


The Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood was founded in John Millais's parents' house on Gower Street, London in 1848. At the initial meeting, John Everett Millais, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, and William Holman Hunt were present. Hunt and Millais were students at the Royal Academy of Arts. They had previously met in another loose association, a sketching-society called the Cyclographic Club. Rossetti was a pupil of Ford Madox Brown. He had met Hunt after seeing his painting The Eve of St. Agnes, which is based on Keats's poem. As an aspiring poet, Rossetti wished to develop the links between Romantic poetry and art. By autumn, four more members had also joined, to form a seven-member-strong Brotherhood. These were William Michael Rossetti (Dante Gabriel Rossetti's brother), Thomas Woolner, James Collinson, and Frederic George Stephens. Ford Madox Brown was invited to join, but preferred to remain independent. He nevertheless remained close to the group. Some other young painters and sculptors were also close associates, including Charles Allston Collins, Thomas Tupper, and Alexander Munro. They kept the existence of the Brotherhood secret from members of the Royal Academy.

[edit] Early doctrines
The Brotherhood's early doctrines were expressed in four declarations:

To have genuine ideas to express;
To study Nature attentively, so as to know how to express them;
To sympathise with what is direct and serious and heartfelt in previous art, to the exclusion of what is conventional and self-parodying and learned by rote;
And, most indispensable of all, to produce thoroughly good pictures and statues.

These principles are deliberately non-dogmatic, since the Brotherhood wished to emphasise the personal responsibility of individual artists to determine their own ideas and methods of depiction. Influenced by Romanticism, they thought that freedom and responsibility were inseparable. Nevertheless, they were particularly fascinated by medieval culture, believing it to possess a spiritual and creative integrity that had been lost in later eras. This emphasis on medieval culture was to clash with certain principles of realism, which stress the independent observation of nature. In its early stages, the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood believed that their two interests were consistent with one another, but in later years the movement divided and began to move in two directions. The realist-side was led by Hunt and Millais, while the medievalist-side was led by Rossetti and his followers, Edward Burne-Jones and William Morris. This split was never absolute, since both factions believed that art was essentially spiritual in character, opposing their idealism to the materialist realism associated with Courbet and Impressionism.
In their attempts to revive the brilliance of colour found in Quattrocento art, Hunt and Millais developed a technique of painting in thin glazes of pigment over a wet white ground. They hoped that in this way their colours would retain jewel-like transparency and clarity. This emphasis on brilliance of colour was in reaction to the excessive use of bitumen by earlier British artists, such as Reynolds, David Wilkie and Benjamin Robert Haydon. Bitumen produces unstable areas of muddy darkness, an effect that the Pre-Raphaelies despised.

[edit] Public controversies
The first exhibition of Pre-Raphaelite work occurred in 1849. Both Millais's Isabella (1848–1849) and Holman Hunt's Rienzi (1848–1849) were exhibited at the Royal Academy, and Rossetti's Girlhood of Mary Virgin was shown at the Free Exhibition on Hyde Park Corner. As agreed, all members of the Brotherhood signed works with their name and the initials "PRB". Between January and April 1850, the group published a literary magazine, The Germ. William Rossetti edited the magazine, which published poetry by the Rossettis, Woolner, and Collinson, together with essays on art and literature by associates of the Brotherhood, such as Coventry Patmore. As the short run-time implies, the magazine did not manage to achieve a sustained momentum. (Daly 1989)




Christ In the House of His Parents, by John Everett Millais, 1850.


In 1850 the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood became controversial after the exhibition of Millais's painting Christ In The House Of His Parents, considered to be blasphemous by many reviewers, notably Charles Dickens. Their medievalism was attacked as backward-looking and their extreme devotion to detail was condemned as ugly and jarring to the eye. According to Dickens, Millais made the Holy Family look like alcoholics and slum-dwellers, adopting contorted and absurd "medieval" poses. A rival group of older artists, The Clique, also used their influence against the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood. Their principles were publicly attacked by the President of the Academy, Sir Charles Lock Eastlake.
However, the Brotherhood found support from the critic John Ruskin, who praised their devotion to nature and rejection of conventional methods of composition. He continued to support their work both financially and in his writings.
Following the controversy, Collinson left the Brotherhood. They met to discuss whether he should be replaced by Charles Allston Collins or Walter Howell Deverell, but were unable to make a decision. From that point on the group disbanded, though their influence continued to be felt. Artists who had worked in the style still followed these techniques (initially anyway) but they no longer signed works "PRB".

[edit] Later developments and influence




Medea by Evelyn De Morgan, 1889, in quattrocento style


Artists who were influenced by the Brotherhood include John Brett, Philip Calderon, Arthur Hughes, Evelyn De Morgan and Frederic Sandys. Ford Madox Brown, who was associated with them from the beginning, is often seen as most closely adopting the Pre-Raphaelite principles.
After 1856, Rossetti became an inspiration for the medievalising strand of the movement. His work influenced his friend William Morris, in whose firm Morris, Marshall, Faulkner & Co. he became a partner, and with whose wife Jane he may have had an affair. Ford Madox Brown and Edward Burne-Jones also became partners in the firm. Through Morris's company the ideals of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood influenced many interior designers and architects, arousing interest in medieval designs, as well as other crafts. This led directly to the Arts and Crafts movement headed by William Morris. Holman Hunt was also involved with this movement to reform design through the Della Robbia Pottery company.
After 1850, both Hunt and Millais moved away from direct imitation of medieval art. Both stressed the realist and scientific aspects of the movement, though Hunt continued to emphasise the spiritual significance of art, seeking to reconcile religion and science by making accurate observations and studies of locations in Egypt and Palestine for his paintings on biblical subjects. In contrast, Millais abandoned Pre-Raphaelitism after 1860, adopting a much broader and looser style influenced by Reynolds. William Morris and others condemned this reversal of principles.
The movement influenced the work of many later British artists well into the twentieth century. Rossetti later came to be seen as a precursor of the wider European Symbolist movement. In the late twentieth century the Brotherhood of Ruralists based its aims on Pre-Raphaelitism, while the Stuckists and the Birmingham Group have also have derived inspiration from it.
The Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery has a world-renowned collection of works by Burne-Jones and the Pre-Raphaelites that, some claim, strongly influenced the young J.R.R. Tolkien. [1]
In the twentieth century artistic ideals changed and art moved away from representing reality. Since the Pre-Raphaelites were fixed on portraying things with near-photographic precision, though with a distinctive attention to detailed surface-patterns, their work was devalued by many critics. Since the 1970s there has been a resurgence in interest in the movement.

[edit] List of artists

[edit] The Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood

James Collinson (painter)
William Holman Hunt (painter)
John Everett Millais (painter)
Dante Gabriel Rossetti (painter, poet)
William Michael Rossetti (critic)
Frederic George Stephens (critic)
Thomas Woolner (sculptor, poet)


[edit] Associated artists and figures

John Brett (painter)
Ford Madox Brown (painter, designer)
Richard Burchett (painter, educator)
Edward Burne-Jones (painter, designer)
Charles Allston Collins (painter)
Frank Cadogan Cowper (painter)
Walter Howell Deverell (painter)
Arthur Hughes (painter, book illustrator)
Robert Braithwaite Martineau (painter)
Jane Morris (artist's model)
May Morris (embroiderer and designer)
William Morris (designer, writer)
Christina Rossetti (poet)
John Ruskin (critic)
Anthony Frederick Augustus Sandys (painter)
Thomas Seddon (painter)
Elizabeth Siddal (painter, poet and artist's model)
Simeon Solomon (painter)
Marie Spartali Stillman (painter)
Algernon Swinburne (poet)
Henry Wallis (painter)
William Lindsay Windus (painter)


[edit] Loosely associated artists

Sophie Gengembre Anderson (painter)
Wyke Bayliss (painter)
George Price Boyce (painter)
Sir Frederick William Burton (painter)
Julia Margaret Cameron (photographer)
James Campbell (painter)
John Collier (painter)
William Davis (painter)
Evelyn De Morgan (painter)
Frank Bernard Dicksee (painter)
John William Godward (painter)
Thomas Cooper Gotch (painter)
Edward Robert Hughes (painter)
John Lee (painter)
Edmund Leighton (painter)
Charles William Mitchell (painter)
Frederic, Lord Leighton (painter)
Joseph Noel Paton (painter)
John William Waterhouse (painter)
Daniel Alexander Williamson (painter)


[edit] Models

Fanny Cornforth
Annie Miller
Jane Morris
Elizabeth Siddall (Rossetti)
Marie Spartali Stillman
Maria Zambaco


[edit] Collections
There are major collections of Pre-Raphaelite work in the Tate Gallery, Victoria and Albert Museum, Manchester Art Gallery, Lady Lever Art Gallery, Liverpool's Walker Art Gallery and Birmingham Museum & Art Gallery. The Delaware Art Museum has the most significant collection of Pre-Raphaelite art outside of the United Kingdom.
Andrew Lloyd Webber is an avid collector of Pre-Raphaelite works and a selection of 300 items from his collection were shown at a major exhibition at the Royal Academy in 2003.

[edit] Books

Bate, P.H. [1901] (1972) The English Pre-Raphaelite painters : their associates and successors, New York : AMS Press, ISBN 0-404-00691-4
des Cars, L. (2000) The pre-Raphaelites : romance and realism, New York : Harry N. Abrams, ISBN 0-81092-891-4
Mancoff, D.N. (2003) Flora symbolica : flowers in Pre-Raphaelite art, Munich ; London ; New York : Prestel, ISBN 3-7913-2851-4
Marsh, J. and Nunn, P.G. (1998) Pre-Raphaelite women artists, London : Thames & Hudson, ISBN 0-500-28104-1
Staley, A. and Newall, C. (2004) Pre-Raphaelite vision : truth to nature, London : Tate, ISBN 1-85437-499-0
Townsend, J., Ridge, J. and Hackney, S. (2004) Pre-Raphaelite painting techniques : 1848-56, London : Tate, ISBN 1-85437-498-2
Watson, M.F. (1997) Collecting the Pre-Raphaelites : the Anglo-American enchantment, Aldershot : Ashgate, ISBN 1-85928-399-3


[edit] See also

List of Pre-Raphaelite paintings
British art
Early Renaissance painting
English school of painting
Hogarth club
Middle Ages in history
John Wharlton Bunney
Florence Claxton
James Smetham
The Light of the World


[edit] Notes

^ See, for example, Bucher (2004) for a brief discussion on the influence of the Pre-Raphaelites on Tolkien.


[edit] References

Barringer, Tim (1998). Reading the Pre-Raphaelites. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-07787-4. 
Bucher, Gregory (2004). "Review of Matthew Dickerson. 'Following Gandalf. Epic Battles and Moral Victory in The Lord of the Rings'", Journal of Religion & Society, 6, ISSN 1522-5658, webpage accessed 13 October 2007
Daly, Gay (1989). Pre-Raphaelites in Love. New York: Ticknor & Fields. ISBN 0-89919-450-8. 
Dickerson, Matthew (2003). Following Gandalf : epic battles and moral victory in the Lord of the rings, Grand Rapids, Mich. : Brazos Press, ISBN 1-58743-085-1
Gaunt, William (1975). The Pre-Raphaelite Tragedy (rev. ed. ed.). London: Cape. ISBN 0-224-01106-5. 
Hawksley, Lucinda (1999). Essential Pre-Raphaelites. Bath: Dempsey Parr. ISBN 1-84084-524-4. 
Prettejohn, Elizabeth (2000). The Art of the Pre-Raphaelites. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-07057-1. 
Ramm, John (2003). "The Forgotten Pre-Raphaelite: Henry Wallis", Antique Dealer & Collectors Guide, 56 (Mar/April) , p. 8–9


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Pre-Raphaelite paintings 



Collection of links
Birmingham Museums & Art Gallery online collection
Liverpool Walker Art Gallery's Pre-Raphaelite collection
Pre-Raphaelite People and Principles
The Millais Site includes many pictures and a complete list of his works
Pre-Raphaelite and other Masters: the Andrew Lloyd Webber Collection
Pre-Raphaelitism Lecture by John Ruskin
Love Revealed: Simeon Solomon and the Pre-Raphaelites
Pre Raphaelitism in Poetry
Literary Aspects of Pre Raphaelitism: The Cambridge History of English and American Literature
The Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood in the History of Art
Pre-Raphaelite Chronology
Lizzie Siddal website
The Pre-Raphaelite Critic is a collection of full-text and excerpted 19th century reviews of the movement and its individual members.
Oscar Wilde, Joseph Worcester, and the English Arts & Crafts Movement an article describing Worcester's desire to establish a brotherhood similar to the Pre-Raphaelites in the SF Bay Area
The Pre-Raphaelite Society
The Samuel and Mary R. Bancroft Collection of Pre-Raphaelite Art
Pre-Raphaelite Sisterhood, an homage to the women featured in Pre-Raphaelite art
The Pre-Raph Pack Discover more about the artists, the techniques they used and a timeline spanning 100 years.








v • d • e

Western art movements by century





14th to 18th century

International Gothic - Renaissance (Early) (14th) · Mannerism (16th) · Baroque (17th) · Rococo - Neoclassicism - Romanticism (18th)






19th century

Realism · Pre-Raphaelites · Academic · Impressionism · Post-Impressionism · Neo-impressionism · Chromoluminarism · Pointillism · Cloisonnism · Les Nabis · Synthetism · Symbolism · Hudson River School






20th century

Modernism · Cubism · Expressionism · Abstract expressionism · Abstract · Neue Künstlervereinigung München · Der Blaue Reiter · Die Brücke · Dada · Fauvism · Neo-Fauvism · Art Nouveau · Bauhaus · De Stijl · Art Deco · Pop art · Futurism · Suprematism · Surrealism · Color Field · Minimalism · Installation art · Lyrical Abstraction · Postmodernism · Conceptual art · Land art · Performance art · Video art · Neo-expressionism · Outsider art · Lowbrow · New media art · Young British Artists · Stuckism · Systems art






21st century

Relational art · Videogame art










Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pre-Raphaelite_Brotherhood"
Categories: Artist groups and collectives | 19th-century art groups | Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood | 1848 establishments | British art | Victorian era 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Български
Català
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Français
Hrvatski
Italiano
ქართული
Latviešu
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Українська
Tiếng Việt
中文









 This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 04:29.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
