













Civil society - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Civil_society";
		var wgTitle = "Civil society";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "209443";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281818363;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Civil society

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


 


This article is part of the
Politics series


Politics





List of political topics
Politics by country
Politics by subdivision
Political economy
Political history
Political history of the world
Political philosophy
Political science
Political systems


Parliamentary
Presidential
Semi-presidential





International relations (theory)
Political scientists
Comparative politics
Public administration


Bureaucracy (street-level)
Adhocracy





Public Policy
Separation of powers


Legislature
Executive
Judiciary





Sovereignty
Theories of political behavior





Subseries





Elections
Electoral systems
Voting

Federalism
Forms of government
Ideology
Political campaigning
Political parties





Politics portal



v • d • e



Civil society is composed of the totality of voluntary civic and social organizations and institutions that form the basis of a functioning society as opposed to the force-backed structures of a state (regardless of that state's political system) and commercial institutions of the market.




Contents


1 Definition
2 Origins

2.1 Pre-modern history
2.2 Modern history
2.3 Post-modern history


3 Democracy
4 Globalization
5 Examples of civil society institutions
6 See also

6.1 Civil society scholars


7 Notes
8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Definition
There are myriad definitions of civil society in the post-modern sense. The London School of Economics Centre for Civil Society's working definition is illustrative:


Civil society refers to the arena of uncoerced collective action around shared interests, purposes and values. In theory, its institutional forms are distinct from those of the state, family and market, though in practice, the boundaries between state, civil society, family and market are often complex, blurred and negotiated. Civil society commonly embraces a diversity of spaces, actors and institutional forms, varying in their degree of formality, autonomy and power. Civil societies are often populated by organizations such as registered charities, development non-governmental organizations, community groups, women's organizations, faith-based organizations, professional associations, trade unions, self-help groups, social movements, business associations, coalitions and advocacy groups.

—[1]


[edit] Origins
The concept of civil society in its pre-modern classical republican understanding is usually connected to the Age of Enlightenment in the 18th century. However, it has much older history in the realm of political thought.

[edit] Pre-modern history





This article is written like a personal reflection or essay and may require cleanup. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style. (October 2008)







This article may require copy-editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone or spelling. You can assist by editing it now. A how-to guide is available. (October 2008)


In the classical period, the concept was used as a synonym for the good society, and seen as indistinguishable from the state. Generally, civil society has been referred to as a political association governing social conflict through the imposition of rules that restrain citizens from harming one another (Edwards 2004:6). For instance, Socrates taught that conflicts within society should be resolved through public argument using ‘dialectic’, a form of rational dialogue to uncover truth. According to Socrates, public argument through ‘dialectic’ was imperative to ensure ‘civility’ in the polis and ‘good life’ of the people (O'Connell 1999).
For Plato, the ideal state was a just society in which people dedicate themselves to the common good, practice civic virtues of wisdom, courage, moderation and justice, and perform the occupational role to which they were best suited. It was the duty of the ‘Philosopher king’ to look after people in civility (Ibid). As far as Aristotle was concerned, polis was an ‘association of associations’ that enables citizens to share in the virtuous task of ruling and being ruled (Edwards 2004:6). His koinonia politike as political community preceded societas civilis introduced later by Cicero. If we analyze the political discourse in the classical period, we can see the importance of a ‘good society’ in ensuring peace and order among the people. The philosophers in the classical period did not make any distinction between the state and society. Rather they held that the state represented the civil form of society and ‘civility’ represented the requirement of good citizenship (Ibid). Moreover, they held that human beings are inherently rational so that they can collectively shape the nature of the society they belong to. In addition to that, human beings have the capacity to voluntarily gather for the common cause and maintain peace in society. By holding this view, we can say that the classical political thinkers had endorsed the genesis of civil society in its original sense.
Due to the unique political arrangements of medieval feudalism, the works of the classical thinkers were downgraded during this period. The domination of the church and feudalism was absolute. Nevertheless, the developments in some parts of Europe since the fourteenth century further stimulated the revival of the concept of ‘human rationalism.’ This influenced to a great extent the shaping of political relations until the end of the Renaissance.
The Thirty Years' War and the subsequent Treaty of Westphalia in 1648 heralded the birth of the modern state system. The Treaty endorsed states as territorially-based political units having sovereignty. As a result, the monarchs were able to exert control domestically by emasculating the feudal lords and to stop relying on the latter for armed troops (Brown 2001:70). Therefore, monarchs could form national armies and deploy a professional bureaucracy and fiscal departments. In this way, monarchs maintained direct control and supreme authority over their subjects. In order to meet the administrative expenditure, monarchs used to control the economy. This gave birth to absolutism (Knutsen 1997:80-118). Until the mid-eighteenth century, absolutism was the hallmark of Europe (Ibid).
The absolutist nature of the state was disputed in the Enlightenment period (Chandhoke 1995:88). As a natural consequence of renaissance, humanism, and the scientific revolution, the Enlightenment thinkers raised fundamental questions such as “What legitimacy does hereditary confer?”, “Why are governments instituted?”, “Why should some human beings have more basic rights than others?”, and so on. These questions led them to make certain assumptions about the nature of the human mind, the then-current sources of political and moral authority, the reasons behind absolutism, and how to move beyond absolutism. The Enlightenment thinkers believed in the inherent goodness of the human mind. They opposed the alliance between the state and the Church as the enemy of human progress and well-being because the coercive apparatus of the state curbed individual liberty and the Church legitimated monarchs by postiting the theory of divine origin. Therefore, both were deemed to be against the will of the people.
Strongly influenced by the atrocities of Thirty Years' War, the political philosophers of the time held that social relations should be ordered in different way than in natural law conditions. Some of their attempts led to the emergence of social contract theory that contested social relations existing in accordance with human nature. They held that human nature can be understood by analyzing objective realities and natural laws conditions. Thus they endorsed that the nature of human beings should be encompassed by the contours of state and established positive laws. Alarmed by the devastating effects of Thirty Years' War and Wars of the Three Kingdoms, Thomas Hobbes underlined the need of a powerful state to maintain civility in society. For Hobbes, human beings are motivated by self-interests (Graham 1997:23). Moreover, these self-interests are often contradictory in nature. Therefore, in state of nature, there was a condition of a war of all against all. In such a situation, life was “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short” (Ibid: 25). Upon realizing the danger of the anarchy, human beings became aware about the need of a mechanism to protect them. As far as Hobbes was concerned, rationality and self-interests persuaded human beings to combine in agreement, to surrender sovereignty to a common power (Kaviraj 2001:289). Hobbes called this common power, state, Leviathan.
Social contract theory of Thomas Hobbes set forth two types of relationship. One was vertical, between the Leviathan and the people; therefore, the latter submitted themselves to the former. The second system was the realm of horizontal relationship among the people. In that system, people, under the surveillance of Leviathan, were compelled to limit their natural rights in a way that it did not harm others’ rights. The first system denotes the state and the second represents civil society in the present meaning. Hobbes’ paradigm shows that the formation of the state conduced to the formation of civil society. Therefore, in his view, the state is imperative to sustain civility in society. Thus, Hobbes’ account of ‘state of nature’ and the ‘sovereignty of the state’ conduced to the germination of realism in later period that defined the nature and relationship between the state and civil society.
Apart from Hobbes, John Locke had a different experience about the political condition in England. It was the period of Glorious Revolution marked by the struggle between the divine right of the Crown and the political rights of Parliament. This influenced Locke to forge a social contract theory of a limited state and a powerful society. In Locke’s view, human beings led a peaceful life in state of nature. However, it could be maintained at the sub-optimal level in the absence of a sufficient system (Brown 2001:73). From that major concern, people gathered together to sign a contract and constituted a common public authority. Nevertheless, Locke held that the consolidation of political power can be turned into autocracy, if it was not brought under reliable restrictions (Kaviraj 2001:291). Therefore, Locke set forth two treaties on government with reciprocal obligations. In the first treaty, people submit themselves to the common public authority. This authority has the power to enact and maintain laws. The second treaty contains the limitations of the authority ie., the state has no power to threaten the basic rights of the human beings. As far as Locke was concerned, the basic rights of human beings denote the preservation of life, liberty and property. Moreover, he held that the state must operate within the bounds of civil and natural laws.
According to Locke, the ‘civility’ in social life was prior to the birth of the state. Because, in his view, people led a peaceful life in the state of nature. Therefore, Locke advocated the primacy of society over the state. Lockean account of state of nature, basic rights, primacy of society and limits of the state were later conduced to the formation of liberal tradition that has a distinct notion about state-civil society relations.
Both Hobbes and Locke had set forth a system, in which peaceful coexistence among human beings could be ensured through social contract. They considered civil society as a sphere that maintained civil life, the realm where civic virtues and rights were derived from natural laws. However, they did not hold that civil society was a separate realm from the state. Rather, they underlined the co-existence between the state and civil society. The systematic approaches of Hobbes and Locke (in their analysis of social relations) were largely influenced by the experiences in their period. Their attempts to explain human nature, natural laws, social contract and the formation of the government had challenged the divine right theory. Apart from divine right, Hobbes and Locke claimed that human intellect can design its political order. This idea had a great impact on the thinkers in the Enlightenment period.
The Enlightenment thinkers argued that human beings are so rational to determine their destiny. Hence, no need of an absolute authority to control them. Both Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Immanuel Kant argued that people are peace lovers and the wars are the creation of absolute regimes (Burchill 2001:33). As far as he was concerned, this system was effective to guard against the domination of a single interest and check the tyranny of the majority (Alagappa 2004:30).

[edit] Modern history
With G.W.F. Hegel, who completely changed the meaning of the idea, modern liberal understanding of civil society as a form of market society appears.[2] Apart from their ancestors, the leading thinker of the Romanticism considered civil society as a separate realm, "system of needs", that stood for the satisfaction of individual interests and private property. Conceiving this idea, Hegel held that civil society had emerged at the particular epoch of capitalism, therefore, it serves its interests: individual rights and private property (Dhanagare 2001:169). Hence, he used the German term "bürgerliche Gesellschaft" to denote civil society as "civilian society" - sphere regulated by civil code.[2] For Hegel, civil society manifests contradictory forces. Being the realm of capitalist interests, there is a possibility of conflicts and inequalities within civil society. Therefore, the constant surveillance of the state is imperative to sustain the moral order in society. Hegel considered the state as the highest form of ethical life. Therefore, the political state has the capacity and authority to correct the fault points of civil society. Having compared the despotic France and democratic America, Alexis de Tocqueville contested Hegel putting weightage to the system of civilian and political associations as counterbalance to both liberal individualism and centralisation of the state. Hence, Hegel's perception of social reality was followed in general by Tocqueville who distinguished political society and civil society.[2]
This was the theme taken further by Karl Marx. For Marx, civil society was the ‘base’ where productive forces and social relations were taking place, whereas political society was the 'superstructure'.[2] Agreeing with the link between capitalism and civil society, Marx held that the latter represents the interests of the bourgeoisie (Edwards 2004:10). Therefore, the state as superstructure also represents the interests of the dominant class; under capitalism it maintains the domination of the bourgeoisie. Hence, Marx rejected the positive role of state put forth by Hegel. Marx argued that the state cannot be a neutral problem solver. Rather, he depicted the state as the defender of the interests of the bourgeoisie. He considered the state and civil society as the executive arms of the bourgeoisie, therefore, both should be withered away (Brown 2001:74).
This negative impression about civil society was rectified by Antonio Gramsci (Edwards 2004:10). Departing somehow from Marx, Gramsci did not consider civil society as coterminous with the socio-economic base of the state. Rather, Gramsci located civil society in the political superstructure. He underlined the crucial role of civil society as the contributor of the cultural and ideological capital for the survival of the hegemony of capitalism (Ehrenberg 1999:208). Rather than posing as a problem, as in the earlier Marxist account, Gramsci viewed civil society as the site for problem-solving. Agreeing with this view, the New Left took his idea assigning civil society a key role in defending people against the state and market and in formulating democratic will to influence the state (Ibid:30). At the same time, the neoliberals consider civil society as a site for struggle to subvert communist and authoritarian regimes (Ibid: 33). Thus, the term civil society appropriated an important place in the political discourses of the New Left and neoliberals.

[edit] Post-modern history
Post-modern way of understanding civil society was first developed by political opposition in former Soviet block East European countries in 1980s. From that time stems a practice within political field of using the idea of civil society instead of political society. However, in 1990s with the emergence of the nongovernmental organizations and the New Social Movements (NSMs) on a global scale, civil society as a third sector became a key terrain of strategic action to construct ‘an alternative social and world order.’ Henceforth, postmodern usage of idea of civil society became divided into two main ways: as a political society and as the third sector - apart from plethora of definitions.
The Washington consensus of the 1990s, which involved conditionality by the World Bank and IMF on loans to debt-laden developing states, also created pressures for states in poorer countries to shrink. This in turn led to practical changes for civil society that went on to influence the theoretical debate. Initially the new conditionality led to an even greater emphasis on `civil society' as a panacea, replacing the state in service provision and social care[3], Hulme and Edward suggested that it was now seen as `the magic bullet.' Some development political scientists cauattioned that this view created new dangers; in `Let's get Civil Society Straight' Whaites argued that the often politicized and potentially divisive nature of civil society was being ignored by some policy makers.
By the end of the 1990s civil society was seen less as a panacea amid the growth of the anti-globalization movement and the transition of many countries to democracy; instead it was increasingly civil society that was called on to justify its legitimacy and democratic credentials, this led to the UN creating a high level panel on civil society [1]. Post-modern civil society theory has now largely returned to a more neutral stance, but with marked differences between the study of the phenomena in richer societies as opposed to writing on civil society in developing states. Civil society in both areas is, however, often viewed in relation to the state, remaining a counter-poise and complement rather than an alternative[3], or as Whaites stated in his 1996 article, `the state is seen as a precondition of civil society'[2]

[edit] Democracy
The literature on relations between civil society and democratic political society have their roots in early liberal writings like those of Alexis de Tocqueville.[2] However they were developed in significant ways by 20th century theorists like Gabriel Almond and Sidney Verba, who identified the role of political culture in a democratic order as vital.[4]
They argued that the political element of many voluntary organizations facilitates better awareness and a more informed citizenry, who make better voting choices, participate in politics, and hold government more accountable as a result.[5] The statutes of these organizations have often been considered micro-constitutions because they accustom participants to the formalities of democratic decision making.
More recently, Robert D. Putnam has argued that even non-political organizations in civil society are vital for democracy. This is because they build social capital, trust and shared values, which are transferred into the political sphere and help to hold society together, facilitating an understanding of the interconnectedness of society and interests within it.[6]
Others, however, have questioned how democratic civil society actually is. Some have noted that the civil society actors have now obtained a remarkable amount of political power without anyone directly electing or appointing them.[7][3] Finally, other scholars have argued that, since the concept of civil society is closely related to democracy and representation, it should in turn be linked with ideas of nationality and nationalism.[8]

[edit] Globalization
The term civil society is currently often used by critics and activists as a reference to sources of resistance to and the domain of social life which needs to be protected against globalization. This is because it is seen as acting beyond boundaries and across different territories.[9] However, as civil society can, under many definitions, include and be funded and directed by those businesses and institutions (especially donors linked to European and Northern states) who support globalization, this is a contested use.[10] Rapid development of civil society on the global scale after a fall of communist system was a part of neo-liberal strategies linked to Washington consensus.[3]. There have also been published studies dealing with unresolved issues regarding the use of the term in connection with the impact and conceptual power of the international aid system (see for example Tvedt 1998).
On the other hand, others see globalization as a social phenomenon expanding the sphere of classical liberal values, which inevitably lead to a larger role for civil society at the expense of politically derived state institutions.



This section requires expansion.



[edit] Examples of civil society institutions






academia
activist groups
charities
citizens' militia
civic groups
clubs (sports, social, etc.)
community foundations
community organizations






consumers/consumer organizations
cooperatives
cultural groups
environmental groups
foundations
intermediary organizations for the voluntary and non-profit sector
men's groups
non-governmental organizations (NGOs)






non-profit organizations (NPOs)
policy institutions
private voluntary organizations (PVOs)
professional associations
religious organizations
support groups
trade unions
women's groups






Not every institution of civil society is a 'countervailing power' to the state.

[edit] See also






Portal:Politics
Civics
Civic nationalism
Civil Affairs
Civil liberties
Anarchism
Civil religion
Civil rights
Communitarianism
Democracy
DEMOLOGOS
Education charter international
Foucault/Habermas debate
Global governance
Human rights
Mass society
Non-state actor
Open society
Political science
Social capital
Social economy
Social entrepreneurship
Social innovation
Sociology
Power
Third sector
Yearbook of International Organizations





[edit] Civil society scholars

Benjamin Barber
Daniel Bell
Robert N. Bellah
Jean Cohen
Michael Edwards
Jean Bethke Elshtain
Amitai Etzioni
Francis Fukuyama
Ernest Gellner
Antonio Gramsci
Jürgen Habermas
Peter Dobkin Hall
Barry Dean Karl
John Keane
David Korten
Frank Moulaert
Michael O'Neill
Elinor Ostrom
Robert D. Putnam
Michael Sandel
Charles Taylor
Alan Whaites







[edit] Notes


^ "What is civil society?". Centre for Civil Society, London School of Economics. 2004-03-01. http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/CCS/what_is_civil_society.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-30. 
^ a b c d e Zaleski, Pawel (2008). "Tocqueville on Civilian Society. A Romantic Vision of the Dichotomic Structure of Social Reality". Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte (Felix Meiner Verlag) 50. 
^ a b c d Pawel Zaleski Global Non-governmental Administrative System: Geosociology of the Third Sector, [in:] Gawin, Dariusz & Glinski, Piotr [ed.]: "Civil Society in the Making", IFiS Publishers, Warszawa 2006
^ Almond, G., & Verba, S.; 'The Civic Culture: Political Attitudes And Democracy In Five Nations; 1989; Sage
^ 'ibid'
^ Robert D. Putnam, Robert Leonardi, Raffaella Y. Nanetti; Robert Leonardi, Raffaella Y. Nanetti (1994). Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0691078890. 
^ Agnew, John; 2002; 'Democracy and Human Rights' in Johnston, R.J., Taylor, Peter J. and Watts, Michael J. (eds); 2002; Geographies of Global Change; Blackwell
^ Pollock, Graham.'Civil Society Theory and Euro-Nationalism' , Studies In Social & Political Thought, Issue 4, March 2001, pp. 31-56
^ Mann, Michael; 1984; The Autonomous Power of The State: Its Origins, Mechanisms and Results; European Journal of Sociology 25: pp185-213
^ United Nations: Partners in Civil Society



[edit] References

Alagappa, Muthiah. Civil Society and Political Change in Asia. Stanford: Standford University Press, 2004. ISBN 0-8047-5097-1
Edwards, Michael. Civil Society. Cambridge, England: Polity Press, 2004. ISBN 0-7456-3133-9.
Hemmati, Minu. Dodds, Felix. Enayati, Jasmin. and McHarry,Jan downloadable copy of Multistakeholder Processes for Governance and Sustainability:Beyond Deadlock and Conflict
O'Connell, Brian. Civil Society: The Underpinnings of American Democracy. Medford, Mass: Tufts University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-87451-924-1.
Perlas, Nicolas, Shaping Globalization - Civil Society, Cultural Power and Threefolding. ISBN 0-95838858X .
Pollock, Graham.'Civil Society Theory and Euro-Nationalism' , Studies In Social & Political Thought, Issue 4, March 2001, pp. 31-56
Tvedt, Terje. Angels of Mercy or Development Diplomats. NGOs & Foreign Aid. Oxford: James Currey, 1998.
Whaites, Alan `Let's get civil society straight: NGOs and Political Theory,' Development in Practice, 1996, [3]
Whaites, Alan, `NGOs, Civil Society and the State: Avoiding theoretical extremes in real world issues,' Development in Practice 1998 [4]
Zaleski, Pawel `Tocqueville on Civilian Society: A Romantic Vision of the Dichotomic Structure of Social Reality', Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte Bd. 50/2008


[edit] External links

LSE Centre for Civil Society
Civil Society in the Post-Communist Context: Linking Theoretical Concept and Social Transformation by Tanya Narozhna
The Western Concept of the Civil Society in the Context of Chinese History by Thomas Metzger
UN relations with Civil Society (NGO's)
UN relations with Civil Society (Businesses)
UNEP Global Civil Society Forum.
EU relations with Civil Society
UK DFID relations with Civil Society
Global civil society (PCDF).
Cox, P., N. Shams, G. Jahn, P. Erickson and P. Hicks. 2002. Building collaboration between NGOs and agricultural research institutes. Cambodian Journal of Agriculture 6: 1-8.
WiserEarth.org - World Index for Social and Environmental Responsibility - formerly www.civilsociety.org.
Stakeholder Forum for a Sustainable Future engagement in UN stakeholder relations
International Society for Third-Sector Research
Bied-Charreton Marc and Requier-Desjardins Mélanie, 2007. Science and civil society in the fight against desertification. Les dossiers thématiques du CSFD. Issue 6. 40 pp.








v • d • e

Law





Core subjects

Administrative law · Comparative law · Conflict of laws · Constitutional law · Contract · Criminal law · Equity · Private law · Property law · Public international law · Public law · Supranational law · Tort · Trust law







Other subjects

Admiralty law · Aviation law · Banking law · Bankruptcy · Commercial law · Competition law · Consumer protection · Corporate law · Environmental law · Evidence · Family law · Human rights · Immigration law · Intellectual property · International criminal law · Labour law · Media law · Military law · Procedure (Civil · Criminal) · Product liability · Space law · Restitution · Tax law · Unjust enrichment · Wills






Legal systems

Canon law · Civil law · Common law · Halakha · Religious law · Roman law · Socialist law · Sharia






Legal theory

Economic analysis · History · Philosophy · Sociology






Legal institutions

Bureaucracy · Civil society · Executive · Judiciary · Legal profession · Legislature · Military · Police






Category · Portal








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Civil_society"
Categories: Community building | Public administration | Civil society | Social economyHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing style editing from October 2008 | All articles needing style editing | Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from October 2008 | All articles needing copy edit | Articles to be expanded since June 2008 | All articles to be expanded 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Asturianu
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Deutsch
Español
فارسی
Français
한국어
Hrvatski
עברית
Қазақша
Lietuvių
Nederlands
日本語
Polski
Português
Русский
Shqip
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 02:07.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
