













Ludwig Boltzmann - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Ludwig_Boltzmann";
		var wgTitle = "Ludwig Boltzmann";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "544255";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281444942;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Ludwig Boltzmann

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Ludwig Boltzmann



Ludwig Eduard Boltzmann (1844-1906)



Born
February 20, 1844(1844-02-20)
Vienna, Austrian Empire


Died
September 5, 1906 (aged 62)
Duino near Trieste, Italy (at that time Austrian Empire)


Residence
Austria, Germany


Nationality
Austrian


Fields
Physicist


Institutions
University of Graz
University of Vienna
University of Munich
University of Leipzig


Alma mater
University of Vienna


Doctoral advisor
Josef Stefan


Doctoral students
Paul Ehrenfest
Philipp Frank
Gustav Herglotz
Lise Meitner


Known for
Boltzmann's constant
Boltzmann equation
H-theorem
Boltzmann distribution
Stefan-Boltzmann law


Signature



"Boltzmann" redirects here. For the lunar crater, see Boltzmann (crater).
Ludwig Eduard Boltzmann (February 20, 1844 – September 5, 1906) was an Austrian physicist famous for his founding contributions in the fields of statistical mechanics and statistical thermodynamics. He was one of the most important advocates for atomic theory when that scientific model was still highly controversial.




Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Childhood and education
1.2 Academic career
1.3 Final years


2 Philosophy
3 Physics
4 The Boltzmann equation
5 Energetics of evolution
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography

[edit] Childhood and education
Boltzmann was born in Vienna, the capital of the Austrian Empire. His father, Ludwig George Boltzmann, was a tax official. His grandfather, who had moved to Vienna from Berlin, was a clock manufacturer, and Boltzmann’s mother, Katharina Pauernfeind, was originally from Salzburg. He received his primary education from a private tutor at the home of his parents. Boltzmann attended high school in Linz, Upper Austria. At age 15, Boltzmann lost his father.
Boltzmann studied physics at the University of Vienna, starting in 1863. Among his teachers were Josef Loschmidt, Joseph Stefan, Andreas von Ettingshausen and Jozef Petzval. Boltzmann received his PhD degree in 1866 working under the supervision of Stefan; his dissertation was on kinetic theory of gases. In 1867 he became a Privatdozent (lecturer). After obtaining his doctorate degree, Boltzmann worked two more years as Stefan’s assistant. It was Stefan who introduced Boltzmann to Maxwell's work.

[edit] Academic career
In 1869, at age 25, he was appointed full Professor of Mathematical Physics at the University of Graz in the province of Styria. In 1869 he spent several months in Heidelberg working with Robert Bunsen and Leo Königsberger and then in 1871 he was with Gustav Kirchhoff and Hermann von Helmholtz in Berlin. In 1873 Boltzmann joined the University of Vienna as Professor of Mathematics and there he stayed until 1876.




Ludwig Boltzmann and co-workers in Graz, 1887. (standing, from the left) Nernst, Streintz, Arrhenius, Hiecke, (sitting, from the left) Aulinger, Ettingshausen, Boltzmann, Klemenčič, Hausmanninger


In 1872, long before women were admitted to Austrian universities, he met Henriette von Aigentler, an aspiring teacher of mathematics and physics in Graz. She was refused permission to unofficially audit lectures, and Boltzmann advised her to appeal; she did, successfully. On July 17, 1876 Ludwig Boltzmann married Henriette von Aigentler; they had three daughters and two sons. Boltzmann went back to Graz to take up the chair of Experimental Physics. Among his students in Graz were Svante Arrhenius and Walther Nernst.[1][2] He spent 14 happy years in Graz and it was there that he developed his statistical concept of nature. In 1885 he became a member of the Imperial Austrian Academy of Sciences and in 1887 he became the President of the University of Graz.
Boltzmann was appointed to the Chair of Theoretical Physics at the University of Munich in Bavaria, Germany in 1890. In 1893, Boltzmann succeeded his teacher Joseph Stefan as Professor of Theoretical Physics at the University of Vienna.

[edit] Final years
Boltzmann spent a great deal of effort in his final years defending his theories. He did not get along with some of his colleagues in Vienna, particularly Ernst Mach, who became a professor of philosophy and history of sciences in 1895. That same year Georg Helm and Wilhelm Ostwald presented their position on Energetics, at a meeting in Lübeck in 1895. They saw energy, and not matter, as the chief component of the universe. However, Boltzmann's position carried the day among other physicists who supported his atomic theories in the debate [3]. Thereafter in 1900, Boltzmann went to the University of Leipzig, on the invitation of Wilhelm Ostwald. After the retirement of Mach due to bad health, Boltzmann came back to Vienna in 1902. His students included Karl Przibram, Paul Ehrenfest and Lise Meitner.
In Vienna, Boltzmann not only taught physics but also lectured on philosophy. Boltzmann’s lectures on natural philosophy were very popular, and received a considerable attention at that time. His first lecture was an enormous success. Even though the largest lecture hall had been chosen for it, the people stood all the way down the staircase. Because of the great successes of Boltzmann’s philosophical lectures, the Emperor invited him for a reception at the Palace.
Boltzmann was subject to rapid alternation of depressed moods with elevated, expansive or irritable moods, likely the symptoms of undiagnosed bipolar disorder. He himself jestingly attributed his rapid swings in temperament to the fact that he was born during the night between Mardi Gras and Ash Wednesday.[4] Meitner relates that those who were close to Boltzmann were aware of his bouts of severe depression and his suicide attempts.
On September 5, 1906, while on a summer vacation in Duino, near Trieste, Boltzmann hanged himself during an attack of depression. He is buried in the Viennese Zentralfriedhof; his tombstone bears the inscription .

[edit] Philosophy
Boltzmann's kinetic theory of gases seemed to presuppose the reality of atoms and molecules, but almost all German philosophers and many scientists like Ernst Mach and the physical chemist Wilhelm Ostwald opposed their existence. During the 1890s Boltzmann attempted to formulate a compromise position which would allow both atomists and anti-atomists to do physics without arguing over atoms. His solution was to use Hertz's theory that atoms were "Bilder", that is, models or pictures. Atomists could think the pictures were the real atoms while the anti-atomists could think of the pictures as representing real atoms, but this did not fully satisfy either group. Furthermore, Ostwald and many defenders of "pure thermodynamics" were trying hard to refute the kinetic theory of gases and statistical mechanics because of Boltzmann's assumptions about atoms and molecules and especially statistical interpretation of the second law.
Around the turn of the century, Boltzmann's science was being threatened by another philosophical objection. Some phyicists, including Mach's student, Gustav Jaumann, interpreted Hertz to mean that all electromagnetic behavior was continuous as if there were no atoms and molecules and as if all physical behavior was ultimately electromagnetic. This movement around 1900 deeply depressed Boltzmann since it could mean the end of his kinetic theory and statistical interpretation of the second law of thermodynamics.
After Mach's resignation in Vienna in 1901, Boltzmann returned there and decided to become a philosopher himself to refute philosophical objections to his physics, but he soon became discouraged again. In 1904 at a physics conference in St. Louis where most physicists seemed to reject atoms and he was not even invited to the physics section but was stuck in a section called "applied mathematics," he violently attacked philosophy, especially on allegedly Darwinian grounds but actually in terms of Lamarck's theory of the inheritance of acquired characteristics that people inherited bad philosophy from the past and that it was hard for scientists to overcome such inheritance.
In 1905 Boltzmann corresponded extensively with the Austro-German philosopher Franz Brentano in hope of mastering philosophy better apparently so that he could refute its presence in science better, but he became discouraged about this approach as well. In the following year 1906 his mental condition became so bad that he had to resign his position. He committed suicide in September of that same year.

[edit] Physics
Boltzmann's most important scientific contributions were in kinetic theory, including the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution for molecular speeds in a gas. In addition, Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics and the Boltzmann distribution over energies remain the foundations of classical statistical mechanics. They are applicable to the many phenomena that do not require quantum statistics and provide a remarkable insight into the meaning of temperature.




Boltzmann’s 1898 I2 molecule diagram showing atomic “sensitive region” (α, β) overlap.


Much of the physics establishment did not share his belief in the reality of atoms and molecules — a belief shared, however, by Maxwell in Scotland and Gibbs in the United States; and by most chemists since the discoveries of John Dalton in 1808. He had a long-running dispute with the editor of the preeminent German physics journal of his day, who refused to let Boltzmann refer to atoms and molecules as anything other than convenient theoretical constructs. Only a couple of years after Boltzmann's death, Perrin's studies of colloidal suspensions (1908-1909) confirmed the values of Avogadro's number and Boltzmann's constant, and convinced the world that the tiny particles really exist.
To quote Planck, "The logarithmic connection between entropy and probability was first stated by L. Boltzmann in his kinetic theory of gases"[5]This famous formula for entropy S is[6] [7]



where k = 1.3806505(24) × 10−23 J K−1 is Boltzmann's constant, and the logarithm is taken to the natural base e. W is the Wahrscheinlichkeit, the frequency of occurrence of a macrostate[8] or, more precisely, the number of possible microstates corresponding to the macroscopic state of a system — number of (unobservable) "ways" in the (observable) thermodynamic state of a system can be realized by assigning different positions and momenta to the various molecules. Boltzmann’s paradigm was an ideal gas of N identical particles, of which Ni are in the i-th microscopic condition (range) of position and momentum. W can be counted using the formula for permutations



where i ranges over all possible molecular conditions. (! denotes factorial.) The "correction" in the denominator is because identical particles in the same condition are indistinguishable.
Boltzmann was also one of the founders of quantum mechanics due to his suggestion in 1877 that the energy levels of a physical system could be discrete.
The equation for S is engraved on Boltzmann's tombstone at the Vienna Zentralfriedhof — his second grave.

[edit] The Boltzmann equation




Boltzmann's bust in the courtyard arcade of the main building, University of Vienna.


Main article: Boltzmann equation
The Boltzmann equation was developed to describe the dynamics of an ideal gas.



where f represents the distribution function of single-particle position and momentum at a given time (see the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution), F is a force, m is the mass of a particle, t is the time and v is an average velocity of particles.
This equation describes the temporal and spatial variation of the probability distribution for the position and momentum of a density distribution of a cloud of points in single-particle phase space. (See Hamiltonian mechanics.) The first term on the left-hand side represents the explicit time variation of the distribution function, while the second term gives the spatial variation, and the third term describes the effect of any force acting on the particles. The right-hand side of the equation represents the effect of collisions.




Boltzmann's grave in the Zentralfriedhof, Vienna, with bust and entropy formula.


In principle, the above equation completely describes the dynamics of an ensemble of gas particles, given appropriate boundary conditions. This first-order differential equation has a deceptively simple appearance, since f can represent an arbitrary single-particle distribution function. Also, the force acting on the particles depends directly on the velocity distribution function f. The Boltzmann equation is notoriously difficult to integrate. David Hilbert spent years trying to solve it without any real success.
The form of the collision term assumed by Boltzmann was approximate. However for an ideal gas the standard Chapman-Enskog solution of the Boltzmann equation is highly accurate. It is expected to lead to incorrect results for an ideal gas only under shock wave conditions.
Boltzmann tried for many years to "prove" the second law of thermodynamics using his gas-dynamical equation — his famous H-theorem. However the key assumption he made in formulating the collision term was "molecular chaos", an assumption which breaks time-reversal symmetry as is necessary for anything which could imply the second law. It was from the probabilistic assumption alone that Boltzmann's apparent success emanated, so his long dispute with Loschmidt and others over Loschmidt's paradox ultimately ended in his failure.
Finally, in the 1970s E.G.D. Cohen and J.R. Dorfman proved that a systematic (power series) extension of the Boltzmann equation to high densities is mathematically impossible. Consequently nonequilibrium statistical mechanics for dense gases and liquids focuses on the Green-Kubo relations, the fluctuation theorem, and other approaches instead.

[edit] Energetics of evolution
Boltzmann's views played an essential role in the development of energetics, the scientific study of energy flows under transformation. In 1922, for example, Alfred J. Lotka referred to Boltzmann as one of the first proponents of the proposition that available energy, also called exergy, can be understood as the fundamental object under contention in the biological, or life-struggle and therefore also in the evolution of the organic world.[9] Lotka interpreted Boltzmann's view to imply that available energy could be the central concept that unified physics and biology as a quantitative physical principle of evolution. In the foreword to Boltzmann's Theoretical Physics and Philosophical Problems, S.R. de Groot noted that


“
Boltzmann had a tremendous admiration for Darwin and he wished to extend Darwinism from biological to cultural evolution. In fact he considered biological and cultural evolution as one and the same things. ... In short, cultural evolution was a physical process taking place in the brain. Boltzmann included ethics in the ideas which developed in this fashion ...
”


Howard T. Odum later sought to develop these views when looking at the evolution of ecological systems, and suggested that the maximum power principle was an example of Darwin's law of natural selection.

[edit] See also

Boltzmann brain
Boltzmann machine
History of the molecule
Lattice Boltzmann methods, a new method in Computational fluid dynamics which utilizes the theories of Boltzmann.
Philosophy of thermal and statistical physics


[edit] References


^ "Paul Ehrenfest (1880–1933) along with Nernst[,] Arrhenius, and Meitner must be considered among Boltzmann’s most outstanding students."—Jäger, Gustav; Nabl, Josef; Meyer, Stephan (April 1999), "Three Assistants on Boltzmann", Synthese, Humanities, Social Sciences and Law (Springer Netherlands) 119 (1-2): 69–84, doi:10.1023/A:1005239104047, ISSN 1573-0964, http://www.springerlink.com/content/vq5443477m7w7782/, retrieved on 2008-06-09 
^ "Walther Hermann Nernst visited lectures by Ludwig Boltzmann" [1]
^ New World Encyclopedia contributors, "Ludwig Boltzmann," New World Encyclopedia, (accessed January 31, 2009).[2]
^ Ruth Lewin Sime (1996). "Lise Meitner, A Life in Physics". WashingtonPost.com. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/style/longterm/books/chap1/lisemeitner.htm. Retrieved on 2009-02-06. 
^ Max Planck, p. 119.
^ The concept of entropy was introduced by Rudolf Clausius in 1865. He was the first to enunciate the second law of thermodynamics by saying that "entropy always increases".
^ An alternative is the information entropy definition introduced in 1948 by Claude Shannon.[3] It was intended for use in communication theory, but is applicable in all areas. It reduces to Boltzmann's expression when all the probabilities are equal, but can, of course, be used when they are not. Its virtue is that it yields immediate results without resorting to factorials or Stirling's approximation. Similar formulas are found, however, as far back as the work of Boltzmann, and explicitly in Gibbs (see reference).
^ Pauli, Wolfgang (1973). Statistical Mechanics. Cambridge: MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-66035-0. , p. 21
^ Maximum power principle



[edit] Further reading

Roman Sexl & John Blackmore (eds.), "Ludwig Boltzmann - Ausgewahlte Abhandlungen", (Ludwig Boltzmann Gesamtausgabe, Band 8), Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1982.
John Blackmore (ed.), "Ludwig Boltzmann - His Later Life and Philosophy, 1900-1906, Book One: A Documentary History", Kluwer, 1995. ISBN 978-0-7923-3231-2
John Blackmore, "Ludwig Boltzmann - His Later Life and Philosophy, 1900-1906, Book Two: The Philosopher", Kluwer, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1995. ISBN 978-0-7923-3464-4
John Blackmore (ed.), "Ludwig Boltzmann - Troubled Genius as Philosopher", in Synthese, Volume 119, Nos. 1 & 2, 1999, pp.1-232.
Brush, Stephen G. (ed. & tr.), Boltzmann, Lectures on Gas Theory, Berkeley, CA: U. of California Press, 1964
Brush, Stephen G. (ed.), Kinetic Theory, New York: Pergamon Press, 1965
Cercignani, Carlo (1998). Ludwig Boltzmann: The Man Who Trusted Atoms. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780198570646. 
Walter Hoeflechner (ed.), Ludwig Boltzmann - Leben und Briefe, Akademische Druck- u. Verlagsanstalt. Graz, Oesterreich, 1994
Brush, Stephen G. (1970). "Boltzmann". in Charles Coulston Gillispie (ed.). Dictionary of Scientific Biography. New York: Scribner. ISBN 0-684-16962-2. 
Brush, Stephen G. (1986). The Kind of Motion We Call Heat: A History of the Kinetic Theory of Gases. Amsterdam: North-Holland. ISBN 0-7204-0370-7. 
P. Ehrenfest & T. Ehrenfest (1911) Begriffliche Grundlagen der statistischen Auffassung in der Mechanik, in: Encyklopädie der mathematischen Wissenschaften mit Einschluß ihrer Anwendungen. Band IV, 2. Teil ( F. Klein and C. Müller (eds.). Leipzig: Teubner, pp. 3–90. Translated as The conceptual Foundations of the Statistical Approach in Mechanics. New York: Cornell University Press, 1959. ISBN 0-486-49504-3
Fasol-Boltzmann, Ilse Maria; Gerhard Fasol (1996). Ludwig Boltzmann (1844-1906) Zum hundertsten Todestag. Wien New York: Springer Verlag. ISBN 3-211-33140-9. 
Planck, Max (1914). The Theory of Heat Radiation. P. Blakiston Son & Co.  English translation by Morton Masius of the 2nd ed. of Waermestrahlung. Reprinted by Dover (1959) & (1991). ISBN 0-486-66811-8
Everdell, William R (1988). "The Problem of Continuity and the Origins of Modernism: 1870-1913". History of European Ideas 9 (5): 531–552. doi:10.1016/0191-6599(88)90001-0. ISSN 0191-6599. 
Klein, Martin J. (1973). "The Development of Boltzmann’s Statistical Ideas". in E. G. D. Cohen and W. Thirring (eds). The Boltzmann Equation: Theory and Applications. Acta physica Austriaca Suppl. 10. Wien: Springer. pp. 53–106. ISBN 0-387-81137-0. 
Tolman, Richard C. (1938). The Principles of Statistical Mechanics. Oxford University Press.  Reprinted: Dover (1979). ISBN 0-486-63896-0
Gibbs, J. Willard (1901). Elementary Principles in Statistical Mechanics. Ox Bow Press (1981). ISBN 0-918024-19-6. 
Lindley, David (2001). Boltzmann's Atom: The Great Debate That Launched A Revolution In Physics. ISBN 0-684-85186-5. 
Lotka, A. J. (1922). "Contribution to the energetics of evolution" (PDF fulltext). Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 8 (6): 147. doi:10.1073/pnas.8.6.147. ISSN 0027-8424. 


[edit] External links


Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Ludwig Boltzmann





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Ludwig Boltzmann





Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Ludwig Boltzmann



Uffink, Jos (2004). "Boltzmann's Work in Statistical Physics". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/statphys-Boltzmann/. Retrieved on 2007-06-11. 
O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Ludwig Boltzmann", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive 
"Ludwig Boltzmann," Universität Wien (German).
Ruth Lewin Sime, Lise Meitner: A Life in Physics Chapter One: Girlhood in Vienna gives Lise Meitner's account of Boltzmann's teaching and career.
Cohen, E.G.D., 1996, "Boltzmann and Statistical Mechanics."
Eftekhari, Ali, "Ludwig Boltzmann (1844-1906)." Discusses Boltzmann's philosophical opinions, with numerous quotes.
Rajasekar, S.; Athavan, N. (2006-09-07). "Ludwig Edward Boltzmann". http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0609047. Retrieved on 2007-05-31. 
Ludwig Boltzmann at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
Eric W. Weisstein, Boltzmann, Ludwig (1844-1906) at ScienceWorld.
Ludwig Boltzmann at Find A Grave




Persondata


NAME
Boltzmann, Ludwig


ALTERNATIVE NAMES



SHORT DESCRIPTION
Austrian Physicist


DATE OF BIRTH
February 20, 1844


PLACE OF BIRTH
Vienna, Austrian Empire


DATE OF DEATH
September 5, 1906


PLACE OF DEATH
Duino, Italy





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ludwig_Boltzmann"
Categories: 1844 births | 1906 deaths | People from Vienna | Austrian physicists | Thermodynamicists | Scientists who committed suicide | Mathematicians who committed suicide | Burials at the Zentralfriedhof | University of Vienna alumni | People with bipolar disorder | Suicides by hanging 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
বাংলা
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Kreyòl ayisyen
Latina
Lietuvių
Magyar
मराठी
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Piemontèis
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 05:22.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
