













Hindi - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Hindi";
		var wgTitle = "Hindi";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "15295117";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281281810;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Hindi

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Hindi (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Hindu.


Hindi
हिन्दी, हिंदी



Spoken in:
India, Fiji (Hindustani), Mauritius (Hindi/Urdu), Nepal (Bhojpuri), Suriname (Sarnami), Trinidad and Tobago (Bhojpuri), Guyana,Myanmar. Also in various countries due to immigration, USA,Canada,Singapore , UK,Germany,UAE, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Australia,Norway,South Africa,Mauritius,Guyana,Malaysia and Suriname.






Total speakers:
First language: ~ 500–680 million (2008)[1]
Second language: 120–225 million (1999)[2] 


Ranking:
2 [Native]


Language family:
Indo-European
Indo-Iranian
Indo-Aryan[3]
   Hindi 


Writing system:
Devanagari, Urdu, Kaithi, Latin, and
several regional scripts. 



Official status


Official language in:
 India (Standard Hindi, Urdu, Maithili)
 Fiji (Hindustani)


Regulated by:
Central Hindi Directorate (India),[4]
National Language Authority (Pakistan)


Language codes


ISO 639-1:
hi


ISO 639-2:
hin


ISO 639-3:
hin










This page contains Indic text. Without rendering support you may see irregular vowel positioning and a lack of conjuncts. More...





Hindi (Devanāgarī: हिन्दी or हिंदी, IAST: Hindī, IPA:  [hɪnd̪iː] (help·info)) is the name given to an Indo-Aryan language, or a dialect continuum of languages, spoken in northern and central India (the "Hindi belt").[5]
Native speakers of Hindi dialects between them account for 41% of the Indian population (2001 Indian census). As defined in the Constitution, Hindi is one of the two official languages of communication (English being the other) for India's federal government and is one of the 22 scheduled languages specified in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution.[6] Official Hindi is often described as Standard Hindi, which along with English, is used for administration of the central government.[7][8]
Hindustani or Standard Hindi is an official language of Fiji. Native speakers of Hindi dialects account for 48% of the Fiji population. This includes all people of Indian ancestary including those whose forefathers emigrated from regions in India, where Hindi was not generally spoken. As defined in the Constitution of Fiji (Constitution Amendment Act 1997 (Act No. 13 of 1997) ,Section4(1) , Hindi is one of the three official languages of communication (English and Fijian being the other).Section 4(4(a)(b)(c)(d)) also states that 4) Every person who transacts business with:(a) a department;(b) an office in a state service; or (c) a local authority;has the right to do so in English, Fijian or Hindustani, either directly or through a competent interpreter.
Standard Hindi is a sanskritised register derived from the khari boli dialect. Urdu is a different, persianised register of the same dialect.




Contents


1 History
2 Hindi and Urdu
3 Phonology
4 Writing system
5 Grammar

5.1 Genders
5.2 Interrogatives
5.3 Pronouns
5.4 Word order
5.5 Tense and aspect of Hindi verbs
5.6 Case


6 Literature
7 See also
8 References

8.1 Notes
8.2 Bibliography
8.3 Dictionaries


9 Further reading
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Main articles: History of the Hindi language and Hindavi
Like many other modern Indian languages, Hindi has evolved from Sanskrit, by way of the Middle Indo-Aryan Prakrit languages and Apabhramsha of the Middle Ages. Though there is no consensus for a specific time, Hindi originated as local dialects such as Braj, Awadhi and finally Khari Boli after the turn of tenth century.[9] In the span of nearly a thousand years of Muslim influence, such as when Muslim rulers controlled much of northern India during the Delhi Sultanate and the Mughal Empire, many Persian and Arabic words were absorbed into khari boli and was called Urdu. Since almost all Arabic words came via Persian, they do not preserve the original phonology of Arabic.
Hindi is contrasted with Urdu in the way both are written, and the use of Sanskrit vocabulary in higher registers. Urdu is the official language of Pakistan and also an official language in some parts of India. The primary differences between the two are the way Standard Hindi is written in Devanagari and draws its "vocabulary" with words from (Indo-Aryan) Sanskrit, while Urdu is written in Urdu script, a variant of the (Semitic) Perso-Arabic script, and draws heavily on Persian and Arabic "vocabulary."
Vocabulary is in quotes here since it is mostly the literary vocabulary that shows this visible distinction with the everyday vocabulary being essentially common between the two.
Hindi is spoken mainly in northern states of Rajasthan, Delhi, Haryana, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Chattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand and Bihar, and is spoken alongside regional languages like Punjabi, Gujarati, Marathi or Bengali throughout north and central India. Hindi is also understood and spoken in other parts of India, Nepal and Bangladesh. Hindustani is spoken by all persons of Indian descent in Fiji. In Western Viti Levu and Northern Vanua Levu, it is a common spoken language and a link language spoken between Fijians of Indian descent and native Fijians. The latter are also the only race in the world of non Indian descent that includes majority hindi speakers.

[edit] Hindi and Urdu
See also: Hindi-Urdu controversy and Hindustani language
The term Urdu arose as far back as the 12th century and gradually merged together with Hindi. The term Hindawi was used in a general sense for the dialects of central and northern India.
There are two fundamental distinctions between standard Urdu and standard Hindi that lead to their being recognised as distinct languages:

the source of borrowed vocabulary (Persian/Arabic for Urdu and Sanskrit for Hindi); and
the script used to write them (for Urdu, an adaptation of the Perso-Arabic alphabet written in Nasta'liq style; for Hindi, an adaptation of the Devanagari script).

Colloquially and linguistically, the distinction between the Urdu and Hindi is insignificant. This is true for the northern half of the Indian subcontinent, wherever neither learned vocabulary nor writing is used. Outside the Delhi dialect area, the term "Hindi" is used in reference to the local dialect, which may be different from both Hindi and Urdu.
The word Hindi has many different uses; confusion of these is one of the primary causes of debate about the identity of Urdu. These uses include:

standardised Hindi as taught in schools throughout India,
formal or official Hindi advocated by Purushottam Das Tandon and as instituted by the post-independence Indian government, heavily influenced by Sanskrit,
the vernacular nonstandard dialects of Hindustani/Hindi-Urdu as spoken throughout much of India and Pakistan, as discussed above,
the neutralised form of the language used in popular television and films, or
the more formal neutralized form of the language used in broadcast and print news reports.

The rubric "Hindi" is often used as a catch-all for those idioms in the North Indian dialect continuum that are not recognised as languages separate from the language of the Delhi region. Punjabi, Bihari, and Chhatisgarhi, while sometimes recognised as being distinct languages, are often considered dialects of Hindi. Many other local idioms, such as the Bhili languages, which do not have a distinct identity defined by an established literary tradition, are almost always considered dialects of Hindi. In other words, the boundaries of "Hindi" have little to do with mutual intelligibility, and instead depend on social perceptions of what constitutes a language.
The other use of the word "Hindi" is in reference to Standard Hindi, the Khari boli register of the Delhi dialect of Hindi (generally called Hindustani) with its direct loanwords from Sanskrit. Standard Urdu is also a standardized form of Hindustani. Such a state of affairs, with two standardized forms of what is essentially one language, is known as a diasystem.
Urdu was earlier called Zabān-e-Urdū-e-Mu`Allah (زبانِ اردوِ معلہ, ज़बान-ए उर्दू-ए मुअल्लह), lit., the "Exalted Language of the Camp". Earlier, the terms "Hindi" and "Urdu" were used interchangeably even by Urdu poets like Mir and Mirza Ghalib of the early 19th century (more often, however, the terms Hindvi/Hindi were used). By 1850, Hindi and Urdu were no longer used for the same language. Other linguists such as Sir G. A. Grierson (1903) have also claimed that Urdu is simply a dialect or style of Western Hindi. Before the Partition of India, Delhi, Lucknow, Aligarh and Hyderabad used to be the four literary centers of Urdu.
The colloquial language spoken by the people of Delhi is indistinguishable by ear, whether it is called Hindi or Urdu by its speakers. The only important distinction at this level is in the script: if written in the Perso-Arabic script, the language is generally considered to be Urdu, and if written in devanagari it is generally considered to be Hindi. However, since independence the formal registers used in education and the media have become increasingly divergent in their vocabulary. Where there is no colloquial word for a concept, Standard Urdu uses Perso-Arabic vocabulary, while Standard Hindi uses Sanskrit vocabulary. This results in the official languages being heavily Sanskritized or Persianized, and nearly unintelligible to speakers educated in the other standard (as far as the formal vocabulary is concerned).
These two standardised registers of Hindustani have become so entrenched as separate languages that many extreme-nationalists, both Hindu and Muslim, claim that Hindi and Urdu have always been separate languages. The tensions reached a peak in the Hindi-Urdu controversy in 1867 in the then United Provinces during the British Raj. However, there were and are unifying forces as well. For example, it is said that Indian Bollywood films are made in "Hindi", but the language used in most of them is the same as that of Urdu speakers in Pakistan.[citation needed]

[edit] Phonology
Main article: Hindi-Urdu phonology










Bilabial
Labio-
dental
Dental/
Alveolar
Retroflex
Post-alv./
Palatal
Velar
Glottal


Nasal
m

n
(ɳ)





Plosive
p
pʰ
b
bʱ

t̪
t̪ʰ
d̪
d̪ʱ
ʈ
ʈʰ
ɖ
ɖʱ

k
kʰ
g
gʱ



Affricate




tʃ
tʃʰ
dʒ
dʒʱ




Fricative

f

s
z

ʃ




ɦ


Tap or Flap


ɾ
(ɽ)
(ɽʱ)





Approximant

ʋ
l

j











Vowels










[edit] Writing system
Main article: Hindustani orthography
Hindi is written in Devanagari script.

[edit] Grammar
Main article: Hindi-Urdu grammar
Hindi is a subject-object-verb language, meaning that verbs usually fall at the end of the sentence rather than before the object (as in English). Hindi also shows split ergativity so that, in some cases, verbs agree with the object of a sentence rather than the subject. Unlike English, Hindi has no definite article (the). The numeral one (एक "ek") might be used as the indefinite singular article (a/an) if this needs to be stressed.
In addition, Hindi uses postpositions (so called because they are placed after nouns) where English uses prepositions. Other differences include gender, honorifics, interrogatives, use of cases, and different tenses. While being complicated, Hindi grammar is fairly regular, with irregularities being relatively limited. Despite differences in vocabulary and writing, Hindi grammar is nearly identical with Urdū. The concept of punctuation other than the full stop having been entirely unused before the arrival of the Europeans, Hindi punctuation uses western conventions for commas, exclamation points, and question marks. Periods are sometimes used to end a sentence, though the traditional "full stop" (a vertical line) is also used.

[edit] Genders
In Hindi, there are two genders for nouns. All male human beings and male animals (and those animals and plants that are perceived to be "masculine") are masculine. All female human beings and female animals (and those animals and plants that are perceived to be "feminine") are feminine. Things, inanimate articles and abstract nouns are also either masculine or feminine according to convention. While this is the same as Urdū and similar to many other Indo-European languages such as, French, Italian and Portuguese, it is a challenge for those who are used to only the English language, which although an Indo-European language, has dropped nearly all of its gender inflection.

[edit] Interrogatives
Besides the standard interrogative terms of who (कौन kaun), what (क्या kyaa), why (कयों kyõ), when (कब kab), where (कहाँ kahã), how and what type (कैसा kaisaa), how many (कितना kitnaa), etc, the Hindi word kyaa (क्या) can be used as a generic interrogative often placed at the beginning of a sentence to turn a statement into a Yes/No question. This makes it clear when a question is being asked. Questions can also be formed simply by modifying intonation, exactly as some questions are in English.

[edit] Pronouns
Hindi has pronouns in the first, second and third person for one gender only. Thus, unlike English, there is no difference between he or she. More strictly speaking, the third person of the pronoun is actually the same as the demonstrative pronoun (this / that). The verb, upon conjugation, usually indicates the difference in the gender. The pronouns have additional cases of accusative and genitive, but no vocative. There may also be binary ways of inflecting the pronoun in the accusative case. Note that for the second person of the pronoun (you), Hindi has three levels of honorifics:

आप (/ɑːp/): Formal and respectable form for you. Has no difference between the singular and the plural. Used in all formal settings and speaking to persons who are senior in job or age. Plural could be stressed by saying आप लोग (/ɑːp log/ you people) or आप सब (/ɑːp səb/ you all).
तुम (/t̪um/): Informal form of you. Has no difference between the singular and the plural. Used in all informal settings and speaking to persons who are junior in job or age. Plural could be stressed by saying तुम लोग (/t̪um log/ you people) or तुम सब (/t̪um səb/ you all).
तू (/t̪uː/): Extremely informal form of you, as thou. Strictly singular, its plural form being /t̪um/. Except for very close friends or poetic language involving God, it could be perceived as offensive in India.

Imperatives (requests and commands) correspond in form to the level of honorific being used, and the verb inflects to show the level of respect and politeness desired. Because imperatives can already include politeness, the word "kripayā", which can be translated as "please", is much less common than in spoken English; it is generally only used in writing or announcements, and its use in common speech may even reflect mockery.

[edit] Word order
The standard word order in Hindi is, in general, Subject Object Verb, but where different emphasis or more complex structure is needed, this rule is very easily set aside (provided that the nouns/pronouns are always followed by their postpositions or case markers). More specifically, the standard order is 1. Subject 2. Adverbs (in their standard order) 3. Indirect object and any of its adjectives 4. Direct object and any of its adjectives 5. Negation term or interrogative, if any, and finally the 6. Verb and any auxiliary verbs. (Snell, p93) Negation is formed by adding the word नहीं (nahī̃, "no"), in the appropriate place in the sentence, or by utilizing न (na) or मत (mat) in some cases. Note that in Hindi, the adjectives precede the nouns they qualify. The auxiliaries always follow the main verb. In general, Hindi speakers or writers enjoy considerable freedom in placing words to achieve stylistic and other socio-psychological effects, though not as much freedom as in heavily inflected languages.[10]

[edit] Tense and aspect of Hindi verbs
Hindi verbal structure is focused on aspect with distinctions based on tense usually shown through use of the verb होना (honā - to be) as an auxiliary. There are three aspects: habitual (imperfect), progressive (also known as continuous) and perfective. Verbs in each aspect are marked for tense in almost all cases with the proper inflected form of होना. Hindi has four simple tenses, present, past, future (presumptive), and subjunctive (referred to as a mood by many linguists).[11] Verbs are conjugated not only to show the number and person (1st, 2nd, 3rd) of their subject, but also its gender. Additionally, Hindi has imperative and conditional moods. The verbs must agree with the person, number and gender of the subject if and only if the subject is not followed by any postposition. If this condition is not met, the verb must agree with the number and gender of the object (provided the object does not have any postposition). If this condition is also not met, the verb agrees with neither. It is this kind of phenomenon that is called mixed ergativity.

[edit] Case
Hindi is a weakly inflected language for case; the relationship of a noun in a sentence is usually shown by postpositions (i.e., prepositions that follow the noun). Hindi has three cases for nouns. The Direct case is used for nouns not followed by any postpositions, typically for the subject case. The Oblique case is used for any nouns that is followed by a postposition. Adjectives modifying nouns in the oblique case will inflect that same way. Some nouns have a separate Vocative case. Hindi has two numbers: singular and plural—but they may not be shown distinctly in all declensions.

[edit] Literature
Main article: Hindi literature
Further information: Bollywood and Bollywood songs
Hindi films play an important role in popular culture. The dialogues and songs of Hindi films use Khariboli and Hindi-Urdu in general, but the intermittent use of various dialects such as Awadhi, Rajasthani, Bhojpuri, and quite often Bambaiya Hindi, as also of many English words, is common.
Alam Ara (1931), which ushered in the era of "talkie" films in India, was a Hindustani film. This film had seven songs in it. Music soon became an integral part of Hindustani/ Hindi cinema. It is a very important part of popular culture and now comprises an entire genre of popular music. So popular is film music that songs filmed even 50-60 years ago are a staple of radio/TV and are generally very familiar to an Indian.
Hindi movies and songs are popular in many parts of India, such as Punjab, Gujarat and Maharashtra, that do not speak Hindi as a native language. Indeed, the Hindi film industry is largely based at Mumbai (Bombay), in the Marathi-speaking state of Maharashtra. Hindi films are also popular abroad, especially in Pakistan, Afghanistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, Thailand, Iran and the UK, and a fan-base is emerging in the rest of Asia-Pacific. These days Hindi movies are released worldwide and have large audiences in the Americas, Europe and Middle Eastern countries too.
The role of radio and television in propagating Hindi beyond its native audience cannot be overstated. Television in India was controlled by the central government until the proliferation of satellite TV made regulation unenforceable. During the era of control, Hindi predominated on both radio and TV, enjoying more air-time than local languages. After the advent of satellite TV, several private channels emerged to compete with the government's official TV channel. Today, a large number of satellite channels provide viewers with much variety in entertainment. These include soap operas, detective serials, horror shows, dramas, cartoons, comedies, host shows for Hindi songs, Hindu mythology and documentaries.

[edit] See also

Hindi languages
Hindi literature
Hindi belt
History of Hindi
Anti-Hindi agitations
Hindi in Bihar
Hindi Wikipedia
Hinglish
Languages of India and Official languages of India
List of Indian languages by total speakers
Complex Text Layout languages


[edit] References

[edit] Notes


^ 258 million "non-Urdu Khariboli" and 400 million Hindi languages per 2001 Indian census data, plus 11 million Urdu in 1993 Pakistan, adjusted to population growth till 2008
^ non-native speakers of Standard Hindi, and Standard Hindi plus Urdu, according to SIL Ethnologue.
^ Dhanesh Jain; George Cardona (2003). The Indo-Aryan languages. Routledge. p. 251. ISBN 9780700711307. 
^ Central Hindi Directorate regulates the use of Devanagari script and Hindi spelling in India. Source: Central Hindi Directorate: Introduction
^ Shapiro (2003), p. 251
^ Constitution of India, Part XVII, Article 343.
^ The Union: Official Languages
^ PDF from india.gov.in containing Articles 343 which states so
^ Shapiro, M: Hindi.
^ Bhatia 1996: 32-33.
^ Shapiro, M: "Hindi"



http://www.cbs.gov.np/Nepal%20in%20figure/Nepal%20in%20Figures%202007_nep.pdf


[edit] Bibliography

Bhatia, Tej K. Colloquial Hindi: The Complete Course for Beginners. London, UK & New York, NY: Routledge, 1996. ISBN 0-415-11087-4 (Book), 0415110882 (Cassettes), 0415110890 (Book & Cassette Course)
Gordon, Raymond G., Jr. (ed.) (2005), "Hindi", written at Dallas, Ethnologue: Languages of the World (15th ed.), SIL International.
Grierson, G. A. Linguistic Survey of India Vol I-XI, Calcutta, 1928, ISBN 81-85395-27-6
Hock, Hans H. (1991), Principles of Historical Linguistics, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin–New York, ISBN 3-11-012962-0
Koul, Omkar N. (1994). Hindi Phonetic Reader.Delhi: Indian Institute of Language Studies.
Koul, Omkar N. (2008). Modern Hindi Grammar. Springfield: Dunwoody Press.
McGregor, R. S. (1977), Outline of Hindi Grammar, 2nd Ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford-Delhi, ISBN 0-19-870008-3 (3rd ed.)
Masica, Colin (1991), written at Cambridge, The Indo-Aryan Languages, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 9780521299442, <http://books.google.com/books?id=J3RSHWePhXwC&printsec=frontcover&dq=indo-aryan+languages>.
Ohala, Manjari (1999), "Hindi", in International Phonetic Association, Handbook of the International Phonetic Association: a Guide to the Use of the International Phonetic Alphabet, Cambridge University Press, 100-103, ISBN 9780521637510, <http://books.google.com/books?id=33BSkFV_8PEC&pg=PA100&vq=%22manjari+ohala%22&dq=%22handbook+of+the+international+phonetic+association%22&sig=sDM59_awCtRXNVwRrx-0jcqollw>.
Pollock, Sheldon I (ed.) (2003). Literary Cultures in History: Reconstructions from South Asia. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. ISBN 0520228219. 
Shapiro, Michael C. (2001), "Hindi", in Garry, Jane & Carl Rubino, An encyclopedia of the world's major languages, past and present, New England Publishing Associates, 305-309.
Shapiro, Michael C. (2003), "Hindi", in Cardona, George & Dhanesh Jain, The Indo-Aryan Languages, Routledge, 250-285, ISBN 9780415772945, <http://books.google.com/books?id=jPR2OlbTbdkC&pg=PA250&dq=indo-aryan&sig=cUNurxJKkTLfKf8uiMd7pWX2RC0>.
Snell, Rupert & Simon Weightman (1989), Teach Yourself Hindi (2003 ed.), McGraw-Hill, ISBN 9780071420129.
Taj, Afroz (2002) A door into Hindi. Retrieved November 8, 2005.
Tiwari, Bholanath ([1966] 2004) हिन्दी भाषा (Hindī Bhāshā), Kitāb Mahal, Allahabad, ISBN 81-225-0017-X.


[edit] Dictionaries

McGregor, R.S. (1993), Oxford Hindi-English Dictionary (2004 ed.), Oxford University Press, USA.


[edit] Further reading

Bhatia, Tej K A History of the Hindi Grammatical Tradition. Leiden, Netherlands & New York, NY : E.J. Brill, 1987. ISBN 90-04-07924-60


[edit] External links

Find more about Hindi on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity




Hindi edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia




Wikibooks has a book on the topic of
Hindi




Hindi at the Open Directory Project
The Union: Official Language
Official Unicode Chart for Devanagari (PDF)
Web Hindi Resources
Wikitravel Hindi Phrasebook
Fiji Constitution Section 4 Languages
Hindi Speaking Tree








v • d • e

 (Official) Languages of the Republic of India





Union-level Official languages



Standard Hindi · English








State-level Official languages



Assamese · Bengali · Bodo · Dogri · Garo · Gujarati · Standard Hindi · Kannada · Kashmiri · Khasi · Kokborok · Konkani · Maithili · Malayalam · Manipuri · Marathi · Mizo · Nepali · Oriya · Punjabi · Santali · Sindhi · Telugu · Tamil · Urdu















v • d • e

Hindi





Grammar · Phonology · Devanagari · History · Vocabulary · Hindustani





Western

Braj Bhasha · Hariyanvi · Bundeli · Kannauji · Sansiboli · Khari boli (Registers: Urdu · Modern Standard Hindi)






Eastern

Awadhi · Bagheli · Dhanwar · Fiji Hindi · Chattisgarhi






Pidgins and Creoles

Hinglish · Bambaiya Hindi · Haflong Hindi · Dakhni






Language politics

Madras anti-Hindi agitation of 1965 · Hindi-Urdu controversy






Arts

Literature · Awards · Sahitya Akademi Award · Jnanpith Award · Bollywood · Writers · Poets













v • d • e

Indo-Iranian languages















 
Indic (Indo-Aryan)














 
Old · Middle









Old

Sanskrit (Vedic · Classical) · Mitanni superstrate






Middle

Abahatta · Apabhramsha · Dramatic Prakrits (Magadhi · Maharashtri · Sauraseni) · Elu · Gāndhārī · Jain · Paisaci · Pāli · Prakrit

















 
Modern









Central





Hindi


Awadhi · Bagheli · Bambaiya Hindi · Brij Bhasha · Bundeli · Chhattisgarhi · Fiji Hindi · Haryanvi · Kannauji · Sansiboli · Sadhukaddi (early form)







Urdu


Dakhni · Rekhta (early form)







Others


Dhanwar









Eastern





Bengali


Chittagonian · Sylheti







Others


Angika · Assamese · Bhojpuri · Bishnupriya Manipuri · Chakma · Halbi · Hajong · Kayort · Kharia Thar · Magahi · Maithili · Majhi · Mal Paharia · Nahari · Oriya · Rajbangsi · Rohingya · Sadri









Northern

Garhwali · Kumaoni · Nepali (Palpa) · Potwari






North
western





Punjabi


Saraiki · Majhi







Others


Aer · Derawali · Dogri · Hindko · Kangri · Kutchi · Sindhi









Southern

Dhivehi · Konkani · Mahal · Marathi · Sinhala






Western





Bhil


Bhili · Gamit







Rajasthani


Bagri · Goaria · Gojri · Jaipuri · Malvi · Marwari · Mewari · Dhatki (sociolect)







Others


Domari · Gujarati · Parkari Koli · Khandeshi · Nahali · Romani · Saurashtra


























 
Iranian














 
Old · Middle









Old





Western


Median · Old Persian







Eastern


Avestan · Old Scythian









Middle





Western


Parthian · Middle Persian







Eastern


Bactrian · Khwarezmian · Ossetic (Jassic) · Sakan (Sacian) · Scythian · Sogdian




















 
Modern









Western





Kurdish


Kermanshahi · Kurmanji · Soranî







Persian


Aimaq · Bukhori · Dari · Dehwari · Dzhidi · Hazaragi · Iranian Persian · Judeo-Shirazi · Khuzestani · Larestani · Tajik







Others


Old Azari · Baluchi · Bashkardi · Caspian · Central Iran · Dari (Zoroastrian) · Fars · Gilaki · Gorani · Harzani · Juhuri · Kumzari · Laki · Luri · Bakhtiari Lori · Mazandarani (Gorgani) · Ormuri · Sangiseri · Parachi · Semnani · Taleshi · Tajik · Tat · Tati · Zazaki









Eastern





Pamir


Ishkashimi · Munji · Roshani (Roshni) · Shughni · Sarikoli · Wakhi · Yazgulami · Yidgha







Others


Bartangi · Hindukush group · Ishkashmi · Karakoram group · Khufi · Munji · Oroshori · Ossetic · Pashto · Sanglechi · Vanji · Waziri · Yaghnobi · Zebaki









Unclassified

Tangshewi























 
Other Indo-Iranian languages









Dardic

Dameli · Domaaki · Gawar-Bati · Kalami · Kalash · Kashmiri · Khowar · Kohistani · Nangalami · Palula · Pashayi · Shina · Shumashti · Torwali · Ushoji






Nuristani





Kamkata-viri


Kamviri · Kata-vari · Mumviri







Others


Askunu · Kalasha-ala · Kamkata-viri · Tregami language · Vasi-vari


















Italics indicate extinct languages.












v • d • e

Languages of South Asia





Main articles

Languages of India (list by number of speakers - scheduled) · Languages of Pakistan · Languages of Bangladesh · Languages of Nepal · Languages of Sri Lanka






Historic languages

Linguistic history of India • Sanskrit: Vedic Sanskrit · Classical Sanskrit · Prakrit: Dramatic Prakrit · Jain Prakrit · Pāli • Others: Middle Indic






Contemporary languages

Austronesian: Sri Lanka Malay • Dravidian: Brahui · Kannada · Malayalam · Tamil · Telugu · Tulu • Indo-Aryan: Angika · Assamese · Bhojpuri · Bengali · Dhivehi · Dogri · Gujarati · Hindi · Hindko · Kashmiri · Konkani · Magahi · Mahal · Maithili · Marathi · Nepali · Oriya · Punjabi · Saraiki · Sindhi · Sinhala · Urdu • Iranian: Balochi · Pashto · Persian · Tajik • Isolates: Andamanese · Burushaski · Kalto · Kusunda • Mon-Khmer: Khasi · Nicobarese • Munda: Ho · Korku · Mundari · Santali · Sora • European influence: English · French · Portuguese • Tibeto-Burman: Ao · Bodo · Garo · Kokborok · Meitei · Mizo · Nepal Bhasa · Sikkimese · Tenyidie · Tibetan






Scripts

Indus · Brahmi • Brahmic family: Devanagari · Sinhala · Telugu · Tamil · Gurmukhi · Bengali · Ranjana · Oriya · Malayalam · Kannada · Gujarati • Arabic: Arwi · Nasta'liq · Shahmukhi






Language activism

Hela Havula · Bengali Language Movement · Sanskrit revival · Pure Tamil movement · Nepal Bhasa movement · Madras anti-Hindi agitation of 1965 · Urdu movement









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hindi"
Categories: Dialects of Hindi | Dialects of Hindustani | Languages of Uttar Pradesh | Hindi | Hindustani | Indo-Aryan languages | Languages of IndiaHidden categories: Articles containing Hindi language text | Articles including recorded pronunciations | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Aragonés
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bikol Central
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Fiji Hindi
Français
Gaeilge
Gàidhlig
Galego
ગુજરાતી
한국어
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingue
ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Kiswahili
Ladino
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
नेपाली
नेपाल भाषा
日本語
Nnapulitano
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Ripoarisch
Română
Romani
Runa Simi
Русский
Sámegiella
Scots
संस्कृत
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
吴语
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 12:49.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
