













Time - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Time";
		var wgTitle = "Time";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "30012";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282275186;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Time

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Time (disambiguation).




The flow of sand in an hourglass can be used to keep track of elapsed time. It also concretely represents the present as being between the past and the future.


Time is a component of the measuring system used to sequence events, to compare the durations of events and the intervals between them, and to quantify the motions of objects. Time has been a major subject of religion, philosophy, and science, but defining it in a non-controversial manner applicable to all fields of study has consistently eluded the greatest scholars.[1]


“

The Moving Finger writes: and, having writ,
Moves on, nor all thy Pity nor Wit,
Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line,
Nor all the Tears wash out a Word of it. … Omar Khayyám

”


In physics and other sciences, time is considered one of the few fundamental quantities.[2] Time is used to define other quantities – such as velocity – and defining time in terms of such quantities would result in circularity of definition.[3] An operational definition of time, wherein one says that observing a certain number of repetitions of one or another standard cyclical event (such as the passage of a free-swinging pendulum) constitutes one standard unit such as the second, is highly useful in the conduct of both advanced experiments and everyday affairs of life. The operational definition leaves aside the question whether there is something called time, apart from the counting activity just mentioned, that flows and that can be measured. Investigations of a single continuum called spacetime brings the nature of time into association with related questions into the nature of space, questions that have their roots in the works of early students of natural philosophy.
Among prominent philosophers, there are two distinct viewpoints on time. One view is that time is part of the fundamental structure of the universe, a dimension in which events occur in sequence. Time travel, in this view, becomes a possibility as other "times" persist like frames of a film strip, spread out across the time line. Sir Isaac Newton subscribed to this realist view, and hence it is sometimes referred to as Newtonian time.[4][5] The opposing view is that time does not refer to any kind of "container" that events and objects "move through", nor to any entity that "flows", but that it is instead part of a fundamental intellectual structure (together with space and number) within which humans sequence and compare events. This second view, in the tradition of Gottfried Leibniz[6] and Immanuel Kant,[7][8] holds that time is neither an event nor a thing, and thus is not itself measurable nor can it be travelled.
Temporal measurement has occupied scientists and technologists, and was a prime motivation in navigation and astronomy. Periodic events and periodic motion have long served as standards for units of time. Examples include the apparent motion of the sun across the sky, the phases of the moon, the swing of a pendulum, and the beat of a heart. Currently, the international unit of time, the second, is defined in terms of radiation emitted by caesium atoms (see below). Time is also of significant social importance, having economic value ("time is money") as well as personal value, due to an awareness of the limited time in each day and in human life spans.




Contents


1 Temporal measurement

1.1 History of the calendar
1.2 History of time measurement devices


2 Definitions and standards

2.1 World time
2.2 Sidereal time
2.3 Chronology


3 Religion

3.1 Linear and cyclical time
3.2 Numeric and Divine time


4 Philosophy

4.1 Time as "unreal"


5 Physical definition

5.1 Classical mechanics
5.2 Modern physics
5.3 Spacetime
5.4 Time dilation
5.5 Relativistic time versus Newtonian time
5.6 Arrow of time
5.7 Quantised time


6 Time and the Big Bang

6.1 Speculative physics beyond the Big Bang


7 Time travel
8 Perception of time

8.1 Psychology
8.2 Altered states of consciousness
8.3 Culture


9 Use of time
10 See also

10.1 Books
10.2 Organizations
10.3 Miscellaneous arts and sciences
10.4 Miscellaneous units of time


11 Notes and references
12 Further reading
13 External links

13.1 Perception of time
13.2 Physics
13.3 Philosophy
13.4 Timekeeping
13.5 Miscellaneous


14 Navigation templates





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Temporal measurement
Temporal measurement, or chronometry, takes two distinct period forms: the calendar, a mathematical abstraction for calculating extensive periods of time,[9] and the clock, a concrete mechanism that counts the ongoing passage of time. In day-to-day life, the clock is consulted for periods less than a day, the calendar, for periods longer than a day. Increasingly, personal electronic devices display both calendars and clocks simultaneously. The number (as on a clock dial or calendar) that marks the occurrence of a specified event as to hour or date is obtained by counting from a fiducial epoch—a central reference point.

[edit] History of the calendar
Main article: Calendar
Artifacts from the Palaeolithic suggest that the moon was used to calculate time as early as 12,000, and possibly even 30,000 BP.[10]
The Sumerian civilization of approximately 2000 BC introduced the sexagesimal system based on the number 60. 60 seconds in a minute, 60 minutes in an hour – and possibly a calendar with 360 (60x6) days in a year (with a few more days added on). Twelve also features prominently, with roughly 12 hours of day and 12 of night, and 12 months in a year (with 12 being 1/5 of 60).
The reforms of Julius Caesar in 45 BC put the Roman world on a solar calendar. This Julian calendar was faulty in that its intercalation still allowed the astronomical solstices and equinoxes to advance against it by about 11 minutes per year. Pope Gregory XIII introduced a correction in 1582; the Gregorian calendar was only slowly adopted by different nations over a period of centuries, but is today the one in most common use around the world.

[edit] History of time measurement devices




Horizontal sundial in Taganrog (1833)


Main article: History of timekeeping devices
See also: Clock
A large variety of devices have been invented to measure time. The study of these devices is called horology.
An Egyptian device dating to c.1500 BC, similar in shape to a bent T-square, measured the passage of time from the shadow cast by its crossbar on a non-linear rule. The T was oriented eastward in the mornings. At noon, the device was turned around so that it could cast its shadow in the evening direction.[11]
A sundial uses a gnomon to cast a shadow on a set of markings which were calibrated to the hour. The position of the shadow marked the hour in local time.
The most precise timekeeping devices of the ancient world were the water clock or clepsydra, one of which was found in the tomb of Egyptian pharaoh Amenhotep I (1525–1504 BC). They could be used to measure the hours even at night, but required manual timekeeping to replenish the flow of water. The Greeks and Chaldeans regularly maintained timekeeping records as an essential part of their astronomical observations. Arab inventors and engineers in particular made improvements on the use of water clocks up to the Middle Ages.[12]
The Arab engineers also invented the first a mechanical clocks to be driven by weights and gears in the 11th century.[13][14][15] Also in the 11th century, the Chinese inventors and engineers invented the first mechanical clocks to be driven by an escapement mechanism.




A contemporary quartz watch


The hourglass uses the flow of sand to measure the flow of time. They were used in navigation. Ferdinand Magellan used 18 glasses on each ship for his circumnavigation of the globe (1522).[16]
Incense sticks and candles were, and are, commonly used to measure time in temples and churches across the globe. Waterclocks, and later, mechanical clocks, were used to mark the events of the abbeys and monasteries of the Middle Ages. Richard of Wallingford (1292–1336), abbot of St. Alban's abbey, famously built a mechanical clock as an astronomical orrery about 1330.[17][18]
The English word clock probably comes from the Middle Dutch word "klocke" which is in turn derived from the mediaeval Latin word "clocca", which is ultimately derived from Celtic, and is cognate with French, Latin, and German words that mean bell. The passage of the hours at sea were marked by bells, and denoted the time (see ship's bells). The hours were marked by bells in the abbeys as well as at sea.




A chip-scale atomic clock


Clocks can range from watches, to more exotic varieties such as the Clock of the Long Now. They can be driven by a variety of means, including gravity, springs, and various forms of electrical power, and regulated by a variety of means such as a pendulum.
A chronometer is a portable timekeeper that meets certain precision standards. Initially, the term was used to refer to the marine chronometer, a timepiece used to determine longitude by means of celestial navigation. More recently, the term has also been applied to the chronometer watch, a wristwatch that meets precision standards set by the Swiss agency COSC.
The most accurate timekeeping devices are atomic clocks, which are accurate to seconds in many millions of years,[19] and are used to calibrate other clocks and timekeeping instruments. Atomic clocks use the spin property of atoms as their basis, and since 1967, the International System of Measurements bases its unit of time, the second, on the properties of caesium atoms. SI defines the second as 9,192,631,770 cycles of that radiation which corresponds to the transition between two electron spin energy levels of the ground state of the 133Cs atom.
Today, the Global Positioning System in coordination with the Network Time Protocol can be used to synchronize timekeeping systems across the globe.
As of 2006[update], the smallest unit of time that has been directly measured is on the attosecond (10−18 s) time scale, or around 1026 Planck times.[20][21][22]

[edit] Definitions and standards

Common units of time

Unit
Size
Notes


attosecond
1/1018 s
smallest measured time


femtosecond
1/1015 s



picosecond
1/1012 s



nanosecond
1/109 s



microsecond
1/106 s



millisecond
0.001 s



second
SI base unit



minute
60 s



hour
60 minutes



day
24 hours



week
7 days
Also called sennight


fortnight
14 days
2 weeks


lunar month
27.2 to 29.5 days
Various definitions of "lunar month" exist


month
28 to 31 days



quarter
3 months



year
12 months



common year
365 days
52 weeks + 1 day


leap year
366 days
52 weeks + 2 days


tropical year
365.24219 days
average


Gregorian year
365.2425 days
average


Olympiad
4 year cycle



lustrum
5 years
Also called pentad


decade
10 years



Indiction
15 year cycle



generation
17 - 25 years
approximate


jubilee (Biblical)
50 years



century
100 years



millennium
1,000 years



See also: Time standard and Orders of magnitude (time)
The SI base unit for time is the SI second. From the second, larger units such as the minute, hour and day are defined, though they are "non-SI" units because they do not use the decimal system, and also because of the occasional need for a leap second. They are, however, officially accepted for use with the International System. There are no fixed ratios between seconds and months or years as months and years have significant variations in length.[23]
The official SI definition of the second is as follows:[23][24]

The second is the duration of 9,192,631,770 periods of the radiation corresponding to the transition between the two hyperfine levels of the ground state of the caesium 133 atom.


At its 1997 meeting, the CIPM affirmed that this definition refers to a caesium atom in its ground state at a temperature of 0 K.[23] Previous to 1967, the second was defined as:

the fraction 1/31,556,925.9747 of the tropical year for 1900 January 0 at 12 hours ephemeris time.


The current definition of the second, coupled with the current definition of the metre, is based on the special theory of relativity, which affirms our space-time to be a Minkowski space.

[edit] World time
The measurement of time is so critical to the functioning of modern societies that it is coordinated at an international level. The basis for scientific time is a continuous count of seconds based on atomic clocks around the world, known as the International Atomic Time (TAI). Other scientific time standards include Terrestrial Time and Barycentric Dynamical Time.
Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) is the basis for modern civil time. Since January 1, 1972, it has been defined to follow TAI with an exact offset of an integer number of seconds, changing only when a leap second is added to keep clock time synchronized with the rotation of the Earth. In TAI and UTC systems, the duration of a second is constant, as it is defined by the unchanging transition period of the cesium atom.
Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) is an older standard, adopted starting with British railroads in 1847. Using telescopes instead of atomic clocks, GMT was calibrated to the mean solar time at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich in the UK. Universal Time (UT) is the modern term for the international telescope-based system, adopted to replace "Greenwich Mean Time" in 1928 by the International Astronomical Union. Observations at the Greenwich Observatory itself ceased in 1954, though the location is still used as the basis for the coordinate system. Because the rotational period of Earth is not perfectly constant, the duration of a second would vary if calibrated to a telescope-based standard like GMT or UT - in which a second was defined as a fraction of a day or year. The terms "GMT" and "Greenwich Mean Time" are sometimes used informally to refer to UT or UTC.
The Global Positioning System also broadcasts a very precise time signal worldwide, along with instructions for converting GPS time to UTC.
Earth is split up into a number of time zones. Most time zones are exactly one hour apart, and by convention compute their local time as an offset from UTC or GMT. In many locations these offsets vary twice yearly due to daylight saving time transitions.

[edit] Sidereal time
Sidereal time is the measurement of time relative to a distant star (instead of solar time that is relative to the sun). It is used in astronomy to predict when a star will be overhead. Due to the rotation of the earth around the sun a sidereal day is 1/366 (4 minutes) less than a solar day.

[edit] Chronology
Main article: Chronology
Another form of time measurement consists of studying the past. Events in the past can be ordered in a sequence (creating a chronology), and can be put into chronological groups (periodization). One of the most important systems of periodization is geologic time, which is a system of periodizing the events that shaped the Earth and its life. Chronology, periodization, and interpretation of the past are together known as the study of history.

[edit] Religion
Further information: Category:Time and fate deities
In the Old Testament book Ecclesiastes, traditionally ascribed to Solomon (970–928 BC), time (as the Hebrew word עדן, זמן `iddan(time) zĕman(season) is often translated) was traditionally regarded as a medium for the passage of predestined events. (Another word, זמן zman, was current as meaning time fit for an event, and is used as the modern Hebrew equivalent to the English word "time".)




Hindu units of time shown logarithmically



There is an appointed time (zman) for everything. And there is a time (’êth) for every event under heaven–
A time (’êth) to give birth, and a time to die; A time to plant, and a time to uproot what is planted.
A time to kill, and a time to heal; A time to tear down, and a time to build up.
A time to weep, and a time to laugh; A time to mourn, and a time to dance.
A time to throw stones, and a time to gather stones; A time to embrace, and a time to shun embracing.
A time to search, and a time to give up as lost; A time to keep, and a time to throw away.
A time to tear apart, and a time to sew together; A time to be silent, and a time to speak.
A time to love, and a time to hate; A time for war, and a time for peace. – Ecclesiastes 3:1–8


[edit] Linear and cyclical time
See also: Time Cycles and Wheel of time
In general, the Judaeo-Christian concept, based on the Bible, is that time is linear, with a beginning, the act of creation by God. The Christian view assumes also an end, the eschaton, expected to happen when Christ returns to earth in the Second Coming to judge the living and the dead. This will be the consummation of the world and time. St Augustine's City of God was the first developed application of this concept to world history. The Christian view is that God is uncreated and eternal so that He and the supernatural world are outside time and exist in eternity. Christian Science defines time as "error" or illusion.
Ancient cultures such as Incan, Mayan, Hopi, and other Native American Tribes, plus the Babylonian, Ancient Greek, Hindu, Buddhist, Jainist, and others have a concept of a wheel of time, that regards time as cyclical and quantic consisting of repeating ages that happen to every being of the Universe between birth and extinction.

[edit] Numeric and Divine time
The Greek language denotes two distinct principles, Chronos and Kairos. The former refers to numeric, or chronological, time. The latter, literally "the right or opportune moment," relates specifically to metaphysical or Divine time. In theology, Kairos is qualitative, as opposed to quantitative.

[edit] Philosophy
Main articles: Philosophy of space and time and Temporal finitism
The earliest recorded African philosophy of time was expounded by the ancient Egyptian thinker Ptahhotep (c. 2650–2600 BC), who said: "Do not lessen the time of following desire, for the wasting of time is an abomination to the spirit."[citation needed] The Vedas, the earliest texts on Indian philosophy and Hindu philosophy dating back to the late 2nd millennium BC, describe ancient Hindu cosmology, in which the universe goes through repeated cycles of creation, destruction and rebirth, with each cycle lasting 4,320,000 years. Ancient Greek philosophers, including Parmenides and Heraclitus, wrote essays on the nature of time.[25]
In Book 11 of St. Augustine's Confessions, he ruminates on the nature of time, asking, "What then is time? If no one asks me, I know: if I wish to explain it to one that asketh, I know not." He settles on time being defined more by what it is not than what it is,[26] an approach similar to that taken in other negative definitions.
In contrast to ancient Greek philosophers who believed that the universe had an infinite past with no beginning, medieval philosophers and theologians developed the concept of the universe having a finite past with a beginning. This view was inspired by the creation event shared by the three Abrahamic religions: Judaism, Christianity and Islam. The Christian philosopher, John Philoponus, presented the first such argument against the ancient Greek notion of an infinite past. However, the most sophisticated medieval arguments against an infinite past were developed by the early Muslim philosopher, Al-Kindi (Alkindus); the Jewish philosopher, Saadia Gaon (Saadia ben Joseph); and the Muslim theologian, Al-Ghazali (Algazel). They developed two logical arguments against an infinite past, the first being the "argument from the impossibility of the existence of an actual infinite", which states:[27]

"An actual infinite cannot exist."
"An infinite temporal regress of events is an actual infinite."
"∴ An infinite temporal regress of events cannot exist."

The second argument, the "argument from the impossibility of completing an actual infinite by successive addition", states:[27]

"An actual infinite cannot be completed by successive addition."
"The temporal series of past events has been completed by successive addition."
"∴ The temporal series of past events cannot be an actual infinite."

Both arguments were adopted by later Christian philosophers and theologians, and the second argument in particular became more famous after it was adopted by Immanuel Kant in his thesis of the first antimony concerning time.[27]
Isaac Newton believed time and space form a container for events, which is as real as the objects it contains.

Absolute, true, and mathematical time, in and of itself and of its own nature, without reference to anything external, flows uniformly and by another name is called duration. Relative, apparent, and common time is any sensible and external measure (precise or imprecise) of duration by means of motion; such a measure – for example, an hour, a day, a month, a year – is commonly used instead of true time.
– Principia[28]

In contrast to Newton's belief in absolute space, and a precursor to Kantian time, Leibniz believed that time and space are relational.[29] The differences between Leibniz's and Newton's interpretations came to a head in the famous Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence. Leibniz thought of time as a fundamental part of an abstract conceptual framework, together with space and number, within which we sequence events, quantify their duration, and compare the motions of objects. In this view, time does not refer to any kind of entity that "flows," that objects "move through," or that is a "container" for events.
Immanuel Kant, in the Critique of Pure Reason, described time as an a priori intuition that allows us (together with the other a priori intuition, space) to comprehend sense experience.[30] With Kant, neither space nor time are conceived as substances, but rather both are elements of a systematic mental framework that necessarily structures the experiences of any rational agent, or observing subject. Spatial measurements are used to quantify how far apart objects are, and temporal measurements are used to quantify how far apart events occur.
In Existentialism, time is considered fundamental to the question of being,[citation needed] in particular by the philosopher Martin Heidegger.[citation needed] (See Ontology).
Henri Bergson believed that time was neither a real homogeneous medium nor a mental construct, but possesses what he referred to as Duration. Duration, in Bergson's view, was creativity and memory as an essential component of reality.[31]

[edit] Time as "unreal"
In 5th century BC Greece, Antiphon the Sophist, in a fragment preserved from his chief work On Truth held that: "Time is not a reality (hypostasis), but a concept (noêma) or a measure (metron)." Parmenides went further, maintaining that time, motion, and change were illusions, leading to the paradoxes of his follower Zeno.[32] Time as illusion is also a common theme in Buddhist thought,[33] and some modern philosophers have carried on with this theme. J. M. E. McTaggart's 1908 The Unreality of Time, for example, argues that time is unreal (see also The flow of time).
However, these arguments often center around what it means for something to be "real". Modern physicists generally consider time to be as "real" as space, though others such as Julian Barbour in his The End of Time argue that quantum equations of the universe take their true form when expressed in the timeless configuration spacerealm containing every possible "Now" or momentary configuration of the universe, which he terms 'platonia'.[34] (See also: Eternalism (philosophy of time).)

[edit] Physical definition
Main article: Time in physics
From the age of Newton up until Einstein's profound reinterpretation of the physical concepts associated with time and space, time was considered to be "absolute" and to flow "equably" (to use the words of Newton) for all observers.[35] The science of classical mechanics is based on this Newtonian idea of time.
Einstein, in his special theory of relativity,[36] postulated the constancy and finiteness of the speed of light for all observers. He showed that this postulate, together with a reasonable definition for what it means for two events to be simultaneous, requires that distances appear compressed and time intervals appear lengthened for events associated with objects in motion relative to an inertial observer.
Einstein showed that if time and space is measured using electromagnetic phenomena (like light bouncing between mirrors) then due to the constancy of the speed of light, time and space become mathematically entangled together in a certain way (called Minkowski space) which in turn results in Lorentz transformation and in entanglement of all other important derivative physical quantities (like energy, momentum, mass, force, etc) in a certain 4-vectorial way (see special relativity for more details).


Classical mechanics




Newton's Second Law



History of ...


Fundamental concepts


Space · Time · Mass · Force
Energy · Momentum




Formulations


Newtonian mechanics
Lagrangian mechanics
Hamiltonian mechanics




Branches


Statics
Dynamics
Kinematics
Applied mechanics
Celestial mechanics
Continuum mechanics
Statistical mechanics




Scientists


Newton · Euler · d'Alembert · Clairaut
Lagrange · Laplace · Hamilton · Poisson






This box: view • talk • edit




[edit] Classical mechanics
In classical mechanics Newton's concept of "relative, apparent, and common time" can be used in the formulation of a prescription for the synchronization of clocks. Events seen by two different observers in motion relative to each other produce a mathematical concept of time that works pretty well for describing the everyday phenomena of most people's experience.

[edit] Modern physics
In the late nineteenth century, physicists encountered problems with the classical understanding of time, in connection with the behavior of electricity and magnetism. Einstein resolved these problems by invoking a method of synchronizing clocks using the constant, finite speed of light as the maximum signal velocity. This led directly to the result that time appears to elapse at different rates relative to different observers in motion relative to one another.





Two-dimensional space depicted in three-dimensional spacetime. The past and future light cones are absolute, the "present" is a relative concept different for observers in relative motion.



[edit] Spacetime
Main article: Spacetime
Modern physics views the curvature of spacetime around an object as much a feature of that object as are its mass and volume.[citation needed]
Time has historically been closely related with space, the two together comprising spacetime in Einstein's special relativity and general relativity. According to these theories, the concept of time depends on the spatial reference frame of the observer, and the human perception as well as the measurement by instruments such as clocks are different for observers in relative motion. Even the temporal order of events can change, but the past and future are defined by the backward and forward light cones, which never change.[citation needed] The past is the set of events that can send light signals to the observer, the future the events to which the observer can send light signals. All else is non-observable and within that set of events the very time-order differs for different observers.[citation needed]

[edit] Time dilation




Relativity of simultaneity: Event B is simultaneous with A in the green reference frame, but it occurred before in the blue frame, and will occur later in the red frame.


Main article: Time dilation
"Time is nature's way of keeping everything from happening at once". This quote, attributed variously to Einstein, John Archibald Wheeler, and Woody Allen, says that time is what separates cause and effect. Einstein showed that people travelling at different speeds, whilst agreeing on cause and effect, will measure different time separations between events and can even observe different chronological orderings between non-causally related events. Though these effects are typically minute in the human experience, the effect becomes much more pronounced for objects moving at speeds approaching the speed of light. Many subatomic particles exist for only a fixed fraction of a second in a lab relatively at rest, but some that travel close to the speed of light can be measured to travel further and survive much longer than expected (a muon is one example). According to the special theory of relativity, in the high-speed particle's frame of reference, it exists, on the average, for a standard amount of time known as its mean lifetime, and the distance it travels in that time is zero, because its velocity is zero. Relative to a frame of reference at rest, time seems to "slow down" for the particle. Relative to the high-speed particle, distances seems to shorten. Even in Newtonian terms time may be considered the fourth dimension of motion; but Einstein showed how both temporal and spatial dimensions can be altered (or "warped") by high-speed motion.
Einstein (The Meaning of Relativity): "Two events taking place at the points A and B of a system K are simultaneous if they appear at the same instant when observed from the middle point, M, of the interval AB. Time is then defined as the ensemble of the indications of similar clocks, at rest relatively to K, which register the same simultaneously."
Einstein wrote in his book, Relativity, that simultaneity is also relative, i.e., two events that appear simultaneous to an observer in a particular inertial reference frame need not be judged as simultaneous by a second observer in a different inertial frame of reference.

[edit] Relativistic time versus Newtonian time


Views of spacetime along the world line of a rapidly accelerating observer in a relativistic universe. The events ("dots") that pass the two diagonal lines in the bottom half of the image (the past light cone of the observer in the origin) are the events visible to the observer.


The animations visualise the different treatments of time in the Newtonian and the relativistic descriptions. At heart of these differences are the Galilean and Lorentz transformations applicable in the Newtonian and relativistic theories, respectively.
In the figures, the vertical direction indicates time. The horizontal direction indicates distance (only one spatial dimension is taken into account), and the thick dashed curve is the spacetime trajectory ("world line") of the observer. The small dots indicate specific (past and future) events in spacetime.
The slope of the world line (deviation from being vertical) gives the relative velocity to the observer. Note how in both pictures the view of spacetime changes when the observer accelerates.
In the Newtonian description these changes are such that time is absolute: the movements of the observer do not influence whether an event occurs in the 'now' (i.e. whether an event passes the horizontal line through the observer).
However, in the relativistic description the observability of events is absolute: the movements of the observer do not influence whether an event passes the "light cone" of the observer. Notice that with the change from a Newtonian to a relativistic description, the concept of absolute time is no longer applicable: events move up-and-down in the figure depending on the acceleration of the observer.

[edit] Arrow of time
Main article: Arrow of time
Time appears to have a direction – the past lies behind, fixed and incommutable, while the future lies ahead and is not necessarily fixed. Yet the majority of the laws of physics don't provide this arrow of time. The exceptions include the Second law of thermodynamics, which states that entropy must increase over time (see Entropy); the cosmological arrow of time, which points away from the Big Bang, and the radiative arrow of time, caused by light only traveling forwards in time. In particle physics, there is also the weak arrow of time, from CPT symmetry, and also measurement in quantum mechanics (see Measurement in quantum mechanics).

[edit] Quantised time
See also: Chronon
Time quantization is a hypothetical concept. In the modern established physical theories (the Standard Model of Particles and Interactions and General Relativity) time is not quantized.
Planck time (~ 5.4 × 10−44 seconds) is the unit of time in the system of natural units known as Planck units. Current established physical theories are believed to fail at this time scale, and many physicists expect that the Planck time might be the smallest unit of time that could ever be measured, even in principle. Tentative physical theories that describe this time scale exist; see for instance loop quantum gravity.

[edit] Time and the Big Bang
Stephen Hawking in particular has addressed a connection between time and the Big Bang. In A Brief History of Time and elsewhere, Hawking says that even if time did not begin with the Big Bang and there were another time frame before the Big Bang, no information from events then would be accessible to us, and nothing that happened then would have any effect upon the present time-frame.[37] Upon occasion, Hawking has stated that time actually began with the Big Bang, and that questions about what happened before the Big Bang are meaningless.[38][39][40] This less-nuanced, but commonly repeated formulation has received criticisms from philosophers such as Aristotelian philosopher Mortimer J. Adler.[41][42]
Scientists have come to some agreement on descriptions of events that happened 10−35 seconds after the Big Bang, but generally agree that descriptions about what happened before one Planck time (5 × 10−44 seconds) after the Big Bang will likely remain pure speculation.

[edit] Speculative physics beyond the Big Bang




A graphical representation of the expansion of the universe with the inflationary epoch represented as the dramatic expansion of the metric seen on the left. Image from WMAP press release, 2006.


While the Big Bang model is well established in cosmology, it is likely to be refined in the future. Little is known about the earliest moments of the universe's history. The Penrose-Hawking singularity theorems require the existence of a singularity at the beginning of cosmic time. However, these theorems assume that general relativity is correct, but general relativity must break down before the universe reaches the Planck temperature, and a correct treatment of quantum gravity may avoid the singularity.[43]
There may also be parts of the universe well beyond what can be observed in principle. If inflation occurred this is likely, for exponential expansion would push large regions of space beyond our observable horizon.
Some proposals, each of which entails untested hypotheses, are:

models including the Hartle-Hawking boundary condition in which the whole of space-time is finite; the Big Bang does represent the limit of time, but without the need for a singularity.[44]
brane cosmology models[45] in which inflation is due to the movement of branes in string theory; the pre-big bang model; the ekpyrotic model, in which the Big Bang is the result of a collision between branes; and the cyclic model, a variant of the ekpyrotic model in which collisions occur periodically.[46][47][48]
chaotic inflation, in which inflation events start here and there in a random quantum-gravity foam, each leading to a bubble universe expanding from its own big bang.[49]

Proposals in the last two categories see the Big Bang as an event in a much larger and older universe, or multiverse, and not the literal beginning.

[edit] Time travel
Main article: Time travel
See also: Time travel in fiction and Grandfather paradox
Time travel is the concept of moving backwards and/or forwards to different points in time, in a manner analogous to moving through space and different from the normal "flow" of time to an earthbound observer. Although time travel has been a plot device in fiction since the 19th century, and one-way travel into the future is arguably possible given the phenomenon of time dilation in the theory of relativity, it is currently unknown whether the laws of physics would allow time travel to the past. Any technological device, whether fictional or hypothetical, that is used to achieve time travel is known as a time machine.
A central problem with time travel to the past is the violation of causality; should an effect precede its cause, it would give rise to the possibility of temporal paradox. Some interpretations of time travel resolve this by accepting the possibility of travel between parallel realities or universes.
Theory would point toward there having to be a physical dimension in which one could travel to, where the present (i.e. the point that which you are leaving) would be present at a point fixed in either the past or future. Seeing as this theory would be dependent upon the theory of a multiverse, it is uncertain how or if it would be possible to just prove the possibility of time travel.

[edit] Perception of time

[edit] Psychology
See also: Mental chronometry and Sense of time
Even in the presence of timepieces, different individuals may judge an identical length of time to be passing at different rates.[citation needed] Commonly, this is referred to as time seeming to "fly" (a period of time seeming to pass faster than possible) or time seeming to "drag" (a period of time seeming to pass slower than possible). The psychologist Jean Piaget called this form of time perception "lived time".[citation needed]
This common experience was used to familiarize the general public to the ideas presented by Einstein's theory of relativity in a 1930 cartoon by Sidney "George" Strube:[50][51]

Man: Well, it's like this,—supposing I were to sit next to a pretty girl for half an hour it would seem like half a minute,—
Einstein: Braffo! You haf zee ideah! [sic]
Man: But if I were to sit on a hot stove for two seconds then it would seem like two hours.

A form of temporal illusion verifiable by experiment is the kappa effect,[52] whereby time intervals between visual events are perceived as relatively longer or shorter depending on the relative spatial positions of the events. In other words: the perception of temporal intervals appears to be directly affected, in these cases, by the perception of spatial intervals.
Time also appears to pass more quickly as one gets older.[citation needed] Stephen Hawking suggests that the perception of time is a ratio: Unit of Time : Time Lived.[citation needed] For example, one hour to a six-month-old person would be approximately "1:4368", while one hour to a 40-year-old would be "1:349,440". Therefore an hour appears much longer to a young child than to an aged adult, even though the measure of time is the same.

[edit] Altered states of consciousness
Altered states of consciousness are sometimes characterized by a different estimation of time. Some psychoactive substances – such as entheogens – may also dramatically alter a person's temporal judgement. When viewed under the influence of such substances as LSD, psychedelic mushrooms, and peyote, a clock may appear to be a strange reference point and a useless tool for measuring the passage of events as it does not correlate with the user's experience. At higher doses, time may appear to slow down, stop, speed up, go backwards and even seem out of sequence. A typical thought might be "I can't believe it's only 8 o'clock, but then again, what does 8 o'clock mean?" As the boundaries for experiencing time are removed, so is its relevance. Many users claim this unbounded timelessness feels like a glimpse into spiritual infinity. To imagine that one exists somewhere "outside" of time is one of the hallmark experiences of a psychedelic voyage.[citation needed] Marijuana, a milder psychedelic, may also distort the perception of time to a lesser degree.[53]
The practice of meditation, central to all Buddhist traditions, takes as its goal the reflection of the mind back upon itself, thus altering the subjective experience of time; the so called, 'entering the now', or 'the moment'.[citation needed]

[edit] Culture
Culture is another variable contributing to the perception of time. Anthropologist Benjamin Lee Whorf reported after studying the Hopi cultures that: "… the Hopi language is seen to contain no words, grammatical forms, construction or expressions or that refer directly to what we call “time”, or to past, present, or future…"[54]
In Hindi and Punjabi (two of the official languages of India), there is only one word kal for both yesterday and tomorrow, the meaning determined by the context.

[edit] Use of time
See also: Time management and Time discipline
In sociology and anthropology, time discipline is the general name given to social and economic rules, conventions, customs, and expectations governing the measurement of time, the social currency and awareness of time measurements, and people's expectations concerning the observance of these customs by others.
The use of time is an important issue in understanding human behaviour, education, and travel behaviour. Time use research is a developing field of study. The question concerns how time is allocated across a number of activities (such as time spent at home, at work, shopping, etc.). Time use changes with technology, as the television or the Internet created new opportunities to use time in different ways. However, some aspects of time use are relatively stable over long periods of time, such as the amount of time spent traveling to work, which despite major changes in transport, has been observed to be about 20-30 minutes one-way for a large number of cities over a long period of time. This has led to the disputed time budget hypothesis.
Time management is the organization of tasks or events by first estimating how much time a task will take to be completed, when it must be completed, and then adjusting events that would interfere with its completion so that completion is reached in the appropriate amount of time. Calendars and day planners are common examples of time management tools.
Arlie Russell Hochschild and Norbert Elias have written on the use of time from a sociological perspective.

[edit] See also




Time portal







Time's mortal aspect is personified in this bronze statue by Charles van der Stappen



See the Time navigation templates below for an exhaustive list of related articles.


[edit] Books

A Brief History of Time
About Time
An Experiment with Time


[edit] Organizations
Leading scholarly organizations for researchers on the history and technology of time and timekeeping

Antiquarian Horological Society - AHS (United Kingdom)
Association Française des Amateurs d'Horlogerie Ancienne - AFAHA (France)
Chronometrophilia (Switzerland)
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Chronometrie - DGC (Germany)
HORA Associazione Italiana Cultori di Orologeria Antica (Italy)
National Association of Watch and Clock Collectors - NAWCC (United States of America)




[edit] Miscellaneous arts and sciences

Anachronistic
Change
Date and time notation by country
List of cycles
Network Time Protocol (NTP)
Nonlinear (arts)
Philosophy of physics
Rate (mathematics)



[edit] Miscellaneous units of time

Fiscal year
Half-life
Hexadecimal time
Season
Tithi
Unix epoch





[edit] Notes and references





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2008)




^ E. Fitgerald, The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam. (Penguin 1989), Stanza lxxi
^ Duff, Michael J.; Okun, Lev B.; Veneziano, Gabriele (March 2002) (PDF). Trialogue on the number of fundamental constants. Institute of Physics Publishing for SISSA/ISAS. http://jhep.sissa.it/archive/papers/jhep032002023/jhep032002023.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-02-02.  p. 17. "I only add to this the observation that relativity and quantum mechanics provide, in string theory, units of length and time which look, at present, more fundamental than any other."
^ Duff, Okun, Veneziano, ibid. p. 3. "There is no well established terminology for the fundamental constants of Nature. … The absence of accurately defined terms or the uses (i.e. actually misuses) of ill-defined terms lead to confusion and proliferation of wrong statements."
^ Rynasiewicz, Robert : Johns Hopkins University (2004-08-12). "Newton's Views on Space, Time, and Motion". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Stanford University. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/newton-stm/. Retrieved on 2008-01-10.  "Newton did not regard space and time as genuine substances (as are, paradigmatically, bodies and minds), but rather as real entities with their own manner of existence as necessitated by God's existence... To paraphrase: Absolute, true, and mathematical time, from its own nature, passes equably without relation the [sic~to] anything external, and thus without reference to any change or way of measuring of time (e.g., the hour, day, month, or year)." 
^ Markosian, Ned. "Time". in Edward N. Zalta. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2002 Edition). http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/time/#3.  "The opposing view, normally referred to either as “Platonism with Respect to Time” or as “Absolutism with Respect to Time,” has been defended by Plato, Newton, and others. On this view, time is like an empty container into which events may be placed; but it is a container that exists independently of whether or not anything is placed in it.". 
^ Burnham, Douglas : Staffordshire University (2006). "Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-1716) Metaphysics - 7. Space, Time, and Indiscernibles". The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. http://www.iep.utm.edu/l/leib-met.htm#H7. Retrieved on 2008-01-10.  "First of all, Leibniz finds the idea that space and time might be substances or substance-like absurd (see, for example, "Correspondence with Clarke," Leibniz's Fourth Paper, §8ff). In short, an empty space would be a substance with no properties; it will be a substance that even God cannot modify or destroy.... That is, space and time are internal or intrinsic features of the complete concepts of things, not extrinsic.... Leibniz's view has two major implications. First, there is no absolute location in either space or time; location is always the situation of an object or event relative to other objects and events. Second, space and time are not in themselves real (that is, not substances). Space and time are, rather, ideal. Space and time are just metaphysically illegitimate ways of perceiving certain virtual relations between substances. They are phenomena or, strictly speaking, illusions (although they are illusions that are well-founded upon the internal properties of substances).... It is sometimes convenient to think of space and time as something "out there," over and above the entities and their relations to each other, but this convenience must not be confused with reality. Space is nothing but the order of co-existent objects; time nothing but the order of successive events. This is usually called a relational theory of space and time." 
^ Mattey, G. J. : UC Davis (1997-01-22). "Critique of Pure Reason, Lecture notes: Philosophy 175 UC Davis". http://www-philosophy.ucdavis.edu/mattey/kant/TIMELEC.HTM. Retrieved on 2008-01-10.  "What is correct in the Leibnizian view was its anti-metaphysical stance. Space and time do not exist in and of themselves, but in some sense are the product of the way we represent things. The are ideal, though not in the sense in which Leibniz thought they are ideal (figments of the imagination). The ideality of space is its mind-dependence: it is only a condition of sensibility.... Kant concluded "absolute space is not an object of outer sensation; it is rather a fundamental concept which first of all makes possible all such outer sensation."...Much of the argumentation pertaining to space is applicable, mutatis mutandis, to time, so I will not rehearse the arguments. As space is the form of outer intuition, so time is the form of inner intuition.... Kant claimed that time is real, it is "the real form of inner intuition."" 
^ McCormick, Matt : California State University, Sacramento (2006). "Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) Metaphysics : 4. Kant's Transcendental Idealism". The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. http://www.iep.utm.edu/k/kantmeta.htm#H4. Retrieved on 2008-01-10.  "Time, Kant argues, is also necessary as a form or condition of our intuitions of objects. The idea of time itself cannot be gathered from experience because succession and simultaneity of objects, the phenomena that would indicate the passage of time, would be impossible to represent if we did not already possess the capacity to represent objects in time.... Another way to put the point is to say that the fact that the mind of the knower makes the a priori contribution does not mean that space and time or the categories are mere figments of the imagination. Kant is an empirical realist about the world we experience; we can know objects as they appear to us. He gives a robust defense of science and the study of the natural world from his argument about the mind's role in making nature. All discursive, rational beings must conceive of the physical world as spatially and temporally unified, he argues." 
^ Richards, E. G. (1998). Mapping Time: The Calendar and its History. Oxford University Press. pp. 3–5. 
^ Rudgley, Richard (1999). The Lost Civilizations of the Stone Age. New York: Simon & Schuster. pp. 86–105. 
^ Barnett, Jo Ellen Time's Pendulum: The Quest to Capture Time—from Sundials to Atomic Clocks Plenum, 1998 ISBN 0-306-45787-3 p.28
^ Barnett, ibid, p.37
^ Professor Salim Al-Hassani (2006), 1001 Inventions: Muslim Heritage in Our World, FSTC, ISBN 0955242606
^ Where the heart is, 1001 Inventions: Muslim Heritage in Our World, 2006
^ Ahmad Y Hassan, Transfer Of Islamic Technology To The West, Part II: Transmission Of Islamic Engineering, History of Science and Technology in Islam.
^ Laurence Bergreen, Over the Edge of the World: Magellan's Terrifying Circumnavigation of the Globe, HarperCollins Publishers, 2003, hardcover 480 pages, ISBN 0-06-621173-5
^ North, J. (2004) God's Clockmaker: Richard of Wallingford and the Invention of Time. Oxbow Books. ISBN 1-85285-451-0
^ Watson, E (1979) "The St Albans Clock of Richard of Wallingford". Antiquarian Horology 372-384.
^ "New atomic clock can keep time for 200 million years: Super-precise instruments vital to deep space navigation". Vancouver Sun. 2008-02-16. http://www.canada.com/vancouversun/news/story.html?id=e24ccfa7-44eb-40b7-8b67-daf8263569ff. Retrieved on 2008-02-16. 
^ "Shortest time interval measured". BBC News. 2004-02-25. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/3486160.stm. 
^ "Fastest view of molecular motion". BBC News. 2006-03-04. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/4766842.stm. 
^ "New Scientist article". http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn7700. Retrieved on 2008-11-27. 
^ a b c Organisation Intergouvernementale de la Convention du Métre (1998) (PDF). The International System of Units (SI), 7th Edition. http://www1.bipm.org/utils/en/pdf/si-brochure.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ "Base unit definitions: Second". NIST. http://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Units/second.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-09. 
^ Dagobert Runes, Dictionary of Philosophy, p. 318
^ St. Augustine, Confessions, Book 11. http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/jod/augustine/Pusey/book11 (Accessed 5/26/07).
^ a b c Craig, William Lane (June 1979), "Whitrow and Popper on the Impossibility of an Infinite Past", The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 30 (2): 165–170 [165–6], doi:10.1093/bjps/30.2.165 
^ Newton, Isaac (1726). The Principia, 3rd edition.  Translated by I. Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1999.
^ Gottfried Martin, Kant's Metaphysics and Theory of Science
^ Kant, Immanuel (1787). The Critique of Pure Reason, 2nd edition.  translated by J. M. D. Meiklejohn, eBooks@Adelaide, 2004—http://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/k/kant/immanuel/k16p/k16p15.html
^ Bergson, Henri (1907) Creative Evolution. trans. by Arthur Mitchell. Mineola: Dover, 1998.
^ Harry Foundalis. "You are about to disappear". http://www.foundalis.com/phi/WhyTimeFlows.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-27. 
^ Tom Huston. "Buddhism and the illusion of time". http://www.buddhistinformation.com/buddhism_and_the_illusion_of_time.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-27. 
^ "Time is an illusion?". http://physicsandphysicists.blogspot.com/2007/03/time-is-illusion.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-27. 
^ Herman M. Schwartz, Introduction to Special Relativity, McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1968, hardcover 442 pages, see ISBN 0882754785 (1977 edition), pp. 10-13
^ A. Einstein, H. A. Lorentz, H. Weyl, H. Minkowski, The Principle of Relativity, Dover Publications, Inc, 2000, softcover 216 pages, ISBN 0486600815, See pp. 37-65 for an English translation of Einstein's original 1905 paper.
^ Hawking, Stephen. "The Beginning of Time". University of Cambridge. http://www.hawking.org.uk/lectures/bot.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-10.  "Since events before the Big Bang have no observational consequences, one may as well cut them out of the theory, and say that time began at the Big Bang. Events before the Big Bang, are simply not defined, because there's no way one could measure what happened at them. This kind of beginning to the universe, and of time itself, is very different to the beginnings that had been considered earlier." 
^ Hawking, Stephen. "The Beginning of Time". University of Cambridge. http://www.hawking.org.uk/lectures/bot.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-10.  "The conclusion of this lecture is that the universe has not existed forever. Rather, the universe, and time itself, had a beginning in the Big Bang, about 15 billion years ago." 
^ Hawking, Stephen (2006-02-27). "Professor Stephen Hawking lectures on the origin of the universe". University of Oxford. http://www.admin.ox.ac.uk/po/news/2005-06/feb/27.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-01-10.  "Suppose the beginning of the universe was like the South Pole of the earth, with degrees of latitude playing the role of time. The universe would start as a point at the South Pole. As one moves north, the circles of constant latitude, representing the size of the universe, would expand. To ask what happened before the beginning of the universe would become a meaningless question because there is nothing south of the South Pole.'" 
^ Ghandchi, Sam : Editor/Publisher (2004-01-16). "Space and New Thinking". http://www.ghandchi.com/312-SpaceEng.htm. Retrieved on 2008-01-10.  "and as Stephen Hawking puts it, asking what was before Big Bang is like asking what is North of North Pole, a meaningless question." 
^ Adler, Mortimer J., Ph.D.. "Natural Theology, Chance, and God". http://radicalacademy.com/adlertheology1.htm. Retrieved on 2008-01-10.  "Hawking could have avoided the error of supposing that time had a beginning with the Big Bang if he had distinguished time as it is measured by physicists from time that is not measurable by physicists.... an error shared by many other great physicists in the twentieth century, the error of saying that what cannot be measured by physicists does not exist in reality."  "The Great Ideas Today". Encyclopaedia Britannica. 1992. 
^ Adler, Mortimer J., Ph.D.. "Natural Theology, Chance, and God". http://radicalacademy.com/adlertheology2.htm. Retrieved on 2008-01-10.  "Where Einstein had said that what is not measurable by physicists is of no interest to them, Hawking flatly asserts that what is not measurable by physicists does not exist — has no reality whatsoever.
With respect to time, that amounts to the denial of psychological time which is not measurable by physicists, and also to everlasting time — time before the Big Bang — which physics cannot measure. Hawking does not know that both Aquinas and Kant had shown that we cannot rationally establish that time is either finite or infinite."  "The Great Ideas Today". Encyclopaedia Britannica. 1992. 
^ Hawking, Stephen; and Ellis, G. F. R. (1973). The Large Scale Structure of Space-Time. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-09906-4. 
^ J. Hartle and S. W. Hawking (1983). "Wave function of the universe". Phys. Rev. D 28: 2960. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.28.2960. 
^ Langlois, David (2002). Brane cosmology: an introduction. arΧiv:hep-th/0209261. 
^ Linde, Andre (2002). Inflationary Theory versus Ekpyrotic/Cyclic Scenario. arΧiv:hep-th/0205259. 
^ "Recycled Universe: Theory Could Solve Cosmic Mystery". Space.com. 8 May 2006. http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/060508_mm_cyclic_universe.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-03. 
^ "What Happened Before the Big Bang?". http://www.science.psu.edu/alert/Bojowald6-2007.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-03. 
^ A. Linde (1986). "Eternal chaotic inflation". Mod. Phys. Lett. A1: 81. 
A. Linde (1986). "Eternally existing self-reproducing chaotic inflationary universe". Phys. Lett. B175: 395–400. 
^ Priestley, J. B. (1964). Man and Time. New York: Crescent Books. pp. 96. 
^ Sunrise (2008). "Unified Field Theory: A new interpretation" (PDF). Chapter 2—The Development of the Unified Field Theory, pg. 31. Sunrise Information Services. http://www.sunrisepage.com/uft/history.pdf. 
^ Wada Y, Masuda T, Noguchi K, 2005, "Temporal illusion called 'kappa effect' in event perception" Perception 34 ECVP Abstract Supplement
^ "Cannabis Effects". Erowid. http://www.erowid.org/plants/cannabis/cannabis_effects.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-02-15.  "Time sense altered: cars seem like they are moving too fast, time dilation and compression are common at higher doses." 
^ Carroll, John B. (ed.)(1956). Language Thought and Reality. Selected Writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf. MIT Press, Boston, Massachusetts. ISBN 0262730065 9780262730068



[edit] Further reading

Barbour, Julian (1999). The End of Time: The Next Revolution in Physics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-514592-5. 
Das, Tushar Kanti (1990). The Time Dimension: An Interdisciplinary Guide. New York: Praeger. ISBN 0275926818. - Research bibliography
Davies, Paul (1996). About Time: Einstein's Unfinished Revolution. New York: Simon & Schuster Paperbacks. ISBN 0-684-81822-1. 
Feynman, Richard (1994) [1965]. The Character of Physical Law. Cambridge (Mass): The MIT Press. pp. 108–126. ISBN 0-262-56003-8. http://mitpress.mit.edu/catalog/item/default.asp?ttype=2&tid=5277. 
Galison, Peter (1992). Einstein's Clocks and Poincaré's Maps: Empires of Time. New York: W. W. Norton. ISBN 0-393-02001-0. 
Highfield, Roger (1992). Arrow of Time: A Voyage through Science to Solve Time's Greatest Mystery. Random House. ISBN 0-449-90723-6. 
Mermin, N. David (2005). It's About Time: Understanding Einstein's Relativity. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-12201-6. http://press.princeton.edu/titles/8112.html. 
Penrose, Roger (1999) [1989]. The Emperor's New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds, and the Laws of Physics. New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 391–417. ISBN 0-19-286198-0. http://www.oup.com/uk/catalogue/?ci=9780192861986. 
Price, Huw (1996). Time's Arrow and Archimedes' Point. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-511798-0. http://www.usyd.edu.au/time/price/TAAP.html. 
Reichenbach, Hans (1999) [1956]. The Direction of Time. New York: Dover. ISBN 0-486-40926-0. http://store.doverpublications.com/0486409260.html. 
Stiegler, Bernard, Technics and Time, 1: The Fault of Epimetheus
Whitrow, Gerald J. (1973). The Nature of Time. Holt, Rinehart and Wilson (New York). 
Whitrow, Gerald J. (1980). The Natural Philosophy of Time. Clarendon Press (Oxford). 
Whitrow, Gerald J. (1988). Time in History. The evolution of our general awareness of time and temporal perspective. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-285211-6. 
Rovelli, Carlo (2006). What is time? What is space?. Rome: Di Renzo Editore. ISBN 8883231465. http://www.direnzo.it/main.phtml?Language=en&Doc=0001&ISBN=8883231465. 
Charlie Gere, (2005) Art, Time and Technology: Histories of the Disappearing Body, Berg


[edit] External links





This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links.






Look up time in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.




Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Time





Wikibooks has more on the topic of
Time






Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Time 



[edit] Perception of time

Time Perception Research at the University of Manchester


[edit] Physics

A walk through Time
Seven Things You Need To Know About Time


[edit] Philosophy

Eastern Philosophy


The Conceptual Scheme of Chinese Philosophical Thinking - Time
Flaws in the Mind: The Invention of Time A site exploring J. Krishnamurti's views on psychological time.


Western Philosophy


Crouch, Will (2006-2008). "Is there a defensible argument for the non-existence of time?". On Philosophy. http://www.onphilosophy.co.uk/time_-_a_dialogue.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-24. 
Dowden, Bradley (California State University, Sacramento) (2007). "Time". in James Fieser, Ph.D., Bradley Dowden, Ph.D.. The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. http://www.iep.utm.edu/t/time.htm. Retrieved on 2008-01-31. 
Le Poidevin, Robin (Winter 2004). "The Experience and Perception of Time". in Edward N. Zalta. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2004/entries/time-experience. Retrieved on 2008-01-17. 
Mcdonough, Jeff (Harvard University) (Winter 2007). "Leibniz's Philosophy of Physics". in Edward N. Zalta. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Stanford University. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2007/entries/leibniz-physics/. Retrieved on 2008-01-31. 
Ross, Kelley L., Ph.D. (Los Angeles Valley College). "The Clarke-Leibniz Debate (1715-1716)". The Proceedings of the Friesian School, Fourth Series (1996, 1999, 2001). http://www.friesian.com/space.htm#clarke. Retrieved on 2008-01-17. 
Ross, Kelley L., Ph.D. (Los Angeles Valley College). "Three Points in Kant's Theory of Space and Time". The Proceedings of the Friesian School, Fourth Series (1996, 1999, 2001). http://www.friesian.com/space.htm#kant. Retrieved on 2008-01-17. 
Savitt, Steven, Ph.D. (University of British Columbia) (Fall 2007). "Being and Becoming in Modern Physics". in Edward N. Zalta. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/spacetime-bebecome/. Retrieved on 2008-01-17. 
Wilson, Catherine (City University of New York) (Summer 2004). "Kant and Leibniz". in Edward N. Zalta. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Stanford University. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2004/entries/kant-leibniz/. Retrieved on 2008-01-31. 


[edit] Timekeeping

Different systems of measuring time
UTC/TAI Timeserver
BBC article on shortest time ever measured
Federation of the Swiss Watch Industry FH
American Watchmakers-Clockmakers Institute
National Association of Watch & Clock Collectors


[edit] Miscellaneous

World Time and Zones
Exploring Time from Planck Time to the lifespan of the universe
International Society for the Study of Time


[edit] Navigation templates







v • d • e

Time





Major concepts

Time · Eternity · Arguments for eternity · Immortality
Deep time · History · Past · Present · Future · Futurology


Time Portal





Measurement and Standards

Chronometry · UTC · UT · TAI · Second · Minute · Hour · Sidereal time · Solar time · Time zone
Clock · Horology · History of timekeeping devices · Astrarium · Marine chronometer · Sundial · Water clock
Calendar · Day · Week · Month · Year · Tropical year · Julian · Gregorian · Islamic
  Intercalation · Leap second · Leap year






Chronology

Astronomical chronology · Geologic Time · Geological history · Geochronology · Archaeological dating
Calendar era · Regnal year · Chronicle · Timeline · Periodization






Religion and Mythology

Time and fate deities · Wheel of time · Kāla · Kalachakra · Prophecy · Dreamtime






Philosophy

Causality · Eternalism · Eternal return · Event · The Unreality of Time · A-series and B-series · B-Theory of time
Endurantism · Four dimensionalism · Perdurantism · Presentism · Temporal finitism · Temporal parts






Physical Sciences

Time in physics · Spacetime · Absolute time and space · T-symmetry
Arrow of time · Chronon · Fourth dimension · Planck epoch · Planck time · Time domain
Theory of relativity · Time dilation · Gravitational time dilation · Coordinate time · Proper time






Biology

Chronobiology · Circadian rhythms






Psychology

Consciousness and spacetime · Mental chronometry · Reaction time · Sense of time · Specious present






Sociology and Anthropology

Futures studies · Long Now Foundation · Time discipline · Time use research






Economics

Newtonian time in economics · Time value of money · Time Banking · Time-based currency






Related topics

Space · Duration · Time capsule · Time travel · Time signature · System time · Metric time · Hexadecimal time · Carpe diem · Tempus fugit








Time articles: Detailed navigation










v • d • e

Time measurement and standards





Major subjects

Time · Chronometry · Orders of magnitude · Units of time · Metrology


Time Portal





International standards

UTC · UT · TAI · ISO 31-1 · Second · DUT1 · Leap second · IERS
Terrestrial Time · Geocentric Coordinate Time · Barycentric Coordinate Time
Civil time · Minute · Hour · 12-hour clock · 24-hour clock · ISO 8601
International Date Line · Solar time · Time zone · Daylight saving time · Time offset






Obsolete standards

Ephemeris time · Barycentric Dynamical Time · Greenwich Mean Time · Prime Meridian






Time in physics

Spacetime · Chronon · Cosmological decade · Planck epoch · Planck time · T-symmetry
Theory of relativity · Time dilation · Gravitational time dilation · Coordinate time · Proper time
Time domain · Continuous time · Discrete time · Absolute time and space






Horology

Clock · Astrarium · Atomic clock · Hourglass · Marine chronometer · Radio clock · Sundial · Watch · Water clock
History of timekeeping devices · Equation of time · Complication






Calendar

Day · Week · Month · Year · Decade · Century · Millennium
Astronomical · Julian · Gregorian · Islamic · Lunisolar · Solar · Lunar · Epact · Intercalation · Leap year
Tropical year · Equinox · Solstice · Seven-day week · Week-day names · Calculating the day of the week · Dominical letter






Archaeology & geology

International Commission on Stratigraphy · Geologic Time · Archaeological dating






Astronomical chronology

Nuclear time scale · Precession · Sidereal time · Galactic year






Unusual units

Fortnight · Jiffy · Lustrum · Saeculum · Shake · Tide






Related topics

Chronology · Duration · System time · Metric time · Mental chronometry · Time value of money · Timekeeper













v • d • e

Chronology





Major subjects

Time · Astronomy · Geology · Paleontology · Archaeology · History


Chronology Portal





Eras and Epochs

Calendar Eras: Ab urbe condita · Anno Domini / Common Era · Anno Mundi · Spanish era · Before Present · Hijri
Egyptian · Sothic cycle · Hindu units of measurement · Hindu Yugas
Regnal year: Canon of Kings · King lists · Limmu · Seleucid era · Era name: Chinese · Japanese · Korean






Calendars

Pre-Julian Roman · Original Julian · Proleptic Julian · Revised Julian
Gregorian · Proleptic Gregorian · Old Style and New Style
Lunisolar · Solar · Lunar · Islamic · Chinese sexagenary cycle
Astronomical year numbering · ISO week date






Astronomic time
and techniques

Astronomical chronology · Cosmic Calendar · Ephemeris · Galactic year · Metonic cycle · Milankovitch cycles






Geologic time scale
and techniques

Deep time · Geological history · Geological time units: Eons · Eras · Periods • Epoch • Age Dating Standards: GSSA • GSSP
Chronostratigraphy · Geochronology · Isotope geochemistry · Law of superposition · Optical dating · Samarium-neodymium dating






Archaeological
techniques



Dating methodology
Absolute dating · Incremental dating · Archaeomagnetic dating · Dendrochronology · Glottochronology · Ice core · Lichenometry · Paleomagnetism · Radiocarbon dating · Radiometric dating · Tephrochronology · Thermoluminescence dating · Uranium-lead dating
Relative dating · Seriation · Stratification








Genetic techniques

Amino acid dating · Molecular clock






Related topics

Chronicle · New Chronology · Periodization · Synchronoptic view · Timeline · Year zero · Circa · Floruit













v • d • e

Time in religion and mythology





Major subjects

Time — Cosmology · Religion · Mythology — Eternity · Arguments for eternity · Immortality

Ritual · Religious festival — Destiny and fate · Predestination · Prophecy · Oracle · Divination · Eschatology




Time Portal





Time and fate deities
of antiquity

Egyptian — Hemsut · Huh
Ancient Near East — Ashima · Ishtar · Mamitu · Mammetun · Manah · Manu the Great · Meni
Greek — The Fates: Moirae — Atropos · Clotho · Lachesis





Ananke · Geras · Horae · Kairos · Khronos · Tyche





Roman — The Fates: Parcae — Decima · Morta · Nona





Camenae: Antevorte/Porrima · Carmenta · Egeria · Postverta
Aeternitas · Anna Perenna · Caerus · Chronos · Fortuna · Vertumnus





Etruscan — Nortia · Tinia
Norse — Norns (Urðr · Verðandi · Skuld)





Day: (Dagr · Skinfaxi) · Night: (Nótt · Hrímfaxi) · Seasons: (Sumarr and Vetr) · Old age: Elli





Baltic — Dalia · Lauma
Polish — Sudz
Romanian — Fates: Ursitoare
Other European — Matres and Matrones · Father Time · Beten
Philippine — Kan-Laon






Hinduism

Kalpa · Manvantara · Yuga · Kāla (time)
Hindu calendar · Hindu units of measurement  · Kali






Buddhism

Wheel of time · Kalachakra · Maitreya






Judaism

Ancient of Days · Ein Sof (Kabbalah)
Hebrew calendar · Missing years · Jewish holidays · Passover · Shabbat






Christianity

Gregorian calendar · Liturgical year · Sabbath in Christianity
Easter · Computus · Moveable feast · Easter controversy · Quartodecimanism · Reform of the date of Easter






Islam

Islamic calendar · Muslim holidays · Predestination in Islam






Other traditions

Dreamtime / The Dreaming · Oracle bone · Maya calendar






Related topics

Week-day names













v • d • e

Time in philosophy





Major subjects

Time · Philosophy · Philosophy of space and time  · A priori and a posteriori
Eternity · Temporal finitism · Event


Time Portal





Causality

Determinism · Deterministic system · Fatalism · Free will · Indeterminism · Compatibilism and incompatibilism
Etiology  · Post hoc ergo propter hoc






Eternalism

Eternal return · Four dimensionalism






Presentism

The Unreality of Time · A-series and B-series · B-Theory of time · Endurantism






Perdurantism

Temporal parts






Related topics

Growing block universe













v • d • e

Metaphysics





Topics



Time  · Experience  · Causality  · Principle  · Will  · Quality  · Value  · Self  · Action  · Intention  · Matter  · Meaning  · Essence  · Subject  · Object  · Unity  · Truth  · Mind  · Necessity  · Pattern  · Type  · Motion  · Freedom  · Form  · Idea  · Modality  · Substance  · Properties  · more...  ·








Ontology



Being  · Category of being  · Change  · Cogito ergo sum  · Dualism  · Embodied philosophy  · Entity  · Existence  · Existentialism  · Identity  · Physical object  · Properties  · Reality  · Relativism  · Scientific realism  · Subjectivism  · Substance theory  · Universal  · Unobservables  · Teleology








Big Questions



What is the nature of the universe?  · What is the meaning of life?  · What is being?  · What is time?  · What is experience?  · What is causality?  · What are principles?  · What is value?  · What is the self?  · What is action?  · What is will?  · Whats is matter?  · What is meaning?  · What are types?  ·








Metaphysical theories



Platonic idealism  · Hindu idealism  · Scientific materialism  · Cartesian dualism  · Phenomenalism  · Existentialism  · Nihilism  · Realism  · Anti-realism  · Determinism  · Solipsism  · Physicalism  · MOQ








Metaphysicians



Aristotle · Thomas Aquinas · George Berkeley · Donald Davidson · René Descartes · Georg W. F. Hegel · Martin Heidegger · Immanuel Kant · Saul Kripke · Gottfried Leibniz · John Locke · George Edward Moore · Isaac Newton · Plato · Plotinus · Hilary Putnam · Willard V. O. Quine · Bertrand Russell · Parmenides · Jean-Paul Sartre · Arthur Schopenhauer · John Duns Scotus · Baruch Spinoza · Alfred N. Whitehead · Ludwig Wittgenstein ·









Portal · Category · Task Force · Stubs · Discussion












Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time"
Categories: Time | Fundamental physics concepts | MeasurementHidden categories: Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006 | All articles containing potentially dated statements | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2008 | Articles needing additional references from July 2008 | Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Asturianu
Avañe'ẽ
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Башҡорт
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Қазақша
Kiswahili
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
O'zbek
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qaraqalpaqsha
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
粵語
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 04:54.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
