











Northern Ireland - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Northern_Ireland";
		var wgTitle = "Northern Ireland";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "21265";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281797473;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Northern Ireland

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 



This article is about the country.  For other uses, see Northern Ireland (disambiguation).


Northern Ireland
Tuaisceart Éireann
Norlin Airlann








Location of  Northern Ireland  (inset - orange)
in the United Kingdom (camel)
in the European continent  (white)





Capital
(and largest city)
Belfast
54°35.456′N 5°50.4′W﻿ / ﻿54.590933°N 5.84°W﻿ / 54.590933; -5.84


Official languages
English (de facto)
Irish
Ulster Scots1


Demonym
British
Irish
Northern Irish


Government
Constitutional monarchy
Consociationalism


 - 
Monarch
Elizabeth II


 - 
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
Gordon Brown MP


 - 
First Minister (Head of Northern Ireland Assembly)
Peter Robinson MLA


 - 
Deputy First Minister
Martin McGuinness MLA


 - 
Secretary of State
Shaun Woodward MP


Establishment


 - 
Government of Ireland Act
3 May 1921 


Area


 - 
Total
13,843 km2 
5,345 sq mi 


Population


 - 
2008 estimate
1,759,000[1] 


 - 
2001 census
1,685,267 


 - 
Density
122/km2 
315/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2002 estimate


 - 
Total
£33.2 billion 


 - 
Per capita
£19,603 


Currency
Pound sterling (GBP)


Time zone
GMT (UTC+0)


 - 
Summer (DST)
BST (UTC+1)


Internet TLD
.uk2


Calling code
+443


1
Officially recognised languages: Northern Ireland has no official language; the use of English has been established through precedent. Irish and Ulster Scots are officially recognised minority languages.


2
.ie, in common with the Republic of Ireland, and also .eu, as part of the European Union. ISO 3166-1 is GB, but .gb is unused.


3
+44 is always followed by 28 when calling landlines. The code is 028 within the UK and 048 from the Republic of Ireland.


Northern Ireland (Irish: Tuaisceart Éireann, Ulster Scots: Norlin Airlann) is a country that is part of the United Kingdom[2] situated in the north-east of the island of Ireland. It shares a border with the Republic of Ireland to the south and west. At the time of the 2001 UK Census, its population was 1,685,000, constituting between a quarter and a third of the island's total population and about 3% of the population of the UK.
Northern Ireland consists of six of the traditional nine counties of the historic Irish province of Ulster. It was created as a distinct subdivision of the UK on 3 May 1921 under the Government of Ireland Act 1920,[3] though its constitutional roots lie in the 1800 Act of Union between Great Britain and Ireland. For over 50 years it had its own devolved government and parliament. These institutions were suspended in 1972 and abolished in 1973. Repeated attempts to restore self-government finally resulted in the establishment of the present-day Northern Ireland Executive and Northern Ireland Assembly. The Assembly operates on consociational democracy principles requiring cross-community support.
Northern Ireland was for many years the site of a violent and bitter ethno-political conflict ("The Troubles") between those claiming to represent Nationalists, who are predominantly Roman Catholic, and those claiming to represent Unionists, who are predominantly Protestant.[4] In general, Nationalists want Northern Ireland to be politically reunited with the rest of Ireland,[5][6] while Unionists, who form a small majority, want it to remain part of the United Kingdom.[7] In general, Unionists consider themselves British (or "Ulstermen") and Nationalists see themselves as Irish, though these identities are not necessarily mutually exclusive. Since the signing of the Belfast Agreement (or "Good Friday Agreement") in 1998, most of the paramilitary groups involved in the Troubles have ceased their armed campaigns.




Contents


1 History
2 Recent history
3 Government and politics

3.1 Citizenship and identity


4 Symbols used in Northern Ireland
5 Geography and climate

5.1 Further reading
5.2 Counties
5.3 Cities
5.4 Towns and villages


6 Variations in geographic nomenclature

6.1 Unionist/Loyalist
6.2 Nationalist/Republican
6.3 Other
6.4 Use of language for geography


7 Law
8 Economy
9 Transport
10 Culture
11 Education
12 See also
13 Footnotes
14 Further reading
15 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


History
Main articles: History of Northern Ireland and The Troubles
For events before 1922 see Ulster or History of Ireland.




Signing of the Ulster Covenant in 1912 in opposition to Home Rule.


The area that is now Northern Ireland has had a diverse history. From serving as the bedrock of Irish resistance in the era of the plantations of Queen Elizabeth and James I in other parts of Ireland, it became the subject of major planting of Scottish and English settlers after the Flight of the Earls in 1607 (when the Gaelic aristocracy fled to Catholic Europe).
The all-island Kingdom of Ireland (1541—1801) merged into the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in 1801 under the terms of the Act of Union, under which the kingdoms of Ireland and Great Britain merged under a government and monarchy based in London. In the early 20th century, Unionists led by Sir Edward Carson opposed the introduction of Home Rule in Ireland. Unionists were in a minority on the island of Ireland as a whole, but were a majority in the northern province of Ulster, a very large majority in the counties of Antrim and Down, small majorities in the counties of Armagh and Londonderry, with substantial numbers also concentrated in the nationalist-majority counties of Fermanagh and Tyrone. These six counties, containing an overall unionist majority, would later form Northern Ireland.
The clash between the House of Commons and House of Lords over the controversial budget of Chancellor of the Exchequer David Lloyd-George produced the Parliament Act 1911, which enabled the veto of the Lords to be overturned. Given that the Lords had been the unionists' main guarantee that a home rule act would not be enacted, because of the majority of pro-unionist peers in the House, the Parliament Act made Home Rule a more likely prospect. Opponents to Home Rule, from Conservative Party leaders like Andrew Bonar Law to militant unionists in Ireland, threatened the use of violence, producing the Larne Gun Running incident in 1914, when they smuggled thousands of rifles and rounds of ammunition from Imperial Germany for the Ulster Volunteers. The prospect of civil war in Ireland loomed.


Prime Ministers
of Northern Ireland


Lord Craigavon (1922–1940)


John Miller Andrews (1940–1943)


Lord Brookeborough (1943–1963)


Captain Terence O'Neill (1963–1969)


James Chichester-Clark (1969–1971)


Brian Faulkner (1971–1972)


In 1914, the Third Home Rule Act, which contained provision for a temporary partition, received the Royal Assent. Its implementation was suspended for the duration of the intervening First World War, which was expected to last only a few weeks, but, in fact, lasted four years.
By the end of the war, the Act was seen as dead in the water, with public opinion in the majority nationalist community having moved from a demand for home rule to something more substantial: independence. David Lloyd George proposed in 1919 a new bill which would divide Ireland into two Home Rule areas, twenty-six counties being ruled from Dublin, six being ruled from Belfast, with a shared Lord Lieutenant of Ireland appointing both executives and a Council of Ireland, which Lloyd George believed would evolve into an all-Ireland parliament.[8]
The island of Ireland was partitioned in 1921 under the terms of the Government of Ireland Act 1920.[9] Six of the nine Ulster counties in the north-east formed Northern Ireland and the remaining three counties (including County Donegal, despite it having a large Protestant minority as well as it being the most northern county in all of Ireland) joined those of Leinster, Munster and Connacht to form Southern Ireland. Whilst Southern Ireland had only a brief existence between 1921 and 1922, a period dominated by the Anglo-Irish War and its aftermath, Northern Ireland was to continue on.




Signature page of the Anglo-Irish Treaty.


Northern Ireland provisionally became an autonomous part of the Irish Free State on 6 December 1922. However, as expected, the Parliament of Northern Ireland chose, under the terms of the Anglo-Irish Treaty, to opt out of the Irish Free State the following day.[10] Shortly after Northern Ireland had exercised its opt out of the Irish Free State, a Boundary Commission was established to decide on the territorial boundaries between the Irish Free State and Northern Ireland. Though leaders in Dublin expected a substantial reduction in the territory of Northern Ireland (with nationalist border areas moving to the Free State), the Boundary Commission decided against this; in fact the unpublished report had recommended that land should be ceded from Southern Ireland to Northern Ireland. To prevent argument, this report was suppressed, and the initial 6-county border was approved by the Dáil in Dublin on 10 December 1925 by a vote of 71 to 20.[11]
In June 1940, to encourage the Irish state to join with the Allies, British Prime Minister Winston Churchill indicated to the Taoiseach Éamon de Valera that the United Kingdom would push for Irish unity, but believing that Churchill could not deliver, de Valera declined the offer.[12] (The British did not inform the Northern Ireland government that they had made the offer to the Dublin government, and De Valera's rejection was not publicised until 1970).
The Ireland Act 1949 gave the first legal guarantee to the Parliament and Government that Northern Ireland would not cease to be part of the United Kingdom without consent of the majority of its citizens.
The Troubles, starting in the late 1960s, consisted of about thirty years of recurring acts of intense violence between elements of Northern Ireland's nationalist community (principally Roman Catholic) and unionist community (principally Protestant) during which 3,254 people were killed.[13] The conflict was caused by the disputed status of Northern Ireland within the United Kingdom and the domination of the minority nationalist community, and discrimination against them, by the unionist majority. The violence was characterised by the armed campaigns of paramilitary groups, including the Provisional IRA campaign of 1969-1997 which was aimed at the end of British rule in Northern Ireland and the creation of a new "all-Ireland" or "thirty-two county", Irish Republic, and the Ulster Volunteer Force, formed in 1966 in response to the perceived erosion of both the British character and unionist domination of Northern Ireland. The state security forces--the British Army and the police (the Royal Ulster Constabulary)--were also involved in the violence. The British government's point of view is that its forces were neutral in the conflict, trying to uphold law and order in Northern Ireland and the right of the people of Northern Ireland to democratic self-determination. Irish republicans, however, regarded the state forces as "combatants" in the conflict, alleging collusion between the state forces and the loyalist paramilitaries as proof of this. The "Ballast" investigation by the Police Ombudsman has confirmed that British forces, and in particular the RUC, did collude with loyalist paramilitaries, were involved in murder, and did obstruct the course of justice when such claims had previously been investigated,[14] although the extent to which such collusion occurred is still hotly disputed. See also the section below on Collusion by Security Forces and loyalist paramilitaries.
As a consequence of the worsening security situation, autonomous regional government for Northern Ireland was suspended in 1972. Alongside the violence, there was a political deadlock between the major political parties in Northern Ireland, including those who condemned violence, over the future status of Northern Ireland and the form of government there should be within Northern Ireland. A plebiscite within Northern Ireland on whether it should remain in the United Kingdom, or form part of a united Ireland, was held in 1973. The vote went heavily in favour (98.9%) of maintaining the status quo with approximately 57.5% of the total electorate voting in support, but only 1% of Catholics voted following a boycott organised by the SDLP. [15]

Recent history
Main article: Northern Ireland peace process
The Troubles were brought to an uneasy end by a peace process which included the declaration of ceasefires by most paramilitary organisations and the complete decommissioning of their weapons, the reform of the police, and the corresponding withdrawal of army troops from the streets and from sensitive border areas such as South Armagh and Fermanagh, as agreed by the signatories to the Belfast Agreement (commonly known as the "Good Friday Agreement"). This reiterated the long-held British position, which had never before been fully acknowledged by successive Irish governments, that Northern Ireland will remain within the United Kingdom until a majority votes otherwise. Bunreacht na hÉireann, the constitution of the Irish state, was amended in 1999 to remove a claim of the "Irish nation" to sovereignty over the whole of Ireland (in Article 2), a claim qualified by an acknowledgement that Ireland could only exercise legal control over the territory formerly known as the Irish Free State. The new Articles 2 and 3, added to the Constitution to replace the earlier articles, implicitly acknowledge that the status of Northern Ireland, and its relationships within the rest of the United Kingdom and with Ireland, would only be changed with the agreement of a majority of voters in both jurisdictions Ireland (voting separately). This aspect was also central to the Belfast Agreement which was signed in 1998 and ratified by referenda held simultaneously in both Northern Ireland and the Republic. At the same time, the British Government recognised for the first time, as part of the prospective, the so-called "Irish dimension": the principle that the people of the island of Ireland as a whole have the right, without any outside interference, to solve the issues between North and South by mutual consent.[16] The latter statement was key to winning support for the agreement from nationalists and republicans. It also established a devolved power-sharing government within Northern Ireland where the government must consist of both unionist and nationalist parties.
These institutions were suspended by the British Government in 2002 after Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) allegations of spying by people working for Sinn Féin at the Assembly (Stormontgate). The resulting case against the accused Sinn Féin member collapsed.
On 28 July 2005, the Provisional IRA declared an end to its campaign and has since decommissioned what is thought to be all of its arsenal. This final act of decommissioning was performed in accordance with the Belfast Agreement of 1998, and under the watch of the Independent International Commission on Decommissioning and two external church witnesses. Many unionists, however, remain sceptical. This IRA decommissioning is in contrast to Loyalist paramilitaries who have so far refused to decommission many weapons. It is not thought that this will have a major effect on further political progress as political parties linked to Loyalist paramilitaries do not attract significant support and will not be in a position to form part of a government in the near future. Sinn Féin, on the other hand, with their (real and perceived) links to militant republicanism, are the largest nationalist party in Northern Ireland.
Politicians elected to the Assembly at the 2003 Assembly Election were called together on 15 May 2006 under the Northern Ireland Act 2006[17] for the purpose of electing a First Minister of Northern Ireland and a deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland and choosing the members of an Executive (before 25 November 2006) as a preliminary step to the restoration of devolved government in Northern Ireland.
Following the election held on 7 March 2007, devolved government returned to Northern Ireland on 8 May 2007 with DUP leader Ian Paisley and Sinn Féin deputy leader Martin McGuinness taking office as First Minister and Deputy First Minister, respectively.[18]The current First Minister Is Peter Robinson, having taken over as leader of the Democratic Unionist Party.

Government and politics
Main article: Elections in Northern Ireland




Parliament Buildings in Stormont, Belfast, seat of the assembly.


Northern Ireland has devolved government within the United Kingdom. There is a Northern Ireland Executive together with the 108 member Northern Ireland Assembly to deal with devolved matters with the UK Government and UK Parliament responsible for reserved matters. Elections to the Assembly are by single transferable vote with 6 representatives elected for each of the 18 Westminster constituencies.
Northern Ireland elects 18 Members of Parliament (MP) to the House of Commons; only 13 take their seats, however, as the 5 Sinn Fein MPs refuse to take the oath to serve the Queen that is required of all MPs. The Northern Ireland Office represents the UK government in Northern Ireland on reserved matters and represents Northern Irish interests within the UK government. The Northern Ireland office is led by the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, who sits in the Cabinet of the United Kingdom.
Northern Ireland is a distinct legal jurisdiction, separate from England and Wales and Scotland.[19]




Communities in Northern Ireland - 1991 census.




Northern Ireland



This article is part of the series:
Politics and government of
Northern Ireland









Government


First Minister: Peter Robinson
deputy First Minister: Martin McGuinness
Northern Ireland Ministers

Northern Ireland Executive

Departments
Executives: First - Suspended - Second




National Assembly


Committees
List of Acts
Statutory Rules
Speaker: William Hay
Members (MLA):

2007 - 2003 - 1998


Constituencies
Elections: 2007 - 2003 - 1998




Other Public Bodies


Northern Ireland Policing Board
Parades Commission




in the UK

Her Majesty's Government

Secretary of State: Shaun Woodward MP
Northern Ireland Office
Direct Rule
Grand Committee
Select Committee
UK Parliament

Commons
Lords
Privy Council



Constituencies

Acts
Elections: 1979, 1983, 1987, 1992,

       1997, 2001, 2005, 2009/10



in the EU

European Parliament

European Parliament constituency
MEP
Elections: 1979, 1984, 1989, 1994,

       1999, 2004, 2009



Political parties

Designated Unionist

Democratic Unionist Party
Ulster Unionist Party
Progressive Unionist Party
Conservatives
Traditional Unionist Voice

Designated Nationalist

Sinn Féin
Social Democratic and Labour Party
Fianna Fáil

Designated Other

Alliance Party
Green Party




Related bodies


North/South Ministerial Council
British-Irish Council
British-Irish Intergovernmental Conference
Civic Forum for Northern Ireland




Agreements


St Andrews Agreement (2006)
Belfast Agreement (1998)
Segregation in Northern Ireland








Other countries · Atlas
 Politics portal
view • talk • edit



Main article: Politics of Northern Ireland
The main political divide in Northern Ireland is between Unionists who wish to see Northern Ireland continue as part of the United Kingdom and Nationalists or Republicans who wish to see Northern Ireland join the rest of Ireland, independent from the United Kingdom. These two opposing views are linked to deeper cultural divisions. Unionists are overwhelmingly Protestant, descendants of mainly Scottish, English, Welsh and Huguenot settlers as well as indigenous Irishmen who had converted to one of the Protestant denominations. Nationalists are predominantly Catholic and descend from the population predating the settlement, with a minority from Scottish Highlanders as well as some converts from Protestantism. Discrimination against nationalists under the Stormont government (1921–1972) gave rise to the nationalist civil rights movement in the 1960s.[20] Some Unionists argue that any discrimination was not just because of religious or political bigotry, but also the result of more complex socio-economic, socio-political and geographical factors.[21] Whatever the cause, the existence of discrimination, and the manner in which Nationalist anger at it was handled, was a major contributing factor which led to the long-running conflict known as the Troubles. The political unrest went through its most violent phase between 1968 and 1994.[22]
The population of Northern Ireland was estimated as being 1,759,000 on 10 December 2008[1]. In the 2001 census, 45.6% of the population identified as belonging to Protestant denominations (of which 20.7% Presbyterian, 15.3% Church of Ireland), 40.3% identified as Catholic, 0.3% identified with non-Christian religions and 13.9% identified with no religion.[23] In terms of community background, 53.1% of the Northern Irish population came from a Protestant background, 43.8% came from a Catholic background, 0.4% from non-Christian backgrounds and 2.7% non-religious backgrounds.[24][25] The population is forecast to pass the 1.8 million mark by 2011.[26]
36% of the present-day population define themselves as Unionist, 24% as Nationalist and 40% define themselves as neither.[27] According to a 2007 opinion poll, 66% express long term preference of the maintenance of Northern Ireland's membership of the United Kingdom (either directly ruled or with devolved government), while 23% express a preference for membership of a united Ireland.[28] This discrepancy can be explained by the overwhelming preference among Protestants to remain a part of the UK (89%), while Catholic preferences are spread across a number of solutions to the constitutional question including remaining a part of the UK (39%), a united Ireland (47%), Northern Ireland becoming an independent state (6%), and those who "don't know" (7%).[29] Official voting figures, which reflect views on the "national question" along with issues of candidate, geography, personal loyalty and historic voting patterns, show 54% of Northern Ireland voters vote for Pro-Unionist parties, 42% vote for Pro-Nationalist parties and 4% vote "other". Opinion polls consistently show that the election results are not necessarily an indication of the electorate's stance regarding the constitutional status of Northern Ireland.
Most of the population of Northern Ireland are at least nominally Christian. The ethno-political loyalties are allied, though not absolutely, to the Roman Catholic and Protestant denominations and these are the labels used to categorise the opposing views. This is, however, becoming increasingly irrelevant as the Irish Question is very complicated. Many voters (regardless of religious affiliation) are attracted to Unionism's conservative policies, while other voters are instead attracted to the traditionally leftist, nationalist Sinn Féin and Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) and their respective party platforms for Democratic Socialism and Social Democracy. For the most part, Protestants feel a strong connection with Great Britain and wish for Northern Ireland to remain part of the United Kingdom. Catholics generally aspire to a United Ireland, or are less certain about how to solve the constitutional question. In the 2007 survey by Northern Ireland Life and Times, 39% of Northern Irish Catholics supported Northern Ireland remaining a part of the United Kingdom, either by direct rule (4%) or devolved government (35%).[30]
Protestants have a slight majority in Northern Ireland, according to the latest Northern Ireland Census.[31] The make-up of the Northern Ireland Assembly reflects the appeals of the various parties within the population. Of the 108 MLA's, 55 are Unionists and 44 are Nationalists (the remaining nine are classified as "other"). The largest single religious denomination is the Roman Catholic Church, which comprises a plurality, followed by the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, the Church of Ireland (Anglican) and the Methodist Church.

Citizenship and identity
Further information: British nationality law and Irish nationality law
People from Northern Ireland are British citizens but may additionally be recognised as Irish citizens.
The 1998 Belfast Agreement between the British and Irish governments provides that:
it is the birthright of all the people of Northern Ireland to identify themselves and be accepted as Irish or British, or both, as they may so choose, and accordingly [the two governments] confirm that their right to hold both British and Irish citizenship is accepted by both Governments and would not be affected by any future change in the status of Northern Ireland.
As a result of the Agreement, the Constitution of Ireland[32] was amended so that people born in Northern Ireland are entitled to be Irish citizens on the same basis as people from any other part of the island of Ireland.
Neither government, however, extends its citizenship to all persons born in Northern Ireland. Both governments exclude some people born in Northern Ireland (e.g. certain persons born in Northern Ireland neither of whose parents is a UK or Irish national).
Several studies and surveys performed between 1971 and 2006 have indicated that, in general, Protestants in Northern Ireland see themselves primarily as 'British', whereas Roman Catholics regard themselves primarily as 'Irish'.[33][34][35][36][37][38][39][40]
This does not however, account for the complex identities within Northern Ireland, given that many of the population regard themselves as "Ulster" or "Northern Irish", either primarily, or as a secondary identity. A 1999 survey showed that 51% of Protestants felt "Not at all Irish" and 41% only "weakly Irish" where 77% of Catholics polled said they felt "strongly Irish".[41]

Symbols used in Northern Ireland
See also: Northern Ireland flags issue




The Union Flag (also known as the Union Jack)






Flag of Executive Committee of the Privy Council of Northern Ireland (also known as the Ulster Banner- no official status since 1972).






Flag of Ireland (also known as the Tricolour - no official status in Northern Ireland)






Former Governmental Coat of Arms of Northern Ireland 1925-72


Northern Ireland comprises a patchwork of communities whose national loyalties are represented in some areas by flags flown from lamp posts. The Union Flag and the former Northern Ireland Flag are flown in some loyalist areas, and the Tricolour, adopted by republicans as the flag of Ireland in 1848, is flown in some republican areas. Even kerbstones in some areas are painted red-white-blue or green-white-orange (or gold), depending on whether local people express unionist/loyalist or nationalist/republican sympathies.[42]
The only official flag is the Union Flag.[43] The Northern Ireland flag was officially the former Governmental Northern Ireland banner (also known as the "Ulster Banner" or "Red Hand Flag") and was based on the arms of the former Parliament of Northern Ireland, and was used by the Government of Northern Ireland and its agencies between 1953 and 1972. Since 1972, it has no official status. It remains, however used uniquely to represent Northern Ireland in certain sporting events[citation needed]. The arms from which the Ulster Banner derives were themselves based on the flag of Ulster.[citation needed]
The Union Flag and the Ulster Banner are mainly used by Unionists.[44] Nationalists generally eschew symbols which uniquely represent Northern Ireland; some instead use the Tricolour, the Irish National Flag, particularly at sporting events. Many people[who?], however, prefer to avoid flags altogether because of their divisive nature. Paramilitary groups on both sides have also developed their own flags[citation needed]. Some unionists also occasionally use the flags of secular and religious organisations to which they belong.[citation needed]
The Irish Rugby Football Union and the Church of Ireland have used the Flag of St. Patrick. It was used to represent Ireland when the whole island was part of the UK and is used by some British army regiments. Foreign flags are also found, such as the Palestinian flags in some Nationalist areas and Israeli flags in some Unionist areas. This is also true during matches with Scottish teams.
The United Kingdom national anthem God Save the Queen is often played at state events in Northern Ireland. At some cross-community events, however, the Londonderry Air (also known as Danny Boy) may be played as a neutral substitute.[citation needed]
At the Commonwealth Games, the Northern Ireland team uses the Ulster Banner as its flag and Danny Boy / A Londonderry Air is used as its national anthem. The Northern Ireland football team also uses the Ulster Banner as its flag but uses God Save The Queen as its national anthem.[45] Major Gaelic Athletic Association matches are opened by the Ireland national anthem, Amhrán na bhFiann (The Soldier's Song), which is also used by some other all-Ireland sporting organisations.[46][47] Since 1995, the Ireland national rugby union team has used a specially commissioned song, Ireland's Call, in place of, or alongside, the Ireland national anthem at international matches.[48][49]
Northern Irish murals have become well-known features of Northern Ireland, depicting past and present divisions, both also documenting peace and cultural diversity. Almost 2,000 murals have been documented in Northern Ireland since the 1970s (see Conflict Archive on the Internet/Murals).

Geography and climate




Map of Northern Ireland


Main articles: Geography of Ireland and Geography of the United Kingdom
Northern Ireland was covered by an ice sheet for most of the last ice age and on numerous previous occasions, the legacy of which can be seen in the extensive coverage of drumlins in Counties Fermanagh, Armagh, Antrim and particularly Down. The centrepiece of Northern Ireland's geography is Lough Neagh, at 151 square miles (392 km²) the largest freshwater lake both on the island of Ireland and in the British Isles. A second extensive lake system is centred on Lower and Upper Lough Erne in Fermanagh. The largest island of Northern Ireland is Rathlin, off the Antrim coast. Strangford Lough is the largest inlet in the British Isles, covering 150 km² (58 sq mi).
There are substantial uplands in the Sperrin Mountains (an extension of the Caledonian fold mountains) with extensive gold deposits, granite Mourne Mountains and basalt Antrim Plateau, as well as smaller ranges in South Armagh and along the Fermanagh–Tyrone border. None of the hills are especially high, with Slieve Donard in the dramatic Mournes reaching 849 metres (2,785 ft), Northern Ireland's highest point. Belfast's most prominent peak is Cave Hill. The volcanic activity which created the Antrim Plateau also formed the eerily geometric pillars of the Giant's Causeway on the north Antrim coast. Also in north Antrim are the Carrick-a-Rede Rope Bridge, Mussenden Temple and the Glens of Antrim.




The Giant's Causeway, County Antrim.


The Lower and Upper River Bann, River Foyle and River Blackwater form extensive fertile lowlands, with excellent arable land also found in North and East Down, although much of the hill country is marginal and suitable largely for animal husbandry.
The valley of the River Lagan is dominated by Belfast, whose metropolitan area includes over a third of the population of Northern Ireland, with heavy urbanisation and industrialisation along the Lagan Valley and both shores of Belfast Lough.




Carrick-a-Rede Rope Bridge.


The whole of Northern Ireland has a temperate maritime climate, rather wetter in the west than the east, although cloud cover is persistent across the region. The weather is unpredictable at all times of the year, and although the seasons are distinct, they are considerably less pronounced than in interior Europe or the eastern seaboard of North America. Average daytime maximums in Belfast are 6.5 °C (43.7 °F) in January and 17.5 °C (63.5 °F) in July. The damp climate and extensive deforestation in the 16th and 17th centuries resulted in much of the region being covered in rich green grassland.
Highest maximum temperature: 30.8 °C (87.4 °F) at Knockarevan, near Garrison, County Fermanagh on 30 June 1976 and at Belfast on 12 July 1983.
Lowest minimum temperature: -17.5 °C (0.5 °F) at Magherally, near Banbridge, County Down on 1 January 1979.[50]

Further reading
Betts, N.L. in Hackney, P. 1992. Stewart & Corry's Flora of the North-east of Ireland. Third Edition. Institute of Irish Studies. The Queen's University of Belfast. ISBN 0 85389 446 9 (HB)

Counties
Main article: Counties of Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland consists of six historic counties: County Antrim, County Armagh, County Down, County Fermanagh, County Londonderry,[51] County Tyrone




Silent Valley Reservoir, County Down.


These counties are no longer used for local government purposes; instead there are twenty-six districts of Northern Ireland which have different geographical extents, even in the case of those named after the counties from which they derive their name. Fermanagh District Council most closely follows the borders of the county from which it takes its name. Coleraine Borough Council, on the other hand, derives its name from the town of Coleraine in County Londonderry.




Lower Lough Erne, County Fermanagh


Although counties are no longer used for governmental purpose, they remain a popular means of describing where places are. They are officially used while applying for an Irish passport, which requires one to state one's county of birth. The name of county then appears in both Irish and English on the passport's information page, as opposed to the town or city of birth on the United Kingdom passport. The Gaelic Athletic Association still uses the counties as its primary means of organisation and fields representative teams of each GAA county.
The county boundaries still appear on Ordnance Survey of Northern Ireland Maps and the Phillips Street Atlases, among others. With their decline in official use, there is often confusion surrounding towns and cities which lie near county boundaries, such as Belfast and Lisburn, which are split between counties Down and Antrim (the majorities of both cities, however, are in Antrim).




Belfast City Hall



Cities
There are 5 major settlements with city status in Northern Ireland:

Armagh
Belfast
Derry[52]
Lisburn
Newry





Carrickfergus Castle - a Norman castle built in 1177



Towns and villages
Main articles: Towns in Northern Ireland and Villages in Northern Ireland

See also the list of places in Northern Ireland for all villages, towns and cities





Donaghadee Harbour and lighthouse



Ahoghill, Antrim, Annalong, Annaclone
Ballycastle, Ballyclare, Ballykelly, Ballymena, Ballymoney, Ballynahinch, Banbridge, Bangor, Bushmills
Carnmoney, Carrickfergus, Carryduff Castledawson, Castlerock, Coalisland, Comber, Coleraine, Cookstown, Craigavon, Crossmaglen, Crumlin,Corbet, Cushendall
Donaghadee, Downpatrick, Dromore, Dundonald, Dungannon, Dungiven, Dromore, Donaghcloney
Enniskillen
Glengormley, Garvagh, Gilford
Garrison
Hillsborough, Holywood
Kilkeel, Kilrea
Larne, Limavady, Lurgan, Loughbrickland
Magherafelt, Macosquin
Newcastle, Newtownards, Newtownstewart
Omagh
Portrush, Portstewart, Portadown, Portaferry, Poyntzpass, Portballintrae
Rasharkin, Rathfriland
Strabane, Scarva,
Warrenpoint


Variations in geographic nomenclature
Main article: Alternative names for Northern Ireland
Many people inside and outside Northern Ireland use other names for Northern Ireland, depending on their point of view. These are grouped under sectarian headings below, however, most of these phrases are often also used as synonyms for Northern Ireland in non-sectarian contexts.

Unionist/Loyalist

Ulster (Ulaidh) is strictly the historic province of Ulster, six of its nine counties are in Northern Ireland. The term "Ulster" is widely used by the Unionist community and the British press as shorthand for Northern Ireland.[53] In the past, calls were made for Northern Ireland's name to be changed to Ulster. This proposal was formally considered by the Government of Northern Ireland in 1937 and again in 1949 but no change was made.[54]


The Province (An Chúige) refers literally the historic Irish province of Ulster but today is used widely, within this community, as shorthand for Northern Ireland.[55] The BBC, in its editorial guidance for Reporting the United Kingdom, states that "the province" is an appropriate secondary synonym for Northern Ireland, "Ulster" is not. It also deprecates the use of the term "British" in favour of "people of Northern Ireland", and the term "mainland" when referring to Great Britain in relation to Northern Ireland[56]


Nationalist/Republican

North of Ireland (Tuaisceart na hÉireann) - to link Northern Ireland to the rest of the island, by describing it as being in the 'north of Ireland' and so by implication playing down Northern Ireland's links with Great Britain. (The northernmost point in Ireland, in County Donegal, is in fact in the Republic.)[57]


North-East Ireland (Oirthuaisceart Éireann) - used in the same way as the "North of Ireland" is used.


The Six Counties (na Sé Chontae) - language used by republicans e.g. Republican Sinn Féin, which avoids using the name given by the British-enacted Government of Ireland Act 1920. (the Republic is similarly described as the Twenty-Six Counties.)[58] Some of the users of these terms contend that using the official name of the region would imply acceptance of the legitimacy of the Government of Ireland Act.


The Occupied Six Counties. The state of Ireland, whose legitimacy is not recognised by republicans opposed to the Belfast Agreement, is described as "The Free State", referring to the Irish Free State, which gained independence (as a Dominion) in 1922.[59]


British-Occupied Ireland. Similar in tone to the Occupied Six Counties this term is used by more dogmatic anti-Good Friday Agreement republicans who still hold that the First Dáil was the last legitimate government of Ireland and that all governments since have been foreign imposed usurpations of Irish national self-determination.[60]


Fourth Green Field (An Cheathrú Gort Glas). From the song Four Green Fields by Tommy Makem which describes Ireland as divided with one of the four green fields (the traditional provinces of Ireland) being In strangers hands, referring to the partition of Ireland.


Other

The North (An Tuaisceart) - used to describe Northern Ireland in the same way that "The South" is used to describe the Republic.
Norn Iron (previously rendered "Norn Irn")[61][62][63] - is an informal and affectionate local nickname used by both nationalists and unionists to refer to Northern Ireland, derived from the pronunciation of the words "Northern Ireland" in an exaggerated Ulster accent (particularly one from the Greater Belfast area). The phrase is seen as a light-hearted way to refer to the province, based as it is on regional pronunciation. Often refers to the Northern Ireland national football team.
The Black North - pejorative[citation needed], as a name used by people from the South.


Use of language for geography




Free Derry mural.


Notwithstanding the ancient realm of Dál Riata which extended into Scotland, disagreement on names, and the reading of political symbolism into the use or non-use of a word, also attaches itself to some urban centres. The most famous example is whether Northern Ireland's second city should be called "Derry" or "Londonderry".
Choice of language and nomenclature in Northern Ireland often reveals the cultural, ethnic and religious identity of the speaker. The first Deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland, Seamus Mallon, was criticised by unionist politicians for calling the region the "North of Ireland" while Sinn Féin has been criticised in some Irish newspapers for still referring to the "Six Counties".[64]
Those who do not belong to any group but lean towards one side often tend to use the language of that group. Supporters of unionism in the British media (notably the Daily Telegraph and the Daily Express) regularly call Northern Ireland "Ulster".[65] Some nationalist and republican-leaning media outlets in Ireland almost always use "North of Ireland" or the "Six Counties".[66]
Government and cultural organisations in Northern Ireland, particularly those pre-dating the 1980s, often use the word "Ulster" in their title; for example, the University of Ulster, the Ulster Museum, the Ulster American Folk Park, the Ulster Orchestra, and BBC Radio Ulster.
Many news bulletins since the 1990s have opted to avoid all contentious terms and use the official name, Northern Ireland. The North is still used by some news bulletins in the Republic, to the annoyance of some Unionists.[citation needed] Bertie Ahern, the previous Taoiseach, now almost always refers to Northern Ireland in public, having previously only used The North. For Northern Ireland's second largest city, broadcasting outlets which are unaligned to either community and broadcast to both use both names interchangeably, often starting a report with "Londonderry" and then using "Derry" in the rest of the report. However, within Northern Ireland, print media which are aligned to either community (the News Letter is aligned to the unionist community while the Irish News is aligned to the nationalist community) generally use their community's preferred term. British newspapers with unionist leanings, such as the Daily Telegraph, usually use the language of the unionist community.[67] In its style guide, The Guardian recommends using "Derry" and "Co Derry", and "not Londonderry".[68] The media in the Republic use the names preferred by nationalists.[69] Whether this is all an official editorial policy or a personal preference by the writers is unknown.
The division in nomenclature is seen particularly in sports and religions associated with one of the communities. Gaelic games use Derry, for example. Nor is there clear agreement on how to decide on a name. When the nationalist-controlled local council voted to re-name the city "Derry" unionists objected, stating that as it owed its city status to a Royal Charter, only a charter issued by the Queen could change the name. The Queen has not intervened on the matter and thus the council is now called "Derry City Council" while the city is still officially "Londonderry". Nevertheless, the council has printed two sets of stationery - one for each term - and their policy is to reply to correspondence using whichever term the original sender used.
At times of high communal tension, each side regularly complains of the use of the nomenclature associated with the other community by a third party such as a media organisation, claiming such usage indicates evident "bias" against their community.

Law
Main article: Northern Ireland law
Northern Ireland's legal and administrative systems have evolved from those in place in pre-partition United Kingdom, and were developed by its devolved government from 1922 until 1972. From 1972 until 1999 (except for brief periods), laws and administration relating to Northern Ireland have been handled directly from Westminster. Between the years 1999 and 2002, and since May 2007, devolution has returned to Northern Ireland.

Economy




Cranes at Harland & Wolff shipyard, now diversified into heavy manufacturing for the renewable energy industry.


Main article: Economy of Northern Ireland
The Northern Ireland economy is the smallest of the four economies making up the United Kingdom. Northern Ireland has traditionally had an industrial economy, most notably in shipbuilding, rope manufacture and textiles, but most heavy industry has since been replaced by services, primarily the public sector. Tourism also plays a big role in the local economy. More recently the economy has benefited from major investment by many large multi-national corporations into high tech industry. These large organisations are attracted by government subsidies and the skilled workforce in Northern Ireland. Despite the presence of many multi-national corporations, the largest employer in the country is the Government.

Transport




Larne Harbour


Main article: Transport in Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland is served by three airports - Belfast International near Antrim, George Best Belfast City in East Belfast, and City of Derry in County Londonderry.
Major sea ports at Larne and Belfast carry passengers and freight between Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Passenger railways are operated by Northern Ireland Railways. With Iarnrod Éireann (Irish Rail), Northern Ireland Railways co-operates in providing the joint Enterprise service between Dublin and Belfast.
Main motorways are:

M1 connecting Belfast to the south and west, ending in Dungannon
M2 connecting Belfast to the north
M3 is a motorway bridge connecting the M1 and M2 in Belfast with the A2 dual carriageway to Bangor
M5 connecting Belfast to Carrickfergus

The cross-border European Route E01 is a major EU-funded cross-border route that will eventually upgrade the road connecting the ports between Larne in Northern Ireland and Rosslare in the Republic of Ireland.

Culture




An Ulster fry, served in Belfast, Northern Ireland.






The Twelfth is a Bank & Public Holiday and an annual Protestant event, involving Orange parades.


Main article: Culture of Northern Ireland
See also: Culture of Ulster, Culture of Ireland, and Culture of the United Kingdom
With its improved international reputation, Northern Ireland has recently witnessed rising numbers of tourists. Attractions include cultural festivals, musical and artistic traditions, countryside and geographical sites of interest, public houses, welcoming hospitality and sports (especially golf and fishing). Since 1987 public houses have been allowed to open on Sundays, despite some opposition.
Main article: Ulster Cycle
The Ulster Cycle is a large body of prose and verse centring around the traditional heroes of the Ulaid in what is now eastern Ulster. This is one of the four major cycles of Irish Mythology. The cycle centres around the reign of Conchobar mac Nessa, who is said to have been king of Ulster around the time of Christ. He ruled from Emain Macha (now Navan Fort near Armagh), and had a fierce rivalry with queen Medb and king Ailill of Connacht and their ally, Fergus mac Róich, former king of Ulster. The foremost hero of the cycle is Conchobar's nephew Cúchulainn.
The Mid Ulster dialect of English spoken in Northern Ireland shows influence from Scotland, with the use of such Scots words as wee for 'little' and aye for 'yes'. Some jocularly call this dialect phonetically by the name Norn Iron. There are supposedly some minute differences in pronunciation between Protestants and Catholics, the best known of which is the name of the letter h, which Protestants tend to pronounce as "aitch", as in British English, and Catholics tend to pronounce as "haitch", as in Hiberno-English. However, geography is a much more important determinant of dialect than ethnic background. English is spoken as a first language by almost 100% of the Northern Irish population, though under the Good Friday Agreement, Irish and Ulster Scots (one of the dialects of the Scots language), sometimes known as Ullans, have recognition as "part of the cultural wealth of Northern Ireland".[70]




Multilingual sign in English, Irish Gaelic, and Ulster Scots.


Main article: Irish language in Northern Ireland
The Irish language is the native language of the whole island of Ireland.[71] It was spoken predominantly throughout what is now Northern Ireland before the settlement of Protestants from Great Britain in the 17th century. Most placenames throughout Northern Ireland are anglicised versions of their Gaelic originals. These Gaelic placenames include thousands of lanes, roads, townlands, towns, villages and all of its modern cities. Examples include Belfast- derived from Béal Feirste, Shankill- derived from Sean Cill and Lough Neagh- derived from Loch nEathach.
In Northern Ireland the Irish language has long been associated with Irish nationalism. The language was seen as a common heritage and indeed the object of affection by many prominent 19th century Protestant republicans and Protestant unionists. There are three main dialects in the island of Ireland—Ulster, Munster and Connaught. Speakers of each dialect often find others difficult to understand. Speakers in Northern Ireland speak the Ulster dialect.
In the early years of the 20th century, the language became a political football throughout Ireland as Republican activists became increasingly linked with it. In the 20th century, the language became in Unionist eyes increasingly polarised for political ends and many in that community would blame Sinn Féin in this regard. After Ireland was partitioned, the language was largely rejected in the education system of the new Northern Ireland. It is argued[72] that the predominant use of the English language may have served to exacerbate the Troubles.
The erection by some Local District Councils of legal bilingual street names (English/Irish),[73] invariably in predominantly Catholic/Nationalist/Republican districts, may be perceived as creating a 'chill factor' by Unionists and as such not conducive to fostering good cross community relationships. However other countries within the United Kingdom, such as Wales and Scotland, enjoy the use of Bilingual signs in Welsh and Scots Gaelic respectively. Because of this, nationalists in Northern Ireland argue for equality in this regard. In responses to the 2001 census in Northern Ireland 10% of the population claimed "some knowledge of Irish",[74] 4.7% to "speak, read, write and understand" Irish.[74] It was not asked as part of the census but in a poll, 1% of respondents said they speak it as their main language at home.[75] Following a public consultation, the decision was taken not to introduce specific legislation for the Irish language at this time, despite 75% of the (self-selecting) respondents stating that they were in favour of such legislation.[76]
Ulster Gaelic/Ulster Irish or Donegal Gaelic/Irish, is the dialect which is nearest to Scots Gaelic. Some words and phrases of the dialect are shared with Scots Gaelic. The dialects of East Ulster - those of Rathlin Island and the Glens of Antrim - were very similar to the Scots Gaelic dialect formerly spoken in Argyll, the part of Scotland nearest to Rathlin Island. The Ulster Gaelic is the most central dialect of Gaelic, both geographically and linguistically, of the once vast Gaelic speaking world, stretching from the south of Ireland to the north of Scotland. At the beginning of the 20th century, Munster Irish was favoured by many revivalists, with a shift to Connaught Irish in the 1960s, which is now the preferred dialect by many in Ireland. Many younger speakers of Irish experience less confusion with dialects due to the expansion of Irish-language broadcasting (TG4) and the exposure to a variety of dialects. There are fewer problems regarding written Irish as there is a standardised spelling and grammar, created by the Irish Government, which was supposed to reflect a compromise between various dialect forms. However, Ulster Irish speakers find that Ulster forms are generally not favoured by the standard.
The dialect is often stigmatised in the non Ulster counties of Ireland,[citation needed] although all learners of Irish in Northern Ireland use this form of the language. Self-instruction courses in Ulster Irish include Now You’re Talking and Tús maith. The writer Séamus Ó Searcaigh RIP, once warned about the Irish Government's attempts at producing a Caighdeán or Standard for the Gaelic language in Ireland in 1953, when he wrote that what will emerge will be "Gaedhilg nach mbéidh suim againn inntí mar nár fhás sí go nádúrtha as an teangaidh a thug Gaedhil go hÉirinn" (A Gaelic which is of no interest to us, for it has not developed naturally from the language brought to Ireland by the Gaels). The Ulster Irish dialect is spoken throughout the area of the historical nine county Ulster, in particular the Gaeltacht region of County Donegal and the Gaeltacht Quarter of West Belfast. Mayo Irish has strong ties with Donegal Irish.
Ulster Scots comprises varieties of the Scots language spoken in Northern Ireland. Aodán Mac Poilín[77] states that "While most argue that Ulster-Scots is a dialect or variant of Scots, some have argued or implied that Ulster-Scots is a separate language from Scots. The case for Ulster-Scots being a distinct language, made at a time when the status of Scots itself was insecure, is so bizarre that it is unlikely to have been a linguistic argument." Approximately 2% of the population claim to speak Ulster Scots,[78] however the number speaking it as their main language in their home is negligible.[75] Classes at colleges can now be taken[79] but for a native English speaker "[the language] is comparatively accessible, and even at its most intense can be understood fairly easily with the help of a glossary."[77] The St Andrews Agreement recognises the need to "enhance and develop the Ulster Scots language, heritage and culture".[80]
There are an increasing number of ethnic minorities in Northern Ireland. Chinese and Urdu are spoken by Northern Ireland's Asian communities; though the Chinese community is often referred to as the "third largest" community in Northern Ireland, it is tiny by international standards. Since the accession of new member states to the European Union in 2004, Central and Eastern European languages, particularly Polish, are becoming increasingly common.
The most common sign language in Northern Ireland is British Sign Language (BSL), but as Catholics tended to send their deaf children to schools in Dublin (St Joseph's Institute for Deaf Boys and St. Mary's Institute for Deaf Girls), Irish Sign Language (ISL) is commonly used in the Nationalist community. The two languages are not related: BSL is in the British family (which also includes Auslan), and ISL is in the French family (which also includes American Sign Language).

Education
Main article: Education in Northern Ireland




Queen's University Belfast


Education in Northern Ireland differs slightly from systems used elsewhere in the United Kingdom. Unlike most areas of the United Kingdom, in the last year of Primary school children sit the eleven plus transfer test, and the results determine whether they attend grammar schools or secondary schools. This system was due to be changed in 2008 amidst some controversy, with the exception of North Armagh where the Dickson Plan is in effect.
Northern Ireland's state (controlled) schools are open to all children in Northern Ireland, although in practice are mainly attended by those from Protestant or non-religious backgrounds. There is a separate publicly funded school system provided for Roman Catholics, although Roman Catholics are free to attend state schools (and some non-Roman Catholics attend Roman Catholic schools). Integrated schools, which attempt to ensure a balance in enrolment between pupils of Protestant, Roman Catholic and other faiths (or none) are becoming increasingly popular, although Northern Ireland still has a primarily de facto religiously segregated education system. In the Primary School Sector, forty schools (8.9% of the total number) are Integrated Schools and thirty two (7.2% of the total number) are Gaelscoileanna.
See:

List of Gaelic medium primary schools in Northern Ireland
List of primary schools in Northern Ireland
List of grammar schools in Northern Ireland
List of secondary schools in Northern Ireland
List of integrated schools in Northern Ireland

There are two main universities in Northern Ireland - The Queen's University of Belfast, and the University of Ulster.

See also




Northern Ireland portal







Ireland portal




Common Travel Area
National parks of Northern Ireland
National Trust Properties in Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland national football team
Republic of Ireland-United Kingdom border
The Ireland Funds

Lists

List of cultural icons of Northern Ireland
List of notable people from Northern Ireland


Footnotes


^ a b http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/7775349.stm
^ The Countries of the UK statistics.gov.uk, accessed 10 October, 2008. The Northern Ireland Act 1998 describes Northern Ireland as "part of the United Kingdom". The term "constituent country" is sometimes applied to Northern Ireland by Unionists and British sources. [1] [2].
^ Statutory Rules & Orders published by authority, 1921 (No. 533); Additional source for 3 May 1921 date: Alvin Jackson, Home Rule - An Irish History, Oxford University Press, 2004, p198.
^ Northern Ireland LIFE & TIMES survey. Question: Generally speaking, do you think of yourself as a unionist, nationalist or neither?, ARK Research, 2005
^ Strategy Framework Document: Reunification through Planned Integration: Sinn Féin’s All Ireland Agenda www.sinnfein.ie, accessed 2 August 2008
^ Policy Summaries: Constitutional Issues www.sdlp.ie, accessed, 2 August 2008
^ Standing up for Northern Ireland www.uup.org, accessed 2 August 2008
^ Pilkington, Colin (2002). Devolution in Britain Today. Manchester University Press. p. 75. ISBN 0719060761. 
^ Northern Ireland became a distinct region of the United Kingdom, by Order in Council on 3 May 1921 (Statutory Rules & Orders published by authority (SR&O) 1921, No. 533). Its constitutional roots remain the Act of Union, two complementary Acts, one passed by the Parliament of Great Britain, the other by the Parliament of Ireland.
^ On 7 December 1922 (the day after the establishment of the Irish Free State) the Parliament resolved to make the following address to the King so as to opt out of the Irish Free State: ”MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN, We, your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects, the Senators and Commons of Northern Ireland in Parliament assembled, having learnt of the passing of the Irish Free State Constitution Act 1922, being the Act of Parliament for the ratification of the Articles of Agreement for a Treaty between Great Britain and Ireland, do, by this humble Address, pray your Majesty that the powers of the Parliament and Government of the Irish Free State shall no longer extend to Northern Ireland". Source: Northern Ireland Parliamentary Report, 7 December 1922 and Anglo-Irish Treaty, sections 11, 12
^ Dáil Éireann - Volume 13 - 10 December 1925.
^ "Anglo-Irish Relations, 1939—41: A Study in Multilateral Diplomacy and Military Restraint" in Twentieth Century British History (Oxford Journals, 2005). ISSN 1477-4674.
^ Malcolm Sutton’s book, “Bear in Mind These Dead: An Index of Deaths from the Conflict in Ireland 1969 - 1993
^ The Ballast report: "...the Police Ombudsman has concluded that this was collusion by certain police officers with identified UVF informants."
^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/march/9/newsid_2516000/2516477.stm
^ Parliamentary debate: "The British government agree that it is for the people of the island of Ireland alone, by agreement between the two parts respectively, to exercise their right of self-determination on the basis of consent, freely and concurrently given, North and South, to bring about a united Ireland, if that is their wish."
^ Northern Ireland Act 2006 (c. 17)
^ (BBC)
^ pdf filePDF (64.6 KB) "For the purposes of the English conflict of laws, every country in the world which is not part of England and Wales is a foreign country and its foreign laws. This means that not only totally foreign independent countries such as France or Russia... are foreign countries but also British Colonies such as the Falkland Islands. Moreover, the other parts of the United Kingdom—Scotland and Northern Ireland—are foreign countries for present purposes, as are the other British Islands, the Isle of Man, Jersey and Guernsey." Conflict of Laws, JG Collier, Fellow of Trinity Hall and lecturer in Law, University of Cambridge
^ Professor John H. Whyte paper on discrimination in Northern Ireland
^ CAIN website key issues discrimination summary
^ Lord Scarman, "Violence and Civil Disturbances in Northern Ireland in 1969: Report of Tribunal of Inquiry" Belfast: HMSO, Cmd 566. (known as the Scarman Report)
^ Northern Ireland Census 2001, Table KS07a: Religion
^ Northern Ireland Census 2001, Table KS07b: Community background: religion or religion brought up in
^ BBC News: Fascination of religion head count
^ Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency population projections
^ Ark survey, 2007. Answer to the question "Generally speaking, do you think of yourself as a unionist, a nationalist or neither?"
^ Answers to the question "Do you think the long-term policy for Northern Ireland should be for it [one of the following"
^ Ark survey, 2007. Answers to the question "Do you think the long-term policy for Northern Ireland should be for it to [one of the following"
^ http://www.ark.ac.uk/nilt/2007/Political_Attitudes/NIRELND2.html
^ 2001 Census Cultural Profile for Northern Ireland
^ Department Of the Taoiseach
^ Breen, R., Devine, P. and Dowds, L. (editors), 1996. "Social Attitudes in Northern Ireland: The Fifth Report" ISBN 0-86281-593-2. Chapter 2 retrieved from http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/othelem/research/nisas/rep5c2.htm on 24 August 2006. Summary: In 1989—1994, 79% Protestants replied "British" or "Ulster", 60% of Catholics replied "Irish."
^ Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 1999. Module:Community Relations. Variable:NINATID. Summary:72% of Protestants replied "British". 68% of Catholics replied "Irish".
^ Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey. Module:Community Relations. Variable:BRITISH. Summary: 78% of Protestants replied "Strongly British."
^ Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 1999. Module:Community Relations. Variable:IRISH. Summary: 77% of Catholics replied "Strongly Irish."
^ Institute of Governance, 2006. "National identities in the UK: do they matter?" Briefing No. 16, January 2006. Retrieved from IoG_BriefingPDF (211 KB) on 24 August 2006. Extract:"Three-quarters of Northern Ireland’s Protestants regard themselves as British, but only 12 per cent of Northern Ireland’s Catholics do so. Conversely, a majority of Catholics (65%) regard themselves as Irish, whilst very few Protestants (5%) do likewise. Very few Catholics (1%) compared to Protestants (19%) claim an Ulster identity but a Northern Irish identity is shared in broadly equal measure across religious traditions."Details from attitude surveys are in Demographics and politics of Northern Ireland.
^ [3] University of York Research Project 2002-2003 L219252024 - Public Attitudes to Devolution and National Identity in Northern Ireland
^ [4] Northern Ireland: Constitutional Proposals and the Problem of Identity, by J. R. Archer The Review of Politics, 1978
^ [5]PDF (131 KB) A changed Irish nationalism? The significance of the Belfast Agreement of 1998, by Joseph Ruane and Jennifer Todd
^ Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 1999. Module:Community Relations. Variable:IRISH.
^ Vandals curbed by plastic edging BBC News, 25 November 2008
^ Statutory Rule 2000 No. 347
^ Northern Irish flags from the World Flag Database
^ FIFA.com: Northern Ireland, Latest News
^ "DUP minister seeks end to Irish anthem at GAA matches". Belfast Telegraph. 2008-01-17. http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/breaking-news/ireland/politics/article3346089.ece. Retrieved on 2008-05-26. 
^ John Sugden and Scott Harvie (1995). "Sport and Community Relations in Northern Ireland 3.2 Flags and anthems". http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/csc/reports/sugdenharvie/sugdenharvie95-3.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-26. 
^ Peter Berlin (2004-12-29). "Long unsung teams live up to anthems: Rugby Union". International Herald Tribune via HighBeam Research. http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1P1-103809383.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-26.  "the band played Nkosi Sikelel' iAfrika and Die Stem for the Springboks and Soldier's Song, the national anthem that is otherwise known as Amhran na bhFiann, and Ireland's Call, the team's official rugby anthem." 
^ "Gavin Mairs: Why it's time to take a stand on anthems". http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/features/daily-features/article2889336.ece. 
^ British Meteorological Office figures
^ Many Nationalists use the name County Derry.
Wikipedia policy is to use Londonderry for the county and Derry for the city. The name usage does not indicate an endorsement for either community's opinions.

^ Most Nationalists use the name Derry, while Unionists often use Londonderry, the name specified on the city's Royal Charter.
Wikipedia policy is to use the name as designated by the elected council. The name usage does not indicate an endorsement for either community's opinions.

^ Examples of usage of this term include Radio Ulster, Ulster Orchestra and RUC; political parties like the Ulster Unionist Party; paramilitary organisations like Ulster Defence Association and Ulster Volunteer Force. Ulster was also used political campaigns such as "Ulster Says No" and Save Ulster from Sodomy.
^ Parliamentary Reports of the Parliament of Northern Ireland, Volume 20 (1937) and The Times, January 6, 1949 – See also Alternative names for Northern Ireland
^ DUP Press Release "PAISLEY REACTS TO PRIME MINISTER’S STATEMENT". Date unknown. Extract "The DUP will be to the fore in representing the vast majority of unionists in the Province."—example of Ian Paisley referring to Northern Ireland as The Province. Retrieved from Google cache on 11 October 2006.
^ "Editorial Policy, Guidance Note" (PDF). BBC. undated. http://www.bbc.co.uk/guidelines/editorialguidelines/assets/advice/reporting_the_uk.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-07-16. "The term “province” is often used synonymously with Northern Ireland and it is normally appropriate to make secondary references to “ the province”"
^ Example of "North of Ireland"
^ Sinn Féin usage of "Six Counties"
^ Examples of usage by the United States-based extreme republican "Irish Freedom Committee"
^ Usage on "Gaelmail.com", a republican website
^ "Councils show that Norn Irn doesn’t work". written at Northern Ireland. The Irish News. The Irish News. 2005-04-27. http://www.irishnews.com/searchlog.asp?reason=denied_empty&script_name=/pageacc.asp&path_info=/pageacc.asp&tser1=ser&par=ben&sid=488252. Retrieved on 26 September 2008. 
^ "New Norn Irn manager named…". Slugger O'Toole. 2007-05-31. http://sluggerotoole.com/index.php/weblog/comments/new-norn-irn-manager-named/. Retrieved on 26 September 2008. 
^ "norn irn v denmark". www.belfastforum.co.uk Belfast forum illustrating local usage. 2007-11-17. http://www.belfastforum.co.uk/index.php?topic=6217.0. Retrieved on 26 September 2008. 
^ Sunday Independent article on Mallon and the use of "Six Counties".
^ Example of Daily Telegraph use of "Ulster" in text of an article, having used "Northern Ireland" in the opening paragraph.
^ Daily Ireland usage of "The North" and the "Six Counties".
^ Daily Telegraph usage
^ The Guardian style guide
^ RTÉ News usage
^ http://www.nio.gov.uk/agreement.pdfPDF (204 KB)
^ Ryan, James G. (1997). Irish Records: Sources for Family and Local History. Flyleaf Press. pp. 40. ISBN 978-0916489762. 
^ Protestants and the Irish Language: Historical Heritage and Current Attitudes in Northern Ireland Rosalind M.O. Pritchard University of Ulster at Coleraine, UK[6]
^ The Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Northern Ireland) Order 1995 (No. 759 (N.I. 5))[7]
^ a b Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency Census 2001 Output
^ a b Northern Ireland LIFE & TIMES Survey: What is the main language spoken in your own home?
^ A Statement by Edwin Poots MLA, Minister of Culture, Arts and Leisure, to the Northern Ireland Assembly on the proposal to introduce Irish Language legislation. 16 October 2007
^ a b Aodan Mac Poilin, 1999, "Language, Identity and Politics in Northern Ireland" in Ulster Folk Life Vol. 45, 1999
^ Northern Ireland LIFE & TIMES Survey: Do you yourself speak Ulster-Scots?
^ "Stranmillis University College - Ulster Scots Project". Stranmillis University College. http://www.stran.ac.uk/informationabout/research/ulsterscotsproject/. Retrieved on 2008-07-16. 
^ St Andrews AgreementPDF (131 KB)



Further reading

Jonathan Bardon, A History of Ulster (Blackstaff Press, Belfast, 1992), ISBN 0-85640-476-4
Brian E. Barton, The Government of Northern Ireland, 1920—1923 (Athol Books, 1980).
Paul Bew, Peter Gibbon and Henry Patterson The State in Northern Ireland, 1921—72: Political Forces and Social Classes, Manchester (Manchester University Press, 1979)
Tony Geraghty (2000). The Irish War. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0-8018-7117-4. 
Robert Kee, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism (Penguin, 1972–2000), ISBN 0-14-029165-2
Osborne Morton, 1994. Marine Algae of Northern Ireland Ulster Museum, Belfast.
Henry Patterson, "Ireland Since 1939: The Persistence of Conflict" (Penguin, 2006), ISBN 978-1-844-88104-8
Hackney, P. (Ed).1992. Stewart's and Corry's Flora of the North-east of Ireland. Third edition. Institute of Irish Studies, The Queen's University of Belfast. ISBN 0 85389 446 9(HB)


External links

Find more about Northern Ireland on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

BBC Northern Ireland News The Northern Ireland news from BBC News Online
Online NI Local Government Portal
ni-photos.jmcwd.com Photos From Around Northern Ireland
NICVA Northern Ireland Council for Voluntary Action
Community NI Community NI: Northern Ireland voluntary and community sector.
Geography in Action The geology of Northern Ireland
BBC Learning Northern Ireland: Landscapes Unlocked - Aerial footage from the Sky High series explaining the physical, social and economic geography of Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland Elections
BBC Nations History of Ireland on bbc.co.uk
Conflict Archive on the Internet from the University of Ulster
Inconvenient Peripheries : Ethnic Identity and the United Kingdom EstatePDF by Prof. Philip Payton
From Partition to Direct Rule: 50 Years of Northern Ireland Parliamentary Papers Online
Discover Northern Ireland Northern Ireland Tourist Board
Outdoor Activities NI Directory of outdoor activities and activity providers in Northern Ireland. Provided by the Countryside Access & Activities Network and The Northern Ireland Tourist Board
Walk NI The definitive guide to walking in Northern Ireland from the Countryside Access & Activities Network and The Northern Ireland Tourist Board
Northern Ireland Tourist Guide What has Northern Ireland got to offer tourists?
The Northern Ireland Guide - a travel guide to Northern Ireland for tourists and residents alike
Armagh Down Tourism
Go To Belfast
Fermanagh Lakelands
Mourne Mountains
culturenorthernireland.org







 
Northern Ireland and the United Kingdom














v • d • e

Northern Ireland topics





History

Ulster Cycle · Annals of Ulster · Nine Years' War · Flight of the Earls · Plantation of Ulster · 1641 Rebellion · Battle of Benburb · Battle of Scarrifholis · Williamite War · Siege of Derry · Battle of the Boyne · 1798 Rebellion · Home Rule Crisis · Belfast Blitz · The Troubles · Peace Process · Belfast · Derry









Politics

Act of Union 1800 · Government of Ireland Act 1920 · Parliament of Northern Ireland (1920-1972) (Acts) · Secretary of State for Northern Ireland · Belfast Agreement 1998 · Northern Ireland Act 1998 · Northern Ireland Assembly (since 1998) (Acts) · Parliamentary constituencies · Districts · Flags issue






Geography

Counties · Places · Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty · Mourne Mountains · Giant's Causeway · National Trust properties






Demographics

Demographics and politics · Catholicism · Presbyterianism · Church of Ireland · Methodism · Ethnic minorities






Culture

Education · Integrated Education · Irish language · Ulster Scots language · Ulster Museum · Northern Irish people






Sport

Football (soccer) · Football (Gaelic) · Rugby · Hurling · Camogie · Handball






Symbols

National flag · Coat of arms · Cúchulainn · Flax · Red Hand of Ulster













v • d • e

Counties and cities of Northern Ireland





Counties



Antrim · Armagh · Down · Fermanagh · Londonderry · Tyrone








Cities



Armagh · Belfast · Derry · Lisburn · Newry















v • d • e

Heads of government of Northern Ireland





Prime Ministers of Executives (1922 – 1972)

James Craigavon · John Miller Andrews · Basil Brookeborough · Terence O'Neill · James Chichester-Clark · Brian Faulkner






Chief Executive of Executive (1973 – 1974)

Brian Faulkner






First Ministers and deputy First Ministers of Executives (2001 – present)





First Ministers


David Trimble · Reg Empey (acting) · David Trimble · Ian Paisley · Peter Robinson







deputy First Ministers


Seamus Mallon · Seamus Mallon (acting) · Mark Durkan · Martin McGuinness · Martin McGuinness
















v • d • e

Northern Ireland Executive





Headquarters: Stormont Castle










 
Heads of government










First Minister


Peter Robinson







deputy First Minister


Martin McGuinness


















 
Departments










Agriculture and Rural Development






Party allocation


Sinn Féin







Minister


Michelle Gildernew










Culture, Arts and Leisure






Party allocation


Democratic Unionist Party







Minister


Gregory Campbell










Education






Party allocation


Sinn Féin







Minister


Caitríona Ruane










Employment and Learning






Party allocation


Ulster Unionist Party







Minister


Reg Empey










Enterprise, Trade and Investment






Party allocation


Democratic Unionist Party







Minister


Arlene Foster










Environment






Party allocation


Democratic Unionist Party







Minister


Sammy Wilson










Finance and Personnel






Party allocation


Democratic Unionist Party







Minister


Nigel Dodds










Office of the First Minister and deputy First Minister






First Minister






Party allocation


Designated Unionist: Democratic Unionist Party







Minister


Peter Robinson







Junior Minister


Jeffrey Donaldson










deputy First Minister






Party allocation


Designated Nationalist: Sinn Féin







Minister


Martin McGuinness







Junior Minister


Gerry Kelly













Health, Social Services and Public Safety






Party allocation


Ulster Unionist Party







Minister


Michael McGimpsey










Regional Development






Party allocation


Sinn Féin







Minister


Conor Murphy










Social Development






Party allocation


Social Democratic and Labour Party







Minister


Margaret Ritchie





















 
Proposed Departments







Justice










Website: www.northernireland.gov.uk












v • d • e

Current members (MLAs) of the Northern Ireland Assembly










 
Democratic Unionist Party (DUP)u








Allan Bresland · Wallace Browne · Thomas Buchanan · Gregory Campbell‡ · Trevor Clarke · Jonathan Craig · Nigel Dodds§ · Alex Easton · Jeffrey Donaldson‡ · Arlene Foster§ · Simon Hamilton · William Hay‖ · David Hilditch · William Irwin · Nelson McCausland · Ian McCrea · William McCrea · Michelle McIlveen · Adrian McQuillan · Maurice Morrow · Stephen Moutray · Robin Newton · Ian Paisley · Ian Paisley Jr · Edwin Poots · George Robinson · Iris Robinson · Peter Robinson*† · Alastair Ross · Jim Shannon · David Simpson · Jimmy Spratt · Mervyn Storey · Peter Weir · Jim Wells · Sammy Wilson§
*Party leader †First Minister ‡Junior Minister §Departmental Minister ‖Speaker (no contact with DUP allowed during tenure)
















 
Sinn Féinn








Gerry Adams* · Martina Anderson · Cathal Boylan · Mickey Brady · Francis Brolly · Paul Butler · Carál Ní Chuilín · Willie Clarke · Pat Doherty · Michelle Gildernew§ · Gerry Kelly‡ · Alex Maskey · Paul Maskey · Fra McCann · Jennifer McCann · Raymond McCartney · Barry McElduff · Claire McGill · Martin McGuinness† · Daithí McKay · Mitchel McLaughlin · Francie Molloy¶ · Conor Murphy§ · John O'Dowd · Michelle O'Neill · Sue Ramsey · Caitríona Ruane§
*Party leader †deputy First Minister ‡Junior Minister §Departmental Minister ¶Deputy Speaker
















 
Ulster Unionist Party (UUP)u








Billy Armstrong · Roy Beggs Jr · David Burnside · Fred Cobain · Robert Coulter · Leslie Cree · Tom Elliott · Reg Empey*§ · Sam Gardiner · Danny Kennedy · John McCallister · David McClarty ¶ · Basil McCrea · Alan McFarland · Michael McGimpsey§ · David McNarry · Ken Robinson · George Savage
*Party leader §Departmental Minister ¶Deputy Speaker
















 
Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP)n








Alex Attwood · Dominic Bradley · Mary Bradley · PJ Bradley · Thomas Burns · John Dallat ¶ · Mark Durkan* · Tommy Gallagher · Carmel Hanna · Dolores Kelly · Alban Maginness · Alasdair McDonnell · Patsy McGlone · Declan O'Loan · Pat Ramsey · Margaret Ritchie§
*Party leader §Departmental Minister ¶Deputy Speaker
















 
Alliance Partyo








Stephen Farry · David Ford* · Anna Lo · Naomi Long · Trevor Lunn · Kieran McCarthy · Séan Neeson
*Party leader
















 
Green Partyo








Brian Wilson
















 
Progressive Unionist Party (PUP)u








Dawn Purvis*
*Party leader
















 
Independent Health Coalitiono








Kieran Deeny*
*Party leader
















 
Independent








Gerry McHughn











nDesignated Nationalist uDesignated Unionist oDesignated Other












v • d • e

Northern Ireland Office





Ministers

Secretary of State for Northern Ireland · Minister of State for Northern Ireland






Executive agencies

Compensation Agency for Northern Ireland · Forensic Science Northern Ireland · Northern Ireland Prison Service · Youth Justice Agency






Non-departmental public bodies

Northern Ireland Policing Board · Parades Commission













v • d • e

Constituencies in Northern Ireland





DUP



Belfast East · Belfast North · East Antrim · East Londonderry · Lagan Valley · North Antrim · South Antrim · Strangford · Upper Bann








Sinn Féin



Belfast West · Fermanagh and South Tyrone · Mid Ulster · Newry and Armagh · West Tyrone








SDLP



Belfast South · Foyle · South Down








UUP



North Down








Northern Ireland European constituency     DUP (1 seat)  ·   Sinn Féin (1 seat)  ·   UUP (1 seat)












v • d • e

Districts of Northern Ireland





(Subdivisions created by the Local Government (Boundaries) Act (Northern Ireland) 1971)








Antrim · Ards · Armagh · Ballymena · Ballymoney · Banbridge · Belfast · Carrickfergus · Castlereagh · Coleraine · Cookstown · Craigavon · Derry · Down · Dungannon and South Tyrone · Fermanagh · Larne · Limavady · Lisburn · Magherafelt · Moyle · Newry and Mourne · Newtownabbey · North Down · Omagh · Strabane















v • d • e

Constituent countries and affiliations of the United Kingdom





Countries of the United Kingdom

England · Scotland · Wales · Northern Ireland






Overseas territories

Anguilla · Bermuda · British Antarctic Territory · British Indian Ocean Territory · British Virgin Islands · Cayman Islands · Falkland Islands · Gibraltar · Montserrat · Pitcairn Islands · St. Helena (including Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha) · South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands · Turks and Caicos Islands






Crown dependencies

Guernsey · Isle of Man · Jersey






Sovereign Base Areas

Akrotiri and Dhekelia













v • d • e

United Kingdom topics





Primary subdivisions

Terminology · England · Northern Ireland · Scotland · Wales · Crown dependencies · Overseas territories






History

Timeline · England · Scotland · Wales · Northern Ireland · British Empire · Social history · Foreign relations






Law

Courts · Nationality law · Legislation






Politics

Parliament · House of Commons · House of Lords · Monarchy · Prime Minister · Cabinet · Government departments · Constitution · Elections · Political parties






Geography

Geology · Mountains · Lakes · Rivers






Economy

History · Stock Exchange · Pound sterling · Banks · Bank of England · Taxation · Transport · Communications · Energy






Military

History · Royal Navy · British Army · Royal Air Force · Nuclear weapons






Demographics

Ethnic groups · Languages · Religion · Subdivisions · Cities · Towns






Culture

Art · Cinema · Cuisine · Identity · Literature · Media · Music · Sport · Television · Public holidays






Portal


















 
International membership and history














v • d • e

Celtic nations and their culture





Nations





Celtic League definition


Brittany · Cornwall · Ireland · Isle of Man · Scotland · Wales







Other claimants


Asturias · England · Galicia · Padania












Languages

Brythonic: Breton · Cornish · Welsh
Goidelic: Irish · Manx · Scottish Gaelic
Mixed: Shelta · Bungee






Culture

Brittany · Cornwall · Ireland · Isle of Man · Scotland · Wales · Celtic art






Music

Brittany · Cornwall · Ireland · Isle of Man · Scotland · Wales






Sport

Cammag · Cornish hurling · Cornish wrestling · Curling · Gaelic football · Gaelic handball · Golf · Gouren · Rounders · Highland games · Hurling · Road bowls · Shinty






Peoples

Breton · Cornish · Irish · Irish Traveller · Manx · Scottish · Ulster-Scots · Welsh













v • d • e

British people








Anguillans · Ascension Islanders · Bermudians · British Virgin Islanders · Caymanians · Chagossians (Ilois) · Channel Islanders · Cornish · English · Falkland Islanders · Gibraltarians · Manx · Montserratians · Northern Irish · Pitcairn Islanders · Saint Helenians · Scots · Tristan Islanders · Turks and Caicos Islanders · Welsh








British diaspora












v • d • e

The British Isles





Terminology · Naming dispute · Islands of the North Atlantic (IONA)





Politics





Sovereign states and
constituent countries


Ireland · United Kingdom (England · Northern Ireland · Scotland · Wales)







British Crown
dependencies


Guernsey · Jersey · Isle of Man







Political cooperation


British-Irish Council · British-Irish Inter-Parliamentary Body · Common Travel Area · North/South Ministerial Council









Geography





Island groups


Channel Islands · Islands of the Clyde · Great Britain · Hebrides · Ireland · Isle of Man · Isles of Scilly · Northern Isles (Orkney · Shetland)







Lists of islands of


Ireland · Isle of Man · United Kingdom (England · Scotland · Wales)









History





Current states and
dependencies


Ireland · United Kingdom (England · Northern Ireland · Scotland · Wales)
Guernsey · Jersey · Isle of Man







Former states


Kingdom of England · Kingdom of Scotland · Kingdom of Ireland · Principality of Wales · Kingdom of Great Britain · United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland · Irish Free State









Society





Modern languages


Auregnais · BSL · Cornish · English · French · Guernésiais · Irish · ISL · Jèrriais · Manx · NISL · Scots (Ulster) · Scottish Gaelic · Sercquiais · Welsh







People


British · Celts · Cornish · English · English Gypsies · Irish · Irish Traveller · Kale · Manx · Scottish · Ulster-Scots · Welsh
















v • d • e

Irish states since 1171





Ireland (1937 onward)  · United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (1922† onward)





Medieval period



Gaelic Ireland (until 1607) · Lordship of Ireland (1171–1541)








Modern period



Kingdom of Ireland (1541–1801) · United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland (1801–1922†)








Twentieth century



Irish Free State (1922–37)








Notable declared states



Republic of Connaught (1798) · Irish Republic (1919–22) · Munster Republic (1922)








See also



Confederate Ireland (1642–53) · Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland (1649–60) · Northern Ireland (1921–72) · Southern Ireland (1921–22)








†Date marks the secession of the majority of Ireland from the United Kingdom rather than the creation of a new state. Official name was changed in 1927.
















Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Northern_Ireland"
Categories: Northern Ireland | History of Ireland | Home Rule in the United Kingdom | 1921 establishmentsHidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | Articles containing Irish language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since December 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ქართული
Kernewek
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Lingála
Magyar
Македонски
Malti
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Occitan
Piemontèis
Polski
Português
Română
Romani
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Soomaaliga
Српски / Srpski
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Tok Pisin
Türkçe
Українська
Vèneto
Yorùbá
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 23:44.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
