











Napoleon I of France - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Napoleon_I_of_France";
		var wgTitle = "Napoleon I of France";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "69880";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282378197;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Napoleon I of France

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"Napoleon" redirects here. For other uses, see Napoleon (disambiguation).





Napoleon I


Emperor of the French; King of Italy,
Mediator of the Swiss Confederation,
Protector of the Confederation of the Rhine





The Emperor Napoleon in His Study at the Tuileries, by Jacques-Louis David, 1812


Reign
20 March 1804 – 6 April 1814
1 March 1815 – 22 June 1815


Coronation
2 December 1804


Predecessor
French Consulate (Executive of the French First Republic, with Napoleon as First Consul);
Previous ruling Monarch : Louis XVI as King of the French (died 1793)


Successor
Louis XVIII (de facto)
Napoleon II (de jure)


Spouse
Joséphine de Beauharnais
Marie Louise of Austria


Issue


Napoleon II of France


Full name


Napoleon Bonaparte


Imperial House
Bonaparte


Father
Carlo Buonaparte


Mother
Letizia Ramolino


Born
15 August 1769(1769-08-15)
Ajaccio, Corsica, France


Died
5 May 1821 (aged 51)
Longwood, Saint Helena


Burial
Les Invalides, Paris


Napoleon Bonaparte (French: Napoléon Bonaparte French pronunciation: [napoleɔ̃ bɔnɑpaʁt]; 15 August 1769 – 5 May 1821) later known as Emperor Napoleon I, was a military and political leader of France whose actions shaped European politics in the early 19th century.
Born in Corsica and trained as an artillery officer in mainland France, Bonaparte rose to prominence under the First French Republic and led successful campaigns against the First and Second Coalitions arrayed against France. In 1799, he staged a coup d'état and installed himself as First Consul; five years later he crowned himself Emperor of the French. In the first decade of the nineteenth century, he turned the armies of the French Empire against every major European power and dominated continental Europe through a series of military victories. He maintained France's sphere of influence by the formation of extensive alliances and the appointment of friends and family members to rule other European countries as French client states.
The French invasion of Russia in 1812 marked a turning point in Napoleon's fortunes. His Grande Armée was badly damaged in the campaign and never fully recovered. In 1813, the Sixth Coalition defeated his forces at Leipzig; the following year the Coalition invaded France, forced Napoleon to abdicate and exiled him to the island of Elba. Less than a year later, he escaped Elba and returned to power, but was defeated at the Battle of Waterloo in June 1815. Napoleon spent the last six years of his life under British supervision on the island of Saint Helena. An autopsy concluded he died of stomach cancer, though Sten Forshufvud and other scientists have since conjectured that he was poisoned with arsenic.
The conflict with the rest of Europe led to a period of total war across the continent; his campaigns are studied at military academies the world over. While considered a tyrant by his opponents, he is also remembered for the establishment of the Napoleonic code, which laid the administrative and judicial foundations for much of Western Europe.




Contents


1 Origins and education
2 Early career

2.1 Siege of Toulon
2.2 13 Vendémiaire
2.3 First Italian campaign
2.4 Egyptian expedition


3 Ruler of France

3.1 French Consulate

3.1.1 Temporary peace in Europe
3.1.2 Reforms


3.2 French Empire

3.2.1 War of the Third Coalition
3.2.2 War of the Fourth Coalition
3.2.3 Peninsular War
3.2.4 War of the Fifth Coalition and remarriage
3.2.5 Invasion of Russia
3.2.6 War of the Sixth Coalition
3.2.7 Hundred Days




4 Exile on Saint Helena

4.1 Death

4.1.1 Cause of death




5 Marriages and children
6 Image
7 Legacy

7.1 Warfare
7.2 Metric system
7.3 Jewish emancipation
7.4 Bonapartism
7.5 Admirers and critics
7.6 Napoleonic Code


8 Titles
9 Notes
10 Citations
11 References
12 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Origins and education




Napoleon's father Carlo Buonaparte was Corsica's representative to the court of Louis XVI of France


Napoleon Bonaparte was born the second of seven children, in Casa Buonaparte in the town of Ajaccio, Corsica, on 15 August 1769, one year after the island was transferred to France by the Republic of Genoa.[1] He was initially named Napoleone di Buonaparte, but later adopted the more French-sounding Napoléon Bonaparte.[note 1]
The Corsican Buonapartes originated from minor Italian nobility, who had come to Corsica in the 16th century.[3] His father Nobile Carlo Buonaparte, an attorney, was named Corsica's representative to the court of Louis XVI in 1777. The dominant influence of Napoleon's childhood was his mother, Maria Letizia Ramolino, whose firm discipline restrained a rambunctious child.[4] He had an elder brother, Joseph; and younger siblings Lucien, Elisa, Louis, Pauline, Caroline and Jérôme. Napoleon was baptised Catholic just before his second birthday, on 21 July 1771 at Ajaccio Cathedral.[5]
Napoleon's noble, moderately affluent background and family connections afforded him greater opportunities to study than were available to a typical Corsican of the time.[6] In January 1779, Napoleon was enrolled at a religious school in Autun, mainland France, to learn French, and in May he was admitted to a military academy at Brienne-le-Château.[7] He spoke with a marked Corsican accent and never learned to spell properly.[8] Napoleon was teased by other students for his accent and applied himself to study.[9][note 2] An examiner observed that Napoleon "has always been distinguished for his application in mathematics. He is fairly well acquainted with history and geography... This boy would make an excellent sailor."[11][note 3] On completion of his studies at Brienne in 1784, Napoleon was admitted to the elite École Militaire in Paris; this ended his naval ambition, which had led him to consider an application to the British Royal Navy.[13] Instead, he trained to become an artillery officer and had to quickly complete the two-year course in one year when his father's death reduced his income.[9] He was examined by the famed scientist Pierre-Simon Laplace, whom Napoleon later appointed to the Senate.[14]

Early career




Pasquale Paoli, portrait by Richard Cosway


On graduation in September 1785, Bonaparte was commissioned a second lieutenant in La Fère artillery regiment.[7][note 4] He served on garrison duty in Valence, Drôme and Auxonne until after the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789, though he took nearly two years of leave in Corsica and Paris during this period. A fervent Corsican nationalist, Bonaparte wrote to the Corsican leader Pasquale Paoli in May 1789: "As the nation was perishing I was born. Thirty thousand Frenchmen were vomited on to our shores, drowning the throne of liberty in waves of blood. Such was the odious sight which was the first to strike me."[16]
He spent the early years of the Revolution in Corsica, fighting in a complex three-way struggle between royalists, revolutionaries, and Corsican nationalists. He supported the revolutionary Jacobin faction, gained the rank of Lieutenant Colonel and command over a battalion of volunteers. After he had exceeded his leave of absence and led a riot against a French army in Corsica, he was somehow able to convince military authorities in Paris to promote him to Captain in July 1792.[17] He returned to Corsica once again, and came into conflict with Paoli, who had decided to split with France and sabotage a French assault on the Sardinian island of La Maddalena, where Bonaparte was one of the expedition leaders.[18] Bonaparte and his family had to flee to the French mainland in June 1793 due to the split with Paoli.[19]

Siege of Toulon
Main article: Siege of Toulon
In July 1793, he published a pro-republican pamphlet, Le Souper de Beaucaire [Supper at Beaucaire], which gained him the admiration and support of Augustin Robespierre, younger brother of the Revolutionary leader Maximilien Robespierre. With the help of fellow Corsican Antoine Christophe Saliceti, Bonaparte was appointed artillery commander of the republican forces at the siege of Toulon. The city had risen against the republican government and was occupied by British troops.[20] He identified a hill placing that allowed republican guns to dominate the city's harbour and force the British ships to evacuate. The assault on the position, during which Bonaparte was wounded in the thigh, led to the capture of the city and his promotion to Brigadier General. His actions brought him to the attention of the Committee of Public Safety and he was given command of the artillery arm of France's Army of Italy.[21] He also became engaged to Désirée Clary, his future sister-in-law, whose father was a rich Marseille trader.[22]

13 Vendémiaire
Main article: 13 Vendémiaire




The Journée of 13 Vendémiaire, Year 4. The Saint-Roch Church, Rue Saint-Honoré, Paris.


Following the fall of the Robespierres in the July 1794 Thermidorian Reaction, Bonaparte was imprisoned at the Fort Carré in Antibes in August 1794 for his association with the brothers. Although he was released after only ten days, he remained out of favour.[23] In April 1795, he was assigned to the Army of the West, which was engaged in the War in the Vendée—a civil war and royalist counter-revolution in France's Vendée region. As an infantry command, it was a demotion from artillery general, and he pleaded poor health to avoid the posting.[24] He was moved to the Bureau of Topography of the Committee of Public Safety and sought, unsuccessfully, to be transferred to Constantinople in order to offer his services to the Sultan.[25] On 15 September he was removed from the list of generals in regular service; the reason given was his refusal to serve in the Vendée campaign. He now faced a desperate financial situation.[26]
On 3 October, royalists in Paris declared a rebellion against the National Convention after they were excluded from a new government, the Directory.[27] One of the leaders of the Thermidorian Reaction, Paul Barras knew of Bonaparte's military exploits at Toulon and gave him command of the improvised forces in defence of the Convention in the Tuileries Palace. Bonaparte had witnessed the massacre of the King's Swiss Guard there three years earlier and realised artillery would be key to its defence.[7] He ordered a young cavalry officer, Joachim Murat to seize large cannon and used them to repel the attackers on 5 October 1795—13 Vendémiaire An IV in the French Republican Calendar. 1,400 royalists died and the rest fled.[27] He had cleared the streets with "a whiff of grapeshot" according to the 19th-century historian Thomas Carlyle.[28]
The defeat of the Royalist insurrection extinguished the threat to the Convention and earned Bonaparte sudden fame, wealth, and the patronage of the new Directory; Murat would become his brother-in-law and one of his generals. Bonaparte was promoted to Commander of the Interior and given command of the Army of Italy.[19] Within weeks he was romantically attached to Barras's former mistress, Joséphine de Beauharnais, whom he married on 9 March 1796, after he had broken off his engagement to Désirée Clary.[29]

First Italian campaign
Main article: Italian campaigns of the French Revolutionary Wars
Two days after the marriage, Bonaparte left Paris to take command of the Army of Italy and led it on a successful invasion of Italy. At the Battle of Lodi he defeated Austrian forces, then drove them out of Lombardy.[19] He was defeated at Caldiero by Austrian reinforcements, led by József Alvinczi, though he regained the initiative at the crucial Battle of the Bridge of Arcole and proceeded to subdue the Papal States.[30] Bonaparte argued against the wishes of Directory atheists to march on Rome and dethrone the Pope as he reasoned this would create a power vacuum that would be exploited by the Kingdom of Naples. Instead, in March 1797, Bonaparte led his army into Austria and forced it to negotiate peace.[31] The Treaty of Leoben gave France control of most of northern Italy and the Low Countries and a secret clause promised the Republic of Venice to Austria. Bonaparte marched on Venice and forced its surrender, ending 1,100 years of independence; he also authorised the French to loot treasures such as the Horses of Saint Mark.[32]




Bonaparte at the Bridge of the Arcole, by Baron Antoine-Jean Gros, (ca. 1801), Louvre, Paris


His application of conventional military ideas to real-world situations effected his military triumphs, such as creative use of artillery as a mobile force to support his infantry. He referred to his tactics thus: "I have fought sixty battles and I have learned nothing which I did not know at the beginning. Look at Caesar; he fought the first like the last."[33] He was adept at espionage and deception and could win battles by concealment of troop deployments and concentration of his forces on the 'hinge' of an enemy's weakened front. If he could not use his favourite envelopment strategy, he would take-up the central position and attack two cooperating forces at their hinge, swing round to fight one until it fled, then turn to face the other.[34] In this Italian campaign, Bonaparte's army captured 150,000 prisoners, 540 cannons and 170 standards.[35] The French army fought 67 actions and won 18 pitched battles due to superior artillery technology and Bonaparte's tactics.[36]
During the campaign, Bonaparte became increasingly influential in French politics. He published two newspapers, ostensibly for the troops in his army, but widely circulated in France as well, and in May 1797, founded a third newspaper, Le Journal de Bonaparte et des hommes vertueux, which was published in Paris.[37] Elections in mid-1797 gave the royalist party more power and alarmed the Directory.[38] The royalists attacked Bonaparte for looting Italy and claimed he had overstepped his authority in dealings with the Austrians. Bonaparte sent General Pierre Augereau to Paris to lead a coup d'état and purge the royalists on 4 September—18 Fructidor. This left Barras and his Republican allies in control again, but dependent on Bonaparte who proceeded to peace negotiations with Austria. This negotiations resulted in the Treaty of Campo Formio, and Bonaparte returned to Paris in December as a hero, more popular than the Directors.[39] He met with Talleyrand, France's new Foreign Minister—who would later serve in the same capacity for Emperor Napoleon—and they began to prepare for an invasion of England.[19]

Egyptian expedition
Main article: French Invasion of Egypt (1798)




Bonaparte Before the Sphinx, (ca. 1868) by Jean-Léon Gérôme, Hearst Castle


After two months of planning, Bonaparte decided France's naval power was not yet strong enough to confront the Royal Navy in the English Channel and proposed a military expedition to seize Egypt and thereby undermine Britain's access to its trade interests in India.[19] The Directory, though troubled by the scope and cost of the enterprise, agreed so the popular general would be absent from the centre of power.[40]
In May 1798, Bonaparte was elected a member of the French Academy of Sciences. His Egyptian expedition included a group of 167 scientists: mathematicians, naturalists, chemists and geodesists among them; their discoveries included the Rosetta Stone and their work was published in the Description de l'Égypte in 1809.[41]
En route to Egypt, Bonaparte reached Malta on 9 June 1798, then controlled by the Knights Hospitaller. The two hundred Knights of French origin did not support the Grand Master, Prussian Ferdinand von Hompesch zu Bolheim, who had succeeded a Frenchman, and made it clear they would not fight against their compatriots. Hompesch surrendered after token resistance and Bonaparte captured a very important naval base with the loss of only three men.[42]
General Bonaparte and his expedition eluded pursuit by the Royal Navy and on 1 July landed at Alexandria.[19] In a largely unsuccessful effort to gain the support of the Egyptian population, Bonaparte issued proclamations that cast him as a liberator of the people from Ottoman oppression (Egypt was then a province of the Ottoman Empire), and praised the precepts of Islam. In a letter to a sheikh in August 1798, Napoleon wrote, "I hope...I shall be able to unite all the wise and educated men of all the countries and establish a uniform regime based on the principles of the Quran which alone are true and which alone can lead men to happiness."[43] However, Bonaparte's secretary Bourienne wrote that his employer had no serious interest in Islam or any other religion beyond their political value.[note 5]




The Battle of the Pyramids, July 21, 1798, painted by François-Louis-Joseph Watteau, ca. 1798-99.


Bonaparte successfully fought the Battle of Chobrakit against the Mamluks, an old power in the Middle East. This helped the French plan their attack in the Battle of the Pyramids fought over a week later, about 6 km from the pyramids. General Bonaparte's forces were greatly outnumbered by the Mamluks' cavalry—20,000 against 60,000—but he formed hollow squares with supplies kept safely inside. 300 French and approximately 6,000 Egyptians were killed.[45]
On 1 August, the British fleet under Horatio Nelson captured or destroyed all but two French vessels in the Battle of the Nile and Bonaparte's goal of a strengthened French position in the Mediterranean Sea was frustrated.[46] His army had nonetheless succeeded in a temporary increase of French power in Egypt, though it faced repeated uprisings.[47] In early 1799, he moved the army into the Ottoman province of Damascus (Syria and Galilee). Bonaparte led these 13,000 French soldiers in the conquest of the coastal towns of Arish, Gaza, Jaffa, and Haifa.[48] The attack on Jaffa was particularly brutal: Bonaparte, on discovering many of the defenders were former prisoners of war, ostensibly on parole, ordered the garrison and 1,400 prisoners to be executed by bayonet or drowning to save bullets.[46] Men, women and children were robbed and murdered for three days.[49]
With his army weakened by disease — mostly bubonic plague — and poor supplies, Bonaparte was unable to reduce the fortress of Acre, and returned to Egypt in May.[46] To speed up the retreat, he ordered plague-stricken men to be poisoned.[50] His supporters have argued this decision was necessary given the continued harassment of stragglers by Ottoman forces and those left behind alive were indeed tortured and beheaded by the Ottomans. Back in Egypt, on 25 July, Bonaparte defeated an Ottoman amphibious invasion at Abukir.[51]

Ruler of France
Main articles: 18 Brumaire and the Napoleonic Era
While in Egypt, Bonaparte stayed informed of European affairs through irregular delivery of newspapers and dispatches. He learnt France had suffered a series of defeats in the War of the Second Coalition.[52] On 24 August 1799, he took advantage of the temporary departure of British ships from French coastal ports and set sail for France, despite the fact he had received no explicit orders from Paris.[46] The army was left in the charge of Jean Baptiste Kléber.[53] Unknown to Bonaparte, the Directory had sent him orders to return to ward off possible invasions of French soil but poor lines of communication meant the messages had failed to reach him.[52] By the time he reached Paris in October, France's situation had been improved by a series of victories. The Republic was bankrupt, however, and the ineffective Directory was unpopular with the French population.[54] The Directory discussed Bonaparte's "desertion" but was too weak to punish him.[52]




British satirical depiction of the coup


Bonaparte was approached by one of the Directors, Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès, for his support in a coup to overthrow the constitutional government. The leaders of the plot included his brother Lucien Bonaparte; the speaker of the Council of Five Hundred, Roger Ducos; another Director, Joseph Fouché; and Talleyrand. On 9 November—18 Brumaire by the French Republican Calendar—Bonaparte was charged with the safety of the legislative councils, who were persuaded to remove to the Château de Saint-Cloud, to the west of Paris, after a rumour of a Jacobin rebellion was spread by the plotters.[55] By the following day, the deputies had realised they faced an attempted coup. Faced with their remonstrations, Bonaparte led troops to seize control and disperse them, which left a rump legislature to name Bonaparte, Sièyes, and Ducos as provisional Consuls to administer the government.[46]

French Consulate
Main articles: French Consulate and War of the Second Coalition




Map of Central Europe after the Treaty of Campo Formio


Though Sieyès expected to dominate the new regime, he was outmanoeuvred by Bonaparte, who drafted the Constitution of the Year VIII and secured his own election as First Consul.[56] This made Bonaparte the most powerful person in France and he took up residence at the Tuileries.[46]
In 1800, Bonaparte and his troops crossed the Alps into Italy, where French forces had been almost completely driven out by the Austrians whilst he was in Egypt.[note 6] The campaign began badly for the French due to strategic errors by Bonaparte; one force was left besieged at Genoa but managed to hold out and thereby occupy Austrian resources.[58] This effort and French general Desaix's timely reinforcements, allowed Bonaparte to narrowly avoid defeat and triumph over the Austrians in June at the significant Battle of Marengo. Bonaparte's brother Joseph led the peace negotiations in Lunéville and reported that Austria, emboldened by British support, would not recognise France's newly gained territory. As negotiations became increasingly fractious, Bonaparte gave orders to his general Moreau to strike Austria once more. Moreau led France to victory at Hohenlinden. As a result, the Treaty of Lunéville was signed in February 1801: the French gains of the Treaty of Campo Formio were reaffirmed and increased.[59]

Temporary peace in Europe
Main articles: Napoleon's invasion of England, Haitian Revolution, and Louisiana Purchase
Bonaparte set up a camp at Boulogne-sur-Mer to prepare for an invasion of Britain but both countries had become tired of war and signed the Treaty of Amiens in October 1801 and March 1802; this included the withdrawal of British troops from most colonial territories it had recently occupied.[60] The peace was uneasy and short-lived; Britain failed to evacuate Malta as promised and protested against Bonaparte's annexation of Piedmont and his Act of Mediation, which established a new Swiss Confederation, though neither of these territories were covered by the Treaty.[61] The dispute culminated in a declaration of war by Britain in May 1803, and he reassembled the invasion camp at Boulogne.[46]




Bonaparte as First Consul, lithograph by Zephyrin Belliard


Bonaparte faced a major setback and eventual defeat in the Haitian Revolution. By the Law of 20 May 1802 Bonaparte re-established slavery in France's colonial possessions, where it had been banned following the Revolution.[62] Following a slave revolt, he sent an army to reconquer Saint-Domingue and establish a base. The force was, however, destroyed by yellow fever and fierce resistance led by Haitian generals Toussaint Louverture and Jean-Jacques Dessalines.[note 7] Faced by imminent war against Britain and bankruptcy, he recognised French possessions on the mainland of North America would be indefensible and sold them to the United States—the Louisiana Purchase—for less than three cents per acre ($7.40 per km²).[64]

Reforms
Bonaparte instituted lasting reforms, including centralised administration of the départements, higher education, a tax code, road and sewer systems and the Banque de France—the country's central bank. He negotiated the Concordat of 1801 with the Catholic Church, which sought to reconcile the mostly Catholic population to his regime. It was presented alongside the Organic Articles, which regulated public worship in France. Later that year, Bonaparte became President of the French Academy of Sciences and appointed Jean Baptiste Joseph Delambre its Permanent Secretary.[41] In May 1802, he instituted the Légion d'Honneur, a substitute for the old royalist decorations and orders of chivalry, to encourage civilian and military achievements; the order is still the highest decoration in France.[65] His powers were increased by the Constitution of the Year X including: Article 1. The French people name, and the Senate proclaims Napoleon-Bonaparte First Consul for Life.[66] After this he was generally referred to as Napoleon rather than Bonaparte.[15]
Napoleon's set of civil laws, the Code Civil—now known as the Napoleonic code—was prepared by committees of legal experts under the supervision of Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès, the Second Consul. Napoleon participated actively in the sessions of the Council of State that revised the drafts. The development of the Code was a fundamental change in the nature of the civil law legal system with its stress on clearly written and accessible law. Other codes were commissioned by Napoleon to codify criminal and commerce law; a Code of Criminal Instruction was published, which enacted rules of due process.[67] See Legacy.

French Empire
Main articles: First French Empire and Napoleonic Wars
Napoleon faced royalist and Jacobin plots as France's ruler, including the Conspiration des poignards [Daggers conspiracy] in October 1800 and the Plot of the Rue Saint-Nicaise two months later.[68] In January 1804, his police uncovered an assassination plot against him which involved Moreau and which was ostensibly sponsored by the Bourbon former rulers of France. On the advice of Talleyrand, Napoleon ordered the kidnapping of the Duke of Enghien, in violation of neighbouring Baden's sovereignty. After a secret trial the Duke was executed, even though he had not been involved in the plot.[69]




Napoleon I in coronation robes, by Robert Lefebvre, 1807


Napoleon used the plot to justify the re-creation of a hereditary monarchy in France, with himself as Emperor, as a Bourbon restoration would be more difficult if the Bonapartist succession was entrenched in the constitution.[70] Napoleon crowned himself Emperor Napoleon I on 2 December 1804 at Notre Dame de Paris and then crowned Joséphine Empress. Claims he seized the crown out of the hands of Pope Pius VII during the ceremony—to avoid his subjugation to the authority of the pontiff—are apocryphal; the coronation procedure had been agreed in advance.[note 8] At Milan Cathedral on 26 May 1805, Napoleon was crowned King of Italy with the Iron Crown of Lombardy. He created eighteen Marshals of the Empire from amongst his top generals, to secure the allegiance of the army. Ludwig van Beethoven, a long-time admirer and disappointed at this turn towards imperialism, scratched his dedication to Napoleon from his 3rd Symphony.[70]

War of the Third Coalition
Main article: War of the Third Coalition
By 1805, Britain had convinced Austria and Russia to join a Third Coalition against France. Napoleon knew the French fleet could not defeat the Royal Navy in a head-to-head battle and planned to lure it away from the English Channel. The French navy would escape from the British blockades of Toulon and Brest and threaten to attack the West Indies, thus drawing-off the British defence of the Western Approaches, in the hope a Franco-Spanish fleet could take control of the Channel long enough for French armies to cross from Boulogne and invade England.[71] However, after defeat at the naval Battle of Cape Finisterre in July 1805 and Admiral Villeneuve's retreat to Cadiz, invasion was never again a realistic option for Napoleon.[72]
Instead, he ordered the army stationed at Boulogne, his Grande Armée, to secretly march to Germany in a turning movement—the Ulm Campaign. This encircled the Austrian forces about to attack France and severed their lines of communication. On 20 October 1805, the French captured 30,000 prisoners at Ulm, though the next day Britain's victory at the Battle of Trafalgar meant the Royal Navy gained control of the seas. Six weeks later, on the first anniversary of his coronation, Napoleon defeated Austria and Russia at Austerlitz. This ended the Third Coalition and he commissioned the Arc de Triomphe to commemorate the victory. Austria had to concede territory: the Peace of Pressburg led to the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire and creation of the Confederation of the Rhine with Napoleon named as its Protector.[73]
Napoleon would go on to say that "The battle of Austerlitz is the finest of all I have fought."[74] Frank McLynn suggests Napoleon was so successful at Austerlitz he lost touch with reality, and what used to be French foreign policy became a "personal Napoleonic one".[75] Vincent Cronin disagrees, stating Napoleon was not overly ambitious for himself, that "he embodied the ambitions of thirty million Frenchmen".[76]

War of the Fourth Coalition




Napoleon reviews his troops shortly before the Battle of Jena-Auerstedt (14 October 1806), as painted by Horace Vernet


Main article: War of the Fourth Coalition
The Fourth Coalition was assembled the following year, and Napoleon defeated Prussia at the Battle of Jena-Auerstedt in October.[77] He marched against advancing Russian armies through Poland, and was involved in the bloody stalemate of the Battle of Eylau on 6 February 1807.[78]
After a decisive victory at Friedland, he signed the Treaties of Tilsit; one with Tsar Alexander I of Russia which divided the continent between the two powers; the other with Prussia which stripped that country of half its territory. Napoleon placed puppet rulers on the thrones of German states, including his brother Jérôme as king of the new Kingdom of Westphalia. In the French-controlled part of Poland, he established the Duchy of Warsaw with King Frederick Augustus I of Saxony as ruler.[79]
With his Milan and Berlin Decrees, Napoleon attempted to enforce a Europe-wide commercial boycott of Britain called the Continental System. This act of economic warfare did not succeed, as it encouraged British merchants to smuggle into continental Europe and Napoleon's exclusively land-based customs enforcers could not stop them.[80]

Peninsular War
Main article: Peninsular War
Portugal did not comply with the Continental System so, in 1807, Napoleon invaded with the support of Spain. Under the pretext of a reinforcement of the Franco-Spanish army occupying Portugal, Napoleon invaded Spain as well, replaced Charles IV with his brother Joseph and placed his brother-in-law Joachim Murat in Joseph's stead at Naples. This led to resistance from the Spanish army and civilians in the Dos de Mayo Uprising.[81] Following a French retreat from much of the country, Napoleon took command and defeated the Spanish Army. He retook Madrid, then outmanoeuvred a British army sent to support the Spanish and drove it to the coast.[82] Before the Spanish population had been fully subdued, Austria again threatened war and Napoleon returned to France.[83]




The Duke of Wellington in 1814 by Sir Thomas Lawrence


The costly and often brutal Peninsular War continued in Napoleon's absence; in the second Siege of Saragossa most of the city was destroyed and over 50,000 people perished.[84] Although Napoleon left 300,000 of his finest troops to battle Spanish guerrillas as well as British and Portuguese forces commanded by Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington, French control over the peninsula again deteriorated. [85] Following several allied victories, the war concluded after Napoleon's abdication in 1814.[86]

War of the Fifth Coalition and remarriage
Main article: War of the Fifth Coalition
In April 1809, Austria abruptly broke its alliance with France and Napoleon was forced to assume command of forces on the Danube and German fronts. After early successes, the French faced difficulties in crossing the Danube and suffered a defeat in May at the Battle of Aspern-Essling near Vienna. The Austrians failed to capitalise on the situation and allowed Napoleon's forces to regroup. He defeated the Austrians again at Wagram and a new peace, the Treaty of Schönbrunn, was signed between Austria and France.[87]
Britain was the other member of the coalition. In addition to the Iberian Peninsula, the British planned to open another front in mainland Europe. However, Napoleon was able to rush reinforcements to Antwerp, due to Britain's inadequately organised Walcheren Campaign.[88] He concurrently annexed the Papal States because of the Church's refusal to support the Continental System; Pope Pius VII responded by excommunicating the emperor. The Pope was then abducted by Napoleon's officers, and though Napoleon had not ordered his abduction, he did not order Pius' release. The Pope was moved throughout Napoleon's territories, sometimes while ill, and Napoleon sent delegations to pressure him on issues including agreement to a new concordat with France, which Pius refused. In 1810 Napoleon married the Austrian Marie Louise, Duchess of Parma, following his divorce of Joséphine; this further strained his relations with the Church and thirteen cardinals were imprisoned for non-attendance at the marriage ceremony.[89] The Pope remained confined for 5 years, and did not return to Rome until May 1814.[90]




Napoleon's empire at its greatest extent in 1811     French Empire     Conquered "Rebellious" States     Conquered "Allied" States


Napoleon consented to one of his marshals—and long-term rival—Bernadotte, ascent to the Swedish throne in November 1810. Napoleon had indulged Bernadotte's indiscretions because he was married to Désirée Clary, but came to regret sparing his life when Bernadotte later sided Sweden with France's enemies.[91]

Invasion of Russia
Main article: French invasion of Russia
The Congress of Erfurt sought to preserve the Russo-French alliance and the leaders had a friendly personal relationship after their first meeting at Tilsit in 1807.[92] By 1811, however, tensions between the two nations had increased and Alexander was under pressure from the Russian nobility to break off the alliance. The first clear sign the alliance had deteriorated was the relaxation of the Continental System in Russia, which angered Napoleon.[93] By 1812, advisers to Alexander suggested the possibility of an invasion of the French Empire and the recapture of Poland. On receipt of intelligence reports on Russia's war preparations, Napoleon expanded his Grande Armée to more than 450,000 men. He ignored repeated advice against an invasion of the vast Russian heartland and prepared for an offensive campaign; on 23 June 1812, his invasion of Russia commenced.[94]
In an attempt to gain increased support from Polish nationalists and patriots, Napoleon termed the war the Second Polish War—the First Polish War had been the Bar Confederation uprising by Polish nobles against Russia in 1768. Polish patriots wanted the Russian part of Poland to be joined with the Duchy of Warsaw and an independent Poland created. This was rejected by Napoleon, who stated he had promised his ally Austria this would not happen. Napoleon refused to manumit the Russian serfs, due to concerns this might provoke a reaction in his army's rear. The serfs would later commit atrocities against French soldiers during France's retreat.[95]
The Russians avoided Napoleon's objective of a decisive engagement and instead retreated deeper into Russia. A brief attempt at resistance was made at Smolensk in August; the Russians were defeated in a series of battles and Napoleon resumed his advance. The Russians again avoided battle, although in a few cases this was only achieved because Napoleon uncharacteristically hesitated to attack when the opportunity arose. Due to the Russian army's scorched earth tactics, the French found it increasingly difficult to forage food for themselves and their horses.[96]




Charles Joseph Minard's graph shows the decreasing size of the Grande Armée as it marched to Moscow and back


The Russians eventually offered battle outside Moscow on 7 September: the Battle of Borodino resulted in approximately 44,000 Russian and 35,000 French, dead, wounded or captured, and may have been the bloodiest day of battle in history up to that point.[97] Although the French had won, the Russian army had accepted, and withstood, the major battle Napoleon had hoped would be decisive. Napoleon's own account was: "The most terrible of all my battles was the one before Moscow. The French showed themselves to be worthy of victory, but the Russians showed themselves worthy of being invincible."[98]
The Russian army withdrew and retreated past Moscow. Napoleon entered the city, assuming its fall would end the war and Alexander would negotiate peace. However, on orders of the city's governor Fyodor Rostopchin, rather than capitulation, Moscow was ordered burned. After a month, concerned about loss of control back in France, Napoleon and his army left.[99]
The French suffered greatly in the course of a ruinous retreat, including from the harshness of the Russian Winter. The Armée had begun as over 400,000 frontline troops, but in the end fewer than 40,000 crossed the Berezina River in November 1812, to escape.[100] The Russians had lost 150,000 in battle and hundreds of thousands of civilians.[101]


War of the Sixth Coalition
Main article: War of the Sixth Coalition




British etching from 1814 in celebration of Napoleon's first exile to Elba at the close of the War of the Sixth Coalition


There was a lull in fighting over the winter of 1812–13 while both the Russians and the French rebuilt their forces; Napoleon was then able to field 350,000 troops.[102] Heartened by France's loss in Russia, Prussia joined with Austria, Sweden, Russia, Great Britain, Spain, and Portugal in a new coalition. Napoleon assumed command in Germany and inflicted a series of defeats on the Coalition culminating in the Battle of Dresden in August 1813.[103] Despite these successes, the numbers continued to mount against Napoleon and the French army was pinned down by a force twice its size and lost at the Battle of Leipzig. This was by far the largest battle of the Napoleonic Wars and cost more than 90,000 casualties in total.[104]
Napoleon withdrew back into France, his army reduced to 70,000 soldiers and 40,000 stragglers, against more than three times as many Allied troops.[105] The French were surrounded: British armies pressed from the south, and other Coalition forces positioned to attack from the German states. Napoleon won a series of victories in the Six Days Campaign, though these were not significant enough to turn the tide and Paris was captured by the Coalition in March 1814.[106]




Napoleon's Villa Mulini on Elba


When Napoleon proposed the army march on the capital, his marshals decided to mutiny.[107] On 4 April, led by Ney, they confronted Napoleon. Napoleon asserted the army would follow him and Ney replied the army would follow its generals. Napoleon had no choice but to abdicate, he did so in favour of his son but the Allies refused to accept this and Napoleon abdicated unconditionally on 6 April. In the Treaty of Fontainebleau the victors exiled him to Elba, an island of 12,000 inhabitants in the Mediterranean 20 km off the Tuscan coast. They gave him sovereignty over the island and allowed him to retain his title of Emperor. Napoleon attempted suicide with a pill he had carried since a near-capture by Russians on the retreat from Moscow. Its potency had weakened with age and he survived to be exiled, while his wife and son took refuge in Vienna.[108] In the first few months on Elba he created a small navy and army, developed the iron mines, and issued decrees on modern agricultural methods.[109]

Hundred Days
Main article: Hundred Days
Separated from his wife and son, who had come under Austrian control, cut off from the allowance guaranteed to him by the Treaty of Fontainebleau, and aware of rumours he was about to be banished to a remote island in the Atlantic Ocean, Napoleon escaped from Elba on 26 February 1815. He landed at Golfe-Juan on the French mainland, two days later.[110] The 5th Regiment was sent to intercept him and made contact just south of Grenoble on 7 March 1815. Napoleon approached the regiment alone, dismounted his horse and, when he was within gunshot range, shouted, "Here I am. Kill your Emperor, if you wish."[111] The soldiers responded with, "Vive L'Empereur!" and marched with Napoleon to Paris; Louis XVIII fled. On 13 March, the powers at the Congress of Vienna declared Napoleon an outlaw and four days later Great Britain, the Netherlands, Russia, Austria and Prussia bound themselves to put 150,000 men into the field to end his rule.[112]




Battle of Waterloo, painted by William Sadler (1782–1839)


Napoleon arrived in Paris on 20 March and governed for a period now called the Hundred Days. By the start of June the armed forces available to him had reached 200,000 and he decided to go on the offensive to attempt to drive a wedge between the oncoming British and Prussian armies. The French Army of the North crossed the frontier into the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, in modern-day Belgium.[113]
Napoleon's forces fought the allies, led by Wellington and Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher, at the Battle of Waterloo on 18 June 1815. Wellington's army withstood repeated attacks by the French and drove them from the field while the Prussians arrived in force and broke through Napoleon's right flank. The French army left the battlefield in disorder, which allowed Coalition forces to enter France and restore Louis XVIII to the French throne. Off the port of Rochefort, Charente-Maritime, after consideration of an escape to the United States, Napoleon formally demanded political asylum from the British Captain Frederick Maitland on HMS Bellerophon on 15 July 1815.[114]

Exile on Saint Helena




Scene in Plymouth Sound in August 1815, by John James Chalon. Pictured is HMS Bellerophon with Napoleon aboard, shortly before to his transferral to HMS Northumberland for delivery to St. Helena.






Longwood House, St Helena: site of Napoleon's captivity


Napoleon was imprisoned and then exiled to the island of St. Helena in the Atlantic Ocean, 2,000 km from any major landmass. In his first two months there, he lived in a pavilion on the Briars estate, which belonged to a William Balcombe. Napoleon became friendly with his family, especially his younger daughter Lucia Elizabeth who later wrote Recollections of the Emperor Napoleon.[115] This friendship ended in 1818 when British authorities became suspicious that Balcombe had acted as an intermediary between Napoleon and Paris, and dismissed him from the island.[116]
Napoleon moved to Longwood House in December 1815; it had fallen into disrepair, and the location was damp, windswept and unhealthy. The Times published articles insinuating that the British government was trying to hasten his death and he often complained of the living conditions in letters to the governor and his custodian, Hudson Lowe.[117] With a small cadre of followers, Napoleon dictated his memoirs and criticised his captors—particularly Lowe. Lowe's treatment of Napoleon is regarded as poor by historians such as Frank McLynn.[118] Lowe exacerbated a difficult situation through measures including a reduction in Napoleon's expenditure, a rule that no gifts could be delivered to him if they mentioned his imperial status, and a document that his supporters had to sign that guaranteed they would stay with the prisoner indefinitely.[118]
In 1818, The Times reported a false rumour of Napoleon's escape and said the news had been greeted by spontaneous illuminations in London.[note 9] There was sympathy for him in the British Parliament: Lord Holland gave a speech which demanded the prisoner be treated with no unnecessary harshness.[120] Napoleon kept himself informed of the events through The Times and hoped for release in the event that Holland became Prime Minister. He also enjoyed the support of Lord Cochrane, who was involved in Chile and Brazil's struggle for independence and wanted to rescue Napoleon and help him set-up a new empire in South America, a scheme frustrated by Napoleon's death in 1821.[121] There were other plots to rescue Napoleon from captivity including one from Texas, where exiled soldiers from the Grande Armée wanted a resurrection of the Napoleonic Empire in America. There was even a plan to rescue him with a primitive submarine.[122] For Lord Byron, Napoleon was the epitome of the Romantic hero, the persecuted, lonely and flawed genius. The news that Napoleon had taken up gardening at Longwood also appealed to more domestic British sensibilities.[123]

Death
Further information: Napoleon's Death Mask and Retour des cendres




Frigate Belle-Poule returns Napoleon's remains to France


In February 1821, his health began to fail rapidly and on 3 May, two British physicians who had recently arrived, attended him and could only recommend palliatives.[124] He died two days later, after confession, Extreme Unction and Viaticum at the hands of Father Ange Vignali.[124] His last words were, "France, armée, tête d'armée, Joséphine."("France, army, head of the army, Joséphine.")[124] Napoleon's original death mask was created around 6 May, though it is not clear which doctor created it.[125][note 10] In his will, he had asked to be buried on the banks of the Seine, but the British governor said he should be buried on St. Helena, in the Valley of the Willows. Hudson Lowe insisted the inscription should read 'Napoleon Bonaparte', Montholon and Bertrand wanted the Imperial title 'Napoleon' as royalty were signed by their first names only. As a result the tomb was left nameless.[127]




Napoleon's tomb at Les Invalides


In 1840, Louis-Philippe, King of the French obtained permission from the British to return Napoleon's remains to France. The remains were transported aboard the frigate Belle-Poule, which had been painted black for the occasion and on 29 November she arrived in Cherbourg. The remains were transferred to the steamship Normandie, which transported them to Le Havre, up the Seine to Rouen and on to Paris. On 15 December, a state funeral was held. The hearse proceeded from the Arc de Triomphe down the Champs-Élysées, across the Place de la Concorde to the Esplanade des Invalides and then to the cupola in St Jérôme's Chapel, where it stayed until the tomb designed by Louis Visconti was completed. In 1861, Napoleon's remains were entombed in a porphyry sarcophagus in the crypt under the dome at Les Invalides.[128]

Cause of death
Napoleon's physician, Francesco Antommarchi, led the autopsy which found the cause of death to be stomach cancer, though he did not sign the official report, stating, "What had I to do with...English reports?"[129] Napoleon's father had died of stomach cancer though this was seemingly unknown at the time of the autopsy.[130] Antommarchi found evidence of a stomach ulcer and it was the most convenient explanation for the British who wanted to avoid criticism over their care of the Emperor.[124]




Death of Napoleon, by Charles de Steuben, 1828


In 1955, the diaries of Napoleon's valet, Louis Marchand, appeared in print. His description of Napoleon in the months before his death led Sten Forshufvud to put forward other causes for his death, including deliberate arsenic poisoning, in a 1961 paper in Nature.[131] Arsenic was used as a poison during the era because it was undetectable when administered over a long period. Forshufvud, in a 1978 book with Ben Weider, noted the emperor's body was found to be remarkably well-preserved when moved in 1840. Arsenic is a strong preservative and therefore this supported the poisoning hypothesis. Forshufvud and Weider observed that Napoleon had attempted to quench abnormal thirst by drinking high levels of orgeat syrup that contained cyanide compounds in the almonds used for flavouring. They maintained that the potassium tartrate used in his treatment prevented his stomach from expellation of these compounds and that the thirst was a symptom of poisoning. Their hypothesis was that the calomel given to Napoleon became an overdose, which killed him and left behind extensive tissue damage.[131] A 2007 article stated that the type of arsenic found in Napoleon's hair shafts was mineral type, the most toxic, and according to toxicologist Dr Patrick Kintz, this supported the conclusion that his death was murder.[132]
The wallpaper used in Longwood contained a high level of arsenic compound used for colouring by British manufacturers. The adhesive, which in the cooler British environment was innocuous, may have grown mold in the more humid climate and emitted the poisonous gas arsine. This theory has been ruled out as it does not explain the arsenic absorption patterns found in other analyses.[131] A 2004 group of researchers claimed treatments imposed on the emperor accidentally caused death by Torsades de pointes—a condition where the heart ceases to function properly.[133]
There have been modern studies which have supported the original autopsy finding.[132] Researchers, in a 2008 study, analysed samples of Napoleon's hair from throughout his life, and from his family and other contemporaries. All samples had high levels of arsenic, approximately 100 times higher than the current average. According to these researchers, Napoleon's body was already heavily contaminated with arsenic as a boy, and the high arsenic concentration in his hair was not due to intentional poisoning; people were constantly exposed to arsenic from glues and dyes, throughout their lives.[note 11] A 2007 study found no evidence of arsenic poisoning in the relevant organs and stated that stomach cancer was the cause of death.[135]

Marriages and children




Napoleon's first wife, Joséphine, Empress of the French, painted by François Gerard, 1801.


Napoleon married Joséphine de Beauharnais in 1796, when he was twenty-six; she was a thirty-two-year old widow whose first husband had been executed during the Revolution. Until she met Bonaparte, she had been known as 'Rose', a name which he disliked. He called her 'Joséphine' instead, and she went by this name henceforth. Bonaparte often sent her love letters while on his campaigns.[136] He formally adopted her son Eugène and cousin Stéphanie, and arranged dynastic marriages for them. Joséphine had her daughter Hortense marry Napoleon's brother, Louis.[137]
Joséphine had lovers, including a Hussar lieutenant, Hippolyte Charles, during Napoleon's Italian campaign.[138] Napoleon learnt the full extent of her affair with Charles while in Egypt, and a letter he wrote to his brother Joseph regarding the subject was intercepted by the British. The letter appeared in the London and Paris presses, much to Napoleon's embarrassment. Napoleon had his own affairs too: during the Egyptian campaign he took Pauline Bellisle Foures, the wife of a junior officer, as his mistress. She became known as Cleopatra after the Egyptian ruler.[139][note 12]
While Napoleon's mistresses had children by him, Joséphine did not produce an heir, possibly due either to the stresses of her imprisonment during the Terror or to an abortion she may have had in her twenties.[141] Napoleon ultimately chose divorce so he could remarry in search of an heir. In March 1810, he married by proxy Marie Louise, Archduchess of Austria, and a great niece of Marie Antoinette; thus he had married into the German royal family. They remained married until his death, though she did not join him in exile on Elba and thereafter never saw her husband again. The couple had one child, Napoleon Francis Joseph Charles (1811–1832), known from birth as the King of Rome. He became Napoleon II in 1814 and reigned for only two weeks. He was awarded the title of the Duke of Reichstadt in 1818 and died of tuberculosis aged 21, with no children.[142]




Empress Marie-Louise and the King of Rome, by Joseph Franque, 1812. Marie Louise, Duchess of Parma with Napoleon II


Napoleon acknowledged two illegitimate children:

Charles Léon, (1806–81) by Louise Catherine Eléonore Denuelle de la Plaigne[143]
Count Alexandre Joseph Colonna-Walewski, (1810–68) by Countess Marie Walewska[143]

He may have had further unacknowledged illegitimate offspring as well:

Karl Eugin von Mühlfeld, by Victoria Kraus[144]
Hélène Napoleone Bonaparte (1816–1910) by Albine de Montholon
Jules Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire, whose mother also remains unknown.[145]



Image
Further information: Napoleon in popular culture and Napoleon complex




In The Plumb-pudding in danger (1805), James Gillray caricatured a tall Pitt and a diminutive Napoleon


Napoleon has become a worldwide cultural icon who symbolises military genius and political power. Since his death, many towns, streets, ships, and even cartoon characters have been named after him. He has been portrayed in hundreds of films and discussed in hundreds of thousands of books and articles.[146]
During the Napoleonic Wars he was taken seriously by the British as a dangerous tyrant, poised to invade. A nursery rhyme warned children that Bonaparte ravenously ate naughty people; the 'bogeyman'.[147] British propaganda depicted Napoleon as much smaller than average height and this image persists. Confusion about his height also results from the difference between the French pouce and British inch—2.71 and 2.54 cm respectively; he was 1.7 metres (5 ft 7 in) tall, average height for the period.[note 13]
In 1908 psychologist Alfred Adler cited Napoleon to describe an inferiority complex where short people adopt an overaggressive behavior to compensate for lack of height; this inspired the term Napoleon complex.[149] The stock character of Napoleon is a comically short "petty tyrant" and this has become a cliché in popular culture. He is often portrayed wearing a comically large bicorne and a hand-in-waistcoat gesture—a reference to the 1812 painting by Jacques-Louis David.[150]

Legacy

Warfare
Further information: Napoleonic weaponry and warfare




Statue in Cherbourg-Octeville unveiled by Napoleon III in 1858. Napoleon I strengthened the town's defences to prevent British naval incursions.


In the field of military organisation, Napoleon borrowed from previous theorists such as Jacques Antoine Hippolyte, Comte de Guibert, the reforms of preceding French governments and developed much of what was already in place. He continued the policy, which emerged from the Revolution, of promotion based primarily on merit.[151] Corps replaced divisions as the largest army units, mobile artillery was integrated into reserve batteries, the staff system became more fluid and cavalry returned as an important formation in French military doctrine—these methods are now referred to as essential features of Napoleonic warfare.[151] Though he consolidated the practice of modern conscription introduced by the Directory, one of the restored monarchy's first acts was to end it.[152]
Weapons and other kinds of military technology remained largely static through the Revolutionary and Napoleonic eras, but 18th century operational mobility underwent significant change.[153] Napoleon's biggest influence was in the conduct of warfare. Napoelon was regarded by the influential military theorist Carl von Clausewitz as a genius in the operational art of war and historians rank him as a great military commander.[154] Wellington, when asked who was the greatest general of the day, answered: "In this age, in past ages, in any age, Napoleon."[155]
A new emphasis towards the destruction, not just outmanoeuvring, of enemy armies emerged. Invasions of enemy territory occurred over broader fronts which made wars costlier and more decisive. The political impact of war increased significantly; defeat for a European power now meant more than the loss of isolated enclaves. Near-Carthaginian peaces intertwined whole national efforts, intensifying the Revolutionary phenomenon of total war.[156]

Metric system
Main article: Metric system
The official introduction of the metric system in September 1799 was unpopular in large sections of French society, and Napoleon's rule greatly aided adoption of the new standard across not only France but the French sphere of influence. Napoleon ultimately took a retrograde step in 1812, as he passed legislation to return France to its traditional units of measurement, but these were decimalised and the foundations were laid for the definitive introduction of the metric system across Europe in the middle of the 19th century.[157]

Jewish emancipation
Further information: Napoleon and the Jews
Napoleon emancipated Jews from laws which restricted them to ghettos, and expanded their rights to property, worship, and careers. Despite the anti-semitic reaction to Napoleon's policies from foreign governments and within France, he believed emancipation would benefit France by attracting Jews to the country given the restrictions they faced elsewhere.[158] He stated that, "I will never accept any proposals that will obligate the Jewish people to leave France, because to me the Jews are the same as any other citizen in our country. It takes weakness to chase them out of the country, but it takes strength to assimilate them."[159] He was seen as so favourable to the Jews that the Russian Orthodox Church formally condemned him as "a false messiah who had conspired with Jews against the Christian faith".[160]

Bonapartism
Main article: Bonapartism
In French political history, Bonapartism has two meanings. The term can refer to people who restored the French Empire under the House of Bonaparte including Napoleon's Corsican family and his nephew Louis. Napoleon left a Bonapartist dynasty which ruled France again; Louis became Napoleon III of France, Emperor of the Second French Empire and was the first President of France. In a wider sense, Bonapartism refers to a broad centrist political movement that advocates the idea of a strong and centralized state, based on popular support.[161]

Admirers and critics
Napoleon ended lawlessness and disorder in post-Revolutionary France.[162] He was however considered a tyrant and usurper by his opponents.[163] His critics charge that he was not significantly troubled when faced with the prospect of war and death for thousands, turned his search for undisputed rule into a series of conflicts throughout Europe and ignored treaties and conventions alike. Napoleon institutionalised plunder of conquered territories: French museums contain art stolen by Napoleon's forces from across Europe. Artefacts were brought to the Louvre for a grand central Museum; his example would later serve as inspiration for more notorious imitators.[164] He was compared to Hitler most famously by the historian Pieter Geyl in 1947.[165] David G. Chandler, historian of Napoleonic warfare, replied that "nothing could be more degrading to the former and more flattering to the latter."[166]




Goya's The Third of May 1808, painted in 1814, depicts the civilian executions that occurred following the Dos de Mayo Uprising. Five thousand defenders of Madrid were executed in two days.[167]


When other countries offered terms to Napoleon which would have restored France's borders to positions that would have delighted his predecessors, Napoleon refused compromise and only accepted his enemies' surrender. Drawing on research by Jacques Bainville, however, several scholars have cast doubt on the sincerity of these offers, as the aim of the powers concerned was Napoleon's destruction, and historians have concluded he shrewdly avoided his enemies' traps.[citation needed]
Critics argue that Napoleon's true legacy must reflect the loss of status for France and needless deaths brought by his rule: historian Victor Davis Hanson writes, "After all, the military record is unquestioned—17 years of wars, perhaps six million Europeans dead, France bankrupt, her overseas colonies lost."[168] McLynn notes that, "He can be viewed as the man who set back European economic life for a generation by the dislocating impact of his wars.[163] Vincent Cronin replies that such criticism relies on the flawed premise that Napoleon was responsible for the wars which bear his name, when in fact France was the victim of a series of coalitions which aimed to destroy the ideals of the Revolution.[169]
International Napoleonic Congresses are held regularly and include participation by members of the French and American military, French politicians and scholars from different countries.[170]

Napoleonic Code




First page of the 1804 original edition of the Code Civil


Main article: Napoleonic code
The Napoleonic code was adopted throughout much of Europe and remained in force after Napoleon's defeat. Napoleon said: "My true glory is not to have won 40 battles...Waterloo will erase the memory of so many victories. ... But...what will live forever, is my Civil Code."[171] The Code still has importance today in a quarter of the world's jurisdictions including in Europe, the Americas and Africa.[172] Dieter Langewiesche described the code as a "revolutionary project" which spurred the development of bourgeoisie society in Germany by the extension of the right to own property and an acceleration towards the end of feudalism. Napoleon reorganised what had been the Holy Roman Empire, made-up of more than a thousand entities, into a more streamlined forty-state Confederation of the Rhine; this provided the basis for the German Confederation and the unification of Germany in 1871.[173] The movement toward national unification in Italy was similarly precipitated by Napoleonic rule.[174] These changes contributed to the development of nationalism and the Nation state.[175]

Titles



Emperor Napoleon I of France
House of Bonaparte



Political offices


Preceded by
French Directory
Provisional Consul of France
11 November – 12 December 1799
Served alongside: 
Roger Ducos and Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès
became Consul


New title
Consulate created

First Consul of France
12 December 1799 – 18 May 1804
Served alongside: 
Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès (Second Consul)
Charles-François Lebrun, duc de Plaisance(Third Consul)
became Emperor


Regnal titles


Vacant
French Revolution
Title last held by
Louis XVI of France
as King of the French
Emperor of the French
18 May 1804 – 6 April 1814
Succeeded by
Louis XVIII of France
as King of France and Navarre


Preceded by
Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor
King of Italy
26 May 1805 – 1814
Vacant
Title next held by
Victor Emmanuel II of Italy


Preceded by
Louis XVIII of France
as King of France and Navarre
Emperor of the French
1 March – 22 June 1815
Succeeded by
Napoleon II of France


New title
State created

Protector of the Confederation of the Rhine
12 July 1806 – 19 October 1813
Rhine Confederation dissolved
successive ruler:
Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor
as President of the German Confederation



Titles in pretence


New title
— TITULAR —
Emperor of the French
6 April 1814 – 1 March 1815
Vacant
Title next held by
Napoleon II of France



Notes


^ He was called Nabolione in Corsican.[2]
^ At Brienne, Napoleon first met the Champagne maker Jean-Rémy Moët. They became friends, and Napoleon would later frequently stay at Moët's estate. Victorious French armies were known for their indulgence in sabrage.[10]
^ Aside from his name, there does not appear to a connection between him and Napoleon's theorem.[12]
^ He was mainly referred to as Bonaparte until he became First Consul for life.[15]
^ "Bonaparte's principle was...to look upon religions as the work of men, but to respect them everywhere as a powerful engine of government...If Bonaparte spoke as a Mussulman (Muslim), it was merely in his character of a military and political chief in a Mussulman country. To do so was essential to his success, to the safety of his army, and...to his glory... In India he would have been for Ali, at Thibet for the Dalai-lama, and in China for Confucius."[44]
^ This is depicted in Bonaparte Crossing the Alps by Hippolyte Delaroche and in Jacques-Louis David's imperial Napoleon Crossing the Alps, he is less realistically portrayed on a charger in the latter work.[57]
^ Claude Ribbe advances the thesis that the French used gas chambers.[63]
^ Napoleon gave the pope a tiara following the ceremony, now referred to as the Napoleon Tiara.
^ A custom in which householders place candles in street-facing windows to herald good news.[119]
^ It was customary to cast a death mask or mold of a leader. Four genuine death masks of Napoleon are known to exist: one in The Cabildo, a state museum located in New Orleans, one in a Liverpool museum, another in Havana and one in the library of the University of North Carolina.[126]
^ The body can tolerate large doses of arsenic if ingested regularly, and arsenic was a fashionable cure-all.[134]
^ One night, during an illicit liaison with the actress Marguerite George, Napoleon had a major fit. This and other more minor attacks have led historians to debate whether he had epilepsy and, if so, to what extent.[140]
^ Napoleon's height was 5 ft 2 French inches according to Antommarchi at Napoleon's autopsy and British sources put his height at 5 ft 7 British inches: both equivalent to 1.7 m.[148] Napoleon surrounded himself with tall bodyguards and had a nickname of le petit caporal which was an affectionate term that reflected his reported camaraderie with his soldiers rather than his height.



Citations


^ McLynn 1998, p.6
^ Asprey 2000, p.4
^ McLynn 1998, p.2
^ Cronin 1994, p.20–21
^ "Cathedral—Ajaccio". La Fondation Napoléon. http://www.napoleon.org/en/magazine/museums/files/Cathedral-Ajaccio.asp. Retrieved on 2008-05-31. 
^ Cronin 1994, p.27
^ a b c Roberts 2001, p.xvi
^ McLynn 1998, p.18
^ a b Hibbert 1998, p.21–2
^ Kladstrup 2005, p.61–8
^ Asprey 2000, p.13
^ Wells 1992, p.74
^ McLynn 1998, p.23
^ McLynn 1998, p.26
^ a b McLynn 1998, p.290
^ McLynn 1998, p.37
^ McLynn 1998, p.55
^ McLynn 1998, p.61
^ a b c d e f Roberts 2001, p.xviii
^ Schom 1998, p.16
^ Schama 1989, p.688
^ McLynn 1998, p.103
^ Schom 1998, p.25
^ McLynn 1998, p.92
^ Schom 1998, p.26
^ McLynn 1998, p.93
^ a b McLynn 1998, p.96
^ Johnson 2002, p.27
^ McLynn 1998, p.102
^ McLynn 1998, p.129
^ Schama 1989, p.738
^ McLynn 1998, p.132
^ McLynn 1998, p.145
^ McLynn 1998, p.142
^ Harvey 2006, p.179
^ McLynn 1998, p.135
^ Hanley 2005, Chapter 3
^ Schom 1998, pp.69–70
^ Schom 1998, p.87
^ Schom 1998, pp.72–73
^ a b Alder 2002
^ McLynn 1998, p.175
^ Cherfils 1914, pp.105 and 125
^ "Bonaparte and Islam.". George Mason University Center for History and New Media. http://chnm.gmu.edu/revolution/d/612/. Retrieved on 2008-10-11. 
^ Smith 1998, p.140
^ a b c d e f g Roberts 2001, p.xx
^ Schom 1998, pp.139–144
^ Roberts 1995, p.147–160
^ McLynn 1998, p.189
^ McLynn 1998, p.193
^ Schom 1998, pp.176–179
^ a b c Connelly 2006, p.57
^ Schom 1998, pp.186–188
^ Schom 1998, p.194
^ McLynn 1998, p.215
^ McLynn 1998, p.224
^ Chandler 2002, p.51
^ McLynn 1998, p.235
^ Schom 1997, p.302
^ McLynn 1998, p.235
^ McLynn 1998, p.265
^ Jackson 2004, p.33
^ Ribbe 2007
^ Connelly 2006, p.70
^ Blaufarb 2007, p.101–2
^ Edwards 1999, p.55
^ McLynn 1998, 255
^ Bruce 1995, p.321–3
^ McLynn 1998, p.296
^ a b McLynn 1998, p.297
^ McLynn 1998, p.321
^ McLynn 1998, p.332
^ Goetz 2005, p.301
^ Schom 1997, p.414
^ McLynn 1998, p.350
^ Cronin 1994, p.344
^ McLynn 1998, p.356
^ McLynn 1998, p.370
^ McLynn 1998, p.426
^ McLynn 1998, p.497
^ Gates 2001, p.20
^ Chandler 1995, p.631
^ McLynn 1998, p.408
^ Harvey 2006, p.631
^ Gates 2001, p.177
^ Gates 2001, p.467
^ Castle 1994, p.90
^ McLynn 1998, p.422
^ McLynn 1998, p.470
^ McLynn 1998, p.433–5
^ McLynn 1998, p.472
^ McLynn 1998, p.378
^ Riehn 1991, p.24
^ Riehn 1991, p.81
^ McLynn 1998, p.545
^ Harvey 2006, p.773
^ McLynn 1998, p.518
^ Markham 1988, p.194
^ McLynn 1998, p.522
^ Markham 1988, p.190 and 199
^ McLynn 1998, p.541
^ McLynn 1998, p.549
^ McLynn 1998, p.565
^ Chandler 1995, p.1020
^ Fremont-Barnes 2004, p.14
^ McLynn 1998, p.585
^ Gates 2003, p.259
^ Schom 1998, p.702
^ McLynn 1998, p.597
^ McLynn 1998, p.604
^ McLynn 1998, p.605
^ Hibbert 1998, p.403
^ Chesney 2006, p.35
^ Cordingly 2004, p.254
^ Balcombe 1845
^ Thomson 1969, p.77–9
^ Schom 1997, p.769–770
^ a b McLynn 1998, p.642
^ Woodward 2005, p.51–9
^ McLynn 1998, p.644
^ Macaulay 1986, p.141
^ Wilkins 1972
^ McLynn 1998, p.651
^ a b c d McLynn 1998, p.655
^ Wilson 1975, p.293–5
^ Fulghum 2007
^ McLynn 1998, p.655
^ Driskel 1993, p.168
^ McLynn 1998, p.656
^ Johnson 2002, p.180–1
^ a b c Cullen 2008, p.146–48
^ a b Cullen 2008, p.156
^ Mari 2004
^ Cullen 2008, p.50
^ Cullen 2008, p.161
^ McLynn 1998, p.117
^ McLynn 1998, p.271
^ McLynn 1998, p.118
^ McLynn 1998, p.188
^ McLynn 1998, p.284
^ McLynn 1998, p.100
^ McLynn 1998, p.663
^ a b McLynn 1998, p.630
^ McLynn 1998, p.423
^ Lowndes 1943
^ "Napoleon Bonaparte (Character)". IMDB. http://www.imdb.com/character/ch0027456/. Retrieved on 2008-10-12.  and Bell 2007, p.13
^ Roberts 2004, p.93
^ Dunan 1963
^ Hall 2006, p.181
^ Bordes 2007, p.118
^ a b Archer 2002, p.397
^ Flynn 2001, p.16
^ Archer 2002, p.383
^ Archer 2002, p.380
^ Roberts 2001, p.272
^ Archer 2002, p.404
^ O'Connor 2003
^ McLynn 1998, p.436
^ Schwarzfuchs 1979, p.50
^ Cronin 1994, p.315
^ Outhwaite 2003 p.50
^ Abbott 2005,p.3
^ a b McLynn 1998, p.666
^ Poulos 2000
^ Geyl 1947
^ Chandler, p. xliii
^ Bertman 2002
^ Hanson 2003
^ Cronin 1994, pp.342–3
^ "Call for Papers: International Napoleonic Society, Fourth International Napoleonic Congress". La Fondation Napoléon. http://www.napoleon.org/en/magazine/presse_review/files/dinard_callforpapers.asp. Retrieved on 2008-06-27. 
^ Wanniski 1998, p.184
^ Wood 2007, p.55
^ Scheck 2008, Chapter: The Road to National Unification
^ Astarita 2005, p.264
^ Alter 2006, p.61–76



References


Abbott, John (2005). Life of Napoleon Bonaparte. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 1417970634. 
Alder, Ken (2002). The Measure of All Things—The Seven-Year Odyssey and Hidden Error That Transformed the World. Free Press. ISBN 074321675X. 
Alter, Peter (2006). Tim Blanning and Hagen Schulze. ed. Unity and Diversity in European Culture c. 1800. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0197263828. 
Archer, Christon I.; John R. Ferris, Holger H. Herwig (2002). World History of Warfare. University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 0803244231. 
Asprey, Robert (2000). The Rise of Napoleon Bonaparte. Basic Books. ISBN 0465048811. 
Astarita, Tommaso (2005). Between Salt Water And Holy Water: A History Of Southern Italy. W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 0393058646. 
Balcombe Abell, Lucia Elizabeth (1845). Recollections of the Emperor Napoleon. J. Murray. OCLC 9123757. 
Bell, David (2007). The First Total War. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 0618349650. http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=Pw5jup_LyHAC&pg=PA212&dq=%22total+war%22+napoleon&lr=&as_brr=3&client=firefox-a#PPA13,M1. 
Bertman, Sandra (2002). "Execution of the Defenders of Madrid, 3rd May 1808". New York University. http://litmed.med.nyu.edu/Annotation?action=view&annid=10375. Retrieved on 2008-11-18. 
Blaufarb, Rafe (2007). Napoleon: Symbol for an Age, A Brief History with Documents. Bedford. ISBN 0312431104. 
Bordes, Philippe (2007). Jacques-Louis David. Yale University Press. ISBN 0300123469. 
Bruce, Evangeline (1995). Napoleon & Josephine, An Improbable Marriage. Scribners. ISBN 0806522615. 
Castle, Ian (1994). Aspern & Wagram 1809: Mighty Clash Of Empires. Osprey. ISBN 1855323664. 
Chandler, David (1995). The Campaigns of Napoleon. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0025236601. 
Chandler, David (2002). Napoleon. Leo Cooper. ISBN 0850527503. 
Cherfils, Christian (1914). Bonaparte et l'Islam d'après les documents français & arabes. Pedone. OCLC 253080866. 
Chesney, Charles (2006). Waterloo Lectures:A Study Of The Campaign Of 1815. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 1428649883. 
Cole, Juan (2007). Napoleon's Egypt: Invading the Middle East. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 1403964319. 
Connelly, Owen (2006). Blundering to Glory: Napoleon's Military Campaigns. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 0742553183. 
Cordingly, David (2004). The Billy Ruffian: The Bellerophon and the Downfall of Napoleon. Bloomsbury. ISBN 158234468X. 
Cronin, Vincent (1994). Napoleon. HarperCollins. ISBN 0006375219. 
Cullen, William (2008). Is Arsenic an Aphrodisiac?. Royal Society of Chemistry. ISBN 0854043632. 
Driskel, Paul (1993). As Befits a Legend. Kent State University Press. ISBN 0873384849. 
Dunan, Marcel (1963). "Napoleon's height" (in French). La Fondation Napoléon. http://www.napoleon.org/fr/salle_lecture/articles/files/Taillenapo_RIN_89_oct1963_2006.asp. Retrieved on 2009-01-11. 
Edwards, Catharine (1999). Roman Presences. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 052159197X. 
Flynn, George Q. (2001). Conscription and democracy: The Draft in France, Great Britain, and the United States. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 031331912X. 
Fremont-Barnes, Gregory; Todd Fisher (2004). The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. Osprey. ISBN 1841768316. 
Fulghum, Neil (2007). "Death Mask of Napoleon". University of North Carolina. http://www.lib.unc.edu/ncc/gallery/napo.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-04. 
Gates, David (2001). The Spanish Ulcer: A History of the Peninsular War. Da Capo Press. ISBN 0306810832. 
Gates, David (2003). The Napoleonic Wars, 1803–1815. Pimlico. ISBN 0712607196. 
Goetz, Robert (2005). 1805: Austerlitz: Napoleon and the Destruction of the Third Coalition. Greenhill Books. ISBN 1853676446. 
Geyl, Pieter (1982) [1947]. Napoleon For and Against. Penguin Books. ISBN 0452000572. 
Hall, Stephen (2006). Size Matters. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 0618470409. http://books.google.com/books?id=FUaIGHxCIEwC&pg=PA181&dq=napoleon+height#PPA181,M1. 
Hanley, Wayne (2005). The Genesis of Napoleonic Propaganda, 1796–1799. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0231124562. 
Hanson, Victor Davis (2003). "The Claremont Institute: The Little Tyrant, A review of Napoleon: A Penguin Life". The Claremont Institute. http://www.claremont.org/publications/crb/id.1038/article_detail.asp. Retrieved on 2008-05-30. 
Harvey, Robert (2006). The War of Wars. Robinson. ISBN 9781845296353. 
Hibbert, Christopher (1998). Waterloo: Napoleon's last campaign. Wordsworth Editions. ISBN 1853266876. 
Jackson, John (2004). Race, Racism, and Science. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 1851094482. 
Johnson, P. (2002). Napoleon: A life. Penguin Books. ISBN 0670030783. 
Kladstrup, Don; Petie Kladstrup (2005). Champagne:How the World's Most Glamorous Wine Triumphed Over War and Hard Times. William Morrow. ISBN 0060737921. 
Lowndes, Marie Adelaide Belloc (1943). Where Love And Friendship Dwelt. Macmillan. OCLC 67554055. 
Macaulay, Neill (1986). Dom Pedro: The Struggle for Liberty in Brazil and Portugal, 1798–1834. Duke University Press. ISBN 0822306816. 
Mari, Francesco; Elisabetta Bertol, Vittorio Fineschi and Steven B Karch (2004-08-01). "Channelling the Emperor: what really killed Napoleon?". Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine (The Royal Society of Medicine Press). http://jrsm.rsmjournals.com/cgi/reprint/97/8/397.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-02-15. 
Markham, Felix (1988). Napoleon. Mass Market Paperback. ISBN 0451627989. 
McLynn, Frank (1998). Napoleon. Pimlico. ISBN 0712662472. 
O'Connor, J; E F Robertson (2003). "The history of measurement". St Andrew's University. http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/HistTopics/Measurement.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-18. 
Outhwaite, William (2003). The Blackwell Dictionary of Modern Social Thought. Blackwell. ISBN 0631221646. 
Peterson, Robert (1995). "Insects, Disease, and Military History: The Napoleonic Campaigns and Historical Perception". American Entomologist (Entomological Society of America) (vol.41). http://entomology.montana.edu/historybug/napoleon/plague_syria.htm. 
Poulos, Anthi (2000). "1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict". International Journal of Legal Information (HeinOnline). 
Ribbe, Claude (2007). Napoleon's Crimes: A Blueprint for Hitler. Oneworld Publications. ISBN 1851685332. 
Riehn, Richard (1991). 1812 Napoleon's Russian Campaign. Wiley. ISBN 0471543020. 
Roberts, Andrew (2001). Napoleon and Wellington. Weidenfeld and Nicholson. ISBN 0297646079. 
Roberts, Chris (2004). Heavy Words Lightly Thrown. Granta. ISBN 1862077657. http://books.google.co.uk/books?hl=en&lr=&id=MdMZqhMzfpYC&oi=fnd&pg=PR9&dq=bogeyman+napoleon+nursery+%22bonaparte+will+pass%22&ots=5OUuZqIWvn&sig=jGSTwn18a56GlBJfTDElVyIMRJo#PPA93,M1. 
Schama, Simon (2004). Citizens. Penguin. ISBN 0141017279. 
Scheck, Raffael (2008). Germany, 1871–1945: A Concise History. Berg. ISBN 184520817X. 
Schom, Alan (1998). Napoleon Bonaparte: A Life. Harper Perennial. ISBN 0060929588. 
Schwarzfuchs, Simon (1979). Napoleon, the Jews and the Sanhedrin. Routledge. ISBN 0197100236. 
Smith, Digby (1998). The Greenhill Napoleonic Wars Data Book. Greenhill Books. ISBN 1853672769. 
Thomson, Kathleen (1969). "Balcombe, Alexander Beatson (1811–77)". Australian Dictionary of Biography Online. http://www.adb.online.anu.edu.au/biogs/A030078b.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-27. 
Wanniski, Jude (1998). The Way the World Works. Regnery Gateway. ISBN 0895263440. 
Wells, David (1992). The Penguin Dictionary of Curious and Interesting Geometry. Penguin Books. ISBN 0140118136. 
Wilkins, William (1972) [1944]. Napoleon's Submarine. New English Library. ISBN 0450010287. 
Wilson, J (8 August 1975). Dr. Archibald Arnott: Surgeon to the 20th Foot and Physician to Napoleon. British Medical Journal. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/picrender.fcgi?artid=1674241&blobtype=pdf. Retrieved on 2008-06-07. 
Wood, Philip (2007). The Law and Practice of International Finance Series. Sweet & Maxwell. ISBN 1847032109. 
Woodward, Chris (July 2005). "Napoleon's Last Journey". History Today. http://www.historytoday.com/MainArticle.aspx?m=31103&amid=30222626. Retrieved on 2008-07-12. 
Youssef, Ahmed (1998) (in French). The Fascination of Egypt: From the Dream to the Project. Harmattan. ISBN 2738466745. 


Further reading

Napoleon I of France bibliography


External links

Find more about Napoleon Bonaparte on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Napoleon Series
International Napoleonic Society
Napoleon I of France at Find A Grave
Napoleon 101, podcast by J. David Markham
Napoleon Bonaparte and Chess Edward Winter
Biography by the US Public Broadcasting Service
 The Constitution of the Consulate (in French) on Wikisource
 The Imperial Constitution (in French) on Wikisource
Memoirs of Napoleon at Project Gutenberg
John Holland Rose The Life of Napoleon I at Project Gutenberg
J. G. Lockhart The History of Napoleon Buonaparte at Project Gutenberg
William Milligan Sloane The Life of Napoleon I. at Project Gutenberg Vol. 1/4
William Milligan Sloane The Life of Napoleon I. at Project Gutenberg Vol. 3/4








v • d • e

Bonaparte family





1st Generation

Joseph of Spain · Napoléon I of France · Lucien, Prince of Canino and Musignano · Elisa, Grand Duchess of Tuscany · Louis I of Holland · Pauline, Princess of Guastalla · Caroline, Queen of Naples and Sicily · Jérôme of Westfalia






2nd Generation

Zénaïde, Princess of Canino and Musignano · Princess Charlotte · Napoléon II of France · Christine, Princess Mario Gabrielli · Princess Victoire · Lady Charlotte Coutts Stuart · Charles Lucien, Prince of Canino and Musignano · Lady Laetitia Wyse · Prince Joseph · Jeanne, Marchioness Honorato Honrati · Prince Paul · Prince Louis Lucien · Prince Pierre Napoléon · Prince Antoine · Alexandrine, Countess Vincenzo Valentini di Laviano · Princess Constance · Napoléon Charles, Prince Royal of Holland · Louis II of Holland · Napoléon III of France · Prince Jérôme Napoléon · Jérôme Napoléon Charles, Prince of Montfort · Mathilde, Princess of San Donato · Napoléon Jospeh, Prince Napoléon






3rd Generation

Joseph Lucien, Prince of Canino and Musignano · Princess Alexandrine · Cardinal Lucien Louis, Prince of Canino and Musignano · Julie, Marchioness of Roccagiovine · Charlotte, Countess Pietro Primoli di Foglia · Princess Léonie · Marie Desirée, Comtesse Paolo Campello della Spina · Augusta, Princess Placido Gabrielli · Napoléon Charles, Prince of Canino and Musignano · Bathile, Countess of Cambacérès · Princess Albertine · Prince Charles · Roland, Prince of Canino and Musignano · Jeanne, Marchioness of Villeneuve-Escaplon · Napoléon Eugène, Prince Imperial of France · Prince Jérôme Napoléon · Prince Charles Joseph · Victor, Prince Napoléon · Prince Napoléon Louis · Marie Laetitia, Duchess of Aosta






4th Generation

Princess Mary, Mrs. Enrico Gotti · Eugénie, Princess of Moskowa · Marie, Princess George of Greece and Denmark · Louise Eugenie, Countess Adam of Moltke-Huitfeld · Prince Jérôme Napoléon · Marie Coltilde, Countess Serge de Witt · Louis, Prince Napoléon






5th Generation

Charles, Prince Napoléon · Princess Catherine, Mrs. Jean Dualé · Princess Laure, Mrs. Jean-Claude Leconte · Prince Jérôme






6th Generation

Princess Caroline · Jean-Christophe, Prince Napoléon · Princess Sophie













v • d • e

List of French monarchs





Carolingians
(843–888, 898-922, 936-987)

Pepin (751-768) • Carloman I (768-771) • Charlemagne (768-814) • Louis I (814-840) • Charles I (843-877) • Louis II (877-879) • Louis III (879-882) • Carloman II (879-884) • Charles II (885-888) • Charles III (898-922) • Louis IV (936-954) • Lothair (954-986) • Louis V (986-987)






Robertians
(888-898, 922-936)

Odo of Paris (888-898) • Robert I (922-923) • Rudolph (923-936)






House of Capet
(987–1328)

Hugh (987–996) • Robert II (996–1031) • Henry I (1031–1060) • Philip I (1060–1108) • Louis VI (1108–1137) • Louis VII (1137–1180) • Philip II (1180–1223) • Louis VIII (1223–1226) • Louis IX (1226–1270) • Philip III (1270–1285) • Philip IV (1285–1314) • Louis X (1314–1316) • John I (1316) • Philip V (1316–1322) • Charles IV (1322–1328)






House of Valois
(1328–1498)

Philip VI (1328–1350) • John II (1350–1364) • Charles V (1364–1380) • Charles VI (1380–1422) • Charles VII (1422–1461) • Louis XI (1461–1483) • Charles VIII (1483–1498)






House of Lancaster
(1422-1453)

Henry VI of England (1422-1453)(disputed)






House of Valois-Orléans
(1498–1515)

Louis XII (1498–1515)






House of Valois-Angoulême
(1515–1589)

Francis I (1515–1547) • Henry II (1547–1559) • Francis II (1559–1560) • Charles IX (1560–1574) • Henry III (1574–1589)






House of Bourbon
(1589–1792)

Henry IV (1589–1610) • Louis XIII (1610–1643) • Louis XIV (1643–1715) • Louis XV (1715–1774) • Louis XVI (1774–1792) • Louis XVII (claimant, 1792–1795)






House of Bonaparte
First Empire (1804–1814, 1815)

Napoleon I (1804–1814, 1815) • Napoleon II (1815)






House of Bourbon
Bourbon Restoration (1814, 1815–1830)

Louis XVIII (1814–1815, 1815–1824) • Charles X (1824–1830) • Louis XIX (1830)(disputed) • Henry V (1830)(disputed)






House of Orléans
July Monarchy (1830–1848)

Louis-Philippe I (1830–1848)






House of Bonaparte
Second Empire (1852–1870)

Napoleon III (1852–1870)













v • d • e

German Confederations 1806–1871





Confederation of the Rhine
 1806–1813



Protector: Napoleon I of France (1806–1813)
Prince primate: Karl Theodor von Dalberg (1806–1813) • Eugene de Beauharnais (1813)







German Confederation
 1815–1866



Presidents: Francis I of Austria (1815–1835) • Ferdinand I of Austria (1835–1848) • Francis Joseph I of Austria (1849–1866)
Imperial regent: Archduke Johann of Austria (1848–1849)







North German Confederation
 1867–1871



President: Wilhelm I of Prussia (1867–1871)








List of German monarchs – History of Germany – House of Habsburg-Lorraine – House of Hohenzollern












v • d • e

Pretenders to the French Throne since 1792





Monarchy in Exile (1792-1815)

1792 Louis XVI 1793 Louis XVII 1795 Louis XVIII 1814 1815













Legitimist Pretenders (1830-present)

1830 Charles X 1836 Louis XIX 1844 Henri V 1883 Jean III 1887 Charles XI 1909 Jacques I 1931 Alphonse I 1936 Alphonse II 1941 Jacques II 1975 Alphonse III 1989 Louis XX present






Orléanist Pretenders (1848-present)

1848 Louis-Philippe I 1850 Philippe VII 1894 Philippe VIII 1926 Jean III 1940 Henri VI 1999 Henri VII present






Bonapartist Prince Imperial (1814-present)

1814 1815 Napoléon I 1821 Napoléon II 1832 Joseph 1844 Louis 1846 Napoléon III (Emperor 1852-1870) 1873 Napoléon IV Eugene 1879 Napoléon V Victor 1926 Napoléon VI Louis 1997 Napoléon VII Charles/Napoléon VIII Jean-Christophe present (disputed)






Bonapartist Prince Canino (1832-1924)

1832 Lucien I 1840 Charles 1857 Joseph 1865 Lucien II 1895 Napoléon III Charles 1899 Roland 1924













v • d • e

 Republican heads of state of France





Styled President of the Republic after 1871, except from 1940-44 (Chief of State) and 1944-47 (Chairman of the Provisional Government)





First Republic
(1792-1804)

National Convention • Directory • Napoléon Bonaparte






Second Republic
(1848-1852)

Jacques-Charles Dupont de l'Eure • Executive Commission • Louis-Eugène Cavaignac • Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte






Government of
National Defense
(1870-1871)

Louis Jules Trochu






Third Republic
(1871-1940)

Adolphe Thiers • Patrice de Mac-Mahon • Jules Armand Dufaure • Jules Grévy • Maurice Rouvier • Sadi Carnot • Charles Dupuy • Jean Casimir-Perier • Charles Dupuy • Félix Faure • Charles Dupuy • Émile Loubet • Armand Fallières • Raymond Poincaré • Paul Deschanel • Alexandre Millerand • Alexandre Millerand • Frédéric François-Marsal • Gaston Doumergue • Paul Doumer • André Tardieu • Albert Lebrun






Vichy France
(1940-1944)

Philippe Pétain






Provisional
Government
(1944-1947)

Charles de Gaulle • Félix Gouin • Georges Bidault • Vincent Auriol • Léon Blum






Fourth Republic
(1947-1959)

Vincent Auriol · René Coty






Fifth Republic
(since 1959)

Charles de Gaulle • Alain Poher • Georges Pompidou • Alain Poher • Valéry Giscard d'Estaing • François Mitterrand • Jacques Chirac • Nicolas Sarkozy






Italics indicate interim officeholder












v • d • e

Napoleonic Marshals of France









Augereau · Bernadotte · Berthier · Bessières · Brune · Davout · Grouchy · Jourdan · Kellermann · Lannes · Lefebvre · MacDonald · Marmont · Masséna · Moncey · Mortier · Murat · Ney · Oudinot · Pérignon · Poniatowski · Saint-Cyr · Sérurier · Soult · Suchet · Victor











Persondata


NAME
Bonaparte, Napoleon


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Napoleon I Bonaparte, Emperor of the French, King of Italy


SHORT DESCRIPTION
French general and ruler


DATE OF BIRTH
15 August 1769


PLACE OF BIRTH
Ajaccio, Corsica


DATE OF DEATH
5 May 1821


PLACE OF DEATH
St. Helena


      



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Napoleon_I_of_France"
Categories: 1769 births | 1821 deaths | Cancer deaths in Saint Helena | Culture heroes | Deaths from stomach cancer | Dictatorship | First French Empire | French commanders of the Napoleonic Wars | French emperors | French exiles | French people of Italian descent | French Roman Catholics | House of Bonaparte | Knights of the Golden Fleece | Leaders who took power by coup | Members of the French Academy of Sciences | Military leaders of the French Revolutionary Wars | Napoleon | People excommunicated by the Roman Catholic Church | People from Ajaccio | Princes of AndorraHidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
مصرى
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Galego
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ქართული
Kiswahili
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Lojban
Luganda
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Malti
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
नेपाली
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Piemontèis
Polski
Português
Ripoarisch
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
संस्कृत
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
Walon
文言
ייִדיש
粵語
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 17:21.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
