











Homosexuality - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Homosexuality";
		var wgTitle = "Homosexuality";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "5488304";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282428606;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Homosexuality

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





Sexual orientation
in human sexuality



Orientations


Asexual · Bisexual · Heterosexual · Homosexual · Pansexual


Gender-based
alternative concepts


Non-westernized concepts
of male sexuality ·
Third sex · Two-spirit


Research


Biology · Demographics · Environment ·
Kinsey scale · Klein Grid · Non-heterosexual ·
Queer studies · Sexology


List


List (category) of
sexual orientations


LGBT Portal · Sexuality Portal



This box: view • talk • edit



Homosexuality refers to attraction or sexual behavior between people of the same sex, or to a sexual orientation. As an orientation, homosexuality refers to "an enduring pattern of or disposition to experience sexual, affectional, or romantic attractions primarily to" people of the same sex; "it also refers to an individual’s sense of personal and social identity based on those attractions, behaviors expressing them, and membership in a community of others who share them."[1][2]
One of the three main categories of sexual orientation, homosexuality, together with bisexuality and heterosexuality, is part of the heterosexual-homosexual continuum. The number of people in the modern West identifying as homosexual — and the proportion having homosexual experiences — are quantities which have been difficult for researchers to estimate reliably.[3] Many recent studies indicate a prevalence of 2% to 13% of the population.[4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14] A 2006 study suggested that 20% of the population anonymously reported some homosexual feelings, few of them identifying as homosexual. [15] The prevalence of male homosexual orientation may vary over time and across societies in part because of variations in fertility rate or family size.[7]
Homosexual relationships and acts have been admired as well as condemned throughout recorded history, depending on the form they took and the culture in which they occurred. Since the end of the 1800s (especially in the West), there has been a movement towards increased visibility, recognition and legal rights for people engaging in certain homosexual activities, including the rights to marriage and civil unions, adoption and parenting, employment, military service, and equal access to health care.




Contents


1 Overview
2 Etymology and usage
3 Sexuality and gender identity

3.1 Sexual orientation, identity, behaviour
3.2 Gender identity
3.3 Forms of relationships

3.3.1 Same-sex relationships
3.3.2 Opposite sex relationships




4 History

4.1 Africa
4.2 Americas
4.3 East Asia
4.4 Europe
4.5 Middle East, South and Central Asia
4.6 South Pacific


5 Demographics
6 Psychology

6.1 History
6.2 Malleability of sexual orientation


7 Etiology
8 Law, politics, society and sociology

8.1 Prejudice and homophobia
8.2 Violence against gay and lesbian people
8.3 Legality

8.3.1 Sexual orientation and the law


8.4 Political activism
8.5 Coming out
8.6 Parenting
8.7 Health

8.7.1 Mental
8.7.2 Physical


8.8 Gay and lesbian youth
8.9 Social construct


9 Military service
10 Religion
11 Homosexual behavior in animals
12 See also
13 References
14 Bibliography

14.1 Books
14.2 Journal articles
14.3 Online articles


15 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Overview
Homosexuality has been a feature of human culture since its earliest history (see history). Certain forms of erotic attraction and sexual pleasure between males were ingrained, an accepted part of the cultural norm. This is most frequently discussed regarding ancient Greece. Particular sexual activities (such as anal sex in some cultures or oral sex in others) however, were disapproved of, despite other aspects being accepted and admired. In cultures influenced by Abrahamic religions, the law and the church established sodomy as a transgression against divine law or a crime against nature. These were subject to severe penalties, including death, often by fire (so as to purify the unholy action).[citation needed] The condemnation of anal sex between males however, predates Christian belief. It was frequent in ancient Greece; "unnatural" can be traced back to Plato.[16]
In the last two decades of the 19th Century, a different view began to predominate in medical and psychiatric circles, judging such behavior as indicative of a type of person with a defined and relatively stable sexual orientation. Karl-Maria Kertbeny coined the term homosexual in 1869 in a pamphlet arguing against a Prussian anti-sodomy law.[17][18] Richard von Krafft-Ebing's 1886 book Psychopathia Sexualis elaborated on the concept.[18]
In the course of the 20th Century, homosexuality became a subject of considerable study and debate in Western societies, especially after the modern gay rights movement began in 1969. Once viewed by authorities as a pathology or mental illness to be cured, homosexuality is now more often investigated as part of a larger impetus to understand the biology, psychology, politics, genetics, history and cultural variations of sexual practice and identity. The legal and social status of people who engage in homosexual acts or identify as gay or lesbian varies enormously across the world, and in some places remains hotly contested in political and religious debate.


Etymology and usage
Main article: Terminology of homosexuality




Zephyrus and Hyacinthus
Attic red-figure cup from Tarquinia, 480 BC (Boston Museum of Fine Arts)


Etymologically, the word homosexual is a Greek and Latin hybrid with homos (sometimes confused with an unrelated Latin word for "man", as in Homo sapiens) deriving from the Greek word for same, thus connoting sexual acts and affections between members of the same sex, including lesbianism.[19] Gay generally refers to male homosexuality, but is sometimes used in a broader sense to refer to all LGBT people. In the context of sexuality, lesbian denotes female homosexuality.
The adjective homosexual describes behavior, relationships, people, orientation etc. The adjectival form literally means "same sex", being a hybrid formed from Greek homo- (a form of homos "same"), and "sexual" from Medieval Latin sexualis (from Classical Latin sexus). Many modern style guides in the U.S. recommend against using homosexual as a noun, instead using gay man or lesbian.[20] Similarly, some recommend completely avoiding usage of homosexual as having a negative and discredited clinical history and because the word only refers to one's sexual behavior, and not to romantic feelings.[20] Gay and lesbian are the most common alternatives. The first letters are frequently combined to create the initialism LGBT (sometimes written as GLBT), in which B and T refer to bisexuals and transgender people. These style guides are not always followed by mainstream media sources.[21]
The first known appearance of homosexual in print is found in an 1869 German pamphlet by the Austrian-born novelist Karl-Maria Kertbeny, published anonymously.[22] The prevalence of the concept owes much to the work of the German psychiatrist Richard Freiherr von Krafft-Ebing and his 1886 work Psychopathia Sexualis.[23] As such, the current use of the term has its roots in the broader 19th century tradition of personality taxonomy. These continue to influence the development of the modern concept of sexual orientation, gaining associations with romantic love and identity in addition to its original, exclusively sexual meaning.
Although early writers also used the adjective homosexual to refer to any single-sex context (such as an all-girls' school), today the term is used exclusively in reference to sexual attraction and activity. The term homosocial is now used to describe single-sex contexts that are not specifically sexual. There is also a word referring to same-sex love, homophilia. Other terms include men who have sex with men or MSM (used in the medical community when specifically discussing sexual activity), homoerotic (referring to works of art), heteroflexible (referring to a person who identifies as heterosexual, but occasionally engages in same-sex sexual activities), and metrosexual (referring to a non-gay man with stereotypically gay tastes in food, fashion, and design). Pejorative terms in English include queer, faggot, fairy, poof, and homo. Beginning in the 1990s, some of these have been reclaimed as positive words by gay men and lesbians, as in the usage of queer studies, queer theory, and even the popular American television program Queer Eye for the Straight Guy. The word homo occurs in many other languages without the pejorative connotations it has in English.[24] As with ethnic slurs and racial slurs, however, the misuse of these terms can still be highly offensive; the range of acceptable use depends on the context and speaker. Conversely, gay, a word originally embraced by homosexual men and women as a positive, affirmative term (as in gay liberation and gay rights), has come into widespread pejorative use among young people.

Sexuality and gender identity

Sexual orientation, identity, behaviour
Main articles: Sexual orientation, Sexual identity, and Sexual behaviour
See also: Situational sexual behavior
American Psychological Association states that sexual orientation "describes the pattern of sexual attraction, behavior and identity e.g. homosexual (aka gay, lesbian), bisexual and heterosexual (aka straight)." "Sexual attraction, behavior and identity may be incongruent. For example, sexual attraction and/or behavior may not necessarily be consistent with identity. Some individuals may identify themselves as homosexual or bisexual without having had any sexual experience. Others have had homosexual experiences but do not consider themselves to be gay, lesbian, or bisexual. Further, sexual orientation falls along a continuum. In other words, someone does not have to be exclusively homosexual or heterosexual, but can feel varying degrees of both. Sexual orientation develops across a person's lifetime-different people realize at different points in their lives that they are heterosexual, bisexual or homosexual."[25]
If a person with a homosexual orientation does not identify as gay or lesbian, they are often referred to as closeted.
Some scholars, such as David Green, state that homosexuality is a modern Western social construct, and as such cannot be used in the context of non-Western male-male sexuality, nor in the pre-modern West.[26]
Homosexual activity can also occur in situations where large groups of persons of the same sex are confined together for some length of time, as in prison, the military, single sex boarding schools, or other sex-segregated communities, where members of those communities might engage in homosexual behaviors but identify as heterosexual otherwise.

Gender identity
The earliest writers on a homosexual orientation usually understood it to be intrinsically linked to the subject's own sex. For example, it was thought that a typical female-bodied person who is attracted to female-bodied persons would have masculine attributes, and vice versa.[27] This understanding was shared by most of the significant theorists of homosexuality from the mid 19th to early 20th Centuries, such as Karl Heinrich Ulrichs, Richard von Krafft-Ebing, Magnus Hirschfeld, Havelock Ellis, Carl Jung and Sigmund Freud, as well as many gender variant homosexual people themselves. However, this understanding of homosexuality as sexual inversion was disputed at the time, and through the second half of the 20th Century, gender identity came to be increasingly seen as a phenomenon distinct from sexual orientation.
Transgender and cisgender people may be attracted to men, women or both, although the prevalence of different sexual orientations is quite different in these two populations (see sexual orientation of transwomen). An individual homosexual, heterosexual or bisexual person may be masculine, feminine, or androgynous, and in addition, many members and supporters of lesbian and gay communities now see the "gender-conforming heterosexual" and the "gender-nonconforming homosexual" as negative stereotypes. However, studies by J Michael Bailey and KJ Zucker have found that a majority of gay men and lesbians report being gender-nonconforming during their childhood years.[28]

Forms of relationships
People with a homosexual orientation can express their sexuality in a variety of ways, and may or may not express it in their behaviors.[29] Research indicates that many lesbians and gay men want and have committed relationships. For example, survey data indicate that between 40% and 60% of gay men and between 45% and 80% of lesbians are currently involved in a romantic relationship.[30] They can have sexual relationships predominately with people of their own gender, the opposite gender, both genders or they can be celibate.[29]
Studies have found same-sex and opposite-sex couples to be equivalent to each other on measures of relationship satisfaction and commitment.[31] Many lesbians and gay men form durable relationships. For example, survey data indicate that between 18% and 28% of gay couples and between 8% and 21% of lesbian couples in the U.S. have lived together 10 or more years.[32]

Same-sex relationships
Main article: Same-sex relationship
Studies have found same-sex and opposite-sex couples to be equivalent to each other on measures of relationship satisfaction and commitment. Many lesbians and gay men form durable relationships, the types of which vary by region and what is permitted by law. For example, survey data indicate that between 18% and 28% of gay couples and between 8% and 21% of lesbian couples in the U.S. have lived together 10 or more years.[30] However, a study found that men in same-sex partnerships in Sweden were 35% more likely to separate as men in heterosexual marriages.[33]

Opposite sex relationships
Many homosexual people have sexual relationships with someone of the opposite sex.[34][35] Reasons can include discrimination, wishful thinking, real affection,[34] desire for family,[36] as well as religious reasons.[37][38] Many homosexual people and their opposite sex partner enter into a mixed-orientation marriage.[39][40] While many hide their orientation from their spouse,[41] others develop a positive homosexual identity while maintaining a successful marriage.[42][43]

History
Main articles: LGBT history and Timeline of LGBT history
Societal attitudes towards same-sex relationships have varied over time and place, from expecting all males to engage in same-sex relationships, to casual integration, through acceptance, to seeing the practice as a minor sin, repressing it through law enforcement and judicial mechanisms, and to proscribing it under penalty of death.
In a detailed compilation of historical and ethnographic materials of Preindustrial Cultures, "strong disapproval of homosexuality was reported for 41% of 42 cultures; it was accepted or ignored by 21%, and 12% reported no such concept. Of 70 ethnographies, 59% reported homosexuality absent or rare in frequency and 41% reported it present or not uncommon." [44]
Many historical figures, including Socrates, Lord Byron, Edward II, Hadrian[45], have had terms such as gay or bisexual applied to them; some, such as Michel Foucault, regard this as risking the anachronistic introduction of a contemporary construction of sexuality foreign to their times,[46] though others challenge this.[47]
A common thread of constructionist argument is that no one in antiquity or the Middle Ages experienced homosexuality as an exclusive, permanent, or defining mode of sexuality. John Boswell has countered this argument by citing ancient Greek writings by Plato,[48] which describe individuals exhibiting exclusive homosexuality.




Khnumhotep and Niankhkhnum. Illustration from photograph © 1999 Greg Reeder.



Africa
Though often ignored or suppressed by European explorers and colonialists, homosexual expression in native Africa was also present and took a variety of forms. Anthropologists Stephen Murray and Will Roscoe reported that women in Lesotho engaged in socially sanctioned "long term, erotic relationships," named motsoalle.[49] E. E. Evans-Pritchard also recorded that male Azande warriors (in the northern Congo) routinely took on young male lovers between the ages of twelve and twenty, who helped with household tasks and participated in intercrural sex with their older husbands. The practice had died out by the early 20th century, after Europeans had gained control of African countries, but was recounted to Evans-Pritchard by the elders to whom he spoke.[50]
The first recorded homosexual couple in history is commonly regarded as Khnumhotep and Niankhkhnum, an Egyptian male couple, who lived around the 2400 BCE. The pair are portrayed in a nose-kissing position, the most intimate pose in Egyptian art, surrounded by what would appear to be their heirs.

Americas




Dance to the Berdache
Sac and Fox Nation ceremonial dance to celebrate the two-spirit person. George Catlin (1796-1872); Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC


Among indigenous peoples of the Americas prior to European colonization, a common form of same-sex sexuality seems to center around the figure of the Two-Spirit individual. Typically the two-spirit individual was recognized early in life, was given a choice by the parents to follow the path, and if the child accepted the role then the child was raised in the appropriate manner, learning the customs of the gender it had chosen. Two-spirit individuals were commonly shamans and were revered as having powers beyond those of ordinary shamans. Their sexual life would be with the ordinary tribe members of the same sex.
Homosexual and transgender individuals were also common among other pre-conquest civilizations in Latin America, such as the Aztecs, Mayans, Quechas, Moches, Zapotecs, and the Tupinambá of Brazil.[51][52]




Balboa setting his war dogs upon Indian practitioners of male love in 1513; New York Public Library


The Spanish conquerors were horrified to discover "sodomy" openly practiced among native peoples, and attempted to crush it out by subjecting the berdaches (as the Spanish called them) under their rule to severe penalties, including public execution, burning and being torn to pieces by dogs.[53] 
East Asia
In East Asia, same-sex love has been referred to since the earliest recorded history. Early European travelers were taken aback by its widespread acceptance and open display.[citation needed]
Homosexuality in China, known as the pleasures of the bitten peach, the cut sleeve, or the southern custom, has been recorded since approximately 600 BCE. These euphemistic terms were used to describe behaviors, but not identities (recently some fashionable young Chinese tend to euphemistically use the term "brokeback," 斷背 duanbei to refer to male homosexuals, from the success of director Ang Lee's film Brokeback Mountain).[54] The relationships were marked by differences in age and social position. However, the instances of same-sex affection and sexual interactions described in the classical novel Dream of the Red Chamber seem as familiar to observers in the present as do equivalent stories of romances between heterosexuals during the same period.
This same-sex love culture gave rise to strong traditions of painting and literature documenting and celebrating such relationships.[citation needed]
Similarly, in Thailand, Kathoey, or "ladyboys," have been a feature of Thai society for many centuries, and Thai kings had male as well as female lovers. While Kathoey may encompass simple effeminacy or transvestism, it most commonly is treated in Thai culture as a third gender. They are generally accepted by society, and Thailand has never had legal prohibitions against homosexuality or homosexual behavior.

Europe
Further information: Homosexuality in ancient Greece, Homosexuality in ancient Rome
The earliest Western documents (in the form of literary works, art objects, as well as mythographic materials) concerning same-sex relationships are derived from ancient Greece. They depict a world in which relationships with women and relationships with youths were the essential foundation of a normal man's love life. Same-sex relationships were a social institution variously constructed over time and from one city to another. The formal practice, an erotic yet often restrained relationship between a free adult male and a free adolescent, was valued for its pedagogic benefits and as a means of population control, though occasionally blamed for causing disorder. Plato praised its benefits in his early writings,[55] but in his late works proposed its prohibition.[56]




Roman man penetrating a youth, possibly a slave, middle of the 1st century AD. Found in Bittir (?), near Jerusalem


In Ancient Rome the situation was reversed. Though the young male body remained a focus of male sexual attention, free boys were off limits as sexual partners. All the emperors with the exception of Claudius took male lovers. The Hellenophile emperor Hadrian is renowned for his relationship with Antinous, but the Christian emperor Theodosius I decreed a law on August 6, 390, condemning passive males to be burned at the stake. Justinian, towards the end of his reign, expanded the proscription to the active partner as well (in 558), warning that such conduct can lead to the destruction of cities through the "wrath of God". Notwithstanding these regulations, taxes on brothels of boys available for homosexual sex continued to be collected until the end of the reign of Anastasius I in 518.
During the Renaissance, rich cities in northern Italy, Florence and Venice in particular, were renowned for their widespread practice of same-sex love, engaged in by a considerable part of the male population and constructed along the classical pattern of Greece and Rome.[57][58] But even as many of the male population were engaging in same-sex relationships, the authorities, under the aegis of the Officers of the Night court, were prosecuting, fining, and imprisoning a good portion of that population. The eclipse of this period of relative artistic and erotic freedom was precipitated by the rise to power of the moralizing monk Girolamo Savonarola. In northern Europe the artistic discourse on sodomy was turned against its proponents by artists such as Rembrandt, who in his Rape of Ganymede no longer depicted Ganymede as a willing youth, but as a squalling baby attacked by a rapacious bird of prey.
The relationships of socially prominent figures, such as King James I and the Duke of Buckingham, served to highlight the issue, including in anonymously authored street pamphlets: "The world is chang'd I know not how, For men Kiss Men, not Women now;...Of J. the First and Buckingham: He, true it is, his Wives Embraces fled, To slabber his lov'd Ganimede;" (Mundus Foppensis, or The Fop Display'd, 1691.)
Love Letters Between a Certain Late Nobleman and the Famous Mr. Wilson was published in 1723 in England and was presumed to be a novel by some modern scholars. The 1749 edition of John Cleland's popular novel Fanny Hill includes a homosexual scene, but this was removed in its 1750 edition. Also in 1749, the earliest extended and serious defense of homosexuality in English, Ancient and Modern Pederasty Investigated and Exemplified, written by Thomas Cannon, was published, but was suppressed almost immediately. It includes the passage, "Unnatural Desire is a Contradiction in Terms; downright Nonsense. Desire is an amatory Impulse of the inmost human Parts."[59] Around 1785 Jeremy Bentham wrote another defense, but this was not published until 1978.[60] Executions for sodomy continued in the Netherlands until 1803, and in England until 1835.
Between 1864 and 1880 Karl Heinrich Ulrichs published a series of twelve tracts, which he collectively titled Research on the Riddle of Man-Manly Love. In 1867 he became the first self-proclaimed homosexual person to speak out publicly in defense of homosexuality when he pleaded at the Congress of German Jurists in Munich for a resolution urging the repeal of anti-homosexual laws. Sexual Inversion by Havelock Ellis, published in 1896, challenged theories that homosexuality was abnormal, as well as stereotypes, and insisted on the ubiquity of homosexuality and its association with intellectual and artistic achievement.[61] Although medical texts like these (written partly in Latin to obscure the sexual details) were not widely read by the general public, they did lead to the rise of Magnus Hirschfeld's Scientific Humanitarian Committee, which campaigned from 1897 to 1933 against anti-sodomy laws in Germany, as well as a much more informal, unpublicized movement among British intellectuals and writers, led by such figures as Edward Carpenter and John Addington Symonds. Beginning in 1894 with Homogenic Love, Socialist activist and poet Edward Carpenter wrote a string of pro-homosexual articles and pamphlets, and "came out" in 1916 in his book My Days and Dreams. In 1900, Elisar von Kupffer published an anthology of homosexual literature from antiquity to his own time, Lieblingminne und Freundesliebe in der Weltliteratur. His aim was to broaden the public perspective of homosexuality beyond it being viewed simply as a medical or biological issue, but also as an ethical and cultural one.

Middle East, South and Central Asia





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2008)






Dance of a bacchá (dancing boy)
Samarkand, (ca 1905 - 1915), photo Sergei Mikhailovich Prokudin-Gorskii. Library of Congress, Washington, DC.


Further information: Homosexuality and Islam
Among many Middle Eastern Muslim cultures egalitarian or age-structured homosexual practices were, and remain, widespread and thinly veiled. The prevailing pattern of same-sex relationships in the temperate and sub-tropical zone stretching from Northern India to the Western Sahara is one in which the relationships were—and are—either gender-structured or age-structured or both. In recent years, egalitarian relationships modeled on the western pattern have become more frequent, though they remain rare. Same-sex intercourse officially carries the death penalty in several Muslim nations: Saudi Arabia, Iran, Mauritania, northern Nigeria, Sudan, and Yemen. [62]
A tradition of art and literature sprang up constructing Middle Eastern homosexuality. Muslim—often Sufi—poets in medieval Arab lands and in Persia wrote odes to the beautiful wine boys who served them in the taverns. In many areas the practice survived into modern times, as documented by Richard Francis Burton, André Gide, and others.
In Persia homosexuality and homoerotic expressions were tolerated in numerous public places, from monasteries and seminaries to taverns, military camps, bathhouses, and coffee houses. In the early Safavid era (1501–1723), male houses of prostitution (amrad khane) were legally recognized and paid taxes. Persian poets, such as Sa’di (d. 1291), Hafez (d. 1389), and Jami (d. 1492), wrote poems replete with homoerotic allusions. The two most commonly documented forms were commercial sex with transgender young males or males enacting transgender roles exemplified by the köçeks and the bacchás, and Sufi spiritual practices in which the practitioner admired the form of a beautiful boy in order to enter ecstatic states and glimpse the beauty of god.
Today, governments in the Middle East often ignore, deny the existence of, or criminalize homosexuality. Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, during his famous 2007 speech at Columbia University, asserted that there were no gay people in Iran. Gay people do live in Iran, but most keep their sexuality a secret for fear of government sanction or rejection by their families.[63]

South Pacific
In many societies of Melanesia, especially in Papua New Guinea, same-sex relationships were, until the middle of the last century, an integral part of the culture. The Etoro and Marind-anim for example, even viewed heterosexuality as sinful and celebrated homosexuality instead. In many traditional Melanesian cultures a pre-pubertal boy would be paired with an older adolescent who would become his mentor and who would "inseminate" him (orally, anally, or topically, depending on the tribe) over a number of years in order for the younger to also reach puberty. Many Melanesian societies, however, have become hostile towards same-sex relationships since the introduction of Christianity by European missionaries.[64]

Demographics
Main article: Demographics of sexual orientation
Reliable data as to the size of the gay and lesbian population is of value in informing public policy.[65] For example, demographics would help in calculating the costs and benefits of domestic partnership benefits, of the impact of legalizing gay adoption, and of the impact of the U.S. military's Don't Ask Don't Tell policy.[65] Further, knowledge of the size of the "gay and lesbian population holds promise for helping social scientists understand a wide array of important questions—questions about the general nature of labor market choices, accumulation of human capital, specialization within households, discrimination, and decisions about geographic location."[65]
Measuring the prevalence of homosexuality may present difficulties. The research must measure some characteristic that may or may not be defining of sexual orientation. The class of people with same-sex desires may be larger than the class of people who act on those desires, which in turn may be larger than the class of people who self-identify as gay/lesbian/bisexual.[65] Studies to determine the proportion of individuals who have had a homosexual experience may misleadingly overstate the prevalence of homosexuality (as not all those who have had homosexual experiences necessarily have a homosexual preference) or understate it (as not all those with a predominantly homosexual orientation are necessarily sexually active or have physically acted on it).[citation needed]
In 1948 and 1953, Alfred Kinsey reported that nearly 46% of the male subjects had "reacted" sexually to persons of both sexes in the course of their adult lives, and 37% had at least one homosexual experience. [66] Kinsey's methodology was criticized. [67][68] A later study tried to eliminate the sample bias, but still reached similar conclusions. [69]
Estimates of the incidence of exclusive homosexuality range from >1% to 10% of the population, usually finding there are slightly more gay men than lesbians.[70][71][72]
Estimates of homosexual activity also vary from one country to another. A 1992 study reported that 6.1% of males in Britain had a homosexual experience, while in France that number was 4.1%.[73] According to a 2003 survey, 12% of Norwegians have had homosexual sex.[13] In New Zealand, a 2006 study suggested that 20% of the population anonymously reported some homosexual feelings, few of them identifying as homosexual. Percentage of persons identifying homosexual was 2-3%. [15] According to a 2008 poll, while only six per cent of Britons define their sexual orientation as homosexual or bisexual, more than twice that number (13 per cent) of Britons have had some form of sexual contact with someone of the same sex.[14]
In the United States, according to exit polling on 2008 Election Day for the 2008 Presidential elections, 4% of electorate self-identified as gay, lesbian, or bisexual, the same percentage as in 2004.”[74]

Psychology
Main article: Homosexuality and psychology
Most lesbian, gay, and bisexual people who seek psychotherapy do so for the same reasons as heterosexuals (stress, relationship difficulties, difficulty adjusting to social or work situations, etc.); their sexual orientation may be of primary, incidental, or no importance to their issues and treatment. Whatever the issue, there is a high risk for anti-gay bias in psychotherapy with lesbian, gay, and bisexual clients.[75] Psychological research in this areas has been relevant to counteracting prejudicial ("homophobic") attitudes and actions, and to the LGBT rights movement generally.[76]

History



Wikinews has related news: Dr. Joseph Merlino on sexuality, insanity, Freud, fetishes and apathy


Psychology was one of the first disciplines to study a homosexual orientation as a discrete phenomenon. The first attempts to classify homosexuality as a disease were made by the fledgling European sexologist movement in the late nineteenth century. In 1886 noted sexologist Richard von Krafft-Ebing listed homosexuality along with 200 other case studies of deviant sexual practices in his definitive work, Psychopathia Sexualis. Krafft-Ebing proposed that homosexuality was caused by either "congenital [during birth] inversion" or an "acquired inversion". In the last two decades of the nineteenth century, a different view began to predominate in medical and psychiatric circles, judging such behavior as indicative of a type of person with a defined and relatively stable sexual orientation. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, pathological models of homosexuality were standard.
Today, the consensus of medical and scientific professional organizations is that homosexuality is not a mental illness. In 1973 the American Psychiatric Association (APA) removed homosexuality as a disorder from the Sexual Deviancy section of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, the DSM-II.[77] The World Health Organization's ICD-9 (1977) listed homosexuality as a mental illness, and in 1990, a resolution was adopted to remove it in the ICD-10 (1993).[78] The ICD-10 added ego-dystonic sexual orientation to the list, which refers to people who want to change their gender identities or sexual orientation because of a psychological or behavioral disorder (F66.1). Groups that advocate reparative therapy, including both secular organizations such as NARTH and religious organizations such as Exodus International, do not accept this position.

Malleability of sexual orientation
The American Psychiatric Association (APA) has stated "some people believe that sexual orientation is innate and fixed; however, sexual orientation develops across a person’s lifetime."[79] In a joint statement with other major American medical organizations, the APA says that "different people realize at different points in their lives that they are heterosexual, gay, lesbian, or bisexual."[80] A report from the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health states: "For some people, sexual orientation is continuous and fixed throughout their lives. For others, sexual orientation may be fluid and change over time."[81] One study has suggested "considerable fluidity in bisexual, unlabeled, and lesbian women's attractions, behaviors, and identities."[82][83]
However, the APA also says that "most people experience little or no sense of choice about their sexual orientation."[84] American medical organizations have further stated therapy cannot change sexual orientation, and have expressed concerns over potential harms.[80] The director of the APA's LGBT Concerns Office explained: "I don't think that anyone disagrees with the idea that people can change because we know that straight people become gays and lesbians.... the issue is whether therapy changes sexual orientation, which is what many of these people claim."[85] The American Psychiatric Association (APA) states, in a 2000 position statement, that they oppose "any psychiatric treatment, such as "reparative" or conversion therapy, which is based upon the assumption that homosexuality per se is a mental disorder or based upon the a priori assumption that a patient should change their sexual orientation.[86] Similarly, United States Surgeon General David Satcher issued a report stating that "there is no valid scientific evidence that sexual orientation can be changed".[87]

Etiology
Main articles: Biology and sexual orientation and Environment and sexual orientation
There is no consensus among scientists about the exact reasons that an individual develops a heterosexual, bisexual, gay, or lesbian orientation.[88] The main reasons cited include genetic and environmental factors, likely in combination.[89][90] Other factors that may play a role include prenatal hormone exposure, where hormones play a role in determining sexual orientation as they do with sex differentiation;[91][92] and prenatal stress on the mother.[93][94][95]
The American Academy of Pediatrics has stated that "sexual orientation probably is not determined by any one factor but by a combination of genetic, hormonal, and environmental influences."[96] The American Psychological Association has stated that "there are probably many reasons for a person's sexual orientation and the reasons may be different for different people". It stated that, for most people, sexual orientation is determined at an early age.[97] The American Psychiatric Association has stated that, "to date there are no replicated scientific studies supporting any specific biological etiology for homosexuality. Similarly, no specific psychosocial or family dynamic cause for homosexuality has been identified, including histories of childhood sexual abuse."[79] Research into how sexual orientation may be determined by genetic or other prenatal factors plays a role in political and social debates about homosexuality, and also raises fears about genetic profiling and prenatal testing.[98]
Innate bisexuality (or predisposition to bisexuality) is a term introduced by Sigmund Freud, based on work by his associate Wilhelm Fliess, that expounds that all humans are born bisexual but through psychological development - which includes both external and internal factors - become monosexual, while the bisexuality remains in a latent state.
In a 2008 study, its authors stated that "There is considerable evidence that human sexual orientation is genetically influenced, so it is not known how homosexuality, which tends to lower reproductive success, is maintained in the population at a relatively high frequency." They hypothesized that "while genes predisposing to homosexuality reduce homosexuals' reproductive success, they may confer some advantage in heterosexuals who carry them." and their results suggested that "genes predisposing to homosexuality may confer a mating advantage in heterosexuals, which could help explain the evolution and maintenance of homosexuality in the population."[99]

Law, politics, society and sociology
Further information: Societal attitudes toward homosexuality

Prejudice and homophobia
Main article: Homophobia
In many cultures, homosexual people are frequently subject to prejudice and discrimination. Like many other minority groups that are the objects of prejudice, they are also subject to stereotyping which further add to marginalization. The prejudice, discrimination and stereotyping are all likely tied to forms of homophobia and heterosexism, which is negative attitudes, bias, and discrimination in favor of opposite-sex sexuality and relationships. Heterosexism can include the presumption that everyone is heterosexual or that opposite-sex attractions and relationships are the norm and therefore superior. Homophobia is a fear of, aversion to, or discrimination against homosexual people.[100][101][102][103] It manifests in different forms, and a number of different types have been postulated, among which are internalized homophobia, social homophobia, emotional homophobia, rationalized homophobia, and others.[104] Similar is lesbophobia specifically targeting lesbians and biphobia against bisexual people. When attitudes manifest as crimes they are often called hate crimes and gay bashing.
Among negative stereotypes are that LGB people are less romantically stable, more promiscuous and more likely to abuse children. Research has generally contradicted these assertions. Research suggests LGB people develop enduring romantic relationships.[105] Gay men are often alleged as having pedophilic tendencies and more likely to commit child sexual abuse than the heterosexual male population, a view rejected by mainstream psychiatric groups and contradicted by research.[106][107][108] Claims that there is scientific evidence to support an association between being gay and being a pedophile are based on misuses of those terms and misrepresentation of the actual evidence.[109]

Violence against gay and lesbian people
Main article: Violence against LGBT people
In the United States, the FBI reported that 15.6% of hate crimes reported to police in 2004 were based on perceived sexual orientation. Sixty-one percent of these attacks were against gay men.[110] The 1998 murder of Matthew Shepard, a gay student, is one of the most notorious incidents in the U.S.

Legality
Further information: Sodomy law and LGBT rights by country or territory
See also: LGBT rights opposition




     No information Homosexuality legal      Same-sex marriage recognized      Other type of partnership recognized (including unregistered cohabitation)      No recognition of same-sex couples      Foreign same-sex marriages recognized Homosexuality illegal      Minimal penalty      Large penalty      Life in prison      Death penalty
Image talk



Most nations do not impede consensual sex between unrelated persons above the local age of consent. Some jurisdictions further recognize identical rights, protections, and privileges for the family structures of same-sex couples, including marriage. Some nations mandate that all individuals restrict themselves to heterosexual relationships; that is, in some jurisdictions homosexual activity is illegal. Offenders face up to the death penalty in some fundamentalist Muslim areas such as Iran and parts of Nigeria. There are, however, often significant differences between official policy and real-world enforcement. See Violence against gays, lesbians, bisexuals, and the transgendered.
Although homosexual acts were decriminalized in some parts of the Western world, such as in Poland in 1932, in Denmark in 1933, in Sweden in 1944, and in the United Kingdom in 1967, it was not until the mid-1970s that the gay community first began to achieve actual, though limited, civil rights in some developed countries. A turning point was reached in 1973 when the American Psychiatric Association removed homosexuality from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, thus negating its previous definition of homosexuality as a clinical mental disorder. In 1977, Quebec became the first state-level jurisdiction in the world to prohibit discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation. During the 1980s and 1990s, most developed countries enacted laws decriminalizing homosexual behavior and prohibiting discrimination against lesbians and gays in employment, housing, and services. Even so, many countries today, all in Africa, Asia, and South America, outlaw homosexuality. In six countries, homosexual behavour is punishable by life imprisonment; In ten others, it carries the death penalty.[111]

Sexual orientation and the law





The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. Please improve this article or discuss the issue on the talk page.



Employment discrimination refers to discriminatory employment practices such as bias in hiring, promotion, job assignment, termination, and compensation, and various types of harassment. In the United States there is "very little statutory, common law, and case law establishing employment discrimination based upon sexual orientation as a legal wrong."[112] Some exceptions and alternative legal strategies are available. President Bill Clinton's Executive Order 13087 (1998) prohibits discrimination based on sexual orientation in the competitive service of the federal civilian workforce,[113] and federal non-civil service employees may have recourse under the due process clause of the U.S. Constitution.[114] Private sector workers may have a Title VII action under a quid pro quo sexual harassment theory,[115] a "hostile work environment" theory,[116] a sexual stereotyping theory,[117] or others.[112]


Housing discrimination refers to discrimination against potential or current tenants by landlords. In the United States, there is no federal law against such discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity, but at least thirteen states and many major cities have enacted laws prohibiting it.[118]


Hate crimes (also known as bias crimes) are crimes motivated by bias against an identifiable social group, usually groups defined by race, religion, sexual orientation, disability, ethnicity, nationality, age, gender, gender identity, or political affiliation. In the United States, 45 states and the District of Columbia have statutes criminalizing various types of bias-motivated violence or intimidation (the exceptions are AZ, GA, IN, SC, and WY). Each of these statutes covers bias on the basis of race, religion, and ethnicity; 32 of them cover sexual orientation, 28 cover gender, and 11 cover transgender/gender-identity.[119]


Political activism
Further information: LGBT social movements
Since the 1960s, many LGBT people in the West, particularly those in major metropolitan areas, have developed a so-called gay culture. To many, gay culture is exemplified by the gay pride movement, with annual parades and displays of rainbow flags. Yet not all LGBT people choose to participate in "queer culture", and many gay men and women specifically decline to do so. To some it seems to be a frivolous display, perpetuating gay stereotypes. To some others, the gay culture represents heterophobia and is scorned as widening the gulf between gay and non-gay people.
With the outbreak of AIDS in the early 1980s, many LGBT groups and individuals organized campaigns to promote efforts in AIDS education, prevention, research, patient support, and community outreach, as well as to demand government support for these programs. Gay Men's Health Crisis, Project Inform, and ACT UP are some notable American examples of the LGBT community's response to the AIDS crisis.
The bewildering death toll wrought by the AIDS epidemic at first seemed to slow the progress of the gay rights movement, but in time it galvanized some parts of the LGBT community into community service and political action, and challenged the heterosexual community to respond compassionately. Major American motion pictures from this period that dramatized the response of individuals and communities to the AIDS crisis include An Early Frost (1985), Longtime Companion (1990), And the Band Played On (1993), Philadelphia (1993), and Common Threads: Stories from the Quilt (1989), the last referring to the NAMES Project AIDS Memorial Quilt, last displayed in its entirety on the Mall in Washington, D.C., in 1996.
Publicly gay politicians have attained numerous government posts, even in countries that had sodomy laws or outright mass murder of gays in their recent past. Examples include Peter Mandelson, Business Secretary in Gordon Brown's cabinet and close friend of Tony Blair and former Norwegian Minister of Finance, Per-Kristian Foss.
LGBT movements are opposed by a variety of individuals and organizations. Supporters of the traditional marriage movement believe that all sexual relationships with people other than an opposite-sex spouse undermines the traditional family[120] and that children should be reared in homes with both a father and a mother.[121][122] There is concern that gay rights may conflict with individual's freedom of speech,[123][124][125][126][127] religious freedoms in the workplace,[128][129] the ability to run churches,[130] charitable organizations[131][132] and other religious organizations[133] in accordance with one's religious views, and that the acceptance of homosexual relationships by religious organizations might be forced through threatening to remove the tax-exempt status of churches whose views don't align with those of the government.[134][135][136][137]
Critics charge that political correctness has led to the association of sex between males and HIV being downplayed.[138][139]

Coming out
Main article: Coming out
Many people who feel attracted to members of their own sex have a so-called "coming out" at some point in their lives. Generally, coming out is described in three phases. The first phase is the phase of "knowing oneself," and the realization or decision emerges that one is open to same-sex relations. This is often described as an internal coming out. The second phase involves one's decision to come out to others, e.g. family, friends, and/or colleagues. This occurs with many people as early as age 11, but others do not clarify their sexual orientation until age 40 or older. The third phase more generally involves living openly as an LGBT person.[140] In the United States today, people often come out during high school or college age. At this age, they may not trust or ask for help from others, especially when their orientation is not accepted in society. Sometimes their own parents are not even informed.
Outing is the practice of publicly revealing the sexual orientation of a closeted person.[141] Notable politicians, celebrities, military service people, and clergy members have been outed, with motives ranging from malice to political or moral beliefs. Many commentators oppose the practice altogether,[142] while some encourage outing public figures who use their positions of influence to harm other gay people.[143]

Parenting
Main article: LGBT parenting
Many LGB people are parents through various means including adoption, donor insemination, foster parenting, surrogacy, from former relationships and together with an opposite sex spouse in a mixed-orientation marriage.[144][145][40][34] Some children do not know they have a LGB parent.[146][147]
In the 2000 U.S. Census, 33 percent of female same-sex couple households and 22 percent of male same-sex couple households reported at least one child under the age of 18 living in the home.[80] In January 2008, the European Court of Human Rights ruled that same-sex couples have the right to adopt a child.[148][149] In the U.S., LGB people can legally adopt in all states except for Florida.[150]
Same-sex parents are supported by the positions of a number of organizations, including the American Psychological Association, the Child Welfare League of America, the American Bar Association, the American Psychiatric Association, the National Association of Social Workers, the North American Council on Adoptable Children, the American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Psychoanalytic Association, and the American Academy of Family Physicians.[151] The American Psychological Association has stated that "there is no scientific evidence that parenting effectiveness is related to parental sexual orientation: lesbian and gay parents are as likely as heterosexual parents to provide supportive and healthy environments for their children"[80]

Health

For lesbian health issues see Lesbian#Health


Mental
Since medical literature began to describe homosexuality, it has often been approached from a view that sought to find an inherent psychopathology as the root cause. Much literature on mental health and homosexuals centered on their depression, substance abuse, and suicide. Although these issues exist among non-heterosexuals, discussion about their causes shifted after homosexuality was removed from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) in 1973. Instead, social ostracism, legal discrimination, internalization of negative stereotypes, and limited support structures indicate factors homosexuals face in Western societies that often adversely affect their mental health.[152] Stigma, prejudice, and discrimination stemming from negative societal attitudes toward homosexuality leads to a higher prevalence of mental health disorders among lesbians, gay men, and bisexuals compared to their heterosexual peers.[153] Evidence indicates that the liberalization of these attitudes over the past few decades is associated with a decrease in such mental health risks among younger LGBT people.[154]

Physical
Further information: Men who have sex with men and Lesbian#Health
Men who have sex with men (MSM) and women who have sex with women (WSW) refers to people who engage in sexual activity with others of the same sex regardless of how they identify themselves as many choose not to accept social identities as lesbian, gay and bisexual.[155][156][157][158][159] These terms are often used in medical literature and social research to describe such groups for study, without needing to consider the issues of sexual self-identity. The terms are seen as problematic, however, because it "obscures social dimensions of sexuality; undermines the self-labeling of lesbian, gay, and bisexual people; and does not sufficiently describe variations in sexual behavior."[160] MSM and WSW are sexually active with each other for a variety of reasons with the main ones arguably sexual pleasure, intimacy and bonding.
Sex between men has many health benefits including relieving stress, boosting the immune system, increases self-esteem, intimacy, and promoting good sleep.[161][162][163][164][165] In contrast to its benefits, sexual behavior can be a disease vector. Safe sex is a relevant harm reduction philosophy.[166]

Gay and lesbian youth
Gay and lesbian youth bear an increased risk of suicide, substance abuse, school problems, and isolation because of a "hostile and condemning environment, verbal and physical abuse, rejection and isolation from family and peers".[167] Further, LGB youths are more likely to report psychological and physical abuse by parents or caretakers, and more sexual abuse. Suggested reasons for this disparity are that (1) LGBT youths may be specifically targeted on the basis of their perceived sexual orientation or gender non-conforming appearance, and (2) "risk factors associated with sexual minority status, including discrimination, invisibility, and rejection by family members... may lead to an increase in behaviors that are associated with risk for victimization, such as substance abuse, sex with multiple partners, or running away from home as a teenager."[168]
Crisis centers in larger cities and information sites on the Internet have arisen to help youth and adults.[169] The Trevor Helpline, a suicide prevention helpline for gay youth, was established following the 1998 airing on HBO of the Academy Award winning short film Trevor.

Social construct
Further information: Queer theory
Because a homosexual orientation is complex and multi-dimensional, some academics and researchers, especially in Queer studies, have argued that it is a historical and social construction. In 1976 the historian Michel Foucault argued that homosexuality as an identity did not exist in the eighteenth century; that people instead spoke of "sodomy", which referred to sexual acts. Sodomy was a crime that was often ignored but sometimes punished severely (see sodomy law).
The term homosexual is often used in European and American cultures to encompass a person’s entire social identity, which includes self and personality. In Western cultures some people speak meaningfully of gay, lesbian, and bisexual identities and communities. In other cultures, homosexuality and heterosexual labels don’t emphasize an entire social identity or indicate community affiliation based on sexual orientation.[170]

Military service
Main article: Sexual orientation and military service
The militaries of the world have a variety of responses to gays, lesbians and bisexuals. Most Western military forces have now removed policies excluding sexual minority members; of the 26 countries that participate militarily in NATO, more than 20 permit open lesbians, gays, or bisexuals to serve; of the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, two (United Kingdom and France) do so. The other three generally do not: China bans gays and lesbians outright, Russia excludes all gays and lesbians during peacetime but allows some gay men to serve in wartime (see below), and the United States (see Don't ask, don't tell) technically permits gays and lesbians to serve, but only in secrecy and celibacy. Israel is the only country in the middle east region that openly allows gays and lesbians to serve in the military.
Policies and attitudes toward gay and lesbian personnel in the military vary widely internationally. Several countries allow gay men and lesbians to serve openly and have granted them the same rights and privileges as their heterosexual counterparts. Many countries neither ban nor support gay and lesbian service members, and a small group continue to ban homosexual personnel outright.
While the question of homosexuality in the military has been highly politicized in the United States, it is not necessarily so in many countries. Generally speaking, sexuality in these cultures is considered a more personal aspect of one's identity than it is in the United States.

Religion
Main article: Religion and homosexuality


Part of a series on
Religion and homosexuality


Bahá'í Faith · Buddhism · Christianity · Confucianism · Hinduism · Islam · Judaism · Norse paganism · Scientology · Shinto · Sikhism · Taoism · Unification Church · Unitarian Universalism · Voodoo (Haitian) · Wicca · Zoroastrianism



v • d • e



Though the relationship between homosexuality and religion can vary greatly across time and place, within and between different religions and sects, and regarding different forms of homosexuality and bisexuality, current authoritative bodies and doctrines of the world's largest religions generally view homosexuality negatively. This can range from quietly discouraging homosexual activity, to explicitly forbidding same-sex sexual practices among adherents and actively opposing social acceptance of homosexuality. Some teach that homosexual orientation itself is sinful,[171] while others assert that only the sexual act is a sin. Some claim that homosexuality can be overcome through religious faith and practice. On the other hand, voices exist within many of these religions that view homosexuality more positively, and liberal religious denominations may bless same-sex marriages. Some view same-sex love and sexuality as sacred, and a mythology of same-sex love can be found around the world. Regardless of their position on homosexuality, many people of faith look to both sacred texts and tradition for guidance on this issue. However, the authority of various traditions or scriptural passages and the correctness of translations and interpretations may be hotly disputed.

Homosexual behavior in animals
Main article: Homosexual behavior in animals




Roy and Silo, two New York Central Park Zoo male Chinstrap Penguins similar to those pictured, became internationally known when they coupled and later were given an egg that needed hatching and care, which they successfully did.[172]


Homosexual behavior in animals refers to the documented evidence of homosexual, bisexual and transgender behavior in non-human animals. Such behaviors include sex, courtship, affection, pair bonding, and parenting. Homosexual and bisexual behavior are widespread in the animal kingdom: a 1999 review by researcher Bruce Bagemihl shows that homosexual behavior, has been observed in close to 1500 species, ranging from primates to gut worms, and is well documented for 500 of them.[173][174] Animal sexual behavior takes many different forms, even within the same species. The motivations for and implications of these behaviors have yet to be fully understood, since most species have yet to be fully studied.[175] According to Bagemihl, "the animal kingdom [does] it with much greater sexual diversity -- including homosexual, bisexual and nonreproductive sex -- than the scientific community and society at large have previously been willing to accept."[176]

See also




LGBT portal




Find more about homosexuality on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Anti-LGBT slogans
BiNet USA
Biphobia
Gender identity disorder
Gay bashing
Hate speech
Heterosexism
Homophobia
Human Rights Campaign
LGBT rights opposition
List of gay, lesbian or bisexual people
Mythology of same-sex love
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force
Non-westernized concepts of male sexuality
Religion and sexuality
Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures
Sodomy law


References


^ "Sexual Orientation and Homosexuality", APAHelpCenter.org, http://www.apahelpcenter.org/articles/article.php?id=31, retrieved on 2007-09-07 
^ APA California Amicus Brief Please fix this cite and remove this comment when done.
^ LeVay, Simon (1996). Queer Science: The Use and Abuse of Research into Homosexuality. Cambridge: The MIT Press ISBN 0-262-12199-9
^ ACSF Investigators (1992). AIDS and sexual behaviour in France. Nature, 360, 407–409.
^ Billy, J. O. G., Tanfer, K., Grady, W. R., & Klepinger, D. H. (1993). The sexual behavior of men in the United States. Family Planning Perspectives, 25, 52–60.
^ Binson, D., Michaels, S., Stall, R., Coates, T. J., Gagnon, & Catania, J. A. (1995). Prevalence and social distribution of men who have sex with men: United States and its urban centers. Journal of Sex Research, 32, 245–254.
^ a b Bogaert, A. F. (2004). The prevalence of male homosexuality: The effect of fraternal birth order and variation in family size. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 230, 33–37. [1] Bogaert argues that: "The prevalence of male homosexuality is debated. One widely reported early estimate was 10% (e.g., Marmor, 1980; Voeller, 1990). Some recent data provided support for this estimate (Bagley and Tremblay, 1998), but most recent large national samples suggest that the prevalence of male homosexuality in modern western societies, including the United States, is lower than this early estimate (e.g., 1–2% in Billy et al., 1993; 2–3% in Laumann et al., 1994; 6% in Sell et al., 1995; 1–3% in Wellings et al., 1994). It is of note, however, that homosexuality is defined in different ways in these studies. For example, some use same-sex behavior and not same-sex attraction as the operational definition of homosexuality (e.g., Billy et al., 1993); many sex researchers (e.g., Bailey et al., 2000; Bogaert, 2003; Money, 1988; Zucker and Bradley, 1995) now emphasize attraction over overt behavior in conceptualizing sexual orientation." (p. 33) Also: "...the prevalence of male homosexuality (in particular, same-sex attraction) varies over time and across societies (and hence is a ‘‘moving target’’) in part because of two effects: (1) variations in fertility rate or family size; and (2) the fraternal birth order effect. Thus, even if accurately measured in one country at one time, the rate of male homosexuality is subject to change and is not generalizable over time or across societies." (p. 33)
^ Fay, R. E., Turner, C. F., Klassen, A. D., & Gagnon, J. H. (1989). Prevalence and patterns of same-gender sexual contact among men. Science, 243, 338–348.
^ Johnson, A. M., Wadsworth, J., Wellings, K., Bradshaw, S., & Field, J. (1992). Sexual lifestyles and HIV risk. Nature, 360, 410–412.
^ Laumann, E. O., Gagnon, J. H., Michael, R. T., & Michaels, S. (1994). The social organization of sexuality: Sexual practices in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
^ Sell, R. L., Wells, J. A., & Wypij, D. (1995). The prevalence of homosexual behavior in the United States, the United Kingdom and France: Results of national population-based samples. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 24, 235–248.
^ Wellings, K., Field, J., Johnson, A., & Wadsworth, J. (1994). Sexual behavior in Britain: The national survey of sexual attitudes and lifestyles. London, UK: Penguin Books.
^ a b Norway world leader in casual sex, Aftenposten
^ a b Sex uncovered poll: Homosexuality, Guardian
^ a b McConaghy et al., 2006
^ "... sow illegitimate and bastard seed in courtesans, or sterile seed in males in defiance of nature." Plato in THE LAWS (Book VIII p.841 edition of Stephanus) or p.340, edition of Penguin Books, 1972.
^ Feray, Jean-Claude; Herzer, Manfred (1990). "Homosexual Studies and Politics in the 19th Century: Karl Maria Kertbeny". Journal of Homosexuality, Vol. 19, No. 1.
^ a b "Biography: Karl Maria Kertbeny", GayHistory.com, http://www.gayhistory.com/rev2/events/kertbeny.htm, retrieved on 2007-09-07 
^ "Etymology of Homosexuality", University of Waterloo, http://www.drama.uwaterloo.ca/Gross%20Indecency/homosexuality_word.shtml, retrieved on 2007-09-07 
^ a b Media Reference Guide (citing AP, NY Times, Washington Post style guides), GLAAD. Retrieved 2007-05-10.
^ See, for example, You calling me a poof? The Times; Scottish Hate Crime Laws extended to Homosexuals and Disabled The Herald, January 2008; and Council praised for 'gay' policy BBC news (see third paragraph)
^ "Kertbeny Coins "Homosexual"", GayHistory.com, http://www.gayhistory.com/rev2/events/1869b.htm, retrieved on 2007-09-07 
^ "Psychopathia Sexualis", Kino.com, http://www.kino.com/psychopathia/history.html, retrieved on 2007-09-07 
^ see wikt:homo
^ [2]
^ Cartographies of Desire: Male-male Sexuality in Japanese Discourse, 1600-1950; By Gregory M. Pflugfelder; Published by University of California Press, 1999, ISBN 0520209095, 9780520209091 399; Quotes from pages 5 and 6; In speaking of sexual desires and practices between males, I use the term male-male sexuality" rather than the more familiar "homosexuality" for deliberate reasons. To begin with, as I explain in Chapter I, inhabitants of the Japanese archipilago before the last century did not usually draw a conceptual link between male-male and female-female forms of erotic behaviour. Thus to adopt the term "homosexuality," which implies an inherent connection between the two, is to accept uncritically the effects of a discursive process whose very emergence demands historical accounting... To impose such categories as "homosexuality" and "bisexuality" upon a society or conceptul universe, whether non-European or pre-nineteenth century, in which they would not have been understood in the same sense that they are currently understood, if indeed at all, and in which behaviour often followed patterns quite different from those we associate with them in our own societies, is unwittingly to hide from view the experience of those very historical subjects whom we seek to comprehend. Even the word "sexuality" invites misinterpretation, so clarification is in order. By "sexuality," I do not mean fixed sexul orientation, as late twentieth century speakers of English tend to do, for instance, when they refer to a particular individual's "sexuality" -- meaning that person's place within the currently canonical trinity of "homosexuality," "heterosexulity," and "bisexuality." For much of the period examined in this study, the notion that each individual possesses a deeply rooted personal identity based on the biological sex of the preferred sexual object or objects (and specifically whether it is the same as or different from her or his own), and the tripartite taxonomy of sexual types that has resulted from this construction, held no currency in Japan, nor had they emerged even in the West.
^ Minton, H. L. (1986). Femininity in men and masculinity in women: American psychiatry and psychology portray homosexuality in the 1930s, Journal of Homosexuality, 13(1), 1-21.
*Terry, J. (1999). An American obsession: Science, medicine, and homosexuality in modern society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
^ Bailey, J.M., Zucker, K.J. (1995), Childhood sex-typed behavior and sexual orientation: a conceptual analysis and quantitative review. Developmental Psychology 31(1):43
^ a b APA Help Center
^ a b What is Nature
^ Relationship Satisfaction and Commitment
^ APA - What is Nature
^ Divorce-Risk Patterns in Same-Sex Marriages in Norway and Sweden
^ a b c Butler, Katy (March 7, 2006). "Many Couples Must Negotiate Terms of 'Brokeback' Marriages". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/03/07/health/07broke.html?_r=2&oref=slogin&oref=slogin. 
^ Hentges, Rochelle (October 4, 2006). "How to tell if your husband is gay". Pittsburgh Tribune-Review. http://www.pittsburghlive.com/x/pittsburghtrib/news/tribpm/s_473458.html. 
^ Gay Men from Heterosexual Marriages: Attitudes, Behaviors, Childhood Experiences, and Reasons for Marriage
^ Gay, Mormon, married
^ Gay No More
^ Gay Fathers in a Straight Marriage
^ a b The Married Lesbian
^ Heterosexual women's perceptions of their marriages to bisexual or homosexual men.
^ Bisexual and gay men in heterosexual marriage: conflicts and resolutions in therapy.
^ Bisexual men in marriage: is a positive homosexual identity and stable marriage possible?
^ Adolescence and puberty By John Bancroft, June Machover Reinisch, p.162
^ Roman Homosexuality By Craig Arthur Williams, p.60
^ Foucault, Michel (1986). The History of Sexuality. Pantheon Books. ISBN 0394417755. 
^ Thomas K. Hubbard, Review of David M. Halperin, How to Do the History of Homosexuality. in Bryn Mawr Classical Review 2003.09.22
^ Boswell, John (1980), Christianity, Social Tolerance, and Homosexuality: Gay People in Western Europe from the Beginning of the Christian Era to the Fourteenth Century, University of Chicago Press, ISBN 978-0-226-06711-7, http://www.press.uchicago.edu/cgi-bin/hfs.cgi/00/231.ctl 
^ Murray, Stephen (ed.); Roscoe, Will (ed.) (1998). Boy Wives and Female Husbands: Studies of African Homosexualities. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0312238290. 
^ Evans-Pritchard, E. E. (December, 1970). Sexual Inversion among the Azande. American Anthropologist, New Series, 72(6), 1428-1434.
^ Pablo, Ben (2004), "Latin America: Colonial]", glbtq.com, http://www.glbtq.com/social-sciences/latin_america_colonial.html, retrieved on 2007-08-01 
^ Murray, Stephen (2004). "Mexico". in Claude J. Summers. glbtq: An Encyclopedia of Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Culture. glbtq, Inc.. http://www.glbtq.com/social-sciences/mexico.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-01. 
^ Mártir de Anglería, Pedro. (1530). Décadas del Mundo Nuevo. Quoted by Coello de la Rosa, Alexandre. "Good Indians", "Bad Indians", "What Christians?": The Dark Side of the New World in Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés (1478-1557), Delaware Review of Latin American Studies, Vol. 3, No. 2, 2002.
^ "Most frequently used new coinages in daily Chinese", Jongo News, August 20, 2007, http://news.jongo.com/articles/07/0820/30157/MzAxNTcoluZIoia.html, retrieved on 2007-09-07 
^ Plato, Phaedrus in the Symposium
^ Plato, Laws, 636D & 835E
^ Rocke, Michael, (1996), Forbidden Friendships: Homosexuality and male Culture in Renaissance Florence, ISBN 0-195122-92-5
^ Ruggiero, Guido, (1985), The Boundaries of Eros, ISBN 0-195034-65-1
^ Gladfelder, Hal (May 2006) In Search of Lost Texts: Thomas Cannon's 'Ancient and Modern Pederasty Investigated and Exemplified", Institute of Historical Research
^ Journal of Homosexuality (ISSN 0091-8369) Volume: 3 Issue: 4 , Volume: 4 Issue: 1
^ Ellis, Havelock; Symonds, John Addington (1975), Sexual Inversion, Arno Press, ISBN 0405073631  (reprint)
^ ILGA:7 countries still put people to death for same-sex acts
^ Fathi, Nazila (2007-09-30). "Despite Denials, Gays Insist They Exist, if Quietly, in Iran". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/30/world/middleeast/30gays.html?_r=1&hp&oref=slogin. Retrieved on 2007-10-01. 
^ Herdt, Gilbert H. (1984), Ritualized Homosexuality in Melanesia, University of California Press, p. 128-136, ISBN 0520080963 
^ a b c d "Demographics of the Gay and Lesbian Population in the United States: Evidence from Available Systematic Data Sources", Dan Black, Gary Gates, Seth Sanders, Lowell Taylor, Demography, Vol. 37, No. 2 (May, 2000), pp. 139-154 (available on JSTOR).
^ Sexual Behavior in the Human Male, p. 656
^ David Leonhardt (28 july 2000). "John Tukey, 85, Statistician; Coined the Word 'Software'". The New York Times. 
^ http://www.swlearning.com/quant/kohler/stat/biographical_sketches/bio15.1.html John Tukey criticizes sample procedure
^ http://www.kinseyinstitute.org/publications/duberman.html Martin Duberman on Gebhart's "cleaning" of data
^ S. Hite, The Hite Report on Male Sexuality, New York, A. Knopf, 1991.
^ S. S. et C. L. Janus, The Janus Report on Sexual Behavior, New York, John Wiley & Sons, 1993.
^ Alfred C. Kinsey, Sexual Behavior in the Human Male, 1948, ISBN 0-7216-5445-2(o.p.), ISBN 0-253-33412-8(reprint).
^ TERESA L. WAITE, December 8, 1992 "Sexual Behavior Levels Compared in Studies In Britain and France" in the New York Times[3]
^ "27% of Gay Voters Sided with McCain". The Advocate. 7 November 2008. http://www.advocate.com/news_detail_ektid65015.asp. Retrieved on 2008-11-08. 
^ Cabaj, R; Stein, T. eds. Textbook of Homosexuality and Mental Health, p. 421
^ ed. Sandfort, T; et al. Lesbian and Gay Studies: An Introductory, Interdisciplinary Approach. Chapter 2.
^ Freedman, Alfred M (2000-09-01), "Recalling APA's Historic Step", APA News, http://www.psych.org/pnews/00-09-01/recalling.html, retrieved on 2007-05-04 
^ Shoffman, Marc (2006-05-17), "Homophobic stigma - A community cause", PinkNews.co.uk, http://www.pinknews.co.uk/news/articles/2005-1496.html, retrieved on 2007-05-04 
^ a b American Psychiatric Association (May 2000). "Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Issues". Association of Gay and Lesbian Psychiatrics. http://www.aglp.org/pages/cfactsheets.html#Anchor-Gay-14210. 
^ a b c d "Just the Facts About Sexual Orientation & Youth: A Primer for Principals, Educators and School Personnel". American Academy of Pediatrics, American Counseling Association, American Association of School Administrators, American Federation of Teachers, American Psychological Association, American School Health Association, The Interfaith Alliance, National Association of School Psychologists, National Association of Social Workers, National Education Association. 1999. http://www.apa.org/pi/lgbc/publications/justthefacts.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-28. 
^ "ARQ2: Question A2 - Sexual Orientation". Centre for Addiction and Mental Health. http://www.camh.net/Publications/Resources_for_Professionals/ARQ2/arq2_question_a2.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-28. 
^ Diamond, Lisa M. (January 2008) (PDF). Female bisexuality from adolescence to adulthood: Results from a 10-year longitudinal study.. 44. Developmental Psychology. pp. 5–14. http://www.apa.org/journals/releases/dev4415.pdf. 
^ "Bisexual women - new research findings". Women's Health News. 17 January 2008. http://www.news-medical.net/?id=34415. 
^ "Answers to Your Questions About Sexual Orientation and Homosexuality". American Psychological Association. http://www.apa.org/topics/orientation.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-26. 
^ Bansal, Monisha. "Psychologists Disagree Over Therapy for Homosexuals". Cybercast News Service. http://www.cnsnews.com/Culture/Archive/200608/CUL20060815a.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-28. 
^ "Position Statement on Therapies Focused on Attempts to Change Sexual Orientation (Reparative or Conversion Therapies)". American Psychiatric Association. May 2000. http://www.psych.org/psych_pract/copptherapyaddendum83100.cfm. Retrieved on 2007-08-28. 
^ The Surgeon General's call to Action to Promote Sexual Health and Responsible Sexual Behavior", A Letter from the Surgeon General U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2001-07-09. Retrieved 2007-03-29.
^ [4]
^ Iemmola, F; Camperio, Ciani, A (Jun 2009). "New evidence of genetic factors influencing sexual orientation in men: female fecundity increase in the maternal line". Archives of sexual behavior 38 (3): 393–9. doi:10.1007/s10508-008-9381-6. PMID 18561014.  edit
^ [5] What the gay brain looks like, Time Magazine;
^ Dörner, G., Rohde, W., Stahl, F., Krell, L., & Masius, W.-G. (1975). A neuroendocrine predisposition for homosexuality in men. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 4, 1–8.
^ Ellis & Ames (1987). Neurohormonal functioning and sexual orientation: A theory of homosexuality-heterosexuality. Psychological Bulletin, 101, 233–258.
^ Dörner, G., Geier, T., Ahrens, L., Krell, L., Münx, G., Sieler, H., Kittner, E., & Müller, H. (1980). Prenatal stress as possible aetiogenetic factor of homosexuality in human males. Endokrinologie, 75, 365–368.
^ Dörner, G., Schenk, B., Schmiedel, B., & Ahrens, L. (1983). Stressful events in prenatal life and bi- and homosexual men. Experimental and Clinical Endocrinology, 31, 83–87.
^ Ellis, L., & Cole-Harding, S. (2001). The effects of prenatal stress, and of prenatal alcohol and nicotine exposure, on human sexual orientation. Physiology and Behavior, 74, 213–226.
^ "Sexual Orientation and Adolescents", American Academy of Pediatrics Clinical Report, http://aappolicy.aappublications.org/cgi/reprint/pediatrics;113/6/1827.pdf, retrieved on 2007-02-23 
^ "Sexual Orientation and Homosexuality", American Psychological Association, http://www.apahelpcenter.org/articles/article.php?id=31, retrieved on 2009-02-03 
^ Mitchum, Robert (2007-08-12), "Study of gay brothers may find clues about sexuality", Chicago Tribune, http://www.chicagotribune.com/features/lifestyle/health/chi-gaygene_bd12aug12,1,5608849.story?ctrack=1&cset=true, retrieved on 2007-05-04 
^ Zietsch et al. (2008)
^ The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language: Fourth Edition.
^ "webster.com". 2008. http://www.webster.com/dictionary/homophobia. Retrieved on 2008-01-29. 
^ homophobial "Dictonary.com". Dictonary.com. 2008. http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/homophobia homophobial. Retrieved on 2008-01-29. 
^ "aol.com". aol.com. 2008. http://reference.aol.com/dictionary?dword=homophobia&lookupbtn=Look+Up. Retrieved on 2008-01-29. 
^ The Riddle Homophobia Scale from Allies Committee website, Department of Student Life, Texas A&M University
^ Jay, Karla; Young, Allen (1979). The gay report: Lesbians and gay men speak out about sexual experiences and lifestyles. New York: Summit. ISBN 0671400134. 
^ Buchanan, Wyatt (2006-10-07). "Foley incident stirs up a stereotype about gay men". http://sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2006/10/07/MNG9HLKTVH1.DTL. Retrieved on 2007-04-07. 
^ Marshall WL, Barbaree HE, Butt J (1988). "Sexual offenders against male children: sexual preferences". Behav Res Ther 26 (5): 383–91. doi:10.1016/0005-7967(88)90071-X. PMID 3190647. 
^ Freund et al. (1989). Heterosexuality, homosexuality, and erotic age preference. Journal of Sex Research, 26, 107-117.
^ [6]
^ "Crime in the United States 2004: Hate Crime", FBI, http://www.fbi.gov/ucr/cius_04/offenses_reported/hate_crime/index.html, retrieved on 2007-05-04 
^ Ottosson, Daniel (November, 2006) (PDF), LGBT world legal wrap up survey, ILGA, http://www.ilga.org/statehomophobia/World_legal_wrap_up_survey_November2006.pdf, retrieved on 2007-09-21 
^ a b Donovan, James M; American Association of Law Libraries Standing Committee on Lesbian and Gay Issues (2007), Sexual Orientation and the Law, William S. Hein & Co., ISBN 083770166X  § 5:17
^ "Executive Order 13087 of May 28, 1998" (PDF), Federal Register 63 (105), 1998-06-02, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=1998_register&docid=fr02jn98-135.pdf, retrieved on 2007-09-07 
^ Ashton v. Civiletti, 613 F.2d 923, 20 Fair Empl. Prac. Cas. (BNA) 1601, 21 Empl. Prac. Dec. (CCH) P 30297 (D.C. Cir. 1979)
^ Kelly v. City of Oakland, 198 F.3d 779, 81 Fair Empl. Prac. Cas. (BNA) 1455, 77 Empl. Prac. Dec. (CCH) P 46281 (9th Cir. 1999)
^ Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services, Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 118 S. Ct. 998, 1002 (1998)
^ Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228 (1989)
^ Renter's Rights Against Sexual Orientation Discrimination, http://realestate.findlaw.com/tenant/tenant-fair-housing/tenant-fair-housing-orientation.html, retrieved on 2007-09-07 
^ "State Hate Crime Laws", Anti-Defamation League, June 2006, http://www.adl.org/99hatecrime/state_hate_crime_laws.pdf, retrieved on 2007-05-04 
^ First Presidency Message on Same-Gender Marriage
^ Brownback, Sam (July 9, 2004). "Defining Marriage Down - We need to protect marriage.". National Review. http://www.nationalreview.com/comment/brownback200407090921.asp. 
^ The Family: A Proclamation to the World
^ Doughty, Steve (November 28, 2007). "Gay hate law 'threat to Christian free speech'". Daily Mail. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/pages/live/articles/news/news.html?in_article_id=496871&in_page_id=1770. 
^ Doughty, Steve (September 6, 2006). "Christian faces court over 'offensive' gay festival leaflets". Daily Mail. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/pages/live/articles/news/news.html?in_article_id=403815&in_page_id=1770. 
^ Gove, Michael (December 24, 2002). "I'd like to say this, but it might land me in prison". The Times. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/columnists/michael_gove/article805241.ece. 
^ "Christian group likens Tory candidate review to witch hunt". CBC News. November 28, 2007. http://www.cbc.ca/canada/calgary/story/2007/11/28/chandler-meeting.html. 
^ Kempling, Chris (April 9, 2008). "Conduct unbecoming a free society". National Post. http://www.nationalpost.com/opinion/story.html?id=431535&p=2. 
^ Moldover, Judith (October 31, 2007). "Employer's Dilemma: When Religious Expression and Gay Rights Cross". New York Law Journal. http://www.law.com/jsp/ihc/PubArticleIHC.jsp?id=1193735028038. 
^ Ritter, Bob (January-February, 2008). "Collision of religious and gay rights in the workplace". Humanist. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1374/is_1_68/ai_n24944645. 
^ "Bishop loses gay employment case". BBC News. July 18, 2007. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/wales/6904057.stm. 
^ Beckford, Martin (June 5 ,2008). "Catholic adoption service stops over gay rights". Telegraph. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/2080669/Catholic-adoption-service-stops-over-gay-rights.html. 
^ LeBlanc, Steve (March 10, 2006). "Catholic Charities to halt adoptions over issue involving gays". Boston Globe. http://www.boston.com/news/local/massachusetts/articles/2006/03/10/catholic_charities_to_halt_adoptions_over_issue_involving_gays/. 
^ Mercer, Greg (April 24, 2008). "Christian Horizons rebuked: Employer ordered to compensate fired gay worker, abolish code of conduct". The Record. http://news.therecord.com/News/CanadaWorld/article/341201. 
^ Gallagher, Maggie (2006-05-15). "Banned in Boston:The coming conflict between same-sex marriage and religious liberty". 011. http://www.weeklystandard.com/Content/Public/Articles/000/000/012/191kgwgh.asp. 
^ Capuzzo, Jill (August 14, 2007). "Church Group Complains of Civil Union Pressure". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/08/14/nyregion/14civil.html?_r=1&oref=slogin. 
^ Capuzzo, Jill. "Group Loses Tax Break Over Gay Union Issue". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/18/nyregion/18grove.html. 
^ Moore, Carrie (May 15, 2008). "LDS Church expresses disappointment in California gay marriage decision". Deseret News. http://www.deseretnews.com/article/1,5143,700226242,00.html. 
^ Chin, James (March 12, 2007). "The risks in hiding the HIV/AIDS truth". 9. Business Day. http://www.netassets.co.za/medical/medical.asp?websiteContentItemID=67274. 
^ "The people punish Mr Blair". Daily Mail (UK). May 6, 2005. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-347665/The-people-punish-Mr-Blair.html. 
^ "The Coming Out Continuum", Human Rights Campaign, http://dev.hrc.org/issues/3333.htm, retrieved on 2007-05-04 
^ Neumann, Caryn E (2004), "Outing", glbtq.com, http://www.glbtq.com/social-sciences/outing.html 
^ Maggio, Rosalie (1991), The Dictionary of Bias-Free Usage: A Guide to Nondiscriminatory Language, Oryx Press, p. 208, ISBN 0897746538 
^ Tatchell, Peter (2007-04-23), "Outing hypocrites is justified", The New Statesman, http://www.newstatesman.com/200704230064, retrieved on 2007-05-04 
^ Gay fathers in straight marriages
^ Bozett, Frederick W.. "The Heterosexually Married Gay and Lesbian Parent". Gay and Lesbian Parents. p. 138. http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=yffzsKWvP6AC&oi=fnd&pg=PA138&ots=8RVKJpMsQh&sig=cV1xTjj9Is2BYObvw7DLb4bd7fw#PPA138,M1. 
^ Helping gay fathers come out to their children
^ A Family Matter: When a Spouse Comes Out as Gay, Lesbian, or Bisexual
^ EMRK is for the LGBT adoption
^ Euronews: Gleichgeschlechtliche Adoptiveltern - Gerichtshof rügt Frankreich (german)
^ "Adoption Laws: State by State". Human Rights Campaign. http://www.hrc.org/issues/parenting/adoptions/2375.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-09. 
^ Professional Organizations on GLBT Parenting, HRC.org, http://www.hrc.org/issues/parenting/professional-opinion.asp, retrieved on 2007-09-01 
^ Schlager, Neil, ed. (1998). Gay & Lesbian Almanac. St. James Press. ISBN 1558623582, p. 152.
^ Meyer, Ilan H. (September 2003). "Prejudice, Social Stress, and Mental Health in Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Populations: Conceptual Issues and Research Evidence". Psychological Bulletin (Psychological Bulletin) 129 (5): 674–697. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.129.5.674. PMID 12956539. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=2072932. 
^ Black gay men, lesbians, have fewer mental disorders than whites, says Mailman School of PH study
^ MSM in Africa: highly stigmatized, vulnerable and in need of urgent HIV prevention
^ "UNAIDS: Men who have sex with men" (asp). UNAIDS. http://www.unaids.org/en/PolicyAndPractice/KeyPopulations/MenSexMen/default.asp. Retrieved on 2008-07-24. 
^ Greenwood, Cseneca; Mario Ruberte (9 April 2004). "African American Community and HIV (Slide 14 mentions TG women)" (ppt). East Bay AIDS Education and Training Center. http://www.hawaii.edu/hivandaids/African_American_Transgenders_and_HIV.ppt. Retrieved on 2008-07-24. 
^ Operario D, Burton J, Underhill K, Sevelius J (January 2008). "Men who have sex with transgender women: challenges to category-based HIV prevention". AIDS Behav 12 (1): 18–26. doi:10.1007/s10461-007-9303-y. PMID 17705095. 
^ Operario D, Burton J (April 2000). "HIV-related tuberculosis in a transgender network--Baltimore, Maryland, and New York City area, 1998-2000". MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 49 (15): 317–20. PMID 10858008. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm4915a1.htm. 
^ Young RM, Meyer IH (July 2005). "The trouble with "MSM" and "WSW": erasure of the sexual-minority person in public health discourse". Am J Public Health 95 (7): 1144–9. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2004.046714. PMID 15961753. 
^ Silverstein, Charles; Felice Picano (1993). The New Joy of Gay Sex. GMP. pp. 198-203. ISBN 0854492143, 9780854492145. 
^ Melody, Michael Edward; Linda Mary Peterson (1999). Teaching America about sex: marriage guides and sex manuals from the late Victorians to Dr. Ruth. NYU Press. pp. 182-198. ISBN 0814755321, 9780814755327. 
^ The Journal of sex research. Society for the Scientific Study of Sex (Original from the University of Michigan). 1992. pp. v.29. 
^ Terry, Deborah J.; Cynthia Gallois, Malcolm McCamish (1993). The Theory of reasoned action: its application to aids-preventive behavior. Routledge. pp. 182-198. ISBN 0080419321, 9780080419329. 
^ Doheny, K. (2008) "10 Surprising Health Benefits of Sex," WebMD (reviewed by Chang, L., M.D.)
^ "STI Epi Update: Oral Contraceptive and Condom Use". Public Health Agency of Canada. 1998-04-23. http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/publicat/epiu-aepi/std-mts/std511_e.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-11. 
^ Gibson, P. (1989), "Gay and Lesbian Youth Suicide", in Fenleib, Marcia R. (ed.), Report of the Secretary's Task Force on Youth Suicide, United States Government Printing Office, ISBN 0160025087 
^ Balsam, Kimberly F.; Esther D. Rothblum (June 2005) (PDF). Victimization Over the Life Span: A Comparison of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Heterosexual Siblings. 73. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. pp. 477–487. http://www.apa.org/journals/features/ccp733477.pdf. 
^ Caruso, Kevin, "Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgender Suicide", Suicide.org, http://www.suicide.org/gay-and-lesbian-suicide.html, retrieved on 2007-05-04 
^ Zachary Green and Michael J. Stiers. Multiculturalism and Group Therapy in the United States: A Social Constructionist Perspective. Springer Netherlands 2002. Pages 233-246.
^ "Charge #1 and specifications preferred by the Presbytery of Southern California against The Rev. C. Lee Irons" (PDF). Presbytery of Southern California of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church. http://www.upper-register.com/irons_trial/charges.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-06-27.  "claiming that homosexuality is an unchosen "condition," rather than a sin of the heart, [...] contradicts the teaching of Scripture that both the desire and the act are sin." 
^ Smith, Dinitia (February 7, 2004). "Love That Dare Not Squeak Its Name". New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=FA0C1EF83A5F0C748CDDAB0894DC404482. Retrieved on 2007-09-10. 
^ Bruce Bagemihl, Biological Exuberance: Animal Homosexuality and Natural Diversity, St. Martin's Press, 1999; ISBN 0312192398
^ Harrold, Max (1999-02-16). "Biological Exuberance: Animal Homosexuality and Natural Diversity". The Advocate, reprinted in Highbeam Encyclopedia. http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1G1-53877996.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-10. 
^ Gordon, Dr Dennis (10 April 2007). "‘Catalogue of Life’ reaches one million species". National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research. http://www.niwascience.co.nz/pubs/mr/archive/2007-04-10-3. Retrieved on 2007-09-10. 
^ [7]



Bibliography

Books

Kenneth J. Dover, Greek Homosexuality, , Gerald Duckworth & Co. Ltd. 1979, ISBN 0-674-36261-6 (hardcover), ISBN 0-674-36270-5 (paperback)
John d'Emilio, Sexual Politics, Sexual Communities: The Making of a Homosexual Minority in the United States, 1940-1970, University of Chicago Press 1983, ISBN 0226142655
Norman Roth. The care and feeding of gazelles - Medieval Arabic and Hebrew love poetry. IN: Lazar & Lacy. Poetics of Love in the Middle Ages, George Mason University Press 1989, ISBN 0913969257
Allan Bérubé, Coming out under Fire: The History of Gay Men and Women in World War Two, New York: MacMillan 1990, ISBN 0029031001
Bret Hinsch, Passions of the Cut Sleeve: The Male Homosexual Tradition in China, The University of California Press, 1990, ISBN 0-520-06720-7
Dynes, Wayne R. (ed.) The Encyclopedia of Homosexuality New York and London, Garland Publishing 1990, ISBN 0824065441
Foucault, Michel, The History of Sexuality vol. 1: An Introduction, p.43. Trans. Robert Hurley. New York: Vintage 1990
George Rousseau, Perilous Enlightenment: Pre- and Post-Modern Discourses--Sexual, Historical, Manchester University Press 1991, ISBN 0719033012
Lillian Faderman, Odd Girls and Twilight Lovers: A History of Lesbian Life in Twentieth Century America, Penguin 1992
Arno Schmitt & Jehoeda Sofer (eds). Sexuality and Eroticism Among Males in Moslem Societies. Haworth Press, 1992
George Chauncey, Gay New York: Gender Urban Culture and the Making of the Gay Male World, New York: Basic Books, 1994
Juanita Ramos , Compañeras: Latina Lesbians : An Anthology, Routledge 1994
Johansson, Warren and Percy, William A., (1994), Outing: Shattering the Conspiracy of Silence, Harrington Park Press
Robert T. Michael, John H. Gagnon, Edward O. Laumann, and Gina Kolata. Sex in America: A definitive survey. Boston: Little, Brown, 1995. ISBN 0-316-07524-8
Percy, William A Pederasty and Pedagogy in Archaic Greece. University of Illinois Press, 1996
Lester G. Brown, Two Spirit People, 1997, Harrington Park Press, ISBN 1-56023-089-4
Bullough et al. (eds.) (1996). Handbook of Medieval Sexuality. Garland Publishing. ISBN 0-8153-1287-3.
Jennifer Terry, An American Obsession: Science, Medicine, and Homosexuality in Modern Society, University of Chicago Press 1999, ISBN 0-226-79367-2
Bullough, Vern L. Before Stonewall: Activists for Gay and Lesbian Rights in Historical Context, Harrington Park Press 2002
Ruth Vanita, Queering India: Same-Sex Love and Eroticism in Indian Culture and Society, Routledge 2002
Joanne Meyers, Historical Dictionary of the Lesbian Liberation Movement: Still the Rage, Scarecrow Press 2003
David K. Johnson, The Lavender Scare: The Cold War Persecution of Gays and Lesbians in the Federal Government, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004
Scott Gunther, "The Elastic Closet: A History of Homosexuality in France, 1942-present" Book about the history of homosexual movements in France (sample chapter available online). Palgrave-Macmillan, 2009. ISBN 023022105X.


Journal articles

Bowman, Karl M.; Eagle, Bernice The Problem of Homosexuality, Journal of Social Hygiene 1953
Norton, Rictor and Crew, Louis The Homophobic Imagination, College English 1974
Simon LeVay, A difference in hypothalamic structure between homosexual and heterosexual men, Science Magazine 1991
Christopher Bagley and Pierre Tremblay, On the Prevalence of Homosexuality and Bisexuality, in a Random Community Survey of 750 Men Aged 18 to 27, Journal of Homosexuality, Volume 36, Number 2, pages 1-18, 1998
McConaghy, N., Hadzi-Pavlovic, D., Stevens, C., Manicavasagar, V., Buhrich, N., & Vollmer-Conna, U. (2006). Fraternal Birth Order and Ratio of Heterosexual/Homosexual Feelings in Women and Men. Journal of Homosexuality, 51(4), 161-174. Retrieved April 7, 2009, doi:10.1300/J082v51n04_09
Zietsch, B., Morley, K., Shekar, S., Verweij, K., Keller, M., Macgregor, S., et al. (2008, November). Genetic factors predisposing to homosexuality may increase mating success in heterosexuals. Evolution and Human Behavior, 29(6), 424-433. Retrieved April 1, 2009, doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2008.07.002


Online articles

BBC News (Feb 1998): Fingerprints Study
BBC News (Apr 1999): Doubt cast on 'gay gene'
WebMD (March 2000): Pointing the Finger at Androgen as a Cause of Homosexuality
BBC News (Oct 2004): Genetics of homosexuality
James Davidson, London Review of Books, June 2, 2005, "Mr and Mr and Mrs and Mrs" - detailed review of The Friend, by Alan Bray, a history of same-sex marriage and other same-sex formal bonds
Murray, Stephen; Homosexuality in traditional Sub-Saharan Africa



External links

Answers to Your Questions About Sexual Orientation and Homosexuality The American Psychological Association
One National Gay & Lesbian Archives
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy - Homosexuality








v • d • e

Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender / Queer studies





Gender and
sexual identities

Lesbian · Gay · Bisexual · Transgender · Queer · Third sex / third gender · Transsexual · Two-spirit







Sexual orientation

Bisexuality · Homosexuality · Biology and sexual orientation · Environment and sexual orientation · Homosexuality and psychology · Demographics · Kinsey scale · Klein Grid






History

Timeline · Social movements · Gays in the Holocaust · Gay Liberation · Stonewall riots · History of lesbianism · Adelphopoiesis · Pederasty






LGBT community
and culture

Coming out · Drag king · Drag queen · Gay bar · Gay village · Gay icon · Lesbian utopia · Pride · Pride parade · Gay Rodeo · Same-sex relationship · Slang · Slogans · Symbols · Tourism






Legal issues

LGBT rights by country or territory (Africa  · The Americas  · Asia  · Europe  · Oceania)  · Adoption · Parenting · Civil unions and partnerships · Same-sex marriage · Sodomy law · Military service · Hate crimes · LGBT rights groups · LGBT rights activists






Intolerance and
discrimination

Biphobia · Gay bashing · Heterosexism · Homophobia · Lesbophobia · LGBT rights opposition · Religious perspectives · Transphobia · Violence






Category:LGBT · Category:Queer studies · LGBT portal












v • d • e

Gender and sexual identities





Gender identities

Male · Female · Androgyne · Boi · Genderfuck · Genderqueer · Intersex · Pangender · Transgender · Womyn






Third sex / Third gender

Eunuch · Fa'afafine · Fakaleiti · Hijra · Kathoey · Khanith · Mahu · Mukhannathun · Muxe · Sworn virgin (gender) · Bissu · Two-Spirit






Sexual identities

Asexual · Bisexual · Ex-gay · Heterosexual · Homosexual · Pansexual · Pomosexual · Banjee · Gay · Lesbian · Queer · Same gender loving · Non-heterosexual · unlabeled






See also

Gender roles · Non-westernized concepts of male sexuality · Polyamory · Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures · Evening people · Sexual orientation






Gender studies portal · Sexuality portal









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homosexuality"
Categories: Gender | Gender studies | LGBT | Sexual orientation | Same-sex sexualityHidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles needing additional references from June 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements | Articles with limited geographic scope 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
العربية
مصرى
Asturianu
বাংলা
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Gàidhlig
Galego
文言
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
O'zbek
Piemontèis
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Scots
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Ślůnski
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
ייִדיש
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 21:47.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
