













Kyrgyzstan - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Kyrgyzstan";
		var wgTitle = "Kyrgyzstan";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "170131";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281075122;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Kyrgyzstan

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Kyrgyz Republic
Кыргыз Республикасы
Kyrgyz Respublikasy
Кыргызская Республика
Kyrgyzskaya Respublika










Flag
Coat of arms





Anthem: National Anthem of the Kyrgyz Republic










Capital
(and largest city)
Bishkek
42°52′N 74°36′E﻿ / ﻿42.867°N 74.6°E﻿ / 42.867; 74.6


Official languages
Kyrgyz (State)
Russian (Official)[1]


Ethnic groups 
68.9% Kyrgyz
14.4% Uzbek
9.1% Russian
7.6% others


Demonym
Kyrgyz
Kyrgyzstani[2]


Government
Presidential republic


 - 
President
Kurmanbek Bakiyev


 - 
Prime Minister
Igor Chudinov


Independence
from the Soviet Union 


 - 
Kirghiz SSR
5 December 1936 


 - 
Declared
31 August 1991 


 - 
Completed
25 December 1991 


Area


 - 
Total
199,900 km2 (86th)
77,181 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
3.6


Population


 - 
July 2008 estimate
5,356,869 (111th)


 - 
1999 census
4,896,100 


 - 
Density
26/km2 (176th)
67/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$10.508 billion[3] (134th)


 - 
Per capita
$2,000[3] (140th)


GDP (nominal)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$3.748 billion[3] 


 - 
Per capita
$713[3] 


Gini (2003)
30.3 (medium) 


HDI (2007)
▼ 0.696 (medium) (116th)


Currency
Som (KGS)


Time zone
KGT (UTC+6)


Drives on the
right


Internet TLD
.kg


Calling code
996


Kyrgyzstan (pronounced /ˈkɝːɡɪstæn/; KƏR-gis-tahn; Kyrgyz: Кыргызстан [qɯrʀɯzˈstɑn]; Russian: Киргизстан [ˈkirɡistan]), officially the Kyrgyz Republic, is a country in Central Asia. Landlocked and mountainous, it is bordered by Kazakhstan to the north, Uzbekistan to the west, Tajikistan to the southwest and China to the east. The ethnonym "Kyrgyz", after which the country is named, is thought to originally mean either "forty girls" or "forty tribes", presumably referring to the epic hero Manas who, as legend has it, unified forty tribes against the Mongols.[citation needed] According to popular interpretations, the 40-ray sun on the flag of Kyrgyzstan symbolizes the forty tribes of Manas.[4]




Contents


1 History

1.1 Early history
1.2 Russian influence
1.3 Soviet era
1.4 Independence


2 Politics
3 Provinces and districts
4 Geography

4.1 Enclaves and exclaves


5 Economy
6 Demographics
7 Languages
8 Culture

8.1 Traditions
8.2 Religion
8.3 Flag
8.4 Education
8.5 Horse riding
8.6 Tourism


9 Transport

9.1 Airports
9.2 Banned airline status
9.3 Railways

9.3.1 Rail links with adjacent countries


9.4 Highways
9.5 Waterways
9.6 Ports and harbours


10 Further reading
11 References
12 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Main article: History of Kyrgyzstan

[edit] Early history
Chinese and Muslim sources of the 7th–12th centuries AD describe the Kyrgyz as red-haired with fair complexion and green (blue) eyes. The Kyrgyz state reached its greatest expansion after defeating the Uyghur Khanate in 840 A.D. Then Kyrgyz quickly moved as far as the Tian Shan range and maintained their dominance over this territory for about 200 years. In the twelfth century, however, the Kyrgyz domination had shrunk to the Altay Range and the Sayan Mountains as a result of the Mongol expansion. With the rise of the Mongol Empire in the thirteenth century, the Kyrgyz migrated south.The Kyrgyz were conquered by Genghis Khan’s son Jöchi in 1207. The area became part of the Qing dynasty of China in the mid-18th century[5].[citation needed]Because of the processes of migration, conquest, intermarriage, and assimilation, many of the Kyrgyz peoples that now inhabit Central and Southwest Asia are of mixed origins, often stemming from fragments of many different tribes, though they speak closely related languages.[1]

[edit] Russian influence
In the early nineteenth century, the southern part of what is today Kyrgyzstan came under the control of the Khanate of Kokand. The territory, then known in Russian as "Kirgizia", was formally incorporated into the Russian Empire in 1876. The Russian takeover was met with numerous revolts against tsarist authority, and many of the Kyrgyz opted to move to the Pamirs and Afghanistan. In addition, the suppression of the 1916 rebellion in Central Asia caused many Kyrgyz to migrate to China. Since many ethnic groups in the region were (and still are) split between neighbouring states at a time when borders were more porous and less regulated, it was common to move back and forth over the mountains, depending on where life was perceived as better; this might mean better rains for pasture or better government after oppression.

[edit] Soviet era




Bishkek






Displays in the former Lenin Museum (now part of the National Museum) celebrated Kyrgyzstan's membership in the Soviet Union


Soviet power was initially established in the region in 1919, and the Kara-Kyrgyz Autonomous Oblast was created within the Russian SFSR (the term Kara-Kirghiz was used until the mid-1920s by the Russians to distinguish them from the Kazakhs, who were also referred to as Kirghiz). On December 5, 1936, the Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic was established as a full republic of the Soviet Union.
During the 1920s, Kyrgyzstan developed considerably in cultural, educational and social life. Literacy was greatly improved, and a standard literary language was introduced by imposing Russian on the populace. Economic and social development also was notable. Many aspects of the Kyrgyz national culture were retained despite the suppression of nationalist activity under Stalin, and, therefore, tensions with the all-Union authorities were constant.
The early years of glasnost had little effect on the political climate in Kyrgyzstan. However, the Republic's press was permitted to adopt a more liberal stance and to establish a new publication, Literaturny Kirghizstan, by the Union of Writers. Unofficial political groups were forbidden, but several groups that emerged in 1989 to deal with the acute housing crisis were permitted to function.
In June 1990, ethnic tensions between Uzbeks and Kyrgyz surfaced in the Osh Oblast, where Uzbeks form a majority of the population. Violent confrontations ensued, and a state of emergency and curfew were introduced. Order was not restored until August 1990.[citation needed]
The early 1990s brought considerable change to Kyrgyzstan. By then, the Kyrgyzstan Democratic Movement (KDM) had developed into a significant political force with support in Parliament. In an upset victory, Askar Akayev, the liberal President of the Kyrgyz Academy of Sciences, was elected to the Presidency in October 1990. The following January, Akayev introduced new government structures and appointed a new government composed mainly of younger, reform-oriented politicians.
In December 1990, the Supreme Soviet voted to change the republic's name to the Republic of Kyrgyzstan. (In 1993, it became the Kyrgyz Republic.) In February 1991, the name of the capital, Frunze, was changed back to its prerevolutionary name of Bishkek. Despite these aesthetic moves toward independence, economic realities seemed to work against secession from the Soviet Union. In a referendum on the preservation of the Soviet Union in March 1991, 88.7% of the voters approved the proposal to retain the Soviet Union as a "renewed federation."
On August 19, 1991, when the State Emergency Committee assumed power in Moscow, there was an attempt to depose Akayev in Kyrgyzstan. After the coup collapsed the following week, Akayev and Vice President German Kuznetsov announced their resignations from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), and the entire bureau and secretariat resigned. This was followed by the Supreme Soviet vote declaring independence from the Soviet Union on August 31, 1991.

[edit] Independence
In October 1991, Akayev ran unopposed and was elected president of the new independent Republic by direct ballot, receiving 95% of the votes cast. Together with the representatives of seven other Republics that same month, he signed the Treaty of the New Economic Community. Finally, on December 21, 1991, Kyrgyzstan joined with the other four Central Asian Republics to formally enter the new Commonwealth of Independent States. In 1992, Kyrgyzstan joined the UN and the OSCE.
The "Tulip Revolution," after the parliamentary elections in March 2005, forced President Akayev's resignation on April 4, 2005. Opposition leaders formed a coalition, and a new government was formed under President Kurmanbek Bakiyev and Prime Minister Feliks Kulov. The nation's capital was also looted during the protests.
Political stability appears to be elusive, however, as various groups and factions allegedly linked to organized crime are jockeying for power. Three of the 75 members of Parliament elected in March 2005 were assassinated, and another member was assassinated on 10 May 2006 shortly after winning his murdered brother's seat in a by-election. All four are reputed to have been directly involved in major illegal business ventures.
Current concerns in Kyrgyzstan include privatization of state-owned enterprises, expansion of Western influence, inter-ethnic relations and terrorism.

[edit] Politics
Main article: Politics of Kyrgyzstan




President Kurmanbek Bakiyev (right) with Dmitry Medvedev in Bishkek, 2008.


The 1993 constitution defines the form of government as a democratic republic. The executive branch includes a president and prime minister. The parliament currently is unicameral. The judicial branch comprises a Supreme Court, a Constitutional Court, local courts and a Chief Prosecutor.
In March 2002, in the southern district of Aksy, five people protesting the arbitrary arrest of an opposition politician were shot dead by police, sparking nationwide protests. President Akayev initiated a constitutional reform process which initially included the participation of a broad range of government, civil and social representatives in an open dialogue, leading to a February 2003 referendum marred by voting irregularities. The amendments to the constitution approved by the referendum resulted in stronger control by the president and weakened the parliament and the Constitutional Court. Parliamentary elections for a new, 75-seat unicameral legislature were held on February 27 and March 13, 2005, but were widely viewed as corrupt. The subsequent protests led to a bloodless coup on March 24, after which Akayev fled the country and was replaced by acting president Kurmanbek Bakiyev (see: Tulip Revolution).
Interim government leaders are developing a new governing structure for the country and working to resolve outstanding constitutional issues. On July 10, 2005, acting president Bakiyev won the presidential election in a landslide, with 88.9% of the vote, and was inaugurated on 14 August. However, initial public support for the new administration substantially declined in subsequent months as a result of its apparent inability to solve the corruption problems that have plagued the country since its independence from the Soviet Union, along with the murders of several members of parliament. Large-scale protests against president Bakiyev took place in Bishkek in April and November 2006, with opposition leaders accusing the president of failing to live up to his election promises to reform the country's constitution and transfer many of his presidential powers to parliament.[6]
While it cannot really be described as an exodus, more and more ethnic white Russians want to leave Kyrgyzstan for Russia. The surge in the numbers of those seeking the necessary permits can be explained by the March events and the continuously shaky situation in Kyrgyzstan, both economically and politically. The Russians are increaisngly pessimistic and concerned about an increasing lawlessness in Bishkek (where almost 50% of the country’s Russian population lives. Interfax reported on 8th February 2006 that if the current trend persists, more than half of Kyrgyzstan’s Russian population will have left within the next ten years. Besides the uncertain outlook for the future, there are signs of growing nationalism and even xenophobia in a country that was always known for one of the most tolerant populations in the Commonwealth of Independent States[2].
On 3 February 2009, President Kurmanbek Bakiyev announced the imminent closure of the Manas Air Base, the only US military base remaining in Central Asia.[7] The closure was approved by Parliament on 19 February 2009 by 78-1 for the government-backed bill.[8] Previously to it Kyrgyz National TV & Radio Broadcasting Corporation shut down the broadcast of Radio Liberty.[citation needed] TV shows “Inconvenient Questions” and “Azattyk+”, which raised serious political issues, were also shut down.[citation needed]
Kyrgyzstan is among the twenty countries in the world with the highest perceived level of corruption: the 2008 Corruption Perception Index for Kyrgyzstan is 1.8 on a scale of 0 (most corrupt) to 10 (least corrupt).[9]

[edit] Provinces and districts
Main articles: Provinces of Kyrgyzstan and Raions of Kyrgyzstan
Kyrgyzstan is divided into seven provinces (sing. oblast (область), pl. oblasttar (областтар)) administered by appointed governors. The capital, Bishkek, and the second large city Osh are administratively independent cities (shaar) with a status equal to a province.




Provinces of Kyrgyzstan


The provinces, and independent cities, are as follows:

Bishkek (city)
Batken
Chui
Jalal-Abad
Naryn
Osh (province)
Talas
Issyk-Kul
Osh (city)

Each province comprises a number of districts (raions), administered by government-appointed officials (akim). Rural communities (ayıl ökmötü), consisting of up to 20 small settlements, have their own elected mayors and councils.

[edit] Geography




Map of Kyrgyzstan






Tian Shan mountain range in Kyrgyzstan.






Orchard near in Issyk Kul Province.


Main article: Geography of Kyrgyzstan
Kyrgyzstan is a landlocked country in Central Asia, bordering Kazakhstan, China, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. The mountainous region of the Tian Shan covers over 80% of the country (Kyrgyzstan is occasionally referred to as "the Switzerland of Central Asia", as a result),[10] with the remainder made up of valleys and basins. Lake Issyk-Kul in the north-western Tian Shan is the largest lake in Kyrgyzstan and the second largest mountain lake in the world after Titicaca. The highest peaks are in the Kakshaal-Too range, forming the Chinese border. Peak Jengish Chokusu, at 7,439 m (24,400 feet), is the highest point and is considered by geologists (though not mountaineers) to be the northernmost peak over 7,000 m (23,000 feet) in the world. Heavy snowfall in winter leads to spring floods which often cause serious damage downstream. The runoff from the mountains is also used for hydro-electricity.
The climate varies regionally. The south-western Fergana Valley is subtropical and extremely hot in summer, with temperatures reaching 40°C (104°F.) The northern foothills are temperate and the Tian Shan varies from dry continental to polar climate, depending on elevation. In the coldest areas temperatures are sub-zero for around 40 days in winter, and even some desert areas experience constant snowfall in this period.
Kyrgyzstan has significant deposits of metals including gold and rare earth metals. Due to the country's predominantly mountainous terrain, less than 8% of the land is cultivated, and this is concentrated in the northern lowlands and the fringes of the Fergana Valley.
Bishkek in the north is the capital and largest city, with approximately 900,000 inhabitants (as of 2005). The second city is the ancient town of Osh, located in the Fergana Valley near the border with Uzbekistan. The principal river is the Kara Darya, which flows west through the Fergana Valley into Uzbekistan. Across the border in Uzbekistan it meets another major Kyrgyz river, the Naryn. The confluence forms the Syr Darya, which originally flowed into the Aral Sea. At this time it no longer reaches the sea, as its water is withdrawn upstream to irrigate cotton fields in Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and southern Kazakhstan. The Chu River also briefly flows through Kyrgyzstan before entering Kazakhstan.

[edit] Enclaves and exclaves
There is one exclave, the tiny village of Barak, Kyrgyzstan,[11] (population 627) in the Fergana valley. The village is surrounded by Uzbek territory and located between the towns of Margilan and Fergana.
There are four Uzbek enclaves within Kyrgyzstan. Two of them are the towns of Sokh (area 125 sq. mi/325 km² and a population of 42,800 in 1993, although some estimates go as high as 70,000; 99% are Tajiks, the remainder Uzbeks), and Shakhrimardan (also known as Shakirmardon or Shah-i-Mardan, area 35 sq. mi/90 km² and a population of 5,100 in 1993; 91% are Uzbeks, the remainder Kyrgyz); the other two are the tiny territories of Chuy-Kara (or Kalacha, roughly 3 km long by 1 km wide or 2 mi by 0.6 mi) and Dzhangail (a dot of land barely 2 or 3 km across). Chuy-Kara is on the Sokh river, between the Uzbek border and the Sokh enclave.
There also are two enclaves belonging to Tajikistan: Vorukh (exclave area between 95 and 130 km² [37–50 sq. mi], population estimated between 23,000 and 29,000, 95% Tajiks and 5% Kyrgyz, distributed among 17 villages), located 45 kilometres (28 mi) south of Isfara on the right bank of the Karafshin river, and a small settlement near the Kyrgyz railway station of Kairagach.

[edit] Economy
Main article: Economy of Kyrgyzstan
Despite the backing of major Western lenders, including the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, Kyrgyzstan has had economic difficulties following independence. Initially, these were a result of the breakup of the Soviet trading bloc and resulting loss of markets, which impeded the republic's transition to a free market economy. The government has reduced expenditures, ended most price subsidies and introduced a value-added tax. Overall, the government appears committed to the transition to a market economy. Through economic stabilization and reform, the government seeks to establish a pattern of long-term consistent growth. Reforms led to Kyrgyzstan's accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) on December 20, 1998.
The Kyrgyz economy was severely affected by the collapse of the Soviet Union and the resulting loss of its vast market. In 1990, some 98% of Kyrgyz exports went to other parts of the Soviet Union. Thus, the nation's economic performance in the early 1990s was worse than any other former Soviet republic except war-torn Armenia, Azerbaijan and Tajikistan, as factories and state farms collapsed with the disappearance of their traditional markets in the former Soviet Union. While economic performance has improved considerably in the last few years, and particularly since 1998, difficulties remain in securing adequate fiscal revenues and providing an adequate social safety net.
Agriculture is an important sector of the economy in Kyrgyzstan (see agriculture in Kyrgyzstan). By the early 1990s, the private agricultural sector provided between one-third and one-half of some harvests. In 2002 agriculture accounted for 35.6% of GDP and about half of employment. Kyrgyzstan's terrain is mountainous, which accommodates livestock raising, the largest agricultural activity, so the resulting wool, meat and dairy products are major commodities. Main crops include wheat, sugar beets, potatoes, cotton, tobacco, vegetables and fruit. As the prices of imported agrichemicals and petroleum are so high, much farming is being done by hand and by horse, as it was generations ago. Agricultural processing is a key component of the industrial economy as well as one of the most attractive sectors for foreign investment.
Kyrgyzstan is rich in mineral resources but has negligible petroleum and natural gas reserves; it imports petroleum and gas. Among its mineral reserves are substantial deposits of coal, gold, uranium, antimony and other valuable metals. Metallurgy is an important industry, and the government hopes to attract foreign investment in this field. The government has actively encouraged foreign involvement in extracting and processing gold. The country's plentiful water resources and mountainous terrain enable it to produce and export large quantities of hydroelectric energy.
On a local level, the economy is primarily kiosk in nature. A large amount of local commerce occurs at bazaars and small village kiosks. Commodities such as petrol (gas) are often sold road-side in gallon jugs. A significant amount of trade is unregulated. There is also a scarcity of common everyday consumer items[specify] in remote villages. Thus a large number of homes are quite self-sufficient with respect to food production. There is a distinct differentiation between urban and rural economies.
The principal exports are nonferrous metals and minerals, woolen goods and other agricultural products, electric energy and certain engineering goods. Imports include petroleum and natural gas, ferrous metals, chemicals, most machinery, wood and paper products, some foods and some construction materials. Its leading trade partners include Germany, Russia, China, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan.

[edit] Demographics




Age distribution pyramid (2005)


Main article: Demographics of Kyrgyzstan
Kyrgyzstan's population is estimated at 5.2 million in 2007.[12] Of those, 34.4% are under the age of 15 and 6.2% are over the age of 65. The country is rural: only about one-third of Kyrgyzstan's population live in urban areas. The average population density is 69 people per square mile (29 people per km²).
The nation's largest ethnic group are the Kyrgyz, a Turkic people, who comprise 69% of the population (2007 estimate). Other ethnic groups include Russians (9.0%) concentrated in the north and Uzbeks (14.5%) living in the south. Small but noticeable minorities include Tatars (1.9%), Uyghurs (1.1%), Tajiks (1.1%), Kazakhs (0.7%) and Ukrainians (0.5%) and other smaller ethnic minorities (1.7%). Kyrgyzstan has undergone a pronounced change in its ethnic composition since independence. The percentage of ethnic Kyrgyz increased from around 50% in 1979 to nearly 70% in 2007, while the percentage of European ethnic groups (Russians, Ukrainians and Germans) as well as Tatars dropped from 35% to about 10%.[12][13]
The Kyrgyz have historically been semi-nomadic herders, living in round tents called yurts and tending sheep, horses and yaks. This nomadic tradition continues to function seasonally (see transhumance) as herding families return to the high mountain pasture (or jailoo) in the summer.

[edit] Languages
Kyrgyzstan is one of two of the five former Soviet republics in Central Asia to retain Russian as an official language (Kazakhstan is the other country to retain Russian). It added the Kyrgyz language to become an officially bilingual country in September 1991. This sent a clear signal to the ethnic Russians that they were welcome in the new independent state, in an effort to avoid a brain drain. Kyrgyz is a member of the Turkic group of languages and was written in the Arabic alphabet until the twentieth century. Latin script was introduced and adopted in 1928, and was subsequently replaced by Cyrillic script in 1941.
Generally, people understand and speak Russian all over the country, except for some remote mountain areas. Russian is the mother tongue of the majority of Bishkek dwellers, and most business and political affairs are carried out in this language. Until recently, Kyrgyz remained a language spoken at home and was rarely used during meetings or other events. However, most parliamentary meetings today are conducted in Kyrgyz, with simultaneous interpretation available for those not speaking Kyrgyz.

[edit] Culture
Main article: Culture of Kyrgyzstan




Musicians playing traditional Kyrgyz music.



Manas, an epic poem
Komuz, a three-stringed lute
Tush kyiz, large, elaborately embroidered wall hangings
Shirdak, flat cushions made in shadow-pairs [14]
other textiles, especially made from felt
Falconry


[edit] Traditions
Illegal, but still practiced, is the tradition of bride kidnapping.[15]
It is debatable whether bride kidnapping is actually traditional. Some of the confusion may stem from the fact that arranged marriages were traditional, and one of the ways to escape an arranged marriage was to arrange a consensual "kidnapping."[16]

[edit] Religion
See also: Islam in Kyrgyzstan




Karakol Dungan Mosque


The Population of Kyrgyzstan is 75% Muslim, 20% Russian Orthodox and 5% other.[17]
During Soviet times, state atheism was encouraged. Today, however, Kyrgyzstan is a secular state, although Islam has exerted a growing influence in politics.[18] For instance, there have been various attempts to decriminalize polygamy, and to arrange for officials to travel on hajj (the pilgrimage to Mecca) under a tax-free arrangement.[18] Kyrgyzstan is an overwhelmingly Sunni Muslim nation and adheres to the Hanafi school of thought.[19]
While Islam in Kyrgyzstan is more of a cultural background than a devout daily practice for many, public figures have expressed support for restoring religious values. For example, human rights ombudsman Tursunbay Bakir-Ulu noted, "In this era of independence, it is not surprising that there has been a return to spiritual roots not only in Kyrgyzstan, but also in other post-communist republics. It would be immoral to develop a market-based society without an ethical dimension."[18] Additionally, Bermet Akayeva, the daughter of Askar Akayev, the former President of Kyrgyzstan, stated during a July 2007 interview that Islam is increasingly taking root across the nation.[20] She emphasized that many mosques have been built and that the Kyrgyz are increasingly devoting themselves to Islam, which she noted was "not a bad thing in itself. It keeps our society more moral, cleaner."[20]




In a traditional Islamic cemetery


The other faiths practiced in Kyrgyzstan include Russian Orthodox and Ukrainian Orthodox versions of Christianity, practiced primarily by Russians and Ukrainians respectively. A small minority of ethnic Germans are also Christian, mostly Lutheran and Baptist as well as a Roman Catholic community of approximately 600.[3] [21] A few Animistic traditions survive as do influences from Buddhism such as the tying of prayer flags onto sacred trees, though some view this practice rooted within Sufi Islam.[22] There are also a small number of Bukharian Jews living in Kyrgyzstan, but during the collapse of the Soviet Union most fled to other countries, mainly the United States and Israel.

[edit] Flag
The 40-rayed yellow sun in the center of the flag represents 40 warriors of the mythical hero Manas. The lines inside the sun represent the crown or tündük (Kyrgyz түндүк) of a yurt, a symbol replicated in many facets of Kyrgyz architecture. The red portion of the flag represents peace and openness of Kyrgyzstan.

[edit] Education




American University of Central Asia


Educational institutions in Kyrgyzstan include:

University of Central Asia
American University of Central Asia
Bishkek Humanities University
International Ataturk-Alatoo University[23]
International University of Kyrgyzstan
Kyrgyz National University[24]
Arabaev Kyrgyz State University[25]
Kyrgyz Russian Slavonic University[26]
Kyrgyz-Russian State University
Kyrgyz-Turkish MANAS University[27]
Kyrgyz Uzbek University
Moskov Institute of Law and Enterprise
Osh State University[28]
Osh Technological University


[edit] Horse riding
The traditional national sports reflect the importance of horse riding in Kyrgyz culture.
Very popular, as in all of Central Asia, is Ulak Tartysh, a team game resembling a cross between polo and rugby in which two teams of riders wrestle for possession of the headless carcass of a goat, which they attempt to deliver across the opposition's goal line, or into the opposition's goal: a big tub or a circle marked on the ground.
Other popular games on horseback include:

At Chabysh - a long-distance horse race, sometimes over a distance of more than 50 km
Jumby Atmai - a large bar of precious metal (the "jumby") is tied to a pole by a thread and contestants attempt to break the thread by shooting at it, while at a gallop
Kyz Kuumai - a man chases a girl in order to win a kiss from her, while she gallops away; if he is not successful she may in turn chase him and attempt to beat him with her "kamchi" (horsewhip)
Oodarysh - two contestants wrestle on horseback, each attempting to be the first to throw the other from his horse
Tyin Enmei - picking up a coin from the ground at full gallop


[edit] Tourism
For those interested in trekking and camping, every oblast offers different attractions and challenges. Some of the most popular locations for camping are southern Osh, the area between Naryn City and the Torugart pass, and the mountains and glaciers surrounding Karakol in Issyk-Kul. Local guides and porters can be hired from many different tour companies in Bishkek and in the oblast capitals.
Skiing is still in its infancy as a tourism industry, but there is one fairly cheap and well-equipped base about a half-hour from Bishkek. In the Karakol Valley National Park, outside Karakol, there is also a ski base with three T-bars and rental equipment available of good quality.

[edit] Transport




Bishkek West Bus Terminal


Main article: Transport in Kyrgyzstan
Transport in Kyrgyzstan is severely constrained by the country's alpine topography. Roads have to snake up steep valleys, cross passes of 3,000 metre (9,000 ft) altitude and more, and are subject to frequent mud slides and snow avalanches. Winter travel is close to impossible in many of the more remote and high-altitude regions. Additional problems are due to the fact that many roads and railway lines built during the Soviet period are today intersected by international boundaries, requiring time-consuming border formalities to cross where they are not completely closed. Horses are still a much-used transport option, especially in more rural areas; Kyrgyzstan's road infrastructure is not extensive, so horses are able to reach locations that motor vehicles cannot, and they do not require expensive, imported fuel.

[edit] Airports
At the end of the Soviet period there were about 50 airports and airstrips in Kyrgyzstan, many of them built primarily to serve military purposes in this border region so close to China. Only a few of them remain in service today.

Manas International Airport near Bishkek is the main international airport, with services to Moscow, Tashkent, Almaty, Beijing, Urumqi, Istanbul, Baku, Delhi and London.
Osh Airport is the main air terminal in the south of the country, with daily connections to Bishkek.
Jalal-Abad Airport is linked to Bishkek by daily flights. The national flag carrier, Kyrgyzstan, operates flights on An-24 aircraft. During the summer months, a weekly flight links Jalal-Abad with the Issyk-Kul Region.
Other facilities built during the Soviet era are either closed down, used only occasionally or restricted to military use (e.g., Kant Air Base near Bishkek, which is used by the Russian Air Force).


[edit] Banned airline status
This country appears on the E.U. list of prohibited countries with regard to the certification of airlines. This means that no airline which is registered with Kyrgyzstan may operate services of any kind within the European Union community. This is due to substandard safety standards. [29]

[edit] Railways
The Chui valley in the north and the Ferghana valley in the south were endpoints of the Soviet Union's rail system in Central Asia. Following the emergence of independent post-Soviet states, the rail lines which were built without regard for administrative boundaries have been cut by borders, and traffic is therefore severely curtailed. The small bits of rail lines within Kyrgyzstan, about 370 km (1,520 mm broad gauge) in total, have little economic value in the absence of the former bulk traffic over long distances to and from such centers as Tashkent, Almaty and the cities of Russia.
There are vague plans about extending rail lines from Balykchy in the north and/or from Osh in the south into the People's Republic of China, but the cost of construction would be enormous.

[edit] Rail links with adjacent countries

Kazakhstan - yes - Bishkek branch - same gauge
Uzbekistan - yes - Osh branch - same gauge
Tajikistan - no - same gauge
China - no - Break of gauge 1524mm/1435mm


[edit] Highways




A road in Osh


With support from the Asian Development Bank, a major road linking the north and southwest from Bishkek to Osh has recently been completed. This considerably eases communication between the two major population centers of the country -- the Chui Valley in the north and the Fergana Valley in the South. An offshoot of this road branches off across a 3,500 meter pass into the Talas Valley in the northwest. Plans are now being formulated to build a major road from Osh into the People's Republic of China.
total: 30,300 km (including 140 km of expressways)
paved: 22,600 km (includes some all-weather gravel-surfaced roads)
unpaved: 7,700 km (these roads are made of unstabilized earth and are difficult to negotiate in wet weather) (1990)

[edit] Waterways
Water transport exists only on Lake Issyk Kul, and has drastically shrunk since the end of the Soviet Union.

[edit] Ports and harbours
Balykchy (Ysyk-Kol or Rybach'ye), on Lake Issyk Kul.

[edit] Further reading




Issyk Kul Lake



Historical Dictionary of Kyrgyzstan by Rafis Abazov
Kyrgyzstan: Central Asia's Island of Democracy? by John Anderson
Kyrgyzstan: The Growth and Influence of Islam in the Nations of Asia and Central Asia by Daniel E. Harmon
Lonely Planet Guide: Central Asia by Paul Clammer, Michael Kohn and Bradley Mayhew
Odyssey Guide: Kyrgyz Republic by Ceri Fairclough, Rowan Stewart and Susie Weldon
Silk Road to Ruin: Is Central Asia the New Middle East? by Ted Rall
Kyrgyzstan: Traditions of Nomads by V. Kadyrov, Rarity Ltd., Bishkek, 2005. ISBN 9-967-424-42-7


[edit] References


^ "Constitution". Government of Kyrgyzstan. http://www.gov.kg/index.php?name=EZCMS&menu=3403&page_id=84. Retrieved on 2007-07-07.  "
Article 5
1. The state language of the Kyrgyz Republic shall be the Kyrgyz language.
2. In the Kyrgyz Republic, the Russian language shall be used in the capacity of an official language." 
^ CIA World Factbook entry on Kyrgysztan
^ a b c d "Kyrgyzstan". International Monetary Fund. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?pr.x=39&pr.y=18&sy=2004&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=917&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&grp=0&a=. Retrieved on 2008-10-09. 
^ Forty tribes and the 40-ray sun on the flag of Kyrgyzstan, SRAS–The School of Russian and Asian Studies
^ www.britannica.com
^ "Clashes erupt in Kyrgyz capital". BBC Online. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/6124428.stm. Retrieved on 21 November 2007. 
^ Proposal to close the Manas Air Base
^ Kyrgyz Parliament Approves U.S. base closure, 19 February 2009
^ 2008 Corruption Perception Index from Transparency International. Retrieved on 14 March 2009
^ Escobar, Pepe. "The Tulip Revolution takes root". Asia Times Online. http://www.atimes.com/atimes/Central_Asia/GC26Ag03.html. Retrieved on 21 November 2007. 
^ http://home.no.net/enklaver/kyrgyzstan.htm
^ a b Ethnic composition of the population in Kyrgyzstan 1999-2007.
^ Population census for Kyrgyzstan, 1999 (Russian)
^ Kyrgyz Style - Production - Souvenirs
^ Lom, Petr. "Synopsis of "The Kidnapped Bride"". Frontline/World. http://www.pbs.org/frontlineworld/stories/kyrgyzstan/thestory.html. Retrieved on 21 November 2007. 
^ Human Rights Watch Report "Reconciled to Violence: State Failure to Stop Domestic Abuse and Abduction of Women in Kyrgyzstan" published September 2006, Vol. 18, No.9.
^ the World Factbook
^ a b c ISN Security Watch - Islam exerts growing influence on Kyrgyz politics
^ Kyrgyzstan - Quick facts, statistics and cultural notes
^ a b EurasiaNet Civil Society - Kyrgyzstan: Time to Ponder a Federal System - Ex-President's Daughter
^ Religion in Kyrgyzstan
^ Shaikh Muhammad Bin Jamil Zeno, Muhammad Bin Jamil Zeno - 2006, pg. 264
^ International Ataturk-Alatoo University
^ Kyrgyz National University
^ Arabaev Kyrgyz State University
^ Kyrgyz Russian Slavonic University
^ Kyrgyz-Turkish MANAS University
^ Osh State University
^ List of banned E.U. air carriers



[edit] External links

Find more about Kyrgyzstan on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Government


Government of Kyrgyzstan official site
President of the Kyrgyz Republic
Kyrgyzstan Ministry of External Trade and Industry
Kyrgyz State Television and Radio
Local government Official website (in Russian)
Chief of State and Cabinet Members


General information


Country Profile from BBC News
Kyrgyzstan entry at The World Factbook
Kyrgyzstan at UCB Libraries GovPubs
Kyrgyzstan at the Open Directory Project
Wikimedia Atlas of Kyrgyzstan
Kyrgyzstan travel guide from Wikitravel


News media


Eurasianet - Kyrgyzstan Daily Digest news


Other


Common Language Project Country Fact Sheet - Kyrgyzstan
On the Roof of the World photo essay from PBS Frontline
Kyrgyzstan's location on a 3D globe (Java)







 
Geographic locale














v • d • e

Countries of Central Asia






 Afghanistan ·  Kazakhstan ·  Kyrgyzstan ·  Mongolia ·  Pakistan ·  Tajikistan ·  Turkmenistan ·  Uzbekistan













v • d • e

Countries of Asia








Afghanistan · Armenia · Azerbaijan1 · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Bhutan · Brunei · Burma · Cambodia · People's Republic of China · Republic of China (Taiwan)2 · Cyprus · Egypt3 · Georgia1 · India · Indonesia4 · Iran · Iraq · Israel · Japan · Jordan · Kazakhstan1 · North Korea · South Korea · Kuwait · Kyrgyzstan · Laos · Lebanon · Malaysia · Maldives · Mongolia · Nepal · Oman · Pakistan · Philippines · Qatar · Russia1 · Saudi Arabia · Singapore · Sri Lanka · Syria · Tajikistan · Thailand · East Timor (Timor-Leste)4 · Turkey1 · Turkmenistan · United Arab Emirates · Uzbekistan · Vietnam · Yemen3

For dependent and other territories, see Dependent territory.

1 Partly or significantly in Europe.  2 The Republic of China (Taiwan) is not officially recognized by the United Nations; see Political status of Taiwan.
3 Partly or significantly in Africa.  4 Partly or wholly reckoned in Oceania.





















 
International membership






United Nations
UN Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe OSCE World Trade Organization
WTO













v • d • e

Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)





Members

Afghanistan · Azerbaijan · Iran · Kazakhstan · Kyrgyzstan · Pakistan · Tajikistan · Turkey · Turkmenistan · Uzbekistan














v • d • e

Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)






Armenia · Azerbaijan · Belarus · Kazakhstan · Kyrgyzstan · Russia · Tajikistan · Uzbekistan · Ukraine · Moldova
Associate member: Turkmenistan · Downgraded membership: Georgia














v • d • e

Eurasian Economic Community (EURASEC)






Belarus · Kazakhstan · Kyrgyzstan · Russia · Tajikistan · Uzbekistan
















v • d • e

Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC)





Members

Afghanistan · Albania · Algeria · Azerbaijan · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Benin · Burkina Faso · Brunei · Cameroon · Chad · Comoros · Côte d'Ivoire · Djibouti · Egypt · Gabon · Gambia · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Guyana · Indonesia · Iran · Iraq · Jordan · Kuwait · Kazakhstan · Kyrgyzstan · Lebanon · Libya · Maldives · Malaysia · Mali · Mauritania · Morocco · Mozambique · Niger · Nigeria · Oman · Pakistan · Palestine · Qatar · Saudi Arabia · Senegal · Sierra Leone · Somalia · Sudan · Suriname · Syria · Tajikistan · Turkey · Tunisia · Togo · Turkmenistan · Uganda · Uzbekistan · United Arab Emirates · Yemen









Observers





Countries and territories


Bosnia and Herzegovina · Central African Republic · Russia · Thailand · Northern Cyprus (as Turkish Cypriot State)







Muslim communities


Moro National Liberation Front







International organizations


Economic Cooperation Organization · African Union · Arab League · Non-Aligned Movement · United Nations
















v • d • e

Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO)





Member States

 China ·  Kazakhstan ·  Kyrgyzstan ·  Russia ·  Tajikistan ·  Uzbekistan







Observer States

 India ·  Iran ·  Mongolia ·  Pakistan






Guests

 Afghanistan ·  ASEAN ·  CIS






Working Languages

Chinese · Russian












 
Other associations














v • d • e

Turkic-speaking regions





Federal subjects of Russia shown in italics.









   



Western Turkic
 Azerbaijan1
 Bashkortostan
 Chuvashia
 Northern Cyprus2
Eastern Turkic
 Altai Republic
 Khakassia
 Kyrgyzstan







 Gagauzia (Moldova)
 Iran
 Kabardino-Balkaria
 Karachay-Cherkessia
 Karakalpakstan (Uzbekistan)

 Sakha Republic
 Tuva







 Kazakhstan
 Kosovo
 Macedonia
 Tatarstan
 Turkey









 Turkmenistan
 Uzbekistan
 Xinjiang (China)












1 Includes the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic.    2 Recognized only by Turkey; see Cyprus dispute.












v • d • e

Modern Independent Turkic states









   


 Azerbaijan




 Kazakhstan




 Kyrgyzstan




 Northern Cyprus1




 Turkey




 Turkmenistan




 Uzbekistan











1 Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus; recognized only by Turkey; see Cyprus dispute.












v • d • e

Turkic topics





Languages





Afshar · Äynu · Altay · Azerbaijani · Baraba Tatar · Bashkir · Bulgar · Chagatai · Chulym · Chuvash · Crimean Tatar · Cuman · Dolgan · Fuyü Gïrgïs · Gagauz · Hunnic · Ili Turki · Karachay-Balkar · Karaim · Karakalpak · Karamanli Turkish · Kazakh · Khakas · Khalaj · Khazar · Khorasani Turkic · Kipchak · Krymchak · Kyrgyz · Kumyk · Kypchak group · Nogai · Old Tatar · Old Turkic · Ottoman Turkish · Pecheneg · Qashqai · Sakha · Salar · Shor · Kazan Tatar · Tofa · Turkic Avar · Turkish · Turkmen · Tuvan · Urum · Uyghur · Uzbek









Peoples

Altays · Azerbaijanis · Balkars · Bashkirs · Bulgars · Chulyms · Chuvashs · Crimean Tatars · Cumans · Dolgans · Gagauz · Iraqi Turkmen · Karachays · Crimean Karaites · Karakalpaks · Karapapak · Kazakhs · Khakas · Khalajs · Khazars · Kimek · Kipchaks · Krymchaks · Kumyks · Kyrgyz · Meskhetian Turks · Nağaybäk · Nogais · Oghuz Turks · Qashqai · Salar · Shatuo Turks · Syrian Turkmen · Tatars · Finnish Tatars · Keräşen Tatars · Lipka Tatars · Siberian Tatars · Volga Tatars · Telengit · Teleuts · Tofalar · Turgesh • Turkish Cypriots · Turkish people (Turks in Bulgaria · Turks of Kosovo · Turks of Romania · Turks in the Republic of Macedonia · Turks of Western Thrace) · Turkmens · Tuvans · Uyghur · Uzbeks · White Huns · Yakuts · Yugur






Politics

Pan-Turkism  · Kemalism · Turanism






Homeland

Göktürks






States

Azerbaijan · Kazakhstan  · Kyrgyzstan · Northern Cyprus · Turkey · Turkmenistan · Uzbekistan






Autonomous
republics

Altai Republic · Bashkortostan · Crimea · Chuvashia · Gagauzia · Karakalpakstan · Khakassia · Nakhchivan · Sakha Republic · Tatarstan · Tuva · Xinjiang






Studies

Old Turkic script · Proto-Turkic language · Turkic alphabets · Turkology






Religions

Islam · Christianity · Buddhism · Shamanism · Tengriism






History of the Turkic peoples















Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kyrgyzstan"
Categories: Kyrgyzstan | Modern Turkic states | Landlocked countries | Russian-speaking countries and territoriesHidden categories: Articles containing Kyrgyz language text | Articles containing Russian language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2007 | Articles needing more detailed references 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
العربية
Aragonés
مصرى
Arpetan
অসমীয়া
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Башҡорт
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
Hak-kâ-fa
Хальмг
한국어
Hawai`i
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kapampangan
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Kaszëbsczi
Қазақша
Kernewek
Кыргызча
Kiswahili
Коми
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Occitan
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
O'zbek
پښتو
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
संस्कृत
Shqip
Simple English
سنڌي
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Taqbaylit
తెలుగు
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Удмурт
Українська
اردو
Volapük
Winaray
Wolof
吴语
ייִדיש
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 13:45.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
