













Cosmos: A Personal Voyage - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Cosmos:_A_Personal_Voyage";
		var wgTitle = "Cosmos: A Personal Voyage";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "146424";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 279921918;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Cosmos: A Personal Voyage

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For the book based on the series, see Cosmos (book).


Cosmos: A Personal Voyage



Cosmos DVD cover


Picture format
4:3


Audio format
Stereo


Episode duration
60 minutes


Creator(s)
Carl Sagan, Ann Druyan & Steven Soter


Director
Adrian Malone


Producer(s)
Gregory Andorfer & Rob McCain





Presented by
Carl Sagan


Music by
Vangelis; various artists


Country of origin
United States


Language(s)
US English


First shown on
PBS


Original run
28 September 1980–
21 December 1980


No. of episodes
13


Official website


Cosmos: A Personal Voyage is a thirteen-part television series written by Carl Sagan, Ann Druyan, and Steven Soter, with Sagan as global presenter. It was executive-produced by Adrian Malone, produced by David Kennard, Geoffrey Haines-Stiles and Gregory Andorfer, and directed by the producers and David Oyster, Richard Wells, Tom Weidlinger, and others. It covered a wide range of scientific subjects including the origin of life and a perspective of our place in the universe.
The series was first broadcast by the Public Broadcasting Service in 1980, and was the most widely watched series in the history of American public television until 1990's The Civil War. It is still the most widely watched PBS series in the world.[1] It won an Emmy and a Peabody Award and has since been broadcast in more than 60 countries and seen by over 600 million people, according to the Science Channel. A book to accompany the series was also published.




Contents


1 Overview
2 Episodes

2.1 Episode 1: "The Shores of the Cosmic Ocean"
2.2 Episode 2: "One Voice in the Cosmic Fugue"
2.3 Episode 3: "The Harmony of the Worlds"
2.4 Episode 4: "Heaven and Hell"
2.5 Episode 5: "Blues for a Red Planet"
2.6 Episode 6: "Travellers' Tales"
2.7 Episode 7: "The Backbone of Night"
2.8 Episode 8: "Journeys in Space and Time"
2.9 Episode 9: "The Lives of the Stars"
2.10 Episode 10: "The Edge of Forever"
2.11 Episode 11: "The Persistence of Memory"
2.12 Episode 12: "Encyclopaedia Galactica"
2.13 Episode 13: "Who Speaks for Earth?"
2.14 Episode 14: "Ted Turner Interviews Dr. Sagan"
2.15 Episode name spelling discrepancies


3 Music of Cosmos
4 Cosmos, a special edition
5 References
6 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Overview
Cosmos was produced in 1978 and 1979 by Los Angeles PBS affiliate KCET on a roughly $6.3 million budget, with over $2 million additionally allocated to promotion. The show's format is based on previous BBC documentaries such as Kenneth Clark's Civilisation, Jacob Bronowski's The Ascent of Man and David Attenborough's Life on Earth.[citation needed] (The BBC—a co-producer of Cosmos—repaid the compliment by screening the series, but episodes were cut to fit 50-minute slots and shown late at night.) However, unlike those series, which were shot entirely on film, Cosmos used videotape for interior scenes and special effects, with film being used for exteriors.




Sagan explains planetary orbits.


The series is notable for its groundbreaking use of special effects, which allowed Sagan to apparently walk through environments that were actually models rather than full-sized sets. The soundtrack included pieces of music provided by Greek composer Vangelis such as Alpha, Pulstar, and Heaven and Hell Part 1 (the last movement serving as the signature theme music for the show, and is directly referenced by the title of episode 4). Throughout the 13 hours of the series it used many tracks from several 1970s albums such as Albedo 0.39, Spiral, Ignacio, Beaubourg, and China. The worldwide success of the documentary series also put Vangelis' music in the homes and to the attention of a global audience.




Sagan in the series' final episode, "Who Speaks for Earth?"


Turner Home Entertainment purchased Cosmos from series producer KCET in 1989. In making the move to commercial television, the hour-long episodes were edited down to shorter lengths, and Sagan shot new epilogues for several episodes in which he discussed new discoveries (and alternate viewpoints) that had arisen since the original broadcast. Additionally, a 14th episode was added which consisted of an interview between Sagan and Ted Turner, and this "new" version of the series was eventually released as a VHS box set.
Cosmos had long been unavailable after its initial release because of copyright issues with the included music, but was released in 2000 on worldwide NTSC DVD, which includes subtitles in seven languages,[2] remastered 5.1 sound, as well as an alternate music and sound effects track. In 2005 The Science Channel rebroadcast the series for its 25th anniversary with updated computer graphics, film footage, and digital sound. Despite being shown again on the Science channel, the total amount of time for the original 13 episodes (780 minutes) was reduced 25% to 585 minutes (45 minutes per episode) in order to make room for commercials[3].
While Sagan was outspoken about political issues in this series and elsewhere, the popular perception of his characterization of large cosmic quantities was that of a sense of wonderment at the vastness of space and time. His famous saying at the start of Episode 8: Journeys in Space and Time "The total number of stars in the Universe is larger than all the grains of sand on all the beaches of the planet Earth" was widely misunderstood, as he was in fact referring to the world being at a "critical branch point in history where our actions will propagate down through the centuries". He stated at the end of Episode 8: Journeys in Space and Time

"Those worlds in space are as countless as all the grains of sand on all the beaches of the earth. Each of those worlds is as real as ours and every one of them is a succession of incidents, events, occurrences which influence its future. Countless worlds, numberless moments, an immensity of space and time. And our small planet at this moment, here we face a critical branch point in history. What we do with our world, right now, will propagate down through the centuries and powerfully affect the destiny of our descendants. It is well within our power to destroy our civilization and perhaps our species as well."


[edit] Episodes

[edit] Episode 1: "The Shores of the Cosmic Ocean"

1. Ann Druyan Intro

Benefits of the end of the Cold War


2. Opening
3. The Cosmos

Introduction
Dr. Sagan launches a Spaceship of the Imagination (a dandelion seed)...


4. Spaceship Universe

...to hundred billion galaxies...
Where we are located (the Local Group), light-years


5 Spaceship Galaxy

...to billion trillion stars, M31...


6 Spaceship Stars

..to the Milky Way, globular clusters, pulsars ...
..to an inhabited exoplanet, Orion Nebula...


7 Spaceship Solar System

..to a yellow star, nine planets, dozens of moons, thousands of asteroids and billions of comets and flying through Valles Marineris


8 Planet Earth

Eratosthenes and the circumference of Earth


9 Alexandrian Library

The modern-day city of Alexandria in Egypt

The ancient Library of Alexandria




10. Ages of Science
11. Cosmic Calendar

The Cosmic Calendar: from the beginning of the universe to the arrival of humans


12. End Credits


[edit] Episode 2: "One Voice in the Cosmic Fugue"

1. Opening
2. Spaceship Cosmic Matter
3. Heike Crab

The story of the Heike crab and artificial selection of crabs resembling samurai warriors


4. Artificial Selection
5. Natural Selection

Evolution through natural selection


6. Watchmaker

Intelligent design


7. Cosmic Calendar

The development of life on the Cosmic Calendar, and the Cambrian explosion
DNA and its functions in growth, replication and repair; mutations


8. Evolution

Animated evolution, from microbes to man


9. Kew Gardens-DNA

Journey into the cell nucleus


10. Miller-Urey Experiment

Common biochemistry of terrestrial organisms
Creation of the molecules of life in the laboratory; the Miller-Urey experiment


11. Alien Life

Speculation about life in Jupiter's clouds


12. Cosmos Update 10 years later

RNA can control chemical reactions as well as reproduce itself.
Comets have a lot of organic molecules in them.




[edit] Episode 3: "The Harmony of the Worlds"

1. Opening
2. Astronomers vs. Astrologers

Astronomy vs. astrology


3. Astrology

Careful observations, fuzzy thinking and pious fraud.


4. Laws of Nature
5. Constellations

Constellations and ancient astronomy


6. Astronomers

Anasazian ceremonial calendar


7. Ptolemy/Copernicus

Ptolemy and the geocentric world view


8. Kepler

Johannes Kepler …


9. Kepler and Tycho Brahe

… and Tycho Brahe


10. Kepler’s Laws

Kepler's laws


11. The Somnium

The first Science Fiction book: The Dream


12. End Credits


[edit] Episode 4: "Heaven and Hell"

1. Opening
2. Heaven and Hell
3. Tunguska Event

The Tunguska event


4. Comets

The composition and origin of comets


5. Collisions with Earth

Asteroids and impact craters
Lunar impact seen by Canterbury monks in 1178 (Giordano Bruno (crater))


6. Planetary Evolution
7. Venus

The controversial theories of Immanuel Velikovsky
The planet Venus in fiction and fact


8. Descent to Venus

Venera landers


9. Change

Human impact on the global environment


10. Deaths of Worlds

Venus as an example of the greenhouse effect


11. Conclusion
12. Cosmos Update 10 years later

The hellish conditions of Venus are a reminder of increasing greenhouse effect.




[edit] Episode 5: "Blues for a Red Planet"




Dr. Sagan with a full scale model of the Viking lander in Death Valley



1. Opening
2. Martians

H. G. Wells and The War of the Worlds


3. Lowell

Percival Lowell's false vision of canals on Mars


4. Edgar Rice Burroughs

Barsoom (The Martians' name of Mars in Edgar Rice Burroughs' science fiction books)


5. Goddard

Robert Goddard and early rocket-building


6. Inhabited Planets

Remote Sensing


7. Mars

Mars probes


8. Viking Landers

The Viking probes and their search for life on Mars


9. Life on Mars?

The work of Sagan's friend, Wolf V. Vishniac


10. Mars Rover

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute's suggestion


11. Terraforming Mars

The possibility of terraforming and colonizing Mars


12. Cosmos Update 10 years later

Mars is relevant to the global environment of the Earth.
Humans on Mars.




[edit] Episode 6: "Travellers' Tales"

1. Opening
2. Voyager, JPL

The Voyager probes


3. Traveller's Routes

Centuries of sailing ships explorers.


4. Dutch Renaissance

The Netherlands in the 17th century
The persecution of Galileo Galilei and his compeers by the Roman Catholic Church for their views on heliocentrism


5. Huygens

The life and work of father Constantijn and particularly son Christiaan Huygens and his contemporaries


6. Huygens - conclusion

Christiaan Huygens' discoveries.


7. Traveller's Tales

Exaggerations in the past.


8. Jovian System

The Voyager probes (first images of Jupiter...


9. Europa and Io

....and its moons)


10. Voyager Ships' Log
11. Saturn and Titan

Saturn and its system of moons, including Titan


12. Cosmos Update 10 years later

Image processing reconstructs Voyager’s worlds.
Voyager’s last portrait of the Solar System.
Tiny blue dot.




[edit] Episode 7: "The Backbone of Night"

1. Opening
2. What are the Stars?

Sagan's childhood in Brooklyn, New York


3. Brooklyn Schoolroom

Teaching children about the cosmos (1)


4. Mythology of Stars

The realization that stars are suns; the Milky Way mythology of the !Kung bushmen and ancient Greeks.


5. Ancient Greek Scientists

The history of ancient Ionia, Thales
The tyrant Polycrates


6. Science Blossoms

Anaximander's use of a stick to tell time and season, Empedocles and the water thief


7. Democritus

The Ionian philosophers: Democritus...


8. Pythagoras

...Pythagoras, Theodorus, Anaxagoras


9. Plato and the Others

Plato, Aristotle, Aristarchus and The Pythagoreans were suppressors of knowledge, advocates of slavery and of epistemic secrecy


10. Distance to Stars

Christiaan Huygens


11. Evidence of Other Planets

Teaching children about the cosmos (2)


12. End Credits


[edit] Episode 8: "Journeys in Space and Time"

1. Opening
2. Constellations

Constellations and how they change over time


3. Time and Space
4. Relativity

The speed of light and Albert Einstein's theory of relativity

Time dilation, redshift, blue shift




5. Leonardo da Vinci

Leonardo da Vinci's designs


6. Interstellar Travel

designs for spaceships that could travel near light speed


7. Time Travel

Time travel and its hypothetical effects on human history


8. Solar Systems

The origins of the solar system
Possible other worlds


9. Cosmic Time Frame

The history of life


10. Dinosaurs
11. Immensity of Space

Commonality between the numinous and Earth's future.
World at a critical branch point in history where our actions will propagate down through the centuries.


12. Cosmos Update 10 years later

Sagan’s novel Contact regarding supraluminal travelling.
Kip Thorne of the California Institute of Technology and wormholes.




[edit] Episode 9: "The Lives of the Stars"

1. Opening
2. Apple Pie

Atoms (electrons and nucleus)


3. The Very Large

Powers of ten, the googol and the googolplex, infinity


4. Atoms
5. Chemical Elements

The periodic table of elements


6. Nuclear Forces

Protons and neutrons


7. The Stars and Our Sun

The lifecycle of stars; white dwarfs, neutron stars, black holes


8. Death of Stars

The end of the Sun and of Earth, supernovae, red giants, pulsars


9. Star Stuff

The creation of different atomic nuclei in stars
Radioactivity and cosmic rays


10. Gravity in Wonderland

Gravity and its effects; gravity as the curvature of spacetime, the wormhole hypothesis


11. Children of the Stars
12. Cosmos Update 10 years later

Supernova SN 1987A.
Neutrino astronomy.




[edit] Episode 10: "The Edge of Forever"




Sagan at the Very Large Array






A 3D projection of an 8-cell performing a simple rotation about a plane which bisects the figure from front-left to back-right and top to bottom.



1. Opening
2. Big Bang

The origins of the universe, the Big Bang theory


3. Galaxies

Types of galaxies


4. Astronomical Anomalies

Galactic collisions, quasars


5. Doppler Effect

The Doppler effect


6. Humason

Life and work of Milton L. Humason


7. Dimensions

Flatland & the four-dimensional and closed universe


8. The Universe

An infinite universe vs. a god


9. India

Creation myths, esp. Hindu cosmology


10. Oscillating Universe

Contracting and re-expanding vs. ever-expanding universe


11. VLA

The Very Large Array in New Mexico, dark matter, the multiverse hypothesis


12. Cosmos Update 10 years later

Milky Way is perhaps a barred spiral galaxy.
Galaxies strung out along odd, irregular surfaces.




[edit] Episode 11: "The Persistence of Memory"

1. Opening

Bits, the basic units of information


2. Intelligence

The diversity of life in the oceans


3. Whales

Whales and their songs

The disturbance of the whale communications network by humans
Whale hunting




4. Genes and DNA

DNA and the brain as libraries


5. The Brain

The structure of the human brain: brain stem, Paul McLean's Triune Brain Model: reptilian brain, limbic system, cerebral cortex
The frontal lobes as critical in long-term planning
Neurons and connections between them, the two brain hemispheres, the corpus callosum


6. The City

The evolution of cities and …


7. Libraries

…the history of libraries, ….


8. Books

…books and writing


9. Computers

The development of computers and satellites, the potential for global collective intelligence


10. Other Brains

Intelligence on other worlds


11. Voyager

The Voyager Golden Record


12. End Credits


[edit] Episode 12: "Encyclopaedia Galactica"

1. Opening
2. Close Encounters

Betty and Barney Hill abduction and UFOs


3. Refutations
4. UFO’s
5. Champollion’s Egypt

Jean-François Champollion's translation of Egyptian hieroglyphs


6. Hieroglyphics
7. Rosetta Stone
8. SETI

Our way of communicating with extraterrestrials (SETI)


9. Arecibo

Arecibo Radiotelescope


10. Drake Equation and Contact

The chance of technical civilizations existing elsewhere in the Milky Way galaxy; the Drake equation


11. Encyclopedia Galactica

A look at a hypothetical encyclopedia consisting of other worlds in the galaxy


12. Cosmos Update 10 years later

Fewer sightings of UFOs, more stories of abductions.
META scanning the skies for signals.




[edit] Episode 13: "Who Speaks for Earth?"

1. Opening
2. Tlingit and Aztec Indians

The Tlingit and the voyage and encounters of the explorer La Pérouse
The Aztecs and the destruction brought by the Spanish conquistadores


3. Who Speaks for Earth?

Sagan's vision (told as a dream) of traveling to a far distant world, only to return to find that the human race had long since been destroyed by nuclear warfare


4. Nuclear War and Balance of Terror

The balance of terror on the Earth today


5. Alexandrian Library

The destruction of the Library of Alexandria ...


6. Hypatia

...and the murder of Hypatia


7. Big Bang and the Stuff of Life

The beginning of the universe and good endeavors of our civilization


8. Evolution of Life
9. Star Stuff
10. What Humans Have Done
11. We Speak for Earth

Sagan's plea to cherish life and continue our journey to the cosmos


12. Cosmos Update 10 years later

Completed the preliminary reconnaissance of planets with spacecraft.
Mighty walls have come tumbling down. Deadly enemies have embraced.
Reducing the obscene number of nuclear weapons.




[edit] Episode 14: "Ted Turner Interviews Dr. Sagan"
Some versions of the series including the first North American home video release included a specially made 14th episode, which consisted of an hour-long interview between Sagan and Ted Turner,[4] in which the two discussed the series and new discoveries in the years since its first broadcast. This unique episode was not included in the DVD release.

[edit] Episode name spelling discrepancies
There are differences in episode names and spellings for Episode 6, 8 and 12 depending on the type of media. (7 NTSC DVDs, Fully International version - DVD region zero, ISBN 0-9703511-1-9)


Episode #
Opening sequence
DVD menu
printed on DVD
printed on box
Cosmos books


Ep. 6
Travellers' Tales
Travelers' Tales
Travellers' Tales
Travellers' Tales
Travelers' Tales


Ep. 8
Journeys in Space and Time
Travels in Space and Time
Travels in Space and Time
Travels in Space and Time
Travels in Space and Time


Ep. 12
Encyclopaedia Galactica
Encyclopaedia Galactica
Encyclopedia Galactica
Encyclopedia Galactica
Encyclopaedia Galactica



An Australia/New Zealand DVD version has printed Encyclopedia Gallactica on the box and the DVD sleeve.


[edit] Music of Cosmos
Some of the music from the television series was compiled on CD:

Disc 1:

Heaven & Hell, part 1 — Vangelis — 1975
The Year 1905 — Dmitri Shostakovich — 1957
Alpha — Vangelis — 1976
Cranes in their Nest — Goro Yamaguchi
Clarinet Concerto A major — Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart — 1791
The Pachelbel Canon — Johann Pachelbel — 1680
Metamorphosis — Jeffrey Boydstun — 19xx
The Sea named Solaris (BWV 639) — Johann Sebastian Bach/Tomita — 1714
Partita for Violin solo no. 3 in E — Johann Sebastian Bach — 1726
The Four Seasons:Spring — Antonio Vivaldi — 1725
Sonata D-Dur für Trompete, Oboe und Basso Continuo — Gottfried Finger — 169x
Concerto for Mandolin in C major — Antonio Vivaldi — 1725
The Tale of Tsar Saltan — Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov — 1899
Legacy — Larry Fast — 1975
Russian Easter Festival Overture — Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov — 1888


Disc 2:

Pulstar — Vangelis — 1976
Vishnu symphony no. 19, opus 217 — Alan Hovhaness — 1966
Melancholy Blues — Louis Armstrong — 1923
Aquarius — Galt MacDermot — 1968
Beaubourg, part 2 — Vangelis — 1978
The Planets: Mars — Gustav Holst — 1915
Alien Images 1 — Jeff Boydstun
Fly...Night Bird — Roy Buchanan — 1974
Entends-tu les Chiens aboyer? — Vangelis — 1977
Le sacre du printemps — Igor Stravinsky — 1913
Prayer of St. Gregory — Alan Hovhaness — 1946
Bulgarian Shepherds Song Izlel je Delyo Hajdutin — Valya Balkanska
Comet 16 — Vangelis — 1986 (only the special edition of Cosmos)




[edit] Cosmos, a special edition




TV program logo of Cosmos special edition


The 1986 special edition of Cosmos is distinctive in many ways. It featured new narration by and filmed segments with Sagan, including content from Sagan's book Comet and discussion of his theory of nuclear winter (none of which was used in subsequent television or home video releases.) The series is much shorter than the original, running four and a half hours. It premiered as one marathon program on the TBS network and has been repeated as six episodes each about 45 minutes in length:

Other Worlds part 1
Other Worlds part 2
Children of the Stars part 1
Children of the Stars part 2
Message from the Sky part 1
Message from the Sky part 2

Visually, the series uses several of the historic sequences and animations from the original series, but interweaved are also new computer animated sequences and additional scenes with host Carl Sagan. As known today, the special edition version was at least broadcast in the United States, Japan, Germany, and Australia.
This version of Cosmos contains a mix of music used in the original series, together with a unique score by Vangelis, composed specially for this series. This score in some sources is also referred to as "Comet", with "Comet 16" acting as the title and ending theme of each episode. "Comet 16" is the only one of the total 21 cues that has officially been released. Some of the new music also appears in the 2000 remastered DVD release.



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Carl Sagan



[edit] References

^ According to The Science Channel.
^ English, French, Italian, German, Spanish, Mandarin and Japanese
^ Some of the missing scenes from Cosmos episode 2
^ Alice Day, New York Times


[edit] External links





This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links.



Cosmos at the Internet Movie Database
The music of Cosmos: a look at the music of Vangelis Papathanassiou
A complete list of the Cosmos soundtrack music, based on the original cue sheets
Cosmos promo on Google Video
25th Anniversary Rebroadcast of Cosmos on The Science Channel
Cosmos 25th Anniversary Edition PopMatters Television Review, Bill Gibron, PopMatters, 20 October 2005
Cosmos (view online)
Cosmos on GUBA




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosmos:_A_Personal_Voyage"
Categories: 1980s American television series | American documentary television series | PBS network shows | Peabody Award winners | 1980 television series debuts | TBS network shows | Documentaries about scienceHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2007 | Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


বাংলা
Català
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Français
한국어
Italiano
Nederlands
日本語
Português
Svenska









 This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 01:41.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
