













Damascus steel - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Damascus_steel";
		var wgTitle = "Damascus steel";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "8593";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281008582;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Damascus steel

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For the album of the same name, see Damascus Steel.





This section is written like a personal reflection or essay and may require cleanup. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style. (December 2007)







This article may require copy-editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone or spelling. You can assist by editing it now. A how-to guide is available. (April 2008)







This article appears to contradict the article Wootz steel. Please see discussion on the linked talk page. Please do not remove this message until the contradictions are resolved.


Damascus steel is a hot-forged steel used in Middle Eastern swordmaking from about 1100 to 1700 AD. Damascus swords were of legendary sharpness and strength, and were apocryphally claimed to be able to cut through lesser quality European swords and even rock. The technique used to create original Damascus steel is now a matter of historical conjecture. Many raw materials, and the metalsmiths' recipes, are no longer available. The foundation for Damascus Steel is Wootz Steel, which originated in India and Sri Lanka[1] and later spread to Persia.[2] From the 3rd century to 17th century, India was shipping steel ingots to the Middle East for use in Damascus Steel.[3]
The general term "Damascus" refers to metal with a visible grain pattern, sometimes with a texture. Modern Damascus is a lamination of folded steels selected with cosmetic qualities, with grinding and polishing specifically to expose the layers. True Damascus patterns are formed when carbon trace elements form visible swirls in the steel mix.[citation needed] These elements change properties when the steel is work hardened (forged), creating the patterns.[citation needed]




Contents


1 History
2 Manufacture
3 Loss of the technique
4 Attempts at reproduction
5 Pattern welded "Damascened" steel
6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
According to Will Durant (The Story of Civilization I: Our Oriental Heritage), the secret of manufacturing Damascus steel was learned by the Arabs from the Persians, and by the Persians from India and Sri Lanka. It is further believed that the people of the Indian subcontinent learned the techniques from the Chinese.




Drawing of corn harvesting knife of twisted cable or pattern welding


Several other steelmaking techniques, such as wootz steel also result in patterned surfaces and have often been sold as Damascus steel, Damascened steel and sometimes watered steel(Japan). The most common technique today for producing these materials is pattern welding, which is widely used for custom knife making. Modern Damascus steel is usually made by pattern welding two tool steels, one with high nickel content, appearing bright, the other appearing more grey so that alternating steels produce light-dark stripes. Treating or pickling the steel with dilute acid after polishing enhances the pattern by darkening one of the steels more than the other.[citation needed] Folding and twisting while hammer forging controls the striped pattern, and the method used is often trademarked. Skilled swordsmiths can manipulate the layered patterns to mimic the complex designs found in the surface of the original, medieval Damascus steel. Some knife artists begin with stacking steel wires and through folding can produce repeating images along a blade, such as a crossed U.S. flags.[citation needed] Stacking wires is a speciality of the Cable Damascus technique, a new age development. The advent of steel wire rope (1830's) provided mid-west blacksmiths a way to make corn harvester's machetes (cable knives).
One explanation of the legendary properties of Damascus steel is that the pattern consists of alternating bands of very hard but brittle iron carbide or cementite and softer more flexible iron. Another possibility is that the steel contains a small amount of vanadium, which would theoretically strengthen the blade [4]. The legendary steel may have been a happy accident by way of the limited production methods. Original Damascus steel billet was formed from a small disk that was hammer folded/forged into its final shape. Unlike northern European methods, the ferro-smelting technique in Persia during the Middle Ages involved small bowl-type crucibles with lids, baked in a mound-type oven often used for bread. Controlling the air contact to the melt, as well as trace elements found locally, all combined to produce a steel blade noticeably better than its contemporaries.[citation needed]
In late 2006, a group of scientists headed by Peter Paufler found direct evidence of nanotubes and nanowires in a sample of a 17th century sword forged from Damascus steel. The complex process of forging and annealing is thought to have accounted for the nano-scale structures.[5]
The origins of the name Damascus remains somewhat controversial. Damascus steel was originally made using ore with a certain chemical composition from a mine that is now exhausted[citation needed], so attempts at reproduction are difficult at best.
It would seem obvious that the name Damascus refers to swords forged in Damascus, but there are several other possible sources of the name. One is the name of the swordsmith himself: the author al-Beruni refers to swords made by a man he names Damashqi. Another author, al-Kindi, refers to swords made in Damascus as Damascene. This word has often been employed as an epithet in various Eastern European legends (Sabya Damaskinya or Sablja Dimiskija meaning "Damascene sword"), of which perhaps the best known are the Serbian legends of Prince Marko, a historical figure of the late 14th century in what is now the Republic of Macedonia.

[edit] Manufacture
The original Damascus steel swords may have been made in the vicinity of Damascus, Syria, in the period from 900AD to as late as 1750AD. Damascus steel is a type of steel alloy that is both hard and flexible, a combination that made it ideal for the building of swords. It is said that when Damascus-made swords were first encountered by Ottomans during the Crusades, it garnered an almost mythical reputation—a Damascus steel blade was said to be able to cut a piece of silk in half as it fell to the ground, as well as being able to chop through normal blades, or even rock, without losing its sharp edge. Recent metallurgical experiments, based on microscopic studies of preserved Damascus-steel blades, have claimed to reproduce a very similar steel via possible reconstructions of the historical process[citation needed].
When forming a batch of steel, impurities are added to control the properties of the resulting alloy. In general, notably during the era of Damascus steel, one could produce an alloy that was hard and brittle at one extreme by adding up to 2% carbon, or soft and malleable at the other, with about 0.5% carbon. The problem for a swordsmith is that the best steel should be both hard and malleable — hard, so as to hold an edge once sharpened, but malleable so it would not break when hitting other metal in combat. This was not possible with normal processes.
Metalsmiths in India and Sri Lanka perhaps as early as 300BCE developed a new technique known as wootz steel that produced a high-carbon steel of unusually high purity. Glass was added to a mixture of iron and charcoal and then heated. The glass would act as a flux and bind to other impurities in the mixture, allowing them to rise to the surface and leave a more pure steel when the mixture cooled. Thousands of steel making sites were found in Samanalawewa area in Sri Lanka that made high carbon steel as early as 300BCE. (Juleff, 1996). These steel making furnaces were built facing western monsoon winds and wind turbulence and suction was used to create heat in the furnace. Steel making sites in Sri Lanka have been dated to 300BCE using carbon dating technology. The technique propagated very slowly through the world, reaching modern-day Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan around 900CE, and then the Middle East circa 1000CE.
This process was further refined in the Middle East using locally produced steels. The exact process remains unknown, but allowed carbides to precipitate out as micro particles arranged in sheets or bands within the body of a blade. The carbides are far harder than the surrounding low carbon steel, allowing the swordsmith to make an edge which would cut hard materials with the precipitated carbides, while the bands of softer steel allowed the sword as a whole to remain tough and flexible.
The banded carbide precipitates appear in the blade as a swirling pattern. By manipulating the ingot of steel in a certain way during forging, various intentional patterns could be induced in the steel. The most common of these was a pattern of lateral bands, often called 'Muhammad's Ladder', most likely formed by cutting or forging notches into the surface of the ingot, then forging it into the blade shape (this is the method Pendray (below) used to reproduce the pattern).
A team of researchers based at the Technical University of Dresden that uses x-rays and electron microscopy to examine Damascus steel discovered the presence of cementite nanowires[6] and carbon nanotubes.[7] Peter Paufler, a member of the Dresden team, says that these nanostructures give Damascus steel its distinctive properties[8] and are a result of the forging process.[8] [9]




Lefever Grade G with Damascus Barrels


The knife makers process was adopted by early gun makers from India and Persia. Eventually the technology to make damascus gun barrels was adopted by European gunmakers. In 1634 Hungarian gunsmith Caspar Hartmann was making guns with damascus barrels for King Gyorcki Raboczi I. A water shed event occured in 1683 with the Siege of Vienna. The defeat of Kara Mustafa by Poland's Jan III Sobieski at Vienna result in thousands of Ottoman produced weapons left on the battle field. Many of these had damascus barrels. By 1700 damascus barrels were being produced at Liege, Belgium. Over time, Liege became the major source for damascus barrels. Damascus barrels were produced by every major gun making center in Europe. The great majority of these barrels were used in shotguns. This usage continued until WWI. After the war, damascus barrels fell out of favor amongst sportsman. By the early 1930's commercial production of damascus barrels had for all practical purposes stopped. The end of this era was the result of stronger cheaper fluid steel that became avaialable after WWI.

[edit] Loss of the technique





This article or section appears to contain speculation and unjustified claims.
Information must be verifiable and based on reliable published sources. Please remove speculation from the article. Please see the discussion on this article's talk page.


For reasons that are not entirely clear, but possibly because sources of ores containing trace amounts of tungsten and/or vanadium needed for its production were depleted, the process was lost to the middle-eastern metalsmiths circa 1750AD. It has been eagerly sought by many since that time.
It has long been argued that the raw material for Damascus steel swords was imported from India, because India was the only known center of crucible-fired steels like wootz. However this conclusion became suspect when the furnaces in Turkmenistan were discovered,[citation needed] demonstrating at least that the technique was moving out from India. The wootz may have been manufactured locally in the Damascus area, but so far no remains of the distinctive wootz furnaces have appeared. The work of Verhoeven et al. supports the hypothesis that the wootz used was from India, as several key impurities that appear to give Damascus steel its properties point to particular ores available only in India.
The Russian bulat steel has many similar properties, at least in nature if not in process. Recently various groups have claimed to have recreated steel with properties consistent with true Damascus blades, through experimental archaeology, though even they admit they cannot be certain how it was originally created. Verhoeven et al. (1998)[10] argued that the keys are ores with certain trace elements, controlled thermal cycling after the initial forging, and a grinding process to reveal the final damask pattern. A somewhat different technique was proposed by Wadsworth and Sherby (1980; also 2001).
The recent discovery of carbon nanotubes in the steel's composition has also brought to light a new hypothesis which might explain the loss of the technique. Carbon nanotubes (perhaps the strongest and stiffest material known), while occurring randomly in nature (simple campfires produce some nanotubes), require fairly high-tech, high-energy production methods to be made in large quantities as useful structural materials. Therefore, ancient smiths, with the level of technology at their disposal, could hardly control the formation of these nanometer-scale carbon structures. Some element of random chance (forging, alloy composition, heat treatment, smelting process, environmental particularities, etc.) might have been responsible for the formation of these structures, which could not only explain some of their "legendary" qualities, but also the reason why, to this day, these properties have never been successfully emulated.

[edit] Attempts at reproduction
From the very start, the superior capabilities of Damascus swords attracted significant attention, and many attempts were made to reproduce either the performance or the appearance of the Damascus blades. Since pattern welding was a widespread technique, and produced surface patterns similar to those found on Damascus blades, many people believed that Damascus blades were made using a pattern welding technique. This belief was challenged in the 1990s when J. D. Verhoeven and A. H. Pendray published an article on their experiments on reproducing the elemental, structural, and visual characteristics of Damascus steel.
Verhoeven and Pendray started with a cake of steel that matched the properties of the original wootz steel from India, which also matched a number of original Damascus swords they had access to. The wootz was in a soft, annealed state, with a large grain structure, and many beads of pure iron carbide which were the result of the hypereutectoid state of the wootz. They had already determined that the grains on the surface of the steel were grains of iron carbide, so their question was how to reproduce the fine iron carbide patterns they saw in the Damascus blades from the large grains in the wootz.
Although such material could be worked at low temperatures to produce the striated Damascene pattern of intermixed ferrite and cementite bands (in a manner identical to pattern-welded Damascus steel), any heat treatment sufficient to dissolve the carbides would destroy the pattern permanently. However, Verhoeven and Pendray discovered that in samples of true Damascus steel the Damascene pattern could be recovered by aging at a moderate temperature. Their investigations found that certain carbide forming elements (chief of which was vanadium), which in the wootz were concentrated in the carbide regions and were formed into a striated pattern during forging just as the iron carbide itself, did not disperse until higher temperatures than those needed to dissolve the carbides. Therefore, though a high heat treatment could remove the visible evidence of patterning associated with carbides it did not remove the underlying patterning of the carbide forming elements, and a subsequent lower temperature heat treatment (at a temperature at which the carbides were again stable) could recover the identical structure by the binding of carbon by those elements.

[edit] Pattern welded "Damascened" steel




Pattern welded "Damascened steel" sheath knife


Main article: Pattern welding
It used to be believed that Damascus steel was made using pattern welding because the layering revealed by etching a pattern-welded blade in acid is similar to that of Damascus steel.
Pattern welded steel is commonly sold today as "Damascus steel", though it appears that the original Damascus steel was not created with that technique. Pattern welded Damascus is made out of several types of steel and iron slices, which are then welded together to form a billet. The patterns vary depending on what the smith does to the billet. The billet is drawn out and folded until the desired number of layers are formed. The end result, if done well, bears a strong resemblance to the surface appearance of a true Damascus blade, though the internal structure is completely dissimilar.

[edit] See also

Japanese sword making
Experimental archaeology
Tungsten carbide, which is often bonded to steel to form tools that are tough, and have a hard, durable cutting surface.


[edit] Notes


^ G. Juleff, "An ancient wind powered iron smeting technology in Sri Lanka", Nature 379 (3), 60-63 (January, 1996
^ Sinopoli (2003): 85
^ Hobson (2004): 192
^ Lutz, J.; Pendray A. (2007). "The Mystery of the Damascus Sword". The Free Library. http://www.thefreelibrary.com/The+Mystery+of+the+Damascus+Sword-a01611003676. 
^ Sanderson, Katharine. "Sharpest cut from nanotube sword." Nature 444(2006): 286.
^ Kochmann, W.; Reibold M., Goldberg R., Hauffe W., Levin A. A., Meyer D. C., Stephan T., Müller H., Belger A., Paufler P. (2004). "Nanowires in ancient Damascus steel". Journal of Alloys and Compounds 372: L15–L19. doi:10.1016/j.jallcom.2003.10.005. ISSN 0925-8388. 
Levin, A. A.; Meyer D. C., Reibold M., Kochmann W., Pätzke N., Paufler P. (2005). "Microstructure of a genuine Damascus sabre" (PDF). Crystal Research and Technology 40 (9): 905–916. doi:10.1002/crat.200410456. http://www.crystalresearch.com/crt/ab40/905_a.pdf. 
^ Reibold, M.; Levin A. A., Kochmann W., Pätzke N., Meyer D. C. (November 16, 2006). "Materials:Carbon nanotubes in an ancient Damascus sabre". Nature 444: 286. doi:10.1038/444286a. 
^ a b Legendary Swords' Sharpness, Strength From Nanotubes, Study Says
^ Sanderson, Katharine (2006-11-15). "Sharpest cut from nanotube sword: Carbon nanotech may have given swords of Damascus their edge". Nature (journal). http://www.nature.com/news/2006/061113/full/061113-11.html. Retrieved on 2006-11-17. 
^ J. D. Verhoeven, A. H. Pendray, and W. E. Dauksch, (1998) The key role of impurities in ancient damascus steel blades", Journal of Mettalurgy 50 (9), 58-64



[edit] References

G. Juleff, "An ancient wind powered iron smelting technology in Sri Lanka", Nature 379 (3), 60-63 (January, 1996)
Eric M. Taleff, Bruce L. Bramfitt, Chol K. Syn, Donald R. Lesuer, Jeffrey Wadsworth, and Oleg D. Sherby, "Processing, structure, and properties of a rolled ultrahigh-carbon steel plate exhibiting a damask pattern," Materials Characterization 46 (1), 11-18 (2001).
J. D. Verhoeven, "A review of microsegregation induced banding phenomena in steels", J. Materials Engineering and Performance 9 (3), 286-296 (2000).
J. D. Verhoeven, A. H. Pendray, and W. E. Dauksch, "The Key Role of Impurities in Ancient Damascus Steel Blades", JOM 50 (9), 58-64 (1998).
J. Wadsworth and O. D. Sherby, "On the Bulat — Damascus steel revisited," Prog. Materials Science 68, 25-35 (1980).
Kochmann, W.; Reibold M., Goldberg R., Hauffe W., Levin A. A., Meyer D. C., Stephan T., Müller H., Belger A., Paufler P. (2004). "Nanowires in ancient Damascus steel". Journal of Alloys and Compounds 372: L15–L19. doi:10.1016/j.jallcom.2003.10.005. ISSN 0925-8388. 
Levin, A. A.; Meyer D. C., Reibold M., Kochmann W., Pätzke N., Paufler P. (2005). "Microstructure of a genuine Damascus sabre" (PDF). Crystal Research and Technology 40 (9): 905–916. doi:10.1002/crat.200410456. http://www.crystalresearch.com/crt/ab40/905_a.pdf. 
Reibold, M.; Levin A. A., Kochmann W., Pätzke N., Meyer D. C. (November 16, 2006). "Materials:Carbon nanotubes in an ancient Damascus sabre". Nature 444: 286. doi:10.1038/444286a. 
Hobson, John M. (2004). The Eastern Origins of Western Civilisation. Cambridge University Press. pp. 85. ISBN 0521547245. 
Sinopoli, Carla M. (2003). The Political Economy of Craft Production: Crafting Empire in South India, c. 1350–1650. Cambridge University Press. pp. 85. ISBN 0521826136. 


[edit] External links

Exeter University recreation of Sri Lankan Steel Furnaces
"Damascus steel's lost secret found"
"Damascene Technique in Metal Working" Detailed historical and scientific discussion with many pictures
"Secret's out for Saracen sabres" News of the discovery of nanotubes and nanowires, from issue 2578 of New Scientist magazine, 15 November 2006, page 20, citing Nature, vol 444, p 286
"Damascus Gun Barrels" Devoted to understanding the technology, people and art that created Forge Welded Damascus Shotgun Barrels. Many pictures. Time line, etc.




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Damascus_steel"
Categories: Steels | Steelmaking | History of Damascus | DamascusHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing style editing from December 2007 | All articles needing style editing | Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from April 2008 | All articles needing copy edit | Articles contradicting other articles | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Česky
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
Français
한국어
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Русский
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 03:28.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
