













Lyndon B. Johnson - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Lyndon_B._Johnson";
		var wgTitle = "Lyndon B. Johnson";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "54533";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282210324;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 


wgOggPlayer.msg = {"ogg-play": "Play", "ogg-pause": "Pause", "ogg-stop": "Stop", "ogg-no-player": "Sorry, your system does not appear to have any supported player software.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload a player\x3c/a\x3e.", "ogg-player-videoElement": "Native browser support", "ogg-player-oggPlugin": "Browser plugin", "ogg-player-cortado": "Cortado (Java)", "ogg-player-vlc-mozilla": "VLC", "ogg-player-vlc-activex": "VLC (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-quicktime-mozilla": "QuickTime", "ogg-player-quicktime-activex": "QuickTime (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-totem": "Totem", "ogg-player-kaffeine": "Kaffeine", "ogg-player-kmplayer": "KMPlayer", "ogg-player-mplayerplug-in": "mplayerplug-in", "ogg-player-thumbnail": "Still image only", "ogg-player-selected": "(selected)", "ogg-use-player": "Use player:", "ogg-more": "More…", "ogg-download": "Download file", "ogg-desc-link": "About this file", "ogg-dismiss": "Close", "ogg-player-soundthumb": "No player", "ogg-no-xiphqt": "You do not appear to have the XiphQT component for QuickTime.\nQuickTime cannot play Ogg files without this component.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload XiphQT\x3c/a\x3e or choose another player."};
wgOggPlayer.cortadoUrl = "http://upload.wikimedia.org/jars/cortado.jar";
wgOggPlayer.extPathUrl = "/w/extensions/OggHandler";


.ogg-player-options {
	border: solid 1px #ccc;
	padding: 2pt;
	text-align: left;
	font-size: 10pt;
}
 <!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Lyndon B. Johnson

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"LBJ" redirects here. For other uses, see LBJ (disambiguation).



Lyndon Baines Johnson








36th President of the United States



In office
November 22, 1963 – January 20, 1969


Vice President
Hubert Humphrey (1965–1969)


Preceded by
John F. Kennedy


Succeeded by
Richard Nixon




37th Vice President of the United States



In office
January 20, 1961 – November 22, 1963


President
John F. Kennedy


Preceded by
Richard Nixon


Succeeded by
Hubert Humphrey




11th United States Senate Majority Leader



In office
January 3, 1955 – January 3, 1961


Deputy
Earle C. Clements (1955–1957)
Mike Mansfield (1957–1961)


Preceded by
William F. Knowland


Succeeded by
Mike Mansfield




9th United States Senate Minority Leader



In office
January 3, 1953 – January 3, 1955


Deputy
Earle C. Clements


Preceded by
Styles Bridges


Succeeded by
William F. Knowland




7th United States Senate Democratic Leader



In office
January 3, 1953 – January 3, 1961


Deputy
Earle C. Clements (1953–1957)
Mike Mansfield (1957-1961)


Preceded by
Ernest McFarland


Succeeded by
Mike Mansfield




10th United States Senate Majority Whip



In office
January 3, 1951 – January 3, 1953


Leader
Ernest McFarland


Preceded by
Francis J. Myers


Succeeded by
Leverett Saltonstall




United States Senator
from Texas



In office
January 3, 1949 – January 3, 1961


Preceded by
W. Lee O'Daniel


Succeeded by
William Blakley




Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Texas's 10th District



In office
April 10, 1937 – January 3, 1949


Preceded by
James P. Buchanan


Succeeded by
Homer Thornberry






Born
August 27, 1908(1908-08-27)
Stonewall, Texas


Died
January 22, 1973 (aged 64)
Stonewall, Texas


Nationality
American


Political party
Democratic


Spouse
Lady Bird Johnson


Children
Lynda Bird Johnson Robb
Luci Baines Johnson Turpin


Alma mater
Southwest Texas State Teachers' College


Profession
Teacher, Career politician


Religion
Disciples of Christ


Signature



Lyndon Baines Johnson (August 27, 1908 – January 22, 1973), often referred to as LBJ, was the 36th President of the United States (1963–1969) immediately following his tenure as the 37th Vice President of the United States (1961–1963).
Johnson, a Democrat, succeeded to the presidency following the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, completed Kennedy's term and was elected President in his own right in a landslide victory in the 1964 Presidential election. Johnson was a major leader of the Democratic Party and as President was responsible for designing the "Great Society" legislation that included civil rights laws, Medicare (government-funded health care for the elderly), Medicaid (government-funded health care for the poor), aid to education, and the "War on Poverty." Simultaneously, he escalated the American involvement in the Vietnam War from 16,000 American soldiers in 1963 to 500,000 in early 1968.
Johnson served as a United States Representative from Texas, from 1937–1949 and as United States Senator (as his grandfather[1] foretold when LBJ was just an infant) from 1949–1961, including six years as United States Senate Majority Leader, two as Senate Minority Leader and two as Senate Majority Whip. After campaigning unsuccessfully for the Democratic nomination in 1960, Johnson was selected by John F. Kennedy to be his running-mate for the 1960 presidential election. Johnson's popularity as President steadily declined after the 1966 Congressional elections, and his reelection bid in the 1968 United States presidential election collapsed as a result of turmoil within the Democratic party related to opposition to the Vietnam War. He withdrew from the race to concentrate on peacemaking. Johnson was renowned for his domineering personality and the "Johnson treatment," his arm-twisting of powerful politicians.
Johnson died after suffering his third heart attack, on January 22, 1973.




Contents


1 Early years
2 Early political career
3 House years

3.1 War record


4 Senate years

4.1 1948 contested election
4.2 Freshman senator
4.3 Senate Democratic leader


5 Vice Presidency
6 Presidency 1963–1969

6.1 Assassination of President John F. Kennedy
6.2 1964 presidential election
6.3 Civil rights
6.4 Great Society

6.4.1 Federal funding for education
6.4.2 "War on poverty"
6.4.3 Medicare and Medicaid
6.4.4 Space race


6.5 Urban riots
6.6 Backlash against Johnson: 1966–67
6.7 Vietnam War
6.8 Israel
6.9 Pardons
6.10 1968 presidential election
6.11 Administration and Cabinet
6.12 Judicial appointments

6.12.1 Supreme Court
6.12.2 Other courts


6.13 Scandals and controversies


7 Post-presidency
8 Death and funeral
9 Legacy

9.1 Major legislation signed


10 In popular culture

10.1 Music
10.2 Video games
10.3 Television
10.4 Books
10.5 Movies


11 Electoral history
12 See also
13 References
14 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early years
Johnson was maternally descended from a pioneer Baptist clergyman, George Washington Baines, who pastored some eight churches in Texas as well as others in Arkansas and Louisiana. Baines was also the president of Baylor University during the American Civil War. George Baines was the grandfather of Johnson's mother, Rebekah Baines Johnson.
Johnson's grandfather Samuel Ealy Johnson, Sr. was raised as a Baptist. Subsequently, in his early adulthood, he became a member of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ). In his later years he became a Christadelphian.[2] According to Lady Bird Johnson, Johnson's father also joined the Christadelphian Church toward the end of his life.[3] Later, as a politician LBJ was influenced in his attitude towards the Jews by the religious beliefs that his family, especially his grandfather, had shared with him (see Operation Texas).[2][4]
Johnson was born near Stonewall, Texas, on August 27, 1908, in a small farmhouse in a poor area on the Pedernales River. His parents, Samuel Ealy Johnson, Jr. and the former Rebekah Baines, had three girls and two boys: LBJ and his brother, Sam Houston Johnson (1914–1978), and sisters Rebekah (1910–1978), Josefa (1912–1961), and Lucia (1916–1997). The nearby small town of Johnson City, Texas was named after LBJ's father's cousin, James Polk Johnson, whose forebears had moved west from Georgia. The Johnsons were originally of Scots-Irish ancestry.[5] In school, Johnson was an awkward, talkative youth and was elected president of his 11th-grade class. He graduated from Johnson City High School in 1924.[6] In 1925, he worked as an elevator operator in downtown San Bernardino, California.[7][8]
In 1926, Johnson enrolled in Southwest Texas State Teachers' College (now Texas State University-San Marcos). He worked his way through school, participated in debate and campus politics, edited the school newspaper, dropped out of school in 1927 and returned one year later, graduating in 1930. The college years refined his skills of persuasion and political organization. In 1927 Johnson taught mostly Mexican children at the Welhausen School in Cotulla, some ninety miles south of San Antonio in La Salle County. In 1930 he taught in Pearsall High School in Pearsall, Texas and afterwards took a position as teacher of public speaking at Sam Houston High School in Houston.[9] When he returned to San Marcos in 1965, after having signed the Higher Education Act, Johnson looked back:

"I shall never forget the faces of the boys and the girls in that little Welhausen Mexican School, and I remember even yet the pain of realizing and knowing then that college was closed to practically every one of those children because they were too poor. And I think it was then that I made up my mind that this nation could never rest while the door to knowledge remained closed to any American."[10]


[edit] Early political career
Johnson briefly taught public speaking and debate in a Houston high school, then entered politics. Johnson's father had served five terms in the Texas legislature and was a close friend of one of Texas's rising political figures, Congressman Sam Rayburn. In 1930, Johnson campaigned for Texas State Senator Welly Hopkins in his run for Congress. Hopkins recommended him to Congressman Richard M. Kleberg, who appointed Johnson as Kleberg's legislative secretary. LBJ was elected speaker of the "Little Congress," a group of Congressional aides, where he cultivated Congressmen, newspapermen and lobbyists. Johnson's friends soon included aides to President Franklin D. Roosevelt, as well as fellow Texans such as Vice President John Nance Garner. He became a surrogate son to Sam Rayburn.




President Roosevelt, Governor James Allred of Texas & Johnson. In later campaigns, Johnson edited Governor Allred out of the picture to assist his campaign


Johnson married Claudia Alta Taylor (already nicknamed "Lady Bird") of Karnack, Texas on November 17, 1934 after having attended Georgetown University Law School for several months. They had two daughters, Lynda Bird, born in 1944, and Luci Baines, born in 1947. Johnson enjoyed giving people and animals his own initials; his daughters' given names are examples, as was his dog, Little Beagle Johnson.
In 1935, he was appointed head of the Texas National Youth Administration, which enabled him to use the government to create education and job opportunities for young people. He resigned two years later to run for Congress. Johnson was a notoriously tough boss throughout his career, often demanding long workdays and work on weekends, and Johnson himself worked as hard as any member of his staff.[11]

[edit] House years
In 1937 Johnson successfully contested a special election for Texas's 10th congressional district, which covered Austin and the surrounding hill country. He ran on a New Deal platform and was effectively aided by his wife. He served in the House from April 10, 1937 to January 3, 1949.[12]
President Roosevelt found Johnson to be a welcome ally and conduit for information, particularly with regards to issues concerning internal politics in Texas (Operation Texas) and the machinations of Vice President Garner and Speaker of the House Sam Rayburn. Johnson was immediately appointed to the Naval Affairs Committee. He worked for rural electrification and other improvements for his district. Johnson steered the projects towards contractors that he personally knew, such as the Brown Brothers, Herman and George, who would finance much of Johnson's future career.[13] In 1941, he ran for the U.S. Senate in a special election against the sitting Governor of Texas, radio personality W. Lee "Pappy" O'Daniel in an election marked by massive fraud on the part of both campaigns. Johnson was not expected to win against the popular governor, but he ran a strong race and was declared the winner in unofficial returns — ultimately losing due to controversial official returns.

[edit] War record
After America entered the war in December 1941, Johnson, still in Congress, became a commissioned officer in the Navy Reserves, then asked Undersecretary of the Navy James Forrestal for a combat assignment.[14] Instead he was sent to inspect the shipyard facilities in Texas and on the West Coast. In the spring of 1942, President Roosevelt needed his own reports on what conditions were like in the Southwest Pacific. Roosevelt felt information that flowed up the military chain of command needed to be supplemented by a highly trusted political aide. From a suggestion by Forrestal, President Roosevelt assigned Johnson to a three-man survey team of the Southwest Pacific.
Johnson reported to General Douglas MacArthur in Australia. Johnson and two Army officers went to the 22nd Bomb Group base, which was assigned the high risk mission of bombing the Japanese airbase at Lae in New Guinea. A colonel took Johnson's original seat on one bomber, and it was shot down with no survivors. Reports vary on what happened to the B-26 Marauder carrying Johnson. Some accounts say it was also attacked by Japanese fighters but survived, while others, including other members of the flight crew, claim it turned back due to generator trouble before reaching the objective and before encountering enemy aircraft and never came under fire, which is supported by official flight records.[15] Other airplanes that continued to the target did come under fire near the target at about the same time that Johnson's plane was recorded as having landed back at the original airbase.[15] MacArthur awarded LBJ the Silver Star, the military's third-highest medal, although it is notable that no other members of the flight crew were awarded medals, and it is unclear what Johnson could have done in his role purely as an "observer" to deserve the medal, even if his aircraft had seen combat.
Johnson's biographer, Robert Caro, stated, "The most you can say about Lyndon Johnson and his Silver Star is that it is surely one of the most undeserved Silver Stars in history, because if you accept everything that he said, he was still in action for no more than 13 minutes and only as an observer. Men who flew many missions, brave men, never got a Silver Star."[15]
Johnson reported back to Roosevelt, to the Navy leaders, and to Congress that conditions were deplorable and unacceptable. He argued the South West Pacific urgently needed a higher priority and a larger share of war supplies. The warplanes sent there, for example, were "far inferior" to Japanese planes, and morale was bad. He told Forrestal that the Pacific Fleet had a "critical" need for 6,800 additional experienced men. Johnson prepared a twelve-point program to upgrade the effort in the region, stressing "greater cooperation and coordination within the various commands and between the different war theaters." Congress responded by making Johnson chairman of a high-powered subcommittee of the Naval Affairs committee. With a mission similar to that of the Truman Committee in the Senate, he probed into the peacetime "business as usual" inefficiencies that permeated the naval war and demanded that admirals shape up and get the job done. However, Johnson went too far when he proposed a bill that would crack down on the draft exemptions of shipyard workers if they were absent from work too often. Organized labor blocked the bill and denounced Johnson. Still, Johnson's mission had a substantial impact because it led to upgrading the South Pacific theater and aided the overall war effort immensely. Johnson’s biographer concludes, "The mission was a temporary exposure to danger calculated to satisfy Johnson's personal and political wishes, but it also represented a genuine effort on his part, however misplaced, to improve the lot of America's fighting men."[16]

[edit] Senate years

[edit] 1948 contested election
In 1948, Johnson again ran for the Senate and won. This election was highly controversial: a three-way Democratic Party primary saw Johnson facing a well-known former governor, Coke Stevenson; and a third candidate. Johnson drew crowds to fairgrounds with his rented helicopter dubbed "The Flying Windmill". He raised money to flood the state with campaign circulars, and won over conservatives by voting for the Taft-Hartley act curbing unions and by criticizing unions on the stump. Stevenson came in first, but lacked a majority, so a runoff was held. Johnson campaigned even harder, while Stevenson's efforts were poor. The runoff count took a week as the two candidates see-sawed for the lead. The Democratic State Central Committee handled the count (not the state, because it was a party primary), and it finally announced Johnson won by eighty-seven votes. The committee voted 29-28 to certify Johnson's nomination, with the last vote cast on Johnson's behalf by the Temple publisher Frank W. Mayborn, who rushed back to Texas from a business trip in Nashville, Tennessee. There were many allegations of fraud on both sides. Thus one writer alleges that Johnson's campaign manager, John B. Connally, was connected with 202 ballots in Precinct 13 in Jim Wells County that had curiously been cast in alphabetical order and all just at the close of polling. Robert Caro argued in his 1989 book that Johnson had rigged the election in Jim Wells County, and other counties in South Texas, as well as rigging 10,000 ballots in Bexar County alone.[17] A judge, Luis Salas, said in 1977 that he had certified 202 fraudulent ballots for Johnson.[18]
The state Democratic convention upheld Johnson. Stevenson went to court, but — with timely help from his friend Abe Fortas — Johnson prevailed. Johnson was elected senator in November, and went to Washington, D.C. tagged with the ironic label "Landslide Lyndon," which he often used deprecatingly to refer to himself.

[edit] Freshman senator
Once in the Senate, Johnson was known among his colleagues for his highly successful "courtships" of older senators, especially Senator Richard Russell, patrician leader of the Conservative coalition and arguably the most powerful man in the Senate. Johnson proceeded to gain Russell's favor in the same way that he had "courted" Speaker Sam Rayburn and gained his crucial support in the House.
Johnson was appointed to the Senate Armed Services Committee, and later in 1950, he helped create the Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee. Johnson became its chairman and conducted investigations of defense costs and efficiency. These investigations tended to dig out old forgotten investigations and demand actions that were already being taken by the Truman Administration, although it can be said that the committee's investigations caused the changes. However, Johnson's brilliant handling of the press, the efficiency with which his committee issued new reports, and the fact that he ensured every report was endorsed unanimously by the committee all brought him headlines and national attention.
Johnson used his political influence in the Senate to receive broadcast licenses from the Federal Communications Commission in his wife's name.[19][20]
In 1951, Johnson was chosen as Senate Majority Whip under a new Majority Leader, Ernest McFarland of Arizona, and served from 1951 to 1953.[12]

[edit] Senate Democratic leader




Senate Desk X, used by all Democratic leaders, including Johnson, since Joseph Tyler Robinson


In the 1952 general election Republicans won a majority in both House and Senate. Among defeated Democrats that year was McFarland, who lost to then-little known Barry Goldwater, Johnson's future presidential opponent.
In January 1953, Johnson was chosen by his fellow Democrats to be the minority leader. Thus, he became the least senior Senator ever elected to this position, and one of the least senior party leaders in the history of the Senate. The whip is usually first in line to replace party leader (e.g., most recently whip Harry Reid became Senate Minority Leader after Tom Daschle's defeat).
One of his first actions was to eliminate the seniority system in appointment to a committee, while retaining it in terms of chairmanships. In the 1954 election, Johnson was re-elected to the Senate, and since the Democrats won the majority in the Senate, Johnson became majority leader. William Knowland was elected minority leader. LBJ's duties were to schedule legislation and help pass measures favored by the Democrats. He, Rayburn and President Dwight D. Eisenhower worked smoothly together in passing Eisenhower's domestic and foreign agenda. As Majority Leader, Johnson was responsible for passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1957, the first civil rights legislation passed by the Senate since Reconstruction.




Johnson gives "The Treatment" to 90-year-old Rhode Island Senator Theodore F. Green in 1957


Historians Caro and Dallek consider Lyndon Johnson the most effective Senate majority leader in history. He was unusually proficient at gathering information. One biographer suggests he was "the greatest intelligence gatherer Washington has ever known", discovering exactly where every Senator stood, his philosophy and prejudices, his strengths and weaknesses, and what it took to win him over.[21] Robert Baker claimed that Johnson would occasionally send senators on NATO trips in order to avoid their dissenting votes.[22] Central to Johnson's control was "The Treatment",[23] described by two journalists:[24]

The Treatment could last ten minutes or four hours. It came, enveloping its target, at the LBJ Ranch swimming pool, in one of LBJ's offices, in the Senate cloakroom, on the floor of the Senate itself — wherever Johnson might find a fellow Senator within his reach.


Its tone could be supplication, accusation, cajolery, exuberance, scorn, tears, complaint and the hint of threat. It was all of these together. It ran the gamut of human emotions. Its velocity was breathtaking, and it was all in one direction. Interjections from the target were rare. Johnson anticipated them before they could be spoken. He moved in close, his face a scant millimeter from his target, his eyes widening and narrowing, his eyebrows rising and falling. From his pockets poured clippings, memos, statistics. Mimicry, humor, and the genius of analogy made The Treatment an almost hypnotic experience and rendered the target stunned and helpless.


[edit] Vice Presidency
Main article: United States presidential election, 1960
Johnson's success in the Senate made him a possible Democratic presidential candidate. He was the "favorite son" candidate of the Texas delegation at the Party's national convention in 1956. In 1960, after the failure of the "Stop Kennedy" coalition he had formed with Adlai Stevenson, Stuart Symington, and Hubert Humphrey, Johnson received 409 votes on the only ballot at the Democratic convention, which nominated John F. Kennedy.
Tip O'Neill, then a representative from Kennedy's home state of Massachusetts, recalled that Johnson approached him at the convention and said, "Tip, I'd like to have you with me on the second ballot." O'Neill, understanding the influence of the Kennedy name, replied, "Senator, there's not going to be any second ballot."[25]
During the convention, Kennedy designated Johnson as his choice for Vice President. Some later reports (such as Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr.'s) say that Kennedy offered the position to Johnson as a courtesy and did not expect him to accept. Others (such as W. Marvin Watson) say that the Kennedy campaign was desperate to win the 1960 election against Richard Nixon and Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., and needed Johnson on the ticket to help carry Southern states.
According to other sources, Kennedy did not want Johnson to be his running-mate and Vice President, and did not even want to ask him. JFK's reported choice was Symington. Johnson, however, decided to seek the Vice Presidency and with Speaker Rayburn's help pressured Kennedy to give him a spot.[26]
At the same time as his Vice Presidential run, Johnson also sought a third term in the U.S. Senate. According to Robert Caro, "On November 5, 1960, Lyndon Johnson won election for both the vice presidency of the United States, on the Kennedy-Johnson ticket, and for a third term as Senator (he had Texas law changed to allow him to run for both offices). When he won the vice presidency, he made arrangements to resign from the Senate, as he was required to do under federal law, as soon as it convened on January 3, 1961."[27] (In 1988, Lloyd Bentsen, the Vice Presidential running mate of Democratic presidential candidate Michael Dukakis, and also a Senator from Texas, took advantage of "Lyndon's law," and was able to retain his seat in the Senate despite Dukakis' loss to George H. W. Bush. The same went for Senator Joe Lieberman of Connecticut in 2000 after Al Gore lost to George W. Bush. In 2008, Joseph Biden was elected Vice President and was re-elected U.S. Senator, like Johnson had done in 1960.)
Johnson was re-elected Senator with 1,306,605 votes (58%) to Republican John Tower's 927,653 (41.1%). Fellow Democrat William A. Blakley was appointed to replace Johnson as Senator, but Blakley lost a special election in May 1961 to Tower.
After the election, Johnson found himself powerless. Despite Kennedy's efforts to keep Johnson busy, informed, and at the White House often, his advisors and even some of his family were more dismissive to the Texan. Kennedy appointed him to jobs such as head of the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunities, through which he worked with African Americans and other minorities. Though Kennedy may have intended this to remain a more nominal position, Taylor Branch in Pillar of Fire contends that Johnson served to push the Kennedy administration's actions for civil rights further and faster than Kennedy originally intended to go. Branch notes the irony of Johnson, who the Kennedy family hoped would appeal to conservative southern voters, being the advocate for civil rights. In particular he notes Johnson's Memorial Day 1963 speech at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania as being a catalyst, that led to more action than otherwise would have occurred.
Johnson took on numerous minor diplomatic missions, which gave him limited insights into global issues. He was allowed to observe Cabinet and National Security Council meetings. Kennedy did give Johnson control over all presidential appointments involving Texas, and he was appointed chairman of the President's Ad Hoc Committee for Science. When, in April 1961, the Soviets beat the U.S. with the first manned spaceflight, Kennedy tasked Johnson with coming up with a 'scientific bonanza' that would prove world leadership. Johnson knew that Project Apollo and an enlarged NASA were feasible, so he steered the recommendation towards a program for landing an American on the moon.

[edit] Presidency 1963–1969

[edit] Assassination of President John F. Kennedy




Lyndon B. Johnson being sworn in aboard Air Force One by Federal Judge Sarah T. Hughes, following the assassination of John F. Kennedy. To the left of Johnson is Jacqueline Kennedy, widow of Kennedy; to his right is Mrs. Lady Bird Johnson, and sitting down near the airplane window is Jack Valenti, founder of the MPAA.


Main article: Lyndon B. Johnson 1963 presidential inauguration
Two hours and eight minutes after President Kennedy was assassinated in a motorcade at Dealey Plaza, Dallas, Texas, Johnson was sworn in as President on Air Force One in Dallas at Love Field Airport on November 22, 1963. He was sworn in by Federal Judge Sarah T. Hughes, a family friend, making him the first President sworn in by a woman. He is also the only President to have been sworn in on Texas soil. Johnson did not swear on a Bible, as there were none on Air Force One; a Roman Catholic missal was found in Kennedy's desk and was used for the swearing-in ceremony.[28]
Johnson created a panel headed by Chief Justice Earl Warren, known as the Warren Commission, to investigate Kennedy's assassination. The commission conducted hearings and concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone in the assassination. Not everyone agreed with the Warren Commission, however, and numerous public and private investigations continued for decades after Johnson left office.[29] The wave of national grief following the assassination gave enormous momentum to Johnson's promise to carry out Kennedy's programs, although he didn't carry them out as much as he had promised. He retained the senior Kennedy appointees, some for the full term of his presidency. Even the late President's brother, Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, with whom Johnson had a notoriously difficult relationship, remained in office until leaving in 1964 to run for the Senate.[30]

[edit] 1964 presidential election
Main article: U.S. presidential election, 1964
On September 7, 1964, Johnson's campaign managers for the 1964 presidential election broadcast the "Daisy ad." It portrayed a little girl picking petals from a daisy, counting up to ten. Then a baritone voice took over, counted down from ten to zero and a nuclear bomb exploded. The message was that Barry Goldwater meant nuclear war. Although it was soon pulled off the air, it escalated into a very heated election. Johnson won the presidency by a sweeping landslide, winning with 61% of the vote and the then-widest popular margin in the 20th century — more than 15 million votes (this was later surpassed by incumbent President Nixon's defeat of Senator McGovern in 1972).[31]. Percentage-wise, Johnson's popular vote margin of over 22 percentage points is a record that stands to this day.
In the summer of 1964, the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP) was organized with the purpose of challenging Mississippi's all-white and anti-civil rights delegation to the Democratic National Convention of that year as not representative of all Mississippians. At the national convention in Atlantic City, New Jersey the MFDP claimed the seats for delegates for Mississippi, not on the grounds of the Party rules, but because the official Mississippi delegation had been elected by a primary conducted under Jim Crow laws in which blacks were excluded because of poll taxes, literacy tests, and even violence against black voters. The national Party’s liberal leaders supported a compromise in which the white delegation and the MFDP would have an even division of the seats; Johnson was concerned that, while the regular Democrats of Mississippi would probably vote for Goldwater anyway, if the Democratic Party rejected the regular Democrats, he would lose the Democratic Party political structure that he needed to win in the South. Eventually, Hubert Humphrey, Walter Reuther and black civil rights leaders (including Roy Wilkins, Martin Luther King, and Bayard Rustin) worked out a compromise with MFDP leaders: the MFDP would receive two non-voting seats on the floor of the Convention; the regular Mississippi delegation would be required to pledge to support the party ticket; and no future Democratic convention would accept a delegation chosen by a discriminatory poll. When the leaders took the proposal back to the 64 members who had made the bus trip to Atlantic City, they voted it down. As MFDP Vice Chair Fannie Lou Hamer said, "We didn't come all the way up here to compromise for no more than we’d gotten here. We didn't come all this way for no two seats, 'cause all of us is tired." The failure of the compromise effort allowed the rest of the Democratic Party to conclude that the MFDP was simply being unreasonable, and they lost a great deal of their liberal support. After that, the convention went smoothly for LBJ without a searing battle over civil rights.[32] Despite the landslide victory, Johnson, who carried the South as a whole in the election, lost the Deep South states of Louisiana, Alabama, Mississippi, Georgia and South Carolina, the first time a Democratic candidate had done so since Reconstruction.
Johnson won the presidency by a plurality of 61 percent and said he would “carry forward the plans and programs of John Fitzgerald Kennedy. Not because of our sorrow or sympathy, but because they are right.” "1964 Year In Review"

[edit] Civil rights




President Johnson signs the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Among the guests behind him is Martin Luther King, Jr.












"Remarks upon Signing the Civil Rights Act of 1964"









Public statement by Lyndon B. Johnson of July 2, 1964 about the Civil Rights Act of 1964.









Problems listening to this file? See media help.


In 1954 the civil rights movement began when the U.S. supreme court put an end to racially segregated public schools."[33] Chief of Justice Earl Warren added:" Separate educational facilities are inherently unequal."[34] This legislation initiated the boycotting of segregated buses in Alabama. Martin Luther King Jr. joined Chief Warren by becoming the leader of the racial equality movement.
In conjunction with the civil rights movement, Johnson overcame southern resistance and convinced Congress to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which outlawed most forms of racial segregation. John Kennedy originally proposed the Act and lined up the necessary votes in the House to pass his civil rights act by the time of his death in November 1963. However, for the fight in the Senate, Johnson was the one to get it pushed through. He signed it into law on July 2, 1964. Legend has it that, as he put down his pen, Johnson told an aide, "We have lost the South for a generation," anticipating a coming backlash from Southern whites against Johnson's Democratic Party.[35]
The southern African Americans were the worst oppressed minority in the United States. It goes without saying that voting was the most demanded right, however it was also the most ignored. In 1965, he achieved passage of a second civil rights bill, the Voting Rights Act, which outlawed discrimination in voting, thus allowing millions of southern blacks to vote for the first time. During that year, "seven of the eleven southern states of the former confederacy"[36] were granted this right. The voting right was given to the following states: " Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina, Virginia and North Carolina."[37] Texas, home to the majority of the African American population at the time, was only granted this right in 1975.[38]
After the murder of civil rights worker Viola Liuzzo, Johnson went on television to announce the arrest of four Ku Klux Klansmen implicated in her death. He angrily denounced the Klan as a "hooded society of bigots", and warned them to "return to a decent society before it's too late." He turned the themes of Christian redemption to push for civil rights, thereby mobilizing support from churches North and South.[39]




President Johnson meets with Civil Rights leader Martin Luther King in the White House Cabinet Room in 1966.


At the Howard University commencement address on June 4, 1965, he said that both the government and the nation needed to help achieve goals:


“
To shatter forever not only the barriers of law and public practice, but the walls which bound the condition of many by the color of his skin. To dissolve, as best we can, the antique enmities of the heart which diminish the holder, divide the great democracy, and do wrong — great wrong — to the children of God...[40]
”


In 1967, Johnson nominated civil rights attorney Thurgood Marshall to be the first African American Associate Justice of the Supreme Court. 
[edit] Great Society
The Great Society program, with its name coined from one of Johnson's speeches,[19] became Johnson's agenda for Congress in January 1965: aid to education, attack on disease, Medicare, urban renewal, beautification, conservation, development of depressed regions, a wide-scale fight against poverty, control and prevention of crime, and removal of obstacles to the right to vote.[citation needed] Congress, at times augmenting or amending, enacted many of Johnson's recommendations.

[edit] Federal funding for education
Johnson had a lifelong commitment to the belief that education was the cure for both ignorance and poverty,[citation needed] and was an essential component of the American Dream, especially for minorities who endured poor facilities and tight-fisted budgets from local taxes.[citation needed] He made education a top priority of the Great Society, with an emphasis on helping poor children. After the 1964 landslide brought in many new liberal Congressmen, he had the votes for the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) of 1965. For the first time, large amounts of federal money went to public schools. In practice ESEA meant helping all public school districts,[citation needed] with more money going to districts that had large proportions of students from poor families (which included all the big cities). However, for the first time private schools (most of them Catholic schools in the inner cities) received services, such as library funding, comprising about 12% of the ESEA budget. As Dallek reports, researchers soon found that poverty had more to do with family background and neighborhood conditions than the quantity of education a child received. Early studies suggested initial improvements for poor kids helped by ESEA reading and math programs, but later assessments indicated that benefits faded quickly and left students little better off than those not in the programs. Johnson’s second major education program was the Higher Education Act of 1965, which focused on funding for lower income students, including grants, work-study money, and government loans. He set up the National Endowment for the Humanities and the National Endowment for the Arts, to support humanists and artists (as the WPA once did). Although ESEA solidified Johnson's support among K-12 teachers' unions, neither the Higher Education Act nor the Endowments mollified the college professors and students growing increasingly uneasy with the war in Vietnam.[41] In 1967 Johnson signed the Corporation for Public Broadcasting to create educational television programs to supplement the broadcast networks.

[edit] "War on poverty"
In 1964, upon Johnson's request, Congress passed a tax-reduction law and the Economic Opportunity Act, which was in association with the war on poverty.[42]

[edit] Medicare and Medicaid
Millions of elderly people were aided[4] by the 1965 Medicare amendment to the Social Security Act. Johnson gave the first two Medicare cards to former President Harry S. Truman and his wife Bess after signing the medicare bill at the Truman Library. Lower income people received medical care funded by the government through the Medicaid program.[43]




Truman (seated right) and his wife Bess (behind him) attend the signing of the Medicare Bill on July 30, 1965, by President Johnson.



[edit] Space race
NASA made new explorations in the space program Johnson helped champion since its start. When three astronauts successfully orbited the moon in December 1968, Johnson congratulated them: "You've taken ... all of us, all over the world, into a new era."

[edit] Urban riots
Major riots in black ghettos caused a series of "long hot summers." They started with a violent disturbance in Harlem in 1964 and the Watts district of Los Angeles in 1965, and extended to 1970. The biggest wave came in April 1968, when riots occurred in over a hundred cities in the wake of the assassination of Martin Luther King. Newark burned in 1967, where six days of rioting left 26 dead, 1500 injured, and the inner city a burned out shell. In Detroit in 1967, Governor George Romney sent in 7400 national guard troops to quell fire bombings, looting, and attacks on white-owned businesses and on police. Johnson finally sent in federal troops with tanks and machine guns. Detroit continued to burn for three more days until finally 43 were dead, 2250 were injured, 4000 were arrested; property damage ranged into the hundreds of millions; much of inner Detroit was never rebuilt. Johnson called for even more billions to be spent in the cities and another federal civil rights law regarding housing, but his political capital had been spent, and his Great Society programs lost support. Johnson's popularity plummeted as a massive white political backlash took shape, reinforcing the sense Johnson had lost control of the streets of major cities as well as his party.[44]




President Johnson with Australian Prime Minister Harold Holt.


Johnson created the Kerner Commission to study the problem of urban riots, headed by Illinois Governor Otto Kerner.[45]

[edit] Backlash against Johnson: 1966–67
Johnson's problems began to mount in 1966. The press had sensed a "Credibility gap" between what Johnson was saying in press conferences and what was happening on the ground in Vietnam, which led to much less favorable coverage of Johnson.[46]
By year's end, the Democratic governor of Missouri warned that Johnson would lose the state by 100,000 votes, despite a half-million margin in 1964. "Frustration over Vietnam; too much federal spending and... taxation; no great public support for your Great Society programs; and ... public disenchantment with the civil rights programs" had eroded the President's standing, the governor reported. There were bright spots, however. In January 1967, Johnson boasted that wages were the highest in history, unemployment was at a 13-year low, and corporate profits and farm incomes were greater than ever; however, a 4.5% jump in consumer prices was worrisome, as well as the rise in interest rates. Johnson asked for a temporary 6% surcharge in income taxes to cover the mounting deficit caused by increased spending. Johnson's approval ratings stayed below 50%; by January 1967, the number of his strong supporters had plunged to 16%, from 25% four months before. He ran about even with Republican George Romney in trial matchups that spring. Asked to explain why he was unpopular, Johnson responded, "I am a dominating personality, and when I get things done I don't always please all the people." Johnson also blamed the press, saying they showed "complete irresponsibility and lie and misstate facts and have no one to be answerable to." He also blamed "the preachers, liberals and professors" who had turned against him.[47] In the congressional elections of 1966, the Republicans gained three seats in the Senate and 47 in the House, reinvigorating the Conservative coalition and making it impossible for Johnson to pass any additional Great Society legislation.

[edit] Vietnam War
Johnson increasingly focused on the American military effort in Vietnam. He firmly believed in the Domino Theory and that his containment policy required America to make a serious effort to stop all Communist expansion.[48] At Kennedy's death, there were 16,000 American military advisors in Vietnam. As President, Lyndon Johnson immediately reversed his predecessor's order to withdraw 1,000 military personnel by the end of 1963 with his own NSAM #273 on November 26, 1963. Johnson expanded the numbers and roles of the American military following the Gulf of Tonkin Incident (less than three weeks after the Republican Convention of 1964, which had nominated Barry Goldwater for President).




LBJ visits Shriners Hospital in Portland, Oregon, in September 1964


The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which gave the President the exclusive right to use military force without consulting the Senate, was based on a false pretext, as he later admitted.[49] It was Johnson who began America's direct involvement in the ground war in Vietnam. By 1968, over 550,000 American soldiers were inside Vietnam; in 1967 and 1968 they were being killed at the rate of over 1,000 a month.[50]
Politically, Johnson closely watched the public opinion polls. His goal was not to adjust his policies to follow opinion, but rather to adjust opinion to support his policies. Until the Tet Offensive of 1968, he systematically downplayed the war: few speeches, no rallies or parades or advertising campaigns. He feared that publicity would charge up the hawks who wanted victory, and weaken both his containment policy and his higher priorities in domestic issues. Jacobs and Shapiro conclude, "Although Johnson held a core of support for his position, the president was unable to move Americans who held hawkish and dovish positions." Polls showed that beginning in 1965, the public was consistently 40-50% hawkish and 10-25% dovish. Johnson's aides told him, "Both hawks and doves [are frustrated with the war] ... and take it out on you."[51]
Additionally, domestic issues were driving his polls down steadily from spring 1966 onward. A few analysts have theorized that "Vietnam had no independent impact on President Johnson's popularity at all after other effects, including a general overall downward trend in popularity, had been taken into account."[52] The war did, however, grow less popular and continued to split the Democratic Party. The Republican Party was not completely pro or anti-war, and Nixon managed to get support from both groups by running on a reduction in troop levels with an eye toward eventually ending the campaign.
He often privately cursed the Vietnam War, and in a conversation with Robert McNamara, Johnson assailed "the bunch of commies" running the New York Times for their articles against the war effort.[53] Johnson believed that America could not afford to lose and risk appearing weak in the eyes of the world. In a discussion about the war with former President Dwight Eisenhower, Johnson said he was "trying to win it just as fast as I can in every way that I know how" and later stated that he needed "all the help I can get."[54] Johnson escalated the war effort continuously from 1964 to 1968, and the number of American deaths rose. In two weeks in May 1968 alone American deaths numbered 1,800 with total casualties at 18,000. Alluding to the Domino Theory, he said, "If we allow Vietnam to fall, tomorrow we’ll be fighting in Hawaii, and next week in San Francisco." When reporters repeatedly pressed Johnson in late 1967 on why he was so committed to the war, Johnson exposed an old war wound to them and said, That is why.[55]




Walt Whitman Rostow showing President Lyndon B. Johnson a model of the Khe Sanh area in February 1968


After the Tet offensive of January 1968, his presidency was dominated by the Vietnam War more than ever. As casualties mounted and success seemed further away than ever, Johnson's popularity plummeted. College students and others protested, burned draft cards, and chanted, "Hey, hey, LBJ, how many kids did you kill today?"[48] Johnson could scarcely travel anywhere without facing protests, and was not allowed by the Secret Service to attend the 1968 Democratic National Convention, where hundreds of thousands of hippies, yippies, Black Panthers and other opponents of Johnson's policies both in Vietnam and in the ghettoes converged to protest. Thus by 1968, the public was polarized, with the "hawks" rejecting Johnson's refusal to continue the war indefinitely, and the "doves" rejecting his current war policies. Support for Johnson's middle position continued to shrink until he finally rejected containment and sought a peace settlement. By late summer, however, he realized that Nixon was closer to his position than Humphrey. However, he continued to support Humphrey publicly in the election, and personally despised Nixon. One of Johnson's well known quotes was "the Democratic party at its worst, is still better than the Republican party at its best".[56]

[edit] Israel
In a 1993 interview for the Johnson Presidential Library oral history archives, Johnson's Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara revealed that a carrier battle group, the U.S. 6th Fleet, on a training exercise near Gibraltar was re-positioned towards the eastern Mediterranean to be able to defend Israel during the build-up to the Six Day War of June 1967. The administration "thought the situation was so tense in Israel that perhaps the Syrians, fearing Israel would attack them, or the Russians supporting the Syrians might wish to redress the balance of power and might attack Israel". The Soviets learned of this deployment, which they regarded as offensive in nature, and in a hotline message from Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin threatened the United States with war.[57]
The Soviet Union supported its Arab allies.[58] In May 1967, the Soviets started a surge deployment of their naval forces into the East Mediterranean. Early in the crisis they began to shadow the US and British carriers with destroyers and intelligence collecting vessels. The Soviet naval squadron in the Mediterranean was sufficiently strong to act as a major restraint on the U.S. Navy.[59] In a 1983 interview with the Boston Globe, McNamara claimed that "We damn near had war". He said Kosygin was angry that "we had turned around a carrier in the Mediterranean".[60]

[edit] Pardons
During his presidency, Johnson issued 1187 pardons and commutations.[61] In general, he granted over 20% of requests and denied the rest.[62]

[edit] 1968 presidential election
Main article: U.S. presidential election, 1968
Entering the 1968 election campaign, initially, no prominent Democratic candidate was prepared to run against a sitting president of the Democratic party. Only Senator Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota challenged Johnson as an anti-war candidate in the New Hampshire primary, hoping to pressure the Democrats to oppose the war. On March 12, McCarthy won 42% of the primary vote to Johnson's 49%, an amazingly strong showing for such a challenger. Four days later, Sen. Robert F. Kennedy of New York entered the race. Internal polling by Johnson's campaign in Wisconsin, the next state to hold a primary election, showed the President trailing badly. Johnson did not leave the White House to campaign.




President Johnson meets with candidate Richard Nixon in July 1968


Johnson had lost control of the Democratic Party, which was splitting into four factions, each of which despised the other three. The first consisted of Johnson (and Humphrey), labor unions, and local party bosses (led by Chicago Mayor Richard J. Daley). The second group consisted of students and intellectuals who were vociferously against the war and rallied behind McCarthy. The third group was Catholics and African Americans; they rallied behind Robert Kennedy. The fourth group was traditional white Southerners, who rallied behind George C. Wallace and the American Independent Party. Vietnam was one of many issues that splintered the party, and Johnson could see no way to win Vietnam[48] and no way to unite the party long enough for him to win re-election.[63]
In addition, Johnson was concerned that he might not make it through another term.[citation needed] Therefore, at the end of a March 31 speech, he shocked the nation when he announced he would not run for re-election: "I shall not seek, and I will not accept the nomination of my party for another term as your President."[64] He did rally the party bosses and unions to give Humphrey the nomination at the 1968 Democratic National Convention. In what was termed the October surprise, Johnson announced to the nation on October 31, 1968, that he had ordered a complete cessation of "all air, naval and artillery bombardment of North Vietnam", effective November 1, should the Hanoi Government be willing to negotiate and citing progress with the Paris peace talks. In the end, the divided Democratic Party crumbled allowing Republican Richard Nixon to win the election.
LBJ was not disqualified from running for a second full term under the provisions of the 22nd Amendment; he had served less than 24 months of President Kennedy's term. Had he stayed in the race and won and served out the new term, he would have been president for 9 years and 2 months, second only to Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Coincidentally, Johnson died just two days after the end of this hypothetical second full term.

[edit] Administration and Cabinet
(All of the cabinet members when Johnson became President in 1963 had been serving under John F. Kennedy previously.)




Official White House portrait of Lyndon B. Johnson




The Johnson Cabinet


OFFICE
NAME
TERM





President
Lyndon B. Johnson
1963–1969


Vice President
None
1963–1965


 
Hubert Humphrey
1965–1969





State
Dean Rusk
1963–1969


Treasury
C. Douglas Dillon
1963–1965


 
Henry H. Fowler
1965–1968


 
Joseph W. Barr
1968–1969


Defense
Robert McNamara
1963–1968


 
Clark M. Clifford
1968–1969


Justice
Robert F. Kennedy
1963–1964


 
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach
1964–1966


 
Ramsey Clark
1966–1969


Postmaster General
John A. Gronouski
1963–1965


 
Larry O'Brien
1965–1968


 
W. Marvin Watson
1968–1969


Interior
Stewart Lee Udall
1963–1969


Agriculture
Orville Lothrop Freeman
1963–1969


Commerce
Luther Hartwell Hodges
1963–1965


 
John Thomas Connor
1965–1967


 
Alexander Buel Trowbridge
1967–1968


 
Cyrus Rowlett Smith
1968–1969


Labor
W. Willard Wirtz
1963–1969


HEW
Anthony Celebrezze
1963–1965


 
John William Gardner
1965–1968


 
Wilbur Joseph Cohen
1968–1969


HUD
Robert Clifton Weaver
1966–1968


 
Robert Coldwell Wood
1969


Transportation
Alan Stephenson Boyd
1967–1969



[edit] Judicial appointments

[edit] Supreme Court
Main article: Lyndon B. Johnson Supreme Court candidates
Johnson appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States:

Abe Fortas–1965

Fortas was also nominated to be Chief Justice of the United States in 1968, but he was filibustered by senators and never was voted upon by the full Senate.


Thurgood Marshall–1967

Marshall was the first African-American to be appointed to the Supreme Court.




[edit] Other courts
Main article: Lyndon B. Johnson judicial appointments
In addition to his Supreme Court appointments, Johnson appointed 40 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, and 126 judges to the United States district courts. Johnson also had a small number of judicial appointment controversies, with one appellate and three district court nominees not being confirmed by the United States Senate before Johnson's presidency ended.

[edit] Scandals and controversies
During 1973 testimony before Congress, the CEO of America's largest cooperative of milk producers said that while Johnson was President, his cooperative had leased Johnson's private jet at a "plush" price, which Johnson wanted to continue once he was out of office.[18]
Johnson continued the wiretapping of Martin Luther King, Jr. that had been previously authorized by the Kennedy administration under Attorney General Robert Kennedy.[65] As a result of listening to the FBI's tapes, remarks on King's lifestyle were made by several prominent officials, including Johnson, who once said that King was a “hypocritical preacher.”[66] Johnson also authorized the tapping of phone conversations of Vietnamese friends of a Nixon associate.[67]
In Latin America, Johnson direcly and indirectly supported the overthrow of left-wing, democratically-elected president Juan Bosch of the Dominican Republic and João Goulart of Brazil, maintaining US support for anti-communist, authoritarian Latin American regimes. American foreign policy towards Latin America remained largely static until election of Jimmy Carter to the presidency in 1977.

[edit] Post-presidency
After leaving the presidency in 1969, Johnson went home to his ranch in Johnson City, Texas. In 1971, he published his memoirs, The Vantage Point. That year, the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum opened near the campus of The University of Texas at Austin. He donated his Texas ranch in his will to the public to form the Lyndon B. Johnson National Historical Park, with the provision that the ranch "remain a working ranch and not become a sterile relic of the past".[68]

[edit] Death and funeral


“
On Inauguration Day, Johnson saw Nixon sworn in, then got on the plane to fly back to Texas. When the front door of the plane closed, Johnson pulled out a cigarette—first cigarette he had smoked since his heart attack in 1955. One of his daughters pulled it out of his mouth and said, "Daddy, what are you doing? You're going to kill yourself." He took it back and said, "I've now raised you girls. I've now been President. Now it's my time!" From that point on, he went into a very self-destructive spiral.
”



—Historian Michael Beschloss[69]



Lyndon Baines Johnson died at 4:39 p.m. on January 22, 1973, two days after Nixon's second Inaugural, on the same day that a ceasefire had been signed in Vietnam, from a third heart attack at his ranch. His health had been affected by years of drinking, heavy smoking and stress; the former president had severe heart disease. He had suffered a second heart attack in April 1972, but had been unable to quit smoking. He was found dead by Secret Service agents, in his bed, with a telephone in his hand. (The Age, 23 January, 1973, pg 1)




A memorial wreath at President Johnson's grave in Texas


Johnson was honored with a state funeral in which Texas Congressman J. J. Pickle and former Secretary of State Dean Rusk eulogized him at the Capitol. The final services took place on January 25. The funeral was held at the National City Christian Church in Washington, D.C., where he had often worshiped as president. The service was presided over by President Richard Nixon and attended by foreign dignitaries such as former Japanese prime minister Eisaku Satō, who served as Japanese prime minister during Johnson's presidency. Eulogies were given by the Rev. Dr. George Davis, the church's pastor, and W. Marvin Watson, former postmaster general. Nixon did not speak, though he attended, as is customary for presidents during state funerals, but the eulogists turned to him and lauded him for his tributes, as Rusk did the day before.
Johnson was buried in his family cemetery (which can be viewed today by visitors to the Lyndon B. Johnson National Park in Stonewall, Texas), a few yards from the house in which he was born. Eulogies were given by John Connally and the Rev. Billy Graham, the minister who officiated the burial rites. The state funeral, the last until Ronald Reagan's in 2004, capped off an unexpectedly busy week in Washington, as the Military District of Washington (MDW) dealt with their second major task in less than a week. Colonel J. Edward Melanson Jr., MDW public affairs chief, reacted: "We're finding out we're made of rubber."[70] The week began with Nixon's second inauguration. The MDW and the Armed Forces Inaugural Committee canceled the remainder of the ceremonies surrounding the inauguration to allow for a full state funeral, as Johnson died only two days after the inauguration.

[edit] Legacy




The coat of arms granted to President Johnson in 1968 by the American College of Heraldry and Arms. Description: Azure on a Saltire Gules fimbriated between four Eagles displayed a Mullet Or.


The Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston, Texas, was renamed the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, and Texas created a legal state holiday to be observed on August 27 to mark LBJ's birthday. It is known as Lyndon Baines Johnson Day. The Lyndon Baines Johnson Memorial Grove on the Potomac was dedicated on September 27, 1974.
The LBJ School of Public Affairs was named in his honor, as is the Lyndon B. Johnson National Grassland.
Interstate 635 in Dallas is named the LBJ Freeway.
Johnson was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom posthumously in 1980.
On March 23, 2007, President George W. Bush signed legislation naming the United States Department of Education headquarters after President Johnson.[71]
Runway 17R/35L at Austin-Bergstrom International Airport is known as the LBJ Runway.
2008 was the celebration of the LBJ Centennial featuring special programs, events, and parties across Texas and in Washington, D.C. LBJ would have been 100 years old on August 27, 2008.

[edit] Major legislation signed

1964: Civil Rights Act of 1964
1964: Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964
1964: Wilderness Act
1964: Nurse Training Act
1964: Food Stamp Act of 1964
1964: Economic Opportunity Act
1965: Higher Education Act of 1965
1965: Social Security Act of 1965
1965: Voting Rights Act
1965: Immigration and Nationality Services Act of 1965
1966: Freedom of Information Act (United States)
1967: Age Discrimination in Employment Act[72]


1967: Public Broadcasting Act of 1967
1968: Bilingual Education Act
1968: Fair housing
1968: Gun Control Act of 1968


[edit] In popular culture

[edit] Music

Referenced in the anti-war song Superbird by Country Joe & the Fish, and "Lyndon Johnson Told the Nation" by Tom Paxton .
A snippet of an LBJ speech is used for the opening of "Killing Floor" by the Electric Flag.
English band Enjoy Destroy named a song LBJ with the chorus containing the slogan, Hey,hey, LBJ, how many kids did you kill today?
Steven Stucky's work August 4, 1964 to be premiered in Dallas in celebration of the 100th anniversary of President Lyndon B. Johnson's birth. The piece focuses on two events that came to a head on August 4, 1964, events that defined LBJ's presidency and defined that time for many Americans — the discovery of the bodies of three slain civil rights workers and the bombing of North Vietnam.


[edit] Video games

Appears as a character in Metal Gear Solid 3: Snake Eater. He is voiced by Richard McGonagle


[edit] Television

In the popular television series Seinfeld, Lyndon B. Johnson was considered by George Costanza to be the ugliest president of all time.


[edit] Books

In the Odd Thomas series of novels by Dean Koontz, Lyndon B. Johnson appears as one of the famous ghosts that haunts the titular character's home town of Pico Mundo, still wearing the hospital gown he had on when he died. When Johson realizes Odd can see him, he responds by mooning him.


[edit] Movies

LBJ (1968): subject of Cuban propaganda film.
The Private Files of J. Edgar Hoover (1977): played by Andrew Duggan.
King (1978, TV): played by Warren Kemmerling.
Hair (1979): The song "Initials/LBJ" mentions Johnson in the lyrics repeatedly.
Kennedy (1983, TV): played by Nesbitt Blaisdell.
The Right Stuff (1983): played by Donald Moffat.
Robert Kennedy & His Times (1985, TV): played by G.D. Spradlin.
J. Edgar Hoover (1987, TV): played by Rip Torn.
LBJ: The Early Years (1987, TV): played by Randy Quaid.
JFK (1991): played by Tom Howard and John William Galt. (voice)
Forrest Gump (1994): archive footage, voice-over by John William Galt.
Thirteen Days (2000): played by Walter Adrian.
Path to War (2002): played by Michael Gambon.
RFK (2002): played by James Cromwell.


[edit] Electoral history
Main article: Electoral history of Lyndon B. Johnson

[edit] See also

History of the United States (1945–1964)
History of the United States (1964–1980)
Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum on the campus of the University of Texas in Austin
Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs
List of facilities named after Lyndon Johnson
Johnson's Silver Star award evaluated


[edit] References
Further information: Lyndon B. Johnson bibliography


^ "LBJ Biography". Lbjlib.utexas.edu. http://www.lbjlib.utexas.edu/johnson/archives.hom/biographys.hom/lbj_bio.asp. Retrieved on 2008-10-06. 
^ a b Smallwood, James M.. "Operation Texas: Lyndon B. Johnson’s Attempt to Save Jews from the German Nazi Holocaust". Institute of Texan Cultures. http://www.texancultures.com/hiddenhistory/Pages10/SmallwoodLBJ.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-04. 
^ "Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum — Religion and President Johnson". http://www.lbjlib.utexas.edu/johnson/archives.hom/FAQs/Religion/religion_hm.asp. 
^ Banta, Joseph (January 1964). "President Lyndon B. Johnson". The Christadelphian 101: 26. 
^ Muckraker, 14 January 2008 edition
^ Caro, Robert A. Volume I
^ "735 — Remarks at a Rally in San Bernardino. October 28, 1964". http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=26682. 
^ "The Ultimate San Bernardino Trivia Quiz". http://www.sbpl.org/trivia.html. 
^ "President Lyndon B. Johnson's Biography." Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum.
^ "Remarks at Southwest Texas State College Upon Signing the Higher Education Act of 1965". Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum. http://www.lbjlib.utexas.edu/johnson/lbjforkids/edu_whca370-text.shtm. Retrieved on 2006-04-11. 
^ Woods, Randall (2006), p. 131
^ a b "JOHNSON, Lyndon Baines — Biographical Information". Bioguide.congress.gov. http://bioguide.congress.gov/scripts/biodisplay.pl?index=J000160. Retrieved on 2008-10-06. 
^ Caro, Robert A. (1982).
^ Hove, Duane T. (2003). American Warriors: Five Presidents in the Pacific Theater of World War II. Burd Street Press. ISBN 978-1572493070.  [1]
^ a b c "CNN.com In-Depth Specials — The story behind LBJ's Silver Star". Cnn.com. http://www.cnn.com/SPECIALS/2001/johnson.silver.star/story/storypage.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-06. 
^ Dallek, Robert. Lone Star Rising, p. 237
^ Woods, Randall (2006), p. 217; Caro, Robert A. (1989)
^ a b Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. p. 27-28. ISBN 0465041957. 
^ a b Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. p. 27. ISBN 0465041957. 
^ Caro, Robert A. (1989-12-18). "THE JOHNSON YEARS: BUYING AND SELLING". The New Yorker. http://www.newyorker.com/archive/1989/12/18/1989_12_18_043_TNY_CARDS_000356927. 
^ Woods, Randall (2006), p. 262
^ Baker, Robert http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/presidents/video/lbj_05.html#v230
^ "New York Times, The Johnson Treatment: Lyndon B. Johnson and Theodore F. Green". Afterimagegallery.com. http://www.afterimagegallery.com/nytjohnson.htm. Retrieved on 2008-10-06. 
^ Rowland Evans and Robert Novak. Lyndon B. Johnson: The Exercise of Power (1966), p. 104
^ John A. Farrell (2001). Tip O'Neill and the Democratic Century: A Biography. Little, Brown. ISBN 0-316-26049-5. 
^ Seymour M. Hersh, The Dark Side of Camelot, 1997, Chapter 12
^ Master of the Senate, p. 1035.
^ Transcript, Lawrence F. O'Brien Oral History Interview XIII, 9/10/86, by Michael L. Gillette, Internet Copy, LBJ Library. See: Page 23 at [2]
^ The Assassination Records Review Board noted in 1998 that Johnson became skeptical of some of the Warren Commission findings. See: Final Report, chapter 1, footnote 17 at http://www.fas.org/sgp/advisory/arrb98/index.html
^ Dallek, Robert (1998). Chapter 2
^ Dallek, Robert (1998). Chapter 3
^ Evans and Novak (1966), pp. 451–456; Taylor Branch. Pillar of Fire: America in the King Years 1963–65, pp. 444–470
^ Duiker,J.W. (2005). Twentieth-Century World History. p.196, Thomson Wadsworth.ISBN 0-534-62811-7
^ Duiker,J.W. (2005). Twentieth-Century World History. p.196, Thomson Wadsworth.ISBN 0-534-62811-7
^ Risen, Clay (2006-03-05). "How the South was won". The Boston Globe. http://www.boston.com/news/globe/ideas/articles/2006/03/05/how_the_south_was_won/. Retrieved on 2007-02-11. 
^ Davidson,C. & Grofman,B. (1994). Quiet Revolution In The South: The Impact Of The Voting Right Act, 1965-1990. p.3, Princeton University Press.
^ Davidson,C. & Grofman,B. (1994). Quiet Revolution In The South: The Impact Of The Voting Right Act, 1965-1990. p.3, Princeton University Press.
^ Davidson,C. & Grofman,B. (1994). Quiet Revolution In The South: The Impact Of The Voting Right Act, 1965-1990. p.3, Princeton University Press.
^ Woods, Randall (2006), pp. 759–787
^ Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965. Volume II, entry 301, pp. 635–640 (1966)
^ Woods, Randall (2006), pp. 563–68; Dallek, Robert (1988), pp. 196–202
^ http://wps.prenhall.com/wps/media/objects/751/769950/Documents_Library/eoa1964.htm Summary by G. David Garson
^ Patricia P. Martin and David A. Weaver. "Social Security: A Program and Policy History," Social Security Bulletin, volume 66, no. 1 (2005), see also online version
^ Woods, Randall (2006), pp. 790–795; Michael W. Flamm. Law And Order: Street Crime, Civil Unrest, and the Crisis of Liberalism in the 1960s (2005)
^ Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. p. 29. ISBN 0465041957. 
^ Rouse, Robert (March 15, 2006). "Happy Anniversary to the first scheduled presidential press conference - 93 years young!". American Chronicle. http://www.americanchronicle.com/articles/6883. 
^ Dallek, Robert. Flawed Giant, pp. 391–396; quotes on pp. 391 and 396
^ a b c "The Sixties". Junior Scholastic. 1994-02-11. pp. 4. 
^ LBJ tape 'confirms Vietnam war error', Martin Fletcher, The Times, November 7th, 2001
^ siwmfilm.net
^ Lawrence R. Jacobs and Robert Y. Shapiro. "Lyndon Johnson, Vietnam, and Public Opinion: Rethinking Realist Theory of Leadership." Presidential Studies Quarterly 29#3 (1999), p. 592
^ John E. Mueller. War, Presidents and Public Opinion (1973), p. 108
^ [3][dead link]
^ "LBJ Library releases telephone conversation recordings". Lbjlib.utexas.edu. http://www.lbjlib.utexas.edu/johnson/Press.hom/tape_release_11_2006.shtm. Retrieved on 2008-10-06. 
^ Dallek, Robert (1998). Flawed Giant: Lyndon B. Johnson and his Times, 1961–1973. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 754. ISBN 978-0195054651. 
^ Lewis L. Gould (1993), p. 98
^ Oral History Archives. Retrieved 8 October 2005.
^ Mediterranean Eskadra
^ Hattendorf, John B. (2000). Naval Strategy and Power in the Mediterranean: Past, Present and Future. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 0714680540. 
^ 'McNamara: Us Near War in '67', Boston Globe, 16 September 1983.
^ http://jurist.law.pitt.edu/pardonspres1.htm
^ http://www.rvc.cc.il.us/faclink/pruckman/pardoncharts/fiscact_files/image002.gif
^ Lewis L. Gould (1993). 1968: The Election that Changed America.
^ Remarks on Decision not to Seek Re-Election (March 31, 1968) Text and audio of speech
^ Garrow, David J. (2002-07/08). "The FBI and Martin Luther King". The Atlantic Monthly. http://www.theatlantic.com/doc/200207/garrow. 
^ Sidey, Hugh (1975-02-10). "L.B.J., Hoover and Domestic Spying". Time. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,912799-2,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-14. 
^ Sanchez, Julian (2008-03-16). "Wiretapping's true danger". The Los Angeles Times. http://www.latimes.com/news/opinion/la-op-sanchez16mar16,0,4039194.story. Retrieved on 2008-12-29. 
^ Harris, Marvin (December 1999). "Taming the wild pecan at Lyndon B. Johnson National Historical Park". Park Science 19 (2). http://www2.nature.nps.gov/parksci/vol19/vol19(2)/08–1harris.htm. 
^ Decisions That Shook the World, vol. 1, 38:18-47. Dir. Gerald Rafshoon. Camera Planet/Discovery Productions, 2004.
^ Elsen, William A. (January 25, 1973). "Ceremonial Group Had Busy 5 Weeks". The Washington Post: p. D3. 
^ "President Bush Signs H.R. 584, Designates U.S. Department of Education as the Lyndon Baines Johnson Federal Building". Whitehouse.gov. http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2007/03/20070323-6.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-06. 
^ Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967



[edit] External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Lyndon B. Johnson




Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Lyndon B. Johnson





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Lyndon B. Johnson



Lyndon Baines Johnson Centennial, commemorating the 100th birthday (August 27, 1908) of the 36th President and a year-long tribute to the LBJ legacy.
CONELRAD's definitive history of the Daisy ad
Extensive essay on Lyndon B. Johnson and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs
Full audio of Johnson speeches via the Miller Center of Public Affairs (UVa)
Johnson's Secret White House Recordings via the Miller Center of Public Affairs (UVa)
The Johnson Library's extensive oral history collection in searchable PDF's via the Miller Center of Public Affairs (UVa)
PBS American Experience Video Biography of Lyndon B. Johnson
Lyndon B. Johnson Library
Interview with Lyndon Johnson’s mistress, (the late) Madeleine Duncan Brown, wherein she talks about how LBJ and HL Hunt were involved in the assassination of JFK
Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs, The University of Texas at Austin
The 1960s Week-By-Week: follows Lyndon Johnson through the 1960s, including press conferences and other news
White House biography
Lyndon B. Johnson Quotes
Photos of Lyndon B. Johnson, hosted by the Portal to Texas History
Lyndon B. Johnson article on educatetheusa.com
Inaugural Address
Audio recordings of Johnson's speeches
White House Tapes: Eavesdropping on LBJ, NPR Weekend Edition audio archives
Walter Jenkins Scandal
LBJ: Master, or Puppet? The 'Texas Observer' story on Lyndon B. Johnson
Vietnam War: bibliography and guide to online and printed sources
Works by Lyndon B. Johnson at Project Gutenberg
Lyndon Baines Johnson from the Handbook of Texas Online



United States House of Representatives


Preceded by
James P. Buchanan
Member from Texas's 10th congressional district
1937 – 1949
Succeeded by
Homer Thornberry


United States Senate


Preceded by
W. Lee O'Daniel
Senator from Texas (Class 2)
1949 – 1961
Served alongside: Thomas T. Connally, Price Daniel,
William A. Blakley and Ralph W. Yarborough
Succeeded by
William Blakley


Political offices


Preceded by
Francis J. Myers
D-Pennsylvania
Senate Majority Whip
January 3, 1951 – January 3, 1953
Succeeded by
Leverett Saltonstall
R-Massachusetts


Preceded by
Ernest McFarland
D-Arizona
Senate Minority Leader
January 3, 1953 – January 3, 1955
Succeeded by
William F. Knowland
R-California


Preceded by
William F. Knowland
R-California
Senate Majority Leader
January 3, 1955 – January 3, 1961
Succeeded by
Mike Mansfield
D-Montana


Preceded by
Richard Nixon
Vice President of the United States
January 20, 1961 – November 22, 1963
Vacant
Title next held by
Hubert Humphrey


Preceded by
John F. Kennedy
President of the United States
November 22, 1963 – January 20, 1969
Succeeded by
Richard Nixon


Party political offices


Preceded by
Francis J. Myers
Pennsylvania
Senate Democratic Whip
1951 – 1953
Succeeded by
Earle C. Clements
Kentucky


Preceded by
Ernest W. McFarland
Arizona
Senate Democratic Leader
1953 – 1961
Succeeded by
Mike Mansfield
Montana


Preceded by
Estes Kefauver
Democratic Party vice presidential candidate
1960
Succeeded by
Hubert Humphrey


Preceded by
John F. Kennedy
Democratic Party presidential candidate
1964


Honorary titles


Preceded by
Martin Luther King, Jr.
Time Person of the Year
1964
Succeeded by
William Westmoreland


Preceded by
Baby boomers
Time Person of the Year
1967
Succeeded by
Apollo 8 astronauts


Preceded by
Harry S. Truman
Oldest U.S. President still living
December 26, 1972 – January 22, 1973
Succeeded by
Richard Nixon


Preceded by
J. Edgar Hoover
Persons who have lain in state or honor
in the United States Capitol rotunda
January 24, 1973 – January 25, 1973
Succeeded by
Hubert Humphrey









v • d • e

Presidents of the United States






George Washington · John Adams · Thomas Jefferson · James Madison · James Monroe · John Quincy Adams · Andrew Jackson · Martin Van Buren · William Henry Harrison · John Tyler · James K. Polk · Zachary Taylor · Millard Fillmore · Franklin Pierce · James Buchanan · Abraham Lincoln · Andrew Johnson · Ulysses S. Grant · Rutherford B. Hayes · James A. Garfield · Chester A. Arthur · Grover Cleveland · Benjamin Harrison · Grover Cleveland · William McKinley · Theodore Roosevelt · William Howard Taft · Woodrow Wilson · Warren G. Harding · Calvin Coolidge · Herbert Hoover · Franklin D. Roosevelt · Harry S. Truman · Dwight D. Eisenhower · John F. Kennedy · Lyndon B. Johnson · Richard Nixon · Gerald Ford · Jimmy Carter · Ronald Reagan · George H. W. Bush · Bill Clinton · George W. Bush · Barack Obama














v • d • e

Cabinet of President Lyndon B. Johnson (1963-1969)





Vice President

None (1963-1965) • Hubert Humphrey (1965-1969)







Secretary of State

Dean Rusk (1963-1969)






Secretary of the Treasury

C. Douglas Dillon (1963-1965) • Henry H. Fowler (1965-1968) • Joseph W. Barr (1968-1969)






Secretary of Defense

Robert McNamara (1963-1968) • Clark Clifford (1968-1969)






Attorney General

Robert F. Kennedy (1963-1964) • Nicholas Katzenbach (1965-1966) • Ramsey Clark (1967-1969)






Postmaster General

John A. Gronouski (1963-1965) • Lawrence O'Brien (1965-1968) • W. Marvin Watson (1968-1969)






Secretary of the Interior

Stewart Udall (1963-1969)






Secretary of the Agriculture

Orville Freeman (1963-1969)






Secretary of Commerce

Luther H. Hodges (1963-1965) • John Thomas Connor (1965-1967) • Alexander Buel Trowbridge (1967-1968) • C. R. Smith (1968-1969)






Secretary of Labor

W. Willard Wirtz (1963-1969)






Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare

Anthony J. Celebrezze (1962-1965) • John William Gardner (1965-1968) • Wilbur Joseph Cohen (1968-1969)






Secretary of Housing and Urban Development

Robert Clifton Weaver (1963-1968) • Robert Coldwell Wood (1969)






Secretary of Transportation

Alan Stephenson Boyd (1967-1969)













v • d • e

United States Democratic Party Presidential Nominees






Andrew Jackson · Martin Van Buren · James K. Polk · Lewis Cass · Franklin Pierce · James Buchanan · Stephen A. Douglas/John C. Breckinridge (SD) · George B. McClellan · Horatio Seymour · Horace Greeley · Samuel J. Tilden · Winfield Scott Hancock · Grover Cleveland · William Jennings Bryan · Alton B. Parker · William Jennings Bryan · Woodrow Wilson · James M. Cox · John W. Davis · Al Smith · Franklin D. Roosevelt · Harry S. Truman · Adlai Stevenson · John F. Kennedy · Lyndon B. Johnson · Hubert Humphrey · George McGovern · Jimmy Carter · Walter Mondale · Michael Dukakis · Bill Clinton · Al Gore · John Kerry · Barack Obama













v • d • e

Vice Presidents of the United States






John Adams · Thomas Jefferson · Aaron Burr · George Clinton · Elbridge Gerry · Daniel D. Tompkins · John C. Calhoun · Martin Van Buren · Richard Mentor Johnson · John Tyler · George M. Dallas · Millard Fillmore · William R. King · John C. Breckinridge · Hannibal Hamlin · Andrew Johnson · Schuyler Colfax · Henry Wilson · William A. Wheeler · Chester A. Arthur · Thomas A. Hendricks · Levi P. Morton · Adlai E. Stevenson I · Garret Hobart · Theodore Roosevelt · Charles W. Fairbanks · James S. Sherman · Thomas R. Marshall · Calvin Coolidge · Charles G. Dawes · Charles Curtis · John Nance Garner · Henry A. Wallace · Harry S. Truman · Alben W. Barkley · Richard Nixon · Lyndon B. Johnson · Hubert Humphrey · Spiro Agnew · Gerald Ford · Nelson Rockefeller · Walter Mondale · George H. W. Bush · Dan Quayle · Al Gore · Dick Cheney · Joe Biden














v • d • e

United States Democratic Party Vice Presidential Nominees






John C. Calhoun · Martin Van Buren · Richard Mentor Johnson · George M. Dallas · William Orlando Butler · William R. King · John C. Breckinridge · Herschel Vespasian Johnson / Joseph Lane · George H. Pendleton · Francis Preston Blair, Jr. · B. Gratz Brown · Thomas A. Hendricks · William Hayden English · Thomas A. Hendricks · Allen G. Thurman · Adlai E. Stevenson I · Arthur Sewall · Adlai E. Stevenson I · Henry G. Davis · John W. Kern · Thomas R. Marshall · Franklin D. Roosevelt · Charles W. Bryan · Joseph Taylor Robinson · John Nance Garner · Henry A. Wallace · Harry S. Truman · Alben W. Barkley · John Sparkman · Estes Kefauver · Lyndon B. Johnson · Hubert Humphrey · Edmund Muskie · Thomas Eagleton/Sargent Shriver · Walter Mondale · Geraldine Ferraro · Lloyd Bentsen · Al Gore · Joe Lieberman · John Edwards · Joe Biden













v • d • e

United States Senators from Texas





Class 1

Rusk • Henderson • Ward • Wigfall • Flanagan • Maxey • Reagan • Chilton • Mills • Culberson • Mayfield • Connally • Daniel • Blakley • Yarborough • Bentsen • Krueger • Hutchison







Class 2

S. Houston • Hemphill • Hamilton • Coke • Chilton • Bailey • Johnston • Sheppard • A. Houston • O'Daniel • Johnson • Blakley • Tower • Gramm • Cornyn













v • d • e

United States Senate Majority Leaders






Lodge • Curtis • Watson • Robinson • Barkley • White • Lucas • McFarland • Taft • Knowland • Johnson • Mansfield • Byrd • Baker • Dole • Byrd • Mitchell • Dole • Lott • Daschle • Lott • Daschle • Frist • Reid
















v • d • e

United States Senate Minority Leaders






Underwood • Robinson • McNary • Austin • McNary • White • Barkley • Wherry • Bridges • Johnson • Knowland • Dirksen • Scott • Baker • Byrd • Dole • Daschle • Lott • Daschle • Lott • Frist • Daschle • Reid • McConnell
















v • d • e

Democratic Party Leaders in the United States Senate






Underwood • Robinson • Barkley • Lucas • McFarland • Johnson • Mansfield • Byrd • Mitchell • Daschle • Reid
















v • d • e

United States Senate Majority Whips






Lewis • Curtis • Jones • Fess • Lewis • Minton • Hill • Wherry • Myers • Johnson • Saltonstall • Clements • Mansfield • Humphrey • Long • Kennedy • Byrd • Cranston • Stevens • Simpson • Cranston • Ford • Lott • Nickles • Reid • Nickles • Reid • McConnell • Durbin
















v • d • e

Cold War






Participants   NATO · Non-Aligned Movement · People's Republic of China · Warsaw Pact





1940s

Yalta Conference · Operation Unthinkable · Potsdam Conference · Gouzenko Affair · Iran crisis of 1946 · Chinese Civil War · Greek Civil War · Restatement of Policy on Germany · Truman Doctrine · Marshall Plan · Czechoslovak coup d'état of 1948 · Tito–Stalin split · Berlin Blockade · Western betrayal · Iron Curtain · Eastern Bloc






1950s

Korean War · First Indochina War · 1953 Iranian coup d'état · Uprising of 1953 in East Germany · 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état · First Taiwan Strait Crisis · Geneva Summit (1955) · Poznań 1956 protests · Hungarian Revolution of 1956 · Suez Crisis · Sputnik crisis · Second Taiwan Strait Crisis · Cuban Revolution · Kitchen Debate · Asian-African Conference · Bricker Amendment · McCarthyism · Operation Gladio · Hallstein Doctrine






1960s

Congo Crisis · Sino-Soviet split · 1960 U-2 incident · Bay of Pigs Invasion · Cuban Missile Crisis · Berlin Wall · Vietnam War · 1964 Brazilian coup d'état · U.S. invasion of the Dominican Republic · South African Border War · Transition to the New Order · Domino theory · Bangkok Declaration · Laotian Civil War · Greek military junta of 1967–1974 · Cultural Revolution · 1962 Sino-Indian War · Prague Spring · Goulash Communism · Sino-Soviet border conflict






1970s

Détente · Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty · Black September in Jordan · Cambodian Civil War · Ping Pong Diplomacy · Four Power Agreement on Berlin · 1972 Nixon visit to China · 1973 Chilean coup d'état · Yom Kippur War · Strategic Arms Limitation Talks · Angolan Civil War · Mozambican Civil War · Ogaden War · Cambodian-Vietnamese War · Sino-Vietnamese War · Iranian Revolution · Operation Condor · Bangladesh Liberation War  · Korean Air Lines Flight 902






1980s

Soviet war in Afghanistan · Olympic boycotts · History of Solidarity · Contras · Central American Crisis · RYAN · Korean Air Lines Flight 007 · Able Archer 83 · Strategic Defense Initiative · Invasion of Grenada · Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 · Singing Revolution · Invasion of Panama · Fall of the Berlin Wall · Revolutions of 1989 · Glasnost · Perestroika






1990s

Breakup of Yugoslavia · Dissolution of the USSR · Dissolution of Czechoslovakia






See also

Soviet and Russian espionage in U.S. · Soviet Union–United States relations · NATO-Russia relations






Establishments

ASEAN · Central Intelligence Agency · Comecon · European Community · KGB · Stasi






Races

Arms race · Nuclear arms race · Space Race






Ideologies

Capitalism · Liberal democracy · Communism · Stalinism · Trotskyism · Maoism






Propaganda

Pravda · Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty · Red Scare · Voice of America · Voice of Russia






Foreign policy

Truman Doctrine · Marshall Plan · Containment · Eisenhower Doctrine · Domino theory · Kennedy Doctrine · Peaceful coexistence · Ostpolitik · Johnson Doctrine · Brezhnev Doctrine · Nixon Doctrine · Ulbricht Doctrine · Carter Doctrine · Reagan Doctrine · Rollback






Timeline of events · Portal · Category












v • d • e

Notable figures of the Cold War






United States

Harry S. Truman · George Marshall (Secretary of State) · Dwight D. Eisenhower · John F. Kennedy · Lyndon B. Johnson · Richard Nixon · Henry Kissinger (Secretary of State) · Gerald Ford · Jimmy Carter · Ronald Reagan · George H. W. Bush






Soviet Union

Joseph Stalin · Nikita Khrushchev · Leonid Brezhnev · Yuri Andropov · Konstantin Chernenko · Mikhail Gorbachev · Boris Yeltsin · Andrei Gromyko (foreign minister) · Anatoly Dobrynin (ambassador to the U.S.)






United Kingdom

Winston Churchill · Clement Attlee · Ernest Bevin (foreign secretary) · Harold Macmillan · Harold Wilson · Margaret Thatcher






West Germany

Konrad Adenauer · Willy Brandt · Helmut Schmidt · Helmut Kohl






People's Republic of China

Mao Zedong · Zhou Enlai (Premier) · Hua Guofeng  · Deng Xiaoping · Zhao Ziyang (General Secretary)






France

Charles de Gaulle · Alain Poher · Georges Pompidou · Valéry Giscard d'Estaing · François Mitterrand






Eastern Europe

Enver Hoxha (Albania) · Josip Broz Tito (Yugoslavia) · Imre Nagy (Hungary) · Nicolae Ceauşescu (Romania) · Alexander Dubček (Czechoslovakia) · Walter Ulbricht  · Erich Honecker (East Germany) · Lech Wałęsa (Poland) · Pope John Paul II (Poland/Vatican City)






Far East

Chiang Kai-shek · Chiang Ching-kuo (Republic of China) · Syngman Rhee · Park Chung-hee (South Korea) · Kim Il-sung (North Korea) · Ho Chi Minh (North Vietnam) · Ngo Dinh Diem (South Vietnam) · Pol Pot (Cambodia) · Aung San (Burma) · Indira Gandhi · Jawaharlal Nehru (India) · Sukarno · Suharto (Indonesia) · Nur Misuari · Jose Maria Sison · Ferdinand Marcos · Imelda Marcos (Philippines)






Canada

William Lyon Mackenzie King · Louis St. Laurent  · John Diefenbaker  · Lester Pearson  · Pierre Trudeau  · Joe Clark  · John Turner  · Brian Mulroney  · Kim Campbell






Latin America

Fidel Castro (Cuba) · Che Guevara (Argentina/Cuba) · Daniel Ortega (Nicaragua) · Salvador Allende · Augusto Pinochet (Chile)






Middle East

Mohammad Reza Pahlavi · Ayatollah Khomeini (Iran) · Saddam Hussein (Iraq) · Gamal Abdel Nasser · Anwar El Sadat (Egypt) · Muammar al-Gaddafi (Libya) Menachem Begin (Israel)






Africa

Patrice Lumumba · Mobutu Sese Seko (Congo/Zaire) · Kwame Nkrumah (Ghana) · Agostinho Neto · José Eduardo dos Santos · Jonas Savimbi (Angola) · Mengistu Haile Mariam (Ethiopia)






Timeline of events · Portal · Category












v • d • e

United States presidential election, 1960





Democratic Party

1960 Democratic National Convention






Candidates

Barnett · Brown · DiSalle · Fisher · Humphrey · Johnson · Kennedy · Meyner · Morse · Smathers · Stevenson · Symington






VP Candidates

Jackson • Johnson • Symington






Republican Party

1960 Republican National Convention






Candidates

Goldwater · Nixon · Rockefeller






VP Candidates

Halleck • Lodge • Rockefeller













v • d • e

United States presidential election, 1968





Democratic Party

1968 Democratic National Convention






Candidates

Branigin · Crommelin · Fisher · Humphrey · R. Kennedy (campaign) · Johnson · Lynch · McCarthy (campaign) · McGovern · Moore · Smathers · Young






VP Candidates

Bond · Muskie · E. Kennedy






Republican Party

1968 Republican National Convention






Candidates

Carlson · Case · Fong · Lindsay · Nixon · Reagan · Rhodes · N. Rockefeller · W. Rockefeller · Romney (campaign) · Stassen · Volpe






VP Candidates

Agnew · Brooke · Bush · Chafee · Evans · Finch · Hatfield · Javits · Love · Morton · Percy · Tower






Third Party

American Independent Party






Candidate

Wallace (campaign)






VP Candidate

LeMay













v • d • e

Cabinet of President John F. Kennedy (1961-1963)





Vice President

Lyndon B. Johnson (1961-1963)







Secretary of State

Dean Rusk (1961-1963)






Secretary of the Treasury

C. Douglas Dillon (1961-1963)






Secretary of Defense

Robert McNamara (1961-1963)






Attorney General

Robert F. Kennedy (1961-1963)






Postmaster General

J. Edward Day (1961-1963) • John A. Gronouski (1963)






Secretary of the Interior

Stewart Udall (1961-1963)






Secretary of the Agriculture

Orville Freeman (1961-1963)






Secretary of Commerce

Luther H. Hodges (1961-1963)






Secretary of Labor

Arthur Goldberg (1961-1962) • W. Willard Wirtz (1962-1963)






Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare

Abraham A. Ribicoff (1961-1962) • Anthony J. Celebrezze (1962-1963)













v • d • e

Time Persons of the Year








Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951) · Elizabeth II (1952) · Konrad Adenauer (1953) · John Foster Dulles (1954) · Harlow Curtice (1955) · Hungarian Freedom Fighter (1956) · Nikita Khrushchev (1957) · Charles de Gaulle (1958) · Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959) · U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960) · John F. Kennedy (1961) · Pope John XXIII (1962) · Martin Luther King, Jr. (1963) · Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) · William Westmoreland (1965) · The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966) · Lyndon B. Johnson (1967) · The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968) · The Middle Americans (1969) · Willy Brandt (1970) · Richard Nixon (1971) · Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972) · John Sirica (1973) · King Faisal (1974) · American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Carol Sutton / Susie Sharp / Addie L. Wyatt (1975)








Complete roster · 1927–1950 · 1951–1975 · 1976–2000 · 2001–present







Persondata


NAME
Johnson, Lyndon Baines


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
LBJ (common referent)


SHORT DESCRIPTION
President of the United States


DATE OF BIRTH
August 27, 1908


PLACE OF BIRTH
Stonewall, Texas, United States


DATE OF DEATH
January 22, 1973


PLACE OF DEATH
Stonewall, Texas, United States





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lyndon_B._Johnson"
Categories: Lyndon B. Johnson Administration cabinet members | Lyndon B. Johnson | American anti-communists | American Disciples of Christ | American military personnel of World War II | American memoirists | American people of the Vietnam War | American ranchers | American schoolteachers | Cold War leaders | Social Progressives | Deaths from myocardial infarction | Democratic Party (United States) presidential nominees | United States presidential candidates, 1956 | United States presidential candidates, 1960 | United States presidential candidates, 1964 | United States presidential candidates, 1968 | United States vice-presidential candidates | Democratic Party (United States) vice presidential nominees | English Americans | History of the United States (1964–1980) | John F. Kennedy assassination | Kennedy Administration cabinet members | Kennedy Administration personnel | Members of the United States House of Representatives from Texas | People from Austin, Texas | Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients | Presidents of the United States | Recipients of the Silver Star medal | San Marcos, Texas | Texas Democrats | Texas State University–San Marcos alumni | Time magazine Persons of the Year | United States Senators from Texas | Vice Presidents of the United States | People from the Texas Hill Country | People from Fredericksburg, Texas | Presidency of Lyndon B. Johnson | 1908 births | 1973 deathsHidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead external links since October 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Aragonés
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Cebuano
Česky
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Kapampangan
ქართული
Kiswahili
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Polski
Português
Română
Rumantsch
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Tiếng Việt
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 22:23.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
