













Nintendo - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Nintendo";
		var wgTitle = "Nintendo";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "21197";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282483666;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Nintendo

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







This article contains Japanese text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of kanji and kana.



Nintendo Company Ltd.
任天堂株式会社




Type
Public
TYO: 7974
Pink Sheets: NTDOY(ADR)
FWB: NTO


Founded
September 23, 1889[1]


Headquarters
 Kyoto, Japan
International offices:[2]
 Redmond, Washington, United States
 Richmond, Canada
 Großostheim, Germany
 Scoresby, Victoria, Australia
 Suzhou, P. R. China (as iQue, Ltd.)
 Seoul, South Korea
 Costa del Este, Panama (as Latamel Inc.)
 São Paulo, Brazil (as Latamel Inc.)
 Taiwan (via Nintendo Co., Ltd. and Haku Yu)
 South Africa (as Core Gaming Systems)


Key people
Satoru Iwata: President and CEO
Reggie Fils-Aime: President and COO of NOA
Shigeru Miyamoto: Game Designer
Conrad Abbott: President of NOC
Rose Lappin: Managing Director of Nintendo Australia
Gunpei Yokoi (deceased): Creator of Game Boy, Game & Watch and Metroid video game series
Hiroshi Yamauchi: Former President and Chairman
Louie Garafolo and David Martinez: Former heads of NOA
Shimony Shickaka: President of NOE


Industry
Card games (previously)
Video games


Products
Game Boy line, Color TV Game, NES, SNES, Virtual Boy, Nintendo 64, Nintendo GameCube, Nintendo DS, Wii and various video games


Revenue
▲ ¥1.672 trillion (2008)[3]


Operating income
▲ ¥487.22 billion (2008)[4]


Net income
▲ ¥257.342 billion (2008)[5]


Total assets
▲ ¥1.8 trillion (2008)[6]


Employees
3,768 (2008)


Website
Nintendo Japan
Nintendo of America
Nintendo of Canada
Nintendo Europe
Nintendo Australia
Nintendo of Taiwan


Nintendo Company Ltd. (任天堂株式会社 ,Nintendō Kabushiki gaisha?) is a global company located in Kyoto, Japan founded on September 23, 1889[1] by Fusajiro Yamauchi to produce handmade hanafuda cards.[7] By 1963, the company had tried several small niche businesses, such as a cab company and a love hotel.[8] Eventually, Nintendo developed into a video game company, becoming one of the most influential in the industry and Japan's third most valuable listed company, with a market value of over US$85 billion.[9] In 2007, Nintendo ranked eighth on the list of largest software companies in the world.[10] Besides video games, Nintendo is also the majority owner of the Seattle Mariners, a Major League Baseball team in Seattle, Washington. According to Nintendo's Touch! Generations website, the name "Nintendo" translated from Japanese to English means "Leave luck to Heaven".[11] As of October 2, 2008, Nintendo has sold over 470 million hardware units and 2.7 billion software units.[12] In that same month, the company's Canadian division, Nintendo of Canada Ltd., was named one of BC's Top Employers by Mediacorp Canada Inc., which was announced by The Vancouver Sun, The Province and the Victoria Times-Colonist.[13]




Contents


1 Video game consoles
2 History

2.1 As a card company (1889–1956)
2.2 New ventures (1956–1975)
2.3 Electronic era (1975–present)


3 Offices and locations
4 Policy

4.1 Emulation
4.2 Content guidelines
4.3 License guidelines


5 See also
6 References
7 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Video game consoles
Main article: Nintendo video game consoles
Nintendo has produced several home and portable video game consoles since 1977. Home consoles include the Color TV Game (1977), Nintendo Entertainment System/Famicom (NES, 1983), Super Nintendo Entertainment System/Super Famicom (SNES, 1990), Nintendo 64 (N64, 1996), Nintendo GameCube (GCN, 2001) and Wii (2006). Portable consoles include the Game & Watch line (1980), Game Boy line (1989), Virtual Boy (1995), Nintendo DS (2004) and Nintendo DSi (2009).

[edit] History
Main article: History of Nintendo




Former headquarters plate, from when Nintendo was solely a playing card company



[edit] As a card company (1889–1956)
Nintendo was founded as a Japanese business by Fusajiro Yamauchi in late 1889, originally named "Nintendo Koppai". Based in Kyoto, Japan, the business produced and marketed a playing card game called Hanafuda. The handmade cards soon became popular, and Yamauchi hired assistants to mass produce cards to satisfy demand.

[edit] New ventures (1956–1975)




The Nintendo Love Tester


In 1956, Hiroshi Yamauchi (the grandson of Fusajiro Yamauchi) visited the U.S. to talk with the United States Playing Card Company, the dominant playing card manufacturer in that country. He found that the world's biggest company in his business was only using a small office. This was a turning point, where Yamauchi realized the limitations of the playing card business. He then gained access to Disney's characters and put them on the playing cards to drive sales.
In 1963, Yamauchi renamed Nintendo Playing Card Company Limited to Nintendo Company, Limited. The company then began to experiment in other areas of business using the newly injected capital. During this period of time between 1963 and 1968, Nintendo set up a taxi company, a "love hotel" chain, a TV network and a food company (trying to sell instant rice, similar to instant noodles). All these ventures eventually failed, and after the 1964 Tokyo Olympics, playing card sales dropped, leaving Nintendo with 60 yen in stocks.
In 1966, Nintendo moved into the Japanese toy industry with the Ultra Hand, an extending arm developed by its maintenance engineer Gunpei Yokoi in his free time. Yokoi was moved from maintenance to the new "Nintendo Games" department as a product developer. Nintendo continued to produce popular toys, including the Ultra Machine, Love Tester and the Kousenjuu series of light gun games. Despite some successful products, Nintendo struggled to meet the fast development and manufacturing turnaround required of the toy market, and fell behind the well-established companies such as Bandai and Tomy.
In 1973, the focus shifted to family entertainment venues with the Laser Clay Shooting System, using the same light gun technology used in Nintendo's Kousenjuu series of toys, and set up in abandoned bowling alleys. Following some success, Nintendo developed several more light gun machines for the emerging arcade scene. While the Laser Clay Shooting System ranges had to be shut down following excessive costs, Nintendo had found a new market.

[edit] Electronic era (1975–present)
In 1974, Nintendo secured the rights to distribute the Magnavox Odyssey home video game console in Japan. In 1977, Nintendo began producing its own Color TV Game home video game consoles. Four versions of these consoles were produced, each playing variations on a single game (for example, Color TV Game 6 featured six versions of Light Tennis).
A student product developer named Shigeru Miyamoto was hired by Nintendo at this time. He worked for Yokoi, and one of his first tasks was to design the casing for several of the Color TV Game consoles. Miyamoto went on to create some of Nintendo's most famous video games and become one of the most recognizable faces in the video game industry.
In 1978, Nintendo moved into the video arcade game industry with Computer Othello, and several more titles followed. Nintendo had some small success with this venture, but the release of Donkey Kong in 1981, designed by Miyamoto, changed Nintendo's fortunes dramatically. The success of the game and many licensing opportunities (such as ports on the Atari 2600, Intellivision and ColecoVision) gave Nintendo a huge boost in profit.
In 1980, Nintendo launched Game & Watch, a handheld video game series developed by Yokoi, to worldwide success.
In 1983, Nintendo launched the Family Computer (commonly called by its shortened name "Famicom") home video game console in Japan alongside ports of its most popular arcade titles. In 1985, the console launched in North America as the Nintendo Entertainment System, and was accompanied by Super Mario Bros., the best-selling video game of all time as of 2009. In 1989, Yokoi developed the Game Boy handheld video game console. Nintendo is the longest-surviving video game console manufacturer to date.
The Nintendo Entertainment System was superseded by the Super Famicom, known outside Japan as the Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES). The Nintendo 64, most notable for its 3D graphics capabilities, introduced the analog stick and multiplayer for up to four players, instead of two. The Nintendo GameCube followed, and was the first Nintendo console to use optical disc storage instead of cartridges. The most recent home console, the Wii, uses motion sensing controllers and has online functionality (although the GameCube did also have some basic online capabilities), used for services such as Nintendo Wi-Fi Connection, Virtual Console and WiiWare.
After the Game & Watch, the handheld development continued with the Game Boy, followed soon after by the Super Game Boy, the Game Boy Pocket and Game Boy Color, each differing in minor aspects. The Game Boy continued for more than a decade until the release of the Game Boy Advance, featuring technical specifications similar to the SNES. The Game Boy Advance SP, a frontlit, flip-screen version, introduced a rechargeable, built-in battery, instead of using AA batteries like its predecessors. The Game Boy Micro was released in 2005, after the Nintendo DS's release, but did not sell as well as its predecessors. The most recent Nintendo handheld console is the Nintendo DS, using two screens, the bottom of which is a touchscreen, with online functionalities and technical power similar to that of the Nintendo 64. The Nintendo DS Lite, a remake of the DS, improved several features of the original model, including the battery life and screen brightness. On October 2, 2008, Nintendo announced the Nintendo DSi, featuring larger screens, improved sound quality, an AAC music player and two cameras—one on the outside and one facing the user. The DSi came out April 5, 2009.

[edit] Offices and locations




The exterior of Nintendo's main headquarters in Kyoto, Japan


Nintendo Company, Limited (NCL) is based in Minami-ku, Kyoto, Kyoto Prefecture, Japan (34°58′11.89″N 135°45′22.33″E﻿ / ﻿34.9699694°N 135.7562028°E﻿ / 34.9699694; 135.7562028). Its pre-2000 office, now its research and development building, is located in Higashiyama-ku, Kyoto. Kyoto Prefecture, Japan (34°58′29.00″N 135°46′10.48″E﻿ / ﻿34.9747222°N 135.7695778°E﻿ / 34.9747222; 135.7695778). Its original Kyoto headquarters can still be found at (34°59′30.03″N 135°45′58.66″E﻿ / ﻿34.991675°N 135.7662944°E﻿ / 34.991675; 135.7662944). Nintendo of America, Incorporated (NOA), its American division, is based in Redmond, Washington. It has distribution centers in Atlanta, Georgia (Nintendo Atlanta) and North Bend, Washington (Nintendo North Bend). Nintendo of Canada, Limited (NOCL) is based in Richmond, British Columbia, with its own distribution centre in Toronto, Ontario. Nintendo Australia Pty Ltd (NAL) is based in Melbourne, Victoria. It handles the distribution, sales and marketing of Nintendo products in Australia and New Zealand. It also manufactures some of the Wii games locally. Nintendo of Europe is based in Großostheim, Germany and holds a subsidiary company in South Africa and trades as Core Gaming Systems which serves as a distribution and sales company for NOE. iQue, Ltd., a Chinese joint venture between its founder, Doctor Wei Yen, and Nintendo, manufactures and distributes official Nintendo consoles and games for the mainland Chinese market, under the iQue brand. Nintendo also established Nintendo of Korea (NoK) on July 7, 2006.

[edit] Policy

[edit] Emulation







This article or section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss these issues on the talk page.

It does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve it by citing reliable sources. Tagged since September 2008.
Its neutrality is disputed. Tagged since September 2008.










This article's factual accuracy is disputed. Please see the relevant discussion on the talk page. (October 2008)


Nintendo is known for a "no tolerance" stance against emulation of its video games and consoles. It claims that copyright-like rights in mask works protect its games from the exceptions that United States copyright law otherwise provides for backup copies. Nintendo uses the claim that emulators running on personal computers have no use other than to play pirated video games, contested by some who say these emulators have been used to develop and test independently produced "homebrew" software on Nintendo's platforms, and that Nintendo's efforts fudge the truth about copyright laws, mainly that ROM image copiers are illegal (they actually are legal if used to dump unprotected ROM images on to a user's computer for personal use, per 17 USC 117(a)(1) and foreign counterparts[14]) and that emulators are illegal (if they do not use copyrighted BIOS, or use other methods to run the game, they are legal). This stance is largely apocryphal, however; Nintendo remains the only modern console manufacturer which has not sued an emulator manufacturer (the most public example being Sony vs. the bleem company).
Emulators have been used by Nintendo and licensed third party companies as a means to re-release older games.

[edit] Content guidelines
For many years, Nintendo had a policy of strict content guidelines for video games published on its consoles. Though Nintendo Japan allowed graphic violence in its video games, nudity and sexuality were strictly prohibited. This was because former Nintendo president Hiroshi Yamauchi believed that if the company allowed the licensing of pornographic games, the company's image would be forever tarnished.[15] Nintendo of America and Nintendo of Europe went further in that games released for Nintendo consoles could not feature nudity, sexuality, profanity (including racism, sexism or slurs), blood, graphic or domestic violence, drugs, political messages or religious symbols (with the exception of widely unpracticed religions, such as the Greek Pantheon).[16] This was done because the Japanese parent company did not want to appear as a "Japanese Invasion" by enforcing Japanese community standards on North American and European children. This zero tolerance policy was praised and championed by U.S. Senator Joseph Lieberman, but others criticized the policy, claiming that gamers should be allowed to choose the content they want to see. Despite the strict guidelines, some exceptions have occurred: Bionic Commando, Smash TV and Golgo 13: Top Secret Episode contained blood and violence, the latter also contained implied sexuality and tobacco use; River City Ransom and Taboo: The Sixth Sense contained nudity, and the latter also contained religious images, as did Castlevania II and III.
One known side effect of this policy was the Sega Genesis version of Mortal Kombat selling over double the number of the Nintendo's Super NES version, mainly because Nintendo had forced publisher Acclaim to recolor the red blood to look like white sweat and replace some of the more gory attacks in its release of the game, unlike Sega, which allowed the selling points of blood and gore to remain in the Genesis version (though the Genesis version of the game required a code to unlock the gore). Nintendo allowed the Super NES version Mortal Kombat II to ship uncensored the following year with a content warning on the packaging.[17]
In 1994, when the ESRB video game ratings system was introduced, Nintendo chose to abolish some of these policies in favor of consumers making their own choices about the content of the games they played. Today, changes to the content of games are done primarily by the game's developer or, occasionally, at the request of Nintendo. The only clear-set rule is that ESRB AO-rated games will not be licensed for play on Nintendo consoles in North America,[18] a practice which is also enforced by Sony and Microsoft. Nintendo has since allowed several mature-content games to be published on its consoles, including: Perfect Dark, Conker's Bad Fur Day, Doom and Doom 64, BMX XXX, the Resident Evil series, killer7, Eternal Darkness: Sanity's Requiem, Bloodrayne, Geist and Dementium: The Ward. Certain games have continued to be modified, however. For example, Konami was forced to remove all references to cigarettes in the 2000 Game Boy Color game Metal Gear Solid also maiming and blood were removed from the Nintendo 64 port of Cruis'n USA. Another example is in the Game Boy Advance game Mega Man Zero 3, where one of the bosses, Hellbat Schilt in the Japanese and European releases, was renamed Devilbat Schilt in the U.S. localization, and another modification to the U.S. releases of the Mega Man Zero games where bosses killed with a saber attack would not gush blood as they do in the Japanese versions. However, the release of the Wii has ensued in a number of even more controversial, mature titles, such as Manhunt 2, No More Heroes, The House of the Dead: Overkill and MadWorld, the latter three of which are published exclusively for the console.

[edit] License guidelines
Nintendo of America also had guidelines for its licensees for them to make games for the Nintendo Entertainment System, in addition to the above content guidelines:[19]

Licensees were not permitted to release the same game for a competing console until two years had passed.
Nintendo would decide how many cartridges would be supplied to the licensee.
Nintendo would decide how much space would be dedicated for articles, advertising, etc. in Nintendo Power.
There was a minimum number of cartridges which had to be ordered by the licensee from Nintendo.
There was a yearly limit of five games that a licensee may produce for a Nintendo console. This rule was made due to caution of over saturation which caused the North American video game crash of 1983.

Konami wanted to produce more games for Nintendo consoles, yet the last rule restricted them. As a result, Konami formed both Ultra Games and, later, Palcom to produce more games.[20] This disadvantaged smaller or beginning companies, as they could not form additional companies at will. Also, Square (now Square Enix) executives have suggested that the price of publishing games on the Nintendo 64, along with the degree of censorship and control, Nintendo enforced over its games—most notably Final Fantasy VI—were factors in moving its games to Sony's PlayStation console.[citation needed]

[edit] See also



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Nintendo 





Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Nintendo






Nintendo portal




History of video games
History of Nintendo
Lewis Galoob Toys, Inc. v. Nintendo of America, Inc.
List of divisions of Nintendo
List of franchises established on Nintendo consoles
List of Nintendo characters
List of Nintendo developers
List of Nintendo games
List of video games published by Nintendo
Multinational corporation
Nintendo Seal of Quality
Nintendo World Store
Player's Choice
Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Nintendo Co., Ltd.
Video games censored by Nintendo of America


[edit] References


^ a b "Company History" (in Japanese). Nintendo. http://www.nintendo.co.jp/n05/index.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-29. 
^ "International Distributors - Company List". Nintendo. http://www.nintendo.com/corp/distributors_international.jsp. Retrieved on 2008-11-17. 
^ Nintendo's Earnings Release: Fiscal Year ended March 31, 2008
^ Nintendo's Earnings Release: Fiscal Year ended March 31, 2008
^ Nintendo's Earnings Release: Fiscal Year ended March 31, 2008
^ Nintendo's Earnings Release: Fiscal Year ended March 31, 2008
^ "Company History". Nintendo. http://www.nintendo.com/corp/history.jsp. Retrieved on 2006-06-04. 
^ "Nintendo History Lesson: The Lucky Birth". N-sider. http://www.n-sider.com/articleview.php?articleid=45. Retrieved on 2006-06-04. 
^ Reuters: Nintendo sets $85 bln high score, thanks to Wii, Nintendo DS
^ Software Top 100: "The World's Largest Software Companies"
^ Touch! Generations
^ Nintendo (2008-10-02). Nintendo's holiday 2008: Wii Speak Channel, Club Nintendo, more surprises. Press release. http://www.nintendo.ca/cgi-bin/usersite/display_info.cgi?lang=en&pageNum=9&id=1955846. Retrieved on 2009-01-17. 
^ "Reasons for Selection, 2009 BC's Top Employers competition". http://www.eluta.ca/top-employer-nintendo-of-canada. 
^ U.S. Copyright Law, Title 17, Chapter 1 § 117
^ Game Over, David Sheff, 1993.
^ Nintendo of America Content Guidelines
^ Mortal Kombat II cover artwork at MobyGames
^ Nintendo of America Customer Service – Nintendo Buyer's Guide
^ Game Over, David Sheff, 1993.
^ Game Over, David Sheff, 1993.



[edit] External links

Find more about Nintendo on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Nintendo official website
English business site (developers only)
Nintendo Power
Official Nintendo Magazine (UK)
Nintendo Wiki,  an external wiki





Companies portal










v • d • e

Nintendo developers





First-party

Brownie Brown • EAD (including R&D1 and R&D2) • Intelligent Systems • Monolith Soft • NST • Project Sora • Retro Studios • SPD






Second-party

AlphaDream • Ambrella • Ape • Camelot Software Planning • Game Freak • Genius Sonority • HAL Laboratory • Nd Cube • Noise • skip Ltd.






Former second-party

Marigul Management (including Clever Trick, Param and Saru Brunei) • Rare • Silicon Knights













v • d • e

Nintendo video game hardware





Consoles

Color TV Game · NES (Family Computer Disk System · NES 2 · AV Family Computer) · Super NES (Super Game Boy · Satellaview · Nintendo Power) · Nintendo 64 (64DD · iQue Player) · GameCube (Game Boy Player · Panasonic Q) · Wii (Virtual Console · WiiWare)






Handhelds

Game & Watch · Game Boy (Pocket · Light) · Virtual Boy · Game Boy Color · Pokémon mini · Game Boy Advance (SP · Micro) · Nintendo DS (Lite · DSi · DSiWare)






Arcade

Nintendo Classic · Vs. Series · PlayChoice-10 · Nintendo Super System · Triforce






Peripherals

DK Bongos · e-Reader · Famicom Four-way Adaptor · Game Boy Camera · Game Boy Pocket Sonar · Game Boy Printer · NES Advantage  · NES Four Score · NES Max · NES Satellite · NES Zapper · Nintendo 64 controller · Power Glove · Power Pad · R.O.B. · Rumble Pak · SNES Mouse · Super Scope · U-Force · WaveBird · Wii Balance Board · Wii Remote · Wii Speak






Technology

MultiAV · Game Paks · Nintendo optical discs













v • d • e

Consumer electronics in Japan






Advantest · Akai · Alaxala Networks · Alps · Alpine · Anritsu · Aiwa · AOR (company) · Brother · Canon · Casio · Citizen Watch · Copal · Clarion (car audio) · Daikin Industries · Denon · Denso · DNP · Eizo · Elpida · Epson · Fanuc · Fostex · Fuji Electric · Fuji Xerox · Fujifilm · Fujitsu · Funai · Futaba · Hamamatsu Photonics · Hitachi · Horiba · HOYA · Icom · Iwatsu · JEOL · JRC · JVC · Kawai · Kenwood · Keyence · Kiramek · Konica Minolta · Korg · Kyocera · Luxman · Mabuchi Motor · Mamiya · Marantz · Maspro · Maxell · Melco · Mimaki · Minebea · Mitsubishi · Mitsumi · Murata Manufacturing · Mutoh · Nakamichi · National · NEC · Nichia · Nikon · Nintendo · Nitto Denko · Oki · Olympus · OMRON · Onkyo · Orion Electric · Quasar · Panasonic · Pentax · Pioneer · Pixela · Plextor · Renesas · Ricoh · Rohm · Roland · Rubycon (company) · Sansui · Sanyo · Seiko · Sega · Sharp · Shimadzu · SII · Sony · Stax · Sumitomo Electric · Sigma · Taiyo Yuden · TEAC · TDK · Technics · Tiger · Toshiba · Uniden · Yaesu · Yagi-Uda · Yamaha · Yaskawa · Yokogawa · Zojirushi · Zuken













v • d • e

Major Information Technology companies





Conglomerates

Bull · GE · HCL · Hitachi · LG · NCR · Panasonic (JVC, Matsushita) · Philips · Samsung · Siemens (Infineon, Qimonda) · Sony · Thomson · Toshiba · Vivendi · Wipro Infotech · Yamaha






Cellular Networks

3Com · Alcatel-Lucent · Allied Telesis · Avaya · Ericsson · Huawei · Nokia Siemens · Nortel · ZTE






Cellular hardware

Alcatel-Lucent · Apple · Audiovox · HTC · Kyocera · LG · Motorola · Nokia · Nortel · Palm · Qualcomm · RIM · Samsung · Sanyo · Sony Ericsson






Telecommunications

AT&T·Verizon·Qwest·Vodafone






Wireless

Verizon Wireless · AT&T Mobility · Sprint Nextel · T-Mobile · Alltel · U.S. Cellular






Cable

Comcast · Cox · Charter · Time Warner Cable






Satellite

DishTV · DirectTV






Satellite Radio

Sirius XM Radio






Dot-coms

Alibaba · Amazon · AOL · Baidu · eBay · Expedia · Google · IAC/InterActiveCorp · Monster Worldwide · Yahoo!






Semiconductors (General)

AMD · Analog Devices · ATI Technologies · Fairchild · Freescale · Infineon · Intel · Micron · National Semiconductor · NVIDIA · NXP · Renesas · ROHM · Skyworks · STMicroelectronics · Texas Instruments · TSMC






Electronics manufacturers

Celestica · Elcoteq · Emerson · Flextronics · Foxconn · Jabil · Kimball · Plexus · Quanta · Sanmina-SCI · SMTC  · Transcend






IT services

Accenture · ACS · Atos Origin · Avanade · BearingPoint · Booz Allen Hamilton · BT · Capgemini · CGI · Cognizant · CSC · Deloitte · EDS · First Data · Fujitsu · Getronics · HCL Technologies · IBM Global Services · Indra · Infosys · Keane · Logica · Neusoft · PA · Perot · SAIC · Sapient · Satyam · Steria · Syntel · TCS · Tech Mahindra · ThoughtWorks · Tieto · Titan · Unisys · Virtusa · Wipro · Xansa






Network hardware

3Com · Brocade  · Cisco Systems · Juniper Networks · Nortel






Display / DTV

BenQ · Chi Mei · Trident Microsystems · ViewSonic · LG · Samsung · Panasonic · Sharp · Sony · Vizio






Software

Adobe · CA · Compuware · Corel · IBM · Idealab · Intuit · Microsoft · Novell · Oracle · PTC · Red Hat · SAP · Sun Microsystems






Gaming

Activision Blizzard · Atari · Capcom · EA · Infogrames · Konami · Microsoft Game Studios · Namco Bandai Games · Nintendo · Sega · Sony Computer Entertainment · Take-Two Interactive · Valve Corporation






Computer and server systems

Acer · Apple · Asus · Dell · Hewlett-Packard  · Hitachi  · IBM · Lenovo · NEC · Panasonic · Sony · Sun  · Toshiba






Security

AVG Technologies · Alwil · ESET · F-Secure · Kaspersky Lab · McAfee · SOFTWIN · Sophos · Symantec · Trend Micro













v • d • e

 TOPIX 100 companies of Japan





Core 30

7&i · Astellas · Canon · Daiichi Sankyo · Hitachi · Honda · JFE · JR East · JT · KDDI · Komatsu · Mitsubishi Corporation · Mitsubishi Estate · Mitsui & Co. · Mizuho · MUFG · Nintendo · Nippon Steel · Nissan · Nomura · NTT · NTT docomo · Panasonic · Shin-Etsu · Sony · Sumitomo Mitsui Financial · Takeda · TEPCO · Tokio Marine · Toyota






Large 70

ÆON · AGC · Asahi Kasei · Bank of Yokohama · Bridgestone · Chubu Electric Power · Chuo Mitsui Trust · Daikin · Daiwa House · Daiwa Securities · Denso · DNP · Eisai · Fanuc · Fujifilm · Fujitsu · Hoya · INPEX · Itochu · JR Central · JR West · Kao · KEPCO · Keyence · Kirin · Kobelco · Kubota · Kyocera · Marubeni · Mitsubishi Chemical · Mitsubishi Electric · Mitsubishi Heavy Industries · Mitsui Fudosan · MOL · MSIG · Murata · NEC · Nidec · Nikon · Nippon Oil · Nitto Denko · NTT Data · ORIX · Resona · Ricoh · Rohm · Secom · Sekisui House · Sharp · Shiseido · SMC · SoftBank · Sompo Japan · Sumitomo Chemical · Sumitomo Corporation · Sumitomo Electric · Sumitomo Metals · Sumitomo Realty · Sumitomo Trust · Suzuki · T&D · TDK · Tohoku Electric Power · Tokyo Electron · Tokyo Gas · Toppan · Toray · Toshiba · Yahoo! Japan · Yamada Denki













v • d • e

Principal Owners of the Seattle Mariners Franchise






Danny Kaye • George Argyros • Jeff Smulyan • Hiroshi Yamauchi • Nintendo of America









v • d • e
Current Major League Baseball owners


American League


East Division
Angelos (Baltimore)
Henry (Boston)
Steinbrenner (N. Y. Yankees)
Sternberg (Tampa Bay)
Rogers Communications (Toronto)

Central Division
Reinsdorf (Chicago Sox)
Dolan (Cleveland)
Ilitch (Detroit)
Glass (Kansas City)
Pohlad (Minnesota)

West Division
Moreno (L. A. Angels)
Wolff (Oakland)
Nintendo of America (Seattle)
Hicks (Texas)



National League


East Division
Liberty Media (Atlanta)
Loria (Florida)
Wilpon (N. Y. Mets)
Montgomery (Philadelphia)
Lerner (Washington)

Central Division
Tribune Company (Chicago Cubs)
Castellini (Cincinnati)
McLane (Houston)
Attanasio (Milwaukee)
Nutting (Pittsburgh)
DeWitt (St. Louis)

West Division
Kendrick (Arizona)
Monfort (Colorado)
McCourt (L. A. Dodgers)
Moores (San Diego)
Neukom (San Francisco)







Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nintendo"
Categories: Companies listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange | Companies listed on the Pink Sheets | Companies listed on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange | Companies established in 1889 | Companies of Japan | Companies headquartered in Kyoto | Companies based in Redmond, Washington | Japanese video game companies | Video game publishers | Nintendo | Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences members | Video game developers | Entertainment Software Association | Seattle MarinersHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | Articles containing Japanese language text | Articles lacking sources from September 2008 | All articles lacking sources | NPOV disputes from September 2008 | Accuracy disputes from October 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Portal:Companies/Total 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ລາວ
Latina
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Lojban
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
Tiếng Việt
中文









 This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 03:23 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
