













Cyberspace - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Cyberspace";
		var wgTitle = "Cyberspace";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "7381";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281080240;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Cyberspace

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Cyberspace (disambiguation).





Part of the series on
Cyborgs



Cyborgology
Bionics / Biomimicry
Biomedical engineering
Brain-computer interface
Cybernetics
Distributed cognition
Genetic engineering
Human ecosystem
Human enhancement
Intelligence amplification


Theory
Cyborg theory
Postgenderism

Centers
Cyberpunk
Cyberspace

Politics
Cognitive liberty
Cyberpunk
Cyborg feminism
Crypto-anarchism
Extropianism
Morphological freedom
Singularitarianism
Transhumanism



 v • d • e 


Cyberspace — from the Greek Κυβερνήτης (kybernētēs, steersman, governor, pilot, or rudder) — is the global domain of electro-magnetics accessed through electronic technology and exploited through the modulation of electromagnetic energy to achieve a wide range of communication and control system capabilities. The term is rooted in the science of cybernetics and Norbert Wiener’s pioneering work in electronic communication and control science, a forerunner to current information theory and computer science. Through its electro-magnetic nature, cyberspace integrates a number of capabilities (sensors, signals, connections, transmissions, processors, controllers) and generates a virtual interactive experience accessed for the purpose of communication and control regardless of a geographic location. In pragmatic terms, Cyberspace allows the interdependent network of information technology infrastructures (ITI), telecommunications networks--such as the Internet, computer systems, integrated sensors, system control networks and embedded processors and controllers common to global control and communications. As a social experience, individuals can interact, exchange ideas, share information, provide social support, conduct business, direct actions, create artistic media, play simulation games, engage in political discussion, etc. The term was originally coined by the cyber-punk science fiction author, William Gibson.[1] The now ubiquitous term has become a conventional means to describe anything associated with computers, information technology, the internet and the diverse internet culture. 'Cyberspace' is recognized as part of the US National Critical Infrastructure [2].




Contents


1 Origins of the term

1.1 Metaphorical


2 Cyberspace as an Internet metaphor
3 Alternate realities in philosophy and art

3.1 Predating computers
3.2 Influenced by computers

3.2.1 Philosophy
3.2.2 Art




4 Popular culture examples
5 See also
6 Notes
7 References
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Origins of the term
The word "cyberspace" (from cybernetics and space) was coined by science fiction novelist and seminal cyberpunk author William Gibson in his 1982 story "Burning Chrome" and popularized by his 1984 novel Neuromancer.[3] The portion of Neuromancer cited in this respect is usually the following:

Cyberspace. A consensual hallucination experienced daily by billions of legitimate operators, in every nation, by children being taught mathematical concepts... A graphic representation of data abstracted from banks of every computer in the human system. Unthinkable complexity. Lines of light ranged in the nonspace of the mind, clusters and constellations of data. Like city lights, receding, (69).


Gibson later commented on the origin of the term in the 2000 documentary No Maps for These Territories:

All I knew about the word "cyberspace" when I coined it, was that it seemed like an effective buzzword. It seemed evocative and essentially meaningless. It was suggestive of something, but had no real semantic meaning, even for me, as I saw it emerge on the page.


[edit] Metaphorical
The metaphor used to describe the 'sense of a social setting that exists purely within a space of representation and communication . . . it exists entirely within a computer space, distributed across increasingly complex and fluid networks.Slater(2002,355) The term Cyberspace started to become a de facto synonym for the Internet, and later the World Wide Web, during the 1990s, especially in academic circles[4] and activist communities. Author Bruce Sterling, who popularized this meaning,[5] credits John Perry Barlow as the first to use it to refer to "the present-day nexus of computer and telecommunications networks." Barlow describes it thus in his essay to announce the formation of the Electronic Frontier Foundation (note the spatial metaphor) in June, 1990:[6]

In this silent world, all conversation is typed. To enter it, one forsakes both body and place and becomes a thing of words alone. You can see what your neighbors are saying (or recently said), but not what either they or their physical surroundings look like. Town meetings are continuous and discussions rage on everything from sexual kinks to depreciation schedules.
Whether by one telephonic tendril or millions, they are all connected to one another. Collectively, they form what their inhabitants call the Net. It extends across that immense region of electron states, microwaves, magnetic fields, light pulses and thought which sci-fi writer William Gibson named Cyberspace.

– John Perry Barlow, "Crime and Puzzlement," 1990-06-08

As Barlow, and the EFF, continued public education efforts to promote the idea of "digital rights," the term was increasingly used during the Internet boom of the late 1990s.

[edit] Cyberspace as an Internet metaphor
While cyberspace should not be confused with the real Internet, the term is often used to refer to objects and identities that exist largely within the communication network itself, so that a web site, for example, might be metaphorically said to "exist in cyberspace." According to this interpretation, events taking place on the Internet are not therefore happening in the countries where the participants or the servers are physically located, but "in cyberspace".
Firstly, it describes the flow of digital data through the network of interconnected computers that was both not 'real' since one could not spatially locate it or feel it as a tangible object and clearly 'real' in its effects. Secondly cyberspace was the site of computer mediated communication(CMC), in which online relationships and alternative forms of online identity were enacted, raising important questions and about the social psychology of Internet use,the relationship between 'online'and 'offline' forms of life and interaction, and the relationship between the 'real' and the virtual. It draws attention to remediation of culture through new media technologies not just a communication tool but a social destination and culturally significant in its own right. Finally cyberspace was seen as providing new opportunities to reshape society and culture through "hidden" identities, or the borderless communication and culture. [7]

Cyberspace is the "place" where a telephone conversation appears to occur. Not inside your actual phone, the plastic device on your desk. Not inside the other person's phone, in some other city. The place between the phones. ...in the past twenty years, this electrical "space," which was once thin and dark and one-dimensional -- little more than a narrow speaking-tube, stretching from phone to phone -- has flung itself open like a gigantic jack-in the- box. Light has flooded upon it, the eerie light of the glowing computer screen. This dark electric netherworld has become a vast flowering electronic landscape. Since the 1960s, the world of the telephone has cross-bred itself with computers and television, and though there is still no substance to cyberspace, nothing you can handle, it has a strange kind of physicality now. It makes good sense today to talk of cyberspace as a place all its own.
– Bruce Sterling, Introduction to The Hacker Crackdown

The "space" in cyberspace has more in common with the abstract, mathematical meanings of the term (see Space) than physical space. It does not have the duality of positive and negative volume (while in physical space for example a room has the negative volume of usable space delineated by positive volume of walls, Internet users cannot enter the screen and explore the unknown part of the Net as an extension of the space they're in), but spatial meaning can be attributed to the relationship between different pages (of books as well as webservers), considering the unturned pages to be somewhere "out there." The concept of cyberspace therefore refers not to the content being presented to the surfer, but rather to the possibility of surfing among different sites, with feedback loops between the user and the rest of the system creating the potential to always encounter something unknown or unexpected.
Videogames differ from text-based communication in that on-screen images are meant to be figures that actually occupy a space and the animation shows the movement of those figures. Images are supposed to form the positive volume that delineates the empty space. A game adopts the cyberspace metaphor by engaging more players in the game, and then figuratively representing them on the screen as avatars. Games do not have to stop at the avatar-player level, but current implementations aiming for more immersive playing space (i.e. Laser tag) take the form of augmented reality rather than cyberspace, fully immersive virtual realities remaining impractical.
Although the more radical consequences of the global communication network predicted by some cyberspace proponents (i.e. the diminishing of state influence envisioned by John Perry Barlow[8]) failed to materialize and the word lost some of its novelty appeal, it remains current as of 2006.[9][10]
Some virtual communities explicitly refer to the concept of cyberspace, e.g. Linden Lab calling their customers "Residents" of Second Life, while all such communities can be positioned "in cyberspace" for explanatory and comparative purposes (as Sterling did in The Hacker Crackdown and many journalists afterwards), integrating the metaphor into a wider cyber-culture.
The metaphor has been useful in helping a new generation of thought leaders to reason through new military strategies around the world, led largely by the US Department of Defense (DoD). [11] The use of cyberspace as a metaphor has had its limits, however, especially in areas where the metaphor becomes confused with physical infrastructure.

[edit] Alternate realities in philosophy and art

[edit] Predating computers
Before cyberspace became a technological possibility, many philosophers suggested the possibility of a virtual reality similar to cyberspace. In The Republic, Plato sets out his allegory of the cave, widely cited as one of the first conceptual realities[citation needed]. He suggests that we are already in a form of virtual reality which we are deceived into thinking is true. True reality for Plato is accessible only through mental training and is the reality of the forms. These ideas are central to Platonism and neoplatonism.
Another forerunner of the modern ideas of cyberspace is Descartes' thought that people might be deceived by an evil demon which feeds them a false reality. This argument is the direct predecessor of the modern ideas of brain in a vat and many popular conceptions of cyberspace take Descartes' ideas as their starting point.
Visual arts have a tradition, stretching back to antiquity, of artefacts meant to fool the eye and be mistaken for reality. This questioning of reality occasionally led some philosophers and especially theologians[citation needed] to distrust art as deceiving people into entering a world which was not real (see Aniconism). The artistic challenge was resurrected with increasing ambition as art became more and more realistic with the invention of photography, film (see Arrival of a Train at a Station) and finally immersive computer simulations.

[edit] Influenced by computers

[edit] Philosophy
American counterculture exponents like William S. Burroughs (whose literary influence on Gibson and cyberpunk in general is widely acknowledged[12][13]) and Timothy Leary[14] were among the first to extoll the potential of computers and computer networks for individual empowerment.[15]
Some contemporary philosophers and scientists (i.e. David Deutsch in The Fabric of Reality) employ virtual reality in various thought experiments. For example Philip Zhai in Get Real: A Philosophical Adventure in Virtual Reality connects cyberspace to the platonic tradition:

Let us imagine a nation in which everyone is hooked up to a network of VR infrastructure. They have been so hooked up since they left their mother's wombs. Immersed in cyberspace and maintaining their life by teleoperation, they have never imagined that life could be any different from that. The first person that thinks of the possibility of an alternative world like ours would be ridiculed by the majority of these citizens, just like the few enlightened ones in Plato's allegory of the cave.

Note that this brain-in-a-vat argument conflates cyberspace with reality, while the more common descriptions of cyberspace contrast it with the "real world".

[edit] Art
Main article: New media art
Having originated among writers, the concept of cyberspace remains most popular in literature and film. Although artists working with other media have expressed interest in the concept, such as Roy Ascott, "cyberspace" in digital art is mostly used as a synonym for immersive virtual reality and remains more discussed than enacted.[16] Indian epic Mahabaratha written by sage Vyasar talks about concepts what is called today Virtual reality,Transportaion in to matrix and web conferrencing.

[edit] Popular culture examples





This article may contain excessive, poor or irrelevant examples. You can improve the article by adding more descriptive text and removing less pertinent examples. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for further suggestions.



In the math mystery cartoon Cyberchase, the action takes place in Cyberspace, managed by the benevolent ruler, Motherboard. It is used as a conceit to allow storylines to take place in virtual worlds -- "Cybersites" -- on any theme and where specific math concepts can be best explored.
The anime Digimon is set in a variant of the cyberspace concept called the "Digital World". The Digital World is a parallel universe made up of data from the Internet. Similar to cyberspace, except that people could physically enter this world instead of merely using a computer.
The CGI show, ReBoot, takes place entirely inside cyberspace, which is composed of two worlds: the Net and the Web.
In the computer game System Shock, the player can use a neural implant to "jack in" to cyberspace terminals, where they can collect data, fight security programs and trigger certain events in the real world, such as unlocking doors.
In the movie Tron, a programmer was physically transferred to the program world, where programs were personalities, resembling the forms of their creators.
The idea of "the matrix" in the movie The Matrix resembles a complex form of cyberspace where people are "jacked in" from birth and do not know that the reality they experience is virtual. See Matrix (cyberpunk).
In the EXE series of MegaMan, there is a place where A.I. programs called NetNavis can "jack in" to Cyberspace from about any electrical appliance. Also, in the MegaMan Zero series, particularly MegaMan Zero 3, the player can occasionally transitate from the real world to the cyberspace during missions.
In the Japanese anime series Lain, the main character begins to learn of a new dimension of reality taking place in cyberspace.
Irregular Webcomic!'s Space theme frequently involves the characters going into Cyberspace.
In the Xenosaga video game series on the PlayStation 2, there is virtual reality called the U.M.N. ("Unus mundus network") that uses the human collective unconscious as an interstellar, cyberspace network. It is similar to the matrix mentioned above, but also facilitates hyperspace travel for spacecraft and can create a virtual reality representation of human memories.
In the Ghost in the Shell fictional universe, there is an extrapolation of the Internet (called "The Net") which a large section of society seems to be able to access. The interface can range from simply visual (through conventional displays or implants) to full-sensory immersion via neural jacks, where (as in William Gibson's Cyberspace) data is shown as visual constructs such as objects that present servers or databases, with graphical depictions of security mechanisms and information stores. Entering and/or traveling The Net is referred to as "net diving", which is an activity with the potential to be physically dangerous.
In the video game Shadow the Hedgehog, two cyberspace levels were made: Digital Circuit and Mad Matrix.
In the Game Boy Advance game Sonic Advance 3, the sixth zone "Cyber Track" is set in cyberspace.
The Air Force Cyber Command (Provisional) (AFCYBER) is the newest United States Air Force major command whose development was announced by the Secretary of the Air Force on November 2, 2006
In the video game Dirge of Cerberus: Final Fantasy VII a character could use a "synthetic net dive" to enter cyberspace and obtain information.


[edit] See also



Look up cyberspace in
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Cybernetics
Cybercrime
Cyber law
Cybersecurity
Cyber-warfare
Cybersex
Cyberzine
Cipherspace
Crypto-anarchism
Digital pet
Electronic sports
Information highway
Infosphere
Internet art
Meatspace, the opposite of cyberspace
Metaverse
Noosphere
Simulation
Social software
Telepresence
Virtual world
Proactive Cyber Defence
24 Hours in Cyberspace


[edit] Notes


^ "26 Years After Gibson, Pentagon Define8-05-23". WIRED. 
^ White House, "The National Strategy To Secure Cyberspace"
^ Po-Mo SF "William Gibson's Neuromancer and Post-Modern Science Fiction"
^ Vanderbilt University, "Postmodernism and the Culture of Cyberspace", Fall 1996 course syllabus
^ Principia Cybernetica "Cyberspace"
^ John Perry Barlow, "Crime and Puzzlement," June 8, 1990
^ New Media, an Introduction: Flew, Terry
^ John Perry Barlow, "A Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace," February 8, 1996
^ White House, "The National Strategy To Secure Cyberspace"
^ FindLaw Legal News site, Tech and IP: Cyberspace section, retrieved November 14, 2006.
^ Cyber Conflict Studies Association, "CCSA"
^ Alexander Laurence, An Interview with John Shirley, 1994
^ "Burroughs/Gysin/Throbbing Gristle", retrieved December 31, 2006
^ "Internet will be the LSD of the 90's", quoted by an on-line biography
^ Douglas Rushkoff, "Godfathers of Cyberspace"
^ Eduardo Kac, "Telepresence Art"



[edit] References

William Gibson. Neuromancer:20th Anniversary Edition. New York:Ace Books, 2004.
Ippolito, Jon (December 1998 – January 1999). "Cross Talk: Is Cyberspace Really a Space?". Artbyte: 12 – 24. 
Irvine, Martin. "Postmodern Science Fiction and Cyberpunk", retrieved 2006-07-19.
Oliver Grau : Virtual Art. From Illusion to Immersion, MIT-Press, Cambridge 2003. (4 Auflagen).
Sterling, Bruce. The Hacker Crackdown: Law and Disorder On the Electronic Frontier. Spectra Books, 1992.
Zhai, Philip. Get Real: A Philosophical Adventure in Virtual Reality. New York: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 1998.
D. Koepsell, The Ontology of Cyberspace, Chicago: Open Court, 2000.
Christine Buci-Glucksmann, "L’art à l’époque virtuel", in Frontières esthétiques de l’art, Arts 8, Paris: L’Harmattan, 2004
Cyberculture, The key Concepts, edited by David Bell, Brian D.Loader, Nicholas Pleace and Douglas Schuler
Slater, Don 2002, 'Social Relationships and Identity Online and Offline', in L.Lievrouw and S.Livingston (eds), The Handbook of New Media, Sage, London, pp533–46.

Mahabharatham Indian Epic.

[edit] External links

A Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace by John Perry Barlow
Virtual Reality Photos, Austria by Johann Steininger
Peculiarities of Cyberspace by Albert Benschop
Sex, Religion and Cyberspace by Richard Thieme
Get Real: A Philosophical Adventure in Virtual Reality by Philip Zhai
Brains in a vat philosophical argument against the idea that we could be in cyberspace and not know it by Hilary Putnam
Cyberspace as a Domain In which the Air Force Flies and Fights, Speech by Secretary of the Air Force Michael Wynne
DOD - Cyberspace
DHS - National Cybersecurity Division
Virtual Humans Forum








v • d • e

The works of William Gibson





The Sprawl trilogy:

Neuromancer · Count Zero · Mona Lisa Overdrive







The Bridge trilogy:

Virtual Light · Idoru · All Tomorrow's Parties






Other novels:

The Difference Engine (with Bruce Sterling) · Pattern Recognition · Spook Country






Burning Chrome
short story collection

"Johnny Mnemonic" · "The Gernsback Continuum" · "Fragments of a Hologram Rose" · "The Belonging Kind" · "Hinterlands" · "Red Star, Winter Orbit" · "New Rose Hotel" · "The Winter Market" · "Burning Chrome" · "Dogfight"






Characters:

Tessier-Ashpool · Molly Millions · Bobby Newmark · Konrad · Hubertus Bigend






Miscellanea:

Agrippa (a book of the dead) · "Disneyland with the Death Penalty" · "Skinner's Room" · Neuromancer video game · Johnny Mnemonic film · New Rose Hotel film · No Maps for These Territories · Node Magazine · "Kill Switch" · "First Person Shooter"






Story elements:

Cyberspace · Megacorporation · Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics · The Sprawl · Raygun Gothic · Gender-bait









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyberspace"
Categories: Cyberspace | Internet history | Virtual reality | William Gibson | Information AgeHidden categories: Articles containing Greek language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2007 | Articles with too many examples 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Bosanski
Català
Česky
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Français
한국어
Hrvatski
Italiano
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Slovenčina
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 14:20.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
