













Statue of Liberty - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Statue_of_Liberty";
		var wgTitle = "Statue of Liberty";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "28617";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282457289;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Statue of Liberty

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Statue of Liberty (disambiguation).



Statue of Liberty National Monument, Ellis Island and Liberty Island


U.S. National Register of Historic Places


U.S. National Monument




















Location:
Liberty Island, New York,[1] U.S.


Nearest city:
New York[2][3]


Coordinates:
40°41′38″N 74°2′37″W﻿ / ﻿40.69389°N 74.04361°W﻿ / 40.69389; -74.04361


Area:
12 acres (49,000 m2)[4]


Built/Founded:
October 28, 1886


Architect:
Frederic Auguste Bartholdi


Visitation:
4,235,595 (includes Ellis Island NM) (2005)


Governing body:
National Park Service


Added to NRHP:
October 15, 1966


Designated NMON:
October 15, 1924


NRHP Reference#:
66000058
[5]





Statue of Liberty*


UNESCO World Heritage Site


State Party
 United States


Type
Cultural


Criteria
i, vi


Reference
307


Region**
North America


Inscription history


Inscription
1984  (8th Session)


* Name as inscribed on World Heritage List.
** Region as classified by UNESCO.


The Statue of Liberty (French: Statue de la Liberté), more formally known as Liberty Enlightening the World (French: La liberté éclairant le monde), was presented to the United States by the people of France in 1886. Standing on Liberty Island in New York Harbor, it welcomes visitors, immigrants, and returning Americans traveling by ship.[6] The copper-clad statue, dedicated on October 28, 1886, commemorates the centennial of the signing of the United States Declaration of Independence and was given to the United States to represent the friendship established during the American Revolution.[7] Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi sculpted the statue[8] and obtained a U.S. patent for its structure.[9] Maurice Koechlin - chief engineer of Gustave Eiffel's engineering company and designer of the Eiffel Tower - engineered the internal structure. Eugène Viollet-le-Duc was responsible for the choice of copper in the statue's construction and adoption of the repoussé technique, where a malleable metal is hammered on the reverse side.[10]
The statue is of a robed woman (i.e. goddess) holding a torch, and is made of a sheeting of pure copper, hung on a framework of steel (originally puddled iron) with the exception of the flame of the torch, which is coated in gold leaf (originally made of copper and later altered to hold glass panes). It stands atop a rectangular stonework pedestal with a foundation in the shape of an irregular eleven-pointed star. The statue is 151 ft (46 m) tall, but with the pedestal and foundation, it is 305 ft (93 m) tall.
Worldwide, the Statue of Liberty is one of the most recognizable icons of the United States[11] and was, from 1886 until the jet age, often one of the first glimpses of the United States for millions of immigrants after ocean voyages from Europe. Visually, the Statue of Liberty appears to draw inspiration from il Sancarlone or the Colossus of Rhodes.
The statue is the central part of Statue of Liberty National Monument, administered by the National Park Service.




Contents


1 Symbolism
2 History

2.1 Inspiration for the face


3 Physical characteristics
4 Origin of the copper
5 Liberty centennial

5.1 New torch


6 Dominion resolved by default
7 Aftermath of 9/11
8 Jumps
9 Inscription
10 Replicas and derivative works
11 In popular culture
12 See also
13 References
14 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Symbolism
The classical appearance (Roman stola, sandals, facial expression) derives from Libertas, ancient Rome's goddess of freedom from slavery, oppression, and tyranny. Her raised right foot is on the move. This symbol of Liberty and Freedom is not standing still or at attention in the harbor, it is moving forward, as her left foot tramples broken shackles at her feet, in symbolism of the United States' wish to be free from oppression and tyranny.[12] Since the 1940s, it has been claimed that the seven spikes on the crown epitomize the Seven Seas and seven continents.[13] Her torch signifies enlightenment. The tablet in her hand represents knowledge and shows the date of the United States Declaration of Independence, in roman numerals, July IV, MDCCLXXVI.
The general appearance of the statue’s head approximates the Roman Sun-god Apollo or the Greek Sun-god Helios as preserved on an ancient marble tablet (today in the Archaeological Museum of Corinth, Corinth, Greece) - Apollo was represented as a solar deity, dressed in a similar robe and having on its head a "radiate crown" with the seven spiked rays of the Helios-Apollo's sun rays, like the Statue's nimbus or halo. The ancient Colossus of Rhodes, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, was a statue of Helios with a radiate crown. The Colossus is referred to in the 1883 sonnet The New Colossus by Emma Lazarus. Lazarus' poem was later engraved on a bronze plaque and mounted inside the Statue of Liberty in 1903.
The statue, also known affectionately as "Miss Liberty" (and in recent years also "Lady Liberty"), has become a symbol of freedom and republicanism. She welcomed arriving immigrants, who could see the statue as they arrived in the United States. There is a version of the statue in France given by the United States in return.

[edit] History
Discussions in France over a suitable gift to the United States to mark the Centennial of the American Declaration of Independence were headed by the politician and sympathetic writer of the history of the United States, Édouard René de Laboulaye. French sculptor Frédéric Bartholdi was commissioned to design a sculpture with the year 1876 in mind for completion. The idea for the commemorative gift then grew out of the political turmoil which was shaking France at the time. The French Third Republic was still considered as a temporary arrangement by many, who wished a return to monarchism, or to some form of constitutional authoritarianism such as they had known under Napoleon. The idea of giving a colossal representation of republican virtues to a sister republic across the sea served as a focus for the republican cause against other politicians.




The first Statue of Liberty, today located in the Jardin du Luxembourg, Paris


The first model, on a small scale, was built in 1870. This first statue is now in the Jardin du Luxembourg in Paris.
A second model, also on a small scale, was further brought to Maceió, a city in the Northeast of Brazil. This model is in front of Maceió's first city hall, built in 1869, which is now a museum.
While on a visit to Egypt that was to shift his artistic perspective from simply grand to colossal, Bartholdi was inspired by the project of the Suez Canal which was being undertaken by Count Ferdinand de Lesseps, who later became a lifelong friend of his. He envisioned a giant lighthouse standing at the entrance to the canal and drew plans for it. It would be patterned after the Roman goddess Libertas, modified to resemble a robed Egyptian peasant, with light beaming out from both a headband and a torch thrust dramatically upward into the skies. Bartholdi presented his plans to the Egyptian Khedive, Isma'il Pasha, in 1867 and, with revisions, again in 1869, but the project was never commissioned because of financial issues the country was going through.[14]




Bartholdi's design patent






Circa 1880 model of the plaster mock-up being realized in the Bartholdi atelier, rue de Chazelles, near Parc Monceau, Paris.






Diorama of the manufacture of Liberty's copper head in the ateliers of Gaget, Gauthier and Cie.


It was agreed that in a joint effort, the American people were to build the base, and the French people were responsible for the Statue and its assembly in the United States. In France, public donations, various forms of entertainment including notably performances of La liberté éclairant le monde (Liberty enlightening the world) by soon-to-be famous composer Charles Gounod at Paris Opera, and a charitable lottery were among the methods used to raise the 2,250,000 francs ($250,000). In the United States, benefit theatrical events, art exhibitions, auctions and prize fights assisted in providing needed funds.
Meanwhile in France, Bartholdi required the assistance of an engineer to address structural issues associated with designing such a colossal copper sculpture. Gustave Eiffel (designer of the Eiffel Tower) was commissioned to design the massive iron pylon and secondary skeletal framework which allows the Statue's copper skin to move independently yet stand upright. Eiffel delegated the detailed work to his trusted structural engineer, Maurice Koechlin.
Bartholdi had initially planned to have the statue completed and presented to the United States on July 4, 1876, but a late start and subsequent delays prevented it. However, by that time the right arm and torch were completed. This part of the statue was displayed at the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia, where visitors were charged 50 cents to climb the ladder to the balcony. The money raised this way was used to start funding the pedestal.
On June 30, 1878, at the Paris Exposition, the completed head of the statue was showcased in the garden of the Trocadéro palace, while other pieces were on display in the Champs de Mars.
Back in America, the site, authorized in New York Harbor by an act of Congress, 1877, was selected by General William Tecumseh Sherman, who settled on Bartholdi's own choice, then known as Bedloe's Island (named after Isaac Bedloe), where there was already an early 19th century star-shaped fortification named Fort Wood. United States Minister to France Levi P. Morton hammered the first nail in the construction of the statue.




Richard Morris Hunt's pedestal under construction in June 1885


On February 18, 1879, Bartholdi was granted a design patent, U.S. Patent D11,023 , on "a statue representing Liberty enlightening the world, the same consisting, essentially, of the draped female figure, with one arm upraised, bearing a torch, and while the other holds an inscribed tablet, and having upon the head a diadem, substantially as set forth." The patent described the head as having "classical, yet severe and calm, features," noted that the body is "thrown slightly over to the left so as to gravitate upon the left leg, the whole figure thus being in equilibrium," and covered representations in "any manner known to the glyptic art in the form of a statue or statuette, or in alto-relievo or bass-relief, in metal, stone, terra-cotta, plaster-of-paris, or other plastic composition."[15]
The financing for the statue was completed in France in July 1882.
Fund-raising for the pedestal, led by William M. Evarts, was going slowly, so publisher Joseph Pulitzer (who established the Pulitzer Prize) opened up the editorial pages of his newspaper, The World, to support the fund raising effort in 1883. Pulitzer used his newspaper to criticize both the rich, who had failed to finance the pedestal construction, and the middle class who were content to rely upon the wealthy to provide the funds.[16] His campaign was an important contribution to the effort, but ultimately Senator Evarts and the American Committee he headed raised the majority of funds for the pedestal.
The construction of the statue was completed in France in July 1884.
The cornerstone of the pedestal, designed by American architect Richard Morris Hunt, was laid on August 5, 1884, but the construction had to be stopped by lack of funds in January 1885. It was resumed on May 11, 1885 after a renewed fund campaign by Joseph Pulitzer in March 1885. Thirty-eight of the forty-six courses of masonry were yet to be built.
The statue arrived in New York Harbor on June 17, 1885 on board the French frigate Isère. To prepare for transit, the Statue was reduced to 350 individual pieces and packed in 214 crates. (The right arm and the torch, which were completed earlier, had been exhibited at the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia in 1876, and thereafter at Madison Square in New York City.)
Financing for the pedestal was completed on August 11, 1885 and construction was finished on April 22, 1886. When the last stone of the pedestal was swung into place the masons reached into their pockets and showered into the mortar a collection of silver coins.
Built into the pedestal's massive masonry are two sets of four iron girders, connected by iron tie beams that are carried up to become part of Eiffel's framework for the statue itself. Thus Liberty is integral with her pedestal.




Used as a lighthouse, the original torch fatally disoriented birds






Currier & Ives chromolithograph of the statue published one year before it was erected. Depicts the statue's original copper-bronze hue, but situates it facing southward instead of eastward. Manhattan and the Brooklyn Bridge are visible in the background.


The statue, which was stored for eleven months in crates waiting for its pedestal to be finished, was then reassembled in four months. On October 28, 1886, the Statue of Liberty was unveiled by President Grover Cleveland in front of thousands of spectators. (Cleveland, as Governor of the State of New York, had earlier vetoed a bill by the New York legislature to contribute $50,000 to building of the pedestal.)[17]
The Statue of Liberty functioned as a lighthouse from 1886 to 1902.[18] At that time the U.S. Lighthouse board was responsible for its operation. There was a lighthouse keeper and the electric light could be seen for 24 miles (39 km) at sea. As a lighthouse, it is the first to use electricity;[19] there was also an electric plant on the island to generate power for the light.[18]
In 1913 a group of young pilots graduated from the Moissant School of Aviation based on Long Island. One of the graduates, the Mexican pilot Juan Pablo Aldasoro was selected to perform the first flight above the Statue of Liberty. All of the graduates later on became members of the Early Birds of Aviation.
In 1916, floodlights were placed around the base of the statue.[20] Also in 1916, the Black Tom explosion caused $100,000 worth of damage ($1.98 million in 2008 dollars[21]) to the statue, embedding fragmentation and eventually leading to the closing of the torch to visitors. The same year, Gutzon Borglum, sculptor of Mount Rushmore, modified the original copper torch by cutting away most of the copper in the flame, retrofitting glass panes and installing an internal light.[22] After these modifications, the torch severely leaked rainwater and snowmelt, accelerating corrosion inside the statue. President Franklin D. Roosevelt rededicated the Statue of Liberty on its 50th anniversary (October 28, 1936).
In 1956, through an act of Congress, Bedloe's Island was officially renamed Liberty Island, though Liberty Island had been used informally since the turn of the century.
As with all historic areas administered by the National Park Service, Statue of Liberty National Monument, along with Ellis Island and Liberty Island, was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on October 15, 1966.[23]
In 1972, President Richard M. Nixon dedicated the American Museum of Immigration, housed in structural additions to the base of the pedestal on top of what was Fort Wood.[24]
In 1984, the Statue of Liberty was added to the list of World Heritage Sites.[25]
In 2007, the Statue of Liberty was one of 20 finalists in a competition to name the New Seven Wonders of the World.

[edit] Inspiration for the face




The figure in Jules Joseph Lefebvre's painting La Vérité - produced in 1870, the same year as the first model of the Statue of Liberty - stikes a similar pose to that of the statue.






Interior view of the statue upwards, reopened to the public in 1986






Aerial view






View from the ground






Full-size replica of the face of the Statue, seen as part of the exhibit in one of the corridors of the Statue's pedestal. Note the retention of the original copper color.


Unsubstantiated sources cite different models for the face of the statue. One indicated the then-recently widowed Isabella Eugenie Boyer, the wife of Isaac Singer, the sewing-machine industrialist. "She was rid of the uncouth presence of her husband, who had left her with only his most socially desirable attributes: his fortune and -- his children. She was, from the beginning of her career in Paris, a well-known figure. As the good-looking French widow of an American industrialist she was called upon to be Bartholdi's model for the Statue of Liberty."[26] Another source believed that the "stern face" belonged to Bartholdi's mother, Charlotte Bartholdi (1801–1891), with whom he was very close.[27] National Geographic magazine also pointed to his mother, noting that Bartholdi never denied nor explained the resemblance.[28]

[edit] Physical characteristics
The interior of the statue used to be open to visitors. They arrived by ferry and could climb the circular single-file stairs (limited by the available space) inside the metallic statue, exposed to the sun out in the harbor (the interior reaching extreme temperatures, particularly in summer), and about 30 people at a time could fit up into the crown. This provided a broad view of New York Harbor (it faces the ocean) through 25 windows, the largest approximately 18" (46 cm) in height. The view did not, therefore, include the skyline of New York City, except through the smallest windows on the left side of the crown. The wait outside regularly exceeded three hours, excluding the wait for ferries and ferry tickets.
The green-blue coloration is caused by chemical reactions, which produced copper salts and created the current hue. Most copper statues in the outside elements, left to their own, will eventually turn this color in a process called patination.[29]
There are 354 steps inside the statue and its pedestal, with 25 windows in the crown which comprise the jewels beneath the seven rays of the diadem. The tablet which the statue holds in her left hand reads, in Roman numerals, "July 4, 1776" the day of the adoption of the Declaration of Independence.
The Statue of Liberty was engineered to withstand heavy winds. Winds of 50 miles per hour cause the Statue to sway 3 inches (7.62 cm) and the torch to sway 5 inches (12.7 cm). This allows the Statue to move rather than break in high wind load conditions.


Feature[30]
Imperial
Metric


Height from base to torch
151 ft 1 in
46 m


Foundation of pedestal to torch
305 ft 1 in
93 m


Heel to top of head
111 ft 1 in
34 m


Length of hand
16 ft 5 in
5 m


Index finger
8 ft 0 in
2.44 m


Circumference at second joint
3 ft 6 in
1.07 m


Head from chin to cranium
17 ft 3 in
5.26 m


Head thickness from ear to ear
10 ft 0 in
3.05 m


Distance across the eye
2 ft 6 in
0.76 m


Length of nose
4 ft 6 in
1.48 m


Right arm length
42 ft 0 in
12.8 m


Right arm greatest thickness
12 ft 0 in
3.66 m


Thickness of waist
35 ft 0 in
10.67 m


Width of mouth
3 ft 0 in
0.91 m


Tablet, length
23 ft 7 in
7.19 m


Tablet, width
13 ft 7 in
4.14 m


Tablet, thickness
2 ft 0 in
0.61 m


Height of granite pedestal
89 ft 0 in
27.13 m


Height of foundation
65 ft 0 in
19.81 m


Weight of copper used in Statue[31]
60,000 pounds
27.22 metric tonnes


Weight of steel used in Statue
250,000 pounds
113.4 metric tonnes


Total weight used in Statue
450,000 pounds
204.1 metric tonnes


Thickness of copper sheeting
3/32 of an inch
2.4 mm



[edit] Origin of the copper
Historical records make no mention of the source of the copper used in the Statue of Liberty. In the village of Visnes in the municipality of Karmøy, Norway, tradition holds that the copper came from the French-owned Visnes Mine.[32][33] Ore from this mine, refined in France and Belgium, was a significant source of European copper in the late nineteenth century. In 1985, Bell Labs used emission spectrography to compare samples of copper from the Visnes Mines and from the Statue of Liberty, found the spectrum of impurities to be very similar, and concluded that the evidence argued strongly for a Norwegian origin of the copper. Other sources say that the copper was mined in Nizhny Tagil.[34] The copper sheets were created in the workshops of the Gaget-Gauthier company, and shaped in the Ateliers Mesureur in the west of Paris in 1878. Funding for the copper was provided by Pierre-Eugène Secrétan.

[edit] Liberty centennial





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2006)


See also: Liberty Weekend




First Lady Nancy Reagan re-opens the statue to the public


The Statue of Liberty was one of the earliest beneficiaries of a cause marketing campaign. A 1983 promotion advertised that for each purchase made with an American Express card, American Express would contribute one penny to the renovation of the statue. The campaign generated contributions of $1.7 million to the Statue of Liberty restoration project. In 1984, the statue was closed so that a $62 million renovation could be performed for the statue's centennial. Chrysler chairman Lee Iacocca was appointed by President Reagan to head the commission overseeing the task (but was later dismissed "to avoid any question of conflict" of interest).[35] Workers erected scaffolding around the statue, obscuring it from public view until the rededication on July 3, 1986 — the scaffolding-clad statue can be seen in the 1984 film Desperately Seeking Susan, in the 1985 film Remo Williams: The Adventure Begins, and in the 1985 film Brewster's Millions. Inside work began with workers using liquid nitrogen to remove seven layers of paint applied to the interior of the copper skin over the decades. That left two layers of tar originally applied to plug leaks and prevent corrosion. Blasting with baking soda removed the tar without further damaging the copper. Larger holes in the copper skin had edges smoothed then mated with new copper patches.[citation needed]
Each of the 1,350 shaped iron ribs backing the skin had to be removed and replaced. The iron had experienced galvanic corrosion wherever it contacted the copper skin, losing up to 50% of its thickness. Bartholdi had anticipated the problem and used an asbestos/pitch combination to separate the metals, but the insulation had worn away decades before. New bars of stainless steel bent into matching shapes replaced the iron bars, with Teflon film separating them from the skin for further insulation and friction reduction.
The internal structure of the upraised right arm was reworked. The statue was erected with the arm offset 18" (0.46 m) to the right and forward of Eiffel's central frame, while the head was offset 24" (0.61 m) to the left, which had been compromising the framework. Theory held that Bartholdi made the modification without Eiffel's involvement after seeing the arm and head were too close. Engineers considered reinforcements made in 1932 insufficient and added diagonal bracing in 1984 and 1986 to make the arm structurally sound.
Besides the replacement of much of the internal iron with stainless steel and the structural reinforcement of the statue itself, the restoration of the mid-1980s also included the replacement of the original torch with a replica, replacing the original iron stairs with new stairs, installing a newer elevator within the pedestal, and upgrading climate control systems. The Statue of Liberty was reopened to the public on July 5, 1986.

[edit] New torch




Original torch, replaced in 1986


A new torch replaced the original in 1986, which was deemed beyond repair because of the extensive 1916 modifications. The 1886 torch is now in the monument's lobby museum. The new torch has gold plating applied to the exterior of the "flame," which is illuminated by external lamps on the surrounding balcony platform.

[edit] Dominion resolved by default
In 1987 US Representative Frank J. Guarini, a Democrat from New Jersey, and Gerald McCann, who was Mayor of Jersey City, sued New York City, contending that New Jersey should have dominion over Liberty Island because it is in the New Jersey portion of the Hudson River. The federally owned island is about 2,000 feet away from Jersey City and over two miles from New York City.[36] By default—since the court chose not to hear the case—the existing legal status of the portions of the island that are above water was left unchanged. The riparian rights to all of the submerged land surrounding the statue belong to New Jersey, however. The islands of New York harbor have been part of New York since the issuance in 1664 of the atypical colonial charter that created New Jersey, [3] which failed to provide a boundary in the middle of the Hudson river—although the boundary line for the water rights later was moved to the middle of the channel.
The federal park service states that the Statue of Liberty is on Liberty Island, which is a federal property that is administered by the National Park Service and that, officially, the island is located within the territorial jurisdiction of the state of New York because of a pact between the state governments of New York and New Jersey that declared a resolution to this issue, which was ratified by Congress in 1834.[4]

[edit] Aftermath of 9/11
Main article: Aftermath of the September 11, 2001 attacks
Liberty Island closed on September 11, 2001; the island reopened in December, the monument reopened on August 3, 2004, but the statue has remained closed. The National Park Service claims that the statue is not shut because of a terrorist threat, but principally because of a long list of fire regulation contraventions, including inadequate evacuation procedures. The museum and ten-story pedestal are open for visitors but are only accessible if visitors have a "Monument Access Pass" which is a reservation that visitors must make in advance of their visit and pick up before boarding the ferry. There is a maximum of 3,000 passes available each day (with a total of 15,000 visitors to the island daily). The interior of the statue remains closed, although a glass ceiling in the pedestal allows for views of Eiffel's iron framework.
Visitors to Liberty Island and the Statue are subject to restrictions, including personal searches similar to the security found in airports.
The Statue of Liberty had previously been threatened by terrorism, according to the FBI. On February 18, 1965, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) announced it had uncovered a plot by three commandos from the Black Liberation Front, who were allegedly connected to Cuba, and a female co-conspirator from Montreal connected with the Front de libération du Québec (FLQ), seeking independence for Quebec from Canada, who were sent to destroy the statue and at least two other national monuments — the Liberty Bell in Philadelphia and the Washington Monument in Washington, D.C.
In June 2006, a bill, S. 3597, was proposed in Senate which, if approved, could re-open the crown and interior of the Statue of Liberty to visitors.[37] In July 2007, a similar measure was proposed in the House of Representatives.[38]
On August 9, 2006, National Park Service Director Fran P. Mainella, in a letter to Congressman Anthony D. Weiner of New York stated that the crown and interior of the statue would remain closed indefinitely. The letter stated that "the current access patterns reflect a responsible management strategy in the best interests of all our visitors."[39] Critics contend that closing the Statue of Liberty indefinitely is an overreaction, and that safe access could easily be resumed under tighter security measures.[citation needed]
On January 23, 2009, Ken Salazar, Secretary of the Interior under President Barack Obama, has stated that he is considering reopening the Statue of Liberty's crown to tourists. "I hope we can find a way," Salazar said in a statement. "It would proclaim to the world -- both figuratively and literally -- that the path to the light of liberty is open to all." [40]

[edit] Jumps
At 2:45 p.m. on February 2, 1912, steeplejack Frederick R. Law successfully performed a parachute jump from the observation platform surrounding the torch. It was done with the permission of the army captain administering the island. The New York Times reported that he "fell fully seventy-five feet [23 m] like a dead weight, the parachute showing no inclination whatsoever to open at first", but he then descended "gracefully", landed hard, and limped away.[41]
The first suicide was May 13, 1929. The Times reported a witness as saying the man, later identified as Ralph Gleason, crawled out through one of the windows of the crown, turned around as if to return, "seemed to slip" and "shot downward, bouncing off the breast of the statue in the plunge." Gleason was killed when he landed on a patch of grass at the base, just a few feet from a workman who was mowing the grass.[42]
On August 23, 2001, French stuntman Thierry Devaux parasailed onto the monument and got hung up on the statue's torch in a bungled attempt to bungee jump from it. He was not hurt and was charged with four misdemeanor offenses including trespassing. [5]

[edit] Inscription
The interior of the pedestal contains a bronze plaque inscribed with the sonnet "The New Colossus" by Emma Lazarus. It has never been engraved on the exterior of the pedestal, despite such depictions in editorial cartoons.[43]


Not like the brazen giant of Greek fame, With conquering limbs astride from land to land; Here at our sea-washed, sunset gates shall stand A mighty woman with a torch, whose flame Is the imprisoned lightning, and her name Mother of Exiles. From her beacon-hand Glows world-wide welcome; her mild eyes command The air-bridged harbor that twin cities frame. "Keep, ancient lands, your storied pomp!" cries she With silent lips. "Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. Send these, the homeless, tempest-tossed to me, I lift my lamp beside the golden door!"


The bronze plaque in the pedestal contains a typographical error: the comma in "Keep, ancient lands" is missing, causing that line to read "'Keep ancient lands, your storied pomp!' cries she", and noticeably altering its meaning.
The name "Mother of Exiles" was never taken up as the statue's name.
The first two lines refer to the ancient Colossus of Rhodes.

[edit] Replicas and derivative works




The French Statue of Liberty on the river Seine in Paris, France. Given to the city in 1889, it faces southwest, downstream along the Seine.


Main article: Replicas of the Statue of Liberty
Hundreds of other Statues of Liberty have been erected worldwide.
Boy Scouts of America placed a small-scale replica of the Statue of Liberty at the Gentry Building in Columbia, Missouri in 1950. Located at the Parks & Recreation Administration Offices, at 7th and Broadway, the plaque notes that the statue was dedicated as a pledge of everlasting fidelity and loyalty. The local project was a component of the Scouts' national 40th anniversary celebration which had Strengthen the Arm of Liberty as its theme. More than 200 replicas were placed nationally as a result. [6]
There is also a replica statue in the middle of the Susquehanna River near Harrisburg, PA. The statue is almost entirely white as viewed from US-322 East and West going past the river. Another replica, in Cape Girardeau, Missouri, stands at the entrance of Capaha Park.




Statue of Liberty replica at Odaiba, overlooking the Rainbow Bridge in Tokyo Bay.


There is a sister statue in Paris and several others elsewhere in France, including one in Bartholdi's home town of Colmar, erected in 2004 to mark the centenary of Bartholdi's death; they also exist in Austria, Germany, Italy, Japan, China, Brazil and Vietnam; one existed in Hanoi during French colonial days. There are replicas in theme parks and resorts, including the New York-New York Hotel & Casino in Las Vegas on the Strip, replicas created as commercial advertising, and replicas erected in U.S. communities by patriotic benefactors, including no less than two hundred donated by Boy Scout troops to local communities. During the Tiananmen Square protest of 1989, Chinese student demonstrators in Beijing built a 10 m image called the Goddess of Democracy, which sculptor Tsao Tsing-yuan said was intentionally dissimilar to the Statue of Liberty to avoid being "too openly pro-American."[44] At around the same time, a copy of this statue was made and displayed on Connecticut Avenue in Washington, DC, in a small park across the street from the Chinese Embassy.




The torch-bearing statue planned in 1936 for the top of Joseph Stalin's Palace of Soviets (which was never actually erected) shows the influence of the New York statue.


The sculptor James Alexander Ewing's most prestigious commission was for the carving of the Glasgow City Chambers' Jubilee Pediment, its apex group of Truth, Riches and Honour, and the statues of The Four Seasons on the building's tower. The figure of Truth is also known as Glasgow's Statue of Liberty, due to its close resemblance to the similarly posed, but very much larger, statue in New York harbour.

[edit] In popular culture
Main article: The Statue of Liberty in popular culture




The Statue of Liberty is part of the New York State Quarter






The Statue of Liberty is on the reverse of all Presidential $1 coins


The Statue of Liberty quickly became a popular icon, featured in scores of posters, pictures, motion pictures, and books. A 1911 O. Henry story relates a fanciful conversation between "Mrs. Liberty" and another statue;[45] it figured in 1918 Liberty Loan posters. During the 1940s and 1950s, pulp Science Fiction magazines featured Lady Liberty surrounded by ruins or by the sediments of the ages.
It has been in dozens of motion pictures. It is a setting in the 1942 Alfred Hitchcock movie Saboteur, which featured a climactic confrontation at the statue. Half submerged in the sand, the Statue provided the apocalyptic revelation at the end of 1968's Planet of the Apes. The statue became a character in the 1989 film, Ghostbusters II, in which it comes to life and helps defeat the evil villain, and was the setting for the climax of the first X-Men film. It can also be seen lying broken on the ground in the movie Independence Day, after the first wave of attacks by the extraterrestrial biological beings from outer space. In the 2004 movie The Day After Tomorrow, the statue gets frozen, and in the 2008 movie Cloverfield, it is decapitated by a giant monster; its head lands in a Manhattan street. In the film, National Treasure: Book of Secrets, the sister statue in Paris provides a clue.
It was the subject of a 1978 University of Wisconsin-Madison prank in which Lady Liberty appeared to be standing submerged in a frozen-over local lake.[46] It has appeared on New York and New Jersey license plates, is used as a logo for the NHL's New York Rangers and the WNBA's New York Liberty, and it was the subject of magician David Copperfield's largest vanishing act.[47]
In 1982 Jessica Skinner was born inside the statue. Her mother went into labor while climbing the stairs, and gave birth before she could get back to ground level.[48]
The statue is often used as a comparative measurement (usually referring to height rather than length) in books and documentaries.[citation needed]

[edit] See also


Columbia Pictures logo
Ellis Island
Franco-American relations
Goddess of Democracy
Libertas
Liberty Island
List of statues
List of statues by height
Marianne
Statues and Sculptures in New York City
Statue of Liberty play, a trick play in American football





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Statue of Liberty



[edit] References


Holdstock, Robert, editor. Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. London: Octopus books, 1978.
Moreno, Barry. The Statue of Liberty Encyclopedia. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000.
Smith, V. Elaine, "Engineering Miss Liberty's Rescue." Popular Science, June 1986, page 68.
Vidal, Pierre. Frédéric-Auguste Bartholdi 1834–1904: Par la Main, par l'Esprit. Paris: Les créations du pélican, 2000.




^ "Frequently Asked Questions". National Park Service. http://www.nps.gov/stli/faqs.htm. Retrieved on 2007-03-22. 
^ New York City Administrative Code Section 2-202 Division into boroughs and boundaries thereof - Division Into Boroughs And Boundaries Thereof., Lawyer Research Center. Accessed July 22, 2008.
^ Liberty Island: Block Group 9, Census Tract 1, New York County, United States Census Bureau, accessed July 22, 2008
^ "Statue of Liberty National Monument". National Park Service. 2007-12-31. http://www.nps.gov/stli/. Retrieved on 2008-07-24. 
^ "National Register Information System". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. 2009-03-13. http://www.nr.nps.gov/. 
^ "Crown of Statue of Liberty may reopen to public soon". Xinhua News Agency. 2008-07-05. http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2008-07/05/content_8496225.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-24. 
^ "Statue of Liberty". National Park Service. 2006-04-28. http://www.nps.gov/archive/stli/prod02.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-24. 
^ "Statue of Liberty National Monument - History & Culture". National Park Service. 2006-10-05. http://www.nps.gov/stli/historyculture/index.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-24. 
^ Bellis, Mary. "Statue of Liberty - Frederic Auguste Bartholdi". About.com. http://inventors.about.com/library/inventors/blliberty.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-24. 
^ "June 17, 1885: The Statue of Liberty Arrives". CR4. 2008-06-17. http://cr4.globalspec.com/blogentry/6055/June-17-1885-The-Statue-of-Liberty-Arrives. Retrieved on 2008-07-24. 
^ "Statue of Liberty". HTML. http://nymag.com/listings/attraction/statue_of_liberty/. Retrieved on 2006-06-20. 
^ Fun Facts
^ USIA. "Portrait of the USA: The Statue of Liberty". http://usinfo.state.gov/infousa/life/symbceleb/statue_liberty.html. Retrieved on 2006-05-29. 
^ "Statue of Liberty National Park: History". http://www.americanparknetwork.com/parkinfo/content.asp?catid=85&contenttypeid=35#1511. Retrieved on 2007-02-07. 
^ Khan, B. Zorina (2005). The Democratization of Invention: Patents and Copyrights in American Economic Development, 1790–1920. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-81135-X.  p. 299 [1]
^ "National Park Service Historical Handbook: Statue of Liberty". 2000-09-25. http://www.cr.nps.gov/history/online_books/hh/11/hh11d.htm. Retrieved on 2007-05-19. 
^ "On This Day, The New York Times, May 2, 1885, "Harper's Weekly featured a cartoon about construction of the Statue of Liberty"
^ a b Crowley, Jim. "Lighthouses of New York Harbor: Statue of Liberty". National Lighthouse Museum. http://www.lighthousemuseum.org/nylights/slibrty.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-24. 
^ "What are some interesting facts about lighthouses?". United States Coast Guard. 2008-07-22. http://www.uscg.mil/history/weblighthouses/h_lighthousefacts.asp. Retrieved on 2008-07-24. 
^ "Statue of Liberty to be Flood-Lighted", Electrical Experimenter 4 (4): pg 237, August 1916, http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Image:Electrical_Experimenter_Aug_1916_pg237.png 
^ http://www.aier.org/research/worksheets-and-tools/cost-of-living-calculator
^ The Torch Redesigned
^ NRIS Search by location
^ Statue of Liberty Construction; [2]
^ Statue of Liberty - UNESCO World Heritage Centre
^ (Ruth Brandon, Singer and the Sewing Machine: A Capitalist Romance, p. 211)
^ (Leslie Allen, "Liberty: The Statue and the American Dream," p. 21)
^ (Alice J. Hall, "Liberty Lifts Her Lamp Once More," July 1986.) Her body was created after Bartholdi's wife.
^ Finishing.com - Why is the Statue of Liberty green
^ National Park Service
^ National Park Service - Statue of Liberty Statistics
^ "Karmøy Kommune". http://www.gonorway.no/norway/township.php?ID=7635f8113ab4aa0. Retrieved on 2006-05-29.  (Tourism website) "Visnes Mining Museum: The copper mines at Visnes were in operation until as recently as 1972. The copper for the Statue of Liberty in New York was extracted here."
^ Copper Development Association. "Copper Facts". http://www.copper.org/education/c-facts/c-liberty.html. Retrieved on 2006-05-29.  A U. S. copper industry website. "The Statue of Liberty contains 179,000 pounds of copper. It came from the Visnes copper mines on Karmoy Island near Stavanger, Norway, and was fabricated by French artisans."
^ "Statue of Liberty Made of Russian Copper?". http://www.russianamericanbusiness.org/EN/web_CONTENT/articles/2005.01.20/group_05/2_articl/articl.shtml. 
^ Robert Pear (1986-02-14). "Iacocca and Secretary of Interior Clash Over Statue Panel Ouster". The New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9A0DE1D61239F937A25751C0A960948260&sec=travel&pagewanted=all. Retrieved on 2006-06-06.  "Interior Secretary Donald P. Hodel … dismissed Mr. Iacocca on Wednesday from the commission 'to avoid any question of conflict' of interest arising from Mr. Iacocca's simultaneous service as head of a private foundation that has raised $233 million for restoration of the statue and Ellis Island. The foundation also awards contracts for the restoration work."
^ "New Jerseyans' Claim To Liberty Island Rejected". Associated Press (New York Times). October 6, 1987. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9B0DE3DE1E3FF935A35753C1A961948260. Retrieved on 2008-07-27.  "The Supreme Court today refused to strip the Statue of Liberty of its status as a New Yorker. The Court, without comment, turned away a move by a two New Jerseyans to claim jurisdiction over the landmark for their state." 
^ "Introduction of Bills and Joint Resolutions—(Senate—June 29, 2006)". Library of Congress Congressional Record. 2006-06-29. S6786. http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/r?r109:@OR+(+@1(S.+3597)++). Retrieved on 2006-08-17. 
^ "Save the Statue of Liberty Act (H.R.2982 — July 10, 2007)". Library of Congress Congressional Record. 2007-07-10. http://thomas.loc.gov/home/gpoxmlc110/h2982_ih.xml. Retrieved on 2007-12-06. 
^ "Statue of Liberty's Crown to Stay Closed" Associated Press, August 9, 2006
^ "Salazar Visits Statue of Liberty, May Reopen Crown". Bloomberg.com. 2009-01-23. http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601103&sid=axx38fOEUykM&refer=us. Retrieved on 2009-01-23. 
^ "Parachute Leap Off Statue of Liberty; Steeplejack Had First Thought of Jumping Off the Singer Building. Steers With His Arms And Lands Safely on Stone Coping 30 feet from Water's Edge—He Won't Talk About It." The New York Times, February 3, 1912, p. 4
^ "Youth Plunges Off Statue of Liberty Crown, 200 Feet High, in First Suicide at That Spot." The New York Times, May 14, 1929, p. 1
^ e.g. Barry Shelton (2000-06-02). "New Statue of Liberty". http://www.freedaily.com/cartoons/000606statuecartoon.html. Retrieved on 2006-05-28. 
^ Tsao Tsing-yuan. "The Birth of the Goddess of Democracy." In Popular Protest and Political Culture in Modern China. Edited by Jeffrey N. Wasserstrom and Elizabeth J. Perry, 140–147. Boulder, Col.: Westview Press, 1994.
^ Henry, O., Sixes and Sevens, "The Lady Higher Up." Project Gutenberg text
^ "Lady Liberty on Lake Mendota". http://www.museumofhoaxes.com/hoax/Hoaxipedia/Lady_Liberty_on_Lake_Mendota/accessdate=2008-03-05. 
^ Poundstone, William. (1986). Bigger Secrets. Houghton Mifflin
^ Live with Regis and Kelly, Feb. 11 2009 Segment titled "Fun Facts"



[edit] External links

Harper's Weekly cartoon on construction of the Statue of Liberty pedestal (NY Times 5/2/1885 On This Day citation)
Statue of Liberty National Monument The official Historical Site handbook.
Statue of Liberty National Monument Visitor information.
PBS documentary about statue of liberty
Statue of Liberty-Ellis Island Foundation Fun facts, children's picture contest, and other information on the foundation.
The Statue of Liberty article by Alexandra Kollontay, 1916.
Historical Information and Photographs
Gallery Images of the Statue of Liberty
Statue of Liberty in the Structurae database

Coordinates: 40°41′21″N 74°02′40″W﻿ / ﻿40.6892°N 74.0445°W﻿ / 40.6892; -74.0445







v • d • e

Lighthouses of New York






Ambrose Tower Light · Aunt Phebe Rock Light · Barber's Point Light · Barcelona (Portland Harbor) Light · Bluff Point Light · Braddock Point Light · Buffalo Light · Buffalo Harbor North and South entrance Lights · Buffalo North breakwater East end Light · Cape Vincent Light · Carleton Island Light · Cedar Island Light · Cold Spring Harbor Light · Coney Island Light · Coxsackie Light · Crossover Island Light · Crown Point Light · Cumberland Head Light · Dunkirk Light · East Charity Shoal Light · Station Eatons Neck · Elm Tree Beacon Light · Esopus Meadows Light · Execution Rocks Light · Fair Haven Light · Fire Island Light · Fort Niagara Light · Fort Lafayette Light · Fort Tompkins Light · Fort Wadsworth Light · Fort Washington (NY) Light · Galloo Island Light · Gardiners Point Island · Horse Island Light · Horton Point Light · Hudson-Athens Light · Huntington Harbor (Lloyd Harbor) Light · Kings Point Light · Latimer Reef Light · Little Gull Island Light · Little Red Lighthouse (Jeffrey's Hook) · Montauk Point Light · Moriches Light · New Dorp Light · North Brother Island Light · North Dumpling Light · Oak Orchard Light · Old Field Point Light · Old Orchard Shoal Light · Ogdensburg Harbor Light · Orient Long Beach Bar Light · Orient Point Light · Oswego Harbor West Pierhead Light · Plattsburgh Beacon Light · Plum Island Light · Point Aux Roches Light · Princes Bay Light · Race Rock Light · Rock Island Light · Romer Shoal Light · Rondout Light · Sands Point Light · Saugerties Light · Selkirk Light · Shinnecock Light · Sodus Outer Light · Sodus Point Light · South Brother Island Channel Range Light · Split Rock Point Light · Staten Island Light · Statue of Liberty · Stepping Stones Light · Stony Point (Henderson) Light · Stony Point Light · Strawberry Island Upper Cut Range Light · Stuyvesant Light · Sunken Meadows Light · Sunken Rock Light · Tarrytown (Sleepy Hollow) Light · Thirty Mile Point Light · (Three) Sisters Island Light · Throgs Neck Light · Tibbetts Point Light · Turkey Point (NY) Light · Watervliet Light · West Point (NY) Light · West Bank Light · Whitehall Narrows Light · Whitestone Point Light














v • d • e

Protected Areas of New York





National Park Service



African Burial Ground National Monument • Castle Clinton National Monument • Eleanor Roosevelt National Historic Site • Federal Hall National Memorial • Fire Island National Seashore • Fort Stanwix National Monument • Gateway National Recreation Area • General Grant National Memorial • Governors Island National Monument • Hamilton Grange National Memorial • Home of Franklin D. Roosevelt National Historic Site • Martin Van Buren National Historic Site • Saint Paul's Church National Historic Site • Sagamore Hill National Historic Site • Saratoga National Historical Park • Statue of Liberty National Monument • Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace National Historic Site • Theodore Roosevelt Inaugural National Historic Site • Vanderbilt Mansion National Historic Site • Women's Rights National Historical Park








National Forests



Finger Lakes








State Parks



Allen H. Treman • Allegany • Amherst • Battle Island • Bayard Cutting Arboretum • Bayswater Point • Bear Mountain • Beaver Island • Beechwood • Belmont Lake • Bethpage • Betty & Wilbur Davis • Big Six Mile Creek • Blauvelt • Bonavista • Bowman Lake • Braddock Bay • Brentwood • Bristol Beach • Brookhaven • Buckhorn Island • Buffalo Harbor • Burnham Point • Buttermilk Falls • Caleb Smith • Camp Hero • Canandaigua Lake • Canoe-Picnic Point • Captree • Catharine Valley Trail • Caumsett • Cayuga Lake • Cedar Island • Cedar Point • Chenango Valley • Cherry Plain • Chimney Bluffs • Chittenango Falls • Clarence Fahnestock • Clark Reservation • Clay Pit Ponds • Cold Spring Harbor • Coles Creek • Conesus Lake • Connetquot River • Crab Island • Croil Island • Cumberland Bay • Darien Lakes • De Veaux Woods • Dean's Cove • Delta Lake • Devil's Hole • Dewolf Point • Donald J. Trump • Earl W. Brydges • Eel Weir • Emma Treadwell Thacher • Empire–Fulton Ferry • Evangola • Fahnestock • Fair Haven Beach • Fillmore Glen • Fort Niagara • Four Mile Creek • Franklin D. Roosevelt • Frenchman Island • Galop Island • Gantry Plaza • Gilbert Lake • Gilgo • Glimmerglass • Golden Hill • Goosepond Mountain • Grafton Lakes • Grass Point • Green Lakes • Hamlin Beach • Harriet Hollister Spencer • Harriman • Haverstraw Beach • Heckscher • Hempstead Lake • High Tor • Highland Lakes • Higley Flow • Hither Hills • Honeoye • Hook Mountain • Hudson Highlands • Hudson River Islands • Hudson River • Hunt's Pond • Iona Island • Irondequoit Bay • Jacques Cartier • James Baird • Jamesport • John Boyd Thacher • Jones Beach • Joseph Davis • Keewaydin • Keuka Lake • Know Farm • Kring Point • Lake Erie • Lake Superior • Lake Taghkanic • Lakeside Beach • Letchworth • Lock 32 • Lodi Point • Long Island • Long Point - Finger Lakes • Long Point - Thousand Islands • Long Point on Lake Chautauqua • Macomb Reservation • Margaret Lewis Norrie • Mark Twain • Mary Island • Max V. Shaul • Mexico Point • Midway • Mine Kill • Minnewaska • Montauk Downs • Montauk Point • Moreau Lake • Napeague • Newtown Battlefield • Niagara Falls • Nissequogue River • Nyack Beach • Oak Orchard • Ogden Mills & Ruth Livingston Mills • Old Croton Aqueduct • Old Erie Canal • Oquaga Creek • Orient Beach • Peebles Island • Pinnacle • Pixley Falls • Point Au Roche • Reservoir • Riverbank • Robert G. Wehle • Robert H. Treman • Robert Moses - Long Island • Robert Moses - Thousand Islands • Robert V. Riddell • Roberto Clemente • Rockefeller • Rockland Lake • Sampson • Sandy Island Beach • Saratoga Lake • Saratoga Spa • Schodack Island • Schunemunk Mountain • Selkirk Shores • Seneca Lake • Shadmoor • Shaver Pond Nature Center • Silver Lake • Sonnenberg Gardens & Mansion • Southwick Beach • St. Lawrence • State Park at the Fair • Sterling Forest • Stony Brook • Storm King • Sunken Meadow • Taconic Outdoor Education Center • Taconic - Copake Falls Area • Taconic - Rudd Pond Area • Tallman Mountain • Taughannock Falls • Theodore Roosevelt Nature Center • Thompson's Lake • Tioga • Trail View • Valley Stream • Verona Beach • Waterson Point • Watkins Glen • Wellesley Island • Westcott Beach • Whetstone Gulf • Whirlpool • Wildwood • Wilson-Tuscarora • Wonder Lake • Woodlawn Beach








Nature Conservancy
Preserves



Eugene and Agnes Meyer Nature Preserve • Santanoni Preserve • Arthur W. Butler Memorial Sanctuary • Indian Brook Assemblage • Marrion Yarrow Preserve • Mildred E. Grierson Memorial Wildlife Sanctuary • Mount Holly Preserve • Long Pond Preserve • Mianus River Gorge Nature Preserve • Henry Morgenthau Preserve • Mount Holly Sanctuary • Otter Creek Preserve • Uplands Farm Nature Sanctuary • Atlantic Double Dunes • Pine Neck Nature Sanctuary • Long Island Center for Conservation • Ruth Wales Sanctuary • Calverton Ponds • Accabonac Harbor • Peconic Estuary Big Woods Preserve • Mashomack Nature Preserve • Montauk Mountain Preserve • Shadmoor Preserve • Andy Warhol Visual Arts Preserve • Coon Mountain Preserve • Gadway Sandstone Pavement Barrens • Silver Lake Bog Preserve • Spring Pond Bog Preserve • Everton Falls Preserve • Clintonville Pine Barrens • O.D. von Engeln Preserve at Malloryville • El Dorado Beach Preserve • Chaumont Barrens Preserve • Freund Wildlife Sanctuary • Lewis A. Swyer Preserve • Hannacroix Ravine Preserve • Kenrose Preserve • Limestone Rise Preserve • Whitbeck Memorial Grove • Stewart Preserve • Lordsland Conservancy • Nellie Hill Preserve • Pawling Nature Reserve • Roger Perry Memorial Preserve • Thompson Pond and Stissing Mountain Preserve • Schunemunk Mountain Preserve • Sam's Point Preserve • Christman Sanctuary • Lisha Kill Natural Area • Moccasin Kill Sanctuary • Denton Sanctuary • Lower Poultney River and Saddles Preserves • West Branch Preserve








State Forests



Allen Lake • Altmar • Ambler • Armlin Hill • Arnold Lake • Artic China • Ashland Pinnacle • Baker School House • Bald Mountain • Balsam • Balsam Swamp • Barbour Brook • Basswood • Basswood Pond • Bates • Battenkill • Battle Hill • Beals Pond • Bear Creek • Bear Swamp • Bearpen Mountain • Beartown • Beaver Creek • Beaver Dams • Beaver Flow • Beaver Meadow • Beebe Hill • Berlin • Big Brook • Big Buck • Birdseye Hollow • Black Creek • Blenheim • Bobell • Bombay • Bonaparte's Cave • Boutwell Hill • Boyce Hill • Brasher Falls • Brokenstraw • Brookfield Railroad • Broome • Bryant Hill • Buck Hill • Bucks Brook • Buckton • Bucktooth • Bully Hill • Bumps Creek • Burnt-Rossman Hills • Burnt Hill • Bush Hill • Cadyville • Cairo Lockwood • Calhoun Creek • California Hill • California Road • Cameron Mills • Cameron • Canacadea • Canada Creek • Canaseraga • Cascade Valley • Cat Hollow • Cattaraugus • Catherineville • Catlin • Chalres E. Baker • Charleston • Chateaugay • Chautauqua Gorge • Chenango • Cherry Valley • Chestnut Woods • Cinnamon Lake • Clapper Hollow • Clark Hill • Cliffside • Clinton • Cobb Brook • Cobb Creek State Forest • Cold Creek • Cold Spring Brook • Cole Hill • Columbia Lake • Coon Hollow • Cotton Hill • Cotrell • Coventry • Coyle Hill • Coyote Flats • Crab Hollow • Crary Mills • Cuyler Hill • Daketown • Danby • Dannemora • Decatur • Deer River • Degrasse • Delaware • Depot Hill • Deruyter • Dobbins • Dog Hollow • Donahue Woods • Downerville • Dry Run • Dunkin's Reserve • Dutch Settlement • Dutton Ridge • Earlville • East Branch Fish Creek • East Osceola • East Otto • Edwin Hollow • Edwin Mountain • Eldridge Swamp • Elkdale • English Hill • Exeter • Fall Brook • Fairfield • Farmersville • Featherstonhaugh • Fire Fall • Fish Creek • Five Streams • Flat Rock • Florence Hill • Fort Jackson • Frank E. Jadwin • Franklin • Franklin 10 • Frozen Ocean • Furnace Creek • Gas Springs • Gates Hill • Gee Brook • Genegantslet • Gillies Hill • Glenmeal • Golden Hill • Goose Egg • Gorton Lake • Gould Corners • Groundry Hill • Grafton Lakes • Granger • Grant Powell • Grantville • Greenwood • Greenwood Creek • Griggs Gulf • Hall Island • Hammond Hill • Harris Hill • Harry E Dobbins • Hartwick • Harvey Mountain • Hatch Creek • Hawkins Pond • Hemlock Ridge • Hewitt • Hickok Brook • Hickory Lake • High Flats • High Knob • High Towers • High Woods • Hill Higher • Hiltonville • Hinckley • Hogsback • Honey Hill • Hooker Mountain • Hoxie Gorge • Huckleberry Ridge • Huntersfield • Hunts Pond • Independence River • Indian Pipe • Italy Hill • Jackson Hill • Jenksville • Jersey Hill • Karr Valley Creek • Kasoag • Keeney Swamp • Kennedy • Kerryville • Ketchumville • Kettlebail • Keyserkill • Klipnocky • Klondike • Knapp Station • Lafayetteville • Lake Desolation • Lassellsville • Lebanon • Leonard Hill • Lesser Wilderness • Lincklaen • Lincoln Mountain • Line Brook • Lonesome Bay • Long Pond • Lookout • Lost Nation • Lost Valley • Ludlow Creek • Lutheranville • Lyon Brook • Macomb Reservation • Mad River • Mallet Pond • Maple Hill • Maple Valley • Marisposa • Marsh Pond • McCarthy Hill • McDonough • Meads Creek • Melondy Hill • Michigan Hill • Middle Grove • Milford • Mohawk Springs • Montrose Point • Moon Pond • Morgan Hill • Morrow Mountain • Moss Hill • Mount Hunger • Mount Pisgah • Mount Pleasant • Mount Tom • Mount Washington • Muller Hill • Murphy Hill • Nanticoke Lake • Nelson Swamp • Newfield • New Michigan • Nimham Mountain • Nine Mile Creek • North Harmony • O'Hara • Oak Ridge • Oakley Corners • Ohisa • Onjebonge • Orebud Creek • Orton Hollow • Ossian • Otselic • Otsquago • Otter Creek • Palmer's Pond • Peck Hill • Painter Hill • Panama • Papish Pond • Partridge Run • Patria • Pease Hill • Penn Mountain • Perkins Pond • Petersburg • Phillips Creek • Pigeon Hill • Pigtail Hollow • Pinckney • Pine Hill • Pine Ridge • Pitcher Springs • Pittstown • Plainfield • Plattekill • Pleasant Lake • Plum Bottom • Point Rock • Popple Pond • Potato Hill • Pulpit Rock • R. Milton Hick • Raecher • Rakph Road • Raymondville • Red Brook • Relay • Rensselaer Number 3 • Rensselaerville • Robinson Hollow • Rock City • Rock Creek • Rockwood • Roeliff Jansen Kill • Roosa Gap • Roseboom • Rural Grove • Rush Creek • Saint Lawrence • Saint Regis • Salmon River • Sand Bay • Sand Flats • Sandy Creek • Scott Patent • Sears Pond • Shawangunk • Shindagin Creek • Shindagin Hollow • Silver Hill • Skinner Hill • Skyline Drive • Slader Creek • Snow Bowl • Sodom • Sonyea • Spring Brook • South Bradford • South Hammond • South Hill • South Mountain • South Valley • Southville • Stammer Creek • Steam Mill • Steuben Hill • Stewart • Stissing Mountain • Stockton • Stone Barn • Stone Hill • Stone Store • Stoney Pond • Sugar Hill • Summer Hill • Susquehanna • Swancott Mill • Swift Hill • Taconic Hereford • Taconic Ridge • Tassell Hill • Taylor Creek • Taylor Valley • Terry Mountain • Texas Hill • Texas Hollow • Texas School House • Three Springs • Tibbetts • Titusville Mountain • Tomannex • Toothaker Creek • Tracy Creek • Tri-County • Triangle • Trout Brook • Trout Lake • Trout River • Tug Hill • Tuller Hill • Turkey Hill • Turkey Point • Turkey Ridge • Turnpike • Urbana • Ushers Road • Vandermark • Vernooykill • Wagner Farm • Wassaic • Webster Hill • Wellman • West Branch • West Hill • West Mountain • West Oscela • West Parishville • Whalen • Whaupaunaucau • Whippoorwill Corners • Whiskey Flats • White Pond • Whittacker • Wiley Brook • Windfall Creek • Winona • Wolf Brook • Wolf Lake • Woodhull • Wurtsboro Ridge • Yatesville Falls • Yellow Barn • Yellow Lake








Wild Forests



Aldrich • Balsam • Black River • Blackhead • Blue Mountain • Bluestone • Cherry Ridge • Colgate Lake • Cranberry Lake • Crystal Lake • Debar Mountain • Dry Brook • Ferris Lake • Fulton Chain • Grass River • Halcott Mountain • Hammond Pond • Horseshoe • Hunter Mountain • Independence River • Jessup River • Kaaterskill • Lake George • Middle Mountain • Moose River Plains • Overlook Mountain • Phoenica • Raquette Boreal • Saranac Lakes • Sargent Ponds • Shaler Mountain • Shandaken • Sundown • Taylor Pond • Vanderwhacker Mountain • Watson East Triangle • White Hill • Wilcox Lake • Willowemoc • Windham High Peak








Forest Preserve



Adirondack Park • Catskill Park








New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation • New York State Department of Environmental Conservation












v • d • e

Protected Areas of New Jersey





National Park Service



Delaware Water Gap National Recreation Area • Edison National Historic Site • Gateway National Recreation Area • Great Egg Harbor Scenic and Recreational River • Middle Delaware National Scenic River • Morristown National Historical Park • New Jersey Coastal Heritage Trail Route • New Jersey Pinelands National Reserve • Statue of Liberty National Monument








State Parks



Allaire • Allamuchy Mountain • Barnegat Lighthouse • Cape May Point • Cheesequake • Corson's Inlet • Delaware and Raritan Canal • Double Trouble • Farny • Fort Mott • Hacklebarney • High Point • Hopatcong • Island Beach • Kittatinny Valley • Liberty • Long Pond Ironworks • Monmouth Battlefield • Parvin • Pigeon Swamp • Princeton Battlefield • Rancocas • Ringwood • Stephens • Swartswood • Voorhees • Washington Crossing • Washington Rock • Wawayanda








State Forests



Abram S. Hewitt • Bass River • Belleplain • Brendan T. Byrne • Jenny Jump • Norvin Green • Penn • Ramapo Mountain • Stokes • Wharton • Worthington








State Marinas



Senator Frank S. Farley • Forked River • Fortescue • Leonardo • Liberty Landing








Recreation Areas



Atsion • Bull's Island • Round Valley • Spruce Run








Other

Spring Meadow Golf Course






New Jersey Division of Parks and Forestry












v • d • e

World Heritage Sites in the United States








Cahokia · Carlsbad Caverns · Chaco Culture · Everglades · Grand Canyon · Great Smoky Mountains · Hawaii Volcanoes · Independence Hall · Kluane-Wrangell-St. Elias-Glacier Bay-Tatshenshini-Alsek (with Canada) · La Fortaleza and San Juan National Historic Site · Mammoth Cave · Mesa Verde · Monticello and the University of Virginia · Olympic National Park · Pueblo de Taos · Redwood · Statue of Liberty · Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park (with Canada) · Yellowstone · Yosemite


















v • d • e

Popular visitor attractions in New York City








Times Square (35M) • Central Park (20M) • Metropolitan Museum of Art (4.5M) • Statue of Liberty (4.24M) • American Museum of Natural History (4M) • Empire State Building (4M) • Museum of Modern Art (2.67M)















v • d • e

U.S. National Register of Historic Places






Keeper of the Register · History of the National Register of Historic Places · Property types · Historic district · Contributing property








List of entries
National Park Service · National Historic Landmarks · National Battlefields · National Historic Sites · National Historical Parks · National Memorials · National Monuments










Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statue_of_Liberty"
Categories: World Heritage Sites in the United States | 1886 establishments | History of immigration to the United States | Landmarks in New York City | National Monuments in New York | Outdoor sculptures in New York City | Lighthouses on the National Register of Historic Places | Lighthouses in New York | Richard Morris Hunt buildings | National symbols of the United States | Liberty symbols | France–United States relations | Colossal statues | Statue of Liberty | Museums in New York | Visitor attractions in New York CityHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | Articles containing French language text | Articles needing additional references from June 2006 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
مصرى
Azərbaycan
Bân-lâm-gú
Башҡорт
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
한국어
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Latina
Lietuvių
Magyar
മലയാളം
Монгол
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
O'zbek
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
吴语
ייִדיש
粵語
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 00:30.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
