













Slavic peoples - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Slavic_peoples";
		var wgTitle = "Slavic peoples";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "29440";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281079178;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Slavic peoples

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"Slav" redirects here. For the former Israeli settlement, see Slav (settlement).




Countries with majority Slavic ethnicities and at least one Slavic national language      West Slavic      East Slavic      South Slavic





Indo-European topics



Indo-European languages


Albanian · Armenian · Baltic
Celtic · Germanic · Greek
Indo-Iranian (Indo-Aryan, Iranian)
Italic · Slavic  
extinct: Anatolian · Paleo-Balkans (Dacian,
Phrygian, Thracian) · Tocharian



Indo-European peoples


Albanians · Armenians
Balts · Celts · Germanic peoples
Greeks · Indo-Aryans
Iranians · Latins · Slavs
historical: Anatolians (Hittites, Luwians)
Celts (Galatians, Gauls) · Germanic tribes
Illyrians · Italics  · Cimmerians · Sarmatians
Scythians  · Thracians  · Tocharians
Indo-Iranians (Rigvedic tribes, Iranian tribes) 



Proto-Indo-Europeans


Language · Society · Religion
 


Urheimat hypotheses


Kurgan hypothesis
Anatolia · Armenia · India · PCT
 


Indo-European studies


The Slavic Peoples are an ethnic and linguistic branch of Indo-European peoples, living mainly in eastern Europe. From the early 6th century they spread from their original homeland (most commonly thought to be in Eastern Europe) to inhabit most of eastern Central Europe, Eastern Europe and the Balkans.[1] Many settled later in Siberia[2] and Central Asia[3] or emigrated to other parts of the world.[4][5] Over half of Europe is, territorially and demographically speaking, inhabited by Slavic-speaking communities[6]
Modern nations and ethnic groups called by the ethnonym "Slavs" are considerably genetically and culturally diverse and relations between them are varied, ranging from a sense of connection to feelings of mutual resentment. [7][8]
Slavic peoples are classified geographically into West Slavic (including Czechs, Kashubians, Moravians, Poles, Silesians, Slovaks and Sorbs), East Slavic (including Belarusians, Russians, Rusyns and Ukrainians), and South Slavic (including Bosniaks, Bulgarians, Croats, Macedonians, Montenegrins, Serbs and Slovenes). For a more comprehensive list, see Ethno-cultural subdivisions.
According to a 2007 genetic study[9] based on Y-chromosome male haplogroups, Slavic men cluster into two main groups; one encompasses all Western-Slavic, Eastern-Slavic, and two Southern-Slavic male populations (western Croats, Slovenes), whilst the other group encompasses all remaining Southern Slavic men.




Contents


1 Origin of the term Slav
2 Proto-Slavic language
3 Origins

3.1 Homeland debate
3.2 Earliest accounts
3.3 Scenarios of ethnogenesis
3.4 Genetics


4 Slavic migrations
5 Religion and alphabet
6 Ethno-cultural subdivisions

6.1 East Slavs
6.2 West Slavs
6.3 South Slavs


7 References
8 See also
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Origin of the term Slav
Excluding the ambiguous mention by Ptolemy of tribes Slavanoi and Soubenoi, the earliest references of "Slavs" under this name are from the 6th century AD. The word is written variously as Sklabenoi, Sklauenoi, or Sklabinoi in Byzantine Greek, and as Sclaueni, Sclauini, or Sthlaueni in Latin. The oldest documents written in Old Church Slavonic and dating from the 9th century attest slověne to describe the Slavs around Thessalonica. Other early attestations include Old Russian slověně "an East Slavic group near Novgorod", Slovutich "Dnieper river", and Croatian Slavonica, a river.
The name is normally linked with the Slavic forms sláva "glory", "fame" or slovo "word, talk" (both akin to slušati "to hear" from the IE root *ḱlew-). Thus slověne would mean "people who speak (the same language)", i.e. people who understand each other, as opposed to the Slavic word for foreign nations, němtsi, meaning "mumbling, murmuring people" (from Slavic němъ - mumbling, mute).[10] For example, the Polish word Niemcy means "Germans" or "Germany" (as do its cognates in many other Slavic languages).
However, some scholars have advanced alternative theories as to the origin of the name. B.P. Lozinski argues that the word sláva once had the meaning of worshipper, in this context meaning practicer of a common Slavic religion, and from that evolved into an ethonym.[11] S.B. Bernstein speculates that it derives from a reconstructed Proto-Indo-European *(s)lawos, cognate to Greek laós "population, people", which itself has no commonly accepted etymology.[12] Meanwhile Max Vasmer and others suggest that the word originated as a river name (compare the etymology of the Volcae), comparing it with such cognates as Latin cluere "to cleanse, purge", a root not known to have been continued in Slavic, although it appears in other languages with similar meanings (cf. Greek klyzein "to wash", Old English hlūtor "clean, pure", Old Norse hlér "sea", Welsh clir "clear, clean", Lithuanian šlúoti "to sweep").

[edit] Proto-Slavic language
Main article: Proto-Slavic language
Proto-Slavic, the ancestor language of all Slavic languages, branched off at some uncertain time in a disputed location from common Proto-Indo-European, passing through a Balto-Slavic stage in which it developed numerous lexical and morphophonological isoglosses with Baltic languages. In the framework of the Kurgan hypothesis, "the Indo-Europeans who remained after the migrations became speakers of Balto-Slavic".[13]
Proto-Slavic proper, or more commonly referred to as Common Slavic or Late Proto-Slavic, defined as the last stage of the language preceding the geographical split of the historical Slavic languages, was likely spoken during the 6th and 7th centuries on a vast territory from Novgorod to southern Greece. That language was unusually uniform, and on the basis of borrowings from foreign languages and Slavic borrowings into other languages, can't be said to have any recognizable dialects. Slavic linguistic unity lasted for at least 1-2 centuries more, as can been seen in Old Church Slavonic manuscripts which, though based on local Slavic speech of Thessaloniki in Macedonia, could still serve the purpose of the first common Slavic literary language.

[edit] Origins
Main article: Early Slavs

[edit] Homeland debate
The location of the speakers of pre-Proto-Slavic and Proto-Slavic is subject to considerable debate. Serious candidates are cultures on the territories of modern Belarus, Poland, European Russia and Ukraine. The proposed frameworks are:

Lusatian culture hypothesis: The pre-Proto-Slavs were present in north-eastern Central Europe since at least the late 2nd millennium BC, and were the bearers of the Lusatian culture and later the Przeworsk culture (2nd century BC to the 4th) (part of the Chernyakhov culture) (2nd-5th centuries AD to 300 AD).
Milograd culture hypothesis: The pre-Proto-Slavs (or Balto-Slavs) were the bearers of the Milograd culture (700 BC to the 100 AD)
Chernoles culture hypothesis: The pre-Proto-Slavs were the bearers of the Chernoles culture (750–200 BC) of northern Ukraine
Tributary of Danube postulated by Oleg Trubachyov ,theory supported by 2007 male haplogroup genetic finding[14]

The starting point in the autochtonic/allochtonic debate was the year 1745, when Johann Christoph de Jordan published De Originibus Slavicis. From the 19th century onwards, the debate became politically charged, particularly in connection with the history of the Partitions of Poland and German imperialism known as Drang nach Osten. The question as to whether Germanic or Slavic peoples were indigenous on the land east of the Oder river was used by factions to pursue their respective German and Polish political claims to governance of those lands.

[edit] Earliest accounts
Further information: Vistula Veneti
Pliny the Elder and Ptolemy mention a tribe of the Veneti around the river Vistula. The lands east of the Rhine, Elbe, Oder, and west of the Vistula river were referred to as Magna Germania by Tacitus in AD 98. Romans occupied the land west of the Rhine. From Romanticism, the allochthonic school theorem is that the 6th century authors re-applied this ethnonym to hitherto unknown Slavic tribes, whence the later designation "Wends" for Slavic tribes, and medieval legends purporting a connection between Poles and Vandals.
The Slavs under name of Venethi, the Antes and the Sclaveni make their first appearance in Byzantine records in the early 6th century. Byzantine historiographers under Justinian I (527-565), such as Procopius of Caesarea, Jordanes and Theophylact Simocatta describe tribes emerging from the area of the Carpathian Mountains, the lower Danube and the Black Sea, invading the Danubian provinces of the Eastern Empire.
Jordanes mentions that the Venethi sub-divided into three groups: the Venethi, the Antes and the Sklavens (Sclovenes, Sklavinoi). The Byzantine term Sklavinoi was loaned as Saqaliba by medieval Arab historiographers.

[edit] Scenarios of ethnogenesis




Areas of Slavic 'homeland', according to Mallory


The Globular Amphora culture stretches from the middle Dniepr to the Elbe in the late 4th and early 3rd millennia BC. It has been suggested as the locus of a Germano-Balto-Slavic continuum (compare Germanic substrate hypothesis), but the identification of its bearers as Indo-Europeans is uncertain. The area of this culture contains numerous tumuli - typical for IE originators.
The Chernoles culture (8th to 3rd c. BC, sometimes associated with the "Scythian farmers" of Herodotus) is "sometimes portrayed as either a state in the development of the Slavic languages or at least some form of late Indo-European ancestral to the evolution of the Slavic stock"[15] The Milograd culture (700 BC - 100 AD), centered roughly on present day Belarus, north of the contemporaneous Chernoles culture, have also been proposed as ancestral to either Slavs or Balts.
The ethnic composition of the bearers of the Przeworsk culture (2nd c. BC to 4th c. AD, associated with the Lugii) of central and southern Poland, northern Slovakia and of Ukraine, including the Zarubintsy culture (2nd c. BC to 2nd c. AD, also connected with the Bastarnae tribe) and the Oksywie culture are other candidates.
The area of southern Ukraine is known to have been inhabited by Scythian and Sarmatian tribes prior to the foundation of the Gothic kingdom. Early Slavic stone stelae found in the middle Dniestr region are markedly different from the Scythian and Sarmatian stelae found in the Crimea.




Daily Life of Eastern Slavs, by Sergei Ivanov.


The (Gothic) Wielbark Culture displaced the eastern Oksywie part of the Przeworsk culture from the 1st century AD. While the Chernyakhov culture (2nd to 5th c. AD, identified with the multi-ethnic kingdom established by the Goths immigrating from the Wielbark culture) leads to the decline of the late Sarmatian culture in the 2nd to 4th centuries, the western part of the Przeworsk culture remains intact until the 4th century, and the Kiev culture flourishes during the same time, in the 2nd-5th c. AD. This latter culture is recognized as the direct predecessor of the Prague-Korchak and Pen'kovo cultures (6th-7th c. AD), the first archaeological cultures the bearers of which are indisputably identified as Slavic. Proto-Slavic is thus likely to have reached its final stage in the Kiev area; there is, however, substantial disagreement in the scientific community over the identity of the Kiev culture's predecessors, with some scholars tracing it from the Ruthenian Milograd culture, others from the "Ukrainian" Chernoles and Zarubintsy cultures and still others from the "Polish" Przeworsk culture. The Kiev culture was overrun by the Huns around 370 AD, which may have triggered the Proto-Slavic expansion to the historical locations of the Slavic languages.

[edit] Genetics
Further information: Genetic history of Europe




Haplogroup R1a Distribution


The modern Slavic peoples come from a wide variety of genetic backgrounds. The frequency of Haplogroup R1a [2] ranges from 63.39% by the Sorbs, 56.4% in Poland and 54% in Ukraine, to 15.2% in Republic of Macedonia, 14.7% in Bulgaria and 12.1% in Herzegovina.[16][17] Haplogroup R1a may be connected to the spread of Proto-Indo-Europeans (see Kurgan hypothesis for more information).
A new study[18] studied several Slavic populations with the aim of localizing the Proto-Slavic homeland. The significant findings of this study are that:

Two genetically distant groups of Slavic populations were revealed: One encompassing all Western-Slavic, Eastern-Slavic, and two Southern-Slavic populations (north-western Croats, Slovenes), and one encompassing all remaining Southern Slavs. According to the authors most Slavic populations have similar Y chromosome pools - R1a, and this similarity can be traced to an origin in middle Dnieper basin of Ukraine from Ukrainian LGM refuge 15 kya.[19]
However, some southern Slavic populations such as Serbs, Bosniaks, Montenegrins, Macedonians, and Bulgarians are clearly separated from the tight DNA cluster of the rest of Slavic populations. According to the authors this phenomenon is explained by "...contribution to the Y chromosomes of peoples who settled in the Balkan region before the Slavic expansion to the genetic heritage of Southern Slavs..."[20]

Northern Eastern Slavs are distinguished by the presence of Y Haplogroup N in their genome. Postulated to originate from Central Asia, it is found at high rates in Finnic peoples. Its presence in Northern Russians[21] attests to the Northern Eastern Slavic tribes mixing with Finnic peoples in northern Eurasia.

[edit] Slavic migrations




Slavic tribes, mid seventh century AD.






The "Sklavinias" in the Balkans, 7th - 8th centuries


According to estern homeland theory prior to becoming known to the Roman world, Slavic speaking tribes were part of the many multi-ethnic confederacies of Eurasia- such as the Sarmatian, Hun and Gothic empires.[22] The Slavs emerged from obscurity when the westward movement of Germans in the 5th and 6th centuries AD (thought to be in conjunction with movement of peoples from Siberia and Eastern Europe: Huns, and later Avars and Bulgars) started the great migration of the Slavs, who settled the lands abandoned by Germanic tribes fleeing the Huns and their allies: westward into the country between the Oder and the Elbe-Saale line; southward into Bohemia, Moravia, much of present day Austria, the Pannonian plain and the Balkans; and northward along the upper Dnieper river. Perhaps some Slavs migrated with the movement of the Vandals to Iberia and north Africa.[23]
Around the 6th century, Slavs appeared on Byzantine borders in great numbers.[24] The Byzantine records note that after they marched through grass wouldn't regrow under their footprints. After a military movement even the Peloponnese and Asia Minor were reported to have Slavic settlements.[25] This southern movement has traditionally been seen as an invasive expansion.[26] By the end of the 6th century, Slavs had settled the Eastern Alps region.
When their migratory movements ended, there appeared among the Slavs the first rudiments of state organizations, each headed by a prince with a treasury and a defense force. Moreover, it was the beginnings of class differentiation, and nobles either pledged allegiance to the Frankish/ Holy Roman Emperors or the Byzantine Emperors.
In the 7th century, the Frankish merchant Samo, who supported the Slavs fighting their Avar rulers, became the ruler of the first known Slav state in Central Europe, which, however, most probably did not outlive its founder and ruler. This provided the foundation for subsequent Slavic states to arise on the former territory of this realm with Carantania being arguably the oldest of them. Very old also are the Principality of Nitra and the Moravian principality (see under Great Moravia). In this period, there existed central Slavic groups and states such as the Balaton Principality, but the subsequent expansion of the Magyars, as well as the Germanisation of Austria, separated the northern and southern Slavs. The First Bulgarian Empire, ruled by a core of Bulgars, was founded in AD 681. After their subsequent Slavicisation, it was instrumental in the spread of Slavic literacy and Christianity to the rest of the Slavic world.
Throughout their history, Slavs came into contact with non-Slavic groups. In the postulated "homeland" region (present-day Ukraine), they had contacts with Sarmatians and the Germanic Goths. After their subsequent spread, they began assimilating non-Slavic peoples. For example, in the Balkans, there were Paleo-Balkan peoples, such as Thracians, Illyrians and Greeks. Having lost their indigenous language due to persistent Hellenisation and the Roman conquest, what remained of the Thracians and Illyrians were completely absorbed into the Slavic tribes. Later invaders such as Bulgars and even Cumans mingled with the Slavs also, particularly in eastern parts (ie Bulgaria). Despite their cultural assimilation, one source states that only 15% of modern-day Bulgarians are of Slavic genetic origin, compared to 49% Thracian.[27]
In the western Balkans, south Slavs and Germanic Gepids intermarried with Avar invaders, eventually producing a Slavicised population. In central Europe, the Slavs intermixed with Germanic, Celtic and Raetian peoples, while the eastern Slavs encountered Uralic and Scandinavian peoples. Scandinavians and Finnic peoples were involved in the early formation of the Russian state but were completely Slavicised after a century. Some Finno-Ugric tribes in the north were also absorbed into the expanding Russian population.[28] In the 11th and 12th centuries, constant incursions by nomadic Turkic tribes, such as the Kipchaks and the Pechenegs, caused a massive migration of East Slavic populations to the safer, heavily forested regions of the north.[29]
Polabian Slavs (Wends) settled in parts of England (Danelaw), apparently as Danish allies; Polabian-Pomeranian Slavs are also known to have even settled on Norse age Iceland.[30] Saqaliba refers to the Slavic mercenaries and slaves in the medieval Arab world in North Africa, Sicily and Al-Andalus. Saqaliba served as caliph's guards.[31][32] In the 12th century, there was intensification of Slavic piracy. The Northern Crusades caused great loss of life among the Wends, and they consequently offered little opposition to German colonization (Ostsiedlung) of the Elbe-Oder region and were gradually assimilated by the Germans, with the exception of Sorbs.[33] The Polabian language survived until the beginning of the 19th century in what is now the German state of Lower Saxony.[34]
Cossacks, although Slavic-speaking and Orthodox Christians, came from a mix of ethnic backgrounds, including Tatars and other Turks. Many early members of the Terek Cossacks were Ossetians.
The Gorals of southern Poland and northern Slovakia are partially descended from Romance-speaking Vlachs who migrated into the region from the 14th to 17th centuries and were absorbed into the local population.




Ethno-linguistic map of Austria–Hungary, 1910.


Conversely, some Slavs were assimilated into other populations. Although the majority continued south, attracted by the riches of the territory which would become Bulgaria, a few remained in the Carpathian basin and were ultimately assimilated into the Magyar or Romance speaking population. There is a large number of river names and other placenames of Slavic origin in Romania.[35] Similarly, the populations of the respective eastern parts of Austria and Germany, and to a much lesser extent eastern Italy, to some degree comprised of people with Slavic ancestry.
In the entire Austro-Hungarian Empire of approximately 50 million people, about 23 million were Slavs. The Slavic peoples who were, for the most part, denied a voice in the affairs of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, were calling for nationalistic self-determination. During the World War I, representatives of the Czechs, Slovaks, Poles, Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes set up organizations in the Allied countries to gain sympathy and recognition.[36] In 1918, after World War I ended, the Slavs established such independent states as Czechoslovakia, Second Polish Republic, and the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes.
Because of the vastness and diversity of the territory occupied by Slavic people, there were several centers of Slavic consolidation. In the 19th century, Pan-Slavism developed as a movement among intellectuals, scholars, and poets, but it rarely influenced practical politics and didn't find support in all nations that had Slavic origins. Pan-Slavism became compromised when Russian Empire started to use it as an ideology justifying its territorial conquests in Central Europe as well as subjugation of other ethnic groups of Slavic origins such as Poles or Ukrainians, and the ideology became associated with Russian imperialism. The common Slavic experience of communism combined with the repeated usage of the ideology by Soviet propaganda after World War II within the Eastern bloc (Warsaw Pact) was a forced high-level political and economic hegemony of the USSR dominated by Russians. A notable political union of the 20th century that covered many South Slavs was Yugoslavia, but it was broken apart as well.
The word "Slavs" was used in the national anthem of the Slovak Republic (1939–1945), Yugoslavia (1943-1992) and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (1992-2003), later Serbia and Montenegro (2003-2006).

[edit] Religion and alphabet
Most Slavic populations gradually adopted Christianity between 6th and 10th century, and consequently their old pagan beliefs declined. See also Rodnovery.
The majority of contemporary Slavs who profess a religion are Eastern Orthodox (and/or Greek Catholic) and Roman Catholic. A very small minority are Protestant, mainly in the north. In the south, Bosniaks and some minority groups are Sunni Muslim. Religious delineations by nationality can be very sharp; in many Slavic ethnic groups the vast majority of religious people share the same religion. Many Slavs are atheist or agnostic: recent estimates suggest 18% in Russia.[37] and 59% in the Czech Republic[38]; nevertheless some Slavs who profess no faith still may traditionally associate themselves with a particular religion in a cultural and historical sense.
Major religions among Slavic peoples:



1. Mainly Eastern Orthodox or/and Greek Catholic:

Belarusians
Bulgarians
Macedonians
Montenegrins
Pannonian Rusyns
Russians
Rusyns
Serbs
Ukrainians



2. Mainly Roman Catholic with small Protestant and Eastern Orthodox minorities:

Bunjevs
Croats
Kashubians
Krashovans
Moravians
Poles
Silesians
Slovaks
Slovenes



3. Mainly Muslim:

For more details on this topic, see Muslims by nationality


Bosniaks
Gorani
Pomaks
Torbesh (Macedonian Muslims)

4. Religious mixtures:

Sorbs (Catholic/Protestant)
Yugoslavs (Atheist/Catholic/Orthodox/Muslim)

5. Mainly atheist with Roman Catholic and Protestant minorities:

Czechs




The Orthodox/Catholic religious divisions become further exacerbated by the use of the Cyrillic alphabet by the Orthodox and Greek Catholics and of the Roman alphabet by Roman Catholics. However, the Serbian language (including Montenegrin) can be written using both the Cyrillic and Roman alphabets. There is also a Latin script to write in Belarusian, called the Lacinka alphabet. The Bosnian language has at times been written using the Arabic alphabet (mostly in Muslim documents), but it nowadays uses exclusively Roman alphabet, though Cyrillic alphabet is in theory available as an alternative.

[edit] Ethno-cultural subdivisions




Present-day distribution of Slavic languages and language groups.


Slavs are customarily divided along geographical lines into three major subgroups: East Slavs, West Slavs, and South Slavs, each with a different and a diverse background based on unique history, religion and culture of particular Slavic group within them. The East Slavs may all be traced to Slavic-speaking populations that were loosely organized under the Kievan Rus' empire beginning in the 10th century A.D. Almost all of the South Slavs can be traced to ethnic Slavs who mixed with the local European population of the Balkans (Illyrians, Dacians/Thracians, Greeks); with some Slavs of modern-day Bulgaria mixing with later invaders from the East, the Bulgars. They were particularly influenced by the Byzantine Empire and the Orthodox Church, although Catholicism and Latin influences were more pertinent in Dalmatia. The West Slavs do not share either of these backgrounds, as they expanded to the West and integrated into the cultural sphere of Western (Roman Catholic) Christianity around this time also mixing with nearby Germanic tribes.
In addition there has been a tendency to consider the category of Northern Slavs. Presently this category is considered to be of East and West Slavs, in opposition to South Slavs, however in 19th century opinions about individual languages/ethnicities varied.
Some of the following subdivisions remain debatable, particularly for smaller groups and national minorities.

[edit] East Slavs
Main article: East Slavs

Russians

Goryuns
Kamchadals
Lipovan Russians
Polekhs
Pomors


Ukrainians

Bojko
Hutsuls
Lemko 4
Poleszuks 2


Belarusians

Poleszuks 2


Rusyns 3

Lemko 4




[edit] West Slavs
Main article: West Slavs

Lechitic group

Poles

Masovians
Polans
Vistulans


Silesians 5
Pomeranians

Kashubians 5
Slovincians†


Polabians †

Sorbs
Obodrites/Abodrites

Obotrites proper†
Wagrians†
Warnower†
Polabians proper†
Linonen†
Travnjane†
Drevani†


Veleti (Wilzi, later Liutici)†

Kissini (Kessiner, Chizzinen, Kyzziner)†
Circipani (Zirzipanen)†
Tollenser†
Redarier†


Ucri (Ukr(an)i, Ukranen)†
Rani (Rujani)†
Hevelli (Stodorani)†
Volinians (Velunzani) †
Pyritzans (Prissani) †




Czech-Slovak group

Bohemians
Czechs
Moravians 6
Slovaks
Pannonian Rusyns 1


Sorbs (Serbo-Lusatians)

Milceni (Upper Sorbs)
Lusatians (Lower Sorbs)




[edit] South Slavs
Main article: South Slavs

Eastern (Bulgaro-Macedonian) group

Bulgarians

Pomaks (Muslim Bulgarians)
Palćene (Banat Bulgarians)
Bessarabian Bulgarians
Anatolian Bulgarians†
Shopi7
Torlaks


Macedonians

Torbesh (Muslim Macedonians)
Aegean Macedonians
Gorani 11
Torlaks






Western group

Slovenes

Carantanians†
Carinthian Slovenes
Hungarian Slovenes
Resians


Serbs

Torlaks8
Užičans


Montenegrins9
Croats

Janjevci (Catholic Slavs in Kosovo)
Burgenland Croats (in Austria)
Molise Croats (in eastern Italy)


Krashovans (Croats in Romania)
Bunjevci 10
Šokci 10
Bunjevci 10
Bosniaks

Muslims by nationality 12


Gorani 11

Muslims by nationality 12


Yugoslavs 13



† Extinct
1 Also considered part of Rusyns
2 Considered transitional between Ukrainians and Belarusians
3 Also considered part of Ukrainians
4 A part of Lemkos identify themselves as Ukrainians and another part as Rusyns[39]
5 Also considered part of Poles
6 Today, often considered part of Czechs, originally closer to Slovaks
7 Most Shopi self-declare as Bulgarians. Cognate with Torlaks.
8 Most Torlaks self-declare as Serbs. Cognate with Shopi.
9 Some of the Montenegrins opt Serb ethnicity, with a historical tradition, dating back to the Serb tribes that have supposedly settled Montenegro many centuries ago. Others opt for Montenegrin ethnicity, but still are followers of the Serbian Orthodox Church, speak the same language and have same historical traditions. A number of ethnic Montenegrins, mostly supporters of Montenegrin independence and adherents of Montenegrin Orthodox Church call their native language Montenegrin, considering it a separate language from Serbian.
10 Both occur widely in northeastern Croatia and also in northern Serbia; their Ikavian dialect is subequal as southern Croats in Hercegovina and Dalmatian mainland from where they once emigrated. Considered part of Croats by most of them, although recently (since Yugoslav disaster) some within Serbia consider themselves a separate peoples
11 These Gorani are Slavs in Kosovo; but not to be confound with other Gorani (or Gorinci) in the highlands of western Croatia (Gorski Kotar county).
12 A census category recognized as an ethnic group. Most Slavic Muslims now opt for Bosniak ethnicity, but some still use the "Muslim" designation.
13 This identity continues to be used by a minority throughout the former Yugoslav republics. The nationality is also declared by diasporans living in the USA and Canada. There are a multitude of reasons as to why people prefer this affiliation, some published on the article.
Note: Besides ethnic groups, Slavs often identify themselves with the local geographical region in which they live. Some of the major regional South Slavic groups include: Zagorci in northern Croatia, Istrani in westernmost Croatia, Dalmatinci in southern Croatia, Boduli in Adriatic islands, Slavonci in eastern Croatia, Bosanci in Bosnia, Hercegovci in southern Bosnia (Herzegovina), Krajišnici in western Bosnia, Semberci in northeast Bosnia, Srbijanci in Serbia proper, Šumadinci in central Serbia, Vojvođani in northern Serbia, Sremci in Syrmia, Bačvani in northwest Vojvodina, Banaćani in Banat, Sandžaklije (Muslims in Serbia/Montenegro border), Kosovci in Kosovo, Crnogorci in Montenegro proper, Bokelji in southwest Montenegro, Trakiytsi in Upper Thracian Lowlands, Dobrudzhantsi in north-east Bulgarian region, Balkandzhii in Central Balkan Mountains, Miziytsi in north Bulgarian region, Pirintsi[40] in Blagoevgrad Province, Ruptsi in the Rhodopes, etc.
Another interesting note is that the very term Slavic itself was registered in the US census of 2000 by more than 127,000 residents.

[edit] References


^ Geography and ethnic geography of the Balkans to 1500
^ Fiona Hill, Russia — Coming In From the Cold?, The Globalist, 23 February 2004
^ Robert Greenall, Russians left behind in Central Asia, BBC News, 23 November 2005.
^ Terry Kirby, 750,000 and rising: how Polish workers have built a home in Britain, The Independent, 11 February 2006.
^ Poles in the United States, Catholic Encyclopedia
^ The Early Slavs. Culture and Society in Ealry Medieval Europe. P M barford. Cornell University Press. 2001. ISBN 0-9014-3977-9. Pg 1: In total, well over half of Europe is, in terms of territorial extent (if not demographically), inhabited by communities speaking one of the many Slav languages and dialects.
^ "Kundera emphasized that for a thousand years the Czechs never had any direct contact with Russia. In spite of their linguistic kinship, the Czechs and the Russians never shared a common world, neither a common history of common culture.(...) Joseph Conrad wrote that "nothing could be more alien to what is called in literary world "the Slavic spirit" than the Polish temperament with its chivalric devotion to moral constraints and its exaggerated respect for individual rights" History of Eastern Europe: Crisis and Change. Robert Bideleux. Routledge 1998.(accentuation added.
^ . From its beginning, Poland drew its primary inspiration from Western Europe and developed a closer affinity with the French and Italians, for example, than with nearer Slavic neighbours of Eastern Orthodox and Byzantine heritage. This westward orientation, which in some ways has made Poland the easternmost outpost of Latinate and Catholic tradition, helps to explain the Poles' tenacious sense of belonging to the "West" and their deeply rooted antagonism toward Russia as the representative of an essentially alien way of life.U.S. Library of Congress[1]accentuation added).
^ Rebala K et al. (2007), Y-STR variation among Slavs: evidence for the Slavic homeland in the middle Dnieper basin, Journal of Human Genetics, 52:406-14
^ Votruba, Martin. "Slovak, Slavic, Slavonic...". Slovak Studies Program. University of Pittsburgh. http://www.pitt.edu/~votruba/qsonhist/slavicslovak.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-29. 
^ Lozinski B.P., The Name SLAV, Essays in Russian History, Archon Books, 1964.
^ Bernstein S. B., Очерк сравнительной грамматики славянских языков, vol. 1-2, Moscow, 1961.
^ F. Kortlandt, The spread of the Indo-Europeans, p.4
^ Rebala K et al. (2007), Y-STR variation among Slavs: evidence for the Slavic homeland in the middle Dnieper basin, Journal of Human Genetics, 52:406-14
^ James P. Mallory, "Chernoles Culture", EIEC
^ Full paper "High-Resolution Phylogenetic Analysis of Southeastern Europe"
^ Abstract "High-Resolution Phylogenetic Analysis of Southeastern Europe"
^ Rebala K et al. (2007), Y-STR variation among Slavs: evidence for the Slavic homeland in the middle Dnieper basin, Journal of Human Genetics, 52:406-14
^ http://www.springerlink.com/content/c3ht013txp686v71/ Y-STR variation among Slavs: evidence for the Slavic homeland in the middle Dnieper basin, p. 408
^ http://www.springerlink.com/content/c3ht013txp686v71/ Y-STR variation among Slavs: evidence for the Slavic homeland in the middle Dnieper basin, p. 410
^ Oleg Balanovsky, Siiri Rootsi, et al., Two Sources of the Russian Patrilineal Heritage in Their Eurasian Context
^ Velentin Sedov: Slavs in Middle Ages
^ Mallory & Adams "Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture
^ Cyril Mango. Byzantium: The Empire of New Rome. Scribner's, 1980.
^ Cyril and Methodius of Thessalonica: The Acculturation of the Slavs
^ The "Macedonian Question": Middle Ages
^ iGENEA official site and literature therein
^ Oleg Balanovsky. Two Sources of the Russian Patrilineal Heritage in Their Eurasian Context
^ Klyuchevsky, Vasily (1987). The course of the Russian history. v.1: "Myslʹ. ISBN 5-244-00072-1. http://www.kulichki.com/inkwell/text/special/history/kluch/kluch16.htm. 
^ Slavs of Muslim Spain
^ Lewis. Race and Slavery in the Middle East
^ The Golden Caliphate
^ Wend – Britannica Online Encyclopedia
^ Polabian language
^ Alexandru Xenopol, Istoria românilor din Dacia Traiană, 1888, vol. I, p. 540
^ Austria-Hungary
^ "(Russian) Опубликована подробная сравнительная статистика религиозности в России и Польше". religare.ru. 6 June 2007. http://www.religare.ru/article42432.htm. Retrieved on 2007-12-27. 
^ "Obyvatelstvo hlásící se k jednotlivým církvím a náboženským společnostem" (in Czech). Czech Statistical Office. http://www.czso.cz/csu/2003edicniplan.nsf/o/4110-03--obyvatelstvo_hlasici_se_k_jednotlivym_cirkvim_a_nabozenskym_spolecnostem. Retrieved on 2006-12-19. 
^ http://lemko.org/lih/whoarewe.html
^ Performing Democracy: Bulgarian Music and Musicians in Transition Page 11 By Donna Anne Buchanan ISBN 0226078264



[edit] See also





Early East Slavs
East Slavs
European ethnic groups
Gord (Slavic settlement)
Lech, Czech and Rus
List of ethnic groups
Pan-Slavic colours
Pan-Slavism
Slavic mythology
South Slavs
West Slavs




Other European ethnic groupings:

Baltic peoples
Berber peoples
Brythonic peoples
Celtic peoples
Finno-Ugric peoples
Italic peoples
Germanic peoples
Romance peoples
Thracian peoples
Illyrian peoples
Turkic peoples
Uralic peoples


Slavisphere






[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Slavs 



Lozinski, B. Philip (1964, 2004), "The Name SLAV", in Ferguson, Alan D.; Levin, Alfred, Essays in Russian History, A collection dedicated to George Vernadsky, Hamden, Connecticut: Archon Books, Vassil Karloukovski, pp. 19–30 .
Kortlandt, Frederik. "FROM PROTO-INDO-EUROPEAN TO SLAVIC" (pdf). Frederik Kortlandt. http://www.kortlandt.nl/publications/art066e.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-09-06. 
THE ORIGIN OF THE BALTIC, GERMAN AND SLAVIC PEOPLE. THE ICELAND AGES
"Najstariji period istorije Slovena (Venedi, Sloveni i Anti)" - N. S. Deržavin
SLOVENI: UNDE ORTI ESTIS? SLOVÁCI, KDE SÚ VAŠE KORENE?, by Cyril A. Hromník (mainly in Slova).
Site about Slavics, Slavic Countries, Cultures, Languages, etc (mainly in Russian)
The early wars between the Macedonian Slavs and the Byzantines (from medieval sources)
"The Genetic Legacy of Paleolithic Homo sapiens sapiens in Extant Europeans: A Y Chromosome Perspective"
 "The Slavs". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 1913. http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Catholic_Encyclopedia_(1913)/The_Slavs. 





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slavic_peoples"
Categories: Slavs | Slavic ethnic groups | Ethnic groups in Europe 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Alemannisch
العربية
Azərbaycan
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Dolnoserbski
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Иронау
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kaszëbsczi
Latina
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 14:13.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
