













Indo-European languages - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Indo-European_languages";
		var wgTitle = "Indo-European languages";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "14848";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283556146;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Indo-European languages

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"Indo-European" redirects here. For other uses, see Indo-European (disambiguation).


Indo-European




Geographic
distribution:
Before the 15th century, Europe, and South, Central and Southwest Asia; today worldwide.


Genetic
classification:
One of the world's major language families


Subdivisions:

Albanian
Anatolian
Armenian
Balto-Slavic
Celtic
Germanic
Hellenic
Indo-Iranian
Italic
Tocharian



ISO 639-2 and 639-5:
ine






     Countries with a majority of speakers of IE languages      Countries with an IE minority language with official status



The Indo-European languages are a family of several hundred related languages and dialects, including most major languages of Europe, the Iranian plateau, Central Asia and the Indian subcontinent. It is composed of 449 languages and dialects, according to the 2005 Ethnologue estimate, about half (219) belonging to the Indo-Aryan sub-branch. "Indo" refers to the Indian subcontinent, as the language group geographically extends from Europe in the west to India in the east. The languages of the Indo-European group are spoken by approximately three billion native speakers, the largest number of the recognised families of languages. (The Sino-Tibetan family has the second-largest number of speakers.)




Contents


1 History of the Indo-European theory
2 Classification

2.1 Grouping
2.2 Proposed subgroupings
2.3 Satem and centum languages
2.4 Suggested superfamilies


3 Historical evolution

3.1 Proto-Indo-European
3.2 Diversification
3.3 Sound changes
3.4 Comparison of conjugations


4 See also
5 Citations and notes
6 References
7 Recommended readings
8 External links

8.1 Databases
8.2 Lexica
8.3 Images







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History of the Indo-European theory
Main article: Indo-European studies
Suggestions of similarities between Indian and European languages began to be made by European visitors to India in the 16th century. In 1583 Thomas Stephens, an English Jesuit missionary in Goa, noted similarities between Indian languages, specifically Konkani, and Greek and Latin. These observations were included in a letter to his brother which was not published until the twentieth century.[1]
The first account to mention Sanskrit came from Filippo Sassetti (born in Florence, Italy in 1540 AD), a Florentine merchant who traveled to the Indian subcontinent and was among the first European observers to study the ancient Indian language, Sanskrit. Writing in 1585, he noted some word similarities between Sanskrit and Italian (e.g. devaḥ/dio "God", sarpaḥ/serpe "serpent", sapta/sette "seven", aṣṭa/otto "eight", nava/nove "nine").[1] However, neither Stephens' nor Sassetti's observations led to further scholarly inquiry.[1]
In 1647 Dutch linguist and scholar Marcus Zuerius van Boxhorn noted the similarity among Indo-European languages, and supposed the existence of a primitive common language which he called "Scythian". He included in his hypothesis Dutch, Greek, Latin, Persian, and German, later adding Slavic, Celtic and Baltic languages. However, the suggestions of Van Boxhorn did not become widely known and did not stimulate further research.
The hypothesis re-appeared in 1786 when Sir William Jones first lectured on similarities between four of the oldest languages known in his time: Latin, Greek, Sanskrit, and Persian. It was Thomas Young who first used the term Indo-European in 1813[2], which became the standard scientific term (except in Germany[3]) through the work of Franz Bopp, whose systematic comparison of these and other old languages supported the theory. Bopp's Comparative Grammar, appearing between 1833 and 1852, counts as the starting-point of Indo-European studies as an academic discipline.

[edit] Classification
Further information: List of languages by first written accounts




Indo-European language family.





Indo-European topics



Indo-European languages


Albanian · Armenian · Baltic
Celtic · Germanic · Greek
Indo-Iranian (Indo-Aryan, Iranian)
Italic · Slavic  
extinct: Anatolian · Paleo-Balkans (Dacian,
Phrygian, Thracian) · Tocharian



Indo-European peoples


Albanians · Armenians
Balts · Celts · Germanic peoples
Greeks · Indo-Aryans
Iranians · Latins · Slavs
historical: Anatolians (Hittites, Luwians)
Celts (Galatians, Gauls) · Germanic tribes
Illyrians · Italics  · Cimmerians · Sarmatians
Scythians  · Thracians  · Tocharians
Indo-Iranians (Rigvedic tribes, Iranian tribes) 



Proto-Indo-Europeans


Language · Society · Religion
 


Urheimat hypotheses


Kurgan hypothesis
Anatolia · Armenia · India · PCT
 


Indo-European studies









v • d • e

Hypothetical
Indo-European
phylogenetic clades






Daco-Thracian







Graeco-Aryan







Graeco-Armenian







Italo-Celtic







Thraco-Illyrian
















Indo-Hittite






The various subgroups of the Indo-European language family include ten major branches (in historical order of their first attestation):

Anatolian languages, earliest attested branch. Isolated terms in Old Assyrian sources from the 19th century BC, Hittite texts from about the 16th century BC; extinct by Late Antiquity.
Greek language, fragmentary records in Mycenaean from the late 15th - early 14th century BC; Homeric traditions date to the 8th century BC. (See Proto-Greek language, History of the Greek language.)
Indo-Iranian languages, descending from a common ancestor, Proto-Indo-Iranian

Indo-Aryan languages, including Sanskrit, attested (via oral tradition) from about the mid 2nd millennium BC (Rigveda). Epigraphically from the 3rd century BC.
Iranian languages, attested from roughly 1000 BC in the form of Avestan. Epigraphically from 520 BC in the form of Old Persian (Behistun inscription)
Dardic languages
Nuristani languages


Italic languages, including Latin and its descendants (the Romance languages), attested from the 7th century BC.
Celtic languages, descended from Proto-Celtic. Gaulish inscriptions date as early as the 6th century BC; Old Irish manuscript tradition from about the 8th century AD.
Germanic languages (from Proto-Germanic), earliest testimonies in runic inscriptions from around the 2nd century, earliest coherent texts in Gothic, 4th century AD. Old English manuscript tradition from about the 8th century.
Armenian language, attested from the 5th century AD.
Tocharian languages, extant in two dialects, attested from roughly the 6th to the 9th century AD. Marginalized by the Old Turkic Uyghur Khaganate and likely extinct by the 10th century.
Balto-Slavic languages, believed by most Indo-Europeanists[4] to form a phylogenetic unit, while a minority ascribes similarities to prolongued language contact.

Slavic languages (from Proto-Slavic), attested from the 9th century, earliest texts in Old Church Slavonic.
Baltic languages, attested from the 14th century, and, for languages attested that late, they retain unusually many archaic features attributed to Proto-Indo-European (PIE).


Albanian language, attested from the 15th century; Proto-Albanian likely emerged from "Paleo-Balkanic" predecessors.[5][6][7]

In addition to the classical ten branches listed above, several extinct and little-known languages have existed:

Illyrian languages — possibly related to Messapian or Venetic; relation to Albanian also proposed.
Venetic language — close to Italic.
Liburnian language — apparently grouped with Venetic.
Messapian language — not conclusively deciphered.
Phrygian language — language of ancient Phrygia, possibly close to Greek, Thracian, or Armenian.
Paionian language — extinct language once spoken north of Macedon.
Thracian language — possibly including Dacian.
Dacian language — possibly close to Thracian or to Proto-Albanian – or both.
Ancient Macedonian language — related to Greek; some propose relationships to Illyrian, Thracian or Phrygian.
Ligurian language — possibly not Indo-European; possibly close to or part of Celtic.
Lusitanian language — possibly related to (or part of) Celtic, or Ligurian, or Italic.


[edit] Grouping
Further information: Language families
Of the top 20 contemporary languages in terms of native speakers according to SIL Ethnologue, 12 are Indo-European: Spanish, English, Hindi, Portuguese, Bengali, Russian, German, Marathi, French, Italian, Punjabi and Urdu, accounting for over 1.6 billion native speakers.[8]
Membership of these languages in the Indo-European language family and branches, groups and subgroups thereof, is determined by a genetic relationship, defined by shared innovations which are presumed to have taken place in a common ancestor. For example, what makes Germanic languages "Germanic" is that large parts of the structures of all the languages so designated can be stated just once for all of them. In other words, they can be treated as an innovation that took place in Proto-Germanic, the source of all the Germanic languages.
Exempted from this concept are shared innovations acquired by borrowing (or other means of convergence), that can not be considered genetic. It has been asserted, for example, that many of the more striking features shared by Italic languages (Latin, Oscan, Umbrian, etc.) might well be "areal features". More certainly, very similar-looking alterations in the systems of long vowels in the West Germanic languages greatly postdate any possible notion of a proto-language innovation (and cannot readily be regarded as "areal", either, since English and continental West Germanic were not a linguistic area). In a similar vein, there are many similar innovations in Germanic and Balto-Slavic that are far more likely to be areal features than traceable to a common proto-language, such as the uniform development of a high vowel (*u in the case of Germanic, *i/u in the case of Baltic and Slavic) before the PIE syllabic resonants *ṛ,* ḷ, *ṃ, *ṇ, unique to these two groups among IE languages. The Balkan sprachbund even features areal convergence that comprise very different branches.
To the evolutionary history of a language family, a genetic "tree model" is considered appropriate only if communities do not remain in effective contact as their languages diverge. Otherwise, a "wave model" applies, featuring borrowings and no clear underlying genetic tree. Using an extension to the Ringe-Warnow model of language evolution early IE was confirmed to have featured limited contact between distinct lineages, while only the Germanic subfamily exhibited a less treelike behaviour as it acquired some characteristics from neighbours early in its evolution rather than from its direct ancestors. The internal diversification of especially West Germanic is cited to have been radically non-treelike.[9]
The Indo-Iranian languages form the largest sub-branch of Indo-European in terms of the number of native speakers as well as in terms of the number of individual languages.

[edit] Proposed subgroupings
Specialists have postulated the existence of such subfamilies (subgroups) as Italo-Celtic, Graeco-Armenian, Graeco-Aryan, and Germanic with Balto-Slavic. The vogue for such subgroups waxes and wanes; Italo-Celtic for example used to be a standard subgroup of Indo-European, but it is now little honored, in part because much of the evidence on which it was based has turned out to have been misinterpreted.[citation needed]
Subgroupings of the Indo European languages are commonly held to reflect genetic relationships and linguistic change. The generic differentiation of Proto-Indo-European into dialects and languages happened hand in hand with language contact and the spread of innovations over different territories.
Rather than being entirely genetic, the grouping of satem languages is commonly inferred as an innovative change that occurred just once, and subsequently spread over a large cohesive territory or PIE continuum that affected all but the peripheral areas.[10] For instance, Kortlandt proposes this satemization process involved interaction between a western and central Indo-European sphere of influence to the ancestors of Balts and Slavs.[11]
Shared features of Phrygian and Greek [12] and of Thracian and Armenian [13] group the southeastern branches of Indo-European together. Some fundamental shared features, like the verbal aorist category (this is a verb form denoting action without reference to duration or completion) having the perfect active particle -s fixed to the stem, link this group closer to Anatolian languages[14] and Tocharian. Shared features with Balto-Slavic languages, on the other hand (especially present and preterit formations), might be due to later contacts.[15]
The Indo-Hittite hypothesis proposes the Indo European language family to consist of two main branches: one represented by the Anatolian languages and another branch encompassing all other Indo European languages. Features that separate Anatolian from all other branches of Indo-European (such as the gender or the verb system) have been interpreted alternately as archaic debris or as innovations due to prolonged isolation. Points proffered in favour of the Indo-Hittite hypothesis are the (non-universal) Indo-European agricultural terminology in Anatolia[16] and the preservation of laryngeals.[17] However, in general this hypothesis is considered to attribute too much weight to the Anatolian evidence. According to another view the Anatolian subgroup left the Indo-European parent language comparatively late, approximately at the same time as Indo-Iranian and later than the Greek or Armenian divisions. A third view, especially prevalent in the so-called French school of Indo-European studies, holds that extant similarities in non-satem languages in general - including Anatolian - might be due to their peripheral location in the Indo-European language area and early separation, rather than indicating a special ancestral relationship.[18] Holm (2008)[19] based on lexical calculations arrives at a picture roughly replicating the general scholarly opinion and refuting the Indo-Hittite hypothesis.

[edit] Satem and centum languages
Main article: Centum-Satem isogloss





This article contains too much jargon and may need simplification or further explanation. Please discuss this issue on the talk page, and/or remove or explain jargon terms used in the article. Editing help is available. (October 2007)






Diachronic map showing the Centum (blue) and Satem (red) areas. The supposed area of origin of satemization is shown in darker red (Sintashta/Abashevo/Srubna cultures).


The terms Centum and Satem are used to describe the evolution of the three original sets of velar consonants that have been reconstructed for Proto-Indo-European, *kʷ (labiovelars), *k (velars), and *ḱ; (palatovelars). Satem languages (Indo-Iranian and Balto-Slavic) lost the distinction between labiovelar and pure velar sounds, and at the same time assibilated the palatal velars. The Centum languages (Germanic, Italic, and Celtic), on the other hand, changed the palatal velars to be the same as pure velars.
Note that the terms "Centum" or "Satem" do not imply that Centum languages descend from a "proto-Centum" or that languages exhibiting Satem features descend from a "proto-Satem". Most modern scholars see the Satem sound change as an areal feature radiating outward from the central Indo-European language communities, but largely failing to reach the western and eastern peripheries.
The Satem-Centum isogloss runs right between the Greek (Centum) and Armenian (Satem) languages (which a number of scholars regard as closely related), with Greek exhibiting some marginal Satem features. Some scholars think that some languages classify neither as Satem nor as Centum (Anatolian, Tocharian, and possibly Albanian).
Areal contact among already distinct post-PIE languages (say, during the 3rd millennium BC) may have spread the sound changes involved. In any case, present-day specialists are rather less galvanized by the division than 19th cent. scholars were, partly because of the recognition that it is, after all, just one isogloss among the multitudes that criss-cross Indo-European linguistic geography.

[edit] Suggested superfamilies
Some linguists propose that Indo-European languages form part of a hypothetical Nostratic language superfamily, and attempt to relate Indo-European to other language families, such as South Caucasian languages, Altaic languages, Uralic languages, Dravidian languages, and Afro-Asiatic languages. This theory remains controversial, like the similar Eurasiatic theory of Joseph Greenberg, and the Proto-Pontic postulation of John Colarusso. Objections to such groupings are not based on any theoretical claim about the likely historical existence or non-existence of such super-families; it is entirely reasonable to suppose that they existed. The difficulty in identifying the details of actual relationships between language families, however, comes in finding concrete evidence that transcends chance resemblance. Since the noise-to-signal ratio in historical linguistics increases steadily over time, at great enough time-depths it becomes open to reasonable doubt that it can even be possible to distinguish between signal and noise.

[edit] Historical evolution

[edit] Proto-Indo-European
Main article: Proto-Indo-European language
The Proto-Indo-European language (PIE) is the common ancestor of the Indo-European languages, spoken by the Proto-Indo-Europeans. The classical phase of Indo-European comparative linguistics leads from Franz Bopp's Comparative Grammar (1833) to August Schleicher's 1861 Compendium and up to Karl Brugmann's Grundriss published from the 1880s. Brugmann's junggrammatische re-evaluation of the field and Ferdinand de Saussure's development of the laryngeal theory may be considered the beginning of "contemporary" Indo-European studies. The generation of Indo-Europeanists active in the last third of the 20th century (such as Calvert Watkins, Jochem Schindler and Helmut Rix) developed a better understanding of morphology and, in the wake of Kuryłowicz's 1956 Apophonie, understanding of the ablaut. From the 1960s, knowledge of Anatolian became certain enough to establish its relationship to PIE. Using the method of internal reconstruction an earlier stage, called Pre-Proto-Indo-European, has been proposed.
PIE was an inflected language, in which the grammatical relationships between words were signaled through inflectional morphemes (usually endings). The roots of PIE are basic morphemes carrying a lexical meaning. By addition of suffixes, they form stems, and by addition of desinences (usually endings), these form grammatically inflected words (nouns or verbs). The hypothetical Indo-European verb system is complex and, like the noun, exhibits a system of ablaut.

[edit] Diversification





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2008)


The diversification of the parent language into the attested branches of daughter languages is historically unattested. The timeline of the evolution of the various daughter languages, on the other hand, is mostly undisputed, quite regardless of the question of Indo-European origins.




mid 2nd millennium BC distribution






mid 1st millennium BC distribution






post- Roman Empire and Migrations period distribution






late medieval distribution (after Islamic, Hungarian and Turkic expansions)



2500 BC–2000 BC: The breakup into the proto-languages of the attested dialects is complete. Proto-Greek is spoken in the Balkans, Proto-Indo-Iranian north of the Caspian in the emerging Andronovo culture. The Bronze Age reaches Central Europe with the Beaker culture, likely composed of various Centum dialects. The Tarim mummies possibly correspond to proto-Tocharians.
2000 BC–1500 BC: Catacomb culture north of the black sea. The chariot is invented, leading to the split and rapid spread of Iranian and Indo-Aryan from the Bactria-Margiana Archaeological Complex over much of Central Asia, Northern India, Iran and Eastern Anatolia. Proto-Anatolian is split into Hittite and Luwian. The pre-Proto-Celtic Unetice culture has an active metal industry (Nebra skydisk).
1500 BC–1000 BC: The Nordic Bronze Age develops pre-Proto-Germanic, and the (pre)-Proto-Celtic Urnfield and Hallstatt cultures emerge in Central Europe, introducing the Iron Age. Migration of the Proto-Italic speakers into the Italian peninsula (Bagnolo stele). Redaction of the Rigveda and rise of the Vedic civilization in the Punjab. The Mycenaean civilization gives way to the Greek Dark Ages.
1000 BC–500 BC: The Celtic languages spread over Central and Western Europe. Baltic languages are spoken in a huge area from present-day Poland to the Ural Mountains in western Russia[20]. Proto Germanic. Homer and the beginning of Classical Antiquity. The Vedic Civilization gives way to the Mahajanapadas. Zoroaster composes the Gathas, rise of the Achaemenid Empire, replacing the Elamites and Babylonia. Separation of Proto-Italic into Osco-Umbrian and Latin-Faliscan. Genesis of the Greek and Old Italic alphabets. A variety of Paleo-Balkan languages are spoken in Southern Europe. The Anatolian languages are extinct.
500 BC–1 BC/AD: Classical Antiquity: spread of Greek and Latin throughout the Mediterranean, and during Hellenism (Indo-Greeks) to Central Asia and the Hindukush. Kushan Empire, Mauryan Empire. Proto-Germanic.
1 BC/AD 500: Late Antiquity, Gupta period; attestation of Armenian. Proto-Slavic. The Roman Empire and then the Great Migrations marginalize the Celtic languages to the British Isles.
500–1000: Early Middle Ages. The Viking Age forms an Old Norse koine spanning Scandinavia, the British Isles and Iceland. The Islamic conquest and the Turkic expansion results in the Arabization and Turkification of significant areas where Indo-European languages were spoken. Tocharian is extinct in the course of the Turkic expansion while Northeastern Iranian (Scytho-Sarmatian) is reduced to small refugia.
1000–1500: Late Middle Ages: Attestation of Albanian and Baltic languages.
1500–2000: Early Modern period to present: Colonialism results in the spread of Indo-European languages to every continent, most notably Romance (North, Central and South America, French Canada, North and South Africa, West Asia), West Germanic (English in North America, South Asia and Australia; to a lesser extent Dutch and German), and Russian to Central Asia and the Russian Far East.


[edit] Sound changes
Main article: Indo-European sound laws





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2008)


As the Proto-Indo-European language broke up, its sound system diverged as well, changing according to various sound laws evidenced in the daughter-languages. Notable cases of such sound laws include Grimm's law in Proto-Germanic, loss of prevocalic *p- in Proto-Celtic, loss of prevocalic *s- in Proto-Greek, Brugmann's law in Proto-Indo-Iranian, as well as satemization (discussed above). Grassmann's law and Bartholomae's law may or may not have operated at the common Indo-European stage.

[edit] Comparison of conjugations
The following table presents a comparison of conjugations of the thematic present indicative of the verbal root *bʰer- 'to carry' (whence English verb to bear) and its reflexes in various early attested IE languages and their modern descendants or relatives, showing that all languages had in the early stage an inflectional verb system.



Proto-Indo-European
(*bʰer- 'to carry')


I (1st. Sg.)
*bʰéroh₂


You (2nd. Sg.)
*bʰéresi


He/She/It (3rd. Sg.)
*bʰéreti


We (1st. Du.)
*bʰérowos


You (2nd. Du.)
*bʰéreth₁es


They (3rd. Du.)
*bʰéretes


We (1st. Pl.)
*bʰéromos


You (2nd. Pl.)
*bʰérete


They (3rd. Pl.)
*bʰéronti




Language Family
Indo-Aryan
Greek
Italic
Germanic
Celtic
Slavic
Armenian



Vedic Sanskrit
Ancient Greek
Latin
Gothic
Old Irish
OCS
Cl. Arm.


I (1st. Sg.)
bhárāmi
phérō
ferō
baíra /bɛra/
biru
berǫ
berem


You (2nd. Sg.)
bhárasi
phéreis
fers
baíris
biri
bereši
beres


He/She/It (3rd. Sg.)
bhárati
phérei
fert
baíriþ
berid
beretъ
berē


We (1st. Du.)
bhárāvas
---
---
baíros
---
berevě
---


You (2nd. Du.)
bhárathas
phéreton
---
baírats
---
bereta
---


They (3rd. Du.)
bháratas
phéreton
---
---
---
berete
---


We (1st. Pl.)
bhárāmas
phéromen
ferimus
baíram
bermai
beremъ
beremk`


You (2nd. Pl.)
bháratha
phérete
fertis
baíriþ
beirthe
berete
berēk`


They (3rd. Pl.)
bháranti
phérousi
ferunt
baírand
berait
berǫtъ
beren


Language Family
Hindi
Modern Greek
French
German
Irish
Czech
Persian


I (1st. Sg.)
(maiṃ) bharūṃ
férno
(je) {con}fère
(ich) {ge}bäre
beirim
beru
bordam


You (2nd. Sg.)
(tū) bhare
férnis
(tu) {con}fères
(du) {ge}bärst
beireann (tú)
bereš
bordi


He/She/It (3rd. Sg.)
(vah) bhare
férni
(il) {con}fère
(er) {ge}bärt
beireann (sé/sí)
bere
bordad


We (1st. Pl.)
(ham) bhareṃ
férnoume
(nous) {con}ferons
(wir) {ge}bären
beirimid
berem(e)
bordim


You (2nd. Pl.)
(tum) bharo
férnete
(vous) {con}ferez
(ihr) {ge}bärt
beireann (sibh)
berete
bordid


They (3rd. Pl.)
(ve) bhareṃ
férnoun
(ils) {con}fèrent
(sie) {ge}bären
beireann (siad)
berou
bordan


While similarities are still visible between the modern descendants and relatives of these ancient languages, the differences have increased over time. Some IE languages have moved from synthetic verb systems to largely periphrastic systems. The pronouns of periphrastic forms are in brackets when they appear. Some of these verbs have undergone a change in meaning as well.

In Modern Irish beir usually only carries the meaning to bear in the sense of bearing a child, its common meanings are to catch, grab.
The Hindi verb bharnā, the continuation of the Sanskrit verb, can have a variety of meanings, but the most common is "to fill". The forms given in the table, although etymologically derived from the present indicative, now have the meaning of subjunctive. The present indicative is conjugated periphrastically, using a participle (etymologically the Sanskrit present participle bharant-) and an auxiliary: maiṃ bhartā hūṃ, tū bhartā hai, vah bhartā hai, ham bharte haiṃ, tum bharte ho, ve bharte haiṃ (masculine forms).
German is not directly descended from Gothic, but the Gothic forms are a close approximation of what the early West Germanic forms of c. 400 AD would have looked like. The cognate of Germanic beranan (English bear) survives in German only in the compound gebären, meaning "bear (a child)".
The Latin verb ferre is irregular, and not a good representative of a normal thematic verb. In French, the irregular Latin verb ferre "to carry" has been supplanted by other verbs and ferre only survives in compounds such as souffrir "to suffer" (from Latin sub- and ferre) and conferer "to confer" (from Latin "con-" and "ferre).
In Modern Greek, phero φέρω (modern transliteration fero) "to bear" is still used but only in specific contexts not in everyday language. The form that is (very) common today is pherno φέρνω (modern transliteration ferno) meaning "to bring". Additionally, the perfective form of pherno (used for the subjuctive voice and also for the future tense) is also phero.


[edit] See also

Grammatical conjugation
Indo-European copula
Indo-European sound laws
Indo-European studies
Language family
List of Indo-European languages
Proto-Indo-European language
Proto-Indo-European root
Nostratic languages


[edit] Citations and notes


^ a b c Auroux, Sylvain (2000). History of the Language Sciences. Berlin, New York: Walter de Gruyter. pp. p.1156. ISBN 3110167352. http://books.google.com/books?id=yasNy365EywC&pg=PA1156&vq=stephens+sassetti&dq=3110167352&as_brr=3&sig=nOsHuf3fqPmzmjmGYk1UnvSiFAs. 
^ In London Quarterly Review X/2 1813.; cf. Szemerényi 1999:12, footnote 6
^ In German it's indogermanisch 'Indo-Germanic' which indicates the east-west extension. That term was first recorded in use in French original as indo-germanique, in 1810 by Conrad Malte-Brun, a French geographer of Danish descent.
^ such as Schleicher 1861, Szemerényi 1957, Collinge 1985, and Beekes 1995
^ Of the Albanian Language - William Martin Leake, London, 1814.
^ ANCIENT ALBANIA INHABITED BY ILLYRIANS-Chapter 36 : Turmoil In The Balkans - Romania, Bulgaria, Albania and Greece Part Three - Albania
^ "The Thracian language". The Linguist List. http://linguistlist.org/forms/langs/LLDescription.cfm?code=txh. Retrieved on 2008-01-27.  "An ancient language of Southern Balkans, belonging to the Satem group of Indo-European. This language is the most likely ancestor of modern Albanian (which is also a Satem language), though the evidence is scanty. 1st Millennium BC - 500 AD." 
^ 308 languages according to SIL; more than one billion speakers (see List of languages by number of native speakers). Historically, also in terms of geographical spread (stretching from the Caucasus to South Asia; c.f. Scythia)
^ [1] Perfect Phylogenetic Networks: A New Methodology for Reconstructing the Evolutionary History of Natural Languages - Luay Nakhleh,Don Ringe & Tandy Warnow, 2005, Language- Journal of the Linguistic Society of America, Volume 81, Number 2, June 2005
^ Britannica 15th edition, vol.22, 1981, p.588, 594
^ Frederik Kortlandt-The spread of the Indo-Europeans, 1989,[2]
^ Lubotsky - The Old Phrygian Areyastis-inscription, Kadmos 27, 9-26, 1988
^ Kortlandt - The Thraco-Armenian consonant shift, Linguistique Balkanique 31, 71-74, 1988
^ Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol.22, Helen Hemingway Benton Publisher, Chicago, (15th ed.) 1981, p.593
^ George S. Lane, Douglas Q. Adams, Britannica 15th edition 22:667, "The Tocharian problem"
^ The supposed autochthony of Hittites, the Indo-Hittite hypothesis and migration of agricultural "Indo-European" societies became intrinsically linked together by C. Renfrew. (Renfrew, C 2001a The Anatolian origins of Proto-Indo-European and the autochthony of the Hittites. In R. Drews ed., Greater Anatolia and the Indo-Hittite language. family: 36-63. Washington, DC: Institute for the Study of Man).
^ Britannica 15th edition, 22 p. 586 "Indo-European languages, The parent language, Laryngeal theory" - W.C.; p. 589, 593 "Anatolian languages" - Philo H.J. Houwink ten Cate, H. Craig Melchert and Theo P.J. van den Hout
^ Britannica 15th edition, 22 p. 594, "Indo-Hittite hypothesis"
^ [3] Holm, Hans J.: The Distribution of Data in Word Lists and its Impact on the Subgrouping of Languages. In: Christine Preisach, Hans Burkhardt, Lars Schmidt-Thieme, Reinhold Decker (eds.): Data Analysis, Machine Learning, and Applications. Proc. of the 31st Annual Conference of the German Classification Society (GfKl), University of Freiburg, March 7-9, 2007. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg-Berlin (2008)
^ http://www.utexas.edu/cola/centers/lrc/iedocctr/ie-lg/Balto-Slavic.html



[edit] References

Auroux, Sylvain, History of the Language Sciences, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, 2000 ISBN 3110167352.
Kortlandt, Frederik, 1990, The Spread of the Indo-Europeans, Journal of Indo-European Studies, 18.1-2: 131-140
Lubotsky, A., The Old Phrygian Areyastis-inscription, Kadmos 27, 9-26, 1988
Kortlandt, Frederik , The Thraco-Armenian consonant shift, Linguistique Balkanique 31, 71-74, 1988
Lane, George S., Adams, Douglas Q., The Tocharian problem, Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol.22, Helen Hemingway Benton Publisher, Chicago, (15th ed.) 1981
Renfrew, C., The Anatolian origins of Proto-Indo-European and the autochthony of the Hittites. In R. Drews ed., Greater Anatolia and the Indo-Hittite language family, Institute for the Study of Man, Washington, DC, 2001
Houwink ten Cate, H.J., Melchert, H. Craig and van den Hout, Theo P.J. Indo-European languages, The parent language, Laryngeal theory, Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol.22, Helen Hemingway Benton Publisher, Chicago, (15th ed.) 1981
Holm, Hans J., The Distribution of Data in Word Lists and its Impact on the Subgrouping of Languages, in Christine Preisach, Hans Burkhardt, Lars Schmidt-Thieme, Reinhold Decker (eds.), Data Analysis, Machine Learning, and Applications, Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the German Classification Society (GfKl), University of Freiburg, March 7-9, 2007, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg-Berlin, 2008
Szemerényi, Oswald; David Jones, Irene Jones (1999). Introduction to Indo-European Linguistics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780198238706. 


[edit] Recommended readings

Beekes, Robert S. P. (1995). Comparative Indo-European Linguistics. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. ISBN 90-272-2151-0 (Europe), ISBN 1-55619-505-2 (U.S.). 
Chakrabarti, Byomkes (1994). A comparative study of Santali and Bengali. Calcutta: K.P. Bagchi & Co. ISBN 8170741289
Collinge, N. E. (1985). The Laws of Indo-European. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. ISBN 0-915027-75-5 (U.S.), ISBN 90-272-2102-2 (Europe). 
Mallory, J.P., (1989). In Search of the Indo-Europeans London: Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0-500-27616-1
Renfrew, Colin (1987). Archaeology & Language. The Puzzle of the Indo-European Origins. London: Jonathan Cape. ISBN 0-224-02495-7
Schleicher, August, A Compendium of the Comparative Grammar of the Indo-European Languages (1861/62).
Strazny, Philip (Ed). (2000). Dictionary of Historical and Comparative Linguistics (1 ed.). Routledge. ISBN 978-1579582180. 
Szemerényi, Oswald (1957). "The problem of Balto-Slav unity". Kratylos 2: 97–123. 
Watkins, Calvert (2000). The American Heritage Dictionary of Indo-European Roots. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-618-08250-6. 
Remys, Edmund, General distinguishing features of various Indo-European languages and their relationship to Lithuanian. Berlin, New York: Indogermanische Forschungen, Vol. 112, 2007.


[edit] External links

[edit] Databases

The Indo-European Database(Indo-European Etymological Dictionary (IEED))
IE language family overview (SIL)
Indo-European at the LLOW-database
Indo-European Documentation Center at the University of Texas at Austin
TITUS(English Startpage) Collection of IE scholarly materials
The Indo-European Database A site of joint resource of Indo-European languages, history, archaeology and religion.
The Dyen, Kruskal and Black lexicostatistical database : the 200-meaning Swadesh lists for 95 Indo-European languages.


[edit] Lexica

Indo-European Roots, from the American Heritage Dictionary.
Early Indo-European Loanwords Preserved in Finnish.


[edit] Images

Indo-European family tree, showing Indo-European languages and sub branches
Image of Indo-European migrations from the Armenian Highlands








v • d • e

List of primary demonstrated language families





Africa

Afro-Asiatic · Juu-ǂHoan · Kadu · Khoe · Koman · Mande · Niger-Congo · Nilo-Saharan · Songhay · Tuu · Ubangian. Isolates: Hadza · Sandawe






Eurasia

Abkhaz-Adygean · Afro-Asiatic · Ainu · Austro-Asiatic · Austronesian · Chukotko-Kamchatkan · Dene-Yeniseian · Dravidian · Eskimo-Aleut · Great Andamanese · Hmong-Mien · Hurro-Urartian · Indo-European · Japonic · Kartvelian · Kradai · Mongolic · Nakho-Dagestanian · Ongan · Sino-Tibetan · Tungusic · Turkic · Uralic · Yukaghir. Perhaps also: Altaic · Tyrsenian. Isolates: Basque · Burushaski · Elamite · Kalto · Korean · Kusunda · Nivkh · Sumerian






New Guinea

Amto-Musan · Austronesian · Baining · Bayono-Awbono · Border (Tami) · Central Solomons · East Bird's Head–Sentani · East Geelvink Bay · Eastern Trans-Fly · Fas · Kwomtari · Lakes Plain · Left May · Mairasi · Nimboran · North Bougainville · Piawi · Ramu–Lower Sepik · Senagi · Sepik · Skou · South Bougainville · South-Central Papuan · Tor-Kwerba · Torricelli · Trans–New Guinea · West Papuan · Yawa · Yuat. Perhaps also: Yele–West New Britain. Isolates: Abinomn · Busa · Isirawa · Kol · Kuot · Pyu · Taiap · Yalë · Yuri · and maybe Sulka






Australia

Bunuban · Burarran · Daly · Giimbiyu (Mangerrian) · Gunwinyguan · Iwaidjan · Jarrakan · Limilngan · Mirndi · Nyulnyulan · Pama-Nyungan · Tankic · Tasmanian · Worrorran. Isolates: Enindhilyagwa · Gaagudju · Laragiya · Ngurmbur · Tiwi · Umbugarla






North America

Algic · Alsean · Caddoan · Chimakuan · Chinookan · Chumashan · Comecrudan · Coosan · Dene-Yeniseian · Eskimo-Aleut · Iroquoian · Kalapuyan · Keresan · Kiowa-Tanoan · Maiduan · Muskogean · Palaihnihan · Plateau Penutian · Pomoan · Salishan · Shastan · Siouan-Catawban · Tsimshianic · Utian · Uto-Aztecan · Wakashan · Wintuan · Yokutsan · Yuman-Cochimí. Perhaps also: Yuki-Wappo. Isolates: Chimariko · Haida · Karuk · Kutenai · Siuslaw · Takelma · Timucua · Washo · Yana · Yuchi · Zuni






Mesoamerica

Mayan · Misumalpan · Mixe-Zoque · Oto-Manguean · Tarascan · Tequistlatecan · Tolan · Totonacan · Uto-Aztecan. Isolates: Cuitlatec · Huave · Lenca · Seri · Xinca






South America

Alacalufan · Arauan · Araucanian · Arutani-Sape · Aymaran · Barbacoan · Bororoan · Cahuapanan · Cariban · Catacaoan · Chapacuran (or Wamo-Chapakura) · Charruan · Chibchan · Chimuan · Choco · Chon · Guaicuruan · Guajiboan · Gê (Je) · Harakmbut · Jirajaran · Jivaroan · Kariri · Katembri-Taruma · Katukinan · Maipurean (Arawakan) · Mascoian · Matacoan · Maxakalian · Muran · Nambikwaran · Otomako-Taparita · Pano-Tacanan · Peba-Yaguan · Puinavean (Makú) · Purian · Quechuan · Saliban · Tucanoan · Tupian · Uru-Chipaya · Witotoan · Yabutian · Yanomaman · Zamucoan · Zaparoan. Perhaps also: Esmerelda-Yaruro · Hibito-Cholón · Lule-Vilela · Macro-Gê · Tequiraca-Canichana. Isolates extant in 2000: Aikana? · Andoque? · Camsa · Canichana · Cofan? · Huaorani · Irantxe? · Itonama · Joti · Movima · Taushiro · Tequiraca (Abishiri) · Ticuna · Trumai · Warao · Yamana · Yuracare






See also

language isolates · unclassified languages · creoles · pidgins · mixed languages · artificial languages · sign languages ·









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indo-European_languages"
Categories: Indo-European languages | Language families | Indo-EuropeanHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2008 | Cleanup from October 2007 | Wikipedia articles needing style editing from October 2007 | All articles needing style editing | Articles needing additional references from July 2008 | Articles containing French language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
贛語
한국어
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Kernewek
Кыргызча
Kiswahili
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lojban
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
日本語
Nnapulitano
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Piemontèis
Tok Pisin
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Ripoarisch
Română
Romani
Runa Simi
Русский
Sámegiella
Scots
Shqip
සිංහල
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
ᏣᎳᎩ
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Tiếng Việt
West-Vlams
粵語
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 13 April 2009, at 13:29 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
