













John Coltrane - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "John_Coltrane";
		var wgTitle = "John Coltrane";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "53536";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281682712;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 


wgOggPlayer.msg = {"ogg-play": "Play", "ogg-pause": "Pause", "ogg-stop": "Stop", "ogg-no-player": "Sorry, your system does not appear to have any supported player software.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload a player\x3c/a\x3e.", "ogg-player-videoElement": "Native browser support", "ogg-player-oggPlugin": "Browser plugin", "ogg-player-cortado": "Cortado (Java)", "ogg-player-vlc-mozilla": "VLC", "ogg-player-vlc-activex": "VLC (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-quicktime-mozilla": "QuickTime", "ogg-player-quicktime-activex": "QuickTime (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-totem": "Totem", "ogg-player-kaffeine": "Kaffeine", "ogg-player-kmplayer": "KMPlayer", "ogg-player-mplayerplug-in": "mplayerplug-in", "ogg-player-thumbnail": "Still image only", "ogg-player-selected": "(selected)", "ogg-use-player": "Use player:", "ogg-more": "More…", "ogg-download": "Download file", "ogg-desc-link": "About this file", "ogg-dismiss": "Close", "ogg-player-soundthumb": "No player", "ogg-no-xiphqt": "You do not appear to have the XiphQT component for QuickTime.\nQuickTime cannot play Ogg files without this component.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload XiphQT\x3c/a\x3e or choose another player."};
wgOggPlayer.cortadoUrl = "http://upload.wikimedia.org/jars/cortado.jar";
wgOggPlayer.extPathUrl = "/w/extensions/OggHandler";


.ogg-player-options {
	border: solid 1px #ccc;
	padding: 2pt;
	text-align: left;
	font-size: 10pt;
}
 <!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); John Coltrane

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"Coltrane" redirects here. For other uses, see Coltrane (disambiguation).


John Coltrane



John Coltrane in 1960



Background information


Birth name
John William Coltrane


Also known as
"Trane"


Born
September 23, 1926(1926-09-23)


Origin
Hamlet, North Carolina,
United States


Died
July 17, 1967 (aged 40) Huntington, New York,
United States


Genre(s)
Jazz, avant-jazz, bebop, hard bop, post bop, modal, free jazz


Occupation(s)
Saxophonist, composer, bandleader


Instrument(s)
Tenor saxophone, soprano saxophone, alto saxophone, flute, bass clarinet


Years active
1946–1967


Label(s)
Prestige, Blue Note, Atlantic, Impulse!


Associated acts
Miles Davis Quintet, John Coltrane Quartet, John Coltrane Quintet


Website
www.johncoltrane.com


John William Coltrane (September 23, 1926 – July 17, 1967)[1] was an American jazz saxophonist and composer.
Starting in bebop and hard bop, Coltrane later pioneered free jazz. He influenced generations of other musicians, and remains one of the most significant tenor saxophonists in jazz history. He was astonishingly prolific: he made about fifty recordings as a leader in his twelve-year-long recording career, and appeared as a sideman on many other albums, notably with trumpeter Miles Davis. As his career progressed, Coltrane's music took on an increasingly spiritual dimension. His second wife was pianist Alice Coltrane, and their son Ravi Coltrane is also a saxophonist.
He received a posthumous Special Citation from the Pulitzer Prize Board in 2007 for his "masterful improvisation, supreme musicianship and iconic centrality to the history of jazz."




Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Early life and career (1926–1954)
1.2 Miles and Monk period (1955–1957)
1.3 Davis and Coltrane again
1.4 First albums as leader
1.5 The first years with Impulse Records (1960-1962)
1.6 Classic Quartet period (1962–1965)
1.7 Avant-garde jazz and the second quartet (1965–1967)
1.8 Adding to the quartet
1.9 Death (1967)


2 Instruments
3 Religious beliefs
4 Legacy
5 Discography

5.1 Prestige and Blue Note Records
5.2 Atlantic Records
5.3 Impulse! Records


6 References
7 Sources
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography

[edit] Early life and career (1926–1954)
John Coltrane was born in Hamlet, North Carolina on September 23, 1926, grew up in High Point NC, and moved to Philadelphia PA in June 1943. He enlisted in the Navy in 1945, and played in the Navy jazz band. Coltrane returned to civilian life in 1946 and began jazz theory studies with Philadelphia guitarist and composer Dennis Sandole. Coltrane continued under Sandole's tutelage until the early 1950s. Contemporary correspondence shows that Coltrane was already known as "Trane" by this point, and that the music from some 1946 recording sessions had been played for Miles Davis — possibly impressing the latter.[1]
John Coltrane went to Penn Griffin School for the Arts in High Point, NC.
An important moment in the progression of Coltrane's musical development occurred on June 5th, 1945, when he saw Charlie Parker perform for the first time. In "Coltrane on Coltrane" he recounted: "the first time I heard Bird play, it hit me right between the eyes."[2] Parker became an early idol of his, and they played together on occasion in the late 1940s.
Although there are recordings of Coltrane from as early as 1945, his peers at the time did not recognize 'genius' in the young musician, though he was a member of groups led by Dizzy Gillespie, Earl Bostic and Johnny Hodges in the early- to mid-1950s.
His main career spanned the twelve years between 1955 and 1967, during which time he reshaped modern jazz and influenced generations of other musicians.[1]

[edit] Miles and Monk period (1955–1957)
Coltrane was freelancing in Philadelphia in the summer of 1955 while studying with guitarist Dennis Sandole when he received a call from trumpeter Miles Davis. Davis, whose success during the late forties had been followed by several years of decline in activity and reputation, due in part to his struggles with narcotics addiction, was again active, and was about to form a quintet. Coltrane was with this edition of the Davis band (known as the "First Great Quintet" to distinguish it from Davis's later group with Wayne Shorter) from October 1955 through April 1957 (with a few absences), a period during which Davis released several influential recordings which revealed the first signs of Coltrane's growing ability. This classic First Quintet, best represented by two marathon recording sessions for Prestige in 1956 that resulted in the albums issued as "Cookin'", "Relaxin'", "Workin'", and "Steamin'", some of the most treasured titles in Davis' early discography, disbanded in mid-April due partially to Coltrane's problematic heroin addiction.[1]
During the later part of 1957 Coltrane worked with Thelonious Monk at New York’s Five Spot, a legendary jazz club, and played in Monk's quartet (July-December 1957), but owing to contractual conflicts took part in only one official studio recording session with this group. A number of "live" recordings from the Five Spot, most of them deriving from tapes made by audience members (and therefore of relatively poor audio quality) have surfaced over the years, and some have been issued by record companies, including "Live at the Five Spot--Discovery!" issued by Blue Note Records in 1993. Astonishingly, a high-quality tape of a concert given by this legendary quartet in November 1957 surfaced more than 40 years later, and in 2005 Blue Note was able to make it commercially available. Recorded by Voice of America, the performances are extraordinary, confirming this group's lofty reputation, and the resulting album, Thelonious Monk Quartet with John Coltrane at Carnegie Hall has been widely acclaimed.
Blue Train, Coltrane's sole date as leader for Blue Note, featuring trumpeter Lee Morgan, bassist Paul Chambers, and trombonist Curtis Fuller, is widely considered his best album from this period. Four of its five tracks are original Coltrane compositions, and several of them, notably the title track, "Moment's Notice" and "Lazy Bird", have gone on to become standards. Both tunes employed the first examples of Coltrane's chord substitution cycles known as Coltrane changes.[1]

[edit] Davis and Coltrane again
Coltrane rejoined Davis in January 1958. In October 1958, jazz critic Ira Gitler coined the term "sheets of sound" to describe the unique style Coltrane developed during his stint with Monk and was perfecting in Miles' group, now a sextet. His playing was compressed, with rapid runs cascading in hundreds of notes per minute. He stayed with Davis until April 1960, working with, in due course, alto saxophonist Cannonball Adderley; pianists Red Garland, Bill Evans, and Wynton Kelly; bassist Paul Chambers; and drummers Philly Joe Jones and Jimmy Cobb. During this time he participated in the aforementioned Davis sessions Milestones and Kind of Blue, and the live recordings, Miles & Monk at Newport and Jazz at the Plaza.[1]













"Giant Steps"









One of Coltrane's most acclaimed recordings, "Giant Steps" features harmonic structures more complex than were used by most musicians of the time.









Problems listening to this file? See media help.





Toward the end of this period Coltrane recorded his first album comprising exclusively his own compositions, Giant Steps (for Atlantic Records). The album's title track is generally considered to have the most complex and difficult chord progression of any widely-played jazz composition. Giant Steps utilizes Coltrane changes, a concept developed initially on Blue Train and featured most notably on the song "Moment's Notice". His development of these altered chord progression cycles led to further experimentation with improvised melody and harmony that he would continue throughout his career.[1]

[edit] First albums as leader
Coltrane formed his first group, a quartet, in 1960. After moving through different personnel including Steve Kuhn, Pete LaRoca, and Billy Higgins, the lineup stabilized in the fall with pianist McCoy Tyner, bassist Steve Davis, and drummer Elvin Jones. Tyner, from Philadelphia, had been a friend of Coltrane's for some years and the two men long had an understanding that the pianist would join Coltrane when Tyner felt ready for the exposure of regularly working with him. Also recorded in the same sessions were the later released albums Coltrane's Sound and Coltrane Plays the Blues.
Still with Atlantic Records, for whom he had recorded Giant Steps, his first record with his new group was also his debut playing the soprano saxophone, the hugely successful My Favorite Things. Around the end of his tenure with Davis, Coltrane had begun playing soprano saxophone, an unconventional move considering the instrument's near obsolescence in jazz at the time. His interest in the straight saxophone most likely arose from his admiration for Sidney Bechet and the work of his contemporary, Steve Lacy, even though Miles Davis claimed to have given Coltrane his first soprano saxophone. The new soprano sound was coupled with further exploration. For example, on the Gershwin tune "But Not for Me", Coltrane employs the kinds of restless harmonic movement (Coltrane changes) used on Giant Steps (movement in major thirds rather than conventional perfect fourths) over the A sections instead of a conventional turnaround progression. Several other tracks recorded in the session utilized this harmonic device, including "26-2," "Satellite," "Body and Soul," and "The Night Has a Thousand Eyes."

[edit] The first years with Impulse Records (1960-1962)




Coltrane and wife Alice, 1962


Shortly before completing his contract with Atlantic in May 1961 (with the album Olé Coltrane although Atlantic would continue to release recordings from their vaults for many years), Coltrane joined the newly formed Impulse! Records label, with whom the "Classic Quartet" would record. It is generally assumed that the clinching reason Coltrane signed with Impulse! was that it would enable him to work again with recording engineer Rudy Van Gelder, who had taped both his and Davis's Prestige sessions, as well as Blue Train. It was at Van Gelder's new studio in Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey that Coltrane would record most of his records for the label.
By early 1961, bassist Davis had been replaced by Reggie Workman while Eric Dolphy joined the group as a second horn around the same time. The quintet had a celebrated (and extensively recorded) residency in November 1961 at the Village Vanguard, which demonstrated Coltrane's new direction. It featured the most experimental music he'd played up to this point, influenced by Indian ragas, the recent developments in modal jazz, and the burgeoning free jazz movement. Longtime Sun Ra saxophonist John Gilmore was particularly influential; the most celebrated of the Vanguard tunes, the 15-minute blues, "Chasin' the 'Trane", was strongly inspired by Gilmore's music.
During this period, critics were fiercely divided in their estimation of Coltrane, who had radically altered his style. Audiences, too, were perplexed; in France he was famously booed during his final tour with Davis. In 1961, Down Beat magazine indicted Coltrane, along with Eric Dolphy, as players of "Anti-Jazz" in an article that bewildered and upset the musicians. Coltrane admitted some of his early solos were based mostly on technical ideas. Furthermore, Dolphy's angular, voice-like playing earned him a reputation as a figurehead of the "New Thing" (also known as "Free Jazz" and "Avant-Garde") movement led by Ornette Coleman, which was also denigrated by some jazz musicians (including Trane's old boss, Miles Davis) and critics. But as Coltrane's style further developed, he was determined to make each performance "a whole expression of one's being", as he would call his music in a 1966 interview.

[edit] Classic Quartet period (1962–1965)













"In a Sentimental Mood"









The romantic ballad features Coltrane with pianist Duke Ellington.






"Soul Eyes"









Coltrane's classic quartet covers the somber Mal Waldron composition.









Problems listening to these files? See media help.





In 1962, Dolphy departed and Jimmy Garrison replaced Workman as bassist. From then on, the "Classic Quartet", as it would come to be known, with Tyner, Garrison, and Jones, produced searching, spiritually driven work. Coltrane was moving toward a more harmonically static style that allowed him to expand his improvisations rhythmically, melodically, and motivically. Harmonically complex music was still present, but on stage Coltrane heavily favored continually reworking his "standards": "Impressions", "My Favorite Things", and "I Want to Talk about You."
The criticism of the quintet with Dolphy may have had an impact on Coltrane. In contrast to the radicalism of Trane's 1961 recordings at the Village Vanguard, his studio albums in 1962 and 1963 (with the exception of Coltrane, which featured a blistering version of Harold Arlen's "Out of This World") were much more conservative and accessible. He recorded an album of ballads and participated in collaborations with Duke Ellington on the album Duke Ellington and John Coltrane and with deep-voiced ballad singer Johnny Hartman on the album John Coltrane and Johnny Hartman. The Impulse compilation Coltrane for Lovers is largely drawn from these three albums. The album Ballads is emblematic of Coltrane's versatility, as the quartet shed new light on old-fashioned standards such as "It's Easy to Remember." Despite a more polished approach in the studio, in concert the quartet continued to balance "standard" and its own more exploratory and challenging music, as can be seen on the Impressions album (two extended jams including the title track along with "Dear Old Stockholm", "After the Rain" and a blues), Coltrane at Newport (where he plays "My Favorite Things") and Live at Birdland both from 1963. Coltrane later said he enjoyed having a "balanced catalogue."
The Classic Quartet produced their most famous record, A Love Supreme, in December 1964. A culmination of much of Coltrane's work up to this period, this four-part suite is an ode to his faith in and love for God (not necessarily God in the Christian sense — in the liner notes of Meditations he says "I believe in all religions"). These spiritual concerns would characterize much of Coltrane's composing and playing from this point onwards, as can be seen from album titles such as Ascension, Om and Meditations. The fourth movement of A Love Supreme, "Psalm", is, in fact, a musical setting for an original poem to God written by Coltrane, and printed in the album's liner notes. Coltrane plays almost exactly one note for each syllable of the poem, and bases his phrasing on the words. Despite its challenging musical content, the album was a commercial success by jazz standards, encapsulating both the internal and external energy of the quartet of Coltrane, Tyner, Jones and Garrison. Indeed the previous album Crescent recorded only a few months before already shows the adventurousness and rapport between these musicians. The album was composed at Coltrane's home in the Dix Hills neighborhood of Huntington, New York.
The quartet only played A Love Supreme live once — in July 1965 at a concert in Antibes, France. By then, Coltrane's music had grown even more adventurous, and the performance provides an interesting contrast to the original.

[edit] Avant-garde jazz and the second quartet (1965–1967)
In his late period, Coltrane showed an increasing interest in avant-garde jazz, purveyed by Ornette Coleman, Albert Ayler, Sun Ra and others. In developing his late style, Coltrane was especially influenced by the dissonance of Ayler's trio with bassist Gary Peacock and drummer Sunny Murray, a rhythm section honed with Cecil Taylor as leader. Coltrane championed many younger free jazz musicians, (notably Archie Shepp), and under his influence Impulse! became a leading free jazz record label.
After A Love Supreme was recorded, Ayler's apocalyptic style became more prominent in Coltrane's music. A series of recordings with the Classic Quartet in the first half of 1965 show Coltrane's playing becoming increasingly abstract, with greater incorporation of devices like multiphonics, utilization of overtones, and playing in the altissimo register, as well as a mutated return to Coltrane's sheets of sound. In the studio, he all but abandoned his soprano to concentrate on the tenor saxophone. In addition, the quartet responded to the leader by playing with increasing freedom. The group's evolution can be traced through the recordings The John Coltrane Quartet Plays, Living Space, Transition (both June 1965), New Thing at Newport (July 1965), Sun Ship (August 1965), and First Meditations (September 1965).
In June 1965, he went into Van Gelder's studio with ten other musicians (including Shepp, Pharoah Sanders, Freddie Hubbard, Marion Brown, and John Tchicai) to record Ascension, a 40-minute long piece that included adventurous solos by the young avant-garde musicians (as well as Coltrane), and was controversial primarily for the collective improvisation sections that separated the solos. After recording with the quartet over the next few months, Coltrane invited Pharoah Sanders to join the band in September 1965.
By any measure, Sanders was one of the most abrasive, virtuosic saxophonists then playing. While Coltrane used over-blowing frequently as an emotional exclamation-point, Sanders would opt to overblow his entire solo, resulting in a constant screaming and screeching in the altissimo range of the instrument. The more Coltrane played with Sanders, the more he gravitated to Sanders' unique sound. John Gilmore was also a major influence on Coltrane's late-period music, as well. After hearing a Gilmore performance, Coltrane is reported to have said "He's got it! Gilmore's got the concept!"[3] He also took informal lessons from Gilmore.

[edit] Adding to the quartet
By late 1965, Coltrane was regularly augmenting his group with Sanders and other free jazz musicians. Rashied Ali joined the group as a second drummer. This was the end of the quartet; claiming he was unable to hear himself over the two drummers, Tyner left the band shortly after the recording of Meditations. Jones left in early 1966, dissatisfied by sharing drumming duties with Ali. Both Tyner and Jones subsequently expressed displeasure in interviews, after Coltrane's death, with the music's new direction, while incorporating some of the free-jazz form's intensity into their own solo projects.
In 1965 Coltrane may have begun using LSD[4] - informing the sublime, "cosmic" transcendence of his late period, and also its incomprehensibility to many listeners. After Jones and Tyner's departures, Coltrane led a quintet with Pharoah Sanders on tenor saxophone, his new wife Alice Coltrane on piano, Jimmy Garrison on bass, and Rashied Ali on drums. Coltrane and Sanders were described by Nat Hentoff as "speaking in tongues." When touring, the group was known for playing very lengthy versions of their repertoire, with many stretching beyond 30 minutes and sometimes even being an hour long. Concert solos for band members regularly extended beyond fifteen minutes in duration.
Despite the radicalism of the horns, the rhythm section with Ali and Alice Coltrane had a more relaxed, random but meditative feel than with Jones and Tyner. The group can be heard on several live recordings from 1966, including Live at the Village Vanguard Again! and Live in Japan. In 1967, Coltrane entered the studio several times; though pieces with Sanders have surfaced (the unusual "To Be", which features both men on flutes), most of the recordings were either with the quartet minus Sanders (Expression and Stellar Regions) or as a duo with Ali. The latter duo produced six performances which appear on the album Interstellar Space.

[edit] Death (1967)
Coltrane died from liver cancer at Huntington Hospital in Long Island, NY on July 17, 1967, at the age of 40. Biographer Lewis Porter has suggested, somewhat controversially, that the cause of Coltrane's illness was hepatitis, although he also attributed the disease to Coltrane's heroin use.[page number needed] In a 1968 interview Albert Ayler claimed that Coltrane was consulting a Hindu meditative healer for his illness instead of Western medicine, though Alice Coltrane later denied this.
The Coltrane family reportedly remains in possession of much more as-yet-unreleased music, mostly mono reference tapes made for the saxophonist and, as with the 1995 release Stellar Regions, master tapes that were checked out of the studio and never returned. The parent company of Impulse!, from 1965 to 1979 known as ABC Records, purged much of its unreleased material in the 1970s.[5] Lewis Porter has stated that Alice Coltrane, who died in 2007, intended to release this music, but over a long period of time, as her son Ravi Coltrane, responsible for reviewing the material, is also pursuing his own career.

[edit] Instruments
Coltrane played clarinet and the alto horn, a brass instrument, in a community band before taking up alto saxophone during high school. In 1947, when he joined King Kolax's band, Coltrane switched to tenor saxophone, the instrument he became known for playing primarily.[1]
In the early 1960s, during his engagement with Atlantic Records, he increasingly played soprano saxophone as well. While with Miles Davis' band, he had been inspired by Steve Lacy and purchased his own soprano in February 1960. The cover of his album My Favorite Things features Coltrane playing soprano.[1]

[edit] Religious beliefs
Coltrane was born and raised a Christian, and was in touch with religion and spirituality from childhood. As a youth, he practiced music in a southern African-American church. In A Night in Tunisia: Imaginings of Africa in Jazz, Norman Weinstein notes the parallel between Coltrane's music and his experience in the southern church.
In 1957 Coltrane began to shift spiritual directions. Two years earlier, he had married Juanita Naima Grubb, a Muslim convert, (for whom he later wrote the piece "Naima"), and came into contact with Islam, an experience that may have led him to overcome his addictions to alcohol and heroin[citation needed].
Coltrane also explored Hinduism, the Kabbala, Jiddu Krishnamurti, yoga, math[citation needed], science, astrology, African history, and even Plato and Aristotle.[6] In the liner notes of his album "A Love Supreme" Coltrane states "[d]uring the year 1957, I experienced, by the grace of God, a spiritual awakening which was to lead me to a richer, fuller, more productive life. At that time, in gratitude, I humbly asked to be given the means and privilege to make others happy through music." In his 1965 album Meditations, Coltrane wrote about uplifting people, "...To inspire them to realize more and more of their capacities for living meaningful lives. Because there certainly is meaning to life."[7]
Moustafa Bayoumi, an associate professor of English at Brooklyn College, City University of New York, argues that Coltrane's "A Love Supreme" features Coltrane chanting, "Allah Supreme."[8] One need only listen to the album, however, to hear the "v" consonant sound in "love" quite clearly.
In October 1965, Coltrane recorded Om, referring to the sacred syllable in Hinduism, which symbolizes the infinite or the entire Universe. Coltrane described Om as the "first syllable, the primal word, the word of power". The 29-minute recording contains chants from the Bhagavad-Gita, a Hindu epic. A 1966 recording, issued posthumously, has Coltrane and Pharoah Sanders chanting from a Buddhist text, The Tibetan Book of the Dead, and reciting a passage describing the primal verbalization "om" as a cosmic/spiritual common denominator in all things.
Coltrane's spiritual journey was interwoven with his investigation into world music. He believed not only in a universal musical structure which transcended ethnic distinctions, but in being able to harness the mystical language of music itself. Coltrane's study of Indian music led him to believe that certain sounds and scales could "produce specific emotional meanings." According to Coltrane, the goal of a musician was to understand these forces, control them, and elicit a response from the audience. Coltrane said: "I would like to bring to people something like happiness. I would like to discover a method so that if I want it to rain, it will start right away to rain. If one of my friends is ill, I'd like to play a certain song and he will be cured; when he'd be broke, I'd bring out a different song and immediately he'd receive all the money he needed."[9]

[edit] Legacy




Statue of Coltrane in High Point, North Carolina, where he lived from the age of 3 months until he was 17.


Although some jazz listeners still consider the late Coltrane albums to contain little more than cacophony, many of these late recordings — among them Ascension, Meditations and the posthumous Interstellar Space are widely considered masterpieces.
The music of Coltrane's modal and Village Vanguard period was the admitted principal influence on what was arguably the first jazz-rock fusion recording, the Byrds' "Eight Miles High" (December 1965). Some of Coltrane's other innovations would be incorporated into the fusion movement, but with diminishing returns of spiritual fervency and earnestness.
The influence Coltrane has had on music spans many different genres and musicians. Coltrane's massive influence on jazz, both mainstream and avant-garde, began during his lifetime and continued to grow after his death. He is one of the most dominant influences on post-1960 jazz saxophonists and has inspired an entire generation of jazz musicians. In 1965, he was inducted into the Down Beat Jazz Hall of Fame, and was posthumously awarded the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 1992.
His widow, Alice Coltrane, after several decades of seclusion, briefly regained a public profile before her death in 2007. Coltrane's son, Ravi Coltrane, named after the great Indian sitarist Ravi Shankar, whom Coltrane greatly admired, has followed in his father's footsteps and is a prominent contemporary saxophonist.
The Saint John Coltrane African Orthodox Church, an African Orthodox Church in San Francisco, has claimed Coltrane as a saint since 1971.[10] Their services incorporate Coltrane's music, using his lyrics as prayers.[11] A documentary on Coltrane, featuring the church, was produced for the BBC in 2004 and is presented by Alan Yentob.[12]
His former home John Coltrane House in Philadelphia was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1999.
In 2002, scholar Molefi Kete Asante listed John Coltrane on his list of 100 Greatest African Americans.[13]
Coltrane's tenor (Selmer Mark VI, serial number 125571, dated 1965) and soprano (Selmer Mark VI, serial number 99626, dated 1962) saxophones were auctioned on February 20th 2005 to raise money for the John Coltrane Foundation. The soprano raised $70,800 but the tenor remained unsold.[1]

[edit] Discography
Main article: John Coltrane discography
Discography below lists albums conceived and approved by Coltrane as a leader during his lifetime. It does not include his many releases as a sideman, sessions assembled into albums by various record labels after Coltrane's contract expired, sessions with Coltrane as a sideman later reissued with his name featured more prominently, or posthumous compilations. See main discography link above for full list.

[edit] Prestige and Blue Note Records

Coltrane (debut solo LP) (1957)
Blue Train (1957)
John Coltrane with The Red Garland Trio (1958)
Soultrane (1958)


[edit] Atlantic Records

Giant Steps (first album entirely of Coltrane compositions) (1960)
Coltrane Jazz (first appearance by McCoy Tyner and Elvin Jones) (1961)
My Favorite Things (1961)
Olé Coltrane (features Eric Dolphy, compositions by Coltrane and Tyner) (1962)


[edit] Impulse! Records

Africa/Brass (brass arranged by Tyner and Dolphy) (1961)
Live! at the Village Vanguard (features Dolphy, first appearance by Jimmy Garrison) (1962)
Coltrane (first album to solely feature the "classic quartet") (1962)
Duke Ellington & John Coltrane (1963)
Ballads (1963)
John Coltrane and Johnny Hartman (1963)
Impressions (1963)
Live at Birdland (1964)
Crescent (1964)
A Love Supreme (1965)
The John Coltrane Quartet Plays (1965)
New Thing at Newport (live with Archie Shepp) (1965)
Ascension (eleven-piece free improvisation) (1965)
Meditations (quartet plus Pharoah Sanders and Rashied Ali) (1966)
Live at the Village Vanguard Again! (featuring Alice Coltrane, as well as Sanders and Ali) (1966)
Expression (final Coltrane-approved release; one track features Coltrane on flute) (1967)


[edit] References


^ a b c d e f g h i allmusic Biography
^ John Coltrane by Lewis Porter. University of Michigan Press: 1999. ISBN 047208643X
^ Corbett, John. "John Gilmore: The Hard Bop Homepage". Eric B. Olsen. Down Beat. http://members.tripod.com/~hardbop/gilmore.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-08. 
^ Porter 1998, pp. 265-266.
^ "ABC-Paramount Records Story", by David Edwards, Patrice Eyries, and Mike Callahan, Both Sides Now website, retrieved January 29, 2007.
^ Emmett G. Price III. "John Coltrane, "A Love Supreme" and GOD". allaboutjazz.com. http://www.allaboutjazz.com/coltrane/article_003.htm. Retrieved on 2008-10-09. 
^ Scott Anderson (Spring 1996). "John Coltrane, Avant Garde Jazz, and the Evolution of My Favorite Things". room34.com. http://room34.com/coltrane/thesis. Retrieved on 2008-10-09. 
^ Jonathan Curiel (2004-08-15). "Muslim roots of the blues: The music of famous American blues singers reaches back through the South to the culture of West Africa". San Francisco Chronicle. http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2004/08/15/INGMC85SSK1.DTL. Retrieved on 2008-10-09. 
^ Porter 1998, p. 211
^ Saint John Coltrane African Orthodox Church web site
^ Article "The Jazz Church" by Gordon Polatnick at www.elvispelvis.com
^ 2004 BBC documentary on the Saint John Coltrane African Orthodox Church at www.diverse.tv
^ Asante, Molefi Kete (2002). 100 Greatest African Americans: A Biographical Encyclopedia. Amherst, New York. Prometheus Books. ISBN 1-57392-963-8.



[edit] Sources

Kahn, Ashley (2003). A Love Supreme: The Story of John Coltrane's Signature Album. Elvin Jones. Penguin Books. ISBN 0142003522. 
Lavezzoli, Peter (2006). The Dawn of Indian Music in the West. Continuum International Publishing Group. ISBN 0826418155. 
Nisenson, Eric (1995). Ascension: John Coltrane and His Quest. Da Capo Press. ISBN 0306806444. 
Porter, Lewis (1999). John Coltrane: His Life and Music. University of Michigan Press. ISBN 047208643X. 
Ratliff, Ben (2007). Coltrane: The Story of a Sound. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux. ISBN 0-374-12606-2. 
Simpkins, Cuthbert (1989). Coltrane: A Biography. New York: Herndon House Publishers. ISBN 0-915-54282-X. 
Thomas, J.C. (1975). Chasin' the Trane. New York: Da Capo. ISBN 0-306-80043-8. 
Woideck, Carl (1998). The John Coltrane Companion. New York: Schirmer Books. ISBN 0-02-864790-4. 


[edit] External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: John Coltrane





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: John Coltrane 



Official Website
John Coltrane at Music City
John Coltrane Sessionography
1957 Carnegie Hall Performance in Transcription and Analysis
Saving the Coltrane Home in Dix Hills, NY
John Coltrane at Find A Grave Retrieved on 2008-03-31
Infography about John Coltrane
"Joe Lovano Selects Essential John Coltrane Tracks", edited by Ted Panken, (Jazz.com)
John Coltrane Multimedia Directory - Kerouac Alley
John Coltrane, Avant Garde Jazz and the Evolution of "My Favorite Things" academic thesis
SoundUnwound timeline






This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links.









v • d • e

John Coltrane





Studio albums

Coltrane · Dakar · Mal-2 · Interplay · The Cats · A Blowin' Session · Cattin' with Coltrane and Quinichette · Traneing In · Coltrane Time · The Dealers · Wheelin' and Dealin' · The Believer · Black Pearls · Bahia · Kenny Burrell and John Coltrane · The Last Trane · Lush Life · Blue Train · Soultrane · Standard Coltrane · Stardust · Settin' the Pace · Trane's Blues · Bags & Trane · Like Sonny · Giant Steps · Coltrane's Sound · The Avant-Garde · My Favorite Things · Coltrane Jazz · Coltrane Plays the Blues · Africa/Brass · Olé Coltrane · Ballads · Coltrane · Duke Ellington & John Coltrane · John Coltrane and Johnny Hartman · Impressions · To the Beat of a Different Drum · Crescent · A Love Supreme · The John Coltrane Quartet Plays · Gleanings · Transition · First Meditations · Ascension · Kulu Sé Mama · Sun Ship · Living Space · Om · Meditations · Cosmic Music · Stellar Regions · Interstellar Space · Expression






Live albums

Live! at the Village Vanguard · Live in Stockholm 1961 · The Complete Copenhagen Concert · The Complete Paris Concerts · The Complete 1962 Stockholm Concert · The Complete Graz Concert · Bye Bye Blackbird · Live at Birdland 1962 · The European Tour · Afro-Blue Impressions · Live in Stockholm 1963 · Newport '63 · The Paris Concert · Live at Birdland · Brazilia · Live at the Half Note: One Down, One Up · Live in Seattle · Creation · New Thing at Newport · Live in Paris · Live in Antibes · Live at the Village Vanguard Again! · Live in Japan · The Olatunji Concert: The Last Live Recording






Compilations

The Complete Columbia Recordings of Miles Davis with John Coltrane · The Complete Prestige Recordings · The Heavyweight Champion: The Complete Atlantic Recordings · The Classic Quartet: The Complete Impulse! Recordings · Ken Burns Jazz: John Coltrane · The Last Giant: Anthology · Coltrane for Lovers






With Miles Davis

Miles: The New Miles Davis Quintet · Basic Miles · 'Round About Midnight · Workin' with The Miles Davis Quintet · Steamin' with The Miles Davis Quintet · Relaxin' with The Miles Davis Quintet · Cookin' with The Miles Davis Quintet · Miles Davis and the Modern Jazz Giants · Miles Davis Quintet at Peacock Alley · Milestones · 1958 Miles · Miles & Monk at Newport · Kind of Blue · Someday My Prince Will Come






Other Albums

Whims Of Chambers · Mating Call · Monk's Music · Thelonious Monk with John Coltrane · The Complete 1957 Riverside Recordings · Thelonious Monk Quartet with John Coltrane at Carnegie Hall · Hard Driving Jazz · High Step · Informal Jazz · Mating Call · Winner's Circle · Tenor Conclave · Countdown: The Savoy Sessions · Dial Africa: The Savoy Sessions · Gold Coast · Jazz Way Out · Tanganyika Strut · Mainstream 1958 · Kenny Burrell and John Coltrane · Infinity · Tenor Madness






Compositions

"Giant Steps" · "Ogunde" · "Impressions" · "Naima" · "Lazy Bird"






Related

Ravi Coltrane · Dix Hills home · Philadelphia house · "Sheets of sound" · 5893 Coltrane · John W. Coltrane Cultural Society






Discography · Category







Persondata


NAME
Coltrane, John William


ALTERNATIVE NAMES



SHORT DESCRIPTION
Jazz saxophonist


DATE OF BIRTH
September 23, 1926


PLACE OF BIRTH
Hamlet, North Carolina


DATE OF DEATH
July 17, 1967, liver cancer


PLACE OF DEATH
Long Island, New York







Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Coltrane"
Categories: 1926 births | 1967 deaths | Avant-garde saxophonists | Hard-bop saxophonists | Post-bop saxophonists | Free jazz saxophonists | Modal jazz saxophonists | Bebop saxophonists | African American musicians | American jazz saxophonists | American jazz composers | American jazz bandleaders | American jazz tenor saxophonists | John Coltrane | Miles Davis | Musicians from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania | United States Navy sailors | Grammy Award winners | Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award winners | Musicians from North Carolina | Deaths from liver cancer | Cancer deaths in New York | Atlantic Records artists | Savoy Records artistsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 | Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 11:41.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
