













The Umbrella Academy - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "The_Umbrella_Academy";
		var wgTitle = "The Umbrella Academy";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "8772864";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282494402;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); The Umbrella Academy

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


The Umbrella Academy



Promotional artwork


Publication information


Publisher
Dark Horse Comics


Schedule
Monthly, every third Wednesday


Format
Limited series


Genre
Superhero


Publication date
September 19, 2007[1] - Present


Number of issues
15 (12 Inculding 3 short stories)


Main character(s)
Sir Reginald Hargreeves
Spaceboy
The Murder Magician
The Kraken
The Rumor
Pogo
The Séance
00.05
The Horror
Vanya Hargreeves


Creative team


Writer(s)
Gerard Way[2]


Artist(s)
Gabriel Bá
James Jean (cover illustrations for series 1 only)[3]


Letterer(s)
Jason Hvam (Internet preview only)[2]
Nate Piekos


Colorist(s)
Dave Stewart[3]


Creator(s)
Gerard Way[4]


Collected editions


The Apocalypse Suite,Dallas
ISBN 1593079788


The Umbrella Academy is a comic book written by Gerard Way with art by Gabriel Bá, cover art by James Jean, colors by Dave Stewart and letters by Blambot's Nate Piekos. The six-issue limited series[5] is released by Dark Horse Comics, the first issue making its premiere on September 19, 2007.[1] It won the 2008 Eisner Award for Best Finite Series/Limited Series. A second series The Umbrella Academy: Dallas followed in 2008. The series has been optioned for a film adaptation planned for release in 2012.




Contents


1 Main story
2 Influence
3 Characters
4 The Apocalypse Suite

4.1 #1: “The Day the Eiffel Tower Went Berserk”

4.1.1 Plot


4.2 #2: “We Only See Each Other At Weddings And Funerals”

4.2.1 Plot


4.3 #3: “Dr. Terminal's Answer”

4.3.1 Plot


4.4 #4: “Baby, I'll Be Your Frankenstein”

4.4.1 Plot


4.5 #5 “Thank You For The Coffee”

4.5.1 Plot


4.6 #6 “Finale" Or "Brothers And Sisters, I Am An Atomic Bomb”

4.6.1 Plot




5 Dallas

5.1 #1 “The Jungle”
5.2 #2 "Boy Scout"
5.3 #3 "Television" or "Are You There, God? It's Me, Klaus"
5.4 #4 "A Perfect Life"
5.5 #5 "All the Animals in the Zoo"


6 Short Stories

6.1 Internet Preview

6.1.1 Plot


6.2 “…But the Past Ain’t Through With You.”

6.2.1 Plot


6.3 “Safe & Sound”

6.3.1 Plot


6.4 “Anywhere But Here”

6.4.1 Plot




7 Collected editions
8 Film
9 Notes
10 References
11 External links

11.1 Interviews
11.2 Reviews
11.3 Short stories







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Main story
The members of the Umbrella Academy, a disbanded group of superheroes, reunite after the death of their adoptive father, "Sir Reginald Hargreeves". Hargreeves, an alien disguised as a famous entrepreneur, collected the members of the Umbrella Academy shortly after their birth and trained them to save the world from an unspecified threat. After his death, the members carry on his plan to save the world.

[edit] Influence
Way has stated that the biggest influence on this piece of work is his favorite writer, Grant Morrison of Doom Patrol. He has also stated that Pat McEown of ZombieWorld: Champion of the Worm was a big influence on his work. Way has said that Edvin Biuković is his all-time favorite artist and that "his Grendel Tales are like my bible to draw from".[4]

[edit] Characters

The Monocle (Sir Reginald Hargreeves) – An alien disguised as a wealthy entrepreneur and inventor, he adopts the members of The Umbrella Academy at birth.
The Umbrella Academy:

00.01 Spaceboy (Luther Hargreeves) – The leader of The Umbrella Academy; his body is that of a gorilla’s and was transplanted after a failed expedition to Mars. His powers are enhanced physical strength and resilience. After his career with The Umbrella Academy he moved to the Moon and lived at the Annihilation Control outpost. On the moon, Luther is attended to by a robotic butler of sorts, named Ben.
00.02 The Kraken (Diego Hargreeves) – The reckless and rebellious member of the group, described by The Monocle as “an insolent brat.” He has the ability to hold his breath indefinitely and has demonstrated a strong affinity for knife-throwing. He and Luther have a very clear rivalry and Diego seems unwilling to take orders from Luther.
00.03 The Rumor (Allison Hargreeves) – Described as narcissistic. She has the ability to prevaricate, whatever she says becomes the truth. After her career with The Umbrella Academy, she married her boyfriend Patrick, who she has since divorced, and had a daughter named Claire.
00.04 The Séance (Klaus Hargreeves) – Showcasing a fretful, morbid temperament, his powers are to contact the dead, levitate and telekinesis. He has the words "Hello" and "Goodbye" tattooed on his palms.
00.05 The Future (see notes at back of The Apocalypse Suite) - Disappeared at the age of ten and reappears in his childhood form 20 years into the future. 00.05 appears to be capable of traveling through time under his own power, although he was forced to spend decades in the future trying to prove the possibility of backwards time-travel before he was able to achieve it. He was shown to have aged normally in the distant future, but regressed back to his youth in transit. 00.05 claims to have read accounts of the Academy's immediate future and their connection to an apocalypse.
00.06 The Horror (Ben Hargreeves) – He possesses monsters under his skin from other dimensions. He is deceased, but no information regarding his death is given. There is a memorial statue of him located in the front of the Academy.
00.07 The White Violin (Vanya Hargreeves) – The most estranged member of the group, Vanya showcases no particular powers, other than an interest in music. Vanya is known to have written a book detailing her life with the Academy and her decision to leave.


Inspector Lupo – A police officer. (Has a resemblance to Commissioner James Gordon)
Abhijat – The Monocle’s bodyguard and assistant.
Dr. Pogo – A talking chimp associated with The Monocle. Spaceboy's Best friend growing up at the Academy.
Mrs. Hargreeves (Grace Hargreeves) - Referred to as "Mom" by the members of the Academy. While the Monocle is shown in a portrait in the first issue, with a woman beside him, this is apparently not the children's "Mom," who shows up in the second issue and appears to be an only partially animate plastic mannequin. Little information is given as to her origins.
Hazel and Cha-Cha - A pair of extremely violent Nazi assassins working for the Temps Aeternalis. They both wear brightly colored cartoon character masks and have a love of sweets.


[edit] The Apocalypse Suite





The plot summary in this article is too long or detailed compared to the rest of the content. Please edit the article to focus on discussing the work rather than merely reiterating the plot. (October 2008)


The six part series, Apocalypse Suite, began with the release of the first issue on September 19, 2007. One issue is to be released on the third Wednesday of every month for six months.[1] The series editor is Scott Allie, and the series assistant editors are Rachel Edidin and Sierra Hahn. The series designer is Tony Ong.

[edit] #1: “The Day the Eiffel Tower Went Berserk”




Cover of the first issue of The Umbrella Academy: Apocalypse Suite that was released on September 19, 2007


The first issue, “The Day the Eiffel Tower Went Berserk”, was released on September 19, 2007. The inside front cover features notes made by Sir Reginald Hargreeves on his seven adopted children, numbered by usefulness.

[edit] Plot
After a brief background is given on The Umbrella Academy, the plot jumps ten years ahead and tells of an event when The Umbrella Academy (aged ten) saved Paris, resulting in The Eiffel Tower flying into space. The story then jumps ahead another 20 years and sets the scene for future issues. Spaceboy is on the moon when he receives a call that The Monocle is dead. Vanya (00.07) receives a mysterious phone call telling her to audition for the chair of a violin player. When Spaceboy arrives at the mansion he encounters 00.05, who has has returned from the future. He states that "there is worse to come".
There are also pages of information; inside the front cover is a featured list of the members of The Umbrella Academy, from the "personal notes of Sir Reginal Hargreeves". On the last page of the story (back to back with the letters page) is an excerpt from the Encyclopedia Umbrellica, offering more details and background information on their exploits in Paris

[edit] #2: “We Only See Each Other At Weddings And Funerals”
The second issue, “We Only See Each Other At Weddings And Funerals”, was released on October 17, 2007.

[edit] Plot
Issue 2 starts the day after Issue 1. Spaceboy is told The Rumor is at the mansion and they greet each other at The Horror's statue. It is revealed he is dead but the cause is unknown, at which point Seance arrives. At a carnival in the city robots cause destruction because of the apparent reformation of The Umbrella Academy. The Future then describes what happened when he left and how he returned. The Kraken turns up and has a small confrontation with Spaceboy. The funeral attracts media attention. The Monocle's wife arrives at the funeral, and says a few words about the Monocle before her cloak is ripped off by The Kraken. She is revealed to be a talking mannequin of sorts, possibly a creation of Hargreeves' to serve as a mother figure to the children. The Kraken then argues with Spaceboy. Meanwhile, in response to the phone call she received last issue, Vanya (00.07) arrives at the Icarus Theatre where she is told to play her violin by a figure obscured by a blinding light. When the light goes off she is in front of many spectators and a skeleton in a suit who calls himself 'The Conductor' of 'The Orchestra Verdammten'. He claims that his new composition, 'The Apocalypse Suite', could destroy the world if played accurately. After hearing the plan, Vanya leaves but The Conductor anticipates her return. At the mansion Spaceboy and The Kraken have a violent conflict. Spaceboy has his laser up to The Kraken but they are broken up by the Rumor and 00.05 when he reveals that the world ended a mere three days after Hargreeve's death. After a moment, the group of heroes realize that the carnival is on fire - Spaceboy reveals that the culprits are the Terminauts, created by the malicious Dr. Terminal (a villain from their past) that were to activate if the Umbrella Academy were ever to reform. The Kraken jumps into the water, and Spaceboy orders everyone to the Televator. The Umbrella Academy has been reformed. The issue ends with a quote from the Monocle at his acceptance speech at the National Thallium Awards.

[edit] #3: “Dr. Terminal's Answer”
The third issue, “Dr. Terminal's Answer”, was released on November 21, 2007.

[edit] Plot
Issue three begins with a flashback from the Rumor, where she's caught in a daze remembering a childhood moment, being held captive by Dr. Terminal. She's snapped back to reality by Spaceboy, and she fades back to the current situation—a burning carnival. The Terminaunts which had activated last issue have been wreaking havoc upon a children's fair, and Space, Rumor, and Seance are fighting to rescue the children. Meanwhile, number 00.05 is being tested by Doctor Pogo, watching the news on a television. Suggesting to begin searching for clues on how close the Apocalypse may be, he leaves Pogo and his "mother" and takes off. Vanya makes it to the fair and is nearly slain by by a Terminaunt missile. She is saved by the Kraken, who took that opportunity to yell at her, to "get lost," because she had left them once already. There is implication that the Terminaunts are destroyed, and the super-team agree that this is only a minor scratch compared to what is coming, ending the adventure. In the Icarus Theater, however, Vanya enters glumly and requests to join the Orchestra Verdammten.
The book is finished with a small table of amusement park injuries, followed by the weekly Letters to the Editor section.

[edit] #4: “Baby, I'll Be Your Frankenstein”
The fourth issue, “Baby, I'll Be Your Frankenstein”, was released on December 19, 2007.

[edit] Plot
The fourth issue begins with a flashback to eighteen years ago. Vanya runs through the Academy, shouting about how she hates everyone around her. She is consoled by Dr. Pogo and, when she states that there's nothing special about her, Pogo tells her that she is indeed special because, unlike her siblings, she doesn't need to destroy in order to be herself. We then jump to the present, where Vanya is being forcefully experimented on by The Conductor of the Orchestra Verdammten. The Conductor reveals that he killed several people to get copies of Hargreeves' secret notes, one of which indicates that Vanya is the most dangerous member of the Umbrella Academy. The Conductor states that while the orchestra is powerful, they need one pure soul to lead them all. Vanya says she will kill him, but before she can move, The Conductor flips a switch and begins Vanya's transformation. We transition to Number 00.05 and Dr. Pogo, who are flying around the city looking for signs of the apocalypse. As they survey the depravity around them, they discuss whether or not the earth is truly worth saving. Back at the Icarus Theatre, Vanya wakes up, now transformed into a pure white creature. At the Academy, The Kraken appears in the parlor (to the surprise of his siblings) and initiates a family fight over who their father loved the most before leaving the group. With The Kraken gone, the rest of the Academy decide to go out and patrol to make sure the city is still safe. Elsewhere, 00.05 and Pogo enjoy coffee at a diner until three men in red and black gas masks enter looking for 00.05. Again back at Icarus, the Conductor reveals Vanya, now dubbed 'La Viole Blanche' (The White Violin). Her entire body is now pure white and the design of a violin runs down her torso. She picks up her violin and plays a single note, ripping the Conductor in half and killing him instantly. She now stands in front of the group, triumphant, and declares that tonight they will kill the Umbrella Academy and tomorrow they will end the world.
The book ends with a riddle: Two bodies have I, though both joined in one. The stiller I stand, the faster I run. The answer is 'an hourglass'.

[edit] #5 “Thank You For The Coffee”
The fifth issue, "Thank You For The Coffee" was released on January 21, 2008.

[edit] Plot
In this fifth installment, the story begins with Inspector Lupo investigating a crime scene where shortly before mysterious masked characters come looking for 00.05. Agnes, a waitress at the diner where it occurred, describes how 00.05 killed every last masked character (whose identity we are yet to find out) before stating that 00.05 last words to her were- "thank you for the coffee." References to the beverage are frequent throughout the novel.
The story then continues with 00.05 searching through Hargreeves room at the Umbrella Academy, looking for a gun to finish himself when the end of the world arrives, but comes instead across Hargreeves Monocle, which when worn, shows the wearer who someone really is. In this case 00.05 looks at Dr Pogo and sees how he was mistreated in the lab, before collapsing and passing out.
Elsewhere, the Rumor and Spaceboy are standing on a building in the city, drinking coffee. They briefly discuss Rumor's daughter, Claire, after which point Spaceboy inquires whether or not the Rumor has lost her powers.
After this the White Violin pays a visit to the Umbrella Academy, promptly destroying the glass windows and the statue of the Horror in the grounds. She also continues to kill Dr Pogo.
The Rumor, Spaceboy and the Séance then turn up to the carnage, and the plot ends with a newspaper being delivered showing the same report that was displayed on the day the world ended. The headline reads "Perfect Day- Nothing bad to report". In the image where 00.05 is transported to the post-apocalypse future, a newspaper is shown with the same headline.

[edit] #6 “Finale" Or "Brothers And Sisters, I Am An Atomic Bomb”
The sixth issue, "Finale" Or "Brothers And Sisters, I Am An Atomic Bomb" was released on February 20, 2008.

[edit] Plot
Following the death of Pogo, the Umbrella Academy sets out to foil The White Violin's plans to end the world. Seance is sent to an unknown location via the Televator, while the team rushes to the Icarus Theatre. Kraken tries to kill Vanya but fails due to past emotions. Rumor tries to influence Vanya and suffers a slashed throat. Spaceboy takes Rumor to a nearby hospital.
The orchestra continues playing, and Vanya claims that there's no use fighting, since the world's going to end anyway. Just then, the Seance arrives, along with Igor Stravinsky, the Manchester Children's Orchestra, and a few members of the Ube tribe. Seance seems to be channeling The Monocle's spirit, and tells Vanya that he plans to counter her apocalyptic song with Stravinsky's 'Rite of Spring'. The Kraken tries to tell Vanya not to listen to the Monocle because others love her when he didn't, but she turns on him angrily. Number Five shoots Vanya in the head, though she survives. The act is then dropped, and the Kraken is surprised to find that it is not the Monocle at all, but the Séance displaying his acting talents. The apocalypse rolls on and a meteor (one of many) hits the theatre, but using his powers of telekinesis, the Séance stops it from killing anyone.
In the epilogue, Number Five recounts the events following the night before. The meteors had shaken loose from the moon. The Rumor and Vanya both live, but neither will be able to use their talents anymore. Their old home is mostly demolished, the Eiffel Tower had crash-landed on top of it. The story then ends with Spaceboy and Kraken reconciling, and after resolving to rebuild, Spaceboy decides to make a sandwich. The group's mother-figure sits in the background. On the table sits a milk carton that reads "MISSING" with the Boy's face beneath.

[edit] Dallas
A second series called The Umbrella Academy: Dallas, began publication on November 26, 2008.

[edit] #1 “The Jungle”
The first issue, "The Jungle" was released on November 26, 2008.
Plot
The next chapter in the adventures of the Umbrella Academy opens with a flashback to seventeen years ago. The Monocle converses with the President on something that only the Academy can solve. Meanwhile the Lincoln Memorial attacks The Umbrella Academy in Washington DC, but is beaten when the Rumor summons a statue of John Wilkes Booth with a lie. The Booth statue kills the Lincoln statue and The Horror believes they will be rewarded with ice cream. Rumor tells him to grow up. We then jump foreword to after the events of the Apocalypse Suite. Vanya has lost all of her memory and is in the hospital and Allison brings her into a TV center where she can see everything she has done. The Seance has become famous and thinks he is special. Also Luther has seemed to stop caring and just lazes around watching T.V. and eating cookies.The Kraken wants to find the people who were witnesses at the coffee shop when 00.05 is attacked by the masked men and breaks a mans arm for not giving him any information. Allison has lost her voice and writes on a sheet of paper what she has to say, and seems to truly hate Vanya for all she has done, especially for killing Pogo. After losing a bet at a dog track Number 5 gets attacked in a parking lot by a legion of the masked men, who he calls the Temps Aeternalis. He quickly kills all of them after refusing to come with them to 'finish the job.' Things go down the drain when a agent who survived the slaughter contacts his superiors and calls for back-up in the form of 'Hazel and Cha-Cha.' In a panic 00.05 kills the man and proclaims in shock, "We're already dead."

[edit] #2 "Boy Scout"
The second issue, "Boy Scout" was released on December 24, 2008.
Plot
The second chapter of Dallas starts out with two unknown figures, revealed quickly to be the aforementioned Hazel and Cha-Cha, at the same coffee shop from volume 1 eating pie. The duo ask for the recipe of the pie that they seem to be infatuated with, but the cook won't tell them. He explains "I wouldn't even tell if you cut off my arms and legs," the two then proceed to do so in short order. The Kraken returns to the police station looking at photos of the massacre from the last issue but Lupo and the monkey, Body, runs into him in Lupo's office and they asked,"Where's The Boy?" but The Kraken had no clue so he just crawled out the window. They ask why he is crawling out the window instead out the front door. The Kraken stated,"Because cops give me the creeps.(Check your sources)" The Kraken returns home and gets into a fight with the now obese Spaceboy saying that they can't find No.5 and Spaceboy is just lazing around. Alison discovers the Monocle's monocle and quickly finds finds No. 5, who is being sung a birthday song by a chimp in drag and apparently believing himself to be the president. Seance ends up by Pogo's grave saying that he misses him and he hears something. He thinks it is Pogo talking to him and hears shocking secrets of No.5 from the monkey's spirit. Hazel and Cha-Cha then appear and smack Seance across the head with a baseball bat and then apologize from a fight they had in the issue beginning. The two proclaim that now with Seance in their hands they can find No.5, The Boy.

[edit] #3 "Television" or "Are You There, God? It's Me, Klaus"
The third issue, "Television" or "Are You There, God? It's Me, Klaus" was released on January 28, 2009.
Plot
The chapter starts with the Seance inside of a television left on by the obese Spaceboy, who is asleep on the couch, and the Seance is trying to tell Spaceboy about what happened to him (being captured and how he will kill him). The television then breaks and Spaceboy wakes up. The Seance was communicating with Spaceboy through the television and Hazel and Cha-Cha found out, breaking the television. Cha-Cha then, after some words about the Seance's shoes and powers are exchanged by the three, puts a gun to the Seance's head. The Seance tries to pay his way out of his situation with money or "hooker amputees," but Hazel and Cha-Cha have the nukes may have been the weapons referred to in the first issue's flashback. Then, after discussing how the nukes were found and the plans that Hazel and Cha-Cha had for finding 00.05, Hazel shoots the Seance. 00.05 starts to tell the Rumor about his past life. He "left out" details of his past from the future. He was captured by the Temps Aeternalis, an agency that preserves the time continuum and recruits "anomolies," like 00.05, and puts them to work. He was changed through surgeries and other training, which explains much of the skills and other abilities he acquires during the Umbrella Academy series. 00.05 was considered the best and was specially trained by a Shubukin Goldfish with a genius-level intellect and the instincts of Nathan Bedford Forrest to take care of specific individuals. 00.05 found out that the augmentations bonded his DNA with those of notorious assassins and he was to kill President Kennedy but, he rebelled. Spaceboy flies to where the Seance was held and tortured and finds him, dead. An electric prod handled by Hazel shocks Spaceboy, believing that it killed him. The Seance, on the other hand, is seen in a pure white Heaven with God, depicted as a cowboy. The Cowboy tells him that he is to return to Earth and to "Stop being such a fairy and kill those two sons o' bitches. And stay off the drugs, Klaus." The Rumor and 00.05 are in a Chinese restaurant continuing their previous conversation. Then, 00.05's commanding officer, the Shubukin Goldfish, walks in to talk with 00.05. 00.05 threatens his officer but the officer states that he has his biological mother in the eyes of two agents that can kill her if necessary. His officer demands that he is to finish the job against the President (Kennedy) by preventing 00.05's past self from interfering. Allison is invited but writes "And why should I care what happens to this little jerk?" He reveals that 00.05's biological mother has twins, implying that Allison is, in fact, 00.05's biological sister.

[edit] #4 "A Perfect Life"
The fourth issue, "A Perfect Life" was released on February 25, 2009.

[edit] #5 "All the Animals in the Zoo"
The fifth issue, "All the Animals in the Zoo" was released on March 25, 2009

[edit] Short Stories
A first short preview story of the series was released on November 2, 2006 on the Dark Horse Comics website.[2] The first printed story was “…But the Past Ain’t Through With You.” which appeared in the 2007 Dark Horse Comics Free Comic Book Day issue.[3] Another story, “Safe & Sound”, was published in July of 2007 in Dark Horse Presents online on MySpace.[6]

[edit] Internet Preview
An Internet preview was released on November 2, 2006 on the Dark Horse website. The story was lettered by Jason Hvam.[2]

[edit] Plot
The story is only two pages long and contains two main characters, The Séance, appearing as an adult, and The Boy, #00.05. A time-travel machine causes the The Séance to briefly experience life as a French military commander.

[edit] “…But the Past Ain’t Through With You.”




Cover of the 2007 Dark Horse Comics Free Comic Book Day issue, featuring the first printed story of The Umbrella Academy, “…But the Past Ain’t Through With You.”


The first printed story of the series, the title is a line from the B-side track "Kill All Your Friends" by Way's band, My Chemical Romance ("And you can sleep in a coffin, but the past ain't through with you"). "…But the Past Ain’t Through with You.", appeared in the 2007 Dark Horse Comics Free Comic Book Day issue. The comic book was released on May 5, 2007, Free Comic Book Day. The comic book also features the début of Pantheon City written by Ron Marz and illustrated by Clément Sauvé and Zero Killer written by Arvid Nelson and illustrated by Matt Camp.[3]

[edit] Plot





The plot summary in this article is too long or detailed compared to the rest of the content. Please edit the article to focus on discussing the work rather than merely reiterating the plot. (September 2007)


The story begins with Spaceboy, The Rumor, and The Séance finding The Rumor’s body in an alley. The scene changes to the studio of the Lucifer Clark Show, a late night talk show, with the Murder Magician, accompanied by his assistant, The Assistant. The Murder Magician matter-of-factly admits to killing The Rumor in front of Lucifer Clark and a live studio audience, both of which seem to not take him seriously. The Murder Magician goes on to reveal his Murderbot, which he claims he will use to murder people. The scene changes to Inspector Lupo complaining about the situation in the studio with two police officers, while they await the appearance of the Umbrella Academy. All five members appear, just having teleported from Tokyo after fighting a sea serpent. Inspector Lupo explains the situation: the Murder Magician has hypnotized Lucifer Clark and the audience, activated the Murderbot, and demanded ten million dollars and a date with a soap opera actress named Gina Barbeux. The scene changes to the inside of the studio, which is now being destroyed by the Murderbot. The Murder Magician and The Assistant are dancing on stage and Lucifer Clark is in a Dagger Head Box. As the Murder Magician is about to saw Lucifer Clark in half, the Murderbot crashes to the ground. The Umbrella Academy appears and Spaceboy orders the Murder Magician to surrender. The Kraken attacks the Murder Magician as The Assistant flees. Spaceboy grabs hold of the Murderbots arm, orders The Horror to grab the other arm, and The Séance to loosen the bolts of the robot. The Horror and Spaceboy each pull a hand, severing the robot’s arms, effectively destroying it. The Rumor seeing The Assistant on the lighting rig lies and tells her that the rig was assembled in a “rush job”. The rig collapses, seemingly killing The Assistant. The Monocle (Sir Reginald Hargreeves) appears in the studio to everyone’s surprise and asks how The Rumor’s body could have been found if she is still alive. Spaceboy explains that The Rumor lied about going to the library after she was found out of the house after midnight. She was actually sneaking out to see her boyfriend. Spaceboy explains that her lie had manifested into another Rumor, which was killed by the Murder Magician. The Monocle commends Spaceboy on his work and states his amazement that he led the Murder Magician to a copy instead of the actual Rumor. The Kraken, enraged, asks The Monocle why he would have told the Murder Magician where to find The Rumor. The Monocle responds by saying, “to teach her a lesson”. The story concludes with The Monocle exiting the studio as he says, “class dismissed”. An editorial note at the end of the story informs the reader that the next installment of the Umbrella Academy some characters “may or may not be living and/or dead”.

[edit] “Safe & Sound”
“Safe & Sound” is an eight-page story published in the first issue of the second volume of Dark Horse Presents in July 2007. The second volume of Dark Horse Presents (an anthology comic book, which was the first comic ever published by Dark Horse) appears monthly exclusively online on the social networking website MySpace for free. The comic book also features stories for the series Sugarshock! written by Joss Whedon and illustrated by Fábio Moon (Gabriel Bá’s twin brother) and Samurai: Heaven and Earth written by Ron Marz and illustrated by Luke Ross.[6]

[edit] Plot





The plot summary in this article is too long or detailed compared to the rest of the content. Please edit the article to focus on discussing the work rather than merely reiterating the plot. (September 2007)


The story begins with The Kraken on top of a moving car occupied by criminals. The credits on the page say “Safe & Sound / featuring The Kraken / Formerly of the Umbrella Academy”. The cars occupants, a driver, a man in the passenger seat with a Tommy Gun, a Gypsy fortuneteller in the back seat, and a little girl in the back seat are all aware that The Kraken in on top of the vehicle. After The Kraken stabs the top of the car, the fortuneteller, who is holding a green crystal ball, orders the man in the front to shoot The Kraken, who manages to escape injury. When the girl in the back says that she wants to go home, the fortuneteller tells her she can as soon as her father pays the ransom. The Kraken punches the man with the gun through the window, prompting the fortuneteller to order the driver to slam the brakes. The Kraken and the man with the gun are ejected from the car, the latter going through the windshield. The Kraken flies through a window of an unoccupied clothing store. The other occupants in the car exit the vehicle and the fortuneteller produces a cartomancy card that portrays death. The driver than indiscriminately shoots at the clothing store with the Tommy Gun. The Kraken emerges on top of the car (behind the fortuneteller) and demands the release of the girl. She pulls out another cartomancy card with devil. The driver shoots at The Kraken, who jumps towards him and punches him. The knocked-out man falls to the ground. The fortuneteller, still defiant, tells The Kraken not to produce his blade, or else she will drop the green crystal ball, which she claims holds the life of the girl she is holding hostage. She claims that if it drops the girl will die. The Kraken throws his knife at the fortuneteller’s shoulder and she drops the crystal ball, which shatters on the ground. The fortuneteller is in shock to see that the girl is still alive and is surprised by a punch delivered by The Kraken. The next scene shows the fortuneteller being arrested who is hysterically saying that the girl should have died. Inspector Lupo (a character similar to Commissioner Gordon of Batman) thanks The Kraken for saving the mayor’s daughter. The Kraken reaches into the back seat of the fortuneteller’s car and produces a crystal ball, identical the one that was destroyed. He hands in to the Inspector and tells him that it is, “Something important. Take care of it.”

[edit] “Anywhere But Here”
Darkhorse released the eight-page short story on their MySpace.

[edit] Plot
(The story takes place 13 years ago, during the group's teenage years) The Monocle is giving a long and boring speech to Diego and Vanya (The Kraken and The White Violin) who are in a punk rock band called Prime 8's, in which Vanya plays the guitar, The Kraken plays the bass guitar and an ape called "Body" plays the drums. Finally The Monocle gives Vanya a plane ticket set to go to Paris, where she is supposed to study music and improve her talents in the violin. Then in Diego's room, he convinces Vanya to go and play at a gig that night, and then with the money they would earn, they could run away from the Umbrella Academy to be in the band. Diego says "You don't belong here (The Academy) so neither do I, I'm not cut for this Hero business". They agree to meet at the gig that night. In the city a bar is filled with people screaming to hear the Prime 8's but Diego hasn't shown up yet and the owner of the bar demands to see the band playing at that moment, so Body decides to finish the band and say goodbye to Vanya. Vanya, very disappointed, is walking down the street and suddenly hears a television from a Shop where TV-News are shown about a Gang arrested by The Umbrella Academy and they did it with the help of The Kraken. "This is where you belong" says Vanya. So Vanya gets in a Taxi, the Driver asks "Are you going somewhere important?" Vanya answers "Yeah, anywhere but here."

[edit] Collected editions
The series has been collected as a trade paperback:
The Umbrella Academy: The Apocalypse Suite (by Gerard Way & Gabriel Bá, includes all six issues from The Apocalypse Suite, extracts from sketchbooks featuring early versions of characters, the short internet preview and the story from Free Comic Book Day 2007, limited edition hardcover, ISBN 1595821635, softcover, ISBN 1593079788)

[edit] Film
Dark Horse have a first look deal with Universal Pictures,[7] who have optioned The Umbrella Academy.[8]
There is a listing for the film at Internet Movie Database, with a tentative release date of 2012. [9]
Variety recently reported more news on the film adaptation: http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118002216.html?categoryid=13&cs=1

[edit] Notes


^ a b c "Umbrella Academy: Apocalypse Suite #1". Dark Horse Comics. 2007. http://www.darkhorse.com/profile/profile.php?sku=14-482. Retrieved on 2007-08-09. 
^ a b c d "Gerard Way gives the world a sneak peek at the upcoming Umbrella Academy series! 11/2/06". Dark Horse Comics. 2006-11-02. http://www.darkhorse.com/news/pressrelease.php?id=1387. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ a b c d "Free Comic Book Day 2007". Dark Horse Comics. 2007. http://www.darkhorse.com/profile/profile.php?sku=14-602. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ a b "Gerard Way Interview: Umbrella Academy 8/14/06". Dark Horse Comics. 2006-08-14. http://www.darkhorse.com/news/interviews.php?id=1350. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Pastorek, Whitney (2007). "Exclusive Peek: Gerard Way's 'Umbrella Academy'". Entertainment Weekly. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,20043177,00.html?cnn=yes. Retrieved on 2007-08-09. 
^ a b "SDCC '07: DARK HORSE PRESENTS RETURNS ON MYSPACE". Newsarama. http://www.newsarama.com/Comic-Con_07/DHC/DHP.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-08. 
^ Dark Horse/Universal Sign First Look Deal, Newsarama, March 18, 2008
^ UMBRELLA ACADEMY Feature Film Update!, IESB, October 19, 2008
^ http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1312171/



[edit] References


The Umbrella Academy at the Comic Book DB
The Umbrella Academy: The Apocalypse Suite at the Grand Comic-Book Database
The Umbrella Academy: Dallas #3 at the Grand Comic-Book Database




[edit] External links

The Umbrella Academy at MySpace
Pages 11-13 of the first issue, Entertainment Weekly
Pages 1-5 of the second issue, Comic Book Resources
The Umbrella Academy.net (Spanish)


[edit] Interviews

Gerard Way: Flexing His Writing Muscles with Umbrella Academy, Comics Bulletin, August 27, 2007
Gabriel Bá: Shaping Umbrella Academy's Landscape, Comics Bulletin - Gemma Milroy, September 11, 2007
Gerard Way: Broadening Comics' Audience with Umbrella Academy, Comics Bulletin - Gemma Milroy, November 26, 2007
The Umbrella Academy: Superhero kids in a class of their own, Sequential Tart, October 1, 2007
UMBRELLA ACADEMICS: Way & Allie Talk Umbrella Academy #3, Comic Book Resources, November 19, 2007
Comic Geek Speak: Episode 327 - Gerard Way Interview, Comic Geek Speak, November 16, 2007
APOCALYPSE SUITE: Way talks Umbrella Academy, Comic Book Resources, April 22, 2008
An interview about The Umbrella Academy: Dallas, Newarama, September 22, 2008


[edit] Reviews

Sunday Slugfest - The Umbrella Academy: Apocalypse Suite #1 (of 6) Review and #3, Comics Bulletin


[edit] Short stories

Internet preview
“Safe & Sound”
"Anywhere But Here"




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Umbrella_Academy"
Categories: Dark Horse Comics limited series | Superhero comics | 2007 comic debuts | Superhero schoolsHidden categories: Title pop | Redundant infobox title param | Wikipedia articles with plot summary needing attention from October 2008 | Wikipedia articles with plot summary needing attention from September 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Español
Français
Italiano
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Português
Suomi









 This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 04:54 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
