













Hadith - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Hadith";
		var wgTitle = "Hadith";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "13749";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281022375;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Hadith

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2007)








Part of a series on 
Islam



Beliefs



Allah · Oneness of God
Muhammad · Other prophets



Practices



Profession of faith · Prayer
Fasting · Charity · Pilgrimage




Texts and laws




Qur'an · Sunnah · Hadith
Fiqh · Sharia · Kalam · Sufism




History and leadership




Timeline of Muslim history
Ahl al-Bayt · Sahaba
Sunni · Shi'a
Rashidun · Shi'a imams




Culture and society




Academics · Animals · Art
Calendar · Children
Demographics · Festivals
Mosques · Philosophy
Science · Women
Politics · Dawah




Islam and other religions




Christianity · Judaism
Hinduism · Sikhism · Jainism




See also




Criticism · Islamophobia
Glossary of Islamic terms




Islam portal
 v • d • e 






Hadith (الحديث transliteration: al-ḥadīth, pl. aḥadīth; lit. "narrative") are oral traditions relating to the words and deeds of the Islamic prophet Muhammad. Hadith collections are regarded by all traditional schools of jurisprudence as important tools for determining the Muslim way of life, the sunnah.




Contents


1 Definition and usage
2 Format
3 Overview
4 History
5 Use
6 Science of hadith
7 Views

7.1 Muslim view
7.2 Sunni view
7.3 Shi'a view

7.3.1 Ibadi view


7.4 Non-Muslim views


8 See also
9 Notes
10 References

10.1 Further reading


11 External links

11.1 Hadith collections







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Definition and usage
Linguistically the word ‘hadith’ means: that which is new from amongst things or a piece of information conveyed either in a small quantity or large. The Arabic plural is aḥādīth. In English academic usage, hadith is often both singular and plural.[citation needed] And hadith is what is spoken by the speaker. Tahdith is the infinitive, or verbal noun, of the original verb form. Therefore, hadith is not the infinitive,[1] rather it is a noun.[2]
In Islamic terminology, the term hadith refers to reports about the statements or actions of Muhammad, or about his tacit approval of something said or done in his presence.[3] Classical hadith specialist Ibn Hajar says that the intended meaning of "hadith" in religious tradition is something attributed to Muhammad, as opposed to the Qur'an.[4] Other associated words possess similar meanings: "khabar" (news, information) often refers to reports about Muhammad, but sometimes refers to traditions about his companions (sahāba) and their successors from the following generation (tābi'īn); conversely, "athar" (trace, vestige) usually refers to traditions about the companions and successors, though sometimes connotes traditions about Muhammad. The word sunnah (custom) is also used in reference to a normative custom of Muhammad or the early Muslim community.[3]

[edit] Format
A hadith consists of two aspects: the text of the report (matn) containing the actual narrative; and the chain of narrators (isnad, or sanad), which documents the route by which the report has been transmitted.[3] The "sanad" is so named due to the reliance of the hadith specialists upon it in determining the authenticity or weakness of a hadith.[clarification needed][5] The sanad consists of a ‘chain’ of the narrators each mentioning the one from whom they heard the hadith until mentioning the originator of the matn along with the matn itself. The first people who received hadith were the companions; so they preserved and understood it, knowing both its generality and particulars, and then conveyed it to those after them as they were commanded. Then the generation following them, the Followers received it thus conveying it to those after them and so on. So the companion would say, “I heard the Prophet say such and such.” The Follower would then say, “I heard a companion say, ‘I heard the Prophet.’” The one after him (after the Follower) would then say, “I heard someone say, ‘I heard a Companion say, ‘I heard the Prophet …’’” and so on.[6]

[edit] Overview
Hadith were originally oral traditions of Muhammad's actions and customs. From the first Fitna of the 7th century people questioned the sources of hadiths. [7] This resulted in a list of transmitters, for example "A told me that B told him that Muhammad said."
Hadith were eventually written down, evaluated and gathered into large collections mostly during the reign of Umar II (bin Abdul Aziz, grandson of Umar bin Khattab(RAA)2nd Caliph) during the 8th century, and also in the 9th century. These works are referred to in matters of Islamic law and history to this day.

[edit] History
Main article: History of Hadith
Traditions of the life of Muhammad and the early history of Islam were passed down orally for more than a hundred years after Muhammad's death in AD 632.
Muslim historians say that Caliph Uthman (the third khalifa, or successor of Muhammad, who had formerly been Muhammad's secretary), was the first to urge Muslims to write the Qur'an in a fixed form, and to record the hadith. Uthman's labours were cut short by his assassination, at the hands of aggrieved soldiers, in 656.
The Muslim community (ummah) then fell into a prolonged civil war, which Muslim historians call the Fitna. After the fourth caliph Ali ibn Abi Talib was assassinated in 661, the Umayyad dynasty seized control of the Islamic empire. Ummayad rule was interrupted by a second civil war (the Second Fitna), re-established, and ended in 758 when the Abbasid dynasty seized the caliphate, and held it, at least in name, until 1258.
Muslim historians say that hadith collection and evaluation continued during the first Fitna and the Umayyad period. However, much of this activity was presumably oral transmission from early Muslims to later collectors, or from teachers to students. If any of these early scholars committed any of these collections to writing, they have not survived. The histories and hadith collections we have today were written down at the start of the Abbasid period, more than a hundred years after Muhammad's death.
Scholars of the Abbasid period were faced with a huge corpus of miscellaneous traditions, some of them flatly contradicting each other. Many of these traditions supported differing views on a variety of controversial matters. Scholars had to decide which hadith were to be trusted as authentic and which had been invented for political or theological purposes. To do this, they used a number of techniques which Muslims now call the science of hadith.
At the beginning of the 7th century, those receiving the hadith started to question the sources of the saying. The hadith were eventually recorded in written form, had their Isnad evaluated, and were gathered into large collections during the 8th century.

[edit] Use
The overwhelming majority of Muslims consider hadith to be essential supplements to and clarifications of the Qur'an, Islam's holy book. In Islamic jurisprudence, the Qur'an contains many rules for the behavior expected of Muslims but there are no specific Qur'anic rules on many religious and practical matters. Muslims believe that they can look at the way of life, or sunnah, of Muhammad and his companions to discover what to imitate and what to avoid. Muslim scholars also find it useful to know how Muhammad or his companions explained the revelations, or on what occasion Muhammad received them. Sometimes this will clarify a passage that otherwise seems obscure. Hadith are a source for Islamic history and biography. For the vast majority of devout Muslims, authentic hadith are also a source of religious inspiration.
Non-Muslim scholars note that there is a great overlap between the records of early Islamic traditions. Accounts of early Islam are also to be found in:

sira (biographies of Prophet Muhammad)
tafsir (exegesis on the Qur'an)
fiqh (Islamic jurisprudence)


[edit] Science of hadith



Part of a series on the 
Science of hadith



Terminology




History of Hadith — ...
Ilm ar-Rijal — ...
Narrators of hadith — ...




Terminology




Isnad — chain of narrators
Matn — hadith text
Riwayah — narration




technical terms




Musnad — supported
Mursal — hurried
Ahaad — single narrator
Munqati — broken
muttasil — uninterrupted isnad
Gharib — strange/rare
Shadhdh — irregular
Munkar — denounced/rejected
Mudraj — interpolated
Da'if jiddan — very weak
Isra'iliyat




Regarding authenticity




Mutawatir — agreed upon



Sahih — authentic
Hasan — fair
Da'if — weak



Mawdo — fabricated



Mudtarib — shaky




Other




Sharh — comments
Hadith collection


This box: view • talk • edit



The science of hadith (Arabic: `Ulum al-hadith) is a method of textual criticism developed by early Muslim scholars in determining the veracity of reports attributed to Muhammad. This is achieved by analyzing the text of the report, the scale of the report's transmission, the routes through which the report was transmitted, and the individual narrators involved in its transmission. On the basis of these criteria, various classifications were devised for hadith. The earliest comprehensive work on the science of hadith was Abu Muhammad al-Ramahurmuzi's "al-Muhaddith", while another significant work was al-Hakim al-Naysaburi's "al-Ma`rifat `ulum al-hadith". Ibn al-Salah's "`Ulum al-hadith" is considered the standard classical reference on the science of hadith.[3]
Hadith are generally categorized as sahīh (sound, authentic), da`īf (weak), or mawdū` (fabricated). Other classifications used also include: hasan (good), which refers to an otherwise sahīh report suffering from minor deficiency, or a weak report strengthened due to numerous other corroborating reports; and munkar (ignored) which is a report that is rejected due to the presence of a solitary and generally unreliable transmitter.[8] Both sahīh and hasan reports are considered acceptable for usage in Islamic legal discourse. Classifications of hadith may also be based upon the scale of transmission. Reports that pass through many reliable transmitters at each point in the isnad up until their collection and transcription are known as mutawātir. These reports are considered the most authoritative as they pass through so many different routes that collusion between all of the transmitters becomes an impossibility. Reports not meeting this standard are known as ahad, and are of several different types.[3]
Another area of focus in the study of hadith is biographical analysis (`ilm al-rijāl, lit. "science of people"), in which details about the transmitter are scrutinized. This includes analyzing their date and place of birth; familial connections; teachers and students; religiosity; moral behaviour; literary output; their travels; as well as their date of death. Based upon these criteria, the reliability (thiqāt) of the transmitter is assessed. Also determined is whether the individual was actually able to transmit the report, which is deduced from their contemporaneity and geographical proximity with the other transmitters in the chain.[9] Examples of biographical dictionaries include Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani's "Tahdhīb al-Tahdhīb" or al-Dhahabi's "Tadhkirat al-huffāz."[10]

[edit] Views





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2007)


Currently there is little communication between the world of Muslim hadith scholarship and Western academia. Muslim scholars and friends reject the Westerners as Orientalists who are hostile to religion in general and Islam in particular. Western academics tend to dismiss Muslim scholars as irrelevant, bound as they are to a millennia-old technique of hadith evaluations which modern scholarship regards as out-dated.
However, some Muslim scholars have undergone Western academic training and attempted to mediate between the traditional Muslim and the secular Western view. Notable among these was Fazlur Rahman Malik (1919-1988) who argued that while the chain of transmission of the hadith may often be spurious, the matn can still be used to understand how Islam can be lived in the modern world. Liberal movements within Islam tend to agree with Rahman's views to varying degrees.

[edit] Muslim view
Muslims who accept hadith believe that trusted hadith are in most cases the words of Muhammad and not the word of God. Hadith Qudsi forms a partial exception; these (few) hadith are said to recount divine revelations given to Muhammad but not included in the Qur'an. However, the words (as opposed to the substance) are believed to be Muhammad's own, and not divine.
While both hadith and Qur'an have been translated, most Muslims believe that translations of the Qur'an are inherently deficient, amounting to little more than a commentary upon the text. There is no such belief regarding hadith. Practicing Muslims cleanse themselves (wudu) before reading or reciting the Qur'an; there is no such requirement for reading or reciting the hadith. Even for Muslims who accept the hadith, they are lower in rank when compared to the Qur'an.
Muslims also use the Ahadith to interpret parts of the Qur'an when verses are not clear or even when verses are clear to achieve an in-depth understanding. This process is called Tafsir.

[edit] Sunni view



Part of a series on 
Hadith collections




v • d • e



Most famous



Sunni six major collections
(Al-Sihah al-Sittah):

Sahih al-Bukhari
Sahih Muslim
Sunan an-Nasa'i al-Sughra
Sunan Abi Dawood
Sunan al-Tirmidhi
Sunan Ibn Maja

Shi'a Twelver collections:

Nahj al-Balagha
"The Four Books" (Al-Kutub Al-Arb'ah)


Kitab al-Kafi of Kulainy
Man la yahduruhu al-Faqih of Shaikh Saduq
Tahdhib al-Ahkam by Shaikh Tusi
al-Istibsar by Shaykh Tusi

Ibadi collections:

al-Jami' as-Sahih by al-Rabi' ibn Habib
Tartib al-Musnad by al-Warijlani




Sunni collections




Al-Muwatta
Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal — 780-855
Sahih Ibn Khuzaymah — 923
Sahih Ibn Hibbaan — 965
Al-Mustadrak alaa al-Sahihain — 1014
Mawdu'at al-Kubra— 1128-1217
Riyadh as-Saaliheen — 1233 - 1278
Mishkat al-Masabih - 1340
Talkhis al-Mustadrak — 1274-1348
Majma al-Zawa'id — 1335-1405
Bulugh al-Maram — 1372-1449
Kanz al-Ummal — 1500th




Shi'a Twelver collections




The book of Sulaym ibn Qays — 600th
Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiyya — 678-713
Wasael ush-Shia — 1600s
Bihar al-Anwar — 1600s
Haqq al-Yaqeen — 1600s
Ain Al-Hayat — 1600s
Sharh Usul al-Kafi — ?-1081




Shi'a Ismaili collections




Qalam-e-Mowla
Daim al-Islam




Mu'tazili collections




Nahj with comments — ?-1258




The Sunni canon of hadith took its final form more than 230 years after the death of Muhammad (632 AD). Later scholars may have debated the authenticity of particular hadith but the authority of the canon as a whole was not questioned. This canon, called the Six major Hadith collections, includes:


Name
Collector
Size


Sahih Bukhari
Imam Bukhari (d. 870)
7275 hadiths


Sahih Muslim
Muslim Ibn al-Hajjaj (d. 875)
included 9200


Sunan Abi Da'ud
Abu Da'ud (d. 888)



Sunan al-Tirmidhi
al-Tirmidhi (d. 892)



Sunan al-Sughra
al-Nasa'i (d. 915)



Sunan Ibn Maja
Ibn Maja (d. 886)



Sahih Bukhari and Sahih Muslim are usually considered the most reliable of these collections. There is some debate over whether the sixth member of this canon should be Ibn Maja or the Muwatta of Imam Malik, which is the earliest hadith canon but predates much of the methodology developed by the classic hadith scholars.
While there are still many traditional Muslims who rely on the ulema and its long tradition of hadith collection and criticism, other contemporary Sunni Muslims are willing to reconsider tradition. Liberal Muslims are most apt to trust the individual conscience, but there are also Salafis who demand the same freedom. The Salafis claim that the ordinary believer can trust his or her own judgment (even if he or she is not trained in Islamic scholarship) if he or she relies on Bukhari and Muslim, the commentators deemed to be sahih, and ignores the weak hadith.

[edit] Shi'a view
Shi'a Muslims do not use the Six major Hadith collections followed by the Sunni because the majority of the companions who passed down these hadith (in the Six major Hadith collections) are considered to have erred by accepting the Caliphate of Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman in preference to Ali, and consequently, Shia believe, cannot be regarded as reliable transmitters of hadith. Shia trust traditions transmitted by the Imams, Muhammad's descendants through Fatima Zahra.[11]
Although Twelver Shi'ism is by far the largest branch of Shi'i Islam, there are various branches within Shi'ism and within each branch, various traditions of scholarship. Each branch and scholar may differ as to the hadith to be accepted as reliable and those to be rejected.
Four prominent Twelver Shi'a hadith collections are written by three authors who are known as the `Three Muhammads`.[11] They are:


Name
Collector
Size


Usul al-Kafi
Muhammad ibn Ya'qub al-Kulayni al-Razi(329 AH)
15,176 hadith


Man la yahduruhu al-Faqih
Muhammad ibn Babuya
9,044


Al-Tahdhib
Shaykh Muhammad Tusi
13,590


Al-Istibsar
Shaykh Muhammad Tusi
5,511


Unlike Akhbari Twelver Shi'a, Usuli Twelver Shi'a scholars do not believe that everything in the four major books are sahih. Every hadith must be individually examined through the process of ilm-ul-hadith. Any hadith that conflicts with the Quran or logic is excluded. [12] Nizari Ismaili have a book of speeches of Ali called Qalam-e-Mowla. For Mustaali Ismaili, a book of hadith called Daim al-Islam narrates events of the Imams of the Fatimid Empire.

[edit] Ibadi view
Ibadi Islam (found mainly in the Arabian kingdom of Oman) accepts many Sunni hadith, while rejecting others, and accepts some hadith not accepted by Sunnis. Ibadi jurisprudence is based only on the hadith accepted by Ibadis, which are far less numerous than those accepted by Sunnis. Several of Ibadism's founding figures - in particular Jabir ibn Zayd - were noted for their hadith research, and Jabir ibn Zayd is accepted as a reliable narrator by Sunni scholars as well as Ibadi ones.
The principal hadith collection accepted by Ibadis is al-Jami'i al-Sahih, also called Musnad al-Rabi ibn Habib, as rearranged by Abu Ya'qub Yusuf b. Ibrahim al-Warijlani. A large proportion of its narrations are via Jabir ibn Zaid or Abu Yaqub; most are reported by Sunnis, while several are not. The total number of hadith it contains is 1005, and an Ibadi tradition recounted by al-Rabi has it that there are only 4000 authentic prophetic hadith. The rules used for determining the reliability of a hadith are given by Abu Ya'qub al-Warijlani, and are largely similar to those used by Sunnis; they criticize some of the companions, believing that some were corrupted after the reign of the first two caliphs. The Ibadi jurists accept hadith narrating the words of Muhammad's companions as a third basis for legal rulings, alongside the Qur'an and hadith relating Muhammad's words.

[edit] Non-Muslim views
Early Western exploration of Islam consisted primarily of translation of the Qur'an and a few histories, often supplemented with disparaging commentary. In the nineteenth century, scholars made greater attempts at impartiality, and translated and commented upon a greater variety of texts. By the beginning of the twentieth century, Western scholars of Islam started to critically engage with the Islamic texts, subjecting them to the same agnostic, searching scrutiny that had previously been applied to Christian texts (see higher criticism). Ignaz Goldziher is the best known of these turn-of-the-century critics, who also included D. S. Margoliuth, Henri Lammens, and Leone Caetani. Goldziher writes, in his Muslim Studies:


“
... it is not surprising that, among the hotly debated controversial issues of Islam, whether political or doctrinal, there is not one in which the champions of the various views are unable to cite a number of traditions, all equipped with imposing isnads
”


The next generations of Western scholars were also sceptics, on the whole: Joseph Schacht, in his Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence (1959), argued that isnads going back to Muhammad were in fact more likely to be spurious than isnads going back to the companions. The focus of his thesis was to prove the legal hadith were all spurious until proven otherwise. John Wansbrough, in the 1970s, and his students Patricia Crone and Michael Cook were even more sweeping in their dismissal of Muslim tradition, arguing that even the Qur'an was likely to have been collected later than claimed.[citation needed]
Contemporary Western scholars of hadith include:

Herbert Berg, The Development of Exegesis in Early Islam (2000)
Fred M. Donner, Narratives of Islamic Origins (1998)
Wilferd Madelung, Succession to Muhammad (1997)

Madelung has immersed himself in the hadith literature and has made his own selection and evaluation of tradition. Having done this, he is much more willing to trust hadith than many of his contemporaries.
Some quotes:

Wilferd Madelung[13]



“
work with the narrative sources, both those that have been available to historians for a long time and others which have been published recently, made it plain that their wholesale rejection as late fiction is unjustified and that with [not without] a judicious use of them, a much more reliable and accurate portrait of the period can be drawn than has been realized so far.
”


Harald Motzki:[7]


“
the mere fact that ahadith and asanid were forged must not lead us to conclude that all of them are fictitious or that the genuine and the spurious cannot be distinguished with some degree of certainty.
”


Gregor Schoeler:[14]


“
The current research on the life of Muhammad is characterized by the fact that two groups of researchers stand directly opposed to one another: The one group advocates, somewhat aggressively, the conviction that all transmitted traditions, in part because of great inner contradictions, legendary forms, and so forth, are to be rejected. The other group is opposed to that view. According to these researchers, the Islamic transmission, despite all these defects, has at least a genuine core, which can be recognized using the appropriate source-critical methods. The difficulty certainly consists of finding criteria by which the genuine is to be differentiated from the spurious.
”


Ignaz Goldziher[15] was of the opinion that most hadiths had been invented by the transmitters to justify certain opinions of their own. According to him hadiths should not be seen as authentic historical accounts. Goldzihers suggestion has been refuted to a certain level by Fuat Sezgin[16]. According to Fuat Sezgin most Hadiths are authentic.

[edit] See also

Science of hadith
Ibn al-Nafis
Hadith collection


[edit] Notes


^ Lisan al-Arab, by Ibn Manthour, vol. 2, pg. 350; Dar al-Hadith edition.
^ al-Kuliyat by Abu al-Baqa’ al-Kafawi, pg. 370; Al-Resalah Publishers. This last phrase is quoted by al-Qasimi in Qawaid al-Tahdith, pg. 61; Dar al-Nafais.
^ a b c d e "Hadith," Encyclopedia of Islam.
^ Fath al-Bari, vol. 1, pg. 193 (page number of the original Maktabah al-Salafiyah edition as appears in the Dar Taibah printing). Al-Suyuti quotes this in his Tadrib al-Rawi, vol. 1, pg. 42 (Dar al-Asimah edition).
^ Tadrib al-Rawi, vol. 1, pgs. 39-41 with abridgement; I left out the majority if not the entirety of the etymology of each term. Suyuti refers this discussion to either both Tibi and Ibn Jama’ah or one to the exception of the other; for details refer to the text.
^ Ilm al-Rijal wa Ahimiyatih, by Mualami, pg. 16, Dar al-Rayah. I substituted the word ‘sunnah’ with the word ‘hadith’ as they are synonymous in this context.
^ a b http://people.uncw.edu/bergh/par246/L21RHadithCriticism.htm
^ See:

"Hadith," Encyclopedia of Islam Online;
"Hadith," Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim world.


^ Berg (2000) p. 8
^ See:

Robinson (2003) pp. 69-70;
Lucas (2004) p. 15


^ a b Momen, Moojan, Introduction to Shi'i Islam, Yale University Press, 1985, p.174
^ Page 1
^ The Succession to Muhammad, page xi
^ Gregor Schoeler, Berg (2003), p. 21
^ see his Muhammedanische Studien, second volume (Halle, 1888)
^ see his Geschichte des arabischen Schrifttums, first volume (Leiden, 1967)



[edit] References

Berg, H. (2000). The development of exegesis in early Islam: the authenticity of Muslim literature from the formative period. Routledge. ISBN 0700712240. 
Lucas, S. (2004). Constructive Critics, Hadith Literature, and the Articulation of Sunni Islam. Brill Academic Publishers. ISBN 9004133194. 
Robinson, C. F. (2003). Islamic Historiography. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521629365. 
Robson, J.. "Hadith". in P.J. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C.E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel and W.P. Heinrichs. Encyclopaedia of Islam Online. Brill Academic Publishers. ISSN 1573-3912. 


[edit] Further reading

Brown, J. (2007). The Canonization of al-Bukhari and Muslim: The Formation and Function of the Sunni Hadith Canon. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
Juynboll, G. H. A. (2007). Encyclopedia of Canonical Hadith. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
Lucas, S. (2002). The Arts of Hadith Compilation and Criticism. University of Chicago. OCLC 62284281. 
Musa, A. Y. Hadith as Scripture: Discussions on The Authority Of Prophetic Traditions in Islam, New York: Palgrave, 2008


[edit] External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Hadith



Hadith, article on Enyclopaedia Britannica Online
Understanding Islam through Hadith by Ram Swarup


[edit] Hadith collections

Read and Search Hadith on Website and Mobile Phone
Hadiths (reported Sayings by The Prophet) A collection of reported sayings by the prophet, and an essay on the sources of Hadiths and their validity
The Seven Canonical Hadith Collections
Searchable hadith Database
Hadeeth Encyclopedia
Hadeeth Search
Renowned Hadith Collection
Search Hadith in Arabic at Ekabakti for Bukhari, Muslim, Tarmizi, Ibnu Majah, Nasaie and Abu Daud








v • d • e

Islam topics





Beliefs

God in Islam · Tawhid · Muhammad · Prophets of Islam






Five Pillars

Shahadah · Salah · Sawm · Zakat · Hajj






History & leaders

Timeline of Muslim history · Ahl al-Bayt · Sahaba · Shi'a Imams · Caliphs: Rashidun Caliphs, Umayyad, Abbasid, Fatimid, Ottomans · Caliphates: Rashidun Caliphate, Umayyad, Abbasid, Caliphate of Cordoba, Fatimid, Ottoman Empire · Conquests · Golden Age · Agricultural Revolution






Religious texts

Qur'an · Sunnah · Hadith






Denominations

Sunni · Shia · Sufism · Ibadi






Life and Culture

Animals · Art · Calendar · Children · Holidays · Mosques · Philosophy · Political aspects · Science · Women · Islamic studies · Islam by country






Law &
Jurisprudence

Baligh · Cleanliness · Criminal · Dhabiĥa · Dhimmi · Divorce · Diet · Economics: Banking, Economic history, Murabaha, Riba · Ethics · Etiquette · Gambling · Gender segregation · Ghusl · Honorifics · Hudud · Hygiene: Miswak, Toilet, Wudu, Najis · Inheritance · Jizya · Leadership · Marital: Marriage contract, Nikah, Nikah Mut‘ah · Mahr · Mahram · Ma malakat aymanukum · Military: Prisoners of war · Slavery · Political · Sexuality: Masturbation, Sexual techniques · Sukuk · Takaful · Tayammum · Theological: Kalam · Zina · Sources






Islamic studies

Agriculture · Arts: Arabesque, Architecture, Calligraphy, Music, Pottery · Creationism · Feminism · Golden Age · Literature: Poetry · Philosophy: Early philosophy, Modern philosophy, Eschatology, Ethics, Theology · Sciences: Alchemy & Chemistry, Astrology, Astronomy, Economics, Islam and science, Mathematics, Medicine, Physics, Psychology · Sociology: Early sociology · Shu'ubiyya · Sports · Conversion of mosques · Historiography · Inventions






Other religions

Christianity · Hinduism · Jainism · Judaism · Sikhism






Related topics

Apostasy · Controversies · Criticism of Islam · Criticism of Muhammad · Criticism of the Qur'an · Islamism · Islamophobia · Islamic terrorism · Islamic view of miracles · Islam and antisemitism · Domestic violence · Persecution of Muslims · Qur'an and miracles · Qutbism










Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hadith"
Categories: Hadith | Aqidah | Islamic mythology | MuhammadHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2007 | Articles containing Arabic language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2008 | All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2008 | Articles needing additional references from September 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
বাংলা
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Español
Français
Frysk
한국어
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kiswahili
Latina
Magyar
മലയാളം
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
O'zbek
Polski
Português
Qaraqalpaqsha
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Zazaki
中文









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 05:15.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
