













Space Shuttle - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Space_Shuttle";
		var wgTitle = "Space Shuttle";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "28189";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282093367;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Space Shuttle

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the space vehicle.  For the NASA Space Program, see Space Shuttle program. For the Soviet space shuttle, see Buran (spacecraft).

Space Shuttle


Space Shuttle Discovery launches at the start of STS-120.


Function
Manned partially re-usable launch and reentry system


Manufacturer
United Space Alliance:
Thiokol/Alliant Techsystems (SRBs)
Lockheed Martin (Martin Marietta) - (ET)
Rockwell/Boeing (orbiter)


Country of origin
United States of America


Size


Height
184 ft (56.1 m)


Diameter
28.5 ft (8.69 m)


Mass
4,470,000 lb (2,030 t)


Stages
2


Capacity


Payload to LEO
24,400 kg (53,600 lb)


Payload to
GTO
3,810 kg (8,390 lb)


Launch history


Status
Active


Launch sites
LC-39, Kennedy Space Center
SLC-6, Vandenberg AFB (unused)


Total launches
125


Successes
124


Failures
1


Other
1 re-entry failure


Maiden flight
April 12, 1981


Notable payloads
International Space Station components
Hubble Space Telescope
Galileo
Magellan
Chandra X-ray Observatory
Compton Gamma Ray Observatory


Boosters (Stage 0) - Solid Rocket Boosters


No boosters
2


Engines
1 solid


Thrust
2,800,000 lbf each, sea level liftoff (12.5 MN)


Specific impulse
269 s


Burn time
124 s


Fuel
solid


First stage - External Tank


Engines
(none)
(3 SSMEs located on Orbiter)


Thrust
1,225,704 lbf total, sea level liftoff (5.45220 MN)


Specific impulse
455 s


Burn time
480 s


Fuel
LOX/LH2


Second stage - Orbiter


Engines
2 OME


Thrust
53.4 kN combined total vacuum thrust (12,000 lbf)


Specific impulse
316 s


Burn time
1250 s


Fuel
MMH/N2O4


NASA's Space Shuttle, officially called the Space Transportation System (STS), is the spacecraft currently used by the United States government for its human spaceflight missions and is scheduled to be retired from service in 2010. At launch, it consists of a rust-colored external tank (ET), two white, slender Solid Rocket Boosters (SRBs), and the orbiter, a winged spaceplane which is the space shuttle in the narrowest sense.
The orbiter carries astronauts and payload such as satellites or space station parts into low earth orbit, into the Earth's upper atmosphere or thermosphere.[1] Usually, five to seven crew members ride in the orbiter. The payload capacity is 22,700 kilograms (50,000 lb). When the orbiter's mission is complete it fires its Orbital Maneuvering System (OMS) thrusters to drop out of orbit and re-enters the lower atmosphere.[1] During the descent, the shuttle orbiter decelerates from hypersonic speed primarily by aerobraking and then for the landing phase it acts as a glider, making a completely unpowered ("deadstick") landing.




Contents


1 Description

1.1 Orbiter vehicle
1.2 Solid Rocket Boosters
1.3 Flight systems
1.4 Markings and insignia
1.5 Upgrades
1.6 Technical data


2 Mission profile

2.1 Launch
2.2 Re-entry and landing
2.3 Landing sites


3 Fleet history
4 Retirement

4.1 Non-NASA replacement vehicles and services


5 See also

5.1 Fiction and games
5.2 Physics
5.3 Similar spacecraft


6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Description
The Shuttle is the first orbital spacecraft designed for partial reusability. It carries payloads to low Earth orbit, provides crew rotation for the International Space Station (ISS), and performs servicing missions. The orbiter can also recover satellites and other payloads from orbit and return them to Earth. Each Shuttle was designed for a projected lifespan of 100 launches or 10 years' operational life. The man responsible for the design of the STS was Maxime Faget, who had also overseen the Mercury, Gemini and Apollo spacecraft designs. The crucial factor in the size and shape of the Shuttle Orbiter was the requirement that it be able to accommodate the largest planned commercial and classified satellites, and have the cross-range recovery range to meet classified USAF missions requirement for a one-around abort for a launch to a polar orbit. Factors involved in opting for 'reusable' solid rockets and an expendable fuel tank included the desire of the Pentagon to obtain a high-capacity payload vehicle for satellite deployment, and the desire of the Nixon administration to reduce the costs of space exploration by developing a spacecraft with reusable components.
Six air-worthy shuttles have been built; the first orbiter, Enterprise, was not built for space flight, and was used only for testing purposes. Five space-worthy orbiters were built: Columbia, Challenger, Discovery, Atlantis, and Endeavour. Challenger disintegrated 73 seconds after launch in 1986, and Endeavour was built as a replacement. Columbia broke apart during re-entry in 2003.
Each Space Shuttle is a partially reusable launch system that is composed of three main assemblies: the reusable Orbiter Vehicle (OV), the expendable external tank (ET), and the two partially-reusable solid rocket boosters (SRBs). The tank and boosters are jettisoned during ascent; only the orbiter goes into orbit. The vehicle is launched vertically like a conventional rocket, and the orbiter glides to a horizontal landing, after which it is refurbished for reuse.
Roger A. Pielke, Jr. has estimated that the Space Shuttle program has cost about US$170 billion (2008 dollars) through early 2008. This works out to an average cost per flight of about US$1.5 billion.[2]
At times, the orbiter itself is referred to as the space shuttle. Technically, this is a misnomer, as the actual "Space Transportation System" (space shuttle) is the combination of the orbiter, the external tank, and the two partially-reusable solid rocket boosters. Combined, these are referred to as the "Stack".

[edit] Orbiter vehicle
Main article: Space Shuttle orbiter
The orbiter resembles an aircraft with double-delta wings, swept 81° at the inner leading edge, and 45° at the outer leading edge. Its vertical stabilizer's leading edge is swept back at a 50° angle. The four elevons, mounted at the trailing edge of the wings, and the rudder/speed brake, attached at the trailing edge of the stabilizer, with the body flap, control the orbiter during descent and landing. The orbiter has a large payload bay measuring 15 feet (4.6 m) by 60 feet (18.3 m) comprising most of the fuselage.
Three Space Shuttle main engines (SSMEs) are mounted on the orbiter's aft fuselage in a triangular pattern. The three engines can swivel 10.5 degrees up and down, and 8.5 degrees from side to side during ascent to change the direction of their thrust and steer the shuttle as well as push. The orbiter structure is made primarily from aluminum alloy, although the engine thrust structure is made from titanium (alloy).

[edit] Solid Rocket Boosters
Main article: Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster
Two solid rocket boosters (SRBs) each provide 12.5 million newtons (2.8 million lbf) of thrust at liftoff, which is 83% of the total thrust needed for liftoff. The SRBs are jettisoned two minutes after launch at a height of about 45.7 kilometres (150,000 ft), and then deploy parachutes and land in the ocean to be recovered.[3] The SRB cases are made of steel about 1.3 centimetres (0.51 in) thick.[4]

[edit] Flight systems
Early shuttle missions took along the GRiD Compass, arguably one of the first laptop computers. The Compass sold poorly, as it cost at least US$8000, but offered unmatched performance for its weight and size.[5] NASA was one of its main customers.[6]
The shuttle was one of the earliest craft to use a computerized fly-by-wire digital flight control system. This means no mechanical or hydraulic linkages connect the pilot's control stick to the control surfaces or reaction control system thrusters.
A primary concern with digital fly-by-wire systems is reliability. Much research went into the shuttle computer system. The shuttle uses five identical redundant IBM 32-bit general purpose computers (GPCs), model AP-101, constituting a type of embedded system. Four computers run specialized software called the Primary Avionics Software System (PASS). A fifth backup computer runs separate software called the Backup Flight System (BFS). Collectively they are called the Data Processing System (DPS).[7][8]
The design goal of the shuttle's DPS is fail operational/fail safe reliability. After a single failure, the shuttle can still continue the mission. After two failures, it can still land safely.
The four general-purpose computers operate essentially in lockstep, checking each other. If one computer fails, the three functioning computers "vote" it out of the system. This isolates it from vehicle control. If a second computer of the three remaining fails, the two functioning computers vote it out. In the rare case of two out of four computers simultaneously failing (a two-two split), one group is picked at random.




Atlantis deploys landing gear before landing on a selected runway just like a common aircraft.


The Backup Flight System (BFS) is separately developed software running on the fifth computer, used only if the entire four-computer primary system fails. The BFS was created because although the four primary computers are hardware redundant, they all run the same software, so a generic software problem could crash all of them. Embedded system avionic software is developed under totally different conditions from public commercial software, the number of code lines is tiny compared to a public commercial software, changes are only made infrequently and with extensive testing, and many programming and test personnel work on the small amount of computer code. However in theory it can still fail, and the BFS exists for that contingency. And while BFS will run in parallel with PASS, to date, BFS has never been engaged to take over control from PASS during any shuttle mission.
The software for the shuttle computers is written in a high-level language called HAL/S, somewhat similar to PL/I. It is specifically designed for a real time embedded system environment.
The IBM AP-101 computers originally had about 424 kilobytes of magnetic core memory each. The CPU could process about 400,000 instructions per second. They have no hard disk drive, and load software from magnetic tape cartridges.
In 1990, the original computers were replaced with an upgraded model AP-101S, which has about 2.5 times the memory capacity (about 1 megabyte) and three times the processor speed (about 1.2 million instructions per second). The memory was changed from magnetic core to semiconductor with battery backup.




Space Shuttle program insignia



[edit] Markings and insignia
The typeface used on the Space Shuttle Orbiter is Helvetica.[9] On the side of the shuttle between the cockpit windows and the cargo bay doors is the name of the orbiter. Underneath the rear of the cargo bay doors is the NASA insignia, the text 'United States' and a flag of the United States. Another United States flag appears on the right wing.

[edit] Upgrades




During STS-101, Atlantis was the first shuttle to fly with a glass cockpit.


Internally, the shuttle remains largely similar to the original design, with the exception of the improved avionics computers. In addition to the computer upgrades, the original vector graphics monochrome cockpit displays were replaced with modern full-color, flat-panel display screens, similar to those of contemporary airliners like the Airbus A380 and Boeing 777. This is called a glass cockpit. Programmable calculators are carried as well (originally the HP-41C). With the coming of the ISS, the orbiter's internal airlocks have been replaced with external docking systems to allow for a greater amount of cargo to be stored on the shuttle's mid-deck during station resupply missions.
The Space Shuttle Main Engines (SSMEs) have had several improvements to enhance reliability and power. This explains phrases such as "Main engines throttling up to 104%." This does not mean the engines are being run over a safe limit. The 100% figure is the original specified power level. During the lengthy development program, Rocketdyne determined the engine was capable of safe reliable operation at 104% of the originally specified thrust. They could have rescaled the output number, saying in essence 104% is now 100%. To clarify this would have required revising much previous documentation and software, so the 104% number was retained. SSME upgrades are denoted as "block numbers", such as block I, block II, and block IIA. The upgrades have improved engine reliability, maintainability and performance. The 109% thrust level was finally reached in flight hardware with the Block II engines in 2001. The normal maximum throttle is 104%, with 106% or 109% used for mission aborts. For the first two missions, STS-1 and STS-2, the external tank was painted white to protect the insulation that covers much of the tank, but improvements and testing showed that it was not required. The weight saved by not painting the tank results in an increase in payload capability to orbit.[10] Additional weight was saved by removing some of the internal "stringers" in the hydrogen tank that proved unnecessary. The resulting "light-weight external tank" has been used on the vast majority of shuttle missions. STS-91 saw the first flight of the "super light-weight external tank". This version of the tank is made of the 2195 aluminum-lithium alloy. It weighs 3.4 tonnes (7,500 lb) less than the last run of lightweight tanks. As the shuttle cannot fly unmanned, each of these improvements has been "tested" on operational flights.
The SRBs (Solid Rocket Boosters) have undergone improvements as well. Design engineers added a third O-ring seal to the joints between the segments after the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster.




The three nozzles of the Main Engine cluster with the two Orbital Maneuvering System (OMS) pods, and the vertical stabilizer above.


Several other SRB improvements were planned in order to improve performance and safety, but never came to be. These culminated in the considerably simpler, lower cost, probably safer and better performing Advanced Solid Rocket Booster. These rockets entered production in the early to mid-1990s to support the Space Station, but were later canceled to save money after the expenditure of $2.2 billion.[11] The loss of the ASRB program resulted in the development of the Super LightWeight external Tank (SLWT), which provides some of the increased payload capability, while not providing any of the safety improvements. In addition, the Air Force developed their own much lighter single-piece SRB design using a filament-wound system, but this too was cancelled.
STS-70 was delayed in 1995, when woodpeckers bored holes in the foam insulation of Discovery's external tank. Since then, NASA has installed commercial plastic owl decoys and inflatable owl balloons which must be removed prior to launch.[12] The delicate nature of the foam insulation has been the cause of damage to the Thermal Protection System, the tile heat shield and heat wrap of the orbiter, during recent launches. NASA remains confident that this damage, while it was the primary cause of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster on February 1, 2003, will not jeopardize the objective of NASA to complete the International Space Station (ISS) in the projected time allotted.
A cargo-only, unmanned variant of the shuttle has been variously proposed, and rejected since the 1980s. It was called the Shuttle-C, and would have traded re-usability for cargo capability, with large potential savings from reusing technology developed for the space shuttle.
On the first four shuttle missions, astronauts wore modified U.S. Air Force high-altitude full-pressure suits, which included a full-pressure helmet during ascent and descent. From the fifth flight, STS-5, until the loss of Challenger, one-piece light blue nomex flight suits and partial-pressure helmets were worn. A less-bulky, partial-pressure version of the high-altitude pressure suits with a helmet was reinstated when shuttle flights resumed in 1988. The Launch-Entry Suit ended its service life in late 1995, and was replaced by the full-pressure Advanced Crew Escape Suit (ACES), which resembles the Gemini space suit worn in the mid-1960s.
To extend the duration that orbiters can stay docked at the ISS, the Station-to-Shuttle Power Transfer System (SSPTS) was installed. The SSPTS allows these orbiters to use power provided by the ISS to preserve their consumables. The SSPTS was first used successfully on STS-118.

[edit] Technical data




Space Shuttle Atlantis transported by a Boeing 747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft (SCA), 1998 (NASA).






Space Shuttle Endeavour being transported by a Boeing 747.






Space Shuttle Orbiter and Soyuz-TM (drawn to scale).






An overhead view of Atlantis as it sits atop the Mobile Launcher Platform (MLP) before STS-79. Two Tail Service Masts (TSMs) to either side of the orbiter's tail provide umbilical connections for propellant loading and electrical power.






Water is released onto the mobile launcher platform on Launch Pad 39A at the start of a rare sound suppression system test in 2004. During launch, 300,000 US gallons (1,100 m³) are poured onto the pad in only 41 seconds.


Orbiter specifications[13] (for Endeavour, OV-105)

Length: 122.17 ft (37.24 m)
Wingspan: 78.06 ft (23.79 m)
Height: 58.58 ft (17.86 m)
Empty weight: 172,000 lb (78,000 kg)[14]
Gross liftoff weight: 240,000 pounds (110,000 kg)
Maximum landing weight: 230,000 pounds (100,000 kg)
Main engines: Three Rocketdyne Block IIA SSMEs, each with a sea level thrust of 393,800 lbf (1.752 MN) at 104% power
Maximum payload: 55,250 lb (25,060 kg)
Payload bay dimensions: 15 ft (4.6 m) by 59 ft (18.0 m)
Operational altitude: 100 to 520 nmi (185 to 960 km)
Speed: 7,743 m/s (27,875 km/h, 25,404 ft/s, 17,321 mi/h)
Crossrange: 2,009 km (1,085 nmi)
Crew: Varies. The earliest shuttle flights had the minimum crew of two; many later missions a crew of five. Today, typically seven people fly (commander, pilot, several mission specialists, and rarely a flight engineer). On two occasions, eight astronauts have flown (STS-61-A, STS-71). Eleven people could be accommodated in an emergency mission (see STS-3xx).

External tank specifications (for SLWT)

Length: 46.9 metres (154 ft)
Diameter: 8.4 metres (28 ft)
Propellant volume: 2,025 cubic metres (535,000 US gal)
Empty weight: 26,535 kg (58,500 lb)
Gross liftoff weight: 756,000 kilograms (1,670,000 lb)

Solid Rocket Booster specifications

Length: 45.6 m (149.6 ft)
Diameter: 3.7 m (12.14 ft)
Empty weight (per booster): 63,272 kg (139,491 lb)
Gross liftoff weight (per booster): 590,000 kg (1.3 million lb)
Thrust (sea level, liftoff): 12.5 MN (2.8 million lbf)

System Stack specifications

Height: 56 m (183.7 ft)
Gross liftoff weight: 2 million kg (4.5 million lb)
Total liftoff thrust: 30.16 MN (6.781 million lbf)


[edit] Mission profile

[edit] Launch
All Space Shuttle missions are launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC). The shuttle will not be launched under conditions where it could be struck by lightning. Aircraft are often struck by lightning with no adverse effects because the electricity of the strike is dissipated through its conductive structure and the aircraft is not electrically grounded. Like most jet airliners, the shuttle is mainly constructed of conductive aluminum, which would normally shield and protect the internal systems. However, upon takeoff the shuttle sends out a long exhaust plume as it ascends, and this plume can trigger lightning by providing a current path to ground. The NASA Anvil Rule for a shuttle launch states that an anvil cloud cannot appear within a distance of 10 nautical miles.[15] The Shuttle Launch Weather Officer will monitor conditions until the final decision to scrub a launch is announced. In addition, the weather conditions must be acceptable at one of the Transatlantic Abort Landing sites (One of several Space Shuttle abort modes) to launch.[16] While the shuttle might safely endure a lightning strike, a similar strike caused problems on Apollo 12, so for safety NASA chooses not to launch the shuttle if lightning is possible (NPR8715.5).
The Shuttle has not been launched if its flight will take it from one year to the next (December to January), a year-end rollover (YERO). Its flight software, designed in the 1970s, was not designed for this, and would require the orbiter's computers be reset through a change of year, which could cause a glitch while in orbit. In 2007, NASA engineers devised a solution to this, allowing Shuttle flights to cross the year-end boundary.[17]
On the day of a launch, after the final hold in the countdown at T minus 9 minutes, the Shuttle goes through its final preparations for launch, and the countdown is automatically controlled by a special computer program at the Launch Control Center. This is known as the Ground Launch Sequencer (GLS), which stops the count if it senses a critical problem with any of the Shuttle's on-board systems. The GLS hands off the count to the Shuttle's on-board computers at T minus 31 seconds, in a process called auto sequence start.
At T minus 16 seconds, the massive sound suppression system (SPS) begins to drench the Mobile Launcher Platform (MLP) and SRB trenches with 300,000 US gallons (1,100 m3) of water to protect the Orbiter from damage by acoustical energy and rocket exhaust reflected from the flame trench and MLP during liftoff.[18]
At T-minus 10 seconds, hydrogen igniters are activated under each engine bell to quell the stagnant gas inside the cones before ignition. Failure to burn these gases can trip the onboard sensors and create the possibility of an overpressure and explosion of the vehicle during the firing phase. The main engine turbopumps also begin charging the combustion chambers with liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen at this time. The computers reciprocate this action by allowing the redundant computer systems to begin the firing phase.
The three Space Shuttle Main Engines (SSMEs) start at T minus 6.6 seconds. The main engines ignite sequentially via the shuttle's general purpose computers (GPCs) at 120 millisecond intervals. The GPCs require that the engines reach 90% of their rated performance to complete the final gimbal of the main engine nozzles to liftoff configuration.[19] When the SSMEs start, the water from the sound suppression system flashes into a large volume of steam that shoots southward. All three SSMEs must reach the required 100% thrust within three seconds, otherwise the onboard computers will initiate an RSLS abort. If the onboard computers verify normal thrust buildup, at T minus 0 seconds, the SRBs are ignited. At this point the vehicle is committed to takeoff, as the SRBs cannot be turned off once ignited. After the SRBs reach a stable thrust ratio, pyrotechnic nuts are detonated by radio controlled signals from the shuttle's GPC's to release the vehicle.[20] The plume from the solid rockets exits the flame trench in a northward direction at near the speed of sound, often causing a rippling of shockwaves along the actual flame and smoke contrails. At ignition, the GPC's mandate the firing sequences via the Master Events Controller, a computer program integrated with the shuttle's four redundant computer systems. There are extensive emergency procedures (abort modes) to handle various failure scenarios during ascent. Many of these concern SSME failures, since that is the most complex and highly stressed component. After the Challenger disaster, there were extensive upgrades to the abort modes.




Shuttle launch of Atlantis at sunset in 2001. The sun is behind the camera, and the plume's shadow intersects the moon across the sky.






STS mission profile






SSLV at Mach 2.46 and 66,000 feet (20,000 m). The surface of the vehicle is colored by the pressure coefficient, and the gray contours represent the density of the surrounding air, as calculated using the OVERFLOW codes.


After the main engines start, but while the solid rocket boosters are still clamped to the pad, the offset thrust from the Shuttle's three main engines causes the entire launch stack (boosters, tank and shuttle) to pitch down about 2 m at cockpit level. This motion is called the "nod", or "twang" in NASA jargon. As the boosters flex back into their original shape, the launch stack pitches slowly back upright. This takes approximately six seconds. At the point when it is perfectly vertical, the boosters ignite and the launch commences.
Shortly after clearing the tower the Shuttle begins a roll and pitch program to set its orbital inclination and so that the vehicle is below the external tank and SRBs, with wings level. The vehicle climbs in a progressively flattening arc, accelerating as the weight of the SRBs and main tank decrease. To achieve low orbit requires much more horizontal than vertical acceleration. This is not visually obvious, since the vehicle rises vertically and is out of sight for most of the horizontal acceleration. The near circular orbital velocity at the 380 kilometres (240 mi) altitude of the International Space Station is 7.68 kilometers per second 27,650 kilometres per hour (17,180 mph), roughly equivalent to Mach 23 at sea level. As the International Space Station orbits at an inclination of 51.6 degrees, the Shuttle has to set its inclination to the same value to rendezvous with the station.
Around a point called Max Q, where the aerodynamic forces are at their maximum, the main engines are temporarily throttled back to avoid overspeeding and hence overstressing the Shuttle, particularly in vulnerable areas such as the wings. At this point, a phenomenon known as the Prandtl-Glauert singularity occurs, where condensation clouds form during the vehicle's transition to supersonic speed.
126 seconds after launch, explosive bolts release the SRBs and small separation rockets push them laterally away from the vehicle. The SRBs parachute back to the ocean to be reused. The Shuttle then begins accelerating to orbit on the Space Shuttle main engines. The vehicle at that point in the flight has a thrust-to-weight ratio of less than one – the main engines actually have insufficient thrust to exceed the force of gravity, and the vertical speed given to it by the SRBs temporarily decreases. However, as the burn continues, the weight of the propellant decreases and the thrust-to-weight ratio exceeds 1 again and the ever-lighter vehicle then continues to accelerate toward orbit.
The vehicle continues to climb and takes on a somewhat nose-up angle to the horizon – it uses the main engines to gain and then maintain altitude while it accelerates horizontally towards orbit. At about five and three-quarter minutes into ascent, the orbiter rolls heads up to switch communication links from ground stations to Tracking and Data Relay Satellites.
Finally, in the last tens of seconds of the main engine burn, the mass of the vehicle is low enough that the engines must be throttled back to limit vehicle acceleration to 3 g (30 m/s²), largely for astronaut comfort.
The main engines are shut down before complete depletion of propellant, as running dry would destroy the engines. The oxygen supply is terminated before the hydrogen supply, as the SSMEs react unfavorably to other shutdown modes. Liquid oxygen has a tendency to react violently, and supports combustion when it encounters hot engine metal. The external tank is released by firing explosive bolts and falls, largely burning up in the atmosphere, though some fragments fall into the ocean, in either the Indian Ocean or the Pacific Ocean depending on launch profile.[13] The sealing action of the tank plumbing and lack of pressure relief systems on the external tank helps it break up in the lower atmosphere. After the foam burns away during reentry, the heat causes a pressure buildup in the remaining liquid oxygen and hydrogen until the tank explodes. This ensures that any pieces that fall back to Earth are small.
To prevent the shuttle from following the external tank back into the lower atmosphere, the Orbital maneuvering system (OMS) engines are fired to raise the perigee higher into the upper atmosphere. On some missions (e.g., missions to the ISS), the OMS engines are also used while the main engines are still firing. The reason for putting the orbiter on a path that brings it back to Earth is not just for external tank disposal. It is one of safety; if the OMS malfunctions, or the cargo bay doors cannot open for some reason, the shuttle is already on a path to return to earth for an emergency abort landing.

[edit] Re-entry and landing





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2007)






Simulation of the outside of the Shuttle as it heats up to over 1,500  °C during re-entry.






Two space shuttles sit at launch pads. This particular occasion is due to the final Hubble servicing mission, where the International Space Station is unreachable, necessitating having a shuttle on standby for a possible rescue mission.






A space shuttle model undergoes a wind tunnel test in 1975. This test is simulating the ionized gasses that surround a shuttle as it reenters the atmosphere.


Almost the entire space shuttle re-entry, except for lowering the landing gear and deploying the air data probes, is normally performed under computer control. However, the re-entry can be flown entirely manually if an emergency arises. The approach and landing phase can be controlled by the autopilot, but is usually hand flown.
The vehicle begins re-entry by firing the Orbital maneuvering system engines, while flying upside down, backside first, in the opposite direction to orbital motion for approximately three minutes, which reduces the shuttle's velocity by about 200 mph (90 m/s). The resultant slowing of the Shuttle lowers its orbital perigee down into the upper atmosphere. The shuttle then flips over, by pulling its nose up (which is actually "down" because it's flying upside down). This OMS firing is done roughly halfway around the globe from the landing site.
The vehicle starts encountering more significant air density in the lower thermosphere at about 400,000 feet (120 km), at around Mach 25 (8.2 km/s). The vehicle is controlled by a combination of RCS thrusters and control surfaces, to fly at a 40 degree nose-up attitude, producing high drag, not only to slow it down to landing speed, but also to reduce reentry heating. In addition, the vehicle needs to bleed off extra speed before reaching the landing site. This is achieved by performing s-curves at up to a 70 degree roll angle.
The orbiter's maximum glide ratio/lift-to-drag ratio varies considerably with speed, ranging from 1:1 at hypersonic speeds, 2:1 at supersonic speeds and reaching 4.5:1 at subsonic speeds during approach and landing.[21]
In the lower atmosphere, the orbiter flies much like a conventional glider, except for a much higher descent rate, over 10,000 feet per minute (50 m/s).
At approximately Mach 3, two air data probes, located on the left and right sides of the orbiter's forward lower fuselage, are deployed to sense air pressure related to the vehicle's movement in the atmosphere.




Columbia touches down at Kennedy Space Center at the end of STS-73.


When the approach and landing phase begins, the orbiter is at a 3,000 m (10,000 ft) altitude, 12 km (7.5 miles) from the runway. The pilots apply aerodynamic braking to help slow down the vehicle. The orbiter's speed is reduced from 682 km/h (424 mph) to approximately 346 km/h (215 mph), (compared to 260 km/h (160 mph) for a jet airliner), at touch-down. The landing gear is deployed while the Orbiter is flying at 430 km/h (267 mph). To assist the speed brakes, a 12 m (40 ft) drag chute is deployed either after main gear or nose gear touchdown (depending on selected chute deploy mode) at about 343 km/h (213 mph). The chute is jettisoned once the orbiter slows to 110 km/h (69 mph).
After landing, the vehicle stands on the runway for several minutes to permit the fumes from poisonous hydrazine (which is used as a fuel for attitude control, and the orbiter's three APUs) to dissipate, and for the shuttle fuselage to cool before the astronauts disembark.

[edit] Landing sites
Conditions permitting, the space shuttle will always land at Kennedy Space Center; however, if the conditions make landing there unfavorable, the shuttle can touch down at Edwards Air Force Base in California or at other sites around the world. A landing at Edwards means that the shuttle must be mated to the Shuttle Carrier Aircraft, and returned to Cape Canaveral, costing NASA an additional 1.7 million dollars. Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-3) also landed once at the White Sands Space Harbor in New Mexico, but this is viewed as a last resort, as NASA scientists believe that the sand could potentially damage the shuttle's exterior.




A computer simulation of high velocity air flow around the space shuttle during re-entry.


A list of other landing sites:[22]

Eglin Air Force Base, Florida
Elmendorf Air Force Base, Alaska[23]
White Sands Space Harbor, New Mexico (actual landing site for STS-3)
MCAS Yuma/Yuma International Airport, Arizona
Plattsburgh Air Force Base, New York (Former site; now closed)
Ben Guerir Air Base, Morocco
Morón Air Base, Spain
Banjul International Airport (Yundum), The Gambia
Zaragoza Air Base, Spain
Clark Air Base, Philippines (decommissioned)
Kuala Lumpur International Airport, Malaysia
RAAF Base Amberley, Australia
Andersen AFB, Guam
Amilcar Cabral International Airport, Cape Verde
Hickam AFB, Hawaii
Stockholm-Arlanda Airport, Sweden
Istres AB, France
Bangor International Airport, Maine
Salina Municipal Airport, Kansas
Westover Air Reserve Base, Massachusetts
Gander International Airport, Canada
RAF Fairford, Gloucestershire, England
Shannon International Airport, Ireland
East Texas Regional Airport, Texas, USA
Campbeltown Airport, Scotland

A list of launch abort sites:

Atlantic City International Airport, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
RAAF Base Darwin, Darwin Australia
Myrtle Beach International Airport, South Carolina, USA
Dyess Air Force Base, Texas, USA
Marine Corps Air Station Cherry Point, North Carolina, USA
Ellsworth Air Force Base, South Dakota, USA
Naval Air Station Oceana, Virginia Beach, Virginia, USA
Esenboğa International Airport, Ankara, Turkey
Dover Air Force Base, Delaware, USA
Fort Wayne International Airport (Air Guard Station), Fort Wayne, Indiana, USA
International Airport of Gran Canaria-Gando, Gran Canaria (Las Palmas), Canary Islands, Spain
Otis Air National Guard Base, Massachusetts, USA
Grant County International Airport, Washington, USA
Pease ANGB, New Hampshire, USA
Hao Airport, French Polynesia
AFB Hoedspruit, South Africa
Bermuda International Airport (former NAS Bermuda)
King Khalid International Airport, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Kinshasa International Airport, Congo-Kinshasa
Cologne Bonn Airport, Germany
Lajes Field, Azores, Portugal
Lincoln Airport, Nebraska, USA
Mountain Home Air Force Base, Idaho, USA
Naval Air Station Bermuda, Bahamas
NSA Souda Bay, Crete, Greece
NSF Diego Garcia, Chagos Archipelago, British Indian Ocean Territory
Orlando International Airport, Florida
RAF Fairford, United Kingdom
Roberts International Airport, Monrovia, Liberia
Lehigh Valley International Airport, Allentown, Pennsylvania, USA
Mataveri International Airport, Hanga Roa, Easter Island, Chile
Halifax Stanfield International Airport, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
Ben Guerir Air Base, Morocco
Columbus Air Force Base, Mississippi


[edit] Fleet history
Main article: List of space shuttle missions





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2008)


Below is a list of major events in the Space Shuttle orbiter fleet.

Space Shuttle major events

Date
Orbiter
Event
Remarks


February 18, 1977
Enterprise
First flight
Attached to Shuttle Carrier Aircraft throughout flight.


August 12, 1977
Enterprise
First free flight
Tailcone on; lakebed landing.


October 12, 1977
Enterprise
Fourth free flight
First with no tailcone; lakebed landing.


October 26, 1977
Enterprise
Final Enterprise free flight
First landing on Edwards AFB concrete runway.


April 12, 1981
Columbia
First Columbia flight, first orbital test flight
STS-1


November 11, 1982
Columbia
First operational flight of the Space Shuttle, first mission to carry four astronauts
STS-5


April 4, 1983
Challenger
First Challenger flight
STS-6


August 30, 1984
Discovery
First Discovery flight
STS-41-D


October 3, 1985
Atlantis
First Atlantis flight
STS-51-J


January 28, 1986
Challenger
Disintegrated 73 seconds after launch
All seven crew members perished.


September 29, 1988
Discovery
First post-Challenger mission
STS-26


May 4, 1989
Atlantis
The first Space Shuttle mission to launch a space probe, Magellan.
STS-30


May 7, 1992
Endeavour
First Endeavour flight
STS-49


November 19, 1996
Columbia
Longest Shuttle mission to date at 17 days, 15 hours
STS-80


October 11, 2000
Discovery
100th Space Shuttle mission
STS-92


February 1, 2003
Columbia
Disintegrated during re-entry
All seven crew members perished.


July 25, 2005
Discovery
First post-Columbia mission
STS-114


Planned fleet events


2009
Atlantis
Final servicing mission the Hubble Space Telescope
STS-125


2009
Endeavour
Deliver the exposed facility of Japan's Kibo laboratory to the International Space Station.
STS-127


2010
Atlantis
Last planned Atlantis flight
STS-131


2010
Endeavour
Last planned Endeavour flight
STS-133


2010
Discovery
Last planned Discovery flight; Last planned flight of the Space Shuttle Program
STS-134



[edit] Retirement
It is planned that in 2010, after nearly 30 years of duty, the Space Shuttle will be retired from service. To fill the void left behind by the Shuttle's retirement, a new spacecraft will be developed that will not only be capable of ferrying passengers and cargo to the ISS, but also beyond Earth's orbit to other worlds.[24] This spacecraft, originally tentatively dubbed the Crew Exploration Vehicle, has evolved into the Orion spacecraft, and the project has been dubbed Project Constellation. Atlantis will be the first of NASA's three space shuttles to be retired as the shuttle program winds down.[25] This next-generation vehicle is targeted for first manned launch in 2014 at the earliest. Therefore, all crews traveling to and from International Space Station for the intervening period of time will have to do so on board Russian spacecraft. Under this dilemma, congressmen are discussing the possibility to postpone the retirement of the space shuttles. One of the proposals, which would cost about $10 billion, would have the shuttles make six or seven additional flights between 2010 and 2013 and speed up development of the Orion ships to be ready by then. A second proposal would keep the shuttles flying until 2015 and leave Orion's schedule alone.[26]

[edit] Non-NASA replacement vehicles and services
NASA announced the awarding of contracts for the cargo resupply of the International Space Station (ISS) to SpaceX and Orbital Sciences Corporation on December 23, 2008.[27] SpaceX will use its Falcon 9 launch vehicle and Dragon spacecraft.[28] Orbital Sciences will use its Taurus II launch vehicle and Cygnus spacecraft.

[edit] See also

Space Shuttle program
Criticism of the Space Shuttle program
GRiD Compass the early laptop carried aboard the shuttle.
Human spaceflight
List of human spaceflights
List of space shuttle missions
NASA Space Shuttle decision
Orbiter Processing Facility
Shuttle Derived Launch Vehicle
Shuttle SERV
Space disaster
Space exploration
Space Shuttle abort modes
Space Shuttle crews
Shuttle Training Aircraft


[edit] Fiction and games

Space shuttles in fiction
Space Shuttle Mission 2007, latest Space Shuttle simulator for Windows XP and Vista PCs.
Orbiter, a freeware simulator that allows users to fly various spacecraft including the shuttle.
Space Shuttle America
Shuttle, a Space Shuttle simulator for PC, Amiga & Atari ST.
X-Plane, a flight simulator that allows players to fly the Space Shuttle's re-entry phase.


[edit] Physics

Atmospheric reentry
Lifting body
Reusable launch system
Single-stage-to-orbit


[edit] Similar spacecraft

Comparison of heavy lift launch systems
Dyna-soar
EADS Phoenix
Hermes
HOPE-X
Kliper
Military space shuttle
Orion (Project Constellation)
Soviet space shuttle Buran
Lockheed Martin X-33
DIRECT, a shuttle-derived vehicle proposed as an alternative for Project Constellation


[edit] References


^ a b NASA (1995). "Earth's Atmosphere". National Aeronautics and Space Administration. http://liftoff.msfc.nasa.gov/academy/space/atmosphere.html. Retrieved on October 25 2007. 
^ The Rise and Fall of the Space Shuttle, Book Review: FINAL COUNTDOWN: NASA and the End of the Space Shuttle Program by Pat Duggins, American Scientist, 2008, Vol. 96, No. 5, p. 32.
^ "NASA Space Shuttle Columbia Launch". http://www.asterpix.com/console?as=1203639196321-20328515dc. 
^ NASA. "Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident". NASA. http://history.nasa.gov/rogersrep/v2appl2b.htm. 
^ The Computer History Museum (2006). "Pioneering the Laptop:Engineering the GRiD Compass". The Computer History Museum. http://www.computerhistory.org/events/index.php?id=1139464298. Retrieved on October 25 2007. 
^ NASA (1985). "Portable Computer". NASA. http://ntrs.nasa.gov/search.jsp?R=499112&id=1&qs=Ntt%3DGRiD%252BCompass%26Ntk%3Dall%26Ntx%3Dmode%2520matchall%26N%3D0%26Ns%3DHarvestDate%257c1. Retrieved on October 26 2007. 
^ Ferguson, Roscoe C.; Robert Tate and Hiram C. Thompson. "Implementing Space Shuttle Data Processing System Concepts in Programmable Logic Devices". NASA Office of Logic Design. http://www.klabs.org/mapld06/abstracts/139_ferguson_a.html. Retrieved on 2006-08-27. 
^ IBM. "IBM and the Space Shuttle". IBM. http://www-03.ibm.com/ibm/history/exhibits/space/space_shuttle.html. Retrieved on August 27 2006. 
^  (2007-09-12). Helvetica [Documentary].
^ Aerospaceweb.org (2006). "Space Shuttle External Tank Foam Insulation". Aerospaceweb.org. http://www.aerospaceweb.org/question/spacecraft/q0285.shtml. Retrieved on October 25 2007. 
^ Encyclopedia Astronautica. "Shuttle". Encyclopedia Astronautica. http://www.astronautix.com/lvfam/shuttle.htm. 
^ Jim Dumoulin. "Woodpeckers damage STS-70 External Tank". NASA. http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-70/woodpecker.html. Retrieved on 2006-08-27. 
^ a b Jenkins, Dennis R. (2007). Space Shuttle: The History of the National Space Transportation System. Voyageur Press. ISBN 0963397451. 
^ [1]
^ Weather at About.com. What is the Anvil Rule for Thunderstorms? Accessed 2008-06-10.
^ NASA Launch Blog. [2] Accessed 2008-06-10.
^ Bergin, Chris. "NASA solves YERO problem for shuttle". http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/content/?cid=5026. Retrieved on 2007-12-22. 
^ National Aeronautics and Space Administration. "Sound Suppression Water System" Revised 2000-08-28. Accessed 2006-07-09.
^ National Aeronautics and Space Administration. "NASA - Countdown 101" Accessed 2006-07-10.
^ HSF - The Shuttle
^ Space Shuttle Technical Conference pg 258
^ Global Security. "Space Shuttle Emergency Landing Sites". GlobalSecurity.org. http://www.globalsecurity.org/space/facility/sts-els.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-03. 
^ US Northern Command. "DOD Support to manned space operations for STS-119". http://www.northcom.mil/News/2009/031309_a.html. 
^ http://www.csa.com/discoveryguides/newshuttle/overview.php
^ http://www.nasa.gov/missions/highlights/schedule.html
^ http://space.newscientist.com/channel/human-spaceflight/space-shuttle/dn13098-politician-urges-nasa-to-postpone-shuttles-retirement.html
^ "NASA Awards Space Station Commercial Resupply Services Contracts". NASA, December 23, 2008.
^ [3]



[edit] Further reading

NSTS 1988 Reference manual
How The Space Shuttle Works
NASA Space Shuttle News Reference - 1981 (PDF document)
Orbiter Vehicles
Lecture Series on the space shuttle from MIT OpenCourseWare


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Space Shuttle



NASA Human Spaceflight - Shuttle: Current status of shuttle missions
Video of current and historical missions (STS-1 thru Current)
NASA TV: View live streaming of launch and mission coverage
Space Shuttle Newsgroup - sci.space.shuttle
List of all Shuttle Landing Sites
Map of Landing Sites
Official NASA Human Space Flight Orbital Tracking system
Congressional Research Service (CRS) Reports regarding the Space Shuttle
Weather criteria for shuttle launch
Newer images, audio, and video of the space shuttle program
Older images of the space shuttle program
The maiden launch of the space shuttle (Google Video)
NASA Shuttle Gallery
Different details and perspectives from the orbiter (Gallery drafts.de) (ger.)
04/16/07: Consolidated Launch Manifest: Space Shuttle Flights and ISS Assembly Sequence.
NASA Further Updates Launch Schedule.
GRiD Compass History at Hrothgar's Cool Old Junk Page
NASA History Series Publications (many of which are on-line)
Space Shuttle Endeavour Pictures at the ISS







 
Links to related articles














v • d • e

Space Shuttle program





Core topics

Space Shuttle · Space Shuttle program







Components

Orbiter · Solid Rocket Booster (SRB) · External Tank (ET) · Main Engine (SSME) · Orbital Maneuvering System (OMS)






Orbiters

Enterprise · Columbia · Challenger · Discovery · Atlantis · Endeavour






Launch sites

Kennedy Space Center LC-39 · Vandenberg AFB SLC-6






Landing sites

Shuttle Landing Facility · Edwards Air Force Base · White Sands Space Harbor · Abort Landing Sites






Developments

Shuttle-Derived Launch Vehicle (SDLV) · Shuttle-C · Ares I · Ares IV · Ares V






Testing

Pathfinder · MPTA · MPTA-ET · ALT






Disasters

Columbia disaster (Columbia Accident Investigation Board)  · Challenger disaster (Rogers Commission Report)






Related topics

Missions (cancelled) · Decision to build · Crews · Abort modes · Crawler-transporter · Shuttle Carrier Aircraft · Space Shuttle Explorer (shuttle replica) · Shuttle Training Aircraft · Getaway Special · Rollbacks






See also: Space shuttles in fiction · Space Shuttle America (motion simulator ride)












v • d • e

Space Shuttles











 US Space Shuttle program
 
 Soviet Buran program







Enterprise (OV-101, atmospheric tests, retired)
Pathfinder (OV-098, ground tests)
Columbia (OV-102, destroyed 2003)
Challenger (OV-099, destroyed 1986)
Discovery (OV-103, active)
Atlantis (OV-104, active)
Endeavour (OV-105, active)




OK-GLI (Buran Analog BST-02, aerotester)
Buran (Shuttle 1.01, destroyed 2002)
Ptichka (Shuttle 1.02, 95–97% completed)
Baikal (Shuttle 2.01, incomplete)
2.02 (partially dismantled)
2.03 (dismantled)



















v • d • e

Reusable launch systems










 
Partially reusable










Current


Falcon 1 · Space Shuttle







Planned


Ares I · Ares V · Shenlong Spaceplane · HTS Maglev Launch Assist Space Shuttle · Silver Dart







Cancelled


Saturn-Shuttle · Shuttle-C

















 
Completely reusable










Planned


Avatar · Falcon 9 · Skylon · SpaceShipTwo · SpaceShipThree







Retired


SpaceShipOne · X-15







Cancelled


Energia II/Uragan · Falcon 5 · K-1 · VentureStar  · Hopper  · NASP  · HOTOL












Italics indicates suborbital launch systems.












v • d • e

United States orbital launch systems





Active

Atlas V · Delta (II · IV) · Falcon 1 · Minotaur · Pegasus · Shuttle · Taurus






In development

Ares I · Ares V · Athena III · Falcon 9 · GX* · Minotaur IV · Taurus II






Retired

Athena · Atlas (B · D · E/F · G · H · I · II · III · SLV-3 · Able · Agena · Centaur) · Conestoga · Delta (A · B · C · D · E · G · J · L · M · N · 0100 · 1000 · 2000 · 3000 · 4000 · 5000 · III) · H-I*  · Juno I · Juno II · N-I* · N-II* · Pilot · Saturn (I · IB · V · INT-21) · Scout · Sparta · Thor (Able · Ablestar · Agena · Burner · Delta · DSV-2U) · Thorad-Agena · Titan (II · IIIA · IIIB · IIIC · IIID · IIIE · 34D · CT-3 · IV) · Vanguard






* - Japanese projects using US rockets or stages












v • d • e

Spaceflight





General spaceflight

History (Space Race, Accidents and incidents) · Astrodynamics · Lists and timelines







Applications

Earth observation satellites (Spy satellites, weather satellites) · Space exploration · Space tourism · Communication satellites · Satellite navigation · Space colonization






Human spaceflight





General


Astronaut  · Life support system







Hazards


Weightlessness (space adaptation syndrome)  · cosmic radiation







Major projects


Vostok · Mercury · Voskhod · Gemini · Soyuz · Apollo · Space Shuttle · Shenzhou · Mir · ISS · Constellation







Other


Extra-vehicular activity









Spacecraft

Launch vehicle · Space Shuttle · Robotic spacecraft · Self-replicating spacecraft · Spacecraft propulsion · Rocket






Destinations

Sub-orbital · Orbital (Geosynchronous orbit, Geocentric orbit)  · Interplanetary spaceflight · Interstellar travel · Intergalactic travel






Space launch

Expendable and Reusable systems · Escape velocity · Direct ascent · Non-rocket spacelaunch · Spaceport · Launch pad






Main agencies

ESA · NASA  · RKA  · CNSA · ISRO · JAXA






Other

Private spaceflight · Space weather · Lagrangian point · Space and survival













 



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space_Shuttle"
Categories: Reusable launch systems | Space Shuttle program | Partially reusable launch vehicles | Manned spacecraftHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2007 | Articles needing additional references from September 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Azərbaycan
Български
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Esperanto
Español
فارسی
Français
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
ລາວ
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
ייִדיש
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 12:00.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
