













PowerPC - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "PowerPC";
		var wgTitle = "PowerPC";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "24281";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280973433;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); PowerPC

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Power Architecture
CPU architecture
This box: view • talk • edit



Historical



POWER • POWER1 • POWER2 • POWER3 • POWER4 • PowerPC-AS • PPC6xx • G4 • Gekko • AIM alliance



Current



PowerPC • e200 • e300 • e500 • e600 • QorIQ • PA6T • POWER5 • POWER6 • PPC4xx • PPC750 • PPC970 • Cell • Xenon • Broadway



Future



POWER7 • e700 • Titan



Related Links



RISC • System p • System i • Blue Gene • Power.org • PAPR • PReP • CHRP • more...



PowerPC (short for Power Performance Computing, often abbreviated as PPC) is a RISC instruction set architecture created by the 1991 Apple–IBM–Motorola alliance, known as AIM. Originally intended for personal computers, PowerPC CPUs have since become popular embedded and high-performance processors. PowerPC was the cornerstone of AIM's PReP and Common Hardware Reference Platform initiatives in the 1990s and while the architecture is well known for being used by Apple's Macintosh lines from 1994 to 2006 (before Apple's transition to Intel), its use in video game consoles and embedded applications far exceed Apple's use.
PowerPC is largely based on IBM's earlier POWER architecture, and retains a high level of compatibility with it; the architectures have remained close enough that the same programs and operating systems will run on both if some care is taken in preparation; newer chips in the POWER series implement the full PowerPC instruction set.




Contents


1 History
2 Design features

2.1 Endian modes


3 Implementations
4 Operating systems

4.1 General-purpose
4.2 Embedded


5 Licenses
6 Products and applications
7 Integrated circuit
8 See also
9 References
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History




IBM PowerPC 601 Microprocessor






A schematic showing the evolution of the different POWER, PowerPC and Power ISAs.


The history of the PowerPC begins with IBM's 801 prototype chip of John Cocke's RISC ideas in the late 1970s. 801-based cores were used in a number of IBM embedded products, eventually becoming the 16-register ROMP processor used in the IBM RT. The RT had disappointing performance and IBM started the America Project to build the fastest processor on the market. The result was the POWER architecture, introduced with the RISC System/6000 in early 1990.
The original POWER microprocessor, one of the first superscalar RISC implementations, was a high performance, multi-chip design. IBM soon realized that they would need a single-chip microprocessor to scale their RS/6000 line from lower-end to high-end machines. Work on a single-chip POWER microprocessor, called the RSC (RISC Single Chip) began. In early 1991 IBM realized that their design could potentially become a high-volume microprocessor used across the industry.
IBM approached Apple with the goal of collaborating on the development of a family of single-chip microprocessors based on the POWER architecture. Soon after, Apple, as one of Motorola's largest customers of desktop-class microprocessors, asked Motorola to join the discussions because of their long relationship, their more extensive experience with manufacturing high-volume microprocessors than IBM and to serve as a second source for the microprocessors. This three-way collaboration became known as AIM alliance, for Apple, IBM, Motorola.
In 1991, the PowerPC was just one facet of a larger alliance among these three companies. On the other side was the growing dominance of Microsoft and Windows in personal computing, and of Intel processors. At the time, most of the personal computer industry was shipping systems based on the Intel 80386 and 80486 chips, which had a CISC architecture, and development of the Pentium processor was well underway. The PowerPC chip was one of several joint ventures involving the three, in their efforts to counter the growing Microsoft-Intel dominance of personal computing.
To Motorola, POWER looked like an unbelievable deal. It allowed them to sell a widely tested and powerful RISC CPU for little design cash on their own part. It also maintained ties with an important customer, Apple, and seemed to offer the possibility of adding another in IBM who might buy smaller versions from them instead of making their own.
At this point Motorola already had its own RISC design in the form of the 88000 which was doing poorly in the market. Motorola was doing well with their 68000 family and the majority of the funding was focused on this. The 88000 effort was somewhat starved for resources.
However, the 88000 was already in production; Data General was shipping 88k machines and Apple already had 88k prototype machines running. The 88000 had also achieved a number of embedded design wins in telecom applications. If the new POWER single-chip solution could be made bus-compatible at a hardware level with the 88000, that would allow both Apple and Motorola to bring machines to market much faster since they would not have to redesign their board architecture.
The result of these various requirements was the PowerPC (Performance Computing) specification.
When the first PowerPC products reached the market, they were met with enthusiasm. In addition to Apple, both IBM and the Motorola Computer Group offered systems built around the processors. Microsoft released Windows NT 3.51 for the architecture, which was used in Motorola's PowerPC servers, and Sun Microsystems offered a version of its Solaris OS. IBM ported its AIX Unix and planned a release of OS/2. Throughout the mid-1990s, PowerPC processors achieved benchmark test scores that matched or exceeded those of the fastest x86 CPUs.
Ultimately, demand for the new architecture on the desktop never truly materialized. Windows, OS/2 and Sun customers, faced with the lack of application software for the PowerPC, almost universally ignored the chip. The PowerPC versions of Solaris, OS/2, and Windows were discontinued after only a brief period on the market. Only on the Macintosh, due to Apple's persistence, did the PowerPC gain traction. To Apple, the performance of the PowerPC was a bright spot in the face of increased competition from Windows 95 and Windows NT-based PCs.
In parallel with the alliance between IBM and Motorola, both companies had development efforts underway internally. The PowerQUICC line was the result of this work inside Motorola. The 4xx series of embedded processors was underway inside IBM. The IBM embedded processor business grew to nearly 100 million in revenue and attracted hundreds of customers.
However, toward the close of the decade, the same manufacturing issues began plaguing the AIM alliance in much the same way it did Motorola, which consistently pushed back deployments of new processors for Apple and other vendors: first from Motorola in the 1990s with the G3 and G4 processors, and IBM with the 64-bit G5 processor in 2003. In 2004, Motorola exited the chip manufacturing business by spinning off its semiconductor business as an independent company called Freescale Semiconductor. Around the same time, IBM exited the embedded processor market by selling its line of PowerPC products to Applied Micro Circuits Corporation (AMCC) and focused their chip designs for PowerPC CPUs towards game machine makers such as Nintendo's GameCube and Wii, Sony's PlayStation 3 and Microsoft's Xbox 360. In 2005 Apple announced they would no longer use PowerPC processors in their Apple Macintosh computers, favoring Intel produced processors instead, citing the performance limitations of the chip for future personal computer hardware specifically related to heat generation and energy usage in future products, as well as the inability of IBM to move the 970 (PowerPC G5) processor to the 3 GHz range. The IBM-Freescale alliance was replaced by an open standards body called Power.org. Power.org operates under the governance of the IEEE with IBM continuing to use and evolve the PowerPC processor on game consoles and Freescale Semiconductor focusing solely on embedded devices.
IBM continues to develop PowerPC microprocessor cores for use in their ASIC offerings. Many high volume applications embed PowerPC cores.
The POWER architecture IBM developed is still very much alive on their server offerings for large businesses and continues to evolve to this day (and current POWER processors implement the full PowerPC instruction set architecture).
The PowerPC specification is now handled by Power.org where IBM, Freescale, and AMCC are members. PowerPC, Cell and POWER processors are now jointly marketed as the Power Architecture. Power.org released a unified ISA, combining POWER and PowerPC ISAs into the new Power ISA v.2.03 specification and a new reference platform for servers called PAPR (Power Architecture Platform Reference).

[edit] Design features
The PowerPC is designed along RISC principles, and allows for a superscalar implementation. Versions of the design exist in both 32-bit and 64-bit implementations. Starting with the basic POWER specification, the PowerPC added:

Support for operation in both big-endian and little-endian modes; the PowerPC can switch from one mode to the other at run-time (see below). This feature is not supported in the PowerPC G5. This was the reason Virtual PC took so long to be made functional on G5-based Macintosh computers.
Single-precision forms of some floating point instructions, in addition to double-precision forms
Additional floating point instructions at the behest of Apple
A complete 64-bit specification, which is backward compatible with the 32-bit mode
A fused multiply-add
Removal of some of the more esoteric POWER instructions, some of which could be emulated by the operating system if necessary.
A paged memory management architecture which is used extensively in server and PC systems.
Addition of a new memory management architecture called Book-E, replacing the conventional paged memory management architecture for embedded applications. Book-E is application software compatible with existing PowerPC implementations, but requires minor changes to the operating system.


[edit] Endian modes
Most PowerPC chips switch endianness via a bit in the MSR (Machine State Register), with a second bit provided to allow the OS to run with a different endianness. Accesses to the "inverted page table" (a hash table that functions as a TLB with off-chip storage) are always done in big-endian mode. The processor starts in big-endian mode.
In little-endian mode, the three lowest-order bits of the effective address are exclusive-ORed with a three bit value selected by the length of the operand. This is enough to appear fully little-endian to normal software. An operating system will see a warped view of the world when it accesses external chips such as video and network hardware. Fixing this warped view of the world requires that the motherboard perform an unconditional 64-bit byte swap on all data entering or leaving the processor. Endianness thus becomes a property of the motherboard. An OS that operates in little-endian mode on a big-endian motherboard must both swap bytes and undo the exclusive-OR when accessing little-endian chips.
AltiVec operations, despite being 128-bit, are treated as if they were 64-bit. This allows for compatibility with little-endian motherboards that were designed prior to AltiVec.
An interesting side-effect of this implementation is that a program can store a 64-bit value (the longest operand format) to memory while in one endian mode, switch modes, and read back the same 64-bit value without seeing a change of byte order. This will not be the case if the motherboard is switched at the same time.
Mercury Computer Systems and Matrox ran the PowerPC in little-endian mode. This was done so that PowerPC devices serving as co-processors on PCI boards could share data structures with host computers based on x86. Both PCI and x86 are little-endian. Solaris and Windows NT for PowerPC also ran the processor in little-endian mode.
Some of IBM's embedded PowerPC chips use a per-page endianness bit. None of the previous applies to them.

[edit] Implementations




IBM PowerPC 604e 200 MHz


The first implementation of the architecture was the PowerPC 601, released in 1992, based on the RSC, implementing a hybrid of the POWER1 and PowerPC instructions. This allowed the chip to be used by IBM in their existing POWER1-based platforms, although it also meant some slight pain when switching to the 2nd generation "pure" PowerPC designs. Apple continued work on a new line of Macintosh computers based on the chip, and eventually released them as the 601-based Power Macintosh on March 14, 1994.
IBM also had a full line of PowerPC based desktops built and ready to ship; unfortunately, the operating system which IBM had intended to run on these desktops—Microsoft Windows NT—was not complete by early 1993, when the machines were ready for marketing. Accordingly, and further because IBM had developed animosity toward Microsoft, IBM decided to rewrite OS/2 for the PowerPC. It took IBM two years to rewrite OS/2 for PowerPC, and by the time the operating system was ready, the market for OS/2 on PowerPC had evaporated. For this reason, the IBM PowerPC desktops did not ship, although the reference design (codenamed Sandalbow) based on the PowerPC 601 CPU was released as an RS/6000 model (Byte magazine 's April 1994 issue included an extensive article about the Apple and IBM PowerPC desktops).
Apple, who also lacked a PowerPC based OS, took a different route. They rewrote the essential pieces of their Mac OS operating system for the PowerPC architecture, and further wrote a 680x0 emulator that could run 68K based applications and the parts of the OS that had not been rewritten.
The second generation was "pure" and included the "low end" PowerPC 603 and "high end" PowerPC 604. The 603 is notable due to its very low cost and power consumption. This was a deliberate design goal on Motorola's part, who used the 603 project to build the basic core for all future generations of PPC chips. Apple tried to use the 603 in a new laptop design but was unable to due to the small 8 KiB level 1 cache. The 68000 emulator in the Mac OS could not fit in 8 KiB and thus slowed the computer drastically. The 603e solved this problem by having a 16 KiB L1 cache which allowed the emulator to run efficiently.




Custom PowerPC CPU found in Nintendo's Wii video game console


In 1993, developers at IBM's Essex Junction, Burlington, Vermont facility started to work on a version of the PowerPC that would support the Intel x86 instruction set directly on the CPU. While the work was done by IBM without the support of the AIM alliance, this chip began to be known inside IBM and by the media as the PowerPC 615. However, profitability concerns and rumors of performance issues in the switching between the x86 and native PowerPC instruction sets resulted in the project being canceled in 1995 after only a limited number of chips were produced for in-house testing. Despite the rumors, the switching process in fact took a mere 5 cycles, or the amount of time required for the processor to empty its instruction pipeline. Microsoft also had a hand in the processor's downfall by refusing to support the PowerPC mode.[1]
The first 64-bit implementation was the PowerPC 620, but it appears to have seen little use because Apple didn't want to buy it and because, with its large die area, it was too expensive for the embedded market. It was later and slower than promised, and IBM used their own POWER3 design instead, offering no 64-bit "small" solution until the late-2002 introduction of the PowerPC 970. The 970 is a 64-bit processor derived from the POWER4 server processor. To create it, the POWER4 core was modified to be backward-compatible with 32-bit PowerPC processors, and a vector unit (similar to the AltiVec extensions in Motorola's 74xx series) was added.
IBM's RS64 processors are a family of chips implementing the "Amazon" variant of the PowerPC architecture. These processors are used in the RS/6000 and AS/400 computer families; the Amazon architecture includes proprietary extensions used by AS/400. The POWER4 and later POWER processors implement the Amazon architecture and replaced the RS64 chips in the RS/6000 and AS/400 families.
IBM developed a separate product line called the "4xx" line focused on the embedded market. These designs included the 401, 403, 405, 440, and 460. In 2004, IBM sold their 4xx product line to Applied Micro Circuits Corporation (AMCC). AMCC continues to develop new high performance products, partly based on IBM's technology, along with technology that was developed within AMCC. These products focus in a variety of applications including networking, wireless, storage, printing/imaging and industrial automation.
Numerically, the PowerPC is mostly found in controllers in cars. Almost half the world's automobiles have at least one PowerPC controller in them.
For the automotive market, Freescale Semiconductor initially offered a large number of variations called the MPC5xx family such as the MPC555, built on a variation of the 601 core called the 8xx and designed in Israel by MSIL (Motorola Silicon Israel Limited). The 601 core is single issue, meaning it can only issue one instruction in a clock cycle. To this they add various bits of custom hardware, to allow for I/O on the single chip. In 2004, the next-generation four-digit 55xx devices were launched for the automotive market. These use the newer e200 series of PowerPC cores.




The Freescale XPC855T Service Processor of a Sun SunFire V20z


Networking is another area where embedded PowerPC processors are found in large numbers. MSIL took the QUICC engine from the MC68302 and made the PowerQUICC MPC860. This was a very famous processor used in many Cisco edge routers in the late 1990s. Variants of the PowerQUICC include the MPC850, and the MPC823/MPC823e. All variants include a separate RISC microengine called the CPM that offloads communications processing tasks from the central processor and has functions for DMA. The follow-on chip from this family, the MPC8260, has a 603e-based core and a different CPM. Honda also uses PowerPC processors for ASIMO[2].




F-35 Lightning II fighter jet


In 2003, BAE SYSTEMS Platform Solutions delivered the Vehicle-Management Computer for the F-35 fighter jet. This platform consists of dual PowerPCs made by Freescale in a triple redundant setup.[3] 
[edit] Operating systems
Operating systems that work on the PowerPC architecture are generally divided into those which are oriented towards the general-purpose PowerPC systems, and those oriented towards the embedded PowerPC systems.
Note that a 64-bit PowerPC application which does not need 64-bit math will run slightly slower than if it were compiled in 32-bit mode. This is because 64-bit pointers and longs consume twice as much memory as their 32-bit counterparts, so the CPU cache will be able to hold fewer data and memory accesses will be more frequent. This is not true in general as, for example, on the Intel 64/AMD64 architecture only 8 registers are available in "legacy" 32-bit mode, while 16 are available in the 64-bit mode[4], an increase which can speed up procedures with large numbers of local variables and cut down memory accesses. Therefore it is not necessary to run a fully 64-bit operating system on a 64-bit PowerPC system; you obtain virtually all of the advantages of the 64-bit architecture by using a 64-bit kernel with 32-bit system software. A tiny minority of software requires a 64-bit build, typically those dealing with >3 GB of virtual memory or 64-bit integer math.

[edit] General-purpose

Apple's Macintosh System 7.1.2 through Mac OS X 10.5.
Linux

Crux PPC
Debian, with 32-bit powerpc a released port[5], and ppc64 in development[6]. Due to the considerations above the developers recommend using the 32-bit "powerpc" port on 64-bit systems (with an appropriate 64-bit kernel).
Fedora with 32 and 64 bit ppc releases [7]
Gentoo Linux, with 32-bit ppc releases[8] and an obsolete 64-bit ppc64 release. Due to the considerations above the developers recommend using the 32-bit "ppc" release on 64-bit systems (with an appropriate 64-bit kernel).
OpenSUSE, Full support for Old World and New World PowerMacs(32 & 64bit), PS3/Cell, and IBM POWER systems.
Red Hat Enterprise Linux
Slackintosh
Ubuntu, Community Supported for versions released after 6.10 to 7.10 [9]
Yellow Dog Linux, 32-bit native, 64-bit in beta[10]


NetBSD, port designations for PowerPC systems

ofppc released[11]
macppc released[12]
evbppc released[13]
pmppc released[14]
mvmeppc released[15]
bebox experimental[16]
amigappc very experimental[17]


FreeBSD, 32-bit powerpc released port[18]
OpenBSD, 32-bit macppc released port[19]
Windows NT 3.51 and 4.0 also supported PowerPC processors
ReactOS is also being ported to the Power ISA.
AmigaOS 4
MorphOS
IBM AIX
IBM i5/OS
OpenSolaris, experimental[20][21]
BeOS R5 Pro (BeBox, Macintosh and clones)
Haiku, experimental (Pegasos), unmaintained


[edit] Embedded

Nucleus RTOS
LiveDevices RTA-OSEKLive
Microware OS-9
MontaVista Linux
QNX
Cisco IOS
LynxOS
VxWorks
eCos
RTEMS
BlueCat embedded Linux from LynuxWorks
OSE from ENEA
INTEGRITY
Juniper Networks - JUNOS Routers and Switches OS .


[edit] Licenses
Companies that have licensed PowerPC include:

Altera - FPGA manufacturer
Apple ('A' in original AIM alliance), switched to Intel starting early 2006
Applied Micro Circuits Corporation (AMCC)
Avago Technologies
BAE Systems for RAD750 processor, used in spacecraft and planetary landers.
Bandai for its Apple Pippin
Cisco Systems for routers.
Culturecom for V-Dragon CPU.
Exponential Technology X704
HCL
LSI Logic
Microsoft, for the Xbox 360 processor, Xenon.
Motorola (now Freescale Semiconductor), as part of the original AIM alliance.
Nintendo for the GameCube and Wii processors.
P.A. Semi.
Rapport for Kilocore 1025 core CPU.
Samsung.
STMicroelectronics for the MPC55xx series.
Sony and Toshiba, for the Cell processor (inside the Playstation 3 and other devices).
Xilinx - FPGA manufacturer, Embedded PowerPC in the Virtex-II Pro, Virtex-4, and Virtex-5 FPGAs.


[edit] Products and applications
Various products and applications related to PowerPC architecture: PowerPC Implementations

[edit] Integrated circuit
Various types of Integrated Circuit (IC) related to PowerPC architecture: PowerPC/Types

[edit] See also

PowerPC Reference Platform (PReP)
Common Hardware Reference Platform (CHRP)
Power Architecture Platform Reference (PAPR)
Power Architecture
PowerOpen Environment
RTEMS real-time operating system


[edit] References


^ Microsoft killed the PowerPC 615 | The Register
^ EETimes.com - Latest robots fill helper, entertainer roles
^ Lockheed Martin F-35 Press Release
^ Porting Code to Intel EM64T-Based Platforms
^ Debian - PowerPC Port
^ Debian PPC64 Port
^ Fedora Project
^ Gentoo Linux Projects - Gentoo Linux PowerPC Development
^ PowerPCFAQ - Ubuntu Wiki
^ Terra Soft - Linux for Cell, PlayStation PS3, QS20, QS21, QS22, IBM System p, Mercury Cell, and Apple PowerPC
^ NetBSD/ofppc
^ NetBSD/macppc
^ NetBSD/evbppc
^ NetBSD/pmppc
^ NetBSD/mvmeppc
^ NetBSD/bebox
^ NetBSD/amigappc
^ FreeBSD/ppc Project
^ OpenBSD/macppc
^ Embedded Solaris on PowerPC
^ Solaris PowerPC Port at OpenSolaris.org




May, Cathy (editor) et al. (1994). The PowerPC Architecture: A Specification for A New Family of RISC Processors. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. ISBN 1-55860-316-6 (2nd ed.).
Hoxey, Steve (editor) et al. The PowerPC Compiler Writer's Guide. Warthman Associates. ISBN 0-9649654-0-2.
Motorola. Programming Environments Manual for 32-bit Implementations of the PowerPC Architecture, a 640 page PDF manual. P/N MPCFPE32B/AD .
IBM (2000). Book E: Enhanced PowerPC Architecture (3rd ed.)
Jeff Duntemann and Ron Pronk. (1994) Inside the PowerPC Revolution. Coriolis Group Books, ISBN 1-883577-04-7
PowerPC Architecture, an IBM article giving POWER and PowerPC history



[edit] External links





This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links.



Power.org
PPC Overview - an overview of PowerPC processors
IBM, Apple, RISC, and the roots of the Power Mac
OS/2 Warp, PowerPC Edition review by Michal Necasek 2005
A developer's guide to the PowerPC architecture– From IBM Developerworks.
A history of chipmaking at IBM– From IBM Developerworks.
PowerPC images and descriptions at cpu-collection.de
Freescale - the creator of PowerPC CPUs PowerPC devision.
Genesi - The creator of EFIKA, Open Desktop Workstation (ODW), Open Server Workstation (OSW), and High Density Blade Server.
PowerPC FAQ
Soft3 - The creator of Samantha, a PowerPC motherboard based on AMCC 440EP System-on-chip (SOC).
Virginia Tech - Supercomputers based on Apple PowerMac and Xserve.
XenPPC Xen Virtual Machine For PowerPC 970
MPC BDM at hardware-hacking.com - page about BDM (background debug mode) interface for PowerPC single-chip microcontrollers
Yellow Dog Linux - a PPC-only Linux distro








v • d • e

Motorola/Freescale processors





Industrial Control Unit

14500






6800 family

6800 · 6809 (see also: Hitachi 6309)






68000 family

68000 · 68008 · 68010 · 68012 · 68020 · 68030 · 68040 · 68060 · ColdFire · DragonBall






Low-cost variants

68EC000 · 68EC020 · 68EC030 · 68EC040 · 68LC040






Pre-PowerPC RISC

88000






Floating-point coprocessors

68881, 68882






Memory Management Unit

68851






PowerPC family

PPC e200 · PPC 6xx/e300 · PPC 75x · PPC e500 · PPC 74xx/e600 · PPC e700 · PowerQUICC family · QorIQ









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PowerPC"
Categories: PowerPC microprocessors | Power ArchitectureHidden categories: Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Bosanski
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Italiano
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 00:03.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
