











Leo Tolstoy - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Leo_Tolstoy";
		var wgTitle = "Leo Tolstoy";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "18622119";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281246295;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Leo Tolstoy

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Leo Tolstoy



Lev Nikolayevich Tolstoy in Yasnaya Polyana, 1908. (Early colour photograph taken by Sergei Mikhailovich Prokudin-Gorskii)


Born
September 9, 1828(1828-09-09)
Yasnaya Polyana, Russian Empire


Died
November 20, 1910 (aged 82)
Astapovo, Russian Empire


Occupation
Novelist


Genres
Realist


Notable work(s)
War and Peace
Anna Karenina







Influences






Petr Chelčický, Aleksandr Pushkin, Laurence Sterne, Harriet Beecher Stowe, Charles Dickens, Plato, Aristotle, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Arthur Schopenhauer, Nikolai Vasilievich Gogol, the Bible, Henry David Thoreau[citation needed]















Influenced






Muhammad Iqbal, Mohandas Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr., Virginia Woolf, Orhan Pamuk, Ludwig Wittgenstein, Edna O'Brien, James Joyce, Vladimir Nabokov, J. D. Salinger, Modernism[citation needed]













Signature



Leo Tolstoy, or Count Lev Nikolayevich Tolstoy (Russian: Лев Никола́евич Толсто́й?·i, Russian pronunciation: [lʲɛv nʲɪkɐˈlaɪvʲɪtɕ tɐlˈstoj]; September 9 [O.S. August 28] 1828 – November 20 [O.S. November 7] 1910), was a Russian writer widely regarded as one of the greatest novelists of all time. His masterpieces, War and Peace and Anna Karenina, represent the peak of realist fiction in their scope, breadth and vivid depiction of 19th-century Russian life and mind.
Tolstoy's further talents as essayist, dramatist, and educational reformer made him the most influential member of the aristocratic Tolstoy family. His literal interpretation of the ethical teachings of Jesus, centering on the Sermon on the Mount, caused him in later life to become a fervent Christian anarchist and pacifist. His ideas on nonviolent resistance, expressed in such works as The Kingdom of God is Within You, were to have a profound impact on such pivotal twentieth-century figures as Gandhi[1] and Martin Luther King, Jr..




Contents


1 Early life
2 Novels and fictional works
3 Religious and political beliefs
4 Bibliography
5 See also
6 References
7 Further reading





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Early life
Tolstoy was born in Yasnaya Polyana, the family estate situated in the region of Tula, Russia. The Tolstoys are a well-known family of old Russian nobility, and he was connected to the grandest families of Russian aristocracy; Alexander Pushkin was his fourth cousin.
The fourth of five children, his parents died when he was young, and he and his siblings were raised by relatives. In 1844, he began studying law and Oriental languages at Kazan University, where teachers described him as "both unable and unwilling to learn." He left university in the middle of his studies, returned to Yasnaya Polyana, and spent much of his time in Moscow and St. Petersburg. In 1851, after contracting heavy gambling debts, he accompanied his elder brother to the Caucasus and joined the Russian Army. He began writing literature around this time.
His conversion from a dissolute and privileged society author to the non-violent and spiritual anarchist of his latter days was brought about by two trips around Europe in 1857 and 1860-61, a period when many liberal-leaning Russian aristocrats escaped the stifling political repression in Russia; others who followed the same path were Alexander Herzen, Mikhail Bakunin, and Peter Kropotkin. During his 1857 visit, Tolstoy witnessed a public execution in Paris, a traumatic experience that would mark the rest of his life. Writing in a letter to his friend V. P. Botkin:

The truth is that the State is a conspiracy designed not only to exploit, but above all to corrupt its citizens ... Henceforth, I shall never serve any government anywhere.

His European trip in 1860-61 shaped both his political and literary transformation when he met Victor Hugo, whose literary talents Tolstoy praised after reading Hugo's newly finished Les Miserables. A comparison of Hugo's novel and Tolstoy's War and Peace shows the influence of the evocation of its battle scenes. Tolstoy's political philosophy was also influenced by a March 1861 visit to French anarchist Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, then living in exile under an assumed name in Brussels. Apart from reviewing Proudhon's forthcoming publication, "La Guerre et la Paix", whose title Tolstoy would borrow for his masterpiece, the two men discussed education, as Tolstoy wrote in his educational notebooks:

If I recount this conversation with Proudhon, it is to show that, in my personal experience, he was the only man who understood the significance of education and of the printing press in our time.





Tolstoy's wife Sofia Andreevna Tolstaya and daughter Alexandra Tolstaya.


Fired by enthusiasm, Tolstoy returned to Yasnaya Polyana and founded thirteen schools for his serfs' children, whose ground-breaking libertarian principles Tolstoy described in his 1862 essay, "The School at Yasnaya Polyana". Tolstoy's educational experiments were short-lived due to harassment by the Tsarist secret police, but as a direct forerunner to A.S.Neill's Summerhill School, the school at Yasnaya Polyana can justifiably be claimed to be the first example of a coherent theory of libertarian education.
On 23 September 1862 Tolstoy married Sofia Andreevna Bers (1844-1919), who was 16 years younger, and together they had thirteen children, five of whom died during their childhoods.[2] The marriage with Sofia Bers was marked from the outset by Tolstoy when, on the eve of their marriage, he gave her his diaries detailing Tolstoy's sexual relations with his serfs. Even so, their early marriage life was comparatively blissful and idyllic and allowed Tolstoy much freedom to compose the literary masterpieces War and Peace and Anna Karenina. His late marriage life has been described by A.N.Wilson as one of the unhappiest in literary history. His relationship with his wife deteriorated as his beliefs became increasingly radical, and he sought to reject his inherited and earned wealth, including the renunciation of copyright on his earlier works.

Novels and fictional works
Tolstoy was one of the giants of 19th century Russian literature. His most famous works include the novels War and Peace and Anna Karenina, and many shorter works, including the novellas The Death of Ivan Ilyich and Hadji Murad. His contemporaries paid him lofty tributes: Dostoevsky thought him the greatest of all living novelists while Gustave Flaubert gushed: "What an artist and what a psychologist!". Anton Chekhov, who often visited Tolstoy at his country estate, wrote: "When literature possesses a Tolstoy, it is easy and pleasant to be a writer; even when you know you have achieved nothing yourself and are still achieving nothing, this is not as terrible as it might otherwise be, because Tolstoy achieves for everyone. What he does serves to justify all the hopes and aspirations invested in literature." Later critics and novelists continue to bear testaments to his art: Virginia Woolf went on to declare him "greatest of all novelists", and James Joyce noted: "He is never dull, never stupid, never tired, never pedantic, never theatrical!". Thomas Mann wrote of his seemingly guileless artistry—"Seldom did art work so much like nature"—sentiments shared in part by many others, including Marcel Proust, William Faulkner, Vladimir Nabokov (who superlatively praised works such as Anna Karenina and The Death of Ivan Ilyich, questioned the reputation of War and Peace and harshly criticized Resurrection and The Kreutzer Sonata).
His autobiographical novels, Childhood, Boyhood, and Youth (1852–1856), his first publications, tell of a rich landowner's son and his slow realization of the differences between him and his peasants. Although in later life Tolstoy rejected these books as sentimental, a great deal of his own life is revealed, and the books still have relevance for their telling of the universal story of growing up.
Tolstoy served as a second lieutenant in an artillery regiment during the Crimean War, recounted in his Sevastapol Sketches. His experiences in battle helped develop his pacifism, and gave him material for realistic depiction of the horrors of war in his later work.
His fiction consistently attempts to convey realistically the Russian society in which he lived. The Cossacks (1863) describes the Cossack life and people through a story of a Russian aristocrat in love with a Cossack girl. Anna Karenina (1877) tells parallel stories of an adulterous woman trapped by the conventions and falsities of society and of a philosophical landowner (much like Tolstoy), who works alongside the peasants in the fields and seeks to reform their lives.
Tolstoy not only drew from his experience of life but created characters in his own image, such as Pierre Bezukhov and Prince Andrei in War and Peace, Levin in Anna Karenina and to some extent, Prince Nekhlyudov in Resurrection.
War and Peace is generally thought to be one of the greatest novels ever written, remarkable for its breadth and unity. Its vast canvas includes 580 characters, many historical, others fictional. The story moves from family life to the headquarters of Napoleon, from the court of Alexander I of Russia to the battlefields of Austerlitz and Borodino. Tolstoy's original idea for War and Peace was to investigate the causes of the Decembrist revolt, to which it refers only in the last chapters, from which can be deduced that Andrei Bolkonski's son will become one of the Decembrists. The novel explores Tolstoy's theory of history, and in particular the insignificance of individuals such as Napoleon and Alexander. Somewhat surprisingly, Tolstoy did not consider War and Peace to be a novel (nor did he consider many of the great Russian fictions written at that time to be novels). This view becomes less surprising if one considers that Tolstoy was a novelist of the realist school who considered the novel to be a framework for the examination of social and political issues in nineteenth-century life. War and Peace (which is to Tolstoy really an epic in prose) therefore did not qualify. Tolstoy thought that Anna Karenina was his first true novel, and it is indeed one of the greatest of all realist novels.
After Anna Karenina, Tolstoy concentrated on Christian themes, and his later novels such as The Death of Ivan Ilyich (1886) and What Then Must We Do? develop a radical anarcho-pacifist Christian philosophy which led to his excommunication from the Russian Orthodox Church in 1901.
For all the due praise of Tolstoy's two great pillars of Russian Civilization, "Anna Karenina" and "War and Peace," Tolstoy rejected the two works later in his life as something not as true of reality. Such an argument is supported in "The Death of Ivan Ilyich" whose main character continually battles with his family and servants, requiring above the water and food needed to keep him alive, Ivan demands honesty.

Religious and political beliefs




Portrait of Leo Tolstoy (1887) by Ilya Yefimovich Repin


After reading Schopenhauer's The World as Will and Representation, Tolstoy gradually became converted to the ascetic morality that was praised in that book as the proper spiritual path for the upper classes.

Do you know what this summer has meant for me? Constant raptures over Schopenhauer and a whole series of spiritual delights which I've never experienced before. ... no student has ever studied so much on his course, and learned so much, as I have this summer.
– Tolstoy's Letter to A.A. Fet, August 30, 1869

In Chapter VI of A Confession, Tolstoy quoted the final paragraph of Schopenhauer's work. In this paragraph, the German philosopher explained how the nothingness that results from complete denial of self is only a relative nothingness and not to be feared. Tolstoy was struck by the description of Christian, Buddhist, and Hindu ascetic renunciation as being the path to holiness. After reading passages such as the following, which abound in Schopenhauer's ethical chapters, Tolstoy, the Russian nobleman, chose poverty and denial of the will.

But this very necessity of involuntary suffering (by poor people) for eternal salvation is also expressed by that utterance of the Savior (Matthew 19:24): "It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God." Therefore those who were greatly in earnest about their eternal salvation, chose voluntary poverty when fate had denied this to them and they had been born in wealth. Thus Buddha Sakyamuni was born a prince, but voluntarily took to the mendicant's staff; and Francis of Assisi, the founder of the mendicant orders who, as a youngster at a ball, where the daughters of all the notabilities were sitting together, was asked: "Now Francis, will you not soon make your choice from these beauties?" and who replied: "I have made a far more beautiful choice!" "Whom?" "La poverta (poverty)": whereupon he abandoned every thing shortly afterwards and wandered through the land as a mendicant.
– Schopenhauer, Parerga and Paralipomena, Vol. II, §170

Tolstoy's Christian beliefs were also based on the Sermon on the Mount, and particularly on the phrase about turn the other cheek, which he saw as a justification for pacifism, nonviolence and nonresistance. Various compendiums of "Tolstoy's Bible" have been published, indicating the passages of the Bible that Tolstoy most relied on, specifically, the actual words of Jesus.[3] Tolstoy believed being a Christian made him a pacifist and, due to the military force used by his government, being a pacifist made him an anarchist.
Tolstoy believed that a true Christian could find lasting happiness by striving for inner self-perfection through following the Great Commandment of loving one's neighbor and God rather than looking outward to the Church or state for guidance and meaning.[4] His belief in nonresistance (nonviolence) when faced by conflict is another distinct attribute of his philosophy based on Christ's teachings.[5] By directly influencing Mahatma Gandhi with this idea through his work The Kingdom of God is Within You (full text of English translation available on Wikisource), Tolstoy has had a huge influence on the nonviolent resistance movement to this day. He believed that the aristocracy were a burden on the poor, and that the only solution to how we live together is through anarchism.[6] He also opposed private property[7] and the institution of marriage and valued the ideals of chastity and sexual abstinence (discussed in Father Sergius and his preface to The Kreutzer Sonata), ideals also held by the young Gandhi. Tolstoy's later work is often criticised as being overly didactic and patchily written,[8] but derives a passion and verve from the depth of his austere moral views.[9] The sequence of the temptation of Sergius in Father Sergius, for example, is among his later triumphs. Gorky relates how Tolstoy once read this passage before himself and Chekhov and that Tolstoy was moved to tears by the end of the reading. Other later passages of rare power include the crises of self faced by the protagonists of The Death of Ivan Ilyich and Master and Man, where the main character (in Ilyich) or the reader (in Master and Man) is made aware of the foolishness of the protagonists' lives.
Tolstoy had a profound influence on the development of anarchist thought. The Tolstoyans were a small Christian anarchist group formed by Tolstoy's companion, Vladimir Chertkov (1854 - 1936), in order to spread Tolstoy's religious teachings. Prince Peter Kropotkin wrote of Tolstoy in the article on anarchism in the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica:

Without naming himself an anarchist, Leo Tolstoy, like his predecessors in the popular religious movements of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, Chojecki, Denk and many others, took the anarchist position as regards the state and property rights, deducing his conclusions from the general spirit of the teachings of Jesus and from the necessary dictates of reason. With all the might of his talent he made (especially in The Kingdom of God is Within You) a powerful criticism of the church, the state and law altogether, and especially of the present property laws. He describes the state as the domination of the wicked ones, supported by brutal force. Robbers, he says, are far less dangerous than a well-organized government. He makes a searching criticism of the prejudices which are current now concerning the benefits conferred upon men by the church, the state and the existing distribution of property, and from the teachings of Jesus he deduces the rule of non-resistance and the absolute condemnation of all wars. His religious arguments are, however, so well combined with arguments borrowed from a dispassionate observation of the present evils, that the anarchist portions of his works appeal to the religious and the non-religious reader alike.

In hundreds of essays over the last twenty years of his life, Tolstoy reiterated the anarchist critique of the State and recommended books by Kropotkin and Proudhon to his readers, whilst rejecting anarchism's espousal of violent revolutionary means, writing in the 1900 essay, "On Anarchy":

The Anarchists are right in everything; in the negation of the existing order, and in the assertion that, without Authority, there could not be worse violence than that of Authority under existing conditions. They are mistaken only in thinking that Anarchy can be instituted by a revolution. But it will be instituted only by there being more and more people who do not require the protection of governmental power ... There can be only one permanent revolution - a moral one: the regeneration of the inner man.

Despite his misgivings about anarchist violence, Tolstoy took risks to circulate the prohibited publications of anarchist thinkers in Russia, and corrected the proofs of Kropotkin's "Words of a Rebel", illegally published in St Petersburg in 1906.
A letter Tolstoy wrote in 1908 to an Indian newspaper entitled "Letter to a Hindu" resulted in intense correspondence with Mohandas Gandhi, who was in South Africa at the time and was beginning to become an activist. Reading "The Kingdom of God is Within You" had convinced Gandhi to abandon violence and espouse nonviolent resistance, a debt Gandhi acknowledged in his autobiography, calling Tolstoy "the greatest apostle of non-violence that the present age has produced". The correspondence between Tolstoy and Gandhi would only last a year, from October 1909 until Tolstoy's death in November 1910, but led Gandhi to give the name the Tolstoy Colony to his second ashram in South Africa. Besides non-violent resistance, the two men shared a common belief in the merits of vegetarianism, the subject of several of Tolstoy's essays.[citation needed] Along with his growing idealism, Tolstoy also became a major supporter of the Esperanto movement. Tolstoy was impressed by the pacifist beliefs of the Doukhobors and brought their persecution to the attention of the international community, after they burned their weapons in peaceful protest in 1895. He aided the Doukhobors in migrating to Canada.
In 1904, during the Russo-Japanese War, Tolstoy condemned the war and wrote to the Japanese Buddhist priest Soyen Shaku in a failed attempt to make a joint pacifist statement.
Tolstoy was an extremely wealthy member of the Russian nobility. He came to believe that he was undeserving of his inherited wealth, and was renowned among the peasantry for his generosity. He would frequently return to his country estate with vagrants whom he felt needed a helping hand, and would often dispense large sums of money to street beggars while on trips to the city, much to his wife's chagrin.[10]
He died of pneumonia[11] at Astapovo station in 1910 after leaving home in the middle of winter at the age of 82. His death came only days after gathering the nerve to abandon his family and wealth[12] and take up the path of a wandering ascetic;[13] a path that he had agonized over pursuing for decades. He had not been at the peak of health before leaving home, his wife and daughters were all actively engaged in caring for him daily. He had been speaking and writing of his own death in the days preceding his departure from home, but fell ill at the train station not far from home. The station master took Tolstoy to his apartment, where his personal doctors were called to the scene. He was given injections of morphine and camphor. The police tried to limit access to his funeral procession, but thousands of peasants lined the streets at his funeral. Still, some peasants were heard to say that, other than knowing that "some nobleman had died," they knew little else about Tolstoy.[14].

Bibliography




Ivan Mozzhukhin in the 1917 screen version of Father Sergius.



Childhood (Детство [Detstvo]; 1852)
The Raid (1852)
Boyhood (Отрочество [Otrochestvo]; 1854)
Youth (Юность [Yunost']; 1856)
Sevastopol Stories (Севастопольские рассказы [Sevastopolskie Rasskazy]; 1855–56)
Family Happiness (1859)
The Cossacks (Казаки [Kazaki]; 1863)
Ivan the Fool: A Lost Opportunity (1863)	
Polikushka (1863)
War and Peace (Война и мир [Voyna i mir]; 1865–69)
A Prisoner in the Caucasus (Кавказский Пленник [Kavkazskii Plennik]; 1872)
Father Sergius (Отец Сергий [Otets Sergii]; 1873)
Anna Karenina (Анна Каренина [Anna Karenina]; 1875–77)
A Confession (1882)
Strider: The Story of a Horse (1864, 1886)
What I Believe (also called My Religion) (1884) complete text
The Death of Ivan Ilyich (Смерть Ивана Ильича [Smert' Ivana Il'icha]; 1886)
How Much Land Does a Man Need? (Много ли человеку земли нужно [Mnogo li cheloveku zemli nuzhno]; 1886)
The Power of Darkness (Власть тьмы [Vlast' t'my]; 1886), drama
The Fruits of Culture (play) (1889)
The Kreutzer Sonata and other stories (Крейцерова соната [Kreitserova Sonata]; 1889)
The Kingdom of God is Within You (available at wikisource) (1894)
Master and Man and other stories (1895)
The Gospel in Brief (1896)
What Is Art? (1897)
Letter to the Liberals (1898)
Resurrection (Воскресение [Voskresenie]; 1899)
The Living Corpse (Живой труп [Zhivoi trup]; published 1911), drama
Hadji Murat (Хаджи-Мурат [Khadzhi-Murat]; written in 1896-1904, published 1912)
The law of love and the law of violence; publisehd in 1940 complete text


See also

Tolstoy syndrome


References


^ Martin E. Hellman, Resist Not Evil in World Without Violence (Arun Gandhi ed.), M.K. Gandhi Institute, 1994, retrieved on 14 December 2006]
^ Feuer,Kathryn B. Tolstoy and the Genesis of War and Peace,Cornell University Press, 1996, ISBN 0801419026
^ Orwin, Donna T. The Cambridge Companion to Tolstoy. Cambridge University Press, 2002
^ citation needed
^ citation needed
^ citation needed
^ citation needed
^ citation needed
^ citation needed
^ citations needed
^ citation needed
^ citation needed
^ citation needed
^ Tolstaia, S.A. The Diaries of Sophia Tolstoy, Book Sales, 1987; Chertkov, V. "The Last Days of Leo Tolstoy," http://www.linguadex.com/tolstoy/index.html, translated by Benjamin Scher



Further reading
Template:Multi-video start Template:Multi-video item Template:Multi-video end


Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Leo Tolstoy





Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Leo Tolstoy





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Leo Tolstoy


Universal and museum websites on Leo Tolstoy

Leo Tolstoy - A comprehensive site with pictures, e-texts, biography, genealogy, etc.
Leo Tolstoy museum in Yasnaya Polyana
(Russian)State Leo Tolstoy Museum in Moscow

Leo Tolstoy's biography and critique

Illustrated Biography online at University of Virginia
Brief bio
Leo Tolstoy's Life - Tolstoy's personal, professional and world event timeline, and synopsis of his life from Masterpiece Theatre.
The Last Days of Leo Tolstoy
Aleksandra Tolstaya, "Tragedy of Tolstoy"
(Russian) The World of Leo Tolstoy
Information and Critique on Leo Tolstoy
Tolstoy's Legacy for Mankind: A Manifesto for Nonviolence, Part 1
Tolstoy's Legacy for Mankind: A Manifesto for Nonviolence, Part 2
Text of "A Confession" and Audio of Tolstoy speaking on TheGodLight.co.uk

E-texts of works by Leo Tolstoy

[1] at Project Gutenberg
Works by Leo Tolstoy at University of Virginia
Leo Tolstoy at Great Books Online
(Russian) A lot of works by Leo Tolstoy in the original Russian
Links to works online
Tolstoy at CCEL
What I Believe - complete text available for download

Leo Tolstoy in the media

Leo Tolstoy at the Internet Movie Database
ALEXANDER II AND HIS TIMES: A Narrative History of Russia in the Age of Alexander II, Tolstoy, and Dostoevsky




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leo_Tolstoy"
Categories: Leo Tolstoy | Tolstoy family | Russian essayists | Russian novelists | Russian short story writers | Russian anarchists | Russian autodidacts | Christian writers | Anti-war activists | Indiana Jones characters | Adoptees | Anarcho-pacifists | Christian anarchists | 1828 births | 1910 deathsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


አማርኛ
العربية
مصرى
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Kiswahili
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
O'zbek
پښتو
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Саха тыла
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Volapük
粵語
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 07:14.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
