













Ecology - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Ecology";
		var wgTitle = "Ecology";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "9630";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281565639;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Ecology

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For the journal, see Ecology (journal).





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2007)






Eugenius Warming founded ecology as a scientific discipline


Ecology (from Greek oîkos, "house"; -λογία, -logia, study of) is the scientific study of the distribution, abundance of life and the interactions between organisms and their natural environment.[1] The environment of an organism includes physical properties, which can be described as the sum of local abiotic factors such as insolation (sunlight), climate, and geology, and biotic ecosystem, which includes other organisms that share its habitat.[2]
The word "ecology" is often used colloquially in such terms as social ecology and deep ecology and in common parlance as a synonym for the natural environment or environmentalism. Likewise "ecologic" or "ecological" is often taken in the sense of environmentally friendly.
The term ecology or oekologie was coined by the German biologist Ernst Haeckel in 1866, when he defined it as "the comprehensive science of the relationship of the organism to the environment."[3] Haeckel did not elaborate on the concept, and the first significant textbook on the subject (together with the first university course) was written by the Danish botanist, Eugenius Warming. For this early work, Warming is often identified as the founder of ecology.[4]




Contents


1 Scope

1.1 Disciplines


2 History
3 Fundamental principles

3.1 Levels of organization
3.2 Biosphere
3.3 Ecosystem
3.4 Dynamics and stability
3.5 Spatial relationships and subdivisions of land
3.6 Ecosystem productivity
3.7 Ecological crisis


4 See also

4.1 Lists
4.2 Related topics


5 Notes
6 References
7 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Scope
Ecology is usually considered as a branch of biology, the general science that studies living organisms. Organisms can be studied at many different levels, from proteins and nucleic acids (in biochemistry and molecular biology), to cells (in cellular biology), to individuals (in botany, zoology, and other similar disciplines), and finally at the level of populations, communities, and ecosystems, to the biosphere as a whole; these latter strata are the primary subjects of ecological inquiry. Ecology is a multidisciplinary science. Because of its focus on the higher levels of the organization of life on earth and on the interrelations between organisms and their environment, ecology draws on many other branches of science, especially geology and geography, meteorology, pedology, genetics, chemistry, and physics. Thus, ecology is considered by some to be a holistic science, one that over-arches older disciplines such as biology which in this view become sub-disciplines contributing to ecological knowledge. In support of viewing ecology as a subject in its own right as opposed to a sub-discipline of biology, Robert Ulanowicz stated that "The emerging picture of ecosystem behavior does not resemble the worldview imparted by an extrapolation of conceptual trends established in other sciences."[5]
Agriculture, fisheries, forestry, medicine, and urban development are among human activities that would fall within Krebs' (1972: 4) explanation of his definition of ecology: where organisms are found, how many occur there, and why.
Ecological knowledge such as the quantification of biodiversity and population dynamics has provided a scientific basis for expressing the aims of environmentalism and evaluating its goals and policies. Additionally, a holistic view of nature is stressed in both ecology and environmentalism.
Consider the ways an ecologist might approach studying the life of honeybees:

The behavioral relationship between individuals of a species is behavioral ecology—for example, the study of the queen bee, and how she relates to the worker bees and the drones.
The organized activity of a species is community ecology; for example, the activity of bees assures the pollination of flowering plants. Beehives additionally produce honey which is consumed by still other species, such as bears.
The relationship between the environment and a species is environmental ecology—for example, the consequences of environmental change on bee activity. Bees may die out due to environmental changes (see pollinator decline). The environment simultaneously affects and is a consequence of this activity and is thus intertwined with the survival of the species.


[edit] Disciplines
Main article: Ecology (disciplines)
Ecology is a broad discipline comprising many sub-disciplines. A common, broad classification, moving from lowest to highest complexity, where complexity is defined as the number of entities and processes in the system under study, is:

Ecophysiology examines how the physiological functions of organisms influence the way they interact with the environment, both biotic and abiotic.
Behavioral ecology examines the roles of behavior in enabling an animal to adapt to its environment.
Population ecology studies the dynamics of populations of a single species.
Community ecology (or synecology) focuses on the interactions between species within an ecological community.
Ecosystem ecology studies the flows of energy and matter through the biotic and abiotic components of ecosystems.
Systems ecology is an interdisciplinary field focusing on the study, development, and organization of ecological systems from a holistic perspective.
Landscape ecology examines processes and relationship in a spatially explicit manner, often across multiple ecosystems or very large geographic areas.
Evolutionary ecology studies ecology in a way that explicitly considers the evolutionary histories of species and their interactions.
Political ecology connects politics and economy to problems of environmental control and ecological change.

Ecology can also be sub-divided according to the species of interest into fields such as animal ecology, plant ecology, insect ecology, marine ecology, and so on. Another frequent method of subdivision is by biome studied, e.g., Arctic ecology (or polar ecology), tropical ecology, desert ecology, etc. The primary technique used for investigation is often used to subdivide the discipline into groups such as chemical ecology, genetic ecology, field ecology, statistical ecology, theoretical ecology, and so forth. These fields are not mutually exclusive.

[edit] History
Main article: History of ecology

[edit] Fundamental principles

[edit] Levels of organization




Some of the biodiversity of a coral reef.


Ecology can be studied at a wide range of levels, from large to small scale. These levels of ecological organization, as well as an example of a question ecologists would ask at each level, include:

Biosphere: " What role does concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide play in the regulation of global temperature?"
Region: "How has geological history influenced regional diversity within certain groups of organisms?"
Landscape: "How do vegetated corridors affect the rate of movement by mammals among isolated fragments?"
Ecosystem: "How does fire affect nutrient availability in grassland ecosystems?"
Community: "How does disturbance influence the number of mammal species in African grasslands?"
Interactions: "What evolutionary benefit do zebras gain by allowing birds to remove parasites?"
Population: "What factors control zebra populations?"
Individual Organism: "How do zebras regulate internal water balance?"

These levels range from broadest to most specific.[6]




[edit] Biosphere
Main articles: Biosphere, Biodiversity, and Unified neutral theory of biodiversity
For modern ecologists, ecology can be studied at several levels: population level (individuals of the same species in the same or similar environment), biocoenosis level (or community of species), ecosystem level, and biosphere level.
The outer layer of the planet Earth can be divided into several compartments: the hydrosphere (or sphere of water), the lithosphere (or sphere of soils and rocks), and the atmosphere (or sphere of the air). The biosphere (or sphere of life), sometimes described as "the fourth envelope," is all living matter on the planet or that portion of the planet occupied by life. It reaches well into the other three spheres, although there are no permanent inhabitants of the atmosphere. Relative to the volume of the Earth, the biosphere is only the very thin surface layer that extends from 11,000 meters below sea level to 15,000 meters above.
It is thought that life first developed in the hydrosphere, at shallow depths, in the photic zone. (Recently, though, a competing theory has emerged, that life originated around hydrothermal vents in the deeper ocean. See Origin of life.) Multicellular organisms then appeared and colonized benthic zones. Photosynthetic organisms gradually produced the chemically unstable oxygen-rich atmosphere that characterizes our planet. Terrestrial life developed later, protected from UV rays by the ozone layer. Diversification of terrestrial species is thought to be increased by the continents drifting apart, or alternately, colliding. Biodiversity is expressed at the ecological level (ecosystem), population level (intraspecific diversity), species level (specific diversity), and genetic level.
The biosphere contains great quantities of elements such as carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen, and oxygen. Other elements, such as phosphorus, calcium, and potassium, are also essential to life, yet are present in smaller amounts. At the ecosystem and biosphere levels, there is a continual recycling of all these elements, which alternate between the mineral and organic states.
Although there is a slight input of geothermal energy, the bulk of the functioning of the ecosystem is based on the input of solar energy. Plants and photosynthetic microorganisms convert light into chemical energy by the process of photosynthesis, which creates glucose (a simple sugar) and releases free oxygen. Glucose thus becomes the secondary energy source that drives the ecosystem. Some of this glucose is used directly by other organisms for energy. Other sugar molecules can be converted to molecules such as amino acids. Plants use some of this sugar, concentrated in nectar, to entice pollinators to aid them in reproduction.
Cellular respiration is the process by which organisms (like mammals) break the glucose back down into its constituents, water and carbon dioxide, thus regaining the stored energy the sun originally gave to the plants. The proportion of photosynthetic activity of plants and other photosynthesizers to the respiration of other organisms determines the specific composition of the Earth's atmosphere, particularly its oxygen level. Global air currents mix the atmosphere and maintain nearly the same balance of elements in areas of intense biological activity and areas of slight biological activity.
Water is also exchanged between the hydrosphere, lithosphere, atmosphere, and biosphere in regular cycles. The oceans are large tanks that store water, ensure thermal and climatic stability, and facilitate the transport of chemical elements thanks to large oceanic currents.
For a better understanding of how the biosphere works, and various dysfunctions related to human activity, American scientists attempted to simulate the biosphere in a small-scale model, called Biosphere II.

[edit] Ecosystem
Main article: Ecosystem




The Daintree Rainforest in Queensland, Australia is an example of a forest ecosystem.


A central principle of ecology is that each living organism has an ongoing and continual relationship with every other element that makes up its environment. The sum total of interacting living organisms (the biocoenosis) and their non-living environment (the biotope) in an area is termed an ecosystem. Studies of ecosystems usually focus on the movement of energy and matter through the system.
Almost all ecosystems run on energy captured from the sun by primary producers via photosynthesis. This energy then flows through the food chains to primary consumers (herbivores who eat and digest the plants), and on to secondary and tertiary consumers (either carnivores or omnivores). Energy is lost to living organisms when it is used by the organisms to do work, or is lost as waste heat.
Matter is incorporated into living organisms by the primary producers. Photosynthetic plants fix carbon from carbon dioxide and nitrogen from atmospheric nitrogen or nitrates present in the soil to produce amino acids. Much of the carbon and nitrogen contained in ecosystems is created by such plants, and is then consumed by secondary and tertiary consumers and incorporated into themselves. Nutrients are usually returned to the ecosystem via decomposition. The entire movement of chemicals in an ecosystem is termed a biogeochemical cycle, and includes the carbon and nitrogen cycle.
Ecosystems of any size can be studied; for example, a rock and the plant life growing on it might be considered an ecosystem. This rock might be within a plain, with many such rocks, small grass, and grazing animals -- also an ecosystem. This plain might be in the tundra, which is also an ecosystem (although once they are of this size, they are generally termed ecozones or biomes). In fact, the entire terrestrial surface of the earth, all the matter which composes it, the air that is directly above it, and all the living organisms living within it can be considered as one, large ecosystem.
Ecosystems can be roughly divided into terrestrial ecosystems (including forest ecosystems, steppes, savannas, and so on), freshwater ecosystems (lakes, ponds and rivers), and marine ecosystems, depending on the dominant biotope.

[edit] Dynamics and stability
Main articles: Biogeochemistry, Homeostasis, and Population dynamics




Much attention has been given to preserving the natural characteristics of Hopetoun Falls, Australia, while allowing ample access for visitors.


Ecological factors that affect dynamic change in a population or species in a given ecology or environment are usually divided into two groups: abiotic and biotic.
Abiotic factors are geological, geographical, hydrological, and climatological parameters. A biotope is an environmentally uniform region characterized by a particular set of abiotic ecological factors. Specific abiotic factors include:

Water, which is at the same time an essential element to life and a milieu
Air, which provides oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide to living species and allows the dissemination of pollen and spores
Soil, at the same time a source of nutriment and physical support

Soil pH, salinity, nitrogen and phosphorus content, ability to retain water, and density are all influential


Temperature, which should not exceed certain extremes, even if tolerance to heat is significant for some species
Light, which provides energy to the ecosystem through photosynthesis
Natural disasters can also be considered abiotic

Biocenose, or community, is a group of populations of plants, animals, microorganisms. Each population is the result of procreations between individuals of the same species and cohabitation in a given place and for a given time. When a population consists of an insufficient number of individuals, that population is threatened with extinction; the extinction of a species can approach when all biocenoses composed of individuals of the species are in decline. In small populations, consanguinity (inbreeding) can result in reduced genetic diversity, which can further weaken the biocenose.
Biotic ecological factors also influence biocenose viability; these factors are considered as either intraspecific or interspecific relations.

Intraspecific relations are those that are established between individuals of the same species, forming a population. They are relations of cooperation or competition, with division of the territory, and sometimes organization in hierarchical societies.





An antlion lies in wait under its pit trap, built in dry dust under a building, awaiting unwary insects that fall in. Many pest insects are partly or wholly controlled by other insect predators.



Interspecific relations—interactions between different species—are numerous, and usually described according to their beneficial, detrimental, or neutral effect (for example, mutualism (relation ++) or competition (relation --). The most significant relation is the relation of predation (to eat or to be eaten), which leads to the essential concepts in ecology of food chains (for example, the grass is consumed by the herbivore, itself consumed by a carnivore, itself consumed by a carnivore of larger size). A high predator to prey ratio can have a negative influence on both the predator and prey biocenoses in that low availability of food and high death rate prior to sexual maturity can decrease (or prevent the increase of) populations of each, respectively. Selective hunting of species by humans that leads to population decline is one example of a high predator to prey ratio in action. Other interspecific relations include parasitism, infectious disease, and competition for limited resources, which can occur when two species share the same ecological niche.

The existing interactions between the various living beings go along with a permanent mixing of mineral and organic substances, absorbed by organisms for their growth, their maintenance, and their reproduction, to be finally rejected as waste. These permanent recycling of the elements (in particular carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen) as well as the water are called biogeochemical cycles. They guarantee a durable stability of the biosphere (at least when unchecked human influence and extreme weather or geological phenomena are left aside). This self-regulation, supported by negative feedback controls, ensures the perenniality of the ecosystems. It is shown by the very stable concentrations of most elements of each compartment. This is referred to as homeostasis. The ecosystem also tends to evolve to a state of ideal balance, called the climax, which is reached after a succession of events (for example a pond can become a peat bog).

[edit] Spatial relationships and subdivisions of land
Main articles: Biome and ecozone
Ecosystems are not isolated from each other, but are interrelated. For example, water may circulate between ecosystems by means of a river or ocean current. Water itself, as a liquid medium, even defines ecosystems. Some species, such as salmon or freshwater eels, move between marine systems and fresh-water systems. These relationships between the ecosystems lead to the concept of a biome.
A biome is a homogeneous ecological formation that exists over a large region, such as tundra or steppes. The biosphere comprises all of the Earth's biomes -- the entirety of places where life is possible -- from the highest mountains to the depths of the oceans.
Biomes correspond rather well to subdivisions distributed along the latitudes, from the equator towards the poles, with differences based on the physical environment (for example, oceans or mountain ranges) and the climate. Their variation is generally related to the distribution of species according to their ability to tolerate temperature, dryness, or both. For example, one may find photosynthetic algae only in the photic part of the ocean (where light penetrates), whereas conifers are mostly found in mountains.
Though this is a simplification of a more complicated scheme, latitude and altitude approximate a good representation of the distribution of biodiversity within the biosphere. Very generally, the richness of biodiversity (as well for animal as for plant species) is decreasing most rapidly near the equator and less rapidly as one approach the poles.
The biosphere may also be divided into ecozones, which are very well defined today and primarily follow the continental borders. The ecozones are themselves divided into ecoregions, though there is not agreement on their limits.

[edit] Ecosystem productivity
In an ecosystem, the connections between species are generally related to their role in the food chain. There are three categories of organisms:




The leaf is the primary site of photosynthesis in plants.



Producers or Autotrophs -- Usually plants or cyanobacteria that are capable of photosynthesis but could be other organisms such as the bacteria near ocean vents that are capable of chemosynthesis.
Consumers or Heterotrophs -- Animals, which can be primary consumers (herbivorous), or secondary or tertiary consumers (carnivorous and omnivores).
Decomposers or Detritivores -- Bacteria, fungi, and insects which degrade organic matter of all types and restore nutrients to the environment. The producers will then consume the nutrients, completing the cycle.

These relations form sequences, in which each individual consumes the preceding one and is consumed by the one following, in what are called food chains or food networks. In a food network, there will be fewer organisms at each level as one follows the links of the network up the chain, forming a pyramid.
These concepts lead to the idea of biomass (the total living matter in an ecosystem), primary productivity (the increase in organic compounds), and secondary productivity (the living matter produced by consumers and the decomposers in a given time).




An ecological pyramid.


These last two ideas are key, since they make it possible to evaluate the carrying capacity -- the number of organisms that can be supported by a given ecosystem. In any food network, the energy contained in the level of the producers is not completely transferred to the consumers. The higher up the chain, the more energy and resources are lost. Thus, from a purely energy and nutrient point of view, it is more efficient for humans to be primary consumers (to subsist from vegetables, grains, legumes, fruit, etc.) than to be secondary consumers (consuming herbivores, omnivores, or their products) and still more so than as a tertiary consumer (consuming carnivores, omnivores, or their products). An ecosystem is unstable when the carrying capacity is overrun.
The total productivity of ecosystems is sometimes estimated by comparing three types of land-based ecosystems and the total of aquatic ecosystems. Slightly over half of primary production is estimated to occur on land, and the rest in the ocean.

The forests (1/3 of the Earth's land area) contain dense biomasses and are very productive.
Savannas, meadows, and marshes (1/3 of the Earth's land area) contain less dense biomasses, but are productive. These ecosystems represent the major part of what humans depend on for food.
Extreme ecosystems in the areas with more extreme climates -- deserts and semi-deserts, tundra, alpine meadows, and steppes -- (1/3 of the Earth's land area) have very sparse biomasses and low productivity
Finally, the marine and fresh water ecosystems (3/4 of Earth's surface) contain very sparse biomasses (apart from the coastal zones).

Ecosystems differ in biomass (grams carbon per square meter) and productivity (grams carbon per square meter per day), and direct comparisons of biomass and productivity may not be valid. An ecosystem such as that found in taiga may be high in biomass, but slow growing and thus low in productivity. Ecosystems are often compared on the basis of their turnover (production ratio) or turnover time which is the reciprocal of turnover.
Humanity's actions over the last few centuries have seriously reduced the amount of the Earth covered by forests (deforestation), and have increased agro-ecosystems. In recent decades, an increase in the areas occupied by extreme ecosystems has occurred, such as desertification.

[edit] Ecological crisis
Main article: Ecological crisis




The retreat of Aletsch Glacier in the Swiss Alps (situation in 1979, 1991 and 2002), due to global warming.


Generally, an ecological crisis occurs with the loss of adaptive capacity when the resilience of an environment or of a species or a population evolves in a way unfavourable to coping with perturbations that interfere with that ecosystem, landscape or species survival (Note: The concept of resilience is not universally accepted in ecology, and moreso represents a contingent within the field that take a holist view of the environment. There are also many ecologists that take a reductionistic perspective and that believe that the environment, at base, is indeterministic). It may be that the environment quality degrades compared to the species needs, after a change in an abiotic ecological factor (for example, an increase of temperature, less significant rainfalls)[citation needed]. It may be that the environment becomes unfavourable for the survival of a species (or a population) due to an increased pressure of predation (for example overfishing). Lastly, it may be that the situation becomes unfavourable to the quality of life of the species (or the population) due to a rise in the number of individuals (overpopulation).
Ecological crises vary in length and severity, occurring within a few months or taking as long as a few million years. They can also be of natural or anthropic origin. They may relate to one unique species or to many species, as in an Extinction event. Lastly, an ecological crisis may be local (as an oil spill) or global (a rise in the sea level due to global warming).
According to its degree of endemism, a local crisis will have more or less significant consequences, from the death of many individuals to the total extinction of a species. Whatever its origin, disappearance of one or several species often will involve a rupture in the food chain, further impacting the survival of other species.
In the case of a global crisis, the consequences can be much more significant; some extinction events showed the disappearance of more than 90% of existing species at that time. However, it should be noted that the disappearance of certain species, such as the dinosaurs, by freeing an ecological niche, allowed the development and the diversification of the mammals. An ecological crisis thus paradoxically favoured biodiversity.
Sometimes, an ecological crisis can be a specific and reversible phenomenon at the ecosystem scale. But more generally, the crises impact will last. Indeed, it rather is a connected series of events, that occur till a final point. From this stage, no return to the previous stable state is possible, and a new stable state will be set up gradually (see homeorhesy).
Lastly, if an ecological crisis can cause extinction, it can also more simply reduce the quality of life of the remaining individuals. Thus, even if the diversity of the human population is sometimes considered threatened (see in particular indigenous people), few people envision human disappearance at short span. However, epidemic diseases, famines, impact on health of reduction of air quality, food crises, reduction of living space, accumulation of toxic or non degradable wastes, threats on keystone species (great apes, panda, whales) are also factors influencing the well-being of people.
Due to the increases in technology and a rapidly increasing population, humans have more influence on their own environment than any other ecosystem engineer.

[edit] See also




Ecology portal







Earth sciences portal







Environment portal





Biodiversity
Ecosystem
Earth Science
Habitat
Habitat conservation
Natural environment
Nature
Ecological Forecasting



[edit] Lists


List of basic biology topics
List of biology topics
List of basic ecology topics
List of ecology topics
List of ecologists
Important publications in ecology



[edit] Related topics


Acoustic ecology
Agroecology
Ecological crisis
Ecological economics
Ecology movement
Ecology of contexts
Ecosystem
Ecosystem model
Ecohydrology
ELDIS, a database on ecological aspects of economical development.
Forest farming
Forest gardening
Human ecology
Knowledge ecology
Social ecology
Systems ecology



[edit] Notes


^ Begon, M.; Townsend, C. R., Harper, J. L. (2006). Ecology: From individuals to ecosystems. (4th ed.). Blackwell. ISBN 1405111178. 
^ Campbell, Neil A.; Brad Williamson; Robin J. Heyden (2006). Biology: Exploring Life. Boston, Massachusetts: Pearson Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-250882-6. http://www.phschool.com/el_marketing.html. 
^ Frodin, D.G. (2001). Guide to Standard Floras of the World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 72. ISBN 0-521-79077-8. http://books.google.com/books?id=aMjXCF4rmDUC&printsec=frontcover&dq=qjIyUKx2VnKAYDw2zTZA9n6hkuk#PPA72,M1.  "[ecology is] a term first introduced by Haeckel in 1866 as Ökologie and which came into English in 1873" 
^ Goodland, R.J. (1975) The tropical origin of ecology: Eugen Warming’s jubilee. Oikos 26, 240-245.
^ R. Ulanowicz, Ecology: The Ascendent Perspective, Columbia (1997)
^ Ecology: Concepts & Applications. Fourth Edition Manuel C. Molles Jr. U of New Mexico. 2008 McGraw Hill Publishing. ISBN 978-0-07-305082-9



[edit] References

Warming, E. (1909) Oecology of Plants - an introduction to the study of plant-communities. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Haeckel, E. (1866) General Morphology of Organisms; General Outlines of the Science of Organic Forms based on Mechanical Principles through the Theory of Descent as reformed by Charles Darwin. Berlin.
Odum, E. P. (1971) General Principles of Ecology, Third Edition W. B. Suanders Company. pp 17-20
Campbell, Neil A.; Brad Williamson; Robin J. Heyden (2006). Biology: Exploring Life. Boston, Massachusetts: Pearson Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-250882-6. http://www.phschool.com/el_marketing.html. 


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Ecology 





At Wikiversity you can learn more and teach others about Ecology at:
The Department of Ecology






Wikibooks has more on the topic of
Ecology






Look up ecology in
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Ecology (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)
Ecology Journals List of the Scientific Journals related to Ecology
Ecology Dictionary - Explanation of Ecological Terms








v • d • e

The Dynamic Earth





Continents

Africa  • Antarctica  • Asia  • Europe  • North America  • Oceania  • South America






Oceans

Antarctic Ocean  • Arctic Ocean  • Atlantic Ocean  • Indian Ocean  • Pacific Ocean






Dynamic Earth

Earth science  • Geological history of Earth  • History of Earth  • Geology  • Plate tectonics  • Structure of the Earth






Natural Environment

Ecology · Ecosystem  · Nature  · Wilderness






Related Articles

Earth Day  · Geology of solar terrestrial planets  · Solar System  · World






Category · Portal












v • d • e

Major subfields of biology






Anatomy · Astrobiology · Biochemistry · Biophysics · Bioinformatics · Biostatistics · Botany · Cell biology · Chronobiology · Conservation biology · Developmental biology · Ecology · Epidemiology · Evolutionary biology · Genetics · Genomics · Human biology · Immunology · Marine biology · Microbiology · Molecular biology · Neuroscience · Nutrition · Origin of life · Paleontology · Parasitology · Pathology · Physiology · Systems biology · Taxonomy · Zoology













v • d • e

Fields within the natural sciences








Astronomy · Biology · Chemistry · Earth science · Physics















v • d • e

Botany





Subdisciplines of botany

Ethnobotany · Paleobotany · Plant anatomy · Plant ecology · Plant evo-devo · Plant morphology · Plant physiology







Plants

Evolutionary history of plants · Algae (Green, Red, Brown) · Bryophyte · Pteridophyte · Gymnosperm · Angiosperm






Plant parts

Flower · Fruit · Leaf · Meristem · Root · Stem · Stoma · Vascular tissue · Wood






Plant cells

Cell wall · Chlorophyll · Chloroplast · Photosynthesis · Plant hormone · Plastid · Transpiration






Plant life cycles

Gametophyte · Plant sexuality · Pollen · Pollination · Seed · Spore · Sporophyte






Plant taxonomy

Botanical name · Botanical nomenclature · Herbarium · IAPT · ICBN · Species Plantarum






Category · Portal












v • d • e

Elements of Nature





Earth

History of Earth · Earth science · Structure of the Earth · Plate tectonics · Geological history of Earth · Geology






Weather

Climate · Earth's atmosphere






Life

Biosphere · Origin of life · Life on Earth · Microbe · Flora · Plants · Fungi · Fauna · Animals · Biology · Evolutionary history of life Protista






Environment

Wilderness · Ecology · Ecosystem






Universe

Matter · Energy · Outer space






Category · Portal








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecology"
Categories: Ecology | Biology | Greek loanwordsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from May 2007 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
العربية
Aragonés
Asturianu
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Bosanski
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
Hawai`i
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ქართული
Кыргызча
Kreyòl ayisyen
Ladino
Latina
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
Malagasy
Māori
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nederlands
日本語
Norfuk / Pitkern
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
پښتو
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Scots
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Українська
اردو
Tiếng Việt
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 20:25.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
