













Dravidian languages - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Dravidian_languages";
		var wgTitle = "Dravidian languages";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "7922";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 279910067;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Dravidian languages

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Dravidian (disambiguation).


Dravidian




Geographic
distribution:
South Asia


Genetic
classification:
One of the world's major language families


Subdivisions:

Northern
Central
South-Central
Southern



ISO 639-2 and 639-5:
dra









Language portal



The Dravidian family of languages includes approximately 73 languages [1] (including the four literary languages of Kannada, Malayalam, Tamil and Telugu) and are mainly spoken in southern India and northeastern Sri Lanka, as well as certain areas in Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, and eastern and central India, as well as in parts of Afghanistan, Iran, and overseas in other countries such as Malaysia and Singapore. It has been epigraphically attested since the 6th century BC.




Contents


1 Origins of the word Dravidian
2 History
3 Classification
4 Relationship to other language families
5 Grammar
6 Phonology

6.1 Historical Phonology
6.2 Words starting with vowels
6.3 Numerals
6.4 Stability and Continuity of Dravidian
6.5 Dravidian substratum influence on Sanskrit


7 Notes
8 References
9 External links
10 See also





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Origins of the word Dravidian
The English word Dravidian was first employed by Robert Caldwell in his book of comparative Dravidian grammar based on the usage of the Sanskrit word drāviḍa in the work Tantravārttika by Kumārila Bhaṭṭa (Zvelebil 1990:xx). As for the origin of the Sanskrit word drāviḍa itself there have been various theories proposed. Basically the theories are about the direction of derivation between tamiẓ and drāviḍa.
There is no definite philological and linguistic basis for asserting unilaterally that the name Dravida also forms the origin of the word Tamil (Dravida -> Dramila -> Tamizha or Tamil). Zvelebil cites the forms such as dramila (in Daṇḍin's Sanskrit work Avanisundarīkathā) damiḷa (found in Ceylonese chronicle Mahavamsa) and then goes on to say (ibid. page xxi): "The forms damiḷa/damila almost certainly provide a connection of dr(a/ā)viḍa " and "... tamiḷ < tamiẓ ...whereby the further development might have been *tamiẓ > *damiḷ > damiḷa- / damila- and further, with the intrusive, 'hypercorrect' (or perhaps analogical) -r-, into dr(a/ā)viḍa. The -m-/-v- alternation is a common enough phenomenon in Dravidian phonology" (Zvelebil 1990:xxi) Zvelebil in his earlier treatise (Zvelebil 1975: p53) states: "It is obvious that the Sanskrit dr(a/ā)viḍa, Pali damila, damiḷo and Prakrit d(a/ā)viḍa are all etymologically connected with tamiẓ" and further remarks "The r in tamiẓ > dr(a/ā)viḍa is a hypercorrect insertion, cf. an analogical case of DED 1033 Ta. kamuku, Tu.kangu "areca nut": Skt. kramu(ka).".
Further, another eminent Dravidian linguist Bhadriraju Krishnamurti in his book Dravidian Languages (Krishnamurti 2003: p. 2, footnote 2) states: "Joseph (1989: IJDL 18.2:134-42) gives extensive references to the use of the term draviḍa, dramila first as the name of a people, then of a country. Sinhala inscriptions of BCE [Before Common Era] cite dameḍa-, damela- denoting Tamil merchants. Early Buddhist and Jaina sources used damiḷa- to refer to a people of south India (presumably Tamil); damilaraṭṭha- was a southern non-Aryan country; dramiḷa-, dramiḍa, and draviḍa- were used as variants to designate a country in the south (Bṛhatsamhita-, Kādambarī, Daśakumāracarita-, fourth to seventh centuries CE) (1989: 134-8). It appears that damiḷa- was older than draviḍa- which could be its Sanskritization."
Based on what Krishnamurti states referring to a scholarly paper published in the International Journal of Dravidian Linguistics, the Sanskrit word draviḍa itself is later than damiḷa since the dates for the forms with -r- are centuries later than the dates for the forms without -r- (damiḷa, dameḍa-, damela- etc.). So it is clear that it is difficult to maintain Dravida -> Dramila -> Tamizha or Tamil.
The Monier-Williams Sanskrit Dictionary[2] lists for the Sanskrit word draviḍa a meaning of "collective Name for 5 peoples, viz. the Āndhras, Karṇāṭakas, Gurjaras, Tailaṅgas, and Mahārāṣṭras".

[edit] History
Main article: Proto-Dravidian
The origins of the Dravidian languages, as well as their subsequent development and the period of their differentiation are unclear, partially due to the lack of comparative linguistic research into the Dravidian languages. The Dravidian languages have remained an isolated family to the present day and have defied all of the attempts to show a connection with the Indo-European tongues, Mitanni, Basque, Sumerian, or Korean. Rasmus K. Rask (1787-1832) considered Dravidian as belonging to the "Scythian" languages referring to Scythians as non-Semitic and non-Indo-European peoples and languages of Eastern Europe and Western Asia sometimes also termed "Hyperborean"[3]. The most promising and plausible hypothesis is that of a linguistic relationship with the Uralic (Hungarian, Finnish) and Altaic (Turkish, Mongol) language groups[4]. The theory that the Dravidian languages display similarities with the Uralic language group, suggesting a prolonged period of contact in the past,[5] is popular amongst Dravidian linguists and has been supported by a number of scholars, including Robert Caldwell,[6] Thomas Burrow,[7] Kamil Zvelebil,[8] and Mikhail Andronov[9] This theory has, however, been rejected by some specialists in Uralic languages,[10] and has in recent times also been criticised by other Dravidian linguists like Bhadriraju Krishnamurti.[11].
Although in modern times speakers of the various Dravidian languages have mainly occupied the southern portion of India, nothing definite is known about the ancient domain of the Dravidian parent speech. It is, however, a well-established and well-supported hypothesis that Dravidian speakers must have been widespread throughout India, including the northwest region.[12] before the arrival of Indo-European speakers.
Proto-Dravidian is thought to have differentiated into Proto-North Dravidian, Proto-Central Dravidian, Proto South-Central Dravidian and Proto-South Dravidian around 500 BC, although some linguists have argued that the degree of differentiation between the sub-families points to an earlier split.
The existence of the Dravidian language family was first suggested in 1816 by Alexander D. Campbell in his Grammar of the Teloogoo Language, in which he and Francis W. Ellis argued that Tamil and Telugu were descended from a common, non-Indo-European ancestor. However, it was not until 1856 that Robert Caldwell published his Comparative grammar of the Dravidian or South-Indian family of languages, which considerably expanded the Dravidian umbrella and established it as one of the major language groups of the world. Caldwell coined the term "Dravidian" from the Sanskrit drāvida, which was used in a 7th century text to refer to the Tamil language of the south of India. The publication of the Dravidian etymological dictionary by T. Burrow and M. B. Emeneau was a landmark event in Dravidian linguistics.
Recent studies of the distribution of alleles on the Y chromosome,[13] microsatellite DNA,[14] and mitochondrial DNA [15] in India have cast overwhelmingly strong doubt for a biological Dravidian "race" distinct from non-Dravidians in the Indian subcontinent. The only distinct ethnic groups present in South Asia, according to genetic analysis, are the Naga, Bodo, Tripura, Balochi, Brahui, Burusho, Hazara, Kalash and Pathan peoples, all of which are found in the northwest and northeastern extremes of south Asia respectively .[16]
Some of the Famous Dravidian dynasties are
1. Cholas 2. Cheras 3. Pandyas 4. Pallavas

[edit] Classification
Dravidian is a close-knit family. The languages are much more closely related than, say, the Indo-European languages. There is a fair degree of agreement on how they are related to each other. The following classification divides Dravidian into three branches. Other classifications use four: Either dividing Central Dravidian into Central (Kolami-Parji) and South-Central (Telugu-Kui), or dividing Northern Dravidian into Northeast (Kurukh-Malto) and Northwest (Brahui). The latter view has been largely abandoned since it has been demonstrated that Brahui is not an ancient language of Pakistan, but arrived from the southeast less than a millennium ago. There are in addition as-yet unclassified Dravidian languages such as Allar.
The languages recognized as Official languages of India are in boldface.


Dravidian 



 Southern 



 Tamil-Kannada 



 Tamil-Kodagu 









Tamil languages (incl. Tamil)








Malayalam














Kodagu (Kodava)












Kota








Toda


















 Kannada 





Kannada








Badaga


















 Tulu 





Koraga








Tulu


















 Central 



 Telugu-Kui 



 Telugu 





Telugu








Savara








Chenchu












 Gondi-Kui 



 Gondi 





Gondi








Maria








Pardhan








Nagarchal














Konda












Kui








Kuvi














Koya








Manda








Pengo


















 Kolami-Parji 









Naiki








Kolami


















Ollari (Gadaba)








Parji
























 Northern 



 Kurukh-Malto 





Kurukh (Oraon)






 Malto 





Kumarbhag Paharia








Sauria Paharia




















Brahui


















The Brahui, Kurukh and Malto have myths about external origins.[17] The Kurukh have traditionally claimed to be from the Deccan Peninsula,[18] more specifically Karnataka. The same tradition has existed of the Brahui.[19][20] They call themselves immigrants.[21] Many scholars hold this same view of the Brahui[22] such as L. H. Horace Perera and M. Ratnasabapathy.[23]

[edit] Relationship to other language families
The Dravidian languages have not been shown to be related to any other language family. Comparisons have been made not just with the other language families of the Subcontinent (Indo-European, Austro-Asiatic, Tibeto-Burman, Nihali, and Kalto), but with all typologically similar language families of the Old World. Dravidian is one of the primary linguistic groups in the proposed Nostratic proposal, which would link most languages in North Africa, Europe and Western Asia into a family with its origins in the Fertile Crescent sometime between the last Ice Age and the emergence of proto-Indo-European 4-6 thousand years BCE. However, the general consensus is that such deep connections are not (yet) demonstrable.
On a less ambitious scale, several scholars have proposed linking Dravidian languages with the ancient Elamite language of what is now south-western Iran. However, despite decades of research, this Elamo-Dravidian language family has not been demonstrated to the satisfaction of many historical linguists.
Nonetheless, while there are no readily detectable genealogical connections, there are strong areal features linking Dravidian with the Indo-Aryan languages. Dravidian languages show extensive lexical (vocabulary) borrowing, but only a few traits of structural (either phonological or grammatical) borrowing, from Indo-Aryan, whereas the Indo-Aryan shows more structural features than lexical borrowings from the Dravidian languages. The Dravidian impact on the syntax of Indo-Aryan languages is considered far greater than the Indo-Aryan impact on Dravidian grammar. Some linguists explain this asymmetry by arguing that Middle Indo-Aryan languages were built on a Dravidian substratum.[24]

[edit] Grammar



This section requires expansion.


The most characteristic features of Dravidian languages are:[8]

Dravidian languages are agglutinative.
Dravidian languages exhibit the inclusive and exclusive we feature.
The major word classes are nouns (substantives, numerals, pronouns), adjectives, verbs, and indeclinables (particles, enclitics, adverbs, interjections, onomatopoetic words, echo words).
Proto-Dravidian used only suffixes, never prefixes or infixes, in the construction of inflected forms. Hence, the roots of words always occurred at the beginning. Nouns, verbs, and indeclinable words constituted the original word classes.
There are two numbers and four different gender systems, the “original” probably having “male: non-male” in the singular and “person:non-person” in the plural.
In a sentence, however complex, only one finite verb occurs, normally at the end, preceded if necessary by a number of gerunds.
Word order follows certain basic rules but is relatively free.
The main (and probably original) dichotomy in tense is past:non-past. Present tense developed later and independently in each language or subgroup.
Verbs are intransitive, transitive, and causative; there are also active and passive forms.
All of the positive verb forms have their corresponding negative counterparts, negative verbs.


[edit] Phonology

[edit] Historical Phonology
Vowels: Proto-Dravidian had ten vowels: a, ā, e, ē, u, ū, i, ī, o, ō. There was contrast between short and long vowels. There were no diphthongs. ai and au are treated as *ay and *av (or *aw) (Subrahmanyam 1983, Zvelebil 1990, Krishnamurti 2003).
Consonants: Proto-Dravidian is reconstructible with the following consonantal phonemes (Subrahmanyam 1983:p40, Zvelebil 1990, Krishnamurti 2003) :



Labial
Dental
Alveolar
Retroflex
Palatal
Velar
Glottal


Plosive
p
t
ṯ
ṭ
c
k



Nasal
m
n
ṉ (??)
ṇ
ñ




Flap


r






Fricative



ḻ (ṛ, r̤)





Lateral


l
ḷ





Approximant
v



y




Alveolar stop ṯ in many daughter languages developed into an alveolar trill ṟ. It still retains the stop sound in Kota and Toda (Subrahmanyam 1983). Malayalam still retains the original (alveolar) stop sound in gemination. (ibid). In Old Tamil it takes the enunciative vowel like the other stops. In other words, ṯ (or ṟ) does not occur word-finally without the enunciative vowel (ibid).
Velar nasal ṅ occurs only before k in Proto-Dravidian as in many of its daughter languages. Therefore it is not considered a separate phoneme in Proto-Dravidian. However, it attained phonemic status in languages like Malayalam, Gondi, Konda and Pengo due to the simplification of the original sequence *ṅk to ṅ. (Subrahmanyam 1983)
The glottal fricative H has been proposed by Bhadriraju Krishnamurti to account for the Old Tamil Aytam (Āytam) and other Dravidian comparative phonological phenomena (Krishnamurti 2003).
Dravidian languages are noted for the lack of distinction between aspirated and unaspirated stops. While some Dravidian languages (especially Malayalam, Kannada and Telugu) have accepted large numbers of loan words from Sanskrit and other Indo-European languages in addition to their already vast vocabulary, in which the orthography shows distinctions in voice and aspiration, the words are pronounced in Dravidian according to different rules of phonology and phonotactics: aspiration of plosives is generally absent, regardless of the spelling of the word. This is not a universal phenomenon and is generally avoided in formal or careful speech, especially when reciting.
For instance, Tamil, like Finnish, Korean, Ainu, and most indigenous Australian languages, does not distinguish between voiced and unvoiced stops. In fact, the Tamil alphabet lacks symbols for voiced and aspirated stops.
Dravidian languages are also characterized by a three-way distinction between dental, alveolar, and retroflex places of articulation as well as large numbers of liquids.

[edit] Words starting with vowels
A substantial number of words also begin and end with vowels, which helps the languages' agglutinative property.
karanu (cry), elumbu (bone), adu (that), awade (there), idu (this), illai (no, absent)
adu-idil-illai (adu = that, idu = this, il= suffix form of "in", so => that-this-in-absent => that-in this-absent => that is absent in this)

[edit] Numerals
The numerals from 1 to 10 in various Dravidian languages.


Number
Tamil
Telugu
Kannada
Tulu
Malayalam
Kurukh
Kolami
Brahui
Proto-Dravidian


1
onru
okaṭi
ondu
onji
onnu
oṇṭa
okkod
asiṭ
*oru(1)


2
iraṇṭu
renḍu
eraḍu
raḍḍu
raṇṭu
indiŋ
irāṭ
irāṭ
*iru(2)


3
mūnru
mūḍu
mūru
mūji
mūnnu
mūnd
mūndiŋ
musiṭ
*muC


4
nālu, nālku, nānku
nālugu
nālku
nālu
nālu
nākh
nāliŋ
čār (II)
*nāl


5
aintu
ayidu
aidu
ainu
añcu
pancē (II)
ayd 3
panč (II)
*cayN


6
āru
āru
āru
āji
āru
soyyē (II)
ār 3
šaš (II)
*caru


7
ēẓu
ēḍu
ēlu
ēlu
ēẓu
sattē (II)
ēḍ 3
haft (II)
*eẓu


8
eṭṭu
enimidi
eṇṭu
ēṇma
eṭṭu
aṭṭhē (II)
enumadī 3
hašt (II)
*eṭṭu


9
onpatu
tommidi
ombattu
ormba
onpatu
naiṃyē (II)
tomdī 3
nōh (II)
*toḷ


10
pattu
padi
hattu
pattu
pattu
dassē (II)
padī 3
dah (II)
*pat(tu)



This is the same as the word for another form of the number one in Tamil and Malayalam. This is used as an indefinite article meaning "a" and also when the number is an adjective followed by a noun (as in "one person") as opposed to when it is a noun (as in "How many are there?" "One").
This is still found in compound words, and has taken on a meaning of "double" in Tamil and Malayalam. For example, irupatu (20, literally meaning "double-ten") or "iraṭṭi" ("double") or Iruvar (meaning two people).
Kolami numbers 5-10 are borrowed from Telugu


Words indicated (II) are borrowings from Indo-Iranian languages.


[edit] Stability and Continuity of Dravidian
The Dravidian language family has been considered remarkably stable. Some aspects of its stability are:

Relative stability of root vowels seems to have been the rule (Zvelebil)[25]
A tendency toward structural and systemic balance and stability is characteristic of the Dravidian group (Zvelebil, ibid)


[edit] Dravidian substratum influence on Sanskrit
Main article: Substratum in Vedic Sanskrit
Dravidian and Sanskrit have influenced each other in various ways from very early times, hence it is an interesting field for linguistic research.
Well-known Indologist and linguist (Zvelebil 1975: pp50-51): "... the period of the high water mark of Tamil classical literature was one in which the two great Sanskrit epics were already completed, but the Sanskrit classical poetry was barely emerging with Aśvaghoṣa." More importantly he continues: "No stylistic feature or convention could have been borrowed by the Tamils (though of course there are borrowings of purāṇic stories" (emphasis added). Zvelebil remarks:"Though the dominance of Sanskrit was exaggerated in some Brahmanic circles of Tamilnadu, and Tamil was given unduly underestimated by a few Sanskrit-oriented scholars, the Tamil and Sanskrit cultures were not generally in rivalry".
However more recent research has shown that Sanskrit has been influenced in certain more fundamental ways than Dravidian languages have been by it: It is by way of phonology[26] and even more significantly here via grammatical constructs. This has been the case from the earliest language available (ca. 1200 B.C.) of Sanskrit: the Ṛg Vedic speech.
Basically, Dravidian languages show extensive lexical (vocabulary) borrowing, but only a few traits of structural (either phonological or grammatical) borrowing, from the Indo-Aryan tongues. On the other hand, Indo-Aryan shows rather large-scale structural borrowing from Dravidian, but relatively few loanwords.[27]
The Ṛg Vedic language has retroflex consonants even though it is well known that the Indo European family and the Indo-Iranian subfamily to which Sanskrit belongs lack retroflex consonants (ṭ/ḍ, ṇ) with about 88 words in the Ṛg Veda having unconditioned retroflexes (Kuiper 1991, Witzel 1999). Some sample words are: (Iṭanta, Kaṇva,śakaṭī, kevaṭa, puṇya, maṇḍūka) This is cited as a serious evidence of substrate influence from close contact of the Vedic speakers with speakers of a foreign language family rich in retroflex phonemes (Kuiper 1991, Witzel 1999). Obviously the Dravidian family would be a serious candidate here (ibid as well as Krishnamurti 2003: p36) since it is rich in retroflex phonemes reconstructible back to the Proto-Dravidian stage[See Subrahmanyam 1983:p40, Zvelebil 1990, Krishnamurti 2003].
A more serious influence on Vedic Sanskrit is the extensive grammatical influence attested by the usage of the quotative marker iti and the occurrence of gerunds of verbs, a grammatical feature not found even in the Avestan language, a sister language of the Vedic Sanskrit. As Krishnamurti states: "Besides, the Ṛg Veda has used the gerund, not found in Avestan, with the same grammatical function as in Dravidian, as a non-finite verb for 'incomplete' action. Ṛg Vedic language also attests the use of iti as a quotative clause complementizer. All these features are not a consequence of simple borrowing but they indicate substratum influence (Kuiper 1991: ch 2)".
The Brahui population of Balochistan has been taken by some as the linguistic equivalent of a relict population, perhaps indicating that Dravidian languages were formerly much more widespread and were supplanted by the incoming Indo-Aryan languages.[28]
Thomason & Kaufman (1988) state that there is strong evidence that Dravidian influenced Indic through "shift", that is, native Dravidian speakers learning and adopting Indic languages. Elst (1999) claims that the presence of the Brahui language, similarities between Elamite and Harappan script as well as similarities between Indo-Aryan and Dravidian indicate that these languages may have interacted prior to the spread of Indo-Aryans southwards and the resultant intermixing of languages. Erdosy (1995:18) states that the most plausible explanation for the presence of Dravidian structural features in Old Indo-Aryan is that the majority of early Old Indo-Aryan speakers had a Dravidian mother tongue which they gradually abandoned. Even though the innovative traits in Indic could be explained by multiple internal explanations, early Dravidian influence is the only explanation that can account for all of the innovations at once – it becomes a question of explanatory parsimony; moreover, early Dravidian influence accounts for the several of the innovative traits in Indic better than any internal explanation that has been proposed.[29]
The noted Indologist Zvelebil remarks[25]: "Several scholars have demonstrated that pre-Indo-Aryan and pre-Dravidian bilingualism in India provided conditions for the far-reaching influence of Dravidian on the Indo-Aryan tongues in the spheres of phonology (e.g., the retroflex consonants, made with the tongue curled upward toward the palate), syntax (e.g., the frequent use of gerunds, which are nonfinite verb forms of nominal character, as in “by the falling of the rain”), and vocabulary (a number of Dravidian loanwords apparently appearing in the Rigveda itself)"

[edit] Notes


^ Ethnologue
^ Sanskrit, Tamil and Pahlavi Dictionaries
^ Kamil Zvelebil (1990). Dravidian Linguistics. Pondicherry Institute od Linguistics and Culture. p. 99. 
^ "Dravidian languages." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 30 Jun. 2008
^ Tyler, Stephen (1968), "Dravidian and Uralian: the lexical evidence". Language 44:4. 798-812
^ Webb, Edward (1860), "Evidences of the Scythian Affinities of the Dravidian Languages, Condensed and Arranged from Rev. R. Caldwell's Comparative Dravidian Grammar", Journal of the American Oriental Society Vol. 7. 271-298.
^ Burrow, T. (1944) "Dravidian Studies IV: The Body in Dravidian and Uralian". Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 11:2. 328-356.
^ a b Zvelebil, Kamal (2006). Dravidian Languages. In Encyclopædia Britannica (DVD edition).
^ Andronov, Mikhail S. (1971), "Comparative Studies on the Nature of Dravidian-Uralian Parallels: A Peep into the Prehistory of Language Families". Proceedings of the Second International Conference of Tamil Studies Madras. 267-277.
^ Zvelebil, Kamal (1970), Comparative Dravidian Phonology Mouton, The Hauge. at p. 22 contains a bibliography of articles supporting and opposing the theory
^ Krishnamurti, Bhadriraju (2003) The Dravidian Languages Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ISBN 0-521-77111-0 at p. 43.
^ "Dravidian languages." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 5 June 2008
^ Sahoo, Sanghamitra; Anamika Singh, G. Himabindu, Jheelam Banerjee, T. Sitalaximi, Sonali Gaikwad, R. Trivedi, Phillip Endicott, Toomas Kivisild, Mait Metspalu, Richard Villems and V. K. Kashyap (2006-01-24). "A prehistory of Indian Y chromosomes: Evaluating demic diffusion scenarios". Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences of United States of America 103 (4): 843–848. doi:10.1073/pnas.0507714103. http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/103/4/843. 
^ Sengupta, S.; et al. (2006-02-01). "Polarity and temporality of high-resolution y-chromosome distributions in India identify both indigenous and exogenous expansions and reveal minor genetic influence of Central Asian pastoralists.". Am J Hum Genet. (The American Society of Human Genetics) 78 (2): 201–221. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?tool=pubmed&pubmedid=16400607. Retrieved on 2007-12-03. 
^ Sharma, S.; Saha A, Rai E, Bhat A, Bamezai R. (2005). "Human mtDNA hypervariable regions, HVR I and II, hint at deep common maternal founder and subsequent maternal gene flow in Indian population groups.". J Hum Genet. 50 (10): 497–506. doi:10.1007/s10038-005-0284-2. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=pubmed&cmd=Retrieve&dopt=AbstractPlus&list_uids=16205836&query_hl=1&itool=pubmed_docsum. Retrieved on 2007-12-03. 
^ Human Genome Diversity Project
^ P. 83 The Quest for the Origins of Vedic Culture: The Indo-Aryan Migration Debate By Edwin Bryant
^ P. 18 The Orāons of Chōtā Nāgpur: their history, economic life, and social organization. by Sarat Chandra Roy, Rai Bahadur; Alfred C Haddon
^ P. 12 Origin and Spread of the Tamils By V. R. Ramachandra Dikshitar
^ P. 32 Ideology and status of Sanskrit : contributions to the history of the Sanskrit language by Jan E M Houben
^ P. 45 The Brahui language, an old Dravidian language spoken in parts of Baluchistan and Sind by Denys Bray
^ Ancient India; Culture and Thought By M. L. Bhagi
^ P. 23 Ceylon & Indian History from Early Times to 1505 A. D. By L. H. Horace Perera, M. Ratnasabapathy
^ Krishnamurti, Bhadriraju (2003) The Dravidian Languages Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ISBN 0-521-77111-0 at p. 40-41.
^ a b Dravidian languages - Britannica Online Encyclopedia
^ Trask, Robert Lawrence (2000). The Dictionary of Historical and Comparative Linguistics. Routledge. pp. 97. ISBN 1579582184. http://books.google.com/books?id=EHeGzQ8wuLQC&pg=PA97&dq=retroflex+%22dravidian+substrate+influence%22+but&sig=fyVKYtseDNEhhNApYROpdpCPg0A#PPA97,M1.  "It is widely suspected that the extinct and undeciphered Indus Valley language was a Dravidian language, but no confirmation is available. The existence of the isolated northern outlier Brahui is consistent with the hypothesis that Dravidian formerly occupied much of North India but was displaced by the invading Indo-Aryan languages, and the presence in the Indo-Aryan languages of certain linguistic features, such as retroflex consonants, is often attributed to Dravidian substrate influence." 
^ Dravidian languages." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 30 Jun. 2008
^ (Mallory 1989)
^ Thomason & Kaufman (1988:141–144)



[edit] References

Caldwell, R., A comparative grammar of the Dravidian, or, South-Indian family of languages, London: Harrison, 1856.; Reprinted London, K. Paul, Trench, Trubner & co., ltd., 1913; rev. ed. by J.L. Wyatt and T. Ramakrishna Pillai, Madras, University of Madras, 1961, reprint Asian Educational Services, 1998. ISBN 81-206-0117-3
Campbell, A.D., A grammar of the Teloogoo language, commonly termed the Gentoo, peculiar to the Hindoos inhabiting the northeastern provinces of the Indian peninsula, 3d ed. Madras, Printed at the Hindu Press, 1849.
Krishnamurti, B., The Dravidian Languages, Cambridge University Press, 2003. ISBN 0-521-77111-0
Subrahmanyam, P.S., Dravidian Comparative Phonology, Annamalai University, 1983.
Zvelebil, Kamil., Dravidian Linguistics: An Introduction", PILC (Pondicherry Institute of Linguistics and Culture), 1990
Zvelebil, Kamil., Tamil Literature, E.J. Brill, Leiden, 1975, ISBN 90-04-04190-7
Kuiper, F.B.J., Aryans in the Rig Veda], Rodopi, 1991, ISBN 90-5183-307-5 (CIP)
Witzel, Michael, Early Sources for South Asian Substrate Languages.Boston, "Mother Tongue", extra number 1999
Trask, Robert Lawrence (2000). The Dictionary of Historical and Comparative Linguistics. Routledge. ISBN 1579582184. 


[edit] External links

Dravidian Etymological Dictionary. The complete dravidian etymological dictionary in a searchable online form.
Dravidian languages page in SIL Ethnologue.
Dravidian from Etruscan Paper claiming a relationship between Dravidian and Etruscan.
Dravidian origin of the Guanches. A paper claiming a Dravidian origin for the language of the Guanches.
Tamil and Japanese
http://www.brahui.tk A site by Shafique-Ur-Rehman, Its all about Brahui People live mostly in Balochistan, Pakistan.
A subsection of the "Languages of the World" Site maintained by the National Virtual Translation Center in Washington DC.


[edit] See also

Susumu Kuno, Professor Emeritus of Linguistics (Harvard University), author of numerous books on Dravidian and other languages
Official languages of India
Nostratic languages








v • d • e

Languages of South Asia





Main articles

Languages of India (list by number of speakers - scheduled) · Languages of Pakistan · Languages of Bangladesh · Languages of Nepal · Languages of Sri Lanka






Historic languages

Linguistic history of India • Sanskrit: Vedic Sanskrit · Classical Sanskrit · Prakrit: Dramatic Prakrit · Jain Prakrit · Pāli • Others: Middle Indic






Contemporary languages

Austronesian: Sri Lanka Malay • Dravidian: Brahui · Kannada · Malayalam · Tamil · Telugu · Tulu • Indo-Aryan: Angika · Assamese · Bhojpuri · Bengali · Dhivehi · Dogri · Gujarati · Hindi · Hindko · Kashmiri · Konkani · Magahi · Mahal · Maithili · Marathi · Nepali · Oriya · Punjabi · Saraiki · Sindhi · Sinhala · Urdu • Iranian: Balochi · Pashto · Persian · Tajik • Isolates: Andamanese · Burushaski · Kalto · Kusunda • Mon-Khmer: Khasi · Nicobarese • Munda: Ho · Korku · Mundari · Santali · Sora • European influence: English · French · Portuguese • Tibeto-Burman: Ao · Bodo · Garo · Kokborok · Meitei · Mizo · Nepal Bhasa · Sikkimese · Tenyidie · Tibetan






Scripts

Indus · Brahmi • Brahmic family: Devanagari · Sinhala · Telugu · Tamil · Gurmukhi · Bengali · Ranjana · Oriya · Malayalam · Kannada · Gujarati • Arabic: Arwi · Nasta'liq · Shahmukhi






Language activism

Hela Havula · Bengali Language Movement · Sanskrit revival · Pure Tamil movement · Nepal Bhasa movement · Madras anti-Hindi agitation of 1965 · Urdu movement













v • d • e

Dravidian languages





Southern

Allar · Arwi · Badaga · Bellary · Irula · Kanikkaran · Kannada · Kodava Takk · Kota · Kurumba  · Malayalam · Paliyan · Tamil · Toda · Tulu






South-Central

Abujmaria · Gondi · Kui · Kuvi · Konda (Koṇḍa) · Koya · Manda · Pengo · Sugali · Telugu






Central

Kolami · Naiki · Parji · Ollari · Gadaba






North

Brahui · Kurux · Malto






Italics indicate extinct languages (no surviving native speakers and no spoken descendant)












v • d • e

List of primary demonstrated language families





Africa

Afro-Asiatic · Juu-ǂHoan · Kadu · Khoe · Koman · Mande · Niger-Congo · Nilo-Saharan · Songhay · Tuu · Ubangian. Isolates: Hadza · Sandawe






Eurasia

Abkhaz-Adygean · Afro-Asiatic · Ainu · Austro-Asiatic · Austronesian · Chukotko-Kamchatkan · Dene-Yeniseian · Dravidian · Eskimo-Aleut · Great Andamanese · Hmong-Mien · Hurro-Urartian · Indo-European · Japonic · Kartvelian · Kradai · Mongolic · Nakho-Dagestanian · Ongan · Sino-Tibetan · Tungusic · Turkic · Uralic · Yukaghir. Perhaps also: Altaic · Tyrsenian. Isolates: Basque · Burushaski · Elamite · Kalto · Korean · Kusunda · Nivkh · Sumerian






New Guinea

Amto-Musan · Austronesian · Baining · Bayono-Awbono · Border (Tami) · Central Solomons · East Bird's Head–Sentani · East Geelvink Bay · Eastern Trans-Fly · Fas · Kwomtari · Lakes Plain · Left May · Mairasi · Nimboran · North Bougainville · Piawi · Ramu–Lower Sepik · Senagi · Sepik · Skou · South Bougainville · South-Central Papuan · Tor-Kwerba · Torricelli · Trans–New Guinea · West Papuan · Yawa · Yuat. Perhaps also: Yele–West New Britain. Isolates: Abinomn · Busa · Isirawa · Kol · Kuot · Pyu · Taiap · Yalë · Yuri · and maybe Sulka






Australia

Bunuban · Burarran · Daly · Giimbiyu (Mangerrian) · Gunwinyguan · Iwaidjan · Jarrakan · Limilngan · Mirndi · Nyulnyulan · Pama-Nyungan · Tankic · Tasmanian · Worrorran. Isolates: Enindhilyagwa · Gaagudju · Laragiya · Ngurmbur · Tiwi · Umbugarla






North America

Algic · Alsean · Caddoan · Chimakuan · Chinookan · Chumashan · Comecrudan · Coosan · Dene-Yeniseian · Eskimo-Aleut · Iroquoian · Kalapuyan · Keresan · Kiowa-Tanoan · Maiduan · Muskogean · Palaihnihan · Plateau Penutian · Pomoan · Salishan · Shastan · Siouan-Catawban · Tsimshianic · Utian · Uto-Aztecan · Wakashan · Wintuan · Yokutsan · Yuman-Cochimí. Perhaps also: Yuki-Wappo. Isolates: Chimariko · Haida · Karuk · Kutenai · Siuslaw · Takelma · Timucua · Washo · Yana · Yuchi · Zuni






Mesoamerica

Mayan · Misumalpan · Mixe-Zoque · Oto-Manguean · Tarascan · Tequistlatecan · Tolan · Totonacan · Uto-Aztecan. Isolates: Cuitlatec · Huave · Lenca · Seri · Xinca






South America

Alacalufan · Arauan · Araucanian · Arutani-Sape · Aymaran · Barbacoan · Bororoan · Cahuapanan · Cariban · Catacaoan · Chapacuran (or Wamo-Chapakura) · Charruan · Chibchan · Chimuan · Choco · Chon · Guaicuruan · Guajiboan · Gê (Je) · Harakmbut · Jirajaran · Jivaroan · Kariri · Katembri-Taruma · Katukinan · Maipurean (Arawakan) · Mascoian · Matacoan · Maxakalian · Muran · Nambikwaran · Otomako-Taparita · Pano-Tacanan · Peba-Yaguan · Puinavean (Makú) · Purian · Quechuan · Saliban · Tucanoan · Tupian · Uru-Chipaya · Witotoan · Yabutian · Yanomaman · Zamucoan · Zaparoan. Perhaps also: Esmerelda-Yaruro · Hibito-Cholón · Lule-Vilela · Macro-Gê · Tequiraca-Canichana. Isolates extant in 2000: Aikana? · Andoque? · Camsa · Canichana · Cofan? · Huaorani · Irantxe? · Itonama · Joti · Movima · Taushiro · Tequiraca (Abishiri) · Ticuna · Trumai · Warao · Yamana · Yuracare






See also

language isolates · unclassified languages · creoles · pidgins · mixed languages · artificial languages · sign languages ·









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dravidian_languages"
Categories: Dravidian languages | Agglutinative languages | Languages of AsiaHidden categories: Articles to be expanded since January 2007 | All articles to be expanded 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Aragonés
Asturianu
বাংলা
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Gaelg
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
ಕನ್ನಡ
Latina
Lietuvių
Líguru
Magyar
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
Türkçe
اردو
Zeêuws
中文









 This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 00:22.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
