













Chinese dragon - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Chinese_dragon";
		var wgTitle = "Chinese dragon";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "66203";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281660456;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Chinese dragon

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Chinese dragon










Hanyu Pinyin:
Lóng


Japanese name


Hiragana:
1. りゅう
2. たつ


Kyūjitai:
龍


Shinjitai:
竜





Transliterations


- Revised Hepburn:
1. ryū
2. tatsu


- Kunrei-shiki:
1. ryû
2. tatu





Korean name


Hangul:
룡/용


Hanja:
龍





Transliterations


- Revised
  Romanization:
Ryong/Yong





Vietnamese name


Quốc ngữ:
rồng, long


Hán tự:
龍


The Chinese dragon'（Simp 龙，Trad 龍） or Oriental dragon' is a mythical creature in East Asian culture with a Chinese origin. It is visualized these days as a long, scaled, snake-like creature with four legs and five claws on each (though it did not always have five claws). In contrast to the European dragon which stands on four legs and which is usually portrayed as evil, the Chinese dragon has long been a potent symbol of auspicious power in Chinese folklore and art. The Chinese dragon is traditionally also the embodiment of the concept of yang (male) and associated with the weather as the bringer of rain and water in an agriculturally water-driven nation. Its female counterpart is the Fenghuang (usually translated as a phoenix).
The dragon is sometimes used in the West as a national emblem of China. However, this usage within both the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China on Taiwan is rare. Firstly, the dragon was historically the symbol of the Emperor of China. Starting with the Yuan Dynasty, regular citizens were forbidden to associate themselves with the symbol. The dragon re-emerged during the Qing Dynasty and appeared on national flags.[1]
Secondly, in European-influenced cultures, the dragon has aggressive, warlike connotations that the Chinese government wishes to avoid. It is for these reasons that the giant panda is far more often used within China as a national emblem than the dragon. In Hong Kong, however, the dragon is part of the design of Brand Hong Kong, a symbol used to promote Hong Kong as an international brand name[2].
Many Chinese people often use the term "Descendants of the Dragon" (龍的傳人) as a sign of ethnic identity, as part of a trend started in the 1970s when different Asian nationalities were looking for animal symbols for representations.[1] The wolf was used among the Mongols, the monkey among Tibetans.[1]
In Chinese culture today, it is mostly used for decorative purposes. It is a taboo to disfigure a depiction of a dragon; for example, an advertisement campaign commissioned by Nike, which featured the American basketball player LeBron James slaying a dragon (as well as beating up an old Kung Fu master), was immediately banned by the Chinese government after public outcry over disrespect.[3]
A number of Chinese proverbs and idioms also feature references to the dragon, for example: "Hoping one's son will become a dragon" (望子成龍, i.e. be as successful and powerful as a dragon).




Contents


1 Regional variations across Asia
2 Dragon worship

2.1 Origin
2.2 Mythical creature
2.3 Ruler of weather and water
2.4 Symbol of imperial authority
2.5 Modern belief


3 Depictions of the dragon

3.1 Neolithic depictions
3.2 Classical depictions
3.3 Children of Dragon
3.4 Dragon toes


4 Cultural references

4.1 Number nine
4.2 Chinese zodiac
4.3 Constellations
4.4 Dragonboat racing
4.5 Dragon dancing
4.6 Dragons and Tigers


5 Chinese dragons in popular culture
6 See also
7 References
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Regional variations across Asia
While depictions of the dragon in art and literature is largely consistent throughout the cultures in which it is found, there are some regional differences. The remainder of this article deals with aspects common across cultures, as well as features peculiar to cultural China.
For more information on peculiarities in the depiction of the dragon in other Asian cultures, see:

Druk
Japanese dragon
Korean dragon
Nāga (or Naga)
Vietnamese dragon


[edit] Dragon worship

[edit] Origin




The C-shaped jade totem of Hongshan Culture is considered by a few as the the prototype of the Chinese dragon


The origin of Chinese dragon is not certain, but some scholars believe that it originated from totems of different tribes in China. Some have suggested that it comes from a stylized depiction of existing animals, such as snakes, fish, or crocodiles. For example, the Banpo site of the Yangshao culture in Shaanxi featured an elongated, snake-like fish motif. The theory of snakes or fish as the origin of the Chinese dragon is not widely accepted.




Jade-carved dragon garment ornament from the Warring States period (403 BC-221 BC).






Gilded-bronze handle in the shape of a dragon's head and neck, made during the Eastern Han period (25–220 AD)


An alternative view, advocated by He Xin, is that the early dragon depicted a species of crocodile. Specifically, Crocodylus porosus, which is the largest living reptile. The crocodile is known to be able to accurately sense changes in air pressure, and be able to sense coming rain. This may have been the origin of the dragon's mythical attributes in controlling the weather, especially the rain. The association with the crocodile is also supported by the view in ancient times that large crocodiles are a variety of dragon. For example, in the Story of Zhou Chu, about the life of a Jin Dynasty warrior, he is said to have killed a "dragon" that infested the waters of his home village, which appears to have been a crocodile.
Others have proposed that its shape is the merger of totems of various tribes as the result of the merger of tribes. The coiled snake or dragon form played an important role in early Chinese culture. Legendary figures like Nüwa (女媧) and Fuxi (伏羲) are depicted as having snake bodies. Some scholars have noted that a myth arose that the first legendary Emperor of China Huang Di (黃帝,Yellow Emperor) used a snake for his coat of arms. According to the myth, every time he conquered another tribe, he incorporated his defeated enemy's emblem into his own, thus explains why the dragon appears to have features of various animals.
Jade badges of rank in coiled form have been dated to the Hongshan culture.[4]

[edit] Mythical creature




Non-Imperial Chinese dragon in Shanghai.






Nine Dragon Screen, Datong (detail).






Mini-Sculpture of a Dragon on top of a temple in Hsinchu, Taiwan


From its origins as totems or the stylized depiction of natural creatures, the Chinese dragon evolved to become a mythical animal. The Han Dynasty scholar Wang Fu recorded Chinese myths that long dragons had nine anatomical resemblances.

The people paint the dragon's shape with a horse's head and a snake's tail. Further, there are expressions as 'three joints' and 'nine resemblances' (of the dragon), to wit: from head to shoulder, from shoulder to breast, from breast to tail. These are the joints; as to the nine resemblances, they are the following: his horns resemble those of a stag, his head that of a camel, his eyes those of a demon, his neck that of a snake, his belly that of a clam (shen, 蜃), his scales those of a carp, his claws those of an eagle, his soles those of a tiger, his ears those of a cow. Upon his head he has a thing like a broad eminence (a big lump), called [chimu] (尺木). If a dragon has no [chimu], he cannot ascend to the sky.[5]

Further sources give variant lists of the nine animal resemblances. Sinologist Henri Doré lists these characteristics of an authentic dragon: "The horns of a deer. The head of a camel. A demon's eyes. The neck of a snake. A tortoise's viscera. A hawk's claws. The palms of a tiger. A cow's ears. And it hears through its horns, its ears being deprived of all power of hearing."[6] He notes that, "Others state it has a rabbit's eyes, a frog's belly, a carp's scales." The anatomy of other legendary creatures, including the chimera and manticore, is similarly amalgamated from fierce animals.
Chinese dragons were considered to be physically concise. Of the 117 scales, 81 are of the yang essence (positive) while 36 are of the yin essence (negative). Initially, the dragon was benevolent but the Buddhists introduced the concept of malevolent influence among some dragons. Just as water destroys, they said, so can some dragons destroy via floods, tidal waves and storms. They suggested that some of the worst floods were believed to have been the result of a mortal upsetting a dragon.
Many pictures of oriental dragons show a flaming pearl under their chin. The pearl is associated with wealth, good luck, and prosperity.
Chinese dragons are occasionally depicted with bat-like wings growing out of the front limbs, but most do not have wings, as their ability to fly (and control rain/water, etc.) are mystical and not seen as a result of their physical attributes.
This description accords with the artistic depictions of the dragon down to the present day. The dragon has also acquired an almost unlimited range of supernatural powers. It is said to be able to disguise itself as a silkworm, or become as large as our entire universe. It can fly among the clouds or hide in water (according to the Guanzi). It can form clouds, can turn into water or fire, can become invisible or glow in the dark (according to the Shuowen Jiezi).
In Singapore and many other countries, folktales speak of the dragon having all the attributes of the other 11 creatures of the zodiac, this includes the whiskers of the rat, the face and horns of an ox, claws and teeth of a tiger, belly of a rabbit, body of a snake, legs of a horse, the beard of a goat, wit(or brain) of a monkey, crest of a rooster, ears of a dog, the snout of a pig.

[edit] Ruler of weather and water
Main article: Dragon King




A dragon seen floating among clouds, on a golden canteen made during the 15th century, Ming Dynasty


Chinese dragons are strongly associated with water in popular belief. They are believed to be the rulers of moving bodies of water, such as waterfalls, rivers, or seas. They can show themselves as water spouts (tornado or twister over water). In this capacity as the rulers of water and weather, the dragon is more anthropomorphic in form, often depicted as a humanoid, dressed in a king's costume, but with a dragon head wearing a king's headdress.
There are four major Dragon Kings, representing each of the four seas: the East Sea (corresponding to the East China Sea), the South Sea (corresponding to the South China Sea), the West Sea (sometimes seen as the Indian Ocean and beyond), and the North Sea (sometimes seen as Lake Baikal).
Because of this association, they are seen as "in charge" of water-related weather phenomenon. In premodern times, many Chinese villages (especially those close to rivers and seas) had temples dedicated to their local "dragon king". In times of drought or flooding, it was customary for the local gentry and government officials to lead the community in offering sacrifices and conducting other religious rites to appease the dragon, either to ask for rain or a cessation thereof.
The King of Wu-Yue in the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period was often known as the "Dragon King" or the "Sea Dragon King" because of his extensive hydro-engineering schemes which "tamed" the sea.

[edit] Symbol of imperial authority




An imperial robe from the Qing Dynasty


At the end of his reign, the first legendary Emperor Huang Di was said to have been immortalized into a dragon that resembled his emblem, and ascended to Heaven. Since the Chinese consider Huang Di as their ancestor, they sometimes refer to themselves as "the descendants of the dragon". This legend also contributed towards the use of the Chinese dragon as a symbol of imperial power.
The dragon, especially yellow or golden dragons with five claws on each foot, was a symbol for the emperor in many Chinese dynasties. The imperial throne was called the Dragon Throne. During the late Qing Dynasty, the dragon was even adopted as the national flag. The dragon is featured in the carvings on the steps of imperial palaces and tombs, such as the Forbidden City in Beijing.
In some Chinese legends, an Emperor might be born with a birthmark in the shape of a dragon. For example, one legend tells the tale of a peasant born with a dragon birthmark who eventually overthrows the existing dynasty and founds a new one; another legend might tell of the prince in hiding from his enemies who is identified by his dragon birthmark.
In contrast, the Empress of China was often identified with the Fenghuang.

[edit] Modern belief
In modern times, belief in the dragon appears to be sporadic at best. There appear to be very few who would see the dragon as a literally real creature. The worship of the Dragon Kings as rulers of water and weather continues in many areas, and is deeply ingrained in Chinese cultural traditions such as Chinese New Year celebrations. Dragon kites are also used in these celebrations.[citation needed]

[edit] Depictions of the dragon




An ancient seal script form of the character for "dragon" that is now written 龍 or 龙 and pronounced lóng in Mandarin Chinese.



[edit] Neolithic depictions
Dragons or dragon-like depictions have been found extensively in neolithic-period archaeological sites throughout China. The earliest depiction of dragons was found at Xinglongwa culture sites. Yangshao culture sites in Xi'an have produced clay pots with dragon motifs. The Liangzhu culture also produced dragon-like patterns. The Hongshan culture sites in present-day Inner Mongolia produced jade dragon amulets in the form of pig dragons.
One such early form was the pig dragon. It is a coiled, elongated creature with a head resembling a boar[7]. The character for "dragon" in the earliest Chinese writing has a similar coiled form, as do later jade dragon amulets from the Shang period.

[edit] Classical depictions
Chinese literature and myths refer to many dragons besides the famous long. The linguist Michael Carr analyzed over 100 ancient dragon names attested in Chinese classic texts.[8] Many such Chinese names derive from the suffix -long:

Tianlong (Chinese: 天龍; pinyin: tiānlóng; Wade-Giles: t'ien-lung; literally "heavenly dragon"), celestial dragon that guards heavenly palaces and pulls divine chariots; also a name for Draco (constellation)
Shenlong (Chinese: 神龍; pinyin: shénlóng; Wade-Giles: shen-lung; literally "god dragon"), thunder god that controls the weather, appearance of a human head, dragon's body, and drum-like stomach
Fucanglong (Chinese: 伏藏龍; pinyin: fúcánglóng; Wade-Giles: fu-tsang-lung; literally "hidden treasure dragon"), underworld guardian of precious metals and jewels, associated with volcanoes
Dilong (Chinese: 地龍; pinyin: dìlóng; Wade-Giles: ti-lung; literally "earth dragon"), controller of rivers and seas; also a name for earthworm
Yinglong (Chinese: 應龍; pinyin: yìnglóng; Wade-Giles: ying-lung; literally "responding dragon"), winged dragon associated with rains and floods, used by Huangdi to kill Chi You
Jiaolong (Chinese: 蛟龍; pinyin: jiāolóng; Wade-Giles: chiao-lung; literally "crocodile dragon"), hornless or scaled dragon, leader of all aquatic animals
Panlong (Chinese: 蟠龍; pinyin: pánlóng; Wade-Giles: p'an-lung; literally "coiled dragon"), lake dragon that has not ascended to heaven
Huanglong (Chinese: 黃龍; pinyin: huánglóng; Wade-Giles: huang-lung; literally "yellow dragon"), hornless dragon symbolizing the emperor
Feilong (Chinese: 飛龍; pinyin: fēilóng; Wade-Giles: fei-lung; literally "flying dragon"), winged dragon that rides on clouds and mist; also a name for pterosaur (compare Feilong kick and Fei Long character)
Qinglong (Chinese: 青龍; pinyin: qīnglóng; Wade-Giles: ch'ing-lung; literally "Azure Dragon"), East one of the Four Symbols, mythological creatures in the Chinese constellations
Qiulong (Chinese: 虯龍; pinyin: qíulóng; Wade-Giles: ch'iu-lung; literally "curling dragon"), contradictorily defined as both "horned dragon" and "hornless dragon"
Chilong (Chinese: 螭龍; pinyin: chīlóng; Wade-Giles: ch'ih-lung; literally "demon dragon"), a hornless dragon or mountain demon

Fewer Chinese dragon names derive from the prefix long-:

Longwang (Chinese: 龍王; pinyin: lóngwáng; Wade-Giles: lung-wang; literally "Dragon Kings") divine rulers of the Four Seas
Longma (Chinese: 龍馬; pinyin: lóngmǎ; Wade-Giles: lung-ma; literally "dragon horse"), emerged from the Luo River and revealed Bagua (concept) to Fu Xi

Some additional Chinese dragons are not named with long 龍, for instance,

Hong (Chinese: 虹; pinyin: hóng; Wade-Giles: hung; literally "rainbow"), a two-headed dragon or rainbow serpent
Shen (Chinese: 蜃; pinyin: shèn; Wade-Giles: shen; literally "giant clam"), a shapeshifting dragon or sea monster believed to create mirages
Bashe (Chinese: 巴蛇; pinyin: bāshé; Wade-Giles: pa-she; literally "ba snake") was a giant python-like dragon that ate elephants
Teng (simplified Chinese: 螣; traditional Chinese: 螣; pinyin: téng; Wade-Giles: t'eng) or Tengshe (simplified Chinese: 腾蛇; traditional Chinese: 騰蛇; pinyin: téngshé; Wade-Giles: t'eng-she; lit. "soaring snake") is a flying dragon without legs

Chinese scholars have classified dragons in diverse systems. For instance, Emperor Huizong of Song canonized five colored dragons as "kings".

The Azure Dragon [Qinglong 青龍] spirits, most compassionate kings.
The Vermillion Dragon [Zhulong 朱龍] spirits, kings that bestow blessings on lakes.
The Yellow Dragon [Huanglong 黃龍] spirits, kings that favorably hear all petitions.
The White Dragon [Bailong 白龍] spirits, virtuous and pure kings.
The Black Dragon [Xuanlong 玄龍] spirits, kings dwelling in the depths of the mystic waters.[9]

With the addition of the Yellow Dragon of the Center to Azure Dragon of the East, these Vermillion, White, and Black Dragons coordinate with the Four Symbols, including the Vermilion Bird of the South, White Tiger of the West, and Black Tortoise of the North.

[edit] Children of Dragon




Pulao in Changchun Temple, Wuhan






Bixi near Marco Polo Bridge, Beijing


Several Ming Dynasty texts list what were claimed as the Nine Offspring of the Dragon (龍生九子), and subsequently these feature prominently in popular Chinese stories and writings. The scholar Xie Zhaozhe (謝肇淛, 1597-1624) gives this listing.

A well-known work of the end of the sixteenth century, the [Wuzazu 五雜俎], informs us about the nine different young of the dragon, whose shapes are used as ornaments according to their nature. The [pulao 蒲牢], dragons which like to cry, are represented on the tops of bells, serving as handles. The [qiuniu 囚牛], which like music, are used to adorn musical instruments. The [chiwen 螭吻/鴟吻], which like swallowing, are placed on both ends of the ridgepoles of roofs (to swallow all evil influences). The [chaofeng 嘲風], lion-like beasts which like precipices, are placed on the four corners of roofs. The [yazi 睚眦/睚眥], which like to kill, serve as ornaments of sword-grips. The [bixi 贔屭], which have the shape of the [chilong 螭龍], and are fond of literature, are represented on the sides of grave-monuments. The [bi'an 狴犴], which like litigation, are placed over prison gates (in order to keep guard). The [suanni 狻猊], which like to sit down, are represented upon the bases of Buddhist idols (under the Buddhas' or Bodhisattvas' feet). The [baxia 霸下], finally, big tortoises which like to carry heavy objects, are placed under grave-monuments. Further, the same author enumerates nine other kinds of dragons — there are so many, says he, because the dragon's nature is very lewd, so that he copulates with all animals —, which are represented as ornaments of different objects or buildings according to their liking prisons, water, the rank smell of newly caught fish or newly killed meat, wind and rain, ornaments, smoke, shutting the mouth (used for adorning key-holes), standing on steep places (placed on roofs), and fire.[5]

The Sheng'an waiji (升庵外集) collection by the poet Yang Shen (楊慎, 1488-1559) gives different 5th and 9th names for the dragon's nine children: the taotie (饕餮), which loves to eat and is found on food-related wares, and the jiaotu (椒圖), which looks like a conch or clam, does not like to be disturbed, and is used on the front door or the doorstep. Yang's list is bixi, chiwen or cháofēng, pulao, bi'an, taotie, qiuniu, yazi, suanni, and jiaotu.
Oldest attestation of the list found in 菽園雜記[3] (by 陸容, 1436-1494), however, he noted that the list enumerates mere synonyms of various antiques, not children of a dragon.

[edit] Dragon toes




The reverse side of a six-lobed bronze mirror from the 8th century, during the Tang Dynasty (618–907), showing a dragon with three toes on each foot


It is sometimes noted that the Chinese dragons have five toes on each foot, while Korean dragons have four, and Japanese dragons have three. To explain this phenomenon, a Chinese legend states that all Imperial dragons originated in China, and the further away from China a dragon went the fewer toes it had. However, historical records show that early Chinese dragons had three toes, but later developed into four toes (such dragons were known as Mang).
The first Ming Emperor copied the Yuan ruling and decreed that the dragon would be his emblem and that it would have five toes (or claws) The four-clawed dragon was typically for imperial nobility and certain high ranking officials. The three clawed dragon was used by lower ranks and the general public (widely seen on various Chinese goods in Ming dynasty). The Long, however, was only for select royalty closely associated with the Imperial family, usually in various symbolic colors, while it was a capital offense for anyone - other than the emperor himself - to ever use the completely gold-colored, five-clawed Long dragon motif. Improper use of claw number and/or colors was considered treason, punishable by execution of the offender's entire clan. Since most east Asian nations at one point or another were considered Chinese tributaries, they were only allowed four-clawed dragons.
The five toes rule was first enforced in 1336 AD (Yuan the second year). "(For commoners) It is forbidden to wear any cloth with patterns of Qilin, Male Fenghuang (Chinese phoenix), White rabbit, Lingzhi, Five-Toe Two-Horn Loong, Eight Loongs, Nine Loongs, Long-live, Fortune-longevity character and Golden Yellow etc." ("禁服麒麟、鸾凤、白兔、灵芝、双角五爪龙、八龙、九龙、万寿、福寿字、赭黄等服")[10]

[edit] Cultural references

[edit] Number nine




A close up view of one full dragon (and the tail end and claw of another) from the Nine Dragons handscroll painted in 1244 CE by Chen Rong, an artist of the Song Dynasty


The number nine is considered lucky in China as it is the largest possible single digit, and Chinese dragons are frequently connected with it. For example, a Chinese dragon is normally described in terms of nine attributes and usually has 117 scales - 81 (9x9) Yang and 36 (9x4) Yin. This is also why there are nine forms of the dragon and the dragon has nine children (see Classical depictions above). The "Nine Dragon Wall" is a screen wall with images of nine different dragons, and is found in imperial palaces and gardens. The wall has 9 large dragons, as well as small dragons that cover the edge. In all there are 635 dragons on it. As nine was considered the number of the emperor, only the most senior officials were allowed to wear nine dragons on their robes - and then only with the robe completely covered with surcoats. Lower-ranking officials had eight or five dragons on their robes, again covered with surcoats; even the emperor himself wore his dragon robe with one of its nine dragons hidden from view.
There are a number of places in China called "Nine Dragons", the most famous being Kowloon (in Cantonese) in Hong Kong. The part of the Mekong in Vietnam is known as Cửu Long, with the same meaning.

[edit] Chinese zodiac
Main article: Dragon (Zodiac)
The dragon is one of the 12 animals in the Chinese zodiac which is used to designate years in the Chinese calendar. It is thought that each animal is associated with certain personality traits. Dragon years are usually the most popular to have babies. There are more babies born in Dragon years than in any other animal years of the Zodiac.
Well-known persons born in the year of the dragon include: Bruce Lee, Ringo Starr, Dr. Seuss, John Lennon, Helen Keller, Salvador Dalí, Susan B. Anthony, Sigmund Freud, Florence Nightingale, Napoleon III, Ronaldo, Mike Allen, James Coburn, Ernesto "Che" Guevara, Penelope Keith and Friedrich Nietzsche.

[edit] Constellations
The Azure Dragon - Qing Long - 青龍 is considered to be the primary of the four celestial guardians, the other three being the Zhu Que - 朱雀 (Vermilion Bird), Bai Hu - 白虎 (White Tiger), Xuan Wu - 玄武 (Black Tortoise-like creature). In this context, the Azure Dragon is associated with the East and the element of Wood.
See also: Five elements (Chinese philosophy)
. 
[edit] Dragonboat racing

Main article Dragon boat

At special festivals, especially the Duan Wu festival, dragon boat races are an important part of festivities. Typically, these are boats rowed by a team of up to 12 rowers, and with a carved dragon as the head of the boat. Dragon boat racing is also an important part of celebrations outside of China, such as at Chinese New Year.

[edit] Dragon dancing

Main article Dragon dance

On auspicious occasions, including Chinese New Year and the opening of shops and residences, festivities often include dancing with dragon puppets. These are "life sized" cloth-and-wood puppets manipulated by a team of people, supporting the dragon with poles. They perform choreographed moves to the accompaniment of drums and music.

[edit] Dragons and Tigers




Detail of an embroidered silk gauze ritual garment from a 4th century BC, Zhou era tomb at Mashan, Hubei province, China. The flowing, curvilinear design incorporates dragons, phoenixes, and tigers.


Tigers have always been an eternal rival to the dragon, thus various artworks depict a dragon and tiger fighting an epic battle. A well used Chinese idiom to describe equal rivals (often in sports nowadays) is "Dragon versus Tiger". In Chinese martial arts, "Dragon style" is used to describe styles of fighting based more on understanding movement, while "Tiger style" is based on brute strength and memorization of techniques.
Ironically India has long been represented by a tiger. Tiger has much symbolic importance throughout Indosphere, and along with Garuda, it has been the most used animal in Indic heraldry. While Royal Bengal Tiger is the national animal of India and Bangladesh, and Malayan Tiger of Malaysia. It was also symbol of many royal houses of South and SE Asia region and in modern times even revolutionary activities are represented by tigers like Indische Legion or LTTE. Tiger's close cat relatives, the Asiatic lion is also widely used in region as in flag of Sri Lanka, national emblem of India and many other nations around like Cambodia, Singapore, etc., and is also national animal of Singapore. Also another cat Snow Panther is the national mammal of Pakistan and Snow lion was national animal of Tibet.

[edit] Chinese dragons in popular culture
As a part of traditional folklore, dragons appear in a variety of mythological fiction. In the classical story Journey to the West, the son of the Dragon King of the West was condemned to serve as a horse for the travellers because of his indiscretions at a party in the heavenly court. The Monkey King's cudgel Rú Yì Bàng was stolen from the Eastern (Donghai) Dragon King áo guǎng. In Fengshen Yanyi and other stories, Nezha, the boy hero, defeats the Dragon Kings and tames the seas. Chinese dragons also appear in innumerable Japanese anime movies and TV shows, manga, and in Western political cartoons as a personification of the People's Republic of China. In a third season episode of Thomas the Tank Engine and Friends and Shining Time Station's Halloween episode "Scare Dares", Thomas received a paper chinese dragon from Brendam Harbor for the Island of Sodor's carnival. He used it to frighten Percy[citation needed]. In the DreamWorks film Kung Fu Panda a snow leopard known as Tai Lung was idenified as a Chinese Dragon because of given characteristics. In Kung Fu Panda 2 another evil dragon known as Sinlong (played by Tilda Swinton) wanted to turn the valley of Peace into the Valley of pieces and her workers were Dholes, Wolves, Wild Boars, Crocodiles, Cobras, Hags, and even Gorillas.

[edit] See also



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Chinese dragon






Chinese mythology
Fenghuang
Culture of China
Dragon
Dragon boat race
Dragon dance
Dragon Kung Fu




List of dragons in mythology and folklore
Long Mu (Dragon's Mother)
An Instinct for Dragons, hypothesis about the origin of dragon myths.











v • d • e

Chinese mythology





Overview topics

Creation myth · Astrology · Dragons · Religion (Folk religion) · Deities · Pangu






Major entities

Deities · Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors · Eight Immortals






Creatures

Xuán Wǔ · Qīng Lóng · Bái Hǔ · Zhū Què · Qilin · Fenghuang · Huli jing · Shi






Places

Xuanpu · Yaochi · Fusang · Queqiao · Penglai · Longmen · Diyu






Literary sources

Shan Hai Jing · Fengshen Yanyi · Legend of the White Snake · Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio · Journey to the West · Fairy Couple







[edit] References


^ a b c Sleeboom, Margaret. [2004] (2004). Academic Nations in China and Japan: Framed in Concepts of Nature, Culture and the Universe. Routledge publishing. ISBN 041531545X
^ "Brand Overview", Brand Hong Kong, 09-2004. Retrieved on 23-02-2007.
^ Robertson, Benjamin (2004-12-17). "The Dragon battles back to beat Nike". Asia Times Online. http://www.atimes.com/atimes/China/FL17Ad01.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-20. 
^ [1] National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC
^ a b de Visser, M.W. 1913. The Dragon in China and Japan. Johannes Müller, 70.[2]
^ Doré, Henri. 1917. Researches into Chinese Superstitions. M. Kennelly, D.J. Finn, and L.F. McGreat, trs. T'usewei. Ch'eng-wen reprint 1966, 681.
^ "Jade coiled dragon, Hongshan Culture (c. 4700-2920 B.C.)", National Gallery of Art, Washington DC. Retrieved on 23-02-2007.
^ Carr, Michael. 1990. "Chinese Dragon Names," Linguistics of the Tibeto-Burman Area 13.2:87-189. He classified them into seven categories: Rain-dragons, Flying-dragons, Snake-dragons, Wug-dragons [wug refers to "worms, bugs, and small reptiles"], Crocodile-dragons, Hill-dragons, and Miscellaneous dragons.
^ Adapted from Doré 682.
^ The Twenty-Four Histories: The History of Yuan-Dress Code (zh:元史·舆服), compiled under Song Lian (宋濂), 1370 AD.


11. Bates, Roy, Chinese Dragons, Oxford University Press, 2002
12. Bates, Roy, All About Chinese Dragons, TuDragons Press, 2007

[edit] External links

Chapter VII, Myths of the Waters, Myths & Legends of China, E.T.C. Werner, 1922:208-235.
Chinese Dragons, Crystalinks
Chinese Dragons, Draconika
Chinese Dragons, Dragonorama
Chinese, Oriental Dragons, History and Information, Dragonsinn
Dragons, Dragon Art, and Dragon Lore in Japan, A to Z Photo Dictionary of Japanese Buddhism
Dragon Articles, Crystal Dragon of Taiwan
Dragons in Ancient China, China the Beautiful
Eastern Dragon Overview, The Circle of the Dragon
Forbidden City Dragon Wall panography, World Heritage Tour
The Chinese Dragon, Everything Dragons
龙生九子, The Dragon's 9 Children (Chinese)




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_dragon"
Categories: Chinese culture | Chinese mythology | Chinese dragons | Chinese legendary creatures | National symbols of ChinaHidden categories: Articles containing Japanese language text | Articles containing Korean language text | Articles containing Vietnamese language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2008 | Articles containing Chinese language text | Articles containing non-English language text | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Català
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Français
贛語
한국어
Italiano
עברית
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Simple English
Српски / Srpski
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 07:55.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
