











Mexico - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Mexico";
		var wgTitle = "Mexico";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "3966054";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282480472;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Mexico

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 



"Mexican(s)" redirects here. For other uses, see Mexico (disambiguation) and Mexican (disambiguation).


United Mexican States
Estados Unidos Mexicanos










Flag
Coat of arms





Anthem: "Himno Nacional Mexicano"
Mexican National Anthem


National seal:
Seal of the United Mexican States 










Capital
(and largest city)
Mexico City
19°03′N 99°22′W﻿ / ﻿19.05°N 99.367°W﻿ / 19.05; -99.367


Official languages
None at federal level.
Spanish (de facto)


National language
Spanish, and 62 Indigenous Amerindian languages[1]


Demonym
Mexican


Government
Federal presidential republic


 - 
President
Felipe Calderón
(PAN)


Legislature
Congress


 - 
Upper House
Senate


 - 
Lower House
Chamber of Deputies


Independence
from Spain 


 - 
Declared
September 16, 1810 


 - 
Recognized
September 27, 1821 


Area


 - 
Total
1,972,550 km2 (15th)
761,606 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
2.5


Population


 - 
mid-2008 estimate
109.955.400 (1-1-2009)[2] (11th)


 - 
2005 census
103,263,388 


 - 
Density
55/km2 (142nd)
142/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$1.550 trillion[3] (11th)


 - 
Per capita
$14,119[3] (54th)


GDP (nominal)
2008 estimate


 - 
Total
$1.022 trillion[3] (13th)


 - 
Per capita
$10,747[3] (54th)


Gini (2008)
▼ 46.1[4] (high) 


HDI (2008)
▲ 0.842 (high) (51st)


Currency
Peso (MXN)


Time zone
Official Mexican Timezones (UTC-8 to -6)


 - 
Summer (DST)
varies (UTC-7 to -5)


Drives on the
right


Internet TLD
.mx


Calling code
52


The United Mexican States[5] (Spanish: Estados Unidos Mexicanos?·i), commonly known as Mexico (IPA: /ˈmɛksɪkoʊ/) (Spanish: México?·i IPA: ['mexiko]), is a federal constitutional republic in North America. It is bordered on the north by the United States; on the south and west by the Pacific Ocean; on the southeast by Guatemala, Belize, and the Caribbean Sea; and on the east by the Gulf of Mexico.[6][7] Mexico is a federation comprising thirty-one states and a federal district, the capital Mexico City, whose metropolitan area is one of the world's most populous. Covering almost 2 million square kilometres,[8] Mexico is the fifth-largest country in the Americas by total area and the 14th largest independent nation in the world. With an estimated population of 109 million,[9] it is the 11th most populous country and the most populous Spanish-speaking country in the world.
In the Pre-Columbian era complex cultures began to form in Mesoamerica. Many matured into advanced civilizations such as the Olmec, the Toltec, the Teotihuacan, the Maya and the Aztec before the first contact with Europeans. Mexico became a colony of Spain from the landing of Hernán Cortés in 1521 until its independence in 1821. The country's post-independence period was characterized by economic instability, territorial secession and civil war, including foreign intervention, two empires and two long domestic dictatorships. The latter led to the Mexican Revolution in 1910, culminating with the promulgation of Mexico's current Constitution in 1917.
As a regional power[10][11] and the only Latin American member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) since 1994, Mexico is firmly established as an upper middle-income country.[12] Mexico is a newly industrialized country[13][14][15][16] and the 11th largest economy in the world by GDP by purchasing power parity. The economy is strongly linked to those of its North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) partners. Despite being considered an emerging power,[17] the uneven distribution of income and the increase in insecurity are issues of concern.
Elections held in July 2000 marked the first time that an opposition party won the presidency from the Institutional Revolutionary Party (Spanish: Partido Revolucionario Institucional, PRI) which had held it since 1929, culminating the political alternation at the federal level, which had begun at the local level during the 1980s.




Contents


1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Pre-Columbian civilizations
2.2 The New Spain
2.3 Independence
2.4 20th and 21st centuries


3 Government and politics

3.1 Foreign relations
3.2 Military

3.2.1 Army
3.2.2 Air Force
3.2.3 Navy


3.3 Law enforcement and crime
3.4 The federation: States of Mexico and the Federal District


4 Geography and climate

4.1 Topography
4.2 Climate
4.3 Biodiversity


5 Economy

5.1 Tourism
5.2 Infrastructure

5.2.1 Energy
5.2.2 Transportation
5.2.3 Communications




6 Demographics

6.1 Metropolitan areas of Mexico
6.2 Immigration
6.3 Ethnography
6.4 Language
6.5 Religion


7 Culture

7.1 Cinema
7.2 Music
7.3 Fine arts
7.4 Broadcast media
7.5 Cuisine
7.6 Craftwork/folk art


8 Sports
9 Health Care and Education
10 Science and technology
11 See also
12 References
13 Bibliography
14 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Etymology




Image of Mexico-Tenochtitlan from the Codex Mendoza.


Main article: Toponymy of Mexico
After New Spain won independence from Spain, it was decided that the new country would be named after its capital, Mexico City, which was founded in 1524 on top of the ancient Aztec capital of México-Tenochtitlan. The origin of the name of the city comes from the Nahuatl language, where Mextli or Mēxihtli, a secret name for the god of war and patron of the Aztecs, Huitzilopochtli, in which case Mēxihco means "Place where Mēxihtli lives". Another hypothesis is that the word Mēxihco derives from the mētztli ("moon"), xictli ("navel", "center" or "son"), and the suffix -co (place), in which case it means "Place at the center of the moon" or "Place at the center of the Lake Moon", in reference to Lake Texcoco. The system of interconnected lakes, of which Texcoco was at the center, had the form of a rabbit, the same image that the Aztecs saw in the moon. Tenochtitlan was located at the center (or navel) of the lake (or rabbit/moon).[18] Still another hypothesis suggests that it is derived from Mēctli, the goddess of maguey.
The name of the city was transliterated to Spanish as México with the phonetic value of the x in Medieval Spanish, which represented the voiceless postalveolar fricative /ʃ/. This sound, as well as the voiced postalveolar fricative /ʒ/, represented by a j, evolved into a voiceless velar fricative /x/ during the sixteenth century.[19] This led to the use of the variant Méjico in many publications in Spanish, most notably in Spain, whereas in Mexico and some other Spanish–speaking countries México was the preferred spelling. In recent years the Real Academia Española, which regulates the Spanish language, determined that both variants are acceptable in Spanish but that the normative recommended spelling is México.[20] The majority of publications in all Spanish-speaking countries now adhere to the new norm, even though the alternative variant is still occasionally used.[21] In English, the x in Mexico represents neither the original nor the current sound, but the consonant cluster /ks/. The official name of the country has had some changes since its creation, starting as the First Mexican Empire followed by the Second Mexican Empire then the Mexican Republic and finally as the United Mexican States.[18]

History
Main article: History of Mexico

Pre-Columbian civilizations




Archaeological sites of Chichén-Itzá, one of the New Seven Wonders.


Human presence in Mesoamerica was once thought to date back 40,000 years based upon what were believed to be ancient human footprints discovered in the Valley of Mexico, but after further investigation using radiometric dating, it appears this is untrue.[22] It is currently unclear whether 21,000 year old fire remains found in the Valley of Mexico are the earliest human remains found in the region.[23] For thousands of years, Mesoamerica was a land of hunter-gatherers. Around 9,000 years ago, ancient indigenous peoples domesticated corn and initiated an agricultural revolution, leading to the formation of many complex civilizations.
These civilizations revolved around cities with writing, monumental architecture, astronomical studies, mathematics, and large militaries. For almost three thousand years, Aridoamerica[24] and Mesoamerica[25] were the site of several advanced Amerindian civilizations.
In 1519, the native civilizations of Mesoamerica were invaded by Spain;[26] among them the Aztecs, Mayans, etc. This was one of the most important conquest campaigns in America. Two years later, in 1521, the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan was conquered by the Spaniards along with the Tlaxcaltecs, the main enemies of the Aztecs, marking the end of the Aztec and giving rise to the Viceroyalty of New Spain in 1535. It became the first and largest provider of resources for the Spanish Empire and the most populous of all Spanish colonies.

The New Spain




The Coat of arms of New Spain.


The New Spain (1535 to 1821) was an important period in Mexico's history, when much of the nation's identity and traditions were created and several cities were built, among them Mexico City, Guadalajara, Veracruz, and Queretaro.
The viceroyalty stretched across a large part of North America, from the southwestern British Columbia and southern US states down to Nicaragua as well as most of the Caribbean, and the Philippines. It was originally divided into the provinces of Nueva Galicia, Nueva Vizcaya, Nuevo Reino de León, Nuevo Santander, Reino de Yucatán and Reino de México, these were divided into Corregimientos or Señoríos. In 1786 king Carlos III signed the Real Ordenanza de Intendentes de Exército y Provincia de Nueva España which created twelve Intendencias that replaced most Reinos, Comandancias, Corregimientos y Alcaldías.

Independence
Main articles: Viceroyalty of New Spain and Mexican War of Independence




Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla, the founder of the Mexican independence movement.






Jose Maria Morelos, The servant of the nation.


Almost 300 years after New Spain was created, on September 16, 1810, independence from Spain was declared by Priest Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla, in the small town of Dolores, Guanajuato.[27]. The first insurgent group was formed by the Priest Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla, the Spanish viceregal army captain Ignacio Allende, the militia captain Juan Aldama and "La Corregidora" Josefa Ortiz de Domínguez. Hidalgo y Costilla and his remaining soldiers were captured in the state of Jalisco. He faced a court trial of the Inquisition and was found guilty of treason. He was executed by firing squad in Chihuahua, on 31 July 1811. His body was mutilated and his head was displayed in Guanajuato as a warning to Mexican rebels. Following the death of Father Hidalgo y Costilla, the leadership of the revolutionary army was assumed by the Priest José María Morelos. Under his leadership the cities of Oaxaca and Acapulco were occupied. In 1813, the Congress of Chilpancingo was convened and on 6 November of that year, the Congress signed the first official document of independence, known as the "Solemn Act of the Declaration of Independence of Northern America". In 1815, Morelos was captured by Spanish colonial authorities, tried, and executed for treason in San Cristóbal Ecatepec on 22 December. Having lost yet another leader, the insurgency was near collapse, but in 1820 Viceroy Juan Ruiz de Apodaca sent an army under the criollo general Agustín de Iturbide against the troops of Vicente Guerrero in Oaxaca. Instead, Iturbide approached Guerrero to join forces, and in 1821 representatives of the Spanish crown and Iturbide signed the Treaty of Córdoba, which recognized Mexican independence under the terms of the Plan of Iguala, ending three centuries of Spanish colonial rule.




The First Mexican Empire covered an area of 4,871,733 km2






Josefa Ortiz de Domínguez was the only conspirator that saw the consumation of Mexican independence.


The war of Mexican independence, which ended in 1821, was one of the longest in the Americas, which eventually led to the independence and creation of the ephemeral First Mexican Empire.[citation needed]
The Empire's territory encompassed the area of the current Mexican republic as well as the present-day U.S. states of California, Nevada, Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, parts of Colorado and Wyoming, and all current Central American countries except for Panama. Agustín de Iturbide was the first and only emperor. Two years later, he was deposed by the republican forces. The Central American states separated, forming the Federal Republic of Central America. In 1824, a republican constitution was drafted creating the United Mexican States with Guadalupe Victoria as its first President.
The first four decades after the creation of the country were marked by a constant strife between liberales (those who supported the federal form of government stipulated in the 1824 constitution) and conservadores (who proposed a hierarchical form of government in which all local authorities were appointed and subject to a central authority).[28] General Antonio López de Santa Anna was a strong influence in Mexican politics, a centralist and a two-time dictator. In 1836, he approved the Siete Leyes, a radical amendment to the constitution that institutionalized the centralized form of government. Having suspended the Constitution of 1824, civil war spread across the country, and three new governments declared independence; the Republic of Texas, the Republic of the Rio Grande (recognized by the United Kingdom) and the Republic of Yucatán. Only Texas was able to defeat Santa Anna, and later the annexation of Texas by the United States created a border dispute that would cause the Mexican–American War. Santa Anna played a big role in trying to muster Mexican forces but this war resulted in the defeat of Mexico and as a result of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848), Mexico lost one third of its surface area due to civil war with Texas, and later wars with the United States.
Dissatisfaction with Santa Anna's return to power, and his unconstitutional rule, led to the liberal Plan of Ayutla, which initiated an era of liberal reforms, known as La Reforma, after which a new constitution was drafted that reestablished federalism as the form of government and first introduced freedom of religion. In the 1860s the country again underwent a military occupation, this time by France, which established the Habsburg Archduke Ferdinand Maximilian of Austria on the Mexican throne as Emperor Maximilian I of Mexico with support from the Catholic clergy, conservative Mexicans and the Mexican nobility. This Second Mexican Empire was victorious for only a few years, when the previous president of the Republic, the Zapotec Indigenous Benito Juárez, managed to restore the republic in 1867.




Benito Juárez, regarded as the greatest 19th Century Mexican president.


For resisting the French occupation, overthrowing the Empire, and restoring the Republic, as well as for his efforts to modernize the country, Juárez is often regarded as Mexico's greatest and most beloved leader.[citation needed] Juárez was recognized by the United States as a ruler in exile during the French-controlled Second Mexican Empire, and got their support in reclaiming Mexico under the Monroe Doctrine after the United States Civil War ended. Benito Juárez was the first Mexican leader who did not have a military background, and also the first full-blooded indigenous national to serve as President of Mexico and to lead a country in the Western Hemisphere in over 300 years.
Today Benito Juárez is remembered as being a progressive reformer dedicated to democracy, equal rights for his nation's indigenous peoples, lessening the great power that the Roman Catholic Church then held over Mexican politics, and the defence of national sovereignty. The period of his leadership is known in Mexican history as La Reforma (the reform), and constituted a liberal political and social revolution with major institutional consequences: the expropriation of church lands, bringing the army under civilian control, liquidation of peasant communal land holdings, the separation of church and state in public affairs, and also led to the almost-complete disenfranchisement of bishops, priests, nuns and lay brothers.

20th and 21st centuries




Venustiano Carranza, former president and supporter of the 1917 constitution.






Evolution of the Mexican territory.


Porfirio Díaz, a republican general during the French intervention, ruled Mexico from 1876–1880 and then from 1880–1911 in five consecutive reelections. The period of his rule is known as the Porfiriato, which was characterized by remarkable economic achievements, investments in art and sciences, but also of huge economic inequality and political repression.[29] A likely electoral fraud that led to his fifth reelection sparked the Mexican Revolution of 1910, initially led by Francisco I. Madero. Díaz resigned in 1911 and Madero was elected president but overthrown and murdered in a coup d'état in 1913 led by a conservative general named Victoriano Huerta.This re-ignited the civil war, with participants such as Pancho Villa and Emiliano Zapata who formed their own forces. A third force, the constitutional army led by Venustiano Carranza, managed to bring an end to the war, and radically amended the 1857 Constitution to include many of the social premises and demands of the revolutionaries into what was eventually called the 1917 Constitution. Carranza was killed in 1920 and succeeded by another revolutionary hero, Álvaro Obregón, who in turn was succeeded by Plutarco Elías Calles. Obregón was reelected in 1928 but assassinated before he could assume power. In 1929, Calles founded the National Revolutionary Party (PNR), later renamed the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) which became the most influential party during the next 70 years.
Between 1940 and 1980, Mexico experienced substantial economic growth that some historians call "El Milagro Mexicano", the Mexican Miracle.[30] The assumption of mineral rights by the government, and the subsequent nationalization of the oil industry into PEMEX during the presidency of Lázaro Cárdenas (1938) was a popular move, but sparked a diplomatic crisis with those countries whose citizens had lost businesses expropriated by the Cárdenas government.
Although the economy continued to flourish, social inequality remained a factor of discontent. Moreover, the PRI rule became increasingly authoritarian and at times oppressive.[31] An example of this is the Tlatelolco massacre[32] of 1968, which according to government officials claimed the life of around 30 protesters, while conservative estimates state that at least 300 were killed and others estimate as many as 800 died.[33]
In the 1970s there was extreme dissatisfaction with the administration of Luis Echeverría which took missteps in both the national and international arenas. Nonetheless, it was in this decade that the first substantial changes to electoral law were made, which initiated a movement of democratization of a system that had become electorally authoritarian.[34][35] While the prices of oil were at historically high records and interest rates were low, Mexico made impressive investments in the state-owned oil company, with the intention of revitalizing the economy, but overborrowing and mismanagement of oil revenues led to inflation and exacerbated the crisis of 1982. That year, oil prices plunged, interest rates soared, and the government defaulted on its debt. In an attempt to stabilize the current account balance, and given the reluctance of international lenders to return to Mexico given the previous default, President de la Madrid resorted to currency devaluations which in turn sparked inflation.




Then-President Vicente Fox and then-U.S. President George Bush at the signature of the Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America.


The first small cracks in the political monopolistic position of PRI were seen in the late 1970s with the creation of 100 deputy seats in the Chamber of Deputies assigned through proportional representation with closed party-lists. Even though at the municipal level the first non-PRI mayor was elected in 1947,[36] it was not until 1989 that the first non-PRI governor of a state was elected (Ernesto Ruffo Appel in Baja California). However, many sources claimed that in 1988 the party resorted to electoral fraud in order to prevent leftist opposition candidate Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas from winning the national presidential elections who lost to Carlos Salinas de Gortari, which led to massive protests in the capital.[37] Salinas embarked on a program of neoliberal reforms which fixed the exchange rate, controlled inflation and culminated with the signing of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which came into effect in 1994. However, that very same day, the Zapatista Army of National Liberation (EZLN) started a two-week-lived armed rebellion against the federal government, and has continued as a non-violent opposition movement against neoliberalism and globalization. Being an election year, in a process that was then called the most transparent in Mexican history, authorities were reluctant to devalue the peso, a move which caused a rapid depletion of the National Reserves. In December 1994, a month after Salinas was succeeded by Ernesto Zedillo, the Mexican economy collapsed.
With a rapid rescue packaged authorized by United States President Bill Clinton and major macroeconomic reforms started by president Zedillo, the economy rapidly recovered and growth peaked at almost 7% by the end of 1999.[38] After a comprehensive electoral reform to increase party representation during Zedillo's administration, as well as discontent with PRI after the economic crisis, led the PRI to lose its absolute majority in the Congress in 1997. In 2000, after 71 years the PRI lost a presidential election to Vicente Fox of the opposition National Action Party (PAN). Neither party had absolute majority in the Congress.
On March 23, 2005, the Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America was signed by Vicente Fox. During the 2006 elections, the position of the PRI in the Congress was further weakened and became the third political force in number of seats in the Chamber of Deputies after the PAN and the Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD), even though the party still has the plurality of state governorships. In the concurrent presidential elections, Felipe Calderón from the PAN was declared the winner, with a razor-thin margin over Andrés Manuel López Obrador of the PRD. López Obrador, however, contested the election and pledged to create an "alternative government".[39]

Government and politics
Main article: Politics of Mexico




Felipe Calderón, the current President of Mexico.






Mexican Congress.


The United Mexican States are a federation whose government is representative, democratic and republican based on a presidential system according to the 1917 Constitution. The constitution establishes three levels of government: the federal Union, the state governments and the municipal governments. All officials at the three levels are elected by voters through first-past-the-post plurality, proportional representation or are appointed by other elected officials.
The federal government is constituted by the Powers of the Union, the three separate branches of government:

Legislative: the bicameral Congress of the Union, composed of a Senate and a Chamber of Deputies, which makes federal law, declares war, imposes taxes, approves the national budget and international treaties, and ratifies diplomatic appointments.[40]
Executive: the President of the United Mexican States, who is the head of state and government, as well as the commander-in-chief of the Mexican military forces. The President also appoints, with Senate approval, the Cabinet and other officers. The President is responsible for executing and enforcing the law, and has the authority of vetoing bills.[41]
Judiciary: The Supreme Court of Justice, comprised by eleven judges appointed by the President with Senate approval, who interpret laws and judge cases of federal competency. Other institutions of the judiciary are the Electoral Tribunal, collegiate, unitary and district tribunals, and the Council of the Federal Judiciary.[42]

All elected executive officials are elected by plurality (first-past-the-post). Seats to the legislature are elected by plurality and proportional representation at the federal and state level.[43] The Chamber of Deputies of the Congress of the Union is conformed by 300 deputies elected by plurality and 200 deputies by proportional representation with closed party lists[44] for which the country is divided into 5 electoral constituencies or circumscriptions.[45] The Senate is conformed by a total of 128 senators: 64 senators, two per state and the Federal District elected by plurality in pairs; 32 senators assigned to the first minority or first-runner up (one per state and the Federal District), and 32 elected by proportional representation with closed party lists for which the country conforms a single electoral constituency.[44]
According to the constitution, all constituent states must have a republican form of government composed of three branches: the executive, represented by a governor and an appointed cabinet, the legislative branch constituted by a unicameral congress and the judiciary, also called a Supreme Court of Justice. They also have their own civil and judicial codes.
In the 2006–2009 Congress of the Union, eight parties are therein represented; five of them, however, have not received neither in this nor in previous congresses more than 4% of the national votes.[46] The other three parties have historically been the dominant parties in Mexican politics:

 National Action Party (Partido Acción Nacional, PAN): a center-right conservative party founded in 1939.
 Institutional Revolutionary Party (Partido Revolucionario Institucional, PRI): a center-left party that ascribes to social democracy, founded in 1929 to unite all the factions of the Mexican Revolution. Prominent left-wing Mexican politicians have been members of the party.
 Party of the Democratic Revolution (Partido de la Revolución Democrática, PRD): a center-left party founded in 1989 by the coalition of socialists and liberal parties, the National Democratic Front which had presented the candidacy of Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas in the 1988 elections.

The PRI held an almost hegemonic power in Mexican politics since 1929. Since 1977 consecutive electoral reforms allowed opposition parties to win more posts at the local and federal level. This process culminated in the 2000 presidential elections in which Vicente Fox, candidate of the PAN, became the first non-PRI president to be elected in 71 years.
In 2006, Felipe Calderón of the PAN faced Andrés Manuel López Obrador of the PRD in a very close election (0.58% difference), in a system without a second-ballot. On September 6, 2006, Felipe Calderón was declared President-elect by the electoral tribunal. His cabinet was sworn in at midnight on December 1, 2006 and Calderón was handed the presidential sash by outgoing Vicente Fox at Los Pinos. He was officially sworn as President on the morning of December 1, 2006 in Congress.

Foreign relations




President Calderón and Canadian Prime Minister Harper at the 2007 North American Leaders' Summit.


Main article: Foreign relations of Mexico
Traditionally, the Mexican government has sought to maintain its interests abroad and project its influence largely through moral persuasion rather than through political or economic pressure.
Since the Mexican Revolution, and until the administration of President Ernesto Zedillo, Mexico had been known for its foreign policy or "doctrine" known as the Doctrina Estrada ("Estrada Doctrine", named after its creator Genaro Estrada). The Estrada Doctrine was a foreign policy guideline of an enclosed view of sovereignty. It claimed that foreign governments should not judge, positively or negatively, the governments or changes in government of other nations, in that such action would imply a breach to their sovereignty.[47] This policy was said to be based on the principles of Non-Intervention, Pacific Solution to Controversies, and Self-Determination of all nations.
During his presidency, Vicente Fox appointed Jorge Castañeda to be his Secretary of Foreign Affairs. Castañeda immediately broke with the Estrada Doctrine, promoting what was called by critics the "Castañeda Doctrine".[48] The new foreign policy called for an openness and an acceptance of criticism from the international community, and the increase of Mexican involvement in foreign affairs.[49]
In line with this new openness in Mexico's foreign policy, some political parties have proposed an amendment of the Constitution in order to allow the Mexican Army, Air Force or Navy to collaborate with the United Nations in peace-keeping missions, or to provide military help to countries that officially ask for it.

Military
Main articles: Military of Mexico, Mexican Army, Mexican Air Force, and Mexican Navy




Durango Class Corvettes of the Mexican Navy.


Mexico has the second largest defense budget in Latin America, with annual military expenditures of US$6 billion or about 0.5% GDP.[50] Mexico's military includes 503,777 total personnel, of which around 192,770 are active in the frontline.[51][52] Since the 1990s, when the military escalated its role in the war on drugs, increasing importance has been placed on acquiring airborne surveillance platforms, light aircraft, helicopters and rapid troop transport.[53][54] The Mexican Military has two branches: the Mexican Army (which includes the Mexican Air Force), and the Mexican Navy. The Mexican armed forces maintain significant infrastructure, including small electronics and weapons testing and research facilities,[55] weapons and vehicle manufacturing centers, and naval dockyards that have the capability of building heavy military vessels.[56] These dockyards and facilities have a significant employment and economic impact in the local economies. In recent years, due in part to its military modernization program, Mexico has improved its training techniques, military command and information structures and has taken steps to becoming more self-reliant in supplying its military by designing as well as manufacturing its own guns,[57] missiles,[58] unmanned air vehicles[59] and naval ships.[60]

Army
There are three main components of the Mexican Army: a national headquarters, territorial commands, and independent units. The Minister of Defense commands the Army by means of a very centralized system and a large number of general officers. The Army uses a modified continental staff system in its headquarters. The Army is the largest branch of Mexico's armed services. At present there are 12 'Military Regions', which are further broken down into 44 subordinate 'Military Zones'.

Air Force
The Mexican Air Force is part of the Mexican Army. The national headquarters is embedded in the Army headquarters in Mexico City. It also follows the continental staff system, with the usual A1, A2, A3, and A4 sections. The tactical forces form what is loosely called an Air Division, but it is dispersed in four regions—Northeast, Northwest, Central, and Southern. The Air Force maintains a total of 18 air bases, and has the additional capability of opening temporary forward operating bases in austere conditions for some of the rotary wing and light fixed-wing assets.

Navy
The Ministry of the Navy, the Mexican Navy’s national headquarters, is located in Veracruz City. The “Junta (or Council) of Admirals” plays a unique consultative and advisory role within the headquarters, an indication of the institutional importance placed on seniority and “year groups” that go back to the admirals’ days as cadets in the naval college. They are a very tightly knit group, and great importance is placed on consultation among the factions within these year groups.
The Navy’s operational forces are organized as two independent groups: the Gulf (East) Force and the Pacific (West) Force. Each group has its own headquarters, a destroyer group, an auxiliary vessel group, a Marine Infantry Group, and a Special Forces group. The Navy also has an air arm with troop transport, reconnaissance, and surveillance aircraft.

Law enforcement and crime




Mexican federal police.


Public security is enacted at the three levels of government, each of which has different prerogatives and responsibilities. Local and state police department are primarily in charge of law enforcement, whereas the Federal Preventive Police is in charge of specialized duties. All levels report to the Secretaría de Seguridad Pública (Secretariat of Public Security). The General Attorney's Office (Procuraduría General de la República, PGR) is the executive power's agency in charge of investigating and prosecuting crimes at the federal level, mainly those related to drug and arms trafficking, espionage, and bank robberies.[61] The PGR operates the Federal Investigations Agency (Agencia Federal de Investigación, AFI) an investigative and preventive agency.[62]
While the government respects the human rights of most citizens,[63] serious abuses of power have been reported in security operations in indigenous communities and poor urban neighborhoods.[63] The National Human Rights Commission has had little impact in reversing this trend, engaging mostly in documentation but failing to use its powers to issue public condemnations to the officials who ignore its recommendations.[64] By law, all defendants have the rights that assure them fair trials and human treatment; however, the system is overburdened and overwhelmed with several problems.[65] Despite the efforts of the authorities to fight crime and fraud, few Mexicans have strong confidence in the police or the judicial system, and therefore, few crimes are actually reported by the citizens.[65] In 2008, president Calderón proposed a major reform of the judicial system, which was approved by the Congress of the Union, which included oral trials, the presumption of innocence for defendants, the authority of local police to investigate crime—until then a prerogative of special police units—and several other changes intended to speed up trials.[66]
Total crimes per capita average 12 per 1,000 people in Mexico, ranking 39 in a survey of 60 countries.[67] Violent crime is a critical issue in Mexico; with a rate of homicide varying from 11 to 14 per 100,000 inhabitants.[68] Drug-traffic and narco-related activities are a major concern in Mexico. Drug cartels are active in the shared border with the US and police corruption and collusion with drug cartels is a crucial problem.[68] Current president Felipe Calderón made abating drug-trafficking one of the top priorities of his administration. In a very controversial move, Calderón deployed military personnel to cities where drug cartels operate. While this move has been criticized by the opposition parties and the National Human Rights Commission, its effects have been praised by the Bureau for International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs as having obtained "unprecedented results..." with "many important successes".[69] In October 2007, the president Calderón and US president George W. Bush announced the Mérida Initiative a historic plan of law enforcement cooperation between the two countries.[70]

The federation: States of Mexico and the Federal District
Main articles: Political divisions of Mexico and Mexican state name etymologies







Gulf of
Mexico


Pacific
Ocean


Central
America


United States of America


Federal
District


AG


Baja
California


Baja
California
Sur


Campeche


Chiapas


Chihuahua


Coahuila


Colima


Durango


Guanajuato


Guerrero


HD


Jalisco


EM


Michoacán


MO


Nayarit


Nuevo
León


Oaxaca


PB


QU


Quintana
Roo


SLP


Sinaloa


Sonora


Tabasco


Tamaulipas


TL


Veracruz


Yucatán


Zacatecas






The United Mexican States are a federation of thirty-one free and sovereign states which form a Union that exercises jurisdiction over the Federal District and other territories. Each state has its own constitution and congress, as well as a judiciary, and its citizens elect by direct voting, a governor (gobernador) for a six-year term, as well as representatives (diputados locales) to their respective state congresses, for three-year terms.[71] The 31 states and the Federal District are collectively called "federal entities", and all are equally represented in the Congress of the Union.
Mexican states are also divided into municipalities (municipios), the smallest official political entity in the country, governed by a mayor or "municipal president" (presidente municipal), elected by its residents by plurality.[72] Municipalities can be further subdivided into non-autonomous boroughs or in semi-autonomous auxiliary presidencies.
Constitutionally, Mexico City, as the capital of the federation and seat of the powers of the Union, is the Federal District, a special political division in Mexico that belongs to the federation as a whole and not to a particular state, and as such, has more limited local rule than the nation's states.[73] Nonetheless, since 1987 it has progressively gained a greater degree of autonomy, and residents now elect a head of government (Jefe de Gobierno) and representatives of a Legislative Assembly directly. Unlike the states, the Federal District does not have a constitution but a statute of government. Mexico City is conterminous and coextensive with the Federal District.
The names of the thirty-one states and the Federal district and their official postal abbreviations in parentheses are presented in the following table, along with the commonly used state flags:


 Aguascalientes (Ags)
 Federal District (DF)
 Mexico State (Edomex)
 San Luis Potosí (SLP)


 Baja California (BC)
 Durango (Dgo)
 Nayarit (Nay)
 Sonora (Son)


 Baja California Sur (BCS)
 Guerrero (Gro)
 Nuevo León (NL)
 Tabasco (Tab)


 Chihuahua (Chih)
 Guanajuato (Gto)
 Oaxaca (Oax)
 Tlaxcala (Tlax)


 Colima (Col)
 Hidalgo (Hgo)
 Puebla (Pue)
 Tamaulipas (Tamps)


 Campeche (Camp)
 Jalisco (Jal)
 Quintana Roo (Q Roo)
 Veracruz (Ver)


 Coahuila (Coah)
 Michoacán (Mich)
 Querétaro (Qro.)
 Yucatán (Yuc)


 Chiapas (Chis)
 Morelos (Mor)
 Sinaloa (Sin)
 Zacatecas (Zac)



Geography and climate




A picture of Mexico as seen from outer space.






Mountain range in south central Mexico.


Main article: Geography of Mexico
Mexico is located at about 23° N and 102° W[74] in the southern portion of North America.[75][76] It is also located in a region known as Middle America.[77][78] Almost all of Mexico lies in the North American Plate, with small parts of the Baja California peninsula on the Pacific and Cocos Plates. Geophysically, some geographers include the territory east of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec (around 12% of the total) within Central America.[79] Geopolitically, however, Mexico is considered part of North America along with Canada and the United States.[80][81]
Mexico's total area is 1,972,550 km², making it the world's 14th largest country by total area, and includes approximately 6,000 km² of islands in the Pacific Ocean (including the remote Guadalupe Island and the Revillagigedo Islands), Gulf of Mexico, Caribbean Sea, and Gulf of California. On its north, Mexico shares a 3,141 km border with the United States. The meandering Río Bravo del Norte (known as the Rio Grande in the United States) defines the border from Ciudad Juárez east to the Gulf of Mexico. A series of natural and artificial markers delineate the United States-Mexican border west from Ciudad Juárez to the Pacific Ocean. On its south, Mexico shares an 871 km border with Guatemala and a 251 km border with Belize.

Topography




A field in the state of Jalisco.


Mexico is crossed from north to south by two mountain ranges known as Sierra Madre Oriental and Sierra Madre Occidental, which are the extension of the Rocky Mountains from northern North America. From east to west at the center, the country is crossed by the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt also known as the Sierra Nevada. A fourth mountain range, the Sierra Madre del Sur, runs from Michoacán to Oaxaca. As such, the majority of the Mexican central and northern territories are located at high altitudes, and the highest elevations are found at the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt: Pico de Orizaba (5,700 m), Popocatépetl (5,462 m) and Iztaccíhuatl (5,286 m) and the Nevado de Toluca (4,577 m). Three major urban agglomerations are located in the valleys between these four elevations: Toluca, Greater Mexico City and Puebla.

Climate
The Tropic of Cancer effectively divides the country into temperate and tropical zones. Land north of the twenty-fourth parallel experiences cooler temperatures during the winter months. South of the twenty-fourth parallel, temperatures are fairly constant year round and vary solely as a function of elevation. This gives Mexico one of the world's most diverse weather systems in the world.
Areas south of the twenty-fourth parallel with elevations up to 1,000 meters (the southern parts of both coastal plains as well as the Yucatán Peninsula), have a yearly median temperature between 24 and 28 °C. Temperatures here remain high throughout the year, with only a 5 °C difference between winter and summer median temperatures. Although low-lying areas north of the twentieth-fourth parallel are hot and humid during the summer, they generally have lower yearly temperature averages (from 20-24 °C) because of more moderate conditions during the winter.
Many large cities in Mexico are located in the Valley of Mexico or in adjacent valleys with altitudes generally above 2,000 m, this gives them a year-round temperate climate with yearly temperature averages (from 16-18 °C) and cool nighttime temperatures throughout the year.
Many parts of Mexico, particularly the north, have a dry climate with sporadic rainfall while parts of the tropical lowlands in the south average more than 200 cm of annual precipitation.

Biodiversity




A "Lepisosteus", one of the endemic species of Mexico.






The Jaguar, a native mammal of Mexico.


Mexico is one of the 18 megadiverse countries of the world. With over 200,000 different species, Mexico is home of 10–12% of the world's biodiversity.[82] Mexico ranks first in biodiversity in reptiles with 707 known species, second in mammals with 438 species, fourth in amphibians with 290 species, and fourth in flora, with 26,000 different species.[83] Mexico is also considered the second country in the world in ecosystems and fourth in overall species.[84] Approximately 2,500 species are protected by Mexican legislations.[84] The Mexican government created the National System of Information about Biodiversity, in order to study and promote the sustainable use of ecosystems.
In Mexico, 170,000 square kilometres are considered "Protected Natural Areas." These include 34 reserve biospheres (unaltered ecosystems), 64 national parks, 4 natural monuments (protected in perpetuity for their aesthetic, scientific or historical value), 26 areas of protected flora and fauna, 4 areas for natural resource protection (conservation of soil, hydrological basins and forests) and 17 sanctuaries (zones rich in diverse species).[82]
The discovery of the Americas brought to the rest of the world many widely used ingredients. Some of Mexico's native ingredients include: chocolate, tomato, maize, vanilla, avocado, guava, chayote, epazote, camote, jícama, nopal, tejocote, huitlacoche, sapote, mamey sapote, many varieties of beans, and an even greater variety of chiles, such as the Habanero. Most of these names are in indigenous languages like Nahuatl.

Economy
Main articles: Economy of Mexico and Economic history of Mexico




Santa Fe business district, Mexico City.


Mexico has a free market mixed economy, and is firmly established as an upper middle-income country.[12] It is the 11th largest economy in the world as measured in gross domestic product in purchasing power parity.[85] According to the latest information available from the International Monetary Fund, Mexico had the second-highest Gross National Income per capita in Latin America in nominal terms, at $9,716 in 2007, and the highest in purchasing power parity (PPP), at $14,119 in 2007.[86] After the 1994 economic debacle, Mexico has made an impressive recovery, building a modern and diversified economy.[12] Recent administrations have also improved infrastructure and opened competition in seaports, railroads, telecommunications, electricity generation, natural gas distribution and airports.[citation needed] Oil is Mexico's largest source of foreign income.[87] According to Goldman Sachs, BRIMC review of emerging economies, by 2050 the largest economies in the world will be as follows: China, United States, India, Brazil, and Mexico.[88] Mexico is the largest North American auto producing nation, recently surpassing Canada and U.S.[89]
According to the director for Mexico at the World Bank, the population in poverty has decreased from 24.2% to 17.6% in the general population and from 42% to 27.9% in rural areas from 2000-2004.[90] Nonetheless, income inequality remains a problem, and huge gaps remain not only between rich and poor but also between the north and the south, and between urban and rural areas. Sharp contrasts in income and Human Development are also a grave problem in Mexico. The 2004 United Nations Human Development Index report for Mexico states that Benito Juárez, a district of Mexico City, and San Pedro Garza García, in the State of Nuevo León, would have a similar level of economic, educational and life expectancy development to Germany or New Zealand. In contrast, Metlatonoc, in the state of Guerrero, would have an HDI similar to that of Syria.[91][92]
GDP annual average growth for the period of 1995–2002 was 5.1%.[35] The economic downturn in the United States also caused a similar pattern in Mexico, from which it rapidly recovered to grow 4.1% in 2005 and 3% in 2005. Inflation has reached a record low of 3.3% in 2005, and interest rates are low, which have spurred credit-consumption in the middle class. Mexico has experienced in the last decade monetary stability: the budget deficit was further reduced and foreign debt was decreased to less than 20% of GDP.[35] Along with Chile, Mexico has the highest rating of long-term sovereign credit in Latin America.




Mexican Bills and Coins.


The remittances from Mexican citizens working in the United States account for .02% of Mexico's GDP[93] which reaches US$20 billion dollars per year in 2004 and is the seventh largest source of foreign income after oil, industrial exports, manufactured good, electronics, automobiles and food exports.[94] In 2008, US$67.5 billion dollars per year was sent by migrants in the United States to Mexico.[95]
Approximately 90% of Mexican trade has been put under free trade agreements with over 40 countries, of which the North American Free Trade Agreement remains the most significant. Almost 90% of Mexican exports go to the United States and Canada[96] and close to 65% of its imports come from these two countries.[96] Other major trade agreements have been signed with the European Union, Japan, Israel and many countries in Central and South America. As such, Mexico has become a major player in international trade and an export power. Measured in the dollar value of exports, Mexico was the 15th largest exporter in the world—tenth if the European Union is treated as a single entity.[97] Mexican exports roughly equal the total exports of all Mercosur members together, Venezuela inclusive.[97] According to the Forbes Global 2000 list of the world's 40 largest companies in 2008, Mexico had 16 companies in the list.[98]
Ongoing economic concerns include the commercial and financial dependence on the US,[99] low real wages, underemployment for a large segment of the population, inequitable income distribution (the top 20% of income earners account for 55% of income), and few advancement opportunities for the largely Amerindian population in the impoverished southern states. Lack of structural reform is further exacerbated by an ever increasing outflow of the population into the United States, decreasing domestic pressure for reform.

Tourism
Main article: Tourism in Mexico




Aerial view of Cancun, Quintana Roo.






Coastal Skyline of Acapulco, Guerrero.


According to the World Tourism Organization, Mexico has one of the largest tourism industries in the world. In 2005 it was the seventh most popular tourist destination worldwide, receiving over 20 million tourists per year; it is the only country in Latin America to be within the top 25. Tourism is also the third largest sector in the country's industrial GDP.[100] The most notable tourist draws are the ancient Meso-American ruins, and popular beach resorts. The coastal climate and unique culture – a fusion of European (particularly Spanish) and Meso-American cultures; also make Mexico attractive. The peak tourist seasons in Mexico are during December and during July and August, with brief surges during the week before Easter and during spring break at many of the beach resort sites which are popular among vacationing college students from the United States.
Mexico is the twenty-third highest tourism spender in the world, and the highest in Latin America[citation needed].

Infrastructure

Energy

See also: Electricity sector in Mexico

Energy production in Mexico is managed by State-owned companies: the Federal Commission of Electricity (Comisión Federal de Electricidad, CFE) and Pemex (Petróleos Mexicanos). The CFE is in charge of the operation of electricity-generating plants and its distribution all across the territory, with the exception of the states of Morelos, México, Hidalgo and Mexico City, whose distribution of electricity is in charge of the State-owned Luz y Fuerza del Centro. Most of the electricity is generated in thermoelectrical plants, even though CFE operates several hydroelectrical plants, as well as wind power, geothermal and nuclear generators.[101]
Pemex is in charge of the exploration, extraction, transportation and marketing of crude oil and natural gas, as well as the refining and distribution of petroleum products and petrochemicals. Pemex is the largest company in Latin America,[102] and the ninth-largest company in the world.[103] In terms of total output, in 2007 it was the sixth-larger producer in the world[104]—in 2003 it was the third-largest[103]— producing 3.1 million of barrels a day, well above the production of Kuwait or Venezuela.[104]

Transportation
Main article: Transportation in Mexico

See also: List of Mexican Federal Highways and List of Mexican railroads





An Aeromexico plane landing at Mexico City International Airport.


The paved-roadway network in Mexico is the most extensive in Latin America at 116,802 km in 2005; 10,474 km were multi-lane freeways or expressways,[105] most of which were tollways. Nonetheless, Mexico's diverse orography—most of the territory is crossed by high-altitude ranges of mountains—as well as economic challenges have led to difficulties in creating an integrated transportation network and even though the network has improved, it still cannot meet national needs adequately.[106]
Being one of the first Latin American countries to promote railway development,[106] the network, though extensive at 30,952 km,[107] is still inefficient to meet the economic demands of transportation.[106] Most of the rail network is mainly used for merchandise or industrial freight and was mostly operated by National Railway of Mexico (Ferrocarriles Nacionales de México, FNM), privatized in 1997.
In 1999, Mexico had 1,806 airports, of which 233 had paved runways; of these, 35 carry 97% of the passenger traffic.[107] The Mexico City International Airport remains the largest in Latin America and the 44th largest in the world[108] transporting 21 million passengers a year.[109] There are more than 30 domestic airline companies of which only two are known internationally: Aeroméxico and Mexicana.
Mass transit in Mexico is modest. Most of the domestic passenger transport needs are served by an extensive bus network[107] with several dozen companies operating by regions. Train passenger transportation between cities is limited. Inner-city rail mass transit is available at Mexico City—with the operation of the metro, elevated and ground train, as well as a Suburban Train connecting the adjacent municipalities of Greater Mexico City—as well as at Guadalajara and Monterrey, the first served by a commuter rail and the second by an underground and elevated metro.

Communications
Main article: Communications in Mexico




A Telmex retail store in Puerto Vallarta, Jalisco.


The telecommunications industry is mostly dominated by Telmex (Teléfonos de México), privatized in 1990. As of 2006, Telmex had expanded its operations to Colombia, Peru, Chile, Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay and the United States. Other players in the domestic industry are Axtel and Maxcom. Due to Mexican orography, providing landline telephone service at remote mountainous areas is expensive, and the penetration of line-phones per capita is low compared to other Latin American countries, at twenty-percent. Mobile telephony has the advantage of reaching all areas at a lower cost, and the total number of mobile lines is almost three times that of landlines, with an estimation of 57 million lines.[110] The telecommunication industry is regulated by the government through Cofetel (Comisión Federal de Telecomunicaciones).
Usage of radio, television, and Internet in Mexico is prevalent.[107] There are approximately 1,410 radio broadcast stations and 236 television stations (excluding repeaters).[110] Major players in the broadcasting industry are Televisa—the largest Spanish media company in the Spanish-speaking world[111]—and TV Azteca.

Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Mexico
According to the latest official census, which reported a population of 103 million, Mexico is the most populous Spanish-speaking country in the world.[112] Mexican annual population growth has drastically decreased from a peak of 3.5% in 1965 to 0.99% in 2005. Life expectancy in 2006 was estimated to be at 75.4 years (72.6 male and 78.3 female). The states with the highest life expectancy are Baja California (75.9 years) and Nuevo Leon (75.6 years). The Federal District has a life expectancy of the same level as Baja California. The lowest levels are found in Chiapas (72.9), Oaxaca (73.2) and Guerrero (73.2 years). The mortality rate in 1970 was 9.7 per 1000 people; by 2001, the rate had dropped to 4.9 men per 1000 men and 3.8 women per 1000 women. The most common reasons for death in 2001 were heart problems (14.6% for men 17.6% for women) and cancer (11% for men and 15.8% for women).
Mexican population is increasingly urban, with close to 75% living in cities. The five largest urban areas in Mexico (Greater Mexico City, Greater Guadalajara, Greater Monterrey, Greater Puebla and Greater Toluca) are home to 30% of the country's population. Migration patterns within the country show positive migration to north-western and south-eastern states, and a negative rate of migration for the Federal District. While the annual population growth is still positive, the national net migration rate is negative (-4.7/1000), attributable to the emigration phenomenon of people from rural communities to the United States.

Metropolitan areas of Mexico
Metropolitan areas in Mexico have been traditionally defined as the group of municipalities that heavily interact with each other, usually around a core city.[113] In 2004, a joint effort between CONAPO, INEGI and the Ministry of Social Development (SEDESOL) agreed to define metropolitan areas as either:[113]

the group of two or more municipalities in which a city with a population of at least 50,000 is located whose urban area extends over the limit of the municipality that originally contained the core city incorporating either physically or under its area of direct influence other adjacent predominantly urban municipalities all of which have a high degree of social and economic integration or are relevant for urban politics and administration; or
a single municipality in which a city of a population of at least one million is located and fully contained, (that is, it does not transcend the limits of a single municipality); or
a city with a population of at least 250,000 which forms a conurbation with other cities in the United States.

It should be noted, however, that northwestern and southeastern states are divided into a small number of large municipalities whereas central states are divided into a large number of smaller municipalities. As such, metropolitan areas in the northwest usually do not extend over more than one municipality (and figures usually report population for the entire municipality) whereas metropolitan areas in the center extend over many municipalities.
Few metropolitan areas extend beyond the limits of one state, namely: Greater Mexico City (Federal District, Mexico and Hidalgo), Puebla-Tlaxcala (Puebla and Tlaxcala, but excludes the city of Tlaxcala), Comarca Lagunera (Coahuila and Durango), and Tampico (Tamaulipas and Veracruz).
The following is a list of the major metropolitan areas of Mexico, as reported in the 2005 census.

Metropolitan areas by population

Rank
City proper
State
Pop.
Rank
City proper
State
Pop.

view • talk • edit

Mexico City

Monterrey



1
Mexico City
Federal District
19,231,829
11
Querétaro
Querétaro
918,100


2
Guadalajara
Jalisco
4,095,853
12
Mérida
Yucatán
897,740


3
Monterrey
Nuevo León
3,664,331
13
Mexicali
Baja California
855,962


4
Puebla
Puebla
2,109,049
14
Aguascalientes
Aguascalientes
805,666



5
Toluca
Mexico State
1,610,786
15
Tampico
Tamaulipas
803,196


6
Tijuana
Baja California
1,483,992
16
Culiacán
Sinaloa
793,730


7
León
Guanajuato
1,425,210
17
Cuernavaca
Morelos
787,556


8
Ciudad Juárez
Chihuahua
1,313,338
18
Acapulco
Guerrero
786,830


9
Torreón
Coahuila
1,110,890
19
Chihuahua
Chihuahua
784,882


10
San Luis Potosi
San Luis Potosí
957,753
20
Morelia
Michoacán
735,624


2005 Census[114]



Immigration
Mexico is home to the largest number of U.S. citizens abroad (estimated at one million as of 1999),[115] which represents 1% of the Mexican population and 25% of all U.S. citizens abroad. Other significant communities of foreigners are those of Central and South America, most notably from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Peru, Cuba, Venezuela, Guatemala, and Belize. Though estimations vary, the Argentine community is considered to be the second largest foreign community in the country (estimated somewhere between 30,000 and 150,000).[116][117] Throughout the 20th century, the country followed a policy of granting asylum to fellow Latin Americans and Europeans (mostly Spaniards in the 1940s) fleeing political persecution in their home countries.
Discrepancies between the figures for official legal aliens and those of all foreign-born residents regardless of their immigration status are quite large. The official figure for foreign-born legal residents in Mexico is 493,000 (since 2004), with a majority (86.9%) of these born in the United States (except Chiapas, where the majority of immigrants are from Central America). The five states with the most immigrants are Baja California (12.1% of total immigrants), Mexico City (the Federal District; 11.4%), Jalisco (9.9%), Chihuahua (9%) and Tamaulipas (7.3%). More than 54.6% of the immigrant population are fifteen years old or younger, while 9% are fifty or older.

Ethnography

See also: Demographics of Mexico and Indigenous peoples in Mexico





School children, from Monterrey, Nuevo León.


Mexico is ethnically diverse, and the constitution defines the country to be a pluricultural nation.

Mestizos (those of mixed European and Amerindian ancestry) form the largest group, comprising up to 60-75% of the total population.[77][118]
Amerindians called indigenous peoples (indígenas) are estimated to be between 12% (pure Amerindian)[119] and 30% (predominantly Amerindian).[77] Indigenous peoples are considered the foundation of the Mexican pluricultural nation and therefore enjoy self-determination in certain areas. Indigenous languages are also considered "national languages" and are protected by law.
Whites make up 9%-17%[77][118] of the population, mostly descendants of the first Spanish settlers; although there are Mexicans of French, Italian, Portuguese, Basque, German, Irish, Polish, Romanian, Russian, Arab (mainly Lebanese and Syrian) and British descents from contemporary migration[120][121] after the waves of immigration that brought many Europeans at the end of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, along with some Canadians and European Americans from the United States and Argentina. Most are found in major cities.

Mexico also received a large number of Lebanese, Syrian,[122] Chinese, Japanese,[120] Korean,[123] and Filipino immigrants.[124]
Afro-Mexicans, mostly of mixed ancestry, live in the coastal areas of Veracruz, Tabasco and Guerrero.

Language
Main article: Languages of Mexico
See also: Mexican Spanish




A page of the Florentine Codex written in romanized Nahuatl, an indigeonus language of central Mexico


There is no de jure constitutional official language at the federal level in Mexico.[125] Spanish, spoken by 97% of the population, is considered a national language by The General Law of Linguistic Rights of the Indigenous Peoples, which also grants all indigenous minority languages spoken in Mexico, regardless of the number of speakers, the same validity as Spanish in all territories in which they are spoken, and indigenous peoples are entitled to request some public services and documents in their native languages.[126] Along with Spanish, the law has granted them the status of "national languages". The law includes all Amerindian languages regardless of origin; that is, it includes the Amerindian languages of ethnic groups non-native to the territory. As such the National Commission for the Development of Indigenous Peoples recognizes the language of the Kickapoo, who immigrated from the United States,[127] and recognizes the languages of the Guatemalan Amerindian refugees.[128] The Mexican government has promoted and established bilingual primary and secondary education in some indigenous rural communities. Approximately 7.1% of the population speaks an indigenous language and 1.2% do not speak Spanish.[129]
Mexico has the largest Spanish-speaking population in the world with more than twice as many as the second largest Spanish-speaking country. Almost a third of all Spanish native speakers in the world live in Mexico.[112] Nahuatl is spoken by 1.5 million people and Yucatec Maya by 800,000. Some of the national languages are in danger of extinction; Lacandon is spoken by fewer than one hundred people.
English is widely used in business at the border cities, as well as by the one million U.S. citizens that live in Mexico, mostly retirees in small towns in Baja California, Guanajuato and Chiapas. Other European languages spoken by sizable communities in Mexico are Venetian, Plautdietsch, German, French and Romani.

Religion
See also: Religion in Mexico, Roman Catholicism in Mexico, and Our Lady of Guadalupe




Metropolitan Cathedral of Guadalajara, Jalisco.


Unlike some other Latin American countries, Mexico has no official religion, and the Constitution of 1917 and the anti-clerical laws imposed limitations on the church and sometimes codified state intrusion into church matters. The government does not provide any financial contributions to the church, and the church does not participate in public education.
The last census reported, by self-ascription, that 95% of the population is Christian. Roman Catholics are 89%[130] of the total population, 47% percent of whom attend church services weekly.[131] In absolute terms, Mexico has the world's second largest number of Catholics after Brazil.[132]
About 6% of the population (more than 4.4 million people) is Protestant,[130] of whom Pentecostals and Charismatics (called Neo-Pentecostals in the census), are the largest group (1.37 million people).[130] There are also a sizeable number of Seventh-day Adventists (0.6 million people).[133] The 2000 national census counted more than one million Jehovah's Witnesses.[130]
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints claims one million registered members as of 2006, about 250,000 of whom are active,[134][135] though this is disputed.[136]
Islam in Mexico is practiced by a small Muslim population in the city of Torreon, Coahuila, and there are an estimated 300 Muslims in the San Cristobal de las Casas area in Chiapas.[137][138]
The presence of Jews in Mexico dates back to 1521, when Hernán Cortés conquered the Aztecs, accompanied by several Conversos. According to the last national census by the INEGI, there are now more than 45,000 Mexican Jews.[130] Almost three million people in the 2000 National Census reported having no religion.[130]
Mexico’s Buddhist population currently makes up a tiny minority, some 108,000 according to latest accounts. Some of its members are of Asian descent, others people of various other walks of life that have turned toward Buddhism in the recent past.
In 1992, Mexico lifted almost all restrictions on the Catholic Church and other religions, including granting all religious groups legal status, conceding them limited property rights, and lifting restrictions on the number of priests in the country.[139] Until recently, priests did not have the right to vote, and even now they cannot be elected to public office.

Culture
Main article: Culture of Mexico




A type of traditional Mexican dance and costumes.


Mexican culture reflects the complexity of the country's history through the blending of pre-Hispanic civilizations and the culture of Spain, imparted during Spain's 300-year colonization of Mexico. Exogenous cultural elements mainly from the United States have been incorporated into Mexican culture. As was the case in most Latin American countries, when Mexico became an independent nation, it had to slowly create a national identity, being an ethnically diverse country in which, for the most part, the only connecting element amongst the newly independent inhabitants was Catholicism.
The Porfirian era (el Porfiriato), in the last quarter of the nineteenth century and the first decade of the twentieth century, was marked by economic progress and peace. After four decades of civil unrest and war, Mexico saw the development of philosophy and the arts, promoted by President Díaz himself. Since that time, though accentuated during the Mexican Revolution, cultural identity had its foundation in the mestizaje, of which the indigenous (i.e. Amerindian) element was the core. In light of the various ethnicities that formed the Mexican people, José Vasconcelos in his publication La Raza Cósmica (The Cosmic Race) (1925) defined Mexico to be the melting pot of all races (thus extending the definition of the mestizo) not only biologically but culturally as well.[140] This exalting of mestizaje was a revolutionary idea that sharply contrasted with the idea of a superior pure race prevalent in Europe at the time.

Cinema
Main article: Cinema of Mexico
Mexican films from the Golden Age in the 1940s and 1950s are the greatest examples of Latin American cinema, with a huge industry comparable to the Hollywood of those years. Mexican films were exported and exhibited in all of Latin America and Europe. Maria Candelaria (1944) by Emilio Fernández, was one of the first films awarded a Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival in 1946, the first time the event was held after World War II. Famous actors and actresses from this period include María Félix, Pedro Infante, Dolores del Río, Jorge Negrete and the comedian Cantinflas.
More recently, films such as Como agua para chocolate (1992), Cronos (1993), Amores perros (2000), Y tu mamá también (2001), El Crimen del Padre Amaro (2002), Pan's Labyrinth (2006) and Babel (2006) have been successful in creating universal stories about contemporary subjects, and were internationally recognised, as in the prestigious Cannes Film Festival. Mexican directors Alejandro González Iñárritu (Amores perros, Babel), Alfonso Cuarón (Children of Men, Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban), Guillermo del Toro, Carlos Carrera (The Crime of Father Amaro), and screenwriter Guillermo Arriaga are some of the most known present-day film makers.

Music
Main article: Music of Mexico




Jalisco Symphony Orchestra.


Mexican society enjoys a vast array of music genres, showing the diversity of Mexican culture. Traditional music includes Mariachi, Banda, Norteño, Ranchera and Corridos; on an every-day basis most Mexicans listen to contemporary music such as pop, rock, etc. in both English and Spanish. Mexico has the largest media industry in Latin America, producing Mexican artists who are famous in Central and South America and parts of Europe, especially Spain. Some well-known Mexican singers are Thalía, Luis Miguel and Paulina Rubio. Popular groups are Café Tacuba, Molotov, RBD and Maná, among others.
Most states, through their Ministry of Culture or of Education, sponsor an Orquesta Sinfónica or Orquesta Filarmónica (Symphony Orchestra or Philharmonica Orchestra) so people can enjoy classical music.

Fine arts




Palace of Fine Arts in Mexico City.


Post-revolutionary art in Mexico had its expression in the works of renowned artists such as Frida Kahlo, Diego Rivera, José Clemente Orozco, Rufino Tamayo, David Alfaro Siqueiros and Juan O'Gorman. Diego Rivera, the most well-known figure of Mexican Muralism, painted the Man at the Crossroads at the Rockefeller Center in New York City, a huge mural that was destroyed the next year due to the inclusion of a portrait of Russian communist leader Lenin.[141] Some of Rivera's murals are displayed at the Mexican National Palace and the Palace of Fine Arts.
Academic music composers of Mexico include Manuel María Ponce, José Pablo Moncayo, Julián Carrillo, Mario Lavista, Carlos Chávez, Silvestre Revueltas, Arturo Márquez, and Juventino Rosas, many of whom incorporated traditional elements into their music. Nobel Prize winner Octavio Paz, Carlos Fuentes, Juan Rulfo, Elena Poniatowska, and José Emilio Pacheco, are some of the most recognized authors of Mexican literature.

Broadcast media
Two of the major television networks based in Mexico are Televisa and TV Azteca. Televisa is also the largest producer of Spanish-language content in the world and also the world's largest Spanish-language media network.[142] Grupo Multimedios is another media conglomerate with Spanish-language broadcasting in Mexico, Spain, and the United States. Soap operas (telenovelas) are translated to many languages and seen all over the world with renowned names like Verónica Castro, Lucía Méndez, Lucero, and Thalía. Even Gael García Bernal and Diego Luna from Y tu mamá también and current Zegna model have appeared in some of them. Some of their TV shows are modeled after counterparts from the U.S. like Family Feud (100 Mexicanos Dijeron or "A hundred Mexicans said" in Spanish) and ¿Qué dice la gente?, Big Brother, American Idol, Saturday Night Live and others. Nationwide news shows like Las Noticias por Adela on Televisa resemble a hybrid between Donahue and Nightline. Local news shows are modeled after counterparts from the U.S. like the Eyewitness News and Action News formats. Border cities receive television and radio stations from the U.S., while satellite and cable subscription is common for the middle-classes in major cities, and they often watch movies and TV shows from the U.S.

Cuisine
Main article: Mexican cuisine
Mexican cuisine is known for its intense and varied flavors, colorful decoration, and variety of spices. Most of today's Mexican food is based on pre-hispanic traditions, including the Aztecs and Maya, combined with culinary trends introduced by Spanish colonists. The conquistadores eventually combined their imported diet of rice, beef, pork, chicken, wine, garlic and onions with the native pre-Columbian food, including maize, tomato, vanilla, avocado, papaya, pineapple, chili pepper, beans, squash, limes (limón in Mexican Spanish), sweet potato, peanut and turkey.
The most internationally recognized dishes include chocolate, tacos, quesadillas, enchiladas, burritos, tamales and mole among others. Regional dishes include mole poblano, chiles en nogada and chalupas from Puebla; cabrito and machaca from Monterrey, cochinita pibil from Yucatán, Tlayudas from Oaxaca, as well as barbacoa, chilaquiles, milanesas, and many others.

Craftwork/folk art

Sports
Main article: Sport in Mexico
See also: 1968 Summer Olympics, 1970 FIFA World Cup, and 1986 FIFA World Cup




The Estadio Azteca (Aztec Stadium) is the official home stadium of the Mexico national football team.






Baseball stadium in Monterrey, home to Monterrey Sultans.


Mexico City hosted the XIX Olympic Games in 1968, making it the only Latin American city to do so.[143] The country has also hosted the FIFA World Cup twice, in 1970 and 1986.[144]
Mexico’s most popular sport is association football. It is commonly believed that Football was introduced in Mexico by Cornish miners at the end of the 19th century. By 1902 a 5 team league emerged still with a strong English influence.[145][146] Football became a professional sport in 1943. Since the “Era Professional” started, Mexico’s top clubs have been Guadalajara with 11 championships, América with 10 and Toluca with 9.[147] In Mexican Football many players have been raised to the level of legend, but two of them have received international recognition above others. Antonio Carbajal was the first player to appear in 5 World Cups, and Hugo Sánchez was named best CONCACAF player of the 20th century by IFFHS. Mexican’s biggest stadiums are Estadio Azteca, Estadio Olímpico Universitario and Estadio Jalisco.
The national sport of Mexico is Charreada.[148] Bullfighting is also a popular sport in the country, and almost all large cities have bullrings. Plaza México in Mexico City, is the largest bullring in the world, which seats 55,000 people. Professional wrestling (or Lucha libre in Spanish) is a major crowd draw with national promotions such as AAA, LLL, CMLL and others.
Baseball, is also popular, especially in the Gulf of Mexico, Yucatan Peninsula and the Northern States. The season runs from March to July with playoffs held in August. The Mexican professional league is named the Liga Mexicana de Beisbol. Current champions (2007) are Sultanes de Monterrey who defeated in a tight series Leones de Yucatán. However, the best level of baseball is played in Liga Mexicana del Pacífico, played in Sinaloa, Sonora and Baja California. Given that it is played during the MLB off-season, some of its players are signed to play with the league 8 teams. Current champions (2007) are Yaquis de Obregon. The league champion participates in the Caribbean Series, a tournament between the Champions of Winter Leagues of Mexico, Venezuela, Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic; the 2009 Caribbean Series edition will be held in Mexicali.




Lorena Ochoa, world's number one woman golfer according to the LPGA.


The most important professional basketball league is the Liga Nacional de Baloncesto Profesional and covers the whole Mexican territory, where the Soles de Mexicali are the current champions. In 2007 three Mexican teams will be competing in the American Basketball Association. In the northwestern states is the CIBACOPA Competition, with professional basketball players from Mexico and the U.S. Universities and some teams from the NBA.
American football is played at the major universities like ITESM (Instituto Tecnológico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey), UANL (Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León), UDLA (University of the Americas), IPN (Instituto Politécnico Nacional) and UNAM. The college league in Mexico is called ONEFA. Rugby is played at the amateur level throughout the country with the majority of clubs in Mexico City and others in Monterrey, Guadalajara, Celaya, Guanajuato and Oaxaca.
Auto racing is very popular in Mexico. Throughout the years, Mexico has hosted races for some of the most important international championships such as Formula One, NASCAR, Champ Car, A1 Grand Prix, among others. Mexico also has its own NASCAR-sanctioned stock car series, the NASCAR Corona Series, which runs 14 events in different cities, drawing large crowds. Other forms of racing include Formula Renault, Formula Vee, touring cars, Pick-up trucks, endurance racing, rallying, and off-road.
Ice hockey is played in larger cities like Monterrey, Guadalajara, Villahermosa, Culiacan and Mexico City.[citation needed]
Notable Mexican athletes include golfer Lorena Ochoa, who is currently ranked first in the LPGA world rankings,[149] Ana Guevara, former world champion of the 400 metres and Olympic subchampion in Athens 2004, and Fernando Platas, a numerous Olympic medal winning diver.
Sport fishing is popular in Baja California and the big Pacific coast resorts, while freshwater bass fishing is growing in popularity too. The gentler arts of diving and snorkeling are big around the Caribbean, with famous dive sites at Cozumel and on the reefs further south. The Pacific coast is becoming something of a center for surfing, with few facilities as yet; all these sports attract tourists to Mexico.

Health Care and Education

Main articles: Health care in Mexico and Education in Mexico.





Biotechnology center, ITESM.


Since the early 1990s, Mexico entered a transitional stage in the health of its population and some indicators such as mortality patterns are similar to those found in developed societies.[150] Although all Mexicans are entitled to receive medical care by the state, 50.3 million Mexicans had no medical insurance as of 2002.[151] Efforts to increase the number of people are being made, and the current administration intends to achieve universal health care by 2011.[152][153]
Mexico's medical infrastructure is very good for the most part and can be excellent in major cities,[154][155] but rural areas and indigenous communities still have poor medical coverage, forcing them to travel to the closest urban area to get specialized medical care.[156]
State-funded institutions such as Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS) and the Institute for Social Security and Services for State Workers (ISSSTE) play a major role in health and social security. Private health services are also very important and account for 13% of all medical units in the country.[157]
Medical training is done mostly at public universities with some specializations done abroad. Some public universities in Mexico, such as the University of Guadalajara, have signed agreements with the U.S. to receive and train American students in Medicine. Health care costs in private institutions and prescription drugs in Mexico are on average lower than that of its North American economic partners.[158]

Education in Mexico






Educational oversight
Minister of Public Education

Secretariat of Public Education
Josefina Vázquez Mota


National education budget (2007)
MXN$1,309,691,048,383
USD$96,342,469,250


Primary language(s) of education
Spanish as the standard. Other minority languages are also available in their local communities.


Nationalized system
Establishment

September 25, 1921


Literacy (2006)
 • Men
 • Women
97.7 %
98.4%
96.8 %


Enrollment
 • Primary
 • Secondary
 • Post-secondary
61.6 million
26.4 million
19.8 million
15.3 million


Attainment
 • Secondary diploma
 • Post-secondary diploma

N/A
N/A


Sources: Sistema Educativo de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos. Principales cifras, ciclo escolar 2003-2004 pdf and the 2000 Census (INEGI)


In 2004, the literacy rate was at 97%[159] for youth under the age of 14 and 91% for people over 15,[160] placing Mexico at the 24th place in the world rank accordingly to UNESCO.[161] Primary and secondary education (9 years) is free and mandatory. Even though different bilingual education programs have existed since the 1960s for the indigenous communities, after a constitutional reform in the late 1990s, these programs have had a new thrust, and free text books are produced in more than a dozen indigenous languages.
In the 1970s, Mexico established a system of "distance-learning" through satellite communications to reach otherwise inaccessible small rural and indigenous communities. Schools that use this system are known as telesecundarias in Mexico. The Mexican distance learning secondary education is also transmitted to some Central American countries and to Colombia, and it is used in some southern regions of the United States as a method of bilingual education. There are approximately 30,000 telesecundarias and approximately a million telesecundaria students in the country.[162]
The largest and most prestigious public university in Mexico, today numbering over 269,000 students, is the National Autonomous University of Mexico (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, UNAM) founded in 1910. Three Nobel laureates and most of Mexico's modern-day presidents are among its former students. UNAM conducts 50% of Mexico's scientific research and has presence all across the country with satellite campuses and research centers. The National Autonomous University of Mexico ranks 150th place in the Top 200 World University Ranking published by The Times Higher Education Supplement in 2008,[163] making it the highest ranked Spanish-speaking university in the world and the highest ranked in Latin America. The second largest university is the National Polytechnic Institute (IPN). These institutions are public, and there are at least a couple of public universities per state.
One of the most prestigious private universities is Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education (ITESM). It was ranked by the Wall Street Journal as the 7th top International Business School worldwide[164] and 74th among the world's top arts and humanities universities ranking of The Times Higher Education Supplement, published in 2005. ITESM has thirty-two secondary campuses, apart from its Monterrey Campus. Other important private universities include Mexico's Autonomous Technological Institute (ITAM), ranked as the best economics school in Latin America, Fundación Universidad de las Américas, Puebla (UDLAP) and the Ibero-American University (Universidad Iberoamericana).

Science and technology
Main article: Science and technology in Mexico




A photograph of the Large Millimeter Telescope in Puebla.






Rodolfo Neri Vela, the first Mexican in space.


Notable Mexican technologists include Luis E. Miramontes, the inventor of the contraceptive pill, Manuel Mondragon, inventor of the first automatic rifle, Guillermo González Camarena, who invented the "Chromoscopic adapter for television equipment" and the "Tricolor System", both early color television transmission systems, and Mario J. Molina, who won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry. Rodolfo Neri Vela, an UNAM graduate, was the first Mexican to enter space (as part of the STS-61-B mission in 1985.)
In recent years, the biggest scientific project being developed in Mexico was the construction of the Large Millimeter Telescope (Gran Telescopio Milimétrico, GMT), the world's largest and most sensitive single-aperture telescope in its frequency range.[165] It was designed to observe regions of space obscured by stellar dust.
Nonetheless, the government currently spends only 0.31% of GDP in science and technology,[166] a low percentage in comparison with other countries. Mexico has a low number of researchers compared to other OECD countries, with only 6 researchers per 10,000 inhabitants.[166] Mexico trains 3 PhDs per million inhabitants per year.[166] Moreover, there is a regional disparity in the allocation of scientific resources; 75% of all doctorate degrees are awarded from institutions in Mexico City area.[166]
In 1962, the National Commission of Outer Space (Comisión Nacional del Espacio Exterior, CONNE) was established, but was dismantled in 1977. In 2007, a project was presented to re-open a new Mexican Space Agency (AEXA) and it was approved at the end of 2008 with the headquarters set to be located in the state of Hidalgo.

See also




Mexico portal




List of Mexico-related articles
Topic outline of Mexico


References


^ There is no official language stipulated in the constitution. However, the General Law of Linguistic Rights for the Indigenous Peoples recognizes all Amerindian minority languages, along with Spanish, as national languages and equally valid in territories where spoken. The government recognizes 62 indigenous languages, and more variants which are mutually unintelligible.[1]
^ INEGI,Consulta de resultados. Numeralia (Publicaciones de contenido general sobre el país), http://www.inegi.gob.mx/est/contenidos/espanol/proyectos/integracion/inegi324.asp?s=est&c=11722#tres, retrieved on June 23, 2008
^ a b c d "Mexico". International Monetary Fund. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2004&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=273&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&grp=0&a=&pr.x=68&pr.y=5. Retrieved on 2008-10-09. 
^ untitled
^ The alternative translation Mexican United States is occasionally used.[2]
^ Merriam-Webster's Geographical Dictionary, 3rd ed. Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster, Inc.; p. 733
^ "Mexico". The Columbia Encyclopedia, 6th ed. 2001–6. New York: Columbia University Press.
^ "Mexico — Geography". CIA The World Factbook. CIA. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/mx.html#Geo. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ "Mexico — People". CIA The World Factbook. CIA. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/mx.html#People. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ "Japan's Regional Diplomacy, Latin America and the Caribbean" (PDF). Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan. http://www.mofa.go.jp/policy/other/bluebook/2006/05.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-01. 
^ "Latin America:Region is losing ground to competitors". Oxford Analytica. http://www.oxanstore.com/displayfree.php?NewsItemID=130098. Retrieved on 2007-10-01. 
^ a b c "List of upper middle-income countries". The World Bank. http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/DATASTATISTICS/0,,contentMDK:20421402~pagePK:64133150~piPK:64133175~theSitePK:239419,00.html#Upper_middle_income. Retrieved on 2007-10-02. 
^ Paweł Bożyk (2006). "Newly Industrialized Countries". Globalization and the Transformation of Foreign Economic Policy. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. p. 164. ISBN 0-75-464638-6. 
^ Mauro F. Guillén (2003). "Multinationals, Ideology, and Organized Labor". The Limits of Convergence. Princeton University Press. pp. 126 (Table 5.1). ISBN 0-69-111633-4. 
^ David Waugh (3rd edition 2000). "Manufacturing industries (chapter 19), World development (chapter 22)". Geography, An Integrated Approach. Nelson Thornes Ltd.. pp. 563, 576–579, 633, and 640. ISBN 0-17-444706-X. 
^ N. Gregory Mankiw (4th Edition 2007). Principles of Economics. Mason, Ohio: Thomson/South-Western. ISBN 0-32-422472-9. 
^ G8: Despite Differences, Mexico Comfortable as G5 Emerging Power
^ a b (Spanish) "Nombre del Estado de México". Government of the State of Mexico. http://www.edomexico.gob.mx/identidad/civica/htm/NomMexico.htm. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ "Evolution of the pronunciation of "x"". Real Academia Española. http://buscon.rae.es/dpdI/SrvltGUIBusDPD?lema=x. 
^ "Diccionario Panhispánico de Dudas". Real Academia Española. http://buscon.rae.es/dpdI/SrvltGUIBusDPD?lema=M%E9xico. 
^ "Mexico". Online Dictionary. Merriam-Webster. http://www.m-w.com/dictionary/Mexico. 
^ Paul R. Renne et al. (2005). "Geochronology: Age of Mexican ash with alleged 'footprints'". Nature 438: E7–E8. doi:10.1038/nature04425. PMID 16319838. 
^ "Native Americans", Encarta
^ "Aridomerica". The Language of Anthropology Dictionary. http://www.123exp-culture.com/t/03604393199/. Retrieved on 2007-09-30. 
^ "Mesoamerica". Online Learning Center. McGraw-Hill. http://highered.mcgraw-hill.com/sites/007299634x/student_view0/glossary.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-30. 
^ Anonymous Conqueror, the (1917) [1550]. Narrative of Some Things of New Spain and of the Great City of Temestitan. Marshall Saville (trans). New York: The Cortés Society. 
^ Catholic Encyclopedia "Miguel Hidalgo Biography". Catholic Encyclopedia. http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/16045a.htm Catholic Encyclopedia. Retrieved on 2007-09-30. 
^ "The Early Republic". Mexico. Microsoft Encarta. 2007. http://encarta.msn.com/encnet/refpages/RefArticle.aspx?refid=761576758&pn=14. Retrieved on 2007-09-29. 
^ "The Díaz Years". Mexico. Microsoft Encarta. 2007. http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia_761576758_15/Mexico.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-30. 
^ "The Mexican Miracle: 1940-1968". World History from 1500. Emayzine. http://www.emayzine.com/lectures/mex9.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-30. 
^ Krauze, Enrique (January-February 2006). "Furthering Democracy in Mexico". Foreign Affairs. http://www.foreignaffairs.org/20060101faessay85106/enrique-krauze/furthering-democracy-in-mexico.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-07. 
^ Elena Poniatowska (1975). Massacre in Mexico (Original "La noche de Tlatelolco"). Viking, New York. ISBN 0-8262-0817-7. 
^ Duncan Kennedy Mexico's long forgotten dirty war BBC News, Saturday, July 19, 2008
^ Schedler, Andreas (2006). Electoral Authoritarianism: The Dynamics of Unfree Competition. L. Rienner Publishers. ISBN 1-5882-6440-8. 
^ a b c Crandall, R.; Paz and Roett (2004). "Mexico's Domestic Economy: Policy Options and Choices". Mexico's Democracy at Work. Lynne Reinner Publishers. p. 160. ISBN 0-8018-5655-8. 
^ (Spanish) "Efemérides (Important dates)". National Action Party. http://v2.pan.org.mx/?P=363. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ Photius Geographic.org, "Mexico The 1988 Elections", (Sources: The Library of the Congress Country Studies, CIA World Factbook)
^ (Spanish) Cruz Vasconcelos, Gerardo. "Desempeño Histórico 1914–2004" (PDF). http://www.imef.org.mx/NR/rdonlyres/F722BEDD-A8DE-49BA-AF4F-1A00889CE618/1192/CAPITULOI1.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-02-17. 
^ (Spanish) Reséndiz, Francisco (2006), "Rinde AMLO protesta como "presidente legítimo"", El Universal, <http://www.eluniversal.com.mx/notas/389114.html>
^ "Articles 50 to 79". Political Constitution of the United Mexican States. Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. http://constitucion.gob.mx/index.php?idseccion=12. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ "Articles 80 to 93". Political Constitution of the United Mexican States. Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. http://constitucion.gob.mx/index.php?idseccion=12. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ "Articles 90 to 107". Political Constitution of the United Mexican States. Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. http://constitucion.gob.mx/index.php?idseccion=12. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ (Spanish) "Third Title, First Chapter, About Electoral systems" (PDF). Código Federal de Instituciones y Procedimientos Electorales (Federal Code of Electoral Institutions and Procedures). Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. 1990-08-15. http://normateca.ife.org.mx/normanet/files_otros/COFIPE/cofipe.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ a b (Spanish) "Third Title, First Chapter, About Electoral systems, Article 11-1" (PDF). Código Federal de Instituciones y Procedimientos Electorales (Federal Code of Electoral Institutions and Procedures). Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. 1990-08-15. http://normateca.ife.org.mx/normanet/files_otros/COFIPE/cofipe.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ (Spanish) "Fourth Title, Second Chapter, About coalitions, Article 59-1" (PDF). Código Federal de Instituciones y Procedimientos Electorales (Federal Code of Electoral Institutions and Procedures). Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. 1990-08-15. http://normateca.ife.org.mx/normanet/files_otros/COFIPE/cofipe.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ "Parliamentary Groups Composition". Chamber of Deputies of the Honorable Congress of the Union. 2006-09-20. http://www3.diputados.gob.mx/camara/001_diputados/005_grupos_. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ (Spanish) Rodríguez, Itzel. "De actualidad política: ¿Qué dice la doctrina Estrada?". http://sepiensa.org.mx/contenidos/h_mexicanas/s.xx/estrada/estrada1.htm. Retrieved on 2007-10-01. 
^ Menéndez Quintero, Marina. "Adiós, Castañeda". http://www.worldpress.org/Americas/909.cfm. Retrieved on 2007-10-01. 
^ Ramírez, Carlos. "Doctrina Estrada; doctrina Castañeda". http://mx.geocities.com/cencoalt/110901/doctrina.htm. Retrieved on 2007-10-01. 
^ "Global Fire Power World Ranking". Global Fire Power. http://www.globalfirepower.com/list_avail_mil_manpower.asp. Retrieved on 2007-09-16. 
^ "Mexico Military Strength". Global Fire Power. http://www.globalfirepower.com/country_detail.asp?country_id=28. Retrieved on 2007-09-16. 
^ The World Factoid, CIA : [https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/mx.html#Econ}
^ Strategy on recent equipment purchases: [3]
^ "Military Expenditures Rank Order". CIA The World Factbook. CIA. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2067rank.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-16. 
^ Mexican Naval missile (in Spanish)
^ Buque logístico multipropósito (in Spanish).
^ The 5.56 X 45mm: 2006. Retrieved on August 7, 2008.
^ Mexican Naval missile (in Spanish)
^ [4]
^ "Mexican navy 2006 activities official report"
^ Mexico Police and Law Enforcement Organizations. Accessed: 2008-03-04
^ Agencia Federal de Investigacion. Procuraduría General de la República. Accessed: 2008-03-04
^ a b Security. Mexico. Encyclopedia Britannica. Accessed: 2008-03-04
^ Big, expensive and weirdly spineless. The Economist. Issued: 2008-02-14. Accessed: 2008-03-04
^ a b Justice. Mexico. Encyclopedia Britannica. Accessed: 2008-03-04
^ McKinley, JC Jr. (March 7, 2008) Mexico’s Congress Passes Overhaul of Justice Laws. The New York Times. Accessed on: 2008-3-18
^ Mexican Crime Statistics. Accessed: 2008-03-04
^ a b Sibaja, H et al. (2006). Central America and Mexico Gang Assessment. Annex 4: Southern and Northern Borders of Mexico Profile. United States Agency of International Development. Accessed: 2008-04-03
^ Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs. (2008). International Narcotics Control Strategy Report. Accessed: 2008-03-04
^ Gómez, Natalia (2007). Otorgará Iniciativa Mérida 500 mdd a México en primer año. El Universal. Accessed: 2008-03-04
^ "Article 116". Political Constitution of the United Mexican States. Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. http://constitucion.gob.mx/index.php?idseccion=12. Retrieved on 2007-10-07. 
^ "Article 115". Political Constitution of the United Mexican States. Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. http://constitucion.gob.mx/index.php?idseccion=12. Retrieved on 2007-10-07. 
^ "Article 112". Political Constitution of the United Mexican States. Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. http://constitucion.gob.mx/index.php?idseccion=12. Retrieved on 2007-10-07. 
^ Francaviglia, Richard V. "Geography and climate", U.S. Mexican War, 1846-1848. March 14, 2006: PBS / KERA
^ Mexico The American Heritage Reference Collection, et al.
^ Mexico The Columbia Encyclopedia
^ a b c d "Mexico" CIA World Factbook. 2007. Washington, DC: Central Intelligence Agency
^ North America The Columbia Encyclopedia
^ Nord-Amèrica, in Gran Enciclopèdia Catalana
^ "Geopolitics Oil and Natural Gas", by Alan Larson, US Undersecretary for Economic, Business, and Agricultural Affairs
^ "Transportation and Security in North America", NACTS North American Center for Transborder Studies, University of Arizona
^ a b "Biodiversidad de México". SEMARNAT. http://cruzadabosquesagua.semarnat.gob.mx/iii.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-07. 
^ "Biodiversidad en México". CONEVYT. http://oregon.conevyt.org.mx/actividades/diversidad/lectura_biodiversidad.htm. Retrieved on 2007-10-07. 
^ a b "Sistema Nacional sobre la Biodiversidad en México". CONABIO. http://www.conabio.gob.mx/institucion/snib/doctos/acerca.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-07. 
^ "Countries Ranked by GDP". World Bank Report. The World Bank. 2007-04. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2006&ey=2013&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=213%2C273%2C228%2C184&s=NGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC&grp=0&a=&pr1.x=39&pr1.y=3. 
^ [5]. The World Bank. Accessed: 2008-09-04
^ ""Mexico" (Economy, Mining)". Microsoft Encarta Online. http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia_761576758_7/Mexico.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-02. 
^ Goldman Sachs Paper No.153 Relevant Emerging Markets
^ [6]
^ (Spanish) "Baja pobreza en México de 24.2 a 17.6%: Banco Mundial", El Universal, 2005-08-24, <http://estadis.eluniversal.com.mx/notas/301198.html>
^ "UNPD Mexico Report on HDI" (PDF). United Nations. 2004. http://hdr.undp.org/docs/reports/national/MEX_Mexico/Mexico_2004_sp.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-02. 
^ (Spanish) "Sobresale Nuevo León por su alto nivel de vida", El Norte, 2006, <http://busquedas.gruporeforma.com/utilerias/imdservicios3w.dll?JPrintS&file=mty/norte01/00393/00393608.htm&palabra=>
^ Workers' Remittances to Mexico - Business Frontier, Issue 1, 2004 - FRB Dallas
^ Free Preview of Members-Only Content | Stratfor
^ http://minnesota.publicradio.org/display/web/2008/10/17/remittances/?refid=0
^ a b "CIA The World Factbook, "Mexico — Economy"". CIA. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/mx.html#Econ. Retrieved on 2007-10-01. 
^ a b Rank Order of Total Value of Exports CIA Factbook
^ forbes (2008-04-02). "Latest release". forbes. http://www.forbes.com/lists/2008/18/biz_2000global08_The-Global-2000-Canada_10Rank.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-01. 
^ Thompson, Adam (2006-06-20), "Mexico, Economics: The US cast a long shadow", Financial Times, <http://www.ft.com/cms/s/f53c9268-005a-11db-8078-0000779e2340,dwp_uuid=bfb8911e-ff83-11da-93a0-0000779e2340.html>
^ "Tourism Industry in Mexico". New Mexico State University. 2006-09-01. http://www.nmsu.edu/~frontera/old_1996/sep96/996mxtur.htm. Retrieved on 2007-10-01. 
^ Generación de electricidad. Comisión Federal de Electricidad.
^ Rodríguez, Isabel. Disminuye inversión física en Pemex, pero aumenta la deuda vía Pidiregas. La Joranda. August 16, 2007
^ a b Frequently Asked Questions. Pemex.
^ a b Running just to stand still The Economist] December 19, 2007
^ Infraestructura Carretera. Secretaría de Comunicaciones y Transportes
^ a b c Transportation and Telecommunications. Encyclopedia Britannica
^ a b c d Infrastructure, Power and Communications, Mexico. Encyclopedia of the Nations
^ Acerca del AICM. Posicionamiento del Aeropuerto Internacional de la Ciudad de México (AICM) con los 50 aeropuertos más importantes del mundo
^ Acerca del AICM, Pasajeros
^ a b Communications CIA Factbook
^ Televisa Brings 2006 FIFA World Cup to Mexico in HD With Snell & Wilcox Kahuna SD/HD Production Switcher
^ a b "Spanish Language History". Today Translations. http://www.todaytranslations.com/index.asp-Q-Page-E-Spanish-Language-History--13053095. Retrieved on 2007-10-01. 
^ a b CONAPO Áreas Metropolitanas
^ "Consulta de datos del Conteo 2005". Conteo 2005. INEGI. 2005. http://www.inegi.gob.mx/est/contenidos/espanol/proyectos/conteos/conteo2005/bd/consulta2/pt.asp?c=6796. 
^ "American Citizens Living Abroad By Country" (PDF). US State Department. 1999. http://www.aca.ch/amabroad.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ Gutiérrez Vega, Mario (2005-10-16). "Migrantes, votos, remesas: La apuesta política de los ausentes" (PDF). Institute of Mexicans Abroad (IME). http://www.ime.gob.mx/investigaciones/bibliografias/apuesta_politica_gutierrez.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ "Especial Argentinos en el exterior, Mexico". La Nación. 2007. http://www.lanacion.com.ar/coberturaespecial/argentinos/mexico/index.asp. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ a b "Ethnic groups". Mexico. Encyclopædia Britannica. http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-27384. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ (Spanish) "Diversidad etnolingüística". Lenguas indígenas. National Commission for the Development of the Indigenous Peoples (CDI). http://www.cdi.gob.mx/index.php?id_seccion=90. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ a b Palma Mora, Mónica (2005). "Asociaciones de Inmigrantes Extranjeros en la Ciudad de México. Una Mirada a Fines del Siglo XX" (PDF). Colegio de la Frontera Norte. http://redalyc.uaemex.mx/redalyc/pdf/151/15103202.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ Alanís Enciso, Fernando S. (2003). "Los Extranjeros en México, La inmigración y el gobierno ¿Tolerancia o intolerancia religiosa?, 1821-1830" (PDF). The Michoacán College. http://historiamexicana.colmex.mx/pdf/13/art_13_1938_16335.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ García Ita, Rosa E. (2005). "Los árabes de México. Asimilación y herencia cultural" (PDF). ITESM. http://confines.mty.itesm.mx/articulos2/GarciaRE.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-03. 
^ Mendoza, Azucena (2005-05-02), "Conmemoran 100 años de inmigración coreana", Noticieros Televisa, <http://www.esmas.com/noticierostelevisa/mexico/443030.html>
^ Mercene, Floro L. (2005-01-28), "Filipinos in Mexican History", Ezilon Infobase, <http://www.ezilon.com/information/article_476.shtml>. Retrieved on 2007-08-20
^ (Spanish) "Título Primero, Capítulo I, De las garantías individuales" (PDF). Constitución Política de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos. Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. 2007-06-19. http://www.normateca.gob.mx/Archivos/34_D_1247_22-06-2007.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-02. 
^ (Spanish) "Ley General de Derechos Lingüísticos de los Pueblos Indígenas (General Law of the Rights of the Indigenous Peoples)" (PDF). CDI México. http://cdi.gob.mx/derechos/vigencia/2006_ley_general_derechos_linguisticos_pueblos_indigenas.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-02. 
^ "Kikapúes — Kikaapoa". CDI México. http://www.cdi.gob.mx/index.php?id_seccion=291. Retrieved on 2007-10-02. 
^ "Aguacatecos, cakchiqueles, ixiles, kekchíes, tecos y quichés". CDI México. http://cdi.gob.mx/index.php?id_seccion=1378. Retrieved on 2007-10-02. 
^ "POBLACIÓN DE 5 AÑOS Y MÁS POR ENTIDAD FEDERATIVA, SEXO Y GRUPOS LENGUA INDÍGENA QUINQUENALES DE EDAD, Y SU DISTRIBUCIÓN SEGÚN CONDICIÓN DE HABLA INDÍGENA Y HABLA ESPAÑOLA" (PDF). INEGI, México. http://www.inegi.gob.mx/prod_serv/contenidos/espanol/bvinegi/productos/censos/poblacion/2000/definitivos/Nal/tabulados/00li01.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-12-13. 
^ a b c d e f "Religión" (PDF). Censo Nacional de Población y Vivienda 2000. INEGI. 2000. http://www.inegi.gob.mx/prod_serv/contenidos/espanol/bvinegi/productos/censos/poblacion/2000/definitivos/Nal/tabulados/00re01.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-04. 
^ "Church attendance". Study of worldwide rates of religiosity. University of Michigan. 1997. http://www.ns.umich.edu/htdocs/releases/print.php?Releases/1997/Dec97/chr121097a. Retrieved on 2007-01-03. 
^ "The Largest Catholic Communities". Adherents.com. http://www.adherents.com/largecom/com_romcath.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-10. 
^ Religious Liberty Thriving, Government Official Tells Adventist Leaders
^ "Mexico, Country profile". The Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Days Saints Newsroom. http://www.lds.org/ldsnewsroom/v/index.jsp?vgnextoid=063cbebe4538f010VgnVCM100000176f620aRCRD&vgnextchannel=d10511154963d010VgnVCM1000004e94610aRCRD. Retrieved on 2007-10-04. 
^ Ludlow, Daniel H. (1994). Encyclopedia of Mormonism. pp. 4:1527. 
^ Arizona Republic, 2001-07-10
^ http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2007/90260.htm International Religious Freedom
^ http://www.wwrn.org/article.php?idd=10271&sec=33&con=May 6ans in Mexico’s Chiapas Region Convert to Islam
^ "Mexico". International Religious Report. U.S. Department of State. 2003. http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2003/24499.htm. Retrieved on 2007-10-04. 
^ Vasconcelos, José; Didier T. Jaén (translator) (1997). La Raza Cósmica (The Cosmic Race). The Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 160. ISBN 0-8018-5655-8. 
^ "Rockefeller Controversy". Diego Rivera Prints. http://www.diego-rivera.org/rockefellercontroversy.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-02. 
^ "Televisa Brings 2006 FIFA World Cup to Mexico in HD With Snell & Wilcox Kahuna SD/HD Production Switcher". Press release. Snell & Wilcox. 2006-06-27. http://www.snellwilcox.com/news_events/press_releases/203. Retrieved on 2007-09-30. 
^ "2016 Binational Olympics". San Diego Metropolitan. December 2003. http://www.sandiegometro.com/2003/dec/coverstory2.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-07. 
^ "About CONCACAF". The Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Association Football (CONCACAF). http://www.concacaf.com/about.asp. Retrieved on 2007-10-07. 
^ "Introduction". Federacion Mexicana de Futbol. http://www.femexfut.org.mx/portalv2/(hjfqs545niz5yh55yipntw55)/default.aspx?s=135. 
^ "Mexico - List of Final Tables". Rec.Sports.Soccer Statistics Foundation. http://www.rsssf.com/tablesm/mexhist.html. 
^ "Mexico - List of Champions". Rec.Sports.Soccer Statistics Foundation. http://www.rsssf.com/tablesm/mexchamp.html. 
^ "Charrería". The Handbook of Texas Online. University of Texas at Austin. http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/CC/llc4.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-30. 
^ "LPGA Rolex Women's World Golf Rankings" (PDF). 2007-10-01. http://www.lpga.com/content/RolexRankings10-1-2007.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-07. 
^ Mexico - Health Care and Social Security
^ Sistema Nacional de Información en Salud - Poblaciones de las Instituciones Prestadoras de Servicios de Salud de México: Definición y Construcción
^ [7]
^ [8]
^ [9]
^ http://www.kwintessential.co.uk/articles/article/Mexico/Health-Care-Issues-Mexico/695
^ [10]. Health and welfare. Encyclopedia Britannica. Accessed on 2008-03-02
^ Sistema Nacional de Información en Salud - Infraestructura
^ Health Care in Mexico
^ "INEGI literacy report -14, 2005". http://www.inegi.gob.mx/est/contenidos/espanol/rutinas/ept.asp?t=medu15&s=est&c=3283. 
^ "INEGI literacy report 15+, 2005". http://www.inegi.gob.mx/est/contenidos/espanol/rutinas/ept.asp?t=medu16&s=est&c=3284. 
^ "Mexico: Youth Literacy Rate". Global Virtual University. http://globalis.gvu.unu.edu/indicator_detail.cfm?IndicatorID=41&Country=MX. Retrieved on 2007-10-02. 
^ "Current Trends in Telesecundarias". Secretariat of Public Education (SEP). http://www.sep.gob.mx/wb2/sep/sep_5033_edusat. 
^ "The Times Higher Awards 2007". The Times Higher Education Supplement. http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/hybrid.asp?typeCode=142&pubCode=1&navcode=105. 
^ "Recruiter's scoreboard Highlights" (PDF). The Wall Street Journal/Harris Interactive survey of corporate recruiters on business schools. The Wall Street Journal. http://online.wsj.com/public/resources/documents/MB_06_Scoreboard.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-04. 
^ Unravelling unidentified γ-ray sources with the large millimeter telescope, Alberto Carramiñana and the LMT-GTM collaboration, in The Multi-Messenger Approach to High-Energy Gamma-Ray Sources, Josep M. Paredes, Olaf Reimer, and Diego F. Torres, eds., Springer Netherlands, 2007. ISBN 978-1-4020-6117-2.
^ a b c d "Science and Technology in Mexico" (PDF). International Scientific Co-operation Policies. European Union. http://ec.europa.eu/research/iscp/countries/mexico/mx-doc2.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-04. 



Bibliography

Krauze, Enrique (1998). Mexico: Biography of Power: A history of Modern Mexico 1810–1996. New York, NY: Harper Perennial. p. 896 p. ISBN 0060929170. 
Meyer, Michael C.; William H. Beezley, editors (2000). The Oxford History of Mexico. Oxford University Press. p. 736 p. ISBN 0195112288. 
Parkes, Henry Bamford (1972). A History of Mexico (3rd ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0395084105. 


External links

Find more about Mexico on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

The Presidency of Mexico
Official site of the Government of Mexico
Chief of State and Cabinet Members
Mexico entry at The World Factbook
Mexico from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Mexico at the Open Directory Project
Wikimedia Atlas of Mexico
Mexico,  an external wiki
Mexico travel guide from Wikitravel
Viva Natura: Biodiversity of Mexico








v • d • e

 Mexico topics





History

Pre-Columbian civilizations · Colonization · War of Independence · First Mexican Empire · Mexico-USA War · La Reforma · French intervention · Second Mexican Empire · Porfiriato · Mexican Revolution · Wettest-known tropical cyclones






Politics

Constitution · President · Congress of the Union · Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation · Political divisions · State governors · Elections · Political parties · Foreign relations · Human rights · G8+5 · North American Leaders' Summit






Economy

Economic history · Peso · Bank of Mexico · Mexican Stock Market · List of companies · North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) · Communications · Transportation · Next Eleven · Economy of Mexico · Newly industrialized country · G20 industrial nations · G20 developing nations · Emerging markets · Oil in Mexico · BRIMC






Geography

States · Cities · Islands · Protected Natural Areas · Mountains · Extreme points






Demographics

People · Languages · Religion · Education · Health care · Metropolitan areas · Water supply and sanitation






Culture

Cuisine · Music · Literature · Cinema · Tourism · Holidays · Sports (1968 Olympic Games · 1970 FIFA World Cup · 1986 FIFA World Cup)






Other topics

Military · Flags · Automotive market · Science and technology






Portal · Mexico Collaboration · WikiProject Mexico











 
Geographic locale














v • d • e

Political divisions of Mexico






States of Mexico: Aguascalientes · Baja California · Baja California Sur · Campeche · Chiapas · Chihuahua · Coahuila · Colima · Durango · Guanajuato · Guerrero · Hidalgo · Jalisco · Mexico State · Michoacán · Morelos · Nayarit · Nuevo León · Oaxaca · Puebla · Querétaro · Quintana Roo · San Luis Potosí · Sinaloa · Sonora · Tabasco · Tamaulipas · Tlaxcala · Veracruz · Yucatán · Zacatecas








Federal District













v • d • e

Countries and dependencies of North America





Several nations listed here straddle both North and South America or can also be considered Caribbean.





Sovereign states

Antigua and Barbuda · Bahamas · Barbados · Belize · Canada · Costa Rica · Cuba · Dominica · Dominican Republic · El Salvador · Grenada · Guatemala · Haiti · Honduras · Jamaica · Mexico · Nicaragua · Panama · St. Kitts and Nevis · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · Trinidad and Tobago · United States






Dependencies





Denmark


Greenland







France


Guadeloupe · Martinique · Saint Barthélemy · Saint Martin · Saint Pierre and Miquelon · Clipperton







Netherlands


Aruba · Netherlands Antilles







United Kingdom


Anguilla · Bermuda · British Virgin Islands · Cayman Islands · Montserrat · Turks and Caicos Islands







United States


Navassa Island · Petrel Islands · Puerto Rico · Serranilla Bank · U.S. Virgin Islands






















 
International membership














v • d • e

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)








Australia · Austria · Belgium · Canada · Czech Republic · Denmark · Finland · France · Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Japan · South Korea · Luxembourg · Mexico · Netherlands · New Zealand · Norway · Poland · Portugal · Slovakia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey · United Kingdom · United States















v • d • e

Organization of American States (OAS)






Antigua and Barbuda · Argentina · Barbados • Belize • Bahamas · Bolivia · Costa Rica · Cuba · Canada • Dominica · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · El Salvador · Grenada · Guatemala · Guyana · Haiti · Honduras · Jamaica · Mexico · Nicaragua · Panama · Paraguay · Peru · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · St. Kitts and Nevis · Suriname · Trinidad and Tobago · United States · Uruguay · Venezuela
















v • d • e

Group of Eight Plus Five (G8+5)





G8

 Canada ·  France ·  Germany ·  Italy ·  Japan ·  Russia ·  United Kingdom ·  United States






+5

 Brazil ·  China ·  India ·  Mexico ·  South Africa













v • d • e

Group of Fifteen (G15)









   


 Algeria
 Argentina
 Brazil




 Chile
 Egypt
 India




 Indonesia
 Iran
 Jamaica




 Kenya
 Malaysia
 Mexico




 Nigeria
 Peru
 Senegal




 Sri Lanka
 Venezuela
 Zimbabwe


















v • d • e

North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)






 Canada •  Mexico •  United States














v • d • e

States belonging to the Community of Democracies at the United Nations





Members

 Cape Verde ·  Chile ·  Czech Republic ·  El Salvador ·  India ·  Italy ·  Korea, South ·  Lithuania ·  Mali
 Mexico ·  Mongolia ·  Morocco ·  Philippines ·  Poland ·  Portugal ·  South Africa ·  United States













v • d • e

Member economies of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)








Australia · Brunei Darussalam · Canada · Chile · People's Republic of China · Hong Kong, China · Indonesia · Japan · Republic of Korea · Malaysia · Mexico · New Zealand · Papua New Guinea · Peru · Philippines · Russian Federation · Singapore · Chinese Taipei * · Thailand · United States · Vietnam
*Designation of the Republic of China















v • d • e

Mercosur · Mercosul  (Southern Common Market)











Full Members
Argentina · Brazil · Paraguay · Uruguay


Becoming Full Members
Venezuela


Associate members
Bolivia · Chile · Colombia · Ecuador · Peru


Observers
Mexico





















v • d • e

Latin Union





Member Nations

Andorra · Angola · Bolivia · Brazil · Cape Verde · Chile · Colombia · Costa Rica · Côte d'Ivoire · Cuba · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · El Salvador · France · Guatemala · Guinea-Bissau · Haiti · Honduras · Italy · Mexico · Moldova · Monaco · Mozambique · Nicaragua · Panama · Paraguay · Peru · Philippines · Portugal · Romania · San Marino · São Tomé and Príncipe · Senegal · Spain · East Timor · Uruguay · Venezuela






Permanent Observers

Argentina · Holy See · Sovereign Military Order of Malta






Official languages

Catalan · French · Italian · Portuguese · Romanian · Spanish













v • d • e

Members of the World Trade Organization (WTO)








Albania · Angola · Antigua and Barbuda · Argentina · Armenia · Australia · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Barbados · Belize · Benin · Bolivia · Botswana · Brazil · Brunei · Burkina Faso · Burma · Burundi · Cambodia · Cameroon · Canada · Cape Verde · Central African Republic · Chad · Chile · PR China · Colombia · Democratic Republic of the Congo · Republic of the Congo · Costa Rica · Côte d'Ivoire · Croatia · Cuba · Djibouti · Dominica · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · Egypt · El Salvador · European Union¹ · Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) · Fiji · Gabon · The Gambia · Georgia · Ghana · Grenada · Guatemala · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Guyana · Haiti · Honduras · Hong Kong² · Iceland · India · Indonesia · Israel · Jamaica · Japan · Jordan · Kenya · South Korea · Kuwait · Kyrgyzstan · Lesotho · Liechtenstein · Macau² · Madagascar · Malawi · Malaysia · Maldives · Mali · Mauritania · Mauritius · Mexico · Moldova · Mongolia · Morocco · Mozambique · Namibia · Nepal · New Zealand · Nicaragua · Niger · Nigeria · Norway · Oman · Pakistan · Panama · Papua New Guinea · Paraguay · Peru · Philippines · Qatar · Rwanda · St. Kitts and Nevis · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · Saudi Arabia · Senegal · Sierra Leone · Singapore · Solomon Islands · South Africa · Sri Lanka · Suriname · Swaziland · Switzerland · Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, and Matsu³ · Tanzania · Thailand · Togo · Tonga · Trinidad and Tobago · Tunisia · Turkey · Uganda · Ukraine · United Arab Emirates · United States · Uruguay · Venezuela · Vietnam · Zambia · Zimbabwe


All twenty-seven member states of the European Union are also members of the WTO in their own right: Austria • Belgium • Bulgaria • Cyprus • Czech Republic • Denmark • Estonia • Finland • France • Germany • Greece • Hungary • Ireland • Italy • Latvia • Lithuania • Luxembourg • Malta • Netherlands and Netherlands Antilles • Poland • Portugal • Romania • Slovakia • Slovenia • Spain • Sweden • United Kingdom.
Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China.
Designated name for the Republic of China (Commonly Known as Taiwan)






















v • d • e

Countries and dependencies of North America





Several nations listed here straddle both North and South America or can also be considered Caribbean.





Sovereign states

Antigua and Barbuda · Bahamas · Barbados · Belize · Canada · Costa Rica · Cuba · Dominica · Dominican Republic · El Salvador · Grenada · Guatemala · Haiti · Honduras · Jamaica · Mexico · Nicaragua · Panama · St. Kitts and Nevis · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · Trinidad and Tobago · United States






Dependencies





Denmark


Greenland







France


Guadeloupe · Martinique · Saint Barthélemy · Saint Martin · Saint Pierre and Miquelon · Clipperton







Netherlands


Aruba · Netherlands Antilles







United Kingdom


Anguilla · Bermuda · British Virgin Islands · Cayman Islands · Montserrat · Turks and Caicos Islands







United States


Navassa Island · Petrel Islands · Puerto Rico · Serranilla Bank · U.S. Virgin Islands















 
International membership and history














v • d • e

Members of the United Nations Security Council





Permanent members

China · France · Russia · United Kingdom · United States







Term ends December 31, 2009

Burkina Faso · Costa Rica · Croatia · Libya · Vietnam






Term ends December 31, 2010

Austria · Japan · Mexico · Turkey · Uganda













 



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mexico"
Categories: Economy of North America | Mexico | Federal countries | Countries | Former Spanish colonies | G15 nations | Liberal democracies | Nahuatl words and phrases | Spanish-speaking countriesHidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism | Wikipedia protected pages without expiry | Articles containing Spanish language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
مصرى
Arpetan
Asturianu
Avañe'ẽ
Aymar aru
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Boarisch
བོད་ཡིག
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Diné bizaad
Dolnoserbski
ཇོང་ཁ
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Føroyskt
Fiji Hindi
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
文言
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Hawai`i
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut
Iñupiak
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kalaallisut
Kapampangan
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Қазақша
Kernewek
Кыргызча
Kiswahili
Коми
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Ladino
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lingála
Lojban
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
Malagasy
മലയാളം
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
नेपाली
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Occitan
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
O'zbek
پښتو
ភាសាខ្មែរ
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
Gagana Samoa
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
Volapük
Winaray
Wolof
吴语
ייִדיש
粵語
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 03:00 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
