













List of constructed languages - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "List_of_constructed_languages";
		var wgTitle = "List of constructed languages";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "1967544";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281756557;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); List of constructed languages

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This list of constructed languages is in alphabetical order, and divided into auxiliary, engineered, and artistic (including fictional) languages, and their respective subgenres.




Contents


1 Auxiliary languages

1.1 Spoken (major)
1.2 Spoken (minor)
1.3 Controlled languages
1.4 Visual languages


2 Engineered languages

2.1 Human-usable
2.2 Knowledge representation


3 Artistic languages

3.1 Languages used in fiction

3.1.1 Literature
3.1.2 Comic books
3.1.3 Movies and television

3.1.3.1 Unnamed languages


3.1.4 Music
3.1.5 Performance
3.1.6 Games
3.1.7 Toys
3.1.8 Internet-based


3.2 Alternative languages
3.3 Micronational languages
3.4 Personal languages
3.5 Language games


4 External Links
5 References and notes
6 See also





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Auxiliary languages

[edit] Spoken (major)
The following are languages that have generated significant followings, or which have been of significance in the history of auxiliary languages.


Language name
ISO
Year of first
publication
Creator
Comments


Volapük
vo, vol
1879–1880
Johann Martin Schleyer
First to generate international interest in International auxiliary languagess (IALs))


Esperanto
eo, epo
1887
L. L. Zamenhof
Fluent speakers: between 30,000 and 300,000[1]; Casual users: est. 100,000 to 2 million; native: 200 to 2000 (1996, est.)[2].


Idiom Neutral

1902
Waldemar Rosenberger
A naturalistic IAL by a former advocate of Volapük


Latino sine Flexione

1903
Giuseppe Peano
"Latin without inflections," it replaced Idiom Neutral in 1908


Ido
io, ido
1907
A group of reformist Esperanto speakers
The most successful offspring of Esperanto


Occidental
ie, ile
1922
Edgar de Wahl
A sophisticated naturalistic IAL (Interlingue)


Novial
nov
1928
Otto Jespersen
Another sophisticated naturalistic IAL


Glosa
igs
1943
Lancelot Hogben, et al.
Originally called Interglossa, has a strong Greco-Latin vocabulary


Interlingua
ia, ina
1951
International Auxiliary Language Association
A Language to create common Romance vocabulary



[edit] Spoken (minor)
There have been literally hundreds of proposals for auxiliary languages, and more continue to be created. The following are languages with some notability, either historically or because of unusual characteristics.


Language name
ISO
Year of first
publication
Creator
Comments


Adjuvilo

1908
Claudius Colas
an esperantido created to cause dissent among Idoists


Afrihili
afh
1970
K. A. Kumi Attobrah
a pan-African language


Arcaicam Esperantom

1969
Manuel Halvelik
'Archaic Esperanto', an archaizing 'Old Esperanto' for literature


Babm

1962
Rikichi Okamoto
noted for using Latin letters as an abjad


Communicationssprache

1839
Joseph Schipfer
based on French


Esperanto II

1937
René de Saussure
last of Saussure's many esperantidos


Europanto

1996
Diego Marani
a "linguistic jest"


Kotava
avk
1978
Staren Fetcey
a sophisticated a priori IAL


Lingua Franca Nova
lfn
1998
Dr. C. George Boeree and others
Romance vocabulary with creole-like grammar


Lingua sistemfrater

1957
Pham Xuan Thai
Greco-Latin vocabulary with southeast Asian grammar


Modern Indo-European

2006
Carlos Quiles and María Teresa Batalla
modernized Proto-Indo-European


Mondial

1940s
Dr. Helge Heimer
naturalistic European language


Mundolinco

1888
J. Braakman
the first esperantido


Neo

1961
Arturo Alfandari
a very terse European language


Noxilo

1997
Mizta Sentaro
a language trying to avoid any regional or ethinic bias


Nuwaubic

1970s?
Malachi Z. York
the language of a black supremacist religious group


Poliespo

1990s?
Nvwtohiyada Idehesdi Sequoyah
Esperanto grammar with significant Cherokee vocabulary


Solresol

1827
François Sudre
the famous "musical language"


Sona

1935
Kenneth Searight
best known attempt at universality of vocabulary


Spokil

1887 or 1890
Adolph Nicolas
an a priori language by a former Volapük advocate


Toki Pona

2001
Sonja Elen Kisa
highly simplified language with restricted vocabulary


Universalglot

1868
Jean Pirro
arguably the first IAL, predating even Volapük


Vendergood

1906
William James Sidis
invented when he was eight years old



[edit] Controlled languages
Controlled languages are natural languages that have in some way been altered to make them simpler, easier to use, or more acceptable to those who do not speak the original language well. Most of these have been based on English.

Basic English
Globish
Special English
Plain English
Simplified English
E-Prime


[edit] Visual languages
Visual languages use symbols or movements in place of the spoken word.

Blissymbols (zbl)
Gestuno
Signuno
Earth Language


[edit] Engineered languages

[edit] Human-usable

An Essay towards a Real Character and a Philosophical Language by John Wilkins
Arahau
aUI
Characteristica universalis
Isotype
Ithkuil
Láadan (ldn)
Loglan
Lin Compress in factor of 7
Logopandecteision
Lojban (jbo)
Ro


[edit] Knowledge representation

Common Logic, an ISO standard derived from KIF
CycL
The Distributed Language Translation project used a "binary-coded" version of Esperanto as a pivot language between the source language and its translation.
Lincos
Loom
RDF


[edit] Artistic languages

[edit] Languages used in fiction

[edit] Literature

Adûnaic from J. R. R. Tolkien's works
Aklo, Tsath-yo, and R'lyehian are ancient and obscure languages in the works of H. P. Lovecraft, Clark Ashton Smith, and others. Aklo is considered by some writers to be the written language of the Serpent People
Amtorian, spoken in some cultures on the planet Venus in Pirates of Venus by Edgar Rice Burroughs and several sequels. Judged by critic Fredrik Ekman to have "a highly inventive morphology but a far less interesting syntax." (See [1].)
Ancient Language in the Inheritance Trilogy by Christopher Paolini (although this is considered to be a cipher of English by many)
Angley, Unglish and Ingliss - three languages spoken respectively at Western Europe, North America and the Pacific in the 29th Century world of Poul Anderson's "Orion Shall Rise". All derived from present-day English, the three are mutually unintelligible, following 800 years of separate development after a 21st century nuclear war and the extensive absorption of words and grammatical forms from French in the first case, Russian, Chinese and Mongolian in the second, and Polynesian in the third.
Anglic, the dominant language of the declining Galactic empire depicted in Poul Anderson's Dominic Flandry series, is descended from present-day English but so changed that only professional historians or linguists can understand English texts.
Anglo-French, in the alternate history world of the Lord Darcy stories by Randall Garrett - where England and France were permanently united into a single kingdom by Richard the Lionheart and their languages consequently merged.
asa'pili ("world language"), in bolo'bolo, by Swiss author P.M..
Atreides battle, in Dune by Frank Herbert
Babel-17, in Babel-17 by Samuel R. Delany
Baronh, language of Abh in Seikai no Monsho (Crest of the Stars) and others, by Morioka Hiroyuki
Black Speech - language of Mordor in The Lord of the Rings
Bokonon - language of the Bokononism religion in Kurt Vonnegut's "Cat's Cradle"
Chakobsa, a language used in the Dune novels by Frank Herbert
Codex Seraphinianus by Luigi Serafini appears to be written in a constructed language which is presumably the language of the alien civilization the book describes
Common The language spoken in a wide variety of fantasy fiction, particularly Dungeons and Dragons.
D'Haran The ancient, dead language of pre-Great War New World (D'Hara, Midlands, and Westland) in Terry Goodkind's "Sword of Truth" series.
Drac, language of the alien species in Barry B. Longyear's Enemy Mine and The Enemy Papers
Kad'k, the language of the Dwarfs in Terry Pratchett's Discworld
Earthsea books (by Ursula K. Le Guin)

Language of the Making - the basis of all magic, spoken by Dragons as their native tongue and learned with considerable effort by human mages
Hardic - linguistically descended from the above
Osskilian, and Kargish - a different family of languages, distantly related


Elemeno, language of two sisters in Caucasia by Danzy Senna.
Fremen, language of the native people of Arrakis, in Dune and other novels by Frank Herbert
Galactic Standard Speech in Asimov' "Foundation series". Inhabitants of the planet Fomalhaut speak "an extreme dialect" of it.
Galacticspeak from The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy
Gobbledygook, the language of goblins, in the Harry Potter series. Noted speakers include Albus Dumbledore and Barty Crouch.
Goodenuf English, a form of English used by foreigners in the novel Rainbows End by Vernon Vinge
Glide, created by Diana Reed Slattery, used by the Death Dancers of The Maze Game
Groilish, spoken by giants in Giants and the Joneses by Julia Donaldson.
High Speech of Gilead from Stephen King's The Dark Tower (series)
Ilythiiri, the language of drow elves in Forgotten Realms setting. [2]
Kesh, in Ursula K. Le Guin's novel Always Coming Home
Krakish, in Guardians of Ga'Hoole by Kathryn Lasky
Láadan (ldn), in Suzette Haden Elgin's science fiction novel Native Tongue and sequels
Lapine, in Watership Down by Richard Adams
Lilliputian from Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels. Further samples of the language are provided in T. H. White's Mistress Masham's Repose. In Gulliver's Travels, other fictional languages, spoken in other places Gulliver visits, are also presented, e.g. Brobdingnagian, Laputan, Balbinarbian and Houyhnhnm languages.
Linyaari spoken by the Linyaari people of Vhiliinyar in Anne McCaffery's Acorna series.
Mando'a, created by Karen Traviss, used by the Mandalorians in the Star Wars Republic Commando novels Hard Contact and Triple Zero
Mangani in the Tarzan novels of Edgar Rice Burroughs
Marain, in The Culture novels of Iain M. Banks
The languages of Middle-earth (most notably Sindarin (sjn), Quenya (qya) and Khuzdûl) by J. R. R. Tolkien, partly published in The Lord of the Rings, and posthumously discussed in The History of Middle-earth and other publications.
Molvanian from Molvania, A Land Untouched By Modern Dentistry
Nadsat slang, in A Clockwork Orange by Anthony Burgess
Newspeak, in Nineteen Eighty-Four by George Orwell (fictional constructed language)
The "Nautilus Language", spoken on board Jules Verne's famous fictional submarine, in token of crew members having completely renounced their former homelands and backgrounds. Every morning, after scanning the horizon with his binoculars, Nemo's second-in-command says: "Nautron respoc lorni virch". The meaning of these words is never clarified, but their construction seems to indicate that the "Nautilus Language" (its actual name is not given) is based on European languages.
Old Solar, in Out of the Silent Planet, Perelandra, and That Hideous Strength by C. S. Lewis
The Old Tongue from Robert Jordan's Wheel of Time series
Paluldonian in a Tarzan novel, Tarzan the Terrible, by Edgar Rice Burroughs. Used by the inhabitants of the realm of Pal-ul-don in Africa, separated from the outside world by impenetrable marshes.
Parseltongue, the language of snakes, in the Harry Potter series. The ability of humans to speak it is considered a magic ability.
Pennsylvanisch, from Michael Flynn's The Forest of Time
Pravic and Iotic, in The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin
Ptydepe, from Václav Havel's play The Memorandum
Quintaglio from Robert J. Sawyer's Quintaglio Ascension Trilogy
Quenya from J. R. R. Tolkien's works.
Qwghlmian from Neal Stephenson's Cryptonomicon and The Baroque Cycle
Rihannsu, spoken by the Rihannsu (Romulans) in the Star Trek novels of Diane Duane
Spocanian, in Rolandt Tweehuysen's fictional country Spocania
Stark (short for Star Common), a common interstellar English-based language from Orson Scott Card's Ender series
Starsza Mowa from Andrzej Sapkowski's Hexer saga
Troll language from Terry Pratchett's Discworld
Utopian language, appearing in a poem by Petrus Gilles accompanying Thomas More's Utopia
Whitmanite, spoken by members of a radical Anarchist-Pacifist cult of the same name in Robert Heinlein' The Puppet Masters. "Allucquere" is a female given name in Whitmanite.
Zaum, poetic tongue elaborated by Velimir Khlebnikov, Aleksei Kruchonykh, and other Russian Futurists as a "transrational" and "most universal" language "of songs, incantations, and curses".
Several languages spoken by Panurge in François Rabelais' Pantagruel (1532)
The Time Machine featured an unnamed language for the Eloi people.
Jack Womack's Dryco novels feature a future form of English with a modified grammar.


[edit] Comic books

Bordurian in some of Hergé's The Adventures of Tintin, mostly in The Calculus Affair
Interlac, the universal language spoken in the 30th century in the Legion of Super Heroes comics
Kryptonese, or Kryptonian, the language of Superman's home planet of Krypton
Syldavian, in some of Hergé's The Adventures of Tintin, mostly in King Ottokar's Sceptre


[edit] Movies and television

Two kinds of alien language, termed "Alienese" and "Beta Crypt 3" appear quite frequently in background sight gags in Futurama.
Ancient in the Stargate universe (i.e. Stargate SG-1 and Stargate Atlantis) is the language of the Ancients, the builders of the Stargates; it is similar in pronunciation to Medieval Latin. The Athosians say prayers in Ancient. (However, when shown onscreen, written Ancient is simply a different character set for English)
Atlantean created by Marc Okrand for the film Atlantis: The Lost Empire
Cityspeak, a "mishmash of Japanese, Spanish, German," plus Hungarian and French, spoken on the street of overcrowded and multi-lingual Los Angeles of 2019 in Blade Runner. Similarly, used in many cyberpunk genre role playing games.
The Divine Language is a language invented by director Luc Besson and actress Milla Jovovich for the 1997 movie The Fifth Element.
Enchanta, in the Encantadia and Etheria television series in the Philippines, created by the head writer Suzette Doctolero
Gelfling, spoken in Jim Henson's fantasy epic The Dark Crystal
Goa'uld, the galactic lingua franca from Stargate SG-1, supposedly influenced Ancient Egyptian
Huttese, language of both alien species and people in some of George Lucas's Star Wars films
Irken, in Invader Zim, by Jhonen Vasquez, et al.
Klingon (tlh), in the Star Trek movie and television series, created by Marc Okrand
Krakozhian from The Terminal
Ku, a fictional African language in the movie The Interpreter (2005)
Linguacode, a universal language code sometimes used by the United Federation of Planets in the Star Trek television series.
Marklar, spoken by the people of Marklar in a South Park episode.
Minbari from Babylon 5, three related languages used together, corresponding to the areas of expertise of the three societal castes.
Nadsat, the fictional language spoken by Alex and his friends in Clockwork Orange
Nellish, a personal language from the main character of Nell
Paku from Land of the Lost
PortuGreek, the trade language featured in Waterworld
The pseudo-Spanish/Greek/Arabic language of Republica, as used in the fictional Chanel 9 program within the British comedy sketch show the The Fast Show
Quenya (qya) and Sindarin (sjn), the two Elven languages, spoken in the Lord of the Rings movies.
Slovetzian, the fictional Slavic language of Slovetzia in the movie The Beautician and the Beast
The Star Wars series features several fictional languages, see: Languages in Star Wars
Tenctonese from the Alien Nation movie and television series, created by Van Ling and Kenneth Johnson
Unas in Stargate SG-1, supposedly the first hosts of the Goa'uld
Ulam, the language spoken by the prehistoric humans in the movie Quest for Fire, created by Anthony Burgess by melting roots of European languages.
Vampire language used in the movie Blade.
Vulcan language from Star Trek


[edit] Unnamed languages

In the Janissaries series of science-fiction novels by Jerry Pournelle, the human natives of the planet Tran speak a language apparently derived from Mycenaean. A form of Latin is also spoken in an empire resembling ancient Rome's, but only by scholars.
Riddley Walker, a 1980 novel by Russell Hoban, set in a post-apocalyptic future, is written entirely in a "devolved" form of English.
Writer/director Luc Besson invented a Divine Language for Milla Jovovich's character "Leeloo" to speak in the film The Fifth Element.
Klonoa's dream language, used in both Phantomile and Lunatea.


[edit] Music

Gulevache: fictional Romance Language of the kingdom of Gulevandia on the bilingual opera Cardoso en Gulevandia by the comedy group Les Luthiers
Kobaian, the language used by 70's French rock group Magma.
Vonlenska, sometimes known as "Hopelandic", the language sung by Jón Þór Birgisson of the Icelandic band "Sigur Rós" on many of their songs.
Loxian, featured on the Enya album Amarantine.
Unnamed language by Yves Barbieux, used in his song "Sanomi" and performed by the Belgian group Urban Trad in the Eurovision Song contest in 2003.
Mohelmot, a forbidden language used by The Residents on the album The Big Bubble: Part Four of the Mole Trilogy.
Unnamed language by Emmanuelle Orange, used in her song Pialoushka and performed by Montreal band Eden106.
Unnamed language featured in the chorus of 2NU's 1991 track This is Ponderous.
Unnamed language featured in the soundtrack to the film 1492: Conquest of Paradise by Vangelis.


[edit] Performance

Grammelot (Cirquish) is a "gibberish" that goes back to the 16th century, used by performers, including those of Cirque du Soleil


[edit] Games

Al Bhed is a language used by the race of people known by the same name in the fictional world of Spira, in the games Final Fantasy X & Final Fantasy X-2
Alaani, Angram (old dwarvish), Asdharia (high elvish), Isdira (elvish), Rogolan (dwarvish), Rssahh (language of the 'lizard-people') and others in the role-playing game The Dark Eye
Ancient Altmer, the old tongue of High Elves in The Elder Scrolls series.
Ancient Hylian is the ancient language used by the first Hylians in The Legend of Zelda
Animalese is one language spoken by the NPC characters of Animal Crossing. There is also the option that they can speak Bebebese.
Bluddian from the video game Captain Blood by Cryo Interactive Entertainment
Common, Darnassian, Draenei language, Dwarvish, Gnomish, Gutterspeak, Orcish, Taurahe, Thalassian, and Troll language, all from the Warcraft Universe
D'ni, the language spoken by the subterranean D'ni people in Cyan Worlds' Myst series of computer games and novels
Dino, the language made by the Dinosaur Planet in Star Fox Adventures
Gargish, used in the Ultima computer game series, by the gargoyle race
Hymmnos, used by Reyvateils for Song Magic in Ar tonelico
kiZombie, used by zombies in the Urban Dead MMORPG
Lashonnu is the language of the Wealdings (the Forest People) in the Gondica role playing game by Anders Blixt
Mando'a, created by Karen Traviss, used by the Mandalorians in Star Wars: Republic Commando
Or'zet, the rediscovered language of the Orks from the Shadowrun role playing game
The unnamed language used by the Protoss in the StarCraft series
Simlish from the computer game The Sims
Sload, the language of the epynomous race in The Elder Scrolls series.
Sperethiel, the language of the Elven nations of Tir Tairngire and Tir na Nóg from the Shadowrun role playing game
Tho Fan, in the Xbox game Jade Empire
The unnamed language used by the Zerg race in the StarCraft series
The unnamed language used by the Blobs when they sing, in the PlayStation Portable Game, "LocoRoco"
The unnamed backwards Japanese/Latin used in Ico and Shadow of the Colossus
The unnamed language used in the Klonoa series up to Klonoa Heroes: Legend of the Star Medal, and an expetation in Namco X Capcom, uses normal Japanese. It is known as Klonian or more recently Lunatean from Klonoa 2: Lunatea's Veil
Panzerese, a mix of German, Japanese, and Latin, used in the Panzer Dragoon series of games.
Alltongue, magical language spoken in Arcadia in The Longest Journey series
Vasudan, the language spoken by the Vasudan race in Descent: FreeSpace – The Great War and in the other titles in the FreeSpace series.


[edit] Toys

Furbish


[edit] Internet-based

Kēlen, by Sylvia Sotomayor
Teonaht, by Sally Caves
Verdurian and several other languages created for the fictional planet of Almea by Mark Rosenfelder


[edit] Alternative languages

Anglish
Brithenig (bzt), created by the inventor of the alternate history of Ill Bethisad, Andrew Smith
Several North Slavic languages, inspired by the existence of West, East and South Slavic languages and the absence of a Northern branch
Wenedyk, a language of the alternate history of Ill Bethisad created by Jan van Steenbergen


[edit] Micronational languages

Talossan, by R. Ben Madison


[edit] Personal languages

Enochian by Edward Kelley
Lingua Ignota, by Hildegard of Bingen


[edit] Language games

Binaliktad
Gibberish
Jeringonza
Língua do Pê
Louchebem
Opish
Pig Latin
Rosarigasino
Rövarspråket
Sananmuunnos
Šatrovački
Starckdeutsch, Starckteutsch
Tutnese
Ubbi dubbi
Verlan
Vesre


[edit] External Links

[[3]]


[edit] References and notes


^ http://www.ling.helsinki.fi/sky/julkaisut/SKY2006_1/1FK60.1.5.LINDSTEDT.pdf
^ Ethnologue report for language code:epo



[edit] See also

Alien language
Artificial script
Constructed language
Engineered language
International auxiliary language
Language game
List of languages
Voynich Manuscript








v • d • e

Constructed languages (conlangs)





Types and concepts

Artistic language (artlang) · Constructed language (conlang) · Constructed script · Engineered language (engelang) · Fictional language · International auxiliary language (IAL) · Language game · Musical language · Relexification · Universal language






Most notable conlangs

Blissymbol · Bon Wen · Enochian · Esperanto · Glosa · Ido · Interlingua · Ithkuil · Kēlen · Klingon · Láadan · Lingua Franca Nova · Lingua Ignota · Loglan · Lojban · Mänti  · Nadsat · Newspeak · Novial · Occidental · Quenya · Sindarin · Solresol · Teonaht · Toki Pona · Volapük






Resources

Conlanger · Conlang XSAMPA · Langmaker · Language Creation Conference · Translation relay · Zompist.com · List of constructed languages






Portal · WikiProject








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_constructed_languages"
Categories: Constructed languages | Lists of languages | Fictional languages | Lists of fictional things 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Català
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Esperanto
Français
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Italiano
Lojban
Nederlands
日本語
Português
Русский
Suomi









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 19:50.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
