











Greek language - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Greek_language";
		var wgTitle = "Greek language";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "11887";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281045702;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["sysop"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Greek language

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Greek
Ελληνικά
Ellīniká 



Pronunciation:
[e̞liniˈka]


Spoken in:
Greece, Cyprus, United States, Australia,
Germany, Turkey, United Kingdom, Canada,
Russia, Albania, Ukraine, France, Georgia,
Italy, Bulgaria, Romania, FYR Macedonia, Armenia and the rest of the Greek diaspora. 


Region:
Balkans






Total speakers:
c. 15 million 


Ranking:
52


Language family:
Indo-European
Hellenic
Greek 


Writing system:
Greek alphabet 


Official status


Official language in:
 Greece
 Cyprus
 European Union

Recognised minority language in:
 Albania[1]
 Armenia[2][3]
 Italy[1]
 Romania[2]
 Ukraine[2]



Regulated by:
No official regulation


Language codes


ISO 639-1:
el


ISO 639-2:
gre (B) 
ell (T)


ISO 639-3:
variously:
grc – Ancient Greek
ell – Modern Greek
pnt – Pontic Greek
gmy – Mycenaean Greek
gkm – Medieval Greek
cpg – Cappadocian Greek
tsd – Tsakonian Greek


Note: This page may contain IPA phonetic symbols in Unicode.


Greek (ελληνικά, IPA: [e̞liniˈka] or ελληνική γλώσσα, IPA: [e̞liniˈkʲi ˈɣlo̞sa]) is an Indo-European language native to the southern Balkan peninsula, the language of the Greeks. It forms an independent branch within Indo-European. It has the longest documented history of any Indo-European language, spanning 34 centuries of written records.[4] In its ancient form, it is the language of classical Ancient Greek literature and the New Testament of the Christian Bible. In its modern form, it is the official language of Greece and Cyprus, and spoken by a total of approximately 20 million people (first language for ca. 15 million), including minority and emigrant communities in numerous parts of the world. It is written in the Greek alphabet.




Contents


1 History
2 Geographic distribution

2.1 Official status


3 Characteristics
4 Evolution from Ancient to Modern Greek
5 Classification
6 Writing system
7 See also
8 References
9 Sources
10 External links

10.1 General background
10.2 Language learning
10.3 Dictionaries
10.4 Literature







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


History
Main article: History of Greek
Greek has been spoken in the Balkan Peninsula around the late 3rd millennium BC. The earliest written evidence is found in the Linear B clay tablets in the "Room of the Chariot Tablets", an LMIII A-context (c. 1400 BC) region of Knossos, in Crete, making Greek one of the world's oldest recorded living languages. Among the Indo-European languages, its date of earliest attestation is matched only by Vedic Sanskrit and the extinct Anatolian languages.
The later Greek alphabet (unrelated to Linear B) is derived from the Phoenician alphabet (abjad); with minor modifications, it is still used today. The Greek language is conventionally divided into the following periods:

Proto-Greek: the assumed last ancestor of all known varieties of Greek which is not recorded. Proto-Greek speakers possibly entered the Greek peninsula in the early 2nd millennium BC. Since then, Greek has been spoken uninterruptedly in Greece.
Mycenaean Greek: the language of the Mycenaean civilization. It is recorded in the Linear B script on tablets dating from the 15th or 14th century BC onwards.
Ancient Greek: in its various dialects was the language of the Archaic and Classical periods of the ancient Greek civilization. It was widely known throughout the Roman Empire. Ancient Greek fell into disuse in western Europe in the Middle Ages, but remained officially in use in the Byzantine world, and was reintroduced to the rest of Europe with the Fall of Constantinople and Greek migration to the areas of Italy.
Koine Greek: The fusion of various ancient Greek dialects with Attic, the dialect of Athens, resulted in the creation of the first common Greek dialect, which became a lingua franca across Eastern Mediterranean and Near East. Koine Greek can be initially traced within the armies and conquered territories of Alexander the Great, but after the Hellenistic colonization of the known world, it was spoken from Egypt to the fringes of India. After the Roman conquest of Greece, an unofficial diglossy of Greek and Latin was established in the city of Rome and Koine Greek became a first or second language in the Roman Empire. The origin of Christianity can also be traced through Koine Greek, as the Apostles used it to preach in Greece and the Greek-speaking world. It is also known as the Alexandrian dialect, Post-Classical Greek or even New Testament Greek, as it was the original language the New Testament was written in.
Medieval Greek, also known as Byzantine Greek: the continuation of Koine Greek during Byzantine Greece, up to the demise of the Byzantine Empire in the 15th century. Medieval Greek is a cover term for a whole continuum of different speech and writing styles, ranging from vernacular continuations of spoken Koine that were already approaching Modern Greek in many respects, to highly learned forms imitating classical Attic. Much of the written Greek that was used as the official language of the Byzantine Empire was an eclectic middle-ground variety based on the tradition of written Koine.
Modern Greek: Stemming from Medieval Greek, Modern Greek usages can be traced in the Byzantine period, as early as 11th century. It is the language used by modern Greeks and apart from Standard Modern Greek, there are several dialects of it.



History of the
Greek language
(see also: Greek alphabet)


Proto-Greek



Mycenaean (c. 1600–1000 BC)



Ancient Greek (c. 1000–330 BC)
Dialects:
Aeolic, Arcadocypriot, Attic-Ionic,
Doric, Locrian, Pamphylian;
Homeric Greek.
Possibly Macedonian.



Koine Greek (c. 330 BC–330)*



Medieval Greek (330–1453)



Modern Greek (from 1453)
Dialects:
Cappadocian, Cretan, Cypriot,
Demotic, Griko, Katharevousa,
Pontic, Tsakonian, Yevanic
This box: view • talk • edit


*Dates (beginning with Ancient Greek) from D.B. Wallace, Greek Grammar Beyond the Basics: An Exegetical Syntax of the New Testament (Grand Rapids 1997), 12.



The tradition of diglossia, the simultaneous existence of vernacular and archaizing written forms of Greek, was renewed in the modern era in the form of a polarization between two competing varieties: Dimotiki, the vernacular form of Modern Greek proper, and Katharevousa, meaning 'purified', an imitation of classical Greek, which was developed in the early 19th century and used for literary, juridic, administrative and scientific purposes in the newly formed modern Greek state. The diglossia problem was brought to an end in 1976 (Law 306/1976), when Dimotikí was declared the official language of Greece and is still in use for all official purposes and in education, having incorporated features of Katharevousa and giving birth to Standard Greek.
Historical unity and continuing identity between the various stages of the Greek language is often emphasised. Although Greek has undergone morphological and phonological changes comparable to those seen in other languages, there has been no time in its history since classical antiquity where its cultural, literary and orthographic tradition was interrupted to such an extent that one can easily speak of a new language emerging. Greek speakers today still tend to regard literary works of ancient Greek as part of their own rather than a foreign language.[5] It is also often estimated that the historical changes have been relatively slight compared with some other languages. According to one estimation, "Homeric Greek is probably closer to demotic than twelfth-century Middle English is to modern spoken English."[6] Ancient Greek texts, especially from Biblical Koine onwards, are thus relatively easy to understand for educated modern speakers. The perception of historical unity is also strengthened by the fact that Greek has not split up into a group of daughter languages, as Latin into the Romance languages.
Greek words have been widely borrowed into the European languages, including English: mathematics, astronomy, democracy, philosophy, thespian, athletics, theater, rhetoric etc. Moreover, Greek words and word elements continue to be productive as a basis for coinages: anthropology, photography, isomer, biomechanics, cinema, physics etc. and form, with Latin words, the foundation of international scientific and technical vocabulary, e.g. all words ending with "-logy" ("discourse"). An estimated 12% of the English vocabulary has Greek origin, while numerous Greek words have English derivatives.[7]

Geographic distribution
Further information: Greeks and Greek diaspora
Greek is spoken by about 14 million people, mainly in Greece and Cyprus, but also worldwide by the members of the Greek diaspora. There are traditional Greek-speaking settlements in the neighbouring countries Albania, the Republic of Macedonia, Bulgaria and Turkey, as well as in several countries in the Black Sea area such as Ukraine, Russia, Romania, Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan, and around the Mediterranean Sea, Southern Italy, Israel, Egypt and ancient coastal towns along the Levant. The language is also spoken by Greek emigrant communities in many countries in Western Europe, especially the United Kingdom and Germany, in Canada and the United States, Australia, as well as in Argentina, Brazil and others.

Official status
Greek is the official language of Greece where it is spoken by about 99.5% of the population. It is also (nominally alongside Turkish), the official language of Cyprus.[8] Because of the membership of Greece and Cyprus in the European Union, Greek is one of the 23 official languages of the European Union. Greek is officially recognized as a minority language in parts of Turkey, Italy and Albania,[1]as well as in Armenia and Ukraine.[2]

Characteristics
Like most Indo-European languages, Greek is highly inflected. Greek language morphology has come down through the ages fairly intact, though with some simplifications. For example, Modern Greek features two numbers: singular and plural. The dual number of Ancient times was abandoned at a very early stage. The instrumental case of Mycenaean Greek disappeared in the Archaic period, and the dative-locative of Ancient Greek disappeared in the late Hellenistic. Four cases, nominative, genitive, accusative and vocative, remain in Modern Greek. The three ancient gender noun categories (masculine, feminine and neuter) never fell out of use, while adjectives agree in gender, number, and case with their respective nouns, as do their articles. Greek verbs have synthetic inflectional forms for:

mood — Ancient Greek: indicative, subjunctive, imperative, and optative; Modern Greek: indicative and imperative (other modal functions are expressed by periphrastic constructions)
number — singular, plural (archaic Greek also had a dual)
voice — Ancient Greek: active, middle, and passive; Modern Greek: active and medio-passive
tense — Ancient Greek: present, past, future; Modern Greek: past and non-past (future is expressed by a periphrastic construction)
person — first, second, third, second person formal form
aspect — Ancient Greek: imperfective, perfective (traditionally called aorist), perfect (sometimes also called perfective, see note about terminology); Modern Greek: perfective and imperfective

Ancient had several infinitives; in Modern, the infinitive of verbs has been replaced by a periphrastic subjunctive.[4] Ancient had a complex participial system; Modern has a simpler one.
A great syntactical reformation took place during Hellenistic times, with the result that late Koine is already much like Modern Greek. However, since Greek syntactical relations are expressed by means of case endings, Greek word order has always been relatively free. In Attic Greek the availability of the definite article and the infinitive and participial clauses permits the construction of very long, complex yet clear sentences. This technique of Attic prose (known as periodic style) is unmatched in other European languages. Since Hellenistic times Greek has tended to be more periphrastic, but much of the syntactical and expressive power of the language has been preserved.



Indo-European topics



Indo-European languages


Albanian · Armenian · Baltic
Celtic · Germanic · Greek
Indo-Iranian (Indo-Aryan, Iranian)
Italic · Slavic  
extinct: Anatolian · Paleo-Balkans (Dacian,
Phrygian, Thracian) · Tocharian



Indo-European peoples


Albanians · Armenians
Balts · Celts · Germanic peoples
Greeks · Indo-Aryans
Iranians · Latins · Slavs
historical: Anatolians (Hittites, Luwians)
Celts (Galatians, Gauls) · Germanic tribes
Illyrians · Italics  · Cimmerians · Sarmatians
Scythians  · Thracians  · Tocharians
Indo-Iranians (Rigvedic tribes, Iranian tribes) 



Proto-Indo-Europeans


Language · Society · Religion
 


Urheimat hypotheses


Kurgan hypothesis
Anatolia · Armenia · India · PCT
 


Indo-European studies


Greek is a language distinguished by an extraordinarily rich vocabulary. In respect to the roots of words, ancient Greek vocabulary was essentially of Indo-European origin, but with a significant number of borrowings from the idioms of the populations that inhabited Greece before the arrival of Proto-Greeks. Words of non-Indo-European origin can be traced into Greek from as early as Mycenaean times; they include a large number of Greek toponyms. The vast majority of Modern Greek vocabulary is directly inherited from ancient Greek, although in certain cases words have changed meanings. Words of foreign origin have entered the language mainly from Latin, Italian and Ottoman Turkish. During older periods of the Greek language, loan words into Greek acquired Greek inflections, leaving thus only a foreign root word. Modern borrowings (from the 20th century on), especially from French and English, are typically not inflected.
One of the most distinctive characteristics of the Greek language is its powerful compound-constructing ability. The speaker is able to combine basic or derived terms in order to construct new, yet perfectly understandable compounds that express in one word what other languages would express in an entire clause, or even an entire sentence. This linguistic flexibility is largely absent from Latin and its offspring languages. In the Homeric language, Thetis — the mother of Achilles, is described as "δυσαριστοτόκεια", dysaristotokeia, meaning "she who, to her own detriment, gave birth to the best"; its equivalent in pure Modern Greek is "πικρολεβεντομάνα", pikroleventomana. Some languages are able to express such a complex meaning naturally in one word, others have different mechanisms (see polysynthetic languages for extreme examples). Compound constructional capability, as is found in Greek, is frequently imitated by modern languages such as French and English in order to produce monolectic compounds; this is often done by actually using Greek roots (e.g. biology < biologie < bios + logos, Micromégas < mikros + megas ) or by applying imported Greek rules to foreign words. For that reason Greek-derived words predominate in the language of science, particularly of the natural sciences, e.g. physics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, etc. It has been speculated by scholars that due to this specific flexibility, Greek and German (another European language famous for its compound construction) have been the languages of philosophy, and that Plato's ideas had pre-existed in Greek, in the same way that Meister Eckhart's thoughts had in German.[9]

Evolution from Ancient to Modern Greek
The development from Ancient Greek to Modern Greek has affected phonology, morphology, and, to a lesser extent, vocabulary. The division into conventional periods is, as with all such periodisations, relatively arbitrary, especially since at all periods, Ancient Greek has enjoyed high prestige, and the literate borrowed heavily from it.
The main phonological changes occurred during the Hellenistic and Roman period (see Koine Greek Phonology for details), and included:

replacement of the pitch accent with a stress accent
simplification of the system of vowels and diphthongs (loss of vowel length distinction, monophthongization of most diphthongs, and some significant steps of iotacism)
development of the voiceless aspirated stop consonants phi and theta to voiceless fricatives (the similar development of chi may have taken place later)
possibly development of the voiced stop consonants — delta, beta and gamma — to voiced fricatives (the date is discussed among scholars)

The morphological changes affected both nouns and verbs. Some of the changes to the verbs are parallel to those that affected the Romance languages as they developed from Vulgar Latin — for instance the loss of certain historic tense forms and their replacement by new constructions — but unlike Romance, Greek continues to inflect nouns for case.

Classification
Greek is an independent branch of the Indo-European language family. The ancient languages which were probably most closely related to it, ancient Macedonian (which many linguistic scholars suggest is a dialect of Greek itself) and Phrygian, are not well enough documented to permit detailed comparison. Among living languages Greek seems to be most closely related to Armenian (see also Graeco-Armenian) and the Indo-Iranian languages (see Graeco-Aryan).[10]

Writing system





Greek alphabet


Αα
Alpha
Νν
Nu


Ββ
Beta
Ξξ
Xi


Γγ
Gamma
Οο
Omicron


Δδ
Delta
Ππ
Pi


Εε
Epsilon
Ρρ
Rho


Ζζ
Zeta
Σσς
Sigma


Ηη
Eta
Ττ
Tau


Θθ
Theta
Υυ
Upsilon


Ιι
Iota
Φφ
Phi


Κκ
Kappa
Χχ
Chi


Λλ
Lambda
Ψψ
Psi


Μμ
Mu
Ωω
Omega


Obsolete letters



Digamma

Qoppa



San

Sampi


Other characters



Stigma

Sho



Heta






Greek diacritics


Main articles: Greek alphabet and Greek orthography
Greek has been written in the Greek alphabet since approximately the 9th century BC. In classical Greek, as in classical Latin, only upper-case letters existed. The lower-case Greek letters were developed much later by medieval scribes to permit a faster, more convenient cursive writing style with the use of ink and quill. The variant of the alphabet in use today is essentially the late Ionic variant, introduced for writing classical Attic in 403 BC.
The modern Greek alphabet consists of 24 letters, each with a capital (majuscule) and lowercase (minuscule) form. The letter sigma has an additional lowercase form (ς) used in final position.


Majuscule form


Α
Β
Γ
Δ
Ε
Ζ
Η
Θ
Ι
Κ
Λ
Μ
Ν
Ξ
Ο
Π
Ρ
Σ
Τ
Υ
Φ
Χ
Ψ
Ω


Minuscule form


α
β
γ
δ
ε
ζ
η
θ
ι
κ
λ
μ
ν
ξ
ο
π
ρ
σ
τ
υ
φ
χ
ψ
ω


In addition to the letters, the Greek alphabet features a number of diacritical signs: three different accent marks (acute, grave and circumflex), originally denoting different shapes of pitch accent on the stressed vowel; the so-called breathing marks (spiritus asper and spiritus lenis), originally used to signal presence or absence of word-initial /h/; and the diaeresis, used to mark full syllabic value of a vowel that would otherwise be read as part of a diphthong. These marks were introduced during the course of the Hellenistic period. Actual usage of the grave in handwriting had seen a rapid decline in favor of uniform usage of the acute during the late 20th century, and it had only been retained in typography.
In the writing reform of 1982, the use of most of them was abolished from official use in Greece. Since then, Modern Greek has been written mostly in the simplified monotonic orthography (or monotonic system), which employs only the acute accent and the diaeresis. The traditional system, now called the polytonic orthography (or polytonic system), is still used internationally for the writing of Ancient Greek.

See also

Ancient Greek
Ancient Greek dialects
Center for the Greek language
English pronunciation of Greek letters
Greek language question
Greek substrate language
Greeklish
Hellenic Foundation for Culture
List of Greek words with English derivatives
That's Greek to me (expression)
Varieties of Modern Greek


References


^ a b c "Greek". Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. http://www.unhchr.ch/udhr/lang/grk.htm. Retrieved on 2008-12-08. 
^ a b c d "List of declarations made with respect to treaty No. 148". Council of Europe. http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/Commun/ListeDeclarations.asp?NT=148&CM=8&DF=23/01/05&CL=ENG&VL=1. Retrieved on 2008-12-08. 
^ "An interview with Aziz Tamoyan, National Union of Yezidi". groong.usc.edu. http://groong.usc.edu/orig/ok-20040916.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-08. 
^ a b "Greek language". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/244595/Greek-language. Retrieved on 2008-11-04. 
^ Browning, Robert. Medieval and Modern Greek. Cambridge University Press, 1983. ISBN 0521299780
^ Margaret Alexiou (1982): Diglossia in Greece. In: William Haas (1982): Standard Languages: Spoken and Written. Manchester University Press ND. ISBN 0389202916, 9780389202912
^ "Greek language". Columbia Encyclopedia. Bartleby.com. http://www.bartleby.com/65/gr/Greeklan.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-08. 
^ The Constitution of Cyprus, App. D., Part 1, Art. 3 states that The official languages of the Republic are Greek and Turkish. [1]. However, the official status of Turkish is only nominal in the Greek-dominated Republic of Cyprus; in practice, outside Turkish-dominated Northern Cyprus, Turkish is little used; see A. Arvaniti (2006): Erasure as a a means of maintaining diglossia in Cyprus, San Diego Linguistics Papers 2: 25-38. Page 27.
^ E. Friedell, Kulturgeschichte Griechenlands.
^ BBC: Languages across Europe: Greek



Sources

W. Sidney Allen, Vox Graeca - a guide to the pronunciation of classical Greek. Cambridge University Press, 1968-74. ISBN 0-521-20626-X
Robert Browning, Medieval and Modern Greek, Cambridge University Press, 2nd edition 1983, ISBN 0-521-29978-0. An excellent and concise historical account of the development of modern Greek from the ancient language.
Crosby and Schaeffer, An Introduction to Greek, Allyn and Bacon, Inc. 1928. A school grammar of ancient Greek
Dionysius of Thrace, "Art of Grammar", "Τέχνη γραμματική", c.100 BC
David Holton et al., Greek: A Comprehensive Grammar of the Modern Language, Routledge, 1997, ISBN 0-415-10002-X. A reference grammar of modern Greek.
Geoffrey Horrocks, Greek: A History of the Language and Its Speakers (Longman Linguistics Library). Addison Wesley Publishing Company, 1997. ISBN 0-582-30709-0. From Mycenean to modern.
Brian Newton, The Generative Interpretation of Dialect: A Study of Modern Greek Phonology, Cambridge University Press, 1972, ISBN 0-521-08497-0.
Andrew Sihler, "A New Comparative Grammar of Greek and Latin", Oxford University Press, 1996. An historical grammar of ancient Greek from its Indo-European origins. Some eccentricities and no bibliography but a useful handbook to the earliest stages of Greek's development.
Herbert Weir Smyth, Greek Grammar, Harvard University Press, 1956 (revised edition), ISBN 0-674-36250-0. The standard grammar of classical Greek. Focuses primarily on the Attic dialect, with comparatively weak treatment of the other dialects and the Homeric Kunstsprache.


External links

General background




Standard Greek edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia





Pontic Greek edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Ancient Greek test of Wikipedia at Wikimedia Incubator




Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Greek language 



Greek Language, Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia.
The Greek Language and Linguistics Gateway, useful information on the history of the Greek language, application of modern Linguistics to the study of Greek, and tools for learning Greek.
The Greek Language Portal, a portal for Greek language and linguistic education.
The Perseus Project has many useful pages for the study of classical languages and literatures, including dictionaries.


Language learning



Wikibooks has more on the topic of
Greek language






Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Greek language



Greek dictionary, tutorial and hangman program with texteditor, this shareware program is aimed at learning New Testament Greek.
Greek spell checker
(Greek) komvos.edu.gr, a website for the support of people who are being taught the Greek language.
Modern Greek Course, a website with sound and many features for learning Modern Greek.
New Testament Greek Three graduated courses designed to help students learn to read the Greek New Testament


Dictionaries



Greek language edition of Wiktionary, the free dictionary/thesaurus



Greek-English/English-Greek dictionary, (Greek)
Translatum - The Greek translation Vortal (Dictionaries and terminology forum)
Greek Lexical Aids, descriptions of both online lexica (with appropriate links) and Greek Lexica in Print.
Online Greek-English and English-Greek dictionary (Modern Greek)
Online Greek <-> English Dictionary with gender and type of words
The Greek Language Portal, dictionaries of all forms of Greek (Ancient, Hellenistic, Medieval, Modern).
Woodhouse English-Greek dictionary, scanned images from S.C. Woodhouse's 1910 dictionary.


Literature

Books in Greek, an extended list of searchable bibliographic information.
(Greek) Center for Neo-Hellenic Studies, a non-profit organization set in order to promote Modern Greek Literature and Culture.
Research lab of modern Greek philosophy, a large e-library of modern Greek texts/books.
The Treasure of the Greek Language, a large collection of e-books from all stages of Greek language.








v • d • e

Official languages of the European Union








Bulgarian · Czech · Danish · Dutch · English · Estonian · Finnish · French · German · Greek · Hungarian · Irish · Italian · Latvian · Lithuanian · Maltese · Polish · Portuguese · Romanian · Slovak · Slovene · Spanish · Swedish















v • d • e

 Greece topics





People

Names · Refugees · Language · List of Greeks






History

Timeline · List of Greek countries and regions · Prehistory · Ancient – Hellenistic – Roman – Byzantine – Ottoman Greece · War of Independence · Modern Greece






Law

Law and order · Supreme Special Court · Court of Cassation · Council of State · Chamber of Accounts






Politics and
government

Political history · Constitution · Parliament · Prime Minister · President · Cabinet · Elections · Political parties · Foreign relations (Aegean dispute · Cyprus dispute · Greco-Turkish relations · Macedonia naming dispute)






Geography

Regions · Climate · Mountains · Lakes · Rivers · Transport · Environmental issues · Islands






Economy

Economic history · Stock Exchange · Euro · Banks · Bank of Greece · Taxation · Shipping · Tourism






Military

Military history · Hellenic Army · Hellenic Navy · Hellenic Air Force · Conscription






Demographics

Demographic history · Social issues · Religion · Diaspora · Cities · Immigration · Minorities






Culture

Art · Cinema · Dance · Literature · Education · Cuisine · Music · Sport · Television






Other topics

Flag · Coat of arms · National anthem · Evzones · Holidays · Name of Greece · International rankings










Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greek_language"
Categories: Fusional languages | Greek language | Languages of Albania | Languages of Australia | Languages of Cyprus | Languages of France | Languages of Georgia (country) | Languages of Greece | Languages of Italy | Languages of Turkey | Languages of the United Kingdom | Languages of the United States | Varieties of GreekHidden categories: Articles containing Greek language text | Articles containing non-English language text | Articles containing German language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
ܐܪܡܝܐ
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Башҡорт
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Հայերեն
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ქართული
Kernewek
Кыргызча
Kiswahili
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lingála
Lojban
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Мокшень
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
O'zbek
ភាសាខ្មែរ
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Ποντιακά
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Tok Pisin
Türkçe
Українська
Vèneto
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
Zazaki
中文









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 09:13.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
