













Alien hand syndrome - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Alien_hand_syndrome";
		var wgTitle = "Alien hand syndrome";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "263801";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 278643667;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Alien hand syndrome

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss these issues on the talk page.

It does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve it by citing reliable sources. Tagged since April 2008.
It may contain original research or unverifiable claims. Tagged since April 2008.
It may need to be wikified to meet Wikipedia's quality standards.Tagged since May 2008.





Alien hand syndrome (anarchic hand or Dr. Strangelove syndrome) is an unusual neurological disorder in which one of the sufferer's hands seems to take on a mind of its own. AHS is best documented in cases where a person has had the two hemispheres of their brain surgically separated, a procedure sometimes used to relieve the symptoms of extreme cases of epilepsy. It also occurs in some cases after other brain surgery, strokes, or infections.




Contents


1 Symptoms
2 Subtypes
3 Explanatory theories
4 Proposed strategies for treatment
5 Selected References from Medical Literature
6 Pop cultural references
7 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Symptoms
An alien hand sufferer can feel normal sensation in the hand, but believes that the hand, while still being a part of their body, behaves in a manner that is totally distinct from the sufferer's normal behavior. They lose the 'sense of agency' associated with the purposeful movement of the limb while retaining a sense of 'ownership' of the limb. They feel that they have no control over the movements of the 'alien' hand, but that, instead, the hand has the capability of acting autonomously--i.e. independent of their voluntary control. The hand effectively has 'a will of its own.' Alien hands can perform complex acts such as undoing buttons, removing clothing, and manipulating tools. Alien behavior can be distinguished from reflexive behavior in that the former is flexibly purposive while the latter is obligatory. Sometimes the sufferer will not be aware of what the alien hand is doing until it is brought to his or her attention, or until the hand does something that draws their attention to its behavior
A related syndrome described by the French neurologist François Lhermitte involves the release through disinhibition of a tendency to compulsively utilize objects that present themselves in the surrounding environment around the patient. The behavior of the patient is, in a sense, obligatorily linked to the "affordances" (using terminology introduced by the American ecological psychologist, J.J. Gibson) presented by objects that are located within the immediate peri-personal environment. This condition, termed "Utilization Behavior", is most often associated with extensive bilateral frontal lobe damage and might actually be thought of as "bilateral" Alien Hand Syndrome in which the patient is compulsively directed by external environmental contingencies (e.g., the presence of a hairbrush on the table in front of them elicits the act of brushing the hair) and has no capacity to "hold back" and inhibit pre-potent motor programs that are obligatorily linked to the presence of specific external objects in the peri-personal space of the patient. When the frontal lobe damage is bilateral and generally more extensive, the patient completely loses the ability to act in a self-directed manner and becomes totally dependent upon the surrounding environmental indicators to guide their behavior in a general social context, a condition also identified by Lhermitte, and referred to as "Environmental Dependency Syndrome".
Sufferers of alien hand will often personify the rogue limb, for example believing it to be "possessed" by some intelligent or alien spirit or an entity that they may name or identify. There is a clear distinction between the behaviors of the two hands in which the affected hand is viewed as "wayward" and sometimes "disobedient" and generally out of the realm of their own voluntary control, while the unaffected hand is under normal volitional control. At times, particularly in patients who have sustained damage to the corpus callosum that connects the two cerebral hemispheres (see also split-brain), the hands appear to be acting in opposition to each other. For example, one patient was observed putting a cigarette into her mouth with her intact, 'controlled' hand (her right, dominant hand), following which her alien, non-dominant, left hand came up to grasp the cigarette, pull the cigarette out of her mouth, and toss it away before it could be lit by the controlled, dominant, right hand. The patient then surmised that "I guess 'he' doesn't want me to smoke that cigarette". This type of problem has been termed "intermanual conflict" or "diagonistic apraxia".
This condition has been thought to provide a fascinating window into the nature of human consciousness as it relates to voluntary action, processes underlying decision making and conscious volition, as well as the general nature of human agency and intentionality. Besides its relevancy to the understanding of the neurobiologic basis of human action, these observations would appear to have significant relevance for the general philosophy of action. In that the recognition of this condition depends upon linking an observation of a particular behavior--the appearance of a purposeful limb behavior--to either a direct report or inference regarding the experience of the actor in the course of producing the movement, and then correlating this relation to brain pathophysiology, alien hand syndrome and its study may be viewed as within the purview of neurophenomenology.

[edit] Subtypes
There are several distinct subtypes of Alien Hand that appear to be associated with specific types of triggering brain injury. Damage to the corpus callosum can give rise to "purposeful" actions in the sufferer's non-dominant hand (a right-handed sufferer's left hand will turn alien, and the right hand will turn alien in the left-handed) as well as a problem termed "intermanual conflict" in which the two hands appear to be directed at opposing purposes, whereas unilateral injury to the brain's frontal lobe can trigger reaching, grasping and other purposeful movements in the contralateral hand. With frontal lobe injury, these movements are often exploratory reaching movements in which external objects are frequently grasped and utilized functionally, without the simultaneous perception on the part of the patient that they are "in control" of these movements. Once an object is maintained in the grasp of the "frontal" form of alien hand, the patient often has difficulty with voluntarily releasing the object from grasp and can sometimes be seen to be peeling the fingers of the hand back off the grasped object using the opposite controlled hand to enable the release of the grasped object.
A distinct "posterior" form of alien hand syndrome is associated with damage to the parietal lobe and/or occipital lobe of the brain. The movements in this situation tend to be more likely to withdraw the palmar surface of the hand away from environmental contact rather than reaching out to grasp onto objects to produce palmar tactile stimulation, as is most often seen in the frontal form of the condition. Alien movements in the posterior form of the syndrome also tend to be less coordinated and show a coarse ataxic motion that is generally not observed in the frontal form of the condition. The alien limb in the posterior form of the syndrome may be seen to 'levitate' upward and away from contact surfaces. Alien hand movement in the posterior form may show a typical posture, sometimes referred to as a 'parietal hand' or 'instinctive avoidance reaction' (a term introduced by neurologist Derek Denny-Brown), in which the digits move into a fully extended position and the palmar surface is pulled back away from approaching objects. The 'alien' movements, however, remain purposeful and goal-directed, a point which clearly differentiates these movements from other forms of involuntary limb movement (e.g., chorea, or myoclonus). In both the frontal and the posterior forms of the alien hand syndrome, the patient's reactions to the limb's apparent capability to perform goal-directed actions independent of conscious volition is similar.
Patients thus will often indicate that the apparently purposeful movements of the alien hand are "wayward" or "disobedient", in that they are not being generated through the exertion of their own voluntary will or directed toward goals that have been consciously produced, but, instead, the alien hand appears to behave independent of conscious will, effectively "on its own". The alien hand may even engage in socially inappropriate behavior in a public venue causing significant embarrassment and distress. Patients may react with dismay and concern at the ability of the hand to perform purposeful actions that are independent of their own sense of control over the movement, a phenomenon termed "auto-criticism".
Alternatively, they may attribute the forces initiating and controlling these purposeful movements to some external being that is somehow "alien" to their self-perceived being. For example, a particularly religious woman with alien hand syndrome, when asked who or what was actually controlling the alien movements of her hand, replied that "God must be doing all of that". Some patients choose to "personify" the hand and dissociate themselves from the behavior of the hand by giving it a proper name and attributing to it a separate and distinct personality and personhood. They may choose to "hold back" these unwanted "alien" movements and behaviors by grasping and constraining the "wayward" hand with the controlled contralateral hand, an action that has been termed "self-restriction" or "self-grasping". Injuries to the cerebral cortex can give rise to aimless movements of either hand, and more complex alien hand movements are usually associated with brain tumors, aneurysm or stroke. Such alien movements and behaviors can also be seen in progressive degenerative diseases that produce a process of steady disintegration within the central nervous system, such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease, and corticobasal degeneration.

[edit] Explanatory theories
Alien hand syndrome is due to damage in the medial motor frontal region of the brain.
It is theorized that Alien Hand Syndrome results when disconnection occurs between different parts of the brain that are engaged in different aspects of the control of bodily movement. As a result, different regions of the brain are able to command bodily movements, but cannot generate a conscious feeling of self-control over these movements. There is thus a dissociation between the process associated with the actual execution of the physical movements of the limb and the process that produces an internal sense of voluntary control over the movements, with this latter process thus creating the internal conscious sensation that the movements are being internally initiated, controlled and produced by an active self. This may involve an abnormality in the brain mechanism that differentiates between "re-afference" (i.e., the return of kinesthetic sensation from the self-generated 'active' limb movement) and "ex-afference" (i.e., kinesthetic sensation generated from an externally-produced 'passive' limb movement).
One theory posed to explain these phenomena proposes that the brain has separable neural "premotor" or "agency" systems for managing the process of transforming intent into overt action. A medial frontal system is engaged in the process of directing exploratory actions based on "internal" drive by releasing or reducing inhibitory control over such actions. Damage to this system produces disinhibition and release of such actions which then occur autonomously. A lateral parieto-occipital system has a similar inhibitory control over actions that withdraw from environmental stimuli as well as the ability to excite actions that are contingent upon and driven by external stimulation, as distinct from internal drive. These two hemispheric systems interact through mutual inhibition that maintains a balance between responding to and withdrawing from environmental stimuli in the behavior of the contralateral limbs. Together, these hemispheric agency systems form an integrated intrahemispheric agency system.
When the medial frontal component system is damaged, involuntary but purposive movements of an exploratory reach-and-grasp nature are released in the contralateral limb. When the posterior parieto-occipital system is damaged, involuntary purposive movements of a release-and-retract nature are released. Furthermore, each intrahemispheric agency system has the capability of acting autonomously in its control over the contralateral limb although unitary control is maintained through interhemispheric communication between these systems via the corpus callosum at the cortical level and other interhemispheric commissures linking the two hemispheres at the subcortical level. Thus, human agency can be thought of as emerging through the linked and coordinated action of at least four major agency systems, two in each hemisphere.
The critical difference between the two hemispheres, however, is the connection between the agency system in the dominant hemisphere and the encoding system based primarily in the dominant hemisphere that links action production and interpretation with language. Thus, the overarching unitary agent that emerges in the intact brain is based primarily in the dominant hemisphere and is closely connected to the organization of language capacity. It is proposed that while action precedes linguistic capacity during development, a process ensues through the course of development through which linguistic constructs are linked to action elements in order to produce a language-based encoding of action-oriented knowledge. Through this process of basically "telling oneself a story" about how an act occurs, a language-based "action-capable" self is constructed.
When there is a major disconnection between the two hemispheres resulting from callosal injury, the language-linked dominant hemisphere agent which maintains its primary control over the dominant limb effectively loses its direct and linked control over the separate "agent" based in the nondominant hemisphere (and, thus, the nondominant limb), which had been previously responsive and "obedient" to the dominant agent. The possibility of purposeful action occurring outside of the realm of influence of the dominant agent, thus can occur and the basic assumption that both hands are controlled through and subject to the dominant agent is proven incorrect. A new explanatory "story" is thus necessitated.
Under such circumstances, the two agents therefore can direct actions in the two limbs that are directed at opposing purposes although the dominant hand remains linked to the dominant agent and is thus viewed as continuing to be under "conscious control" and obedient to conscious will, while the nondominant hand is no longer "tied in" to the dominant agent and is thus identified by the conscious language-based dominant agent as having a separate and alien agency. This theory would explain the emergence of alien behavior in the nondominant limb and intermanual conflict between the two limbs in the presence of damage to the corpus callosum. The distinct frontal and posterior forms of the alien hand syndrome would be explained by selective injury to either the frontal or the posterior agency systems within a particular hemisphere, with the alien behavior developing in the limb contralateral to the damaged hemisphere.

[edit] Proposed strategies for treatment
Although there is no known formal (primary) treatment for Alien Hand Syndrome at this time, the symptoms can be reduced and managed to some degree by keeping the alien hand occupied and involved in a task, for example by giving it an object to hold in its grasp. Also, specific learned tasks can restore voluntary control of the hand to a significant degree. For example, one patient with the "frontal" form of alien hand who would reach out to grasp onto different objects (e.g., door handles) as he was walking, was given a cane to hold in the alien hand while walking, even though he really did not need a cane for its usual purpose of assisting with balance and facilitating ambulation. With the cane firmly in the grasp of the alien hand, it would generally not release the grasp and drop the cane in order to reach out to grasp onto a different object. Thus, different strategies can be employed to reduce the interference of the alien hand behavior on the ongoing coherent controlled actions of the patient.
Furthermore, in the presence of unilateral damage to a single cerebral hemisphere, there is generally a gradual reduction in the frequency of alien behaviors observed over time and a gradual restoration of voluntary control over the affected hand, suggesting that neuroplasticity in the bihemispheric and subcortical brain systems involved in voluntary movement production can serve to re-establish the connection between the executive production process and the internal self-generation and registration process. Exactly how this may occur is not well-understood but a process of gradual recovery from alien hand syndrome when the damage involves a single hemisphere has been reported.
In another approach, the patient is trained to perform a specific task, such as moving the alien hand to contact a specific object or a highly salient environmental target, which is a movement that the patient can learn to generate voluntarily through training in order to effectively override the alien behavior. Yet another approach involves simultaneously "muffling" the action of the alien hand and limiting the sensory feedback coming back to the hand from environmental contact by placing it in a restrictive "cloak" such as a specialized soft foam hand orthosis or, alternatively, an everyday oven mitt. Of course, this then limits the degree to which the hand can subserve functional goals for the patient. Theoretically, this approach could slow down the process through which voluntary control of the hand is restored if the neuroplasticity that underlies recovery involves the exercise of voluntary will to control the actions of the hand in a functional context.

[edit] Selected References from Medical Literature

Selected References from Medical Literature


Akelaitis, A. (1944–1945). Studies on the corpus callosum. IV. Diagonistic dyspraxia in epileptics following partial and complete section of the corpus callosum. American Journal of Psychiatry, 101, 594–599.
Archibald, S.J., Mateer, C.A., Kerns, K.A. (2001). Utilization behavior: clinical manifestations and neurological mechanisms. Neuropsychological Review, 11, 117-130.
Assal, F., Schwartz, S., Vuilleumier, P. (2007) Moving with or without will: Functional neural correlates of alien hand syndrome. Annals of Neurology, 62, 301-306.
Banks, G., Short, P., Martinez, J., Latchaw, R., Ratcliff, G., & Boller, F. (1989). The alien hand syndrome: Clinical and postmortem findings. Archives of Neurology, 46, 456–459.
Baynes, K., Tramo, M. J., Reeves, A. G., & Gazzaniga, M. S. (1997). Isolation of a right hemisphere cognitive system in a patient with anarchic (alien) hand sign. Neuropsychologia, 35, 1159–1173.
Biran, I., Giovanetti, T., Buxbaum, L., Chatterjee, A. (2006). The alien hand syndrome. What makes the alien hand alien? Cognitive Neuropsychology 23, 563-582.
Biran, I., & Chatterjee, A. (2004). Alien hand syndrome. Archives of Neurology, 61, 292–294.
Blakemore, S. J., Wolpert, D. M., & Frith, C. D. (2002). Abnormalities in the awareness of action. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 237–242.
Bogen, J. E. (1993). The Callosal syndrome. In K. M. Heilman & E. V. Valenstein (Eds.), Clinical neuropsychology (3rd ed., pp. 337–407). New York: Oxford University Press.
Brion, S., & Jedynak, C. P. (1972). Disorders of interhemispheric transfer (callosal disconnection). 3 cases of tumor of the corpus callosum. [The ‘strange hand sign’]. Revue Neurologique (Paris), 126, 257–266.
Bundick, T., & Spinella, M. (2000). Subjective experience, involuntary movement, and posterior alien hand syndrome. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 68, 83–85.
Buxbaum, L. J., Schwartz, M. F., Coslett, H. B., & Carew, T. G. (1995). Naturalistic action and praxis in callosal apraxia. Neurocase, 1(3–17).
Chan, J. L., & Liu, A. B. (1999). Anatomical correlates of alien hand syndromes. Neuropsychiatry, Neuropsychology, and Behavioral Neurology, 12, 149–155.
Chatterjee, A. (1998). Feeling frontal dysfunction: Facilitory paratonia and the regulation of motor behavior. Neurology, 51, 937–939.
Cooney, J. W., & Gazzaniga, M. S. (2003). Neurological disorders and the structure of human consciousness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 161–165.
David, N., Newen, A., Vogeley, K. (2008). The "sense of agency" and its underlying cognitive and neural mechanisms. Consciousness and Cognition, 17, 523-534.
Della Sala, S., Marchetti, C., & Spinnler, H. (1991). Right-sided anarchic (alien) hand: A longitudinal study. Neuropsychologia, 29, 1113–1127.
Denny-Brown, D. (1958). The nature of apraxia. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 126, 9–32.
Desmurget, M., & Grafton, S. (2000). Forward modeling allows feedback control for fast reaching movements. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 423–431.
Doody, R.S., Jankovic, J. (1992). The alien hand and related signs. Journal of Neurology Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 55, 806-810.
Eslinger, P. J. (2002). The anatomic basis of utilization behavior: A shift from frontal-parietal to intrafrontal mechanisms. Cortex, 38, 273–276.
Feinberg, T. E. (1997). Some interesting perturbations of the self in neurology. Seminars in Neurology, 17, 129–135.
Feinberg, T. E., Schindler, R. J., Flanagan, N. G., & Haber, L. D. (1992). Two alien hand syndromes. Neurology, 42, 19–24.
Fellows, L., & Farah, M. J. (2005). Is the anterior cingulate necessary for cognitive control? Brain, 128, 788–796.
Fisher, C. M. (2000). Alien hand phenomena: A review with the addition of six personal cases. The Canadian Journal of Neurological Sciences, 27, 192–203.
Frith C. D., Blakemore, S. J., & Wolpert, D. M. (2000). Abnormalities in the awareness and control of action. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B. Biological Sciences, 355(1404), 1771–1788.
Gasquoine, P. G. (1993). Alien hand sign. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 15, 653–667.
Gehring, W. J., & Knight, R. T. (2000). Prefrontal-cingulate interactions in action monitoring. Nature Neuroscience, 3, 516–520.
Gerloff, C., Corwell, B., Chen, R., Hallet, M., & Cohen, L. G. (1997). Stimulation over the human supplementary motor area interferes with the organization of future elements in complex motor sequences. Brain, 120, 1587–1602.
Ghahramani, Z. (2000). Computational neuroscience: Building blocks of movement. Nature, 407(6805), 682–683.
Giovannetti, T., Buxbaum, L. J., Biran, I., & Chatterjee, A. (2005). Reduced endogenous control in alien hand syndrome: Evidence from naturalistic action. Neuropsychologia, 43, 75–88.
Giovannetti, T., Libon, D. J., & Hart, T. (2002). Awareness of naturalistic action errors in dementia. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 8, 633–644.
Goldberg, G. (1985). Supplementary motor area structure and function: Review and hypothesis. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 8, 567–616.
Goldberg, G. (2000) Invited Editorial: When aliens invade: multiple mechanisms for dissociation between will and action. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 68, 7.
Goldberg, G. (1987) From intent to action: Evolution and function of the premotor systems of the frontal lobe. In: The Frontal Lobes Re-visited. Ed. E. Perecman. IRBN Press.
Goldberg, G. (1992) Premotor systems, attention to action and behavioural choice. In: Neurobiology of motor programme selection. New approaches to mechanisms of behavioural choice. Eds. J. Kien, C. McCrohan, & W. Winlow. Oxford, Pergamon Press, pp. 225-249.
Goldberg, G., & Bloom, K. K. (1990). The alien hand sign: Localization, lateralization and recovery. American Journal of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 69, 228–238.
Goldberg, G., Mayer, N. H., & Toglia, J. U. (1981). Medial frontal cortex infarction and the alien hand sign. Archives of Neurology, 38, 683–686.
Hart, T., Giovannetti, T., Montgomery, M. W., & Schwartz, M. F. (1998). Awareness of errors in naturalistic action after traumatic brain injury. The Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 13, 16–28.
Jackson, J. H. (1958). On some implications of dissolution of the nervous system. In J. Taylor (Ed.), Selected writings of John Hughlings Jackson (vol 2, 1st ed., pp. 29–44). London: Staples Press.
Kertesz, A. (2000). Alien hand, free will and Arnold Pick. The Canadian Journal of Neurological Sciences, 27, 183.
Kikkert, M.A., Ribbers, G.M., Koudstaal, P.J. (2006) Alien hand syndrome in stroke: a report of two cases and review of the literature. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 87, 728-732.
Kischka, U., Ettlin, T. M., Lichtenstern, L., & Riedo, C. (1996). Alien hand syndrome of the dominant hand and ideomotor apraxia of the nondominant hand. European Neurology, 36, 39–42.
Kumral, E. (2001). Compulsive grasping hand syndrome: A variant of anarchic hand. Neurology, 57, 2143–2144.
Levine, D. N., & Rinn, W. E. (1986). Opticosensory ataxia and alien hand syndrome after posterior cerebral artery territory infarction. Neurology, 36, 1094–1097.
Lhermitte, F. (1983). “Utilization behaviour” and its relation to lesions of the frontal lobes. Brain, 106 (Pt 2), 237-255.
Lhermitte, F., Pillon, B., Serdaru, M. (1986) Human autonomy and the frontal lobes. Part I: Imitation and utilization behavior. A neuropsychological study of 75 patients. Annals of Neurology, 19, 326-334.
Lhermitte, F. (1986) Human autonomy and the frontal lobes. Part II: Patient behavior in complex and social situations: The "Environmental Dependency" syndrome. Annals of Neurology, 19, 335-343.
Luria, A. R. (1966). Higher cortical functioning in man. New York: Oxford University Press.
MacDonald, A. W., III, Cohen, J. D., Stenger, V. A., & Carter, C. S. (2000). Dissociating the role of the dorsolateral prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex in cognitive control. Science, 288(5472), 1835–1838.
Marchetti, C., & Della Sala, S. (1998). Disentangling the alien and anarchic hand. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 3, 191–208.
Marey-Lopez, J.,Rubio-Nazabal,E., Alonso-Magdalena, L., & Lopez-Facal,S. (2002).Posterior alien hand syndrome after a right thalamic infarct. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 73, 447–449.
McNabb, A. W., Carroll, W. M., & Mastaglia, F. L. (1988). “Alien hand” and loss of bimanual coordination after dominant anterior cerebral artery territory infarction. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 51, 218–222.
Milner, A., & Goodale, M. (1995). The visual brain in action. New York: Oxford University Press.
Nicholas, J.J., Wichner, M.H., Gorelick, P.B., Ramsey, M.M. (1998) "Naturalization" of the alien hand. A case report. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 79, 113-114.
Nishikawa, T., Okuda, J., Mizuta, I., Ohno, K., Jamshidi, J., Tokunaga, H., et al. (2001). Conflict of intentions due to callosal disconnection. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 71, 462–471.
Norman, D. A., & Shallice, T. (1986). Attention to action; willed and automatic control of behavior. Consciousness and Self-Regulation, 4, 1–18.
Ong Hai, B. G., & Odderson, I. R. (2000). Involuntary masturbation as a manifestation of stroke-related alien hand syndrome. American Journal of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 79, 395–398.
Pack, B.C., Stewart, K.J., Diamond, P.T., Gale, S.D. (2002). Posterior-variant alien hand syndrome: clinical features and response to rehabilitation. Disability and Rehabilitation, 24, 817-818.
Parkin, A.J., & Barry, C. (1991). Alien hand sign and other cognitive deficits following ruptured aneurysm of the anterior communicating artery. Behavioral Neurology, 4, 167-179.
Passingham, R. E., Ramnani, N., & Rowe, J. B. (2004). The motor system. In R. S. J. Frackowiak, K. J., Friston, C. D. Frith, R. J. Dolan, C. J. Price, S. Zeki, et al. (Eds.), Human brain function (pp. 5–32). New York: Elsevier Academic Press.
Riddoch, M. J., Edwards, M. G., Humphreys, G. W., West, R., & Heafield, T. (1998). An experimental study of anarchic hand syndrome: Evidence that visual affordances direct action. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 15, 645–683.
Rohde, S., Weidauer, S., Lanfermann, H., Zanelia, F. (2002). Posterior alien hand syndrome: case report. Neuroradiology, 44, 921-923.
Scepkowski, L., & Cronin-Golomb, A. (2003). The alien hand: Cases, categorizations, and anatomic correlates. Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience Reviews, 2, 261–277.
Synofzik, M., Vosgerau, G., Newen, A. (2008). I move, therefore I am: a new theoretical framework to investigate agency and ownership. Consciousness and Cognition, 17, 411-424.
Suwanwela, N. C., & Leelacheavasit, N. (2002). Isolated corpus callosal infarction secondary to pericallosal artery disease presenting as alien hand syndrome. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 72, 533–536.
Tanaka, Y., Iwasa, H., & Yoshida, M. (1990). Diagonistic dyspraxia: Case report and movement-related potentials. Neurology, 40, 657–661.
Tanaka, Y., Yoshida, A., Kawahata, N., Hashimoto, R., & Obayashi, T. (1996). Diagonistic dyspraxia. Clinical characteristics, responsible lesion and possible underlying mechanism. Brain, 119 (Pt 3), 859–873.
Trojano, L., Crisci, C., Lanzillo, B., Elefante, R., & Caruso, G. (1993). How many alien hand syndromes? Follow-up of a case. Neurology, 43, 2710–2712.
Tsakiris, M., Schutz-Bosbach, S., Gallagher, S. (2007). On agency and body-ownership: phenomenological and neurocognitive reflections. Consciousness and Cognition, 16, 645-660.
Turken, A. U., & Swick, D. (1999). Response selection in the human anterior cingulate cortex. Nature neuroscience, 2, 920–924.
Ventura, M. G., Goldman, S., & Hildebrand, J. (1995). Alien hand syndrome without a corpus callosum lesion. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 58, 735–737.
Wolpert, D. M., Ghahramani, Z., & Flanagan, J. R. (2001). Perspectives and problems in motor learning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 487–494.




[edit] Pop cultural references
The theme of hands and other limbs outside the owner's control is a common one in pop culture, especially comedy, although not every example of such can be considered as Alien hand syndrome per se. Some examples which are relevant include:

The character Dr. Strangelove in the movie Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb suffers from the syndrome. His hand seems to act in a more complex manner, so that it acts in accordance with his subconscious urges (e.g. punching himself in the face, giving a Hitler salute when he speaks about eugenics).
Mentioned in the Elliott Smith documentary film Strange Parallel as it relates to Elliott's paranoia of futuristic "robot hands" that control themselves.
In the 1987 novel Peace on Earth by Stanisław Lem, the main character Ijon Tichy's left hand appears to be connected to an alternative personality inside Ijon's brain and is even able to communicate that personality's thoughts through Morse Code tapping.


[edit] External links

Recent review article on Alien Hand Syndrome by LA Scepkowski & A Cronin-Golomb
Editorial paper regarding the different forms of Alien Hand Syndrome by G Goldberg
Recent review article from the Archives of Neurology by I. Biran and A. Chatterjee
Videos inspired by the syndrome?
Information about the rare disorder, as well as how many times it has influenced the media.




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alien_hand_syndrome"
Categories: Neurological disordersHidden categories: Articles lacking sources from April 2008 | All articles lacking sources | Articles that may contain original research since April 2008 | All pages needing to be wikified | Wikify from May 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Dansk
Deutsch
Español
עברית
Magyar
Polski
Português
Русский
中文









 This page was last modified on 21 March 2009, at 00:50 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
