













Hanseatic League - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Hanseatic_League";
		var wgTitle = "Hanseatic League";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "14105";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280542013;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Hanseatic League

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the 13th to 17th-century trading monopoly.  For the modern business association, see Hanseatic Parliament.




Northern Europe in 1400, showing the extent of the Hansa.






Lübeck - The "Queen of the Hanse"


The Hanseatic League (also known as the Hansa) was an alliance of trading cities and their guilds that established and maintained trade monopoly along the coast of Northern Europe, from the Baltic to the North Sea and inland, during the Late Middle Ages and Early modern period (c.13th–17th centuries). The Hanseatic cities had their own law system and furnished their own protection and mutual aid.





Contents


1 History

1.1 Foundation
1.2 Expansion
1.3 Zenith
1.4 Rise of rival powers
1.5 End of the Hansa
1.6 Historical maps


2 Lists of former Hansa cities

2.1 Members of the Hanseatic League

2.1.1 Wendish Circle
2.1.2 Saxony, Thuringia, Brandenburg Circle
2.1.3 Poland, Prussia, Livonia, Sweden Circle
2.1.4 Rhine, Westphalia, the Netherlands Circle


2.2 Counting houses

2.2.1 Principal Kontore
2.2.2 Subsidiary Kontore


2.3 Other cities with a Hansa community


3 Fictional references
4 See also
5 References

5.1 Notes
5.2 Bibliography


6 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Historians generally trace the origins of the League to the rebuilding of the North German town of Lübeck in 1159 by Duke Henry the Lion of Saxony, after Henry had captured the area from Count Adolf II of Holstein.
Exploratory trading adventures, raids and piracy had happened earlier throughout the Baltic (see Vikings) — the sailors of Gotland sailed up rivers as far away as Novgorod, for example — but the scale of international trade economy in the Baltic area remained insignificant before the growth of the Hanseatic League.
German cities achieved domination of trade in the Baltic with striking speed over the next century, and Lübeck became a central node in all the seaborne trade that linked the areas around the North Sea and the Baltic Sea. The 15th century saw the climax of Lübeck's hegemony. Visby, one of the midwives of the Hanseatic League in 1358, declined to become a member. Visby dominated trade in the Baltic before the Hanseatic League, and with its monopolistic ideology, suppressed the Gotlandic free-trade competition.

[edit] Foundation




Hanseatic League's formation in Hamburg, Germany (circa 1241)


Lübeck became a base for merchants from Saxony and Westphalia to spread east and north. Well before the term Hanse appeared in a document (1267), merchants in a given city began to form guilds or Hansa with the intention of trading with towns overseas, especially in the less-developed eastern Baltic area, a source of timber, wax, amber, resins, furs, even rye and wheat brought down on barges from the hinterland to port markets. The towns furnished their own protection armies and each guild had to furnish a number of member into service, when needed. The trade ships often had to be used to carry soldiers and their arms. The Hanseatic cities came to each other's aid.
Visby functioned as the leading centre in the Baltic before the Hansa. For 100 years the Germans sailed under the Gotlandic flag to Novgorod. Sailing east, Visby merchants established a branch at Novgorod. To begin with the Germans used the Gotlandic Gutagard. With the influx of too many merchants the Gotlanders arranged their own trading stations for the German Petershof further up from the river — see a translation of the grant[1] of privileges to merchants in 1229. Before the foundation of the Hanseatic league in 1358 the word Hanse did not occur in the Baltic. The Gotlanders used the word varjag.
Hansa societies worked to remove restrictions to trade for their members. For example, the merchants of the Cologne Hansa convinced Henry II of England to free them (1157) from all tolls at London and allowed them to trade at fairs throughout England. The "Queen of the Hansa", Lübeck, where traders trans-shipped goods between the North Sea and the Baltic, gained the Imperial privilege of becoming an Imperial city in 1227, the only such city east of the River Elbe.
Lübeck, which had access to the Baltic and North Sea fishing grounds, formed an alliance in 1241 with Hamburg, another trading city, which controlled access to salt-trade routes from Lüneburg. The allied cities gained control over most of the salt-fish trade, especially the Scania Market; and Cologne joined them in the Diet of 1260. In 1266 Henry III of England granted the Lübeck and Hamburg Hansa a charter for operations in England, and the Cologne Hansa joined them in 1282 to form the most powerful Hanseatic colony in London. Much of the drive for this co-operation came from the fragmented nature of existing territorial government, which failed to provide security for trade. Over the next 50 years the Hansa itself emerged with formal agreements for confederation and co-operation covering the west and east trade routes. The chief city and linchpin remained Lübeck; with the first general Diet of the Hansa held there in 1356, the Hanseatic League acquired an official structure and could date its official founding.

[edit] Expansion




Main trading routes of the Hanseatic League.


Lübeck's location on the Baltic provided access for trade with Scandinavia and Kiev Rus, putting it in direct competition with the Scandinavians who had previously controlled most of the Baltic trade routes. A treaty with the Visby Hansa put an end to competition: through this treaty the Lübeck merchants also gained access to the inland Russian port of Novgorod, where they built a trading post or Kontor. Other such alliances formed throughout the Holy Roman Empire. The League never became a closely-managed formal organisation. Assemblies of the Hanseatic towns met irregularly in Lübeck for a Hansetag (‘Hanseatic Diet’), from 1356 onwards, but many towns chose not to send representatives and decisions were not binding on individual cities.[citation needed] Over time, the network of alliances grew to include a flexible roster of 70 to 170 cities.[2]
The league succeeded in establishing additional Kontors in Bruges (Flanders), Bergen (Norway), and London (England). These trading posts became significant enclaves. The London Kontor, established in 1320, stood west of London Bridge near Upper Thames Street. (Cannon Street station occupies the site now[update].) It grew significantly over time into a walled community with its own warehouses, weighhouse, church, offices and houses, reflecting the importance and scale of the activity carried on. The first reference to it as the Steelyard (der Stahlhof) occurs in 1422.
In addition to the major Kontors, individual Hanseatic ports had a representative merchant and warehouse. In England this happened in Boston, Bristol, Bishop's Lynn (now King's Lynn), which features the sole remaining Hanseatic warehouse in England, Hull, Ipswich, Norwich, Yarmouth (now Great Yarmouth), and York.




Town Hall of Reval (now Tallinn, Estonia).


The League primarily traded timber, furs, resin (or tar), flax, honey, wheat, and rye from the east to Flanders and England with cloth (and, increasingly, manufactured goods) going in the other direction. Metal ore (principally copper and iron) and herring came southwards from Sweden.
German colonists under strict Hansa supervision built numerous Hansa cities on and near the east Baltic coast, such as Danzig (Gdańsk), Elbing (Elblag), Thorn (Toruń), Reval (Tallinn), Riga, and Dorpat (Tartu), some of which still retain many Hansa buildings and bear the style of their Hanseatic days. Most were founded under Lübeck law (Lübisches Recht), which provided that they had to appeal in all legal matters to Lübeck's city council. The Livonian Confederation incorporated parts of modern-day Estonia and Latvia and had its own Hanseatic parliament (diet); all of its major towns became members of the Hanseatic League. The dominant language of trade was Middle Low German, a dialect with significant impact for countries involved in the trade, particularly the larger Scandinavian languages.

[edit] Zenith




Georg Giese from Danzig, 34 year old German Hanseatic merchant at the Steelyard, painted in London by Hans Holbein






The old and rich port city of Danzig (Gdańsk). View of the Krantor (crane gate)






Hanseatic museum in Bergen (Norway)


The League had a fluid structure, but its members shared some characteristics. First, most of the Hansa cities either started as independent cities or gained independence through the collective bargaining power of the League, such independence remained limited, however. The Hanseatic free imperial cities owed allegiance directly to the Holy Roman Emperor, without any intermediate tie to the local nobility.
Another similarity involved the cities strategic locations along trade routes. In fact, at the height of its power in the late 1300s, the merchants of the Hanseatic League succeeded in using their economic clout and sometimes their military might - trade routes needed protecting and the League's ships sailed well-armed - to influence imperial policy.
The League also wielded power abroad. Between 1361 and 1370, the League waged war against Denmark. Initially unsuccessful, Hanseatic towns in 1368 allied in the Confederation of Cologne, sacked Copenhagen and Helsingborg, and forced King Valdemar IV of Denmark and his son-in-law Hakon VI of Norway to grant the League 15 percent of the profits from Danish trade in the subsequent peace-treaty of Stralsund in 1370, thus gaining an effective trade and political monopoly in Scandinavia. This favourable treaty marked the high-water mark of Hanseatic power. The commercial privileges were renewed in the Treaty of Vordingborg, 1435.[3][4][5]
The Hansa also waged a vigorous campaign against pirates. Between 1392 and 1440, maritime trade of the League faced danger from raids of the Victual Brothers and their descendants, privateers hired in 1392 by Albert of Mecklenburg against the Queen Margaret I of Denmark. In the Dutch-Hanseatic War (1438—41), the merchants of Amsterdam sought and eventually won free access to the Baltic and broke the Hansa monopoly. As an essential part of protecting their investment in trade and ships, the League trained pilots and erected lighthouses.
Exclusive trade routes often came at a high price. Most foreign cities confined the Hansa traders to certain trading areas and to their own trading posts. They could seldom, if ever, interact with the local inhabitants, except in the matter of actual negotiation. Moreover, many people, merchant and noble alike, envied the power of the League. For example, in London the local merchants exerted continuing pressure for the revocation of the privileges of the League. The refusal of the Hansa to offer reciprocal arrangements to their English counterparts exacerbated the tension. King Edward IV of England reconfirmed the league's privileges in the Treaty of Utrecht (1474) despite this hostility, in part thanks to the significant financial contribution the League made to the Yorkist side during The Wars of the Roses. A century later, in 1597, Queen Elizabeth I of England expelled the League from London and the Steelyard closed the following year. The very existence of the League and its privileges and monopolies created economic and social tensions that often crept over into rivalry between League members.

[edit] Rise of rival powers
The economic crises of the late 14th century did not spare the Hansa. Nevertheless, its eventual rivals emerged in the form of the territorial states, whether new or revived, and not just in the west: Poland triumphed over the Teutonic Knights in 1466; Ivan III of Russia ended the entrepreneurial independence of Novgorod in 1478. New vehicles of credit imported from Italy outpaced the Hansa economy, in which silver coin changed hands rather than bills of exchange.
In the 14th century, tensions between Prussian region and the "Wendish" cities (Lübeck and eastern neighbours) rose. Lübeck was dependent on its role as centre of the Hansa, being on the shore of the sea without a major river. Lübeck was on the entrance of the land route to Hamburg, but this land route could be circumvented by the sea travel around Denmark and through the Sound. Prussia's main interest, on the other hand, was primarily the export of bulk products like grain and timber, which were very important for England, the Low Countries, and later on also for Spain and Italy.
In 1454, year of Elisabeth Habsburg's marriage to the Jagiellonian king the towns of the Prussian Confederation rose against the dominance of the Teutonic Order and asked for help from King Casimir IV of Poland. Danzig, Thorn, and Elbing came under the protection of the Kingdom of Poland, (1466 - 1569 referred to as Royal Prussia) by the Second Peace of Thorn (1466). Polish-Lithuania in turn was heavily supported by the Holy Roman Empire through family connections and by military assistance under the Habsburgs. Kraków, then the capital of Poland, was also a Hansa city with German burghers around 1500. The lack of customs borders on the River Vistula after 1466 helped to gradually increase Polish grain export, transported to the sea down the Vistula, from 10,000 t per year in the late 15th century to over 200,000 t in the 17th century.[6] The Hansa-dominated maritime grain trade made Poland one of the main areas of its activity, helping Danzig to become the Hansa's largest city due to its control of Polish grain exports.
The member cities took responsibility for their own protecting. Polish attempts at subjugating Danzig had to be fought off repeatedly. In 1567 a Hanseatic League Agreement reconfirms previous obligations and rights of League members, such as common protection and defense against enemies. It begins Wir Burgermeister und Rethe der Teutschenn Hanse Stett Lubegk, Collen, Braunschweig und Dantzigk als Haupt und Quartier Stett tun kund [1]. The Prussian Quartier cities of Thorn, Elbing, Koenigsberg and Riga and Dorpat also signed. When pressed by the king of Poland-Lithuania, Danzig remained neutral and would not allow ships running for Poland into its territory. They had to anchor somewhere else, such as at Putzig or Pautzke as it was named then.
A major benefit for the Hansa was its domination of the shipbuilding market, mainly in Lübeck and in Danzig. The Hansa sold ships everywhere in Europe, including Italy. The Hansa had excluded the Hollanders, because it wanted to favour Bruges as a huge staple market at the end of a trade route. When the Hollanders started to become competitors of the Hansa in shipbuilding, the Hansa tried to stop the flow of shipbuilding technology from Hansa towns to Holland. Danzig, a trading partner of Amsterdam, tried to stall the decision. Dutch ships sailed to Danzig to take grain from the Prussians directly, to the dismay of Lübeck. Hollanders also circumvented the Hansa towns by trading directly with North German princes in non-Hansa towns. Dutch freight costs were much lower than those of the Hansa, and the Hansa were excluded as middlemen.
Bruges, Antwerp and Holland all became part of the same country, the Duchy of Burgundy, which actively tried to take over the monopoly of trade from the Hansa, and the staple market from Bruges was moved to Amsterdam. The Dutch merchants aggressively challenged the Hansa and met with much success. Hanseatic cities in Prussia, Livonia supported the Dutch against the core cities of the Hansa in northern Germany. After several naval wars between Burgundy and the Hanseatic fleets, Amsterdam gained the position of leading port for Polish and Baltic grain from the late 15th century onwards. The Dutch regarded Amsterdam's grain trade as the mother of all trades (Moedernegotie). Denmark and England tried to destroy the Netherlands in the early 16th century, but failed.[citation needed]
Nuremberg in Franconia developed an overland route to sell formerly Hansa monopolized products from Frankfurt via Nuremberg and Leipzig to Poland and Russia, trading Flemish cloth and French wine in exchange for grain and furs from the east. The Hansa profited from the Nuremberg trade by allowing Nurembergers to settle in Hansa towns, which the Franconians exploited by taking over trade with Sweden as well. The Nuremberger merchant Albrecht Moldenhauer was influential in developing the trade with Sweden and Norway, and his sons Wolf and Burghard established themselves in Bergen and Stockholm, becoming leaders of the Hanseatic activities locally.

[edit] End of the Hansa




Heinrich Sudermann






Modern, faithful painting of the Adler von Lübeck, the world's largest ship at its time.


At the start of the 16th century the League found itself in a weaker position than it had known for many years. The rising Swedish Empire had taken control of much of the Baltic. Denmark had regained control over its own trade, the Kontor in Novgorod had closed, and the Kontor in Bruges had become effectively defunct. The individual cities which made up the League had also started to put self-interest before their common Hansa interests. Finally the political authority of the German princes had started to grow — and so to constrain the independence of action which the merchants and Hanseatic towns had enjoyed.
The League attempted to deal with some of these issues. It created the post of Syndic in 1556 and elected Heinrich Sudermann[7] as permanent official with legal training who worked to protect and extend the diplomatic agreements of the member towns. In 1557 and 1579 revised agreements spelled out the duties of towns and some progress was made. The Bruges Kontor moved to Antwerp and the Hansa attempted to pioneer new routes. However, the League proved unable to halt the progress around it and so a long decline commenced. The Antwerp Kontor closed in 1593, followed by the London Kontor in 1598. The Bergen Kontor continued until 1754; its buildings alone of all the Kontoren survive (see Bryggen).
The gigantic Adler von Lübeck, which was constructed for military use against Sweden during the Northern Seven Years' War (1567-70), but never put to action, epitomizes the vain attempts of the League's leading city Lübeck to uphold its long privileged commercial position in a changed economic and political climate.
By the late 16th century, the League imploded and could no longer deal with its own internal struggles, the social and political changes that accompanied the Protestant Reformation, the rise of Dutch and English merchants, and the incursion of the Ottoman Empire upon its trade routes and upon the Holy Roman Empire itself. Only nine members attended the last formal meeting in 1669 and only three (Lübeck, Hamburg and Bremen) remained as members until its final demise in 1862.[citation needed]
Despite its collapse, several cities still maintain the link to the Hanseatic League today[update]. The Dutch cities of Deventer, Kampen, Zutphen, and the nine German cities Bremen, Demmin, Greifswald, Hamburg, Lübeck, Lüneburg, Rostock, Stralsund and Wismar still call themselves Hanse cities. Lübeck, Hamburg, and Bremen continue to style themselves officially as "Free and Hanseatic Cities." (Rostock's football team is named F.C. Hansa Rostock in memory of the city's trading past.) For Lübeck in particular, this anachronistic tie to a glorious past remained especially important in the 20th century. In 1937 the Nazis removed this privilege through the Greater Hamburg Act after the Senat of Lübeck did not permit Adolf Hitler to speak in Lübeck during his election campaign.[8] He held the speech in Bad Schwartau, a small village on the outskirts of Lübeck. Subsequently, he referred to Lübeck as "the small city close to Bad Schwartau." Three years ago King's Lynn became the only English member of the newly formed modern Hanseatic League, whose members include Hamburg and Lubeck. The "new" HANSE hopes to foster and develop business links and tourism within towns and cities as well as promote cultural exchange .

[edit] Historical maps








Europe in 1097









The Baltic region in 1219 (German coast occupied by Denmark, before the Battle of Bornhöved (1227)









Europe in 1328









Europe in 1430









Europe in 1470











Carta marina of the Baltic Sea region (1539)









The Baltic region in 1646 (Treaty of Brömsebro)









The Baltic region in 1658 (Treaty of Roskilde)









The Baltic region in 1814 (Congress of Vienna)






[edit] Lists of former Hansa cities

[edit] Members of the Hanseatic League




Cities of the Wendish and Pommeranian Circle.



[edit] Wendish Circle

Lübeck (chief city)
Greifswald
Hamburg
Kiel
Lüneburg
Rostock
Stade
Stettin (Szczecin)
Stralsund
Wismar


[edit] Saxony, Thuringia, Brandenburg Circle




Alfeld
Aschersleben
Berlin
Bockenem
Brandenburg
Braunschweig (chief city)
Bremen
Einbeck
Erfurt
Frankfurt (Oder)
Gardelegen
Goslar
Gronau
Halberstadt
Halle (Saale)
Hameln
Hanover (Hannover)
Havelberg
Helmstedt
Hildesheim




Kyritz
Lüneburg
Magdeburg (chief city)
Merseburg
Mühlhausen
Naumburg
Nordhausen
Northeim
Osterburg
Osterode am Harz
Perleberg
Pritzwalk
Quedlinburg
Salzwedel
Seehausen
Stendal
Tangermünde
Uelzen
Uslar
Werben





[edit] Poland, Prussia, Livonia, Sweden Circle

Breslau (Wrocław)
Chełmno
Danzig (Gdańsk, chief city)
Dorpat (Tartu)
Elbing (Elbląg)
Fellin (Viljandi)
Kraków
Goldingen (Kuldīga)
Kokenhusen (Koknese)
Königsberg (now Kaliningrad)
Lemsal (Limbaži)
Pernau (Pärnu)
Reval (Tallinn)
Riga (Rīga, chief city)
Roop (Straupe)
Thorn (Toruń)
Visby
Wenden (Cēsis)
Windau (Ventspils)
Wolmar (Valmiera)


[edit] Rhine, Westphalia, the Netherlands Circle

Duisburg
Zwolle
Haltern am See
Hattem
Hasselt
Hattingen
Cologne
Dortmund (chief city)
Soest
Geseke
Osnabrück
Münster
Coesfeld
Roermond
Nijmegen
Tiel
Deventer, with subsidiary cities:

Ommen
Enschede
Oldenzaal
Hasselt
Gramsbergen


Groningen
Kampen
Bochum
Recklinghausen
Hamm
Unna
Werl
Zutphen
Breckerfeld
Minden


[edit] Counting houses

[edit] Principal Kontore




Bryggen in Bergen, Norway



Bergen - Bryggen
Brugge (Bruges)
Steelyard - district of London
Novgorod - Velikiy Novgorod, Russia


[edit] Subsidiary Kontore




The Hanseatic Warehouse in King's Lynn is the only surviving Hanseatic League building in England






Kontor in Antwerp



Antwerp
Berwick upon Tweed
Boston
Damme
Edinburgh
Hull
Ipswich
King's Lynn
Kaunas
Newcastle
Polotsk
Pskov
Great Yarmouth
York


[edit] Other cities with a Hansa community




Aberdeen
Anklam
Arnhem
Bolsward
Cesis (Wenden)
Chełmno (Kulm)
Doesburg
Göttingen
Goldingen (Kuldiga)
Hafnarfjord (Hafnarfjörður)
Harlingen
Herford
Hindeloopen
Kalmar




Kokenhusen (Koknese)
Lemgo
Narwa (Narva)
Oldenzaal
Paderborn
Scalloway
Słupsk (Stolp)
Smolensk
Stargard Szczeciński (Stargard)
Turku (Åbo)
Tver
Wolmar (Valmiera)
Wesel
Wiburg (Vyborg)
Windau (Ventspils)





[edit] Fictional references

A Terran Hanseatic League exists in Kevin J. Anderson's science fiction series, Saga of Seven Suns. The political structure of this fictional interstellar version closely resembles that of the historical Hanseatic League.
In the computer game series Patrician players begin as a trader and work their way to the head of the Hanseatic League.
In the computer game Darklands players can accept smaller missions from Hanseatic traders.
In the Perry Rhodan SF series, the trade organisation the Cosmic Hansa (Kosmische Hanse) covers the Galaxy. The English translation for this organisation is Cosmic House (see American issues 1800-1803) as it was felt that no one would understand the Hanseatic League reference.
Midgard open source content management system has often been referred to as the Hanseatic League of Open Source.
In the Battletech tabletop and roleplaying universe, there is a state in the Deep Periphery (towards the center of the Galaxy, measured from Earth) called the Hanseatic League, which is structured as a plutocratic trade empire, but which has considerably more primitive social and technological structures when compared to human societies closer to Earth.
The PC game Patrician III: Rise of the Hanse is a simulation of trade amongst member cities of the Hanseatic League beginning in the 14th century.
Hanseatic League merchant caravans are used as the backdrop for "living history" groups in Florida and North Carolina. Hanseatic League Historical Re-enactors has two chapters, Bergens Kontor in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and Voss Kontor in Fayetteville, North Carolina. Both groups portray merchants from a Hanseatic League merchant caravan originating from kontors and towns in Norway. They offer "in character" lectures, skits and "theatre in the round", based on the history of the Hanseatic League, for the education and entertainment of Renaissance Festival patrons and local schools.


Robert Heinlein's novel, Citizen of the Galaxy, revolves around a loose league of trading spaceships of varying old Earth nationalities like the Finns aboard the "Sisu." Another ship is called "Hansea."


Arthur Rimbaud mentions the Hansa merchant ships in his poem, Le Bateau ivre:




...moi, bateau perdu sous les cheveux des anses,
Jeté par l'ouragan dans l'éther sans oiseau,
Moi dont les Monitors et les voiliers des Hanses
N'auraient pas repêché la carcasse ivre d'eau ;




[edit] See also

List of ships of the Hanseatic League
Thalassocracy
Hanseatic Parliament
Naval history
Hanseatic Cross
Dutch-Hanseatic War
Company of Merchant Adventurers of London
Hanseatic flags
Lufthansa


[edit] References

Find more about Hanseatic League on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

[edit] Notes


^ Medieval Sourcebook: Privileges Granted to German Merchants at Novgorod, 1229
^ Fernand Braudel: The Perspective of the World. Vol III of Civilisation and Capitalism 1984
^ Phillip Pulsiano, Kirsten Wolf, Medieval Scandinavia: An Encyclopedia, Taylor & Francis, 1993, p.265, ISBN 0824047877
^ Peter N. Stearns, William Leonard Langer, The Encyclopedia of World History: Ancient, Medieval, and Modern, Chronologically Arranged, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2001, p.265, ISBN 0395652375
^ Angus MacKay, David Ditchburn, Atlas of Medieval Europe, Routledge, 1997, p.171, ISBN 0415019230
^ Norman Davies God's playground. A history of Poland, Columbia University Press, 1982
^ de:Heinrich Sudermann
^ Guide to Lubeck



[edit] Bibliography

P. Dollinger The German Hansa (1970; repr.1999).
E. Gee Nash. The Hansa. 1929 (Reprint. 1995 Edition, Barnes and Noble)


[edit] External links

Chronology
Hanseatic Cities in The Netherlands / Holland
Hanseatic League Historical Re-enactors
Hanseatic Towns Network
Hanseatic League related sources in the German Wikisource
Colchester a Hanseatic port - Gresham









v • d • e

Members of the Hanseatic League by circle





Chief cities shown in bold · Free Imperial Cities of the Holy Roman Empire shown in italics





Wendish and
Pomeranian

Greifswald · Hamburg · Kiel · Lübeck · Lüneburg · Rostock · Stade · Stargard · Stettin · Stralsund · Wismar









Saxony, Thuringia,
Brandenburg

Berlin · Brandenburg · Bremen · Brunswick · Erfurt · Frankfurt · Goslar · Halle · Magdeburg






Poland, Prussia,
Livonia, Sweden

Breslau (Wrocław) · Danzig (Gdańsk) · Dorpat (Tartu) · Fellin (Viljandi) · Elbing (Elbląg) · Königsberg (Kaliningrad) · Krakow · Pernau (Pärnu) · Reval (Tallinn) · Riga · Stockholm · Thorn (Toruń) · Visby






Rhine, Westphalia,
Netherlands

Bochum · Breckerfeld · Cologne · Deventer · Dortmund · Duisburg · Groningen · Haltern · Hamm · Harderwijk · Hattem · Hasselt · Kampen · Münster · Nijmegen · Oldenzaal · Osnabrück · Recklinghausen · Roermond · Soest · Tiel · Unna · Werl · Zutphen · Zwolle






Principal Kontore

Bryggen (Bergen) · Hanzekantoor (Brugg (Bruges)) · Steelyard (London) · Peterhof (Novgorod)






Subsidiary Kontore

Antwerp · Berwick · Boston · Damme · Leith · Hull · Ipswich · King's Lynn · Kaunas · Newcastle · Polotsk · Pskov · Yarmouth · York









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hanseatic_League"
Categories: Economic history | Hanseatic League | Northern Europe | Baltic Sea | Monopolies | International trade organizations | Guilds | 1358 establishments | Gotland | Imperial free citiesHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2008 | Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006 | All articles containing potentially dated statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Bosanski
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Français
Frysk
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Ido
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Malti
मराठी
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Slovenčina
Svenska
Tagalog
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 01:00.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
