













NTSC - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "NTSC";
		var wgTitle = "NTSC";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "21689";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281501952;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); NTSC

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 




Television encoding systems by nation, Countries using the NTSC system are shown in green.


NTSC (National Television System Committee) is the analog television system used in most of the Americas, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, the Philippines, Burma, and some Pacific island nations and territories (see map). NTSC is also the name of the U.S. standardization body that adopted the NTSC broadcast standard.[1] The first black-and-white NTSC standard for broadcast was developed in 1941 and had no provision for color transmissions. In 1953 a second standard was issued, which allowed color broadcasting to be compatible with the existing stock of black-and-white receivers, while maintaining the broadcast channel bandwidth already in use. NTSC was the first widely adopted broadcast color system. After over a half-century of use, the vast majority of over-the-air NTSC transmissions in the United States will be replaced with ATSC on June 12, 2009 and by August 31, 2011 in Canada.




Contents


1 History
2 Technical details

2.1 Lines and refresh rate
2.2 Color encoding
2.3 Transmission modulation scheme
2.4 Framerate conversion
2.5 Modulation for analog satellite transmission
2.6 Field order


3 Comparative quality
4 Variants

4.1 NTSC-M
4.2 NTSC-J
4.3 PAL-M
4.4 PAL-N
4.5 NTSC 4.43
4.6 NTSC-film
4.7 Canada/US Video Game Region


5 Vertical Interval Reference
6 Countries and territories using NTSC

6.1 North America
6.2 Central America and the Caribbean
6.3 South America
6.4 Asia
6.5 Pacific

6.5.1 US Territories
6.5.2 Other Pacific island nations
6.5.3 Historic (used NTSC experimentally before adopting PAL)


6.6 Indian Ocean
6.7 Middle East
6.8 Europe


7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
See also: History of television
The National Television System Committee was established in 1940 by the United States Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to resolve the conflicts that arose between companies over the introduction of a nationwide analog television system in the United States. In March 1941, the committee issued a technical standard for black-and-white television that built upon a 1936 recommendation made by the Radio Manufacturers Association (RMA). Technical advancements of the vestigial sideband technique allowed for the opportunity to increase the image resolution. The NTSC selected 525 scan lines as a compromise between RCA's 441–scan line standard (already being used by RCA's NBC TV network) and Philco's and DuMont's desire to increase the number of scan lines to between 605 and 800. The standard recommended a frame rate of 30 frames (images) per second, consisting of two interlaced fields per frame at 262.5 lines per field and 60 fields per second. Other standards in the final recommendation were an aspect ratio of 4:3, and frequency modulation (FM) for the sound signal (which was quite new at the time).
In January 1950, the Committee was reconstituted to standardize color television. In December 1953, it unanimously approved what is now called the NTSC color television standard (later defined as RS-170a). The "compatible color" standard retained full backward compatibility with existing black-and-white television sets. Color information was added to the black-and-white image by adding a color subcarrier of 4.5 × 455/572 MHz (approximately 3.58 MHz) to the video signal. To reduce interference between the chrominance signal and FM sound carrier required a slight reduction of the frame rate from 30 frames per second to 30/1.001 (very close to 29.97) frames per second, and changing the line frequency from 15,750 Hz to 15,734.26 Hz.
The FCC had briefly approved a different color television standard, starting in October 1950, which was developed by CBS.[2] However, this standard was incompatible with black-and-white broadcasts. It used a rotating color wheel, reduced the number of scan lines from 525 to 405, and increased the field rate from 60 to 144 (but had an effective frame rate of only 24 frames a second). Legal action by rival RCA kept commercial use of the system off the air until June 1951, and regular broadcasts only lasted a few months before manufacture of all color television sets was banned by the Office of Defense Mobilization (ODM) in October, ostensibly due to the Korean War.[3] CBS rescinded its system in March 1953,[4] and the FCC replaced it on December 17, 1953 with the NTSC color standard, which was cooperatively developed by several companies (including RCA and Philco).[5] The first publicly announced network TV broadcast of a program using the NTSC "compatible color" system was an episode of NBC's Kukla, Fran and Ollie on August 30, 1953, although it was viewable in color only at the network's headquarters.[6] The first nationwide view of NTSC color came on the following January 1 with the coast-to-coast broadcast of the Tournament of Roses Parade, viewable on prototype color receivers at special presentations across the country.
The first color NTSC television camera was the RCA TK-40, used for experimental broadcasts in 1953; an improved version, the TK-40A, introduced in March 1954, was the first commercially available color TV camera. Later that year, the improved TK-41 became the standard camera used throughout much of the 1960s.
The NTSC standard has been adopted by other countries, including most of the Americas and Japan. With the advent of digital television, analog broadcasts are being phased out. Most U. S. NTSC broadcasters are mandated by the FCC to shut down their analog transmitters in 2009. Low-power stations, Class A stations and translators are not immediately affected. An analog cut-off date for those stations is to be determined.

[edit] Technical details

[edit] Lines and refresh rate
NTSC color encoding is used with the M format, which consists of 29.97 interlaced frames of video per second. Each frame consists of a total of 525 scanlines, of which 486 make up the visible raster. The remainder (the vertical blanking interval) are used for synchronization and vertical retrace. Originally designed to be blank to allow for the simple analog circuits and slow vertical retrace of early TV receivers, some of these lines now can contain other data such as closed captioning and vertical interval timecode (VITC). In the complete raster (ignoring half-lines), the even-numbered or 'lower" scanlines (lines 21 to 263 in the video signal) are drawn in the first field, and the odd-numbered or "upper" (signal lines 283 to 525) are drawn in the second field, to yield a flicker-free image at the field refresh frequency of approximately 59.94 Hertz (actually 60 Hz/1.001). For comparison, PAL uses 625 lines (576 visible), and so has a higher vertical resolution, but a lower temporal resolution of 25 frames or 50 fields per second.
The NTSC field refresh frequency in the black-and-white system originally exactly matched the nominal 60 Hz frequency of alternating current power used in the United States. Matching the field refresh rate to the power source avoided intermodulation (also called beating) which produces rolling bars on the screen. Synchronization of the refresh rate to the power incidentally helped kinescope cameras record early live television broadcasts, as it was very simple to synchronize a film camera to capture one frame of video on each film frame by using the alternating current frequency as a shutter trigger.[citation needed] (By the time the frame rate changed to 29.97 Hz for color, it was nearly as easy to trigger the camera shutter from the video signal itself.)
The figure of 525 lines was chosen as a consequence of the limitations of the vacuum-tube-based technologies of the day. In early TV systems, a master voltage-controlled oscillator was run at twice the horizontal line frequency, and this frequency was divided down by the number of lines used (in this case 525) to give the field frequency (60 Hz in this case). This frequency was then compared with the 60 Hz power-line frequency and any discrepancy corrected by adjusting the frequency of the master oscillator. The only practical method of frequency division available at the time was the use of multivibrators, which could only divide by small numbers. For interlaced scanning, an odd number of lines per frame was required in order to make the vertical retrace distance identical for the odd and even fields; an extra odd line means that the same distance is covered in retracing from the final odd line to the first even line as from the final even line to the first odd line, so simplifying the retrace circuitry. This meant that a chain of multivibrators was needed, each of which had to divide by a small, odd number. (Note that an odd number is never integrally divisible by any even number). The closest practical sequence to 500 was 3 × 5 × 5 × 7 = 525. Similarly, 625-line PAL and SECAM uses 5 × 5 × 5 × 5. The British 405-line system used 3 × 3 × 3 × 3 × 5, the French 819-line system used 3 × 3 × 7 × 13. Although other values were theoretically possible, all of them involved division by unacceptably large numbers, which produced reliability problems.
In the color system the refresh frequency was shifted slightly downward to 59.94 Hz to eliminate stationary dot patterns in the color carrier, as explained below in "Color encoding".

[edit] Color encoding
For backward compatibility with black-and-white television, NTSC uses a luminance-chrominance encoding system invented in 1938 by Georges Valensi. Luminance (derived mathematically from the composite color signal) takes the place of the original monochrome signal. Chrominance carries color information. This allows black-and-white receivers to display NTSC signals simply by ignoring the chrominance.
The original chromaticities of the NTSC color primaries were R=[0.67,0.33], G=[0.21,0.71], B=[0.14,0.08][7], yielding a far larger gamut than most of today's monitors. Over the decades, however, desire for a brighter picture prompted TV manufacturers to deviate from that specification, sacrificing saturation for increased brightness[8]. This deviation from the standard, which happened both at the receiver and broadcaster stage, was the source of considerable color variation in the 1960s[9] As a result, in 1968 the SMPTE recommended a new set of phosphor primaries for studio use[10], which in 1979 became part of SMPTE 170M, the engineering standard describing the American broadcasting system. Although the old 1953 NTSC specifications are still part of the United States Code of Federal Regulations, all modern broadcast equipment follows the SMPTE 170M standard instead and thus encodes a signal for the SMPTE "C" set of phosphor primaries.[8]
In NTSC, chrominance is encoded using two 3.579545 MHz signals which are 90 degrees out of phase, known as I (in-phase) and Q (quadrature) QAM. These two signals are each amplitude modulated and then added together. Mathematically, the combination can be viewed as a single sine wave with varying phase relative to a reference and varying amplitude. The phase represents the instantaneous color hue captured by a TV camera, and the amplitude represents the instantaneous color saturation.
For a TV to recover hue information from the I/Q phase, it must have a zero phase reference. It also needs a reference for amplitude to recover the saturation information. So, the NTSC signal includes a short sample of this reference signal, known as the color burst, located on the 'back porch' of each horizontal line (the time between the end of the horizontal synchronization pulse and the end of the blanking pulse.) The color burst consists of a minimum of eight cycles of the unmodulated (fixed phase and amplitude) color subcarrier. The TV receiver has a "local oscillator" which it synchronizes to the color bursts and then uses as a reference for decoding the chrominance. By comparing the reference signal derived from color burst to the chrominance signal's amplitude and phase at a particular point in the raster scan, the device determines what chrominance to display at that point. Combining that with the amplitude of the luminance signal, the receiver calculates exactly what color to make the point, i.e. the point at the instantaneous position of the continuously scanning beam. Note that analog TV is discrete in the vertical dimension (there are distinct lines) but continuous in the horizontal dimension (every point blends into the next with no boundaries), hence there are no pixels in analog TV. (Digital TV sets receiving analog signals convert the continuous horizontal scan lines into discrete pixels before displaying them. This process of discretization necessarily degrades the picture information somewhat, though in the best sets the effect may be imperceptible. Digital sets include all sets with a matrix of discrete pixels built into the display device, such as LCD, plasma, and DLP screens, but not conventional CRTs. The high quality image from a plasma or DLP display panel may offset all loss of image quality incurred through discretization.)
When a transmitter broadcasts an NTSC signal, it amplitude-modulates a radio-frequency carrier with the NTSC signal just described, while it frequency-modulates a carrier 4.5 MHz higher with the audio signal. If non-linear distortion happens to the broadcast signal, the 3.579545 MHz color carrier may beat with the sound carrier to produce a dot pattern on the screen. To make the resulting pattern less noticeable, designers adjusted the original 60 Hz field rate down by a factor of 1.001 (0.1%), to approximately 59.94 fields per second. This adjustment ensures that the sums and differences of the sound carrier and the color subcarrier and their multiples (i.e., the intermodulation products of the two carriers) are not exact multiples of the frame rate, which is the necessary condition for the dots to remain stationary on the screen, making them most noticeable.
The 59.94 rate is derived from the following calculations. Designers chose to make the chrominance subcarrier frequency an n + 0.5 multiple of the line frequency to minimize interference between the luminance signal and the chrominance signal. (Another way this is often stated is that the color subcarrier frequency is an odd multiple of half the line frequency.) They then chose to make the audio subcarrier frequency an integer multiple of the line frequency to minimize visible (intermodulation) interference between the audio signal and the chrominance signal. The original black-and-white standard, with its 15750 Hz line frequency and 4.5 MHz audio subcarrier, does not meet these requirements, so designers had either to raise the audio subcarrier frequency or lower the line frequency. Raising the audio subcarrier frequency would prevent existing (black and white) receivers from properly tuning in the audio signal. Lowering the line frequency is comparatively innocuous, because the horizontal and vertical synchronization information in the NTSC signal allows a receiver to tolerate a substantial amount of variation in the line frequency. So the engineers chose the line frequency to be changed for the color standard. In the black-and-white standard, the ratio of audio subcarrier frequency to line frequency is 4.5 MHz / 15,750 = 285.71. In the color standard, this becomes rounded to the integer 286, which means the color standard's line rate is 4.5 MHz / 286 = approximately 15,734 lines per second. Maintaining the same number of scan lines per field (and frame), the lower line rate must yield a lower field rate. Dividing (4,500,000 / 286) lines per second by 262.5 lines per field gives approximately 59.94 fields per second.

[edit] Transmission modulation scheme




Spectrum of a System M television channel with NTSC color.


An NTSC television channel as transmitted occupies a total bandwidth of 6 MHz. A guard band, which does not carry any signals, occupies the lowest 250 kHz of the channel to avoid interference between the video signal of one channel and the audio signals of the next channel down[citation needed]. The actual video signal, which is amplitude-modulated, is transmitted between 500 kHz and 5.45 MHz above the lower bound of the channel. The video carrier is 1.25 MHz above the lower bound of the channel. Like most AM signals, the video carrier generates two sidebands, one above the carrier and one below. The sidebands are each 4.2 MHz wide. The entire upper sideband is transmitted, but only 750 kHz of the lower sideband, known as a vestigial sideband, is transmitted. The color subcarrier, as noted above, is 3.579545 MHz above the video carrier, and is quadrature-amplitude-modulated with suppressed carrier. The highest 25 kHz of each channel contains the audio signal, which is frequency-modulated, making it compatible with the audio signals broadcast by FM radio stations in the 88–108 MHz band. The main audio carrier is 4.5 MHz above the video carrier. Sometimes a channel may contain an MTS signal, which is simply more than one audio signal. This is normally the case when stereo audio and/or second audio program signals are used.
The Cvbs (Composite vertical blanking signal) (sometimes called "setup") is a voltage offset between the "black" and "blanking" levels. Cvbs is unique to NTSC. Cvbs has the advantage of making NTSC video more easily separated from its primary sync signals. The disadvantage is that Cvbs results in a smaller dynamic range when compared with PAL or SECAM.

[edit] Framerate conversion
See also: Telecine
There is a large difference in framerate between film, which runs at 24.0 frames per second, and the NTSC standard, which runs at approximately 29.97 frames per second.
Unlike the two other video formats, PAL and SECAM, this difference cannot be overcome by a simple speed-up.
A complex process called "3:2 pulldown" is used. One film frame is transmitted for three video fields (1½ video frame times), and the next frame is transmitted for two video fields (one video frame time). Two 24 frame/s film frames are therefore transmitted in five 60 Hz video fields, for an average of 2½ video fields per film frame. The average frame rate is thus 60 / 2.5 = 24 frame/s, so the average film speed is exactly what it should be. There are drawbacks, however. Still-framing on playback can display a video frame with fields from two different film frames, so any motion between the frames will appear as a rapid back-and-forth flicker. There can also be noticeable jitter/"stutter" during slow camera pans (telecine judder).
To avoid 3:2 pulldown, film shot specifically for NTSC television is often taken at 30 frame/s.[citation needed]
For viewing native PAL or SECAM material (such as European television series and some European movies) on NTSC equipment, a standards conversion has to take place. There are basically two ways to accomplish this.

The framerate can be slowed from 25 to 23.976 frames per second (a slowdown of about 4%) to subsequently apply 3:2 pulldown.
Interpolation of the contents of adjacent frames in order to produce new intermediate frames; this introduces artifacts, and even the most modestly trained of eyes can quickly spot video which has been converted between formats.


[edit] Modulation for analog satellite transmission
Because satellite power is severely limited, analog video transmission through satellites differs from terrestrial TV transmission. AM is a linear modulation method, so a given demodulated signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) requires an equally high received RF SNR. The SNR of studio quality video is over 50 dB, so AM would require prohibitively high powers and/or large antennas.
Wideband FM is used instead to trade RF bandwidth for reduced power. Increasing the channel bandwidth from 6 to 36 MHz allows a RF SNR of only 10 dB or less. The wider noise bandwidth reduces this 40 dB power saving by 36 MHz / 6 MHz = 8 dB for a substantial net reduction of 32 dB.
Sound is on a FM subcarrier as in terrestrial transmission, but frequencies above 4.5 MHz are used to reduce aural/visual interference. 6.8, 5.8 and 6.2 MHz are commonly used. Stereo can be multiplex or discrete, and unrelated audio and data signals may be placed on additional subcarriers.
A triangular 60 Hz energy dispersal waveform is added to the composite baseband signal (video plus audio and data subcarriers) before modulation. This limits the satellite downlink power spectral density in case the video signal is lost. Otherwise the satellite might transmit all of its power on a single frequency, interfering with terrestrial microwave links in the same frequency band.
In half transponder mode, the frequency deviation of the composite baseband signal is reduced to 18 MHz to allow another signal in the other half of the 36 MHz transponder. This reduces the FM benefit somewhat, and the recovered SNRs are further reduced because the combined signal power must be "backed off" to avoid intermodulation distortion in the satellite transponder. A single FM signal is constant amplitude, so it can saturate a transponder without distortion.

[edit] Field order
Unlike PAL or SECAM in which a 'frame' of video consists of an 'odd' field followed by an 'even' field, an NTSC 'frame' consists of an 'even' field followed by an 'odd' field. As far as the reception of an analog signal is concerened, this is purely a matter of convention and, it makes no difference. It's rather like the broken lines running down the middle of a road, it doesn't matter whether it is a line/space pair or a space/line pair, the effect to a driver is exactly the same. Indeed if NTSC is converted to PAL or vice versa, again it is of no consequence, the frame boundaries just shift by one field.
The introduction of digital television formats has changed things somewhat. Most digital TV formats including the popular DVD format record NTSC originated video with the even frame first in the recorded field (The development of DVD took place in the NTSC format). However this frame sequence has migrated through to the so called PAL format (actually a technically incorrect description) of digital video with the result that the even field is often recorded first in the frame. This is no longer a matter of convention because a frame of digital video is a distinct entity on the recorded medium. This means that when reproducing many digital formats (including DVD) it is necessary to reverse the frame order otherwise an unacceptable shuddering 'comb' effect occurs on moving objects as they are shown ahead in one field and then jump back in the next. Also, authoring DVD videos from computer based video formats requires reversal of the field order.
This has also become a hazard where progressive video is transcoded to interlaced and vice versa. Systems which recover progressive frames or transcode video should ensure that this 'Field Order' is obeyed, otherwise the recovered frame will consist of a field from one frame and a field from an adjacent frame, resulting in 'comb' interlacing artifacts.

[edit] Comparative quality
Reception problems can degrade an NTSC picture by changing the phase of the color signal (actually differential phase distortion), so the color balance of the picture will be altered unless a compensation is made in the receiver. This necessitates the inclusion of a tint control on NTSC sets, which is not necessary on PAL or SECAM systems. When compared to PAL in particular, NTSC color accuracy and consistency is considerably inferior, leading to video professionals and television engineers jokingly referring to NTSC as Never The Same Color, Never Twice the Same Color or No True Skin Colors.[11]
The use of NTSC coded color in S-Video systems completely eliminates the phase distortions. As a consequence, the use of NTSC color encoding gives the highest resolution picture quality of the three color systems.
The mismatch between NTSC's 30 frames per second and film's 24 frames is overcome by a process which capitalizes on the field rate of the interlaced NTSC signal, thus avoiding the film playback speedup used for PAL and SECAM at 25 frames per second (which causes the accompanying audio to increase in pitch slightly, recently fixed with the use of a pitch shifter) at the price of some jerkiness in the video. See Framerate conversion above.
The coming of digital television and high-definition television will end the need for analog television systems. NTSC broadcasts are mandated by the FCC to end in the United States on [1] June 12, 2009.[citation needed]

[edit] Variants

[edit] NTSC-M
Unlike PAL, with its many varied underlying broadcast television systems in use throughout the world, NTSC color encoding is invariably used with broadcast system M, giving NTSC-M.

[edit] NTSC-J
Only Japan's variant "NTSC-J" is slightly different: in Japan, black level and blanking level of the signal are identical (at 0 IRE), as they are in PAL, while in American NTSC, black level is slightly higher (7.5 IRE) than blanking level. Since the difference is quite small, a slight turn of the brightness knob is all that is required to enjoy the "other" variant of NTSC on any set as it is supposed to be; most watchers might not even notice the difference in the first place.

[edit] PAL-M
The Brazilian PAL-M system uses the same broadcast bandwidth, frame rate, and number of lines as NTSC, but using PAL color encoding. It is therefore partially NTSC-compatible. NTSC-M tv sets can receive terrestrial PAL-M broadcasts, NTSC VCRs can play videotapes recorded in PAL-M and vice versa, but only in black & white due to the fact that the color information cannot be decoded. Conversely, DVD players sold for the PAL-M market are identical to NTSC DVD players, as the frame rates match and the difference in analog color encoding becomes irrelevant in digital formats.

[edit] PAL-N
Main article: PAL#PAL-N
This is used in Paraguay and Bolivia (though Bolivia has recently switched to NTSC-M from PAL-N). This is very similar to PAL-M (used in Brazil). It is also closely related to PAL-Nc (used in Argentina) and PAL-N (used in Uruguay).
The similarities of NTSC-M and NTSC-N can be seen on the ITU identification scheme table, which is reproduced here:

World television systems

System
Lines 
Frame rate
Channel b/w
Visual b/w
Sound offset
Vestigial sideband
Vision mod.
Sound mod.
Notes


M
525
29.97
6
4.2
+4.5
0.75
Neg.
FM
Most of the Americas and Caribbean, Philippines, South Korea, Taiwan (all NTSC-M) and Brazil (PAL-M).


N
625
25
6
4.2
+4.5
0.75
Neg.
FM
Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay (all PAL-N). Greater number of lines results in higher quality.


As it is shown, aside from the number of lines and frames per second, the systems are identical. NTSC-N/PAL-N/PAL-Nc are compatible with sources such as game consoles, VHS/Betamax VCRs, and DVD players. However, they are not compatible with baseband broadcasts (which are received over an antenna), though some newer sets come with baseband NTSC 3.58 support (NTSC 3.58 being the frequency for color modulation in NTSC: 3.58 MHz).

[edit] NTSC 4.43
In what can be considered an opposite of PAL-60, NTSC 4.43 is a pseudo color system which transmits NTSC encoding (525/29.97) in a color subcarrier of 4.43 MHz instead of 3.58 MHz. The resulting output is only viewable by TVs which support the resulting pseudo-system (usually multi-standard TVs). Using a native NTSC TV to decode the signal yields no color, while using a PAL TV to decode the system yields erratic colors (observed to be lacking red and flickering randomly). The format is apparently limited to few early laserdisc players and some game consoles sold in markets where the PAL system is used.
The NTSC 4.43 system, while not a broadcast format, appears most often as a playback function of PAL cassette format VCRs, beginning with the Sony 3/4" U-Matic format and then following onto Betamax and VHS format machines. As Hollywood has the claim of providing the most cassette software (movies and television series) for VCRs for the world's viewers, and as not all cassette releases were made available in PAL formats, a means of playing NTSC format cassettes was highly desired.
Multi-standard video monitors were already in use in Europe to accommodate broadcast sources in PAL, SECAM, and NTSC video formats. The heterodyne color-under process of U-Matic, Betamax & VHS lent itself to minor modification of VCR players to accommodate NTSC format cassettes. The color-under format of VHS uses a 629 kHz subcarrier while U-Matic & Betamax use a 688 kHz subcarrier to carry an amplitude modulated chroma signal for both NTSC and PAL formats. Since the VCR was ready to play the color portion of the NTSC recording using PAL color mode, the PAL scanner and capstan speeds had to be adjusted from PAL's 50 Hz field rate to NTSC's 59.94 Hz field rate, and faster linear tape speed.
The changes to the PAL VCR are minor thanks to the existing VCR recording formats. The output of the VCR when playing an NTSC cassette in NTSC 4.43 mode is 525 lines/29.97 frames per second with PAL compatible heterodyned color. The multi-standard receiver is already set to support the NTSC H & V frequencies; it just needs to do so while receiving PAL color.
The existence of those multi-standard receivers was probably part of the drive for region coding of DVDs. As the color signals are component on disc for all display formats, almost no changes would be required for PAL DVD players to play NTSC (525/29.97) discs as long as the display was frame-rate compatible.

[edit] NTSC-film
NTSC with a frame rate of 23.976 frame/s is described in the NTSC-film standard.



This section requires expansion.



[edit] Canada/US Video Game Region
Sometimes NTSC-US or NTSC-U/C is used to describe the video gaming region of North America (the U/C refers to US + Canada), as regional lockout usually restricts games released within a region to that region.

[edit] Vertical Interval Reference
The standard NTSC video image contains some lines (lines 1–21 of each field) which are not visible (this is known as the Vertical Blanking Interval, or VBI); all are beyond the edge of the viewable image, but only lines 1–9 are used for the vertical-sync and equalizing pulses. The remaining lines were deliberately blanked in the original NTSC specification to provide time for the electron beam in CRT-based screens to return to the top of the display.
VIR (or Vertical interval reference), widely adopted in the 1980s, attempts to correct some of the color problems with NTSC video by adding studio-inserted reference data for luminance and chrominance levels on line 19. [2] Suitably-equipped television sets could then employ these data in order to adjust the display to a closer match of the original studio image. The actual VIR signal contains three sections, the first having 70 percent luminance and the same chrominance as the color burst signal, and the other two having 50 percent and 7.5 percent luminance respectively. [3]
A less-used successor to VIR, GCR, also added ghost (multipath interference) removal capabilities.
The remaining vertical blanking interval lines are typically used for datacasting or ancillary data such as video editing timestamps (vertical interval timecodes or SMPTE timecodes on lines 12–14 [4] [5]), test data on lines 17–18, a network source code on line 20 and closed captioning, XDS, and V-chip data on line 21. Early teletext applications also used vertical blanking interval lines 14–18 and 20, but teletext over NTSC was never widely adopted by viewers [6].
Many stations transmit TV Guide On Screen (TVGOS) data for an electronic program guide on VBI lines. The primary station in a market will broadcast 4 lines of data, and backup stations will broadcast 1 line. In most markets the PBS station is the primary host. TVGOS data can occupy any line from 10-25, but in practice its limited to 11-18, 20 and line 22. Line 22 is only used for 2 broadcast, DirecTV and CFPL-TV.

[edit] Countries and territories using NTSC

[edit] North America

 Canada, NTSC broadcast to be abandoned by August 2011, simulcast in ATSC [12]
 Mexico, NTSC broadcast to be abandoned by January 2022, simulcast in ATSC
 United States, NTSC broadcast currently scheduled to be abandoned on June 12, 2009 [13]


[edit] Central America and the Caribbean




 Antigua and Barbuda
 Aruba
 Bahamas
 Barbados
 Belize
 Bermuda
 British Virgin Islands




 Cayman Islands
 Costa Rica
 Cuba
 Dominica
 Dominican Republic
 El Salvador
 Guatemala
 Grenada




 Haiti
 Honduras
 Jamaica
Leeward Islands
 Montserrat
 Netherlands Antilles
 Nicaragua




 Panama
 Puerto Rico (U.S.)
 Saint Kitts and Nevis
 Saint Lucia
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
 Trinidad and Tobago
 U.S. Virgin Islands





[edit] South America




 Bolivia
 Chile
 Colombia




 Ecuador
 Guyana
 Paraguay (until 2006 Paraguay used PAL)




 Peru
 Suriname
 Venezuela





[edit] Asia




 Japan, NTSC-J broadcast will be abandoned by July 2011, simulcasting ISDB-T
 Philippines, NTSC-M broadcast will be abandoned by December 2015, simulcast in DVB-T


 South Korea, NTSC broadcast to be abandoned by December 2012, simulcast in ATSC
 Republic of China (Taiwan), NTSC broadcast to be abandoned by 2010, simulcast in DVB-T
 Union of Myanmar (Burma)



Historic - Countries that have now changed to PAL:

 North Korea (Propaganda station aimed at South Korea; domestic broadcasts use PAL)
 Cambodia (Historic; Cambodia now uses PAL)
 Vietnam (Historic; Vietnam now uses PAL)
 Thailand, Former used shortly by Thai TV Channel 4 Bangkunbrohma, Later changed to PAL in late 1950s.





[edit] Pacific

[edit] US Territories

 American Samoa
 Guam
 Northern Mariana Islands
Midway Atoll (a US military base)


[edit] Other Pacific island nations

 Marshall Islands (in Compact of Free Association with US; US aid funded NTSC adoption)
 Micronesia (in Compact of Free Association with US)
 Palau (in Compact of Free Association with US; adopted NTSC before independence)
 Samoa (closely tied to American Samoa; US aid funded NTSC adoption)
 Tonga (US aid funded NTSC adoption)


[edit] Historic (used NTSC experimentally before adopting PAL)

 Fiji (Historic; used before 1989, Fiji has used PAL since 1990)
 Australia (Historic; All of Australia uses PAL)


[edit] Indian Ocean

Diego Garcia


[edit] Middle East

 South Yemen (Historic; all of Yemen now uses PAL)


[edit] Europe

 United Kingdom (Experimented with a 405-line variant of NTSC in the 1950s and 1960s; dropped in favor of PAL)


[edit] See also

Broadcast television systems

ATSC Standards
BTSC
NTSC-J
PAL
RCA
SECAM


Moving image formats
Oldest television station
Television channel frequencies
Very high frequency
Ultra high frequency

Knife-edge effect
Channel 1
Channel 37
North American broadcast television frequencies
North American cable television frequencies
Australasian TV frequencies


U.S. cable television channel frequencies
TVTower.com - Commercial Television Frequencies
Broadcast safe
NTSC-J
PAL
SECAM


[edit] Notes


^ National Television System Committee (1951-1953), [Report and Reports of Panel No. 11, 11-A, 12-19, with Some supplementary references cited in the Reports, and the Petition for adoption of transmission standards for color television before the Federal Communications Commission, n.p., 1953], 17 v. illus., diagrs., tables. 28 cm. LC Control No.:54021386 Library of Congress Online Catalog
^ A third "line sequential" system from Color Television Inc. (CTI) was also considered. The CBS and final NTSC systems were called "field sequential" and "dot sequential" systems, respectively.
^ "Color TV Shelved As a Defense Step", The New York Times, October 20, 1951, p. 1. "Action of Defense Mobilizer in Postponing Color TV Poses Many Question for the Industry", The New York Times, October 22, 1951, p. 23. "TV Research Curb on Color Avoided", The New York Times, October 26, 1951. Ed Reitan, CBS Field Sequential Color System, 1997. A variant of the CBS system was later used by NASA to broadcast pictures of astronauts from space.
^ "CBS Says Confusion Now Bars Color TV," Washington Post, March 26, 1953, p. 39.
^ "F.C.C. Rules Color TV Can Go on Air at Once", The New York Times, December 19, 1953, p. 1.
^ "NBC Launches First Publicly-Announced Color Television Show", Wall Street Journal, August 31, 1953, p. 4.
^ Kiver, Milton S. (1964). Color Television Fundamentals. New York: McGraw-Hill. pp. 323. 
^ a b DeMarsh, Leroy (1993): TV Display Phosphors/Primaries - Some History. SMPTE Journal, December 1993: 1095-1098.
^ Sharma, Gaurav; Trussell, H. Joel (1997): Digital Color Imaging. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 6 (7): 901-932.
^ SMPTE RP (Recommended Practice) 145. SMPTE C Color Monitor Colorimetry
^ Jain, Anal K., Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing, Upper Saddle River NJ: Prentice Hall, 1989, p. 82.
^ Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) Press release May 2007
^ http://commerce.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?FuseAction=PressReleases.Detail&PressRelease_Id=84452e41-ca68-4aef-b15f-bbca7bab2973



[edit] References

A standard defining the NTSC system was published by the International Telecommunication Union in 1998 under the title "Recommendation ITU-R BT.470-7, Conventional Analog Television Systems". It isn't publicly available on the Internet, but it can be purchased from the ITU.
Ed Reitan (1997). CBS Field Sequential Color System.


[edit] External links

Representation of the NTSC refresh rate on a television and on a DVD
Understanding & Measuring Video TV-RF Signals by Glen Kropuenske, CET, Sencore Application Engineer

The horizontal resolution numbers in the following tables and graphs may not reflect reality, when transmitted over an analog medium in NTSC format.







v • d • e

Digital Video Resolutions





Designation




Usage Examples
Definition (lines)
Rate (Hz)


Interlaced (fields)
Progressive (frames)










Low; MP@LL




LDTV, VCD
240; 288 (SIF)
 
24, 30; 25









Standard; MP@ML




SDTV, SVCD, DVD, DV
480 (NTSC, PAL-M)
60
24, 30


576 (PAL, SECAM)
50
25









Enhanced




EDTV
480; 576
 
60; 50









High; MP@HL




HDTV, BD, HD DVD, HDV
720
 
24, 30, 60; 25, 50


1080
50, 60
24, 30; 25









This table illustrates total horizontal and vertical pixel resolution via box size. It does not accurately reflect the screen or pixel shape (aspect ratio) of these formats, which is either 4:3, or 16:9.












v • d • e

Broadcast video formats










 
Television










Analog






525 lines


NTSC · NTSC-J · PAL-M







625 lines


PAL · PAL-N/NC · PALplus · SECAM







Audio


BTSC (MTS) · NICAM-728 · Zweiton (A2 / IGR) · EIAJ · SAP







Hidden signals


Captioning · Teletext · CGMS-A · GCR · PDC · VBI · VEIL · VITC · WSS · XDS







Defunct systems


Pre-1940 · Baird-Nipkow · 180 lines · 405 lines · 441 lines · 819 lines · MAC · MUSE










Digital






Interlaced


SDTV (480i · 576i) · HDTV (1080i)







Progressive


LDTV (240p · 288p · 1seg) · EDTV (480p · 576p) · HDTV (720p · 1080p)







MPEG-2 standards


ATSC · DVB · ISDB · DMB-T/H







MPEG-4 AVC standards


ATSC 2.0 (A/72)  · DMB · DMB-T/H · DVB · SBTVD · 1seg







Audio


AC-3 (5.1) · MPEG Multichannel · PCM · LPCM · AAC







Hidden signals


Captioning · Teletext · CPCM · Broadcast flag · AFD · EPG




















 
Digital cinema






Super Hi-Vision (2540p · 4320p) · DCI














 
Technical issues






14:9 compromise · MPEG transport · Reverse Standards Conversion · Standards conversion · Video processing · Video on demand · HDTV blur












Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NTSC"
Categories: Video formats | Television technology | ITU-R recommendationsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008 | Articles to be expanded since June 2008 | All articles to be expanded 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
فارسی
Français
한국어
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Magyar
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Slovenčina
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 14:05.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
