













Thermodynamics - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Thermodynamics";
		var wgTitle = "Thermodynamics";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "29952";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281863142;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Thermodynamics

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





It has been suggested that Theory of heat be merged into this article or section. (Discuss)


In physics, thermodynamics (from the Greek θερμ-<θερμότης, therme, meaning "heat"[1] and δυναμις, dynamis, meaning "power") is the study of the conversion of energy into work and heat and its relation to macroscopic variables such as temperature and pressure. Its underpinnings, based upon statistical predictions of the collective motion of particles from their microscopic behavior, is the field of statistical thermodynamics, a branch of statistical mechanics.[2][3][4]. Historically, thermodynamics developed out of need to increase the efficiency of early steam engines.[5]




Typical thermodynamic system, showing input from a heat source (boiler) on the left and output to a heat sink (condenser) on the right. Work is extracted, in this case by a series of pistons.






Contents


1 Starting point and relevance
2 History
3 The laws of thermodynamics
4 Thermodynamic potentials
5 Classical thermodynamics
6 Statistical thermodynamics
7 Chemical thermodynamics
8 Thermodynamic systems
9 Conjugate variables
10 Thermodynamic instruments
11 Thermodynamic states
12 Thermodynamic processes
13 See also

13.1 Approaches and applied fields
13.2 Other
13.3 Wikibooks


14 References
15 Further reading
16 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Starting point and relevance
The starting point for most thermodynamic considerations are the laws of thermodynamics, which postulate that energy can be exchanged between physical systems as heat or work.[6] They also postulate the existence of a quantity named entropy, which can be defined for any system.[7] In thermodynamics, interactions between large ensembles of objects are studied and categorized. Central to this are the concepts of system and surroundings. A system is composed of particles, whose average motions define its properties, which in turn are related to one another through equations of state. Properties can be combined to express internal energy and thermodynamic potentials, which are useful for determining conditions for equilibrium and spontaneous processes.
With these tools, thermodynamics describes how systems respond to changes in their surroundings. This can be applied to a wide variety of topics in science and engineering, such as engines, phase transitions, chemical reactions, transport phenomena, and even black holes. The results of thermodynamics are essential for other fields of physics and for chemistry, chemical engineering, aerospace engineering, mechanical engineering, cell biology, biomedical engineering, materials science, and economics to name a few.[8][9]

[edit] History




Sadi Carnot (1796-1832): was the father of thermodynamics


Main article: History of thermodynamics
The history of thermodynamics as a scientific discipline generally begins with Otto von Guericke who, in 1650, built and designed the world's first vacuum pump and created the world's first ever vacuum (known as the Magdeburg hemispheres). Guericke was driven to make a vacuum in order to disprove Aristotle's long-held supposition that 'nature abhors a vacuum'. Shortly after Guericke, the Irish physicist and chemist Robert Boyle had learned of Guericke's designs and, in 1656, in coordination with English scientist Robert Hooke, built an air pump.[10] Using this pump, Boyle and Hooke noticed a correlation between pressure, temperature, and volume. In time, Boyle's Law was formulated, which states that pressure and volume are inversely proportional. Then, in 1679, based on these concepts, an associate of Boyle's named Denis Papin built a bone digester, which was a closed vessel with a tightly fitting lid that confined steam until a high pressure was generated.
Later designs implemented a steam release valve that kept the machine from exploding. By watching the valve rhythmically move up and down, Papin conceived of the idea of a piston and a cylinder engine. He did not, however, follow through with his design. Nevertheless, in 1697, based on Papin's designs, engineer Thomas Savery built the first engine. Although these early engines were crude and inefficient, they attracted the attention of the leading scientists of the time.
Their work led 127 years later to Sadi Carnot, the "father of thermodynamics", who, in 1824, published Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire, a discourse on heat, power, and engine efficiency. The paper outlined the basic energetic relations between the Carnot engine, the Carnot cycle, and Motive power. This marks the start of thermodynamics as a modern science.[3]
The term thermodynamics was coined by James Joule in 1849 to designate the science of relations between heat and power.[3] By 1858, "thermo-dynamics", as a functional term, was used in William Thomson's paper An Account of Carnot's Theory of the Motive Power of Heat.[11] The first thermodynamic textbook was written in 1859 by William Rankine, originally trained as a physicist and a civil and mechanical engineering professor at the University of Glasgow.[12]

[edit] The laws of thermodynamics
Main article: Laws of thermodynamics
In thermodynamics, there are four laws that do not depend on the details of the systems under study or how they interact. Hence these laws are very generally valid, can be applied to systems about which one knows nothing other than the balance of energy and matter transfer. Examples of such systems include Einstein's prediction of spontaneous emission around the turn of the 20th century, and ongoing research into the thermodynamics of black holes.
These four laws are:

Zeroth law of thermodynamics, about thermal equilibrium:




If two thermodynamic systems are separately in thermal equilibrium with a third, they are also in thermal equilibrium with each other.


If we grant that all systems are (trivially) in thermal equilibrium with themselves, the Zeroth law implies that thermal equilibrium is an equivalence relation on the set of thermodynamic systems. This law is tacitly assumed in every measurement of temperature. Thus, if we want to know if two bodies are at the same temperature, it is not necessary to bring them into contact and to watch whether their observable properties change with time.[13]


First law of thermodynamics, about the conservation of energy:




The change in the internal energy of a closed thermodynamic system is equal to the sum of the amount of heat energy supplied to the system and the work done on the system.




Second law of thermodynamics, about entropy:




The total entropy of any isolated thermodynamic system tends to increase over time, approaching a maximum value.




Third law of thermodynamics, about the absolute zero of temperature:




As a system asymptotically approaches absolute zero of temperature all processes virtually cease and the entropy of the system asymptotically approaches a minimum value; also stated as: "the entropy of all systems and of all states of a system is zero at absolute zero" or equivalently "it is impossible to reach the absolute zero of temperature by any finite number of processes".



The following has sometimes been called the "Fourth Law of Thermodynamics".

Onsager reciprocal relations:




In connected thermodynamic systems which are in equilibrium neither for pressure nor temperature, heat flow between is caused by forces proportional with unit of pressure difference, and equal to the proportional density flow caused per unit of temperature difference.






See also: Bose–Einstein condensate and negative temperature.




[edit] Thermodynamic potentials
Main article: Thermodynamic potentials
As can be derived from the energy balance equation (or Burks' equation) on a thermodynamic system there exist energetic quantities called thermodynamic potentials, being the quantitative measure of the stored energy in the system. The five most well known potentials are:


Internal energy



Helmholtz free energy



Enthalpy



Gibbs free energy



Grand potential



Other thermodynamic potentials can be obtained through Legendre transformation. Potentials are used to measure energy changes in systems as they evolve from an initial state to a final state. The potential used depends on the constraints of the system, such as constant temperature or pressure. Internal energy is the internal energy of the system, enthalpy is the internal energy of the system plus the energy related to pressure-volume work, and Helmholtz and Gibbs energy are the energies available in a system to do useful work when the temperature and volume or the pressure and temperature are fixed, respectively.

[edit] Classical thermodynamics
Main article: Classical thermodynamics
Classical thermodynamics is the original early 1800s variation of thermodynamics concerned with thermodynamic states, and properties as energy, work, and heat, and with the laws of thermodynamics, all lacking an atomic interpretation. In precursory form, classical thermodynamics derives from chemist Robert Boyle’s 1662 postulate that the pressure P of a given quantity of gas varies inversely as its volume V at constant temperature; i.e. in equation form: PV = k, a constant. From here, a semblance of a thermo-science began to develop with the construction of the first successful atmospheric steam engines in England by Thomas Savery in 1697 and Thomas Newcomen in 1712. The first and second laws of thermodynamics emerged simultaneously in the 1850s, primarily out of the works of William Rankine, Rudolf Clausius, and William Thomson (Lord Kelvin).

[edit] Statistical thermodynamics
Main article: Statistical thermodynamics
With the development of atomic and molecular theories in the late 1800s and early 1900s, thermodynamics was given a molecular interpretation. This field is called statistical thermodynamics, which can be thought of as a bridge between macroscopic and microscopic properties of systems. Essentially, statistical thermodynamics is an approach to thermodynamics situated upon statistical mechanics, which focuses on the derivation of macroscopic results from first principles. It can be opposed to its historical predecessor phenomenological thermodynamics, which gives scientific descriptions of phenomena with avoidance of microscopic details. The statistical approach is to derive all macroscopic properties (temperature, volume, pressure, energy, entropy, etc.) from the properties of moving constituent particles and the interactions between them (including quantum phenomena). It was found to be very successful and thus is commonly used.

[edit] Chemical thermodynamics
Main article: Chemical thermodynamics
Chemical thermodynamics is the study of the interrelation of energy with chemical reactions or with a physical change of state within the confines of the laws of thermodynamics. During the years 1873-76 the American mathematical physicist Josiah Willard Gibbs published a series of three papers, the most famous being On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances, in which he showed how thermodynamic processes could be graphically analyzed, by studying the energy, entropy, volume, temperature and pressure of the thermodynamic system, in such a manner to determine if a process would occur spontaneously.[14] During the early 20th century, chemists such as Gilbert N. Lewis, Merle Randall, and E. A. Guggenheim began to apply the mathematical methods of Gibbs to the analysis of chemical processes.[15]

[edit] Thermodynamic systems
Main article: Thermodynamic system







An important concept in thermodynamics is the “system”. Everything in the universe except the system is known as surroundings. A system is the region of the universe under study. A system is separated from the remainder of the universe by a boundary which may be imaginary or not, but which by convention delimits a finite volume. The possible exchanges of work, heat, or matter between the system and the surroundings take place across this boundary. Boundaries are of four types: fixed, moveable, real, and imaginary.
Basically, the “boundary” is simply an imaginary dotted line drawn around a volume of something when there is going to be a change in the internal energy of that something. Anything that passes across the boundary that effects a change in the internal energy of the something needs to be accounted for in the energy balance equation. That something can be the volumetric region surrounding a single atom resonating energy, such as Max Planck defined in 1900; it can be a body of steam or air in a steam engine, such as Sadi Carnot defined in 1824; it can be the body of a tropical cyclone, such as Kerry Emanuel theorized in 1986 in the field of atmospheric thermodynamics; it could also be just one nuclide (i.e. a system of quarks) as some are theorizing presently in quantum thermodynamics.
For an engine, a fixed boundary means the piston is locked at its position; as such, a constant volume process occurs. In that same engine, a moveable boundary allows the piston to move in and out. For closed systems, boundaries are real while for open system boundaries are often imaginary. There are five dominant classes of systems:

Isolated Systems – matter and energy may not cross the boundary
Adiabatic Systems – heat must not cross the boundary
Diathermic Systems - heat may cross boundary
Closed Systems – matter may not cross the boundary
Open Systems – heat, work, and matter may cross the boundary (often called a control volume in this case)

As time passes in an isolated system, internal differences in the system tend to even out and pressures and temperatures tend to equalize, as do density differences. A system in which all equalizing processes have gone practically to completion, is considered to be in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium.
In thermodynamic equilibrium, a system's properties are, by definition, unchanging in time. Systems in equilibrium are much simpler and easier to understand than systems which are not in equilibrium. Often, when analysing a thermodynamic process, it can be assumed that each intermediate state in the process is at equilibrium. This will also considerably simplify the situation. Thermodynamic processes which develop so slowly as to allow each intermediate step to be an equilibrium state are said to be reversible processes.

[edit] Conjugate variables
Main article: Conjugate variables (thermodynamics)
The central concept of thermodynamics is that of energy, the ability to do work. By the First Law, the total energy of a system and its surroundings is conserved. Energy may be transferred into a system by heating, compression, or addition of matter, and extracted from a system by cooling, expansion, or extraction of matter. In mechanics, for example, energy transfer equals the product of the force applied to a body and the resulting displacement.
Conjugate variables are pairs of thermodynamic concepts, with the first being akin to a "force" applied to some thermodynamic system, the second being akin to the resulting "displacement," and the product of the two equalling the amount of energy transferred. The common conjugate variables are:

Pressure-volume (the mechanical parameters);
Temperature-entropy (thermal parameters);
Chemical potential-particle number (material parameters).


[edit] Thermodynamic instruments
Main article: Thermodynamic instruments
There are two types of thermodynamic instruments, the meter and the reservoir. A thermodynamic meter is any device which measures any parameter of a thermodynamic system. In some cases, the thermodynamic parameter is actually defined in terms of an idealized measuring instrument. For example, the zeroth law states that if two bodies are in thermal equilibrium with a third body, they are also in thermal equilibrium with each other. This principle, as noted by James Maxwell in 1872, asserts that it is possible to measure temperature. An idealized thermometer is a sample of an ideal gas at constant pressure. From the ideal gas law PV=nRT, the volume of such a sample can be used as an indicator of temperature; in this manner it defines temperature. Although pressure is defined mechanically, a pressure-measuring device, called a barometer may also be constructed from a sample of an ideal gas held at a constant temperature. A calorimeter is a device which is used to measure and define the internal energy of a system.
A thermodynamic reservoir is a system which is so large that it does not appreciably alter its state parameters when brought into contact with the test system. It is used to impose a particular value of a state parameter upon the system. For example, a pressure reservoir is a system at a particular pressure, which imposes that pressure upon any test system that it is mechanically connected to. The Earth's atmosphere is often used as a pressure reservoir.
It is important that these two types of instruments are distinct. A meter does not perform its task accurately if it behaves like a reservoir of the state variable it is trying to measure. If, for example, a thermometer were to act as a temperature reservoir it would alter the temperature of the system being measured, and the reading would be incorrect. Ideal meters have no effect on the state variables of the system they are measuring.

[edit] Thermodynamic states
Main article: Thermodynamic state
When a system is at equilibrium under a given set of conditions, it is said to be in a definite state. The state of the system can be described by a number of intensive variables and extensive variables. The properties of the system can be described by an equation of state which specifies the relationship between these variables. State may be thought of as the instantaneous quantitative description of a system with a set number of variables held constant.

[edit] Thermodynamic processes
Main article: Thermodynamic processes
A thermodynamic process may be defined as the energetic evolution of a thermodynamic system proceeding from an initial state to a final state. Typically, each thermodynamic process is distinguished from other processes, in energetic character, according to what parameters, as temperature, pressure, or volume, etc., are held fixed. Furthermore, it is useful to group these processes into pairs, in which each variable held constant is one member of a conjugate pair. The seven most common thermodynamic processes are shown below:

An isobaric process occurs at constant pressure.
An isochoric process, or isometric/isovolumetric process, occurs at constant volume.
An isothermal process occurs at a constant temperature.
An adiabatic process occurs without loss or gain of heat.
An isentropic process (reversible adiabatic process) occurs at a constant entropy.
An isenthalpic process occurs at a constant enthalpy.
A steady state process occurs without a change in the internal energy of a system.




Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Thermodynamics






Physics portal




[edit] See also

[edit] Approaches and applied fields




Atmospheric thermodynamics
Biological thermodynamics
Black hole thermodynamics
Chemical thermodynamics
Classical thermodynamics




Equilibrium thermodynamics
Maximum entropy thermodynamics
Non-equilibrium thermodynamics
Philosophy of thermal and statistical physics




Psychrometrics
Quantum thermodynamics
Statistical thermodynamics
Thermoeconomics





Ecological Economics


[edit] Other
Lists and timelines:

List of important publications in thermodynamics
List of textbooks in statistical mechanics
List of thermal conductivities
List of thermodynamic properties
Table of thermodynamic equations
Timeline of thermodynamics, statistical mechanics, and random processes

Thermodynamic:




Boundary
Component
Conjugate variables

Temperature / Entropy
Pressure / Volume
(Stress / Strain)
Chemical potential / Particle number


Constant:

Avogadro's NA
Boltzmann k
Ideal gas R
Stefan-Boltzmann σ


Critical line
Cycle

External combustion engine
Internal combustion engine
Atkinson
Bell Coleman
Brayton
Carnot
Combined
Diesel
Ericsson
Hampson-Linde
Heat engine

Carnot


HEHC
Hot air engine
Heat pump & refrigeration
Kalina
Kleemenko
Lenoir
Miller
Mixed/Dual
Otto
Rankine
Regenerative
Siemens
Stirling
Stoddard


Ensemble

Canonical
Grand canonical
Isoenthalpic-isobaric
Isothermal-isobaric
Microcanonical


Equations

Boltzmann
Bridgman
Churchill-Bernstein
Clausius-Clapeyron relation
Debye-Hückel
Equation of state
Exact differential
Gibbs-Duhem
Gibbs-Helmholtz
Green-Kubo relations
Maxwell relations
Onsager reciprocal relations






Equilibrium

Chemical
Dynamic
Local
Phase


History
Instruments

Barometer
Calorimeter
Dynamometer
Thermometer


Laws:

Zeroth
First
Second
Third
Charles's
Dulong-Petit
Fundamental relation
Gas laws

Ideal gas


Joule's
Onsager reciprocal relations
Stefan-Boltzmann


Limit
Material properties

Bulk modulus K
Compressibility β
Specific heat capacity c
Thermal expansion α


Potential

Internal energy
Entropy
Gibbs free energy
Grand
Helmholtz free energy


Process

Adiabatic
Isenthalpic
Isentropic
Isobaric
Isochoric
Isothermal
Quasistatic
Spontaneous
Steady state


State

Excited
Function
Ground
Standard
Stationary
Steady


System

Closed
Dissipative
Isolated


Temperature

Negative
Range





Variable:

Chemical potential μ
Density
Energy

Conservation of
Conversion efficiency
Electrical
Free
Gibbs free G
Helmholtz free A
Internal U
Kinetic
Potential
Specific


Enthalpy H
Entropy S

& information theory
As energy dispersal
Introduction to
Residual
Shannon
Statistical


Exergy

Efficiency


Mass
Mole (unit)
Particle number N
Pressure P
Temperature T
Volume V
Work W

Mechanical



Theorem:

Carnot's
Clausius
Equipartition
Bolzmann's H
Nernst heat
Virial




Other Related Topics



Heat:

Critical heat flux
Heat of combustion
Heat transfer

Convective


Latent heat
Mechanical equivalent
Theory of heat
Volumetric heat capacity

Thermal:

Analysis
Conductivity
Contact
Efficiency
Energy
Equilibrium
Expansion

Negative


Mass
Motion
Radiation
Science



Physical chemistry:

Autocatalytic reactions and order creation
Boiling point
Calorimetry
Chemical energetics
Chemical kinetics
Endergonic reaction
Endothermic
Exothermic
Gibbs phase rule
Melting point
Phase diagram

Calphad


Phase transition
Thermodynamic databases for pure substances
Triple point
Vapor-liquid equilibrium



Statistical Mechanics:

Boltzmann distribution
Boltzmann distribution law
Boltzmann factor
Bose-Einstein condensate
Bose-Einstein statistics
Brownian motion
Configuration integral
Degeneracy
Degrees of freedom
Fermi-Dirac statistics
Fluctuations
Gibbs paradox
Ideal gas
Irreversibility
Kinetic theory
Macrostate
Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics
Microstate
Molecular chaos
Partition function

Thermoelectricity:

Nernst effect
Peltier effect
Seebeck effect
Thermionic emission
Thermoelectric effect
Thermoelectricity
Thermogenerator
Thermophotovoltaic
Thermopower
Thomson effect



Sundry:




Absolute zero
Arrow of time
Black body
Dissipation
Ettingshausen effect
Extensive quantity
Intensive quantity
Legendre transformation
Loschmidt's paradox
Mass-energy equivalence
Physical information
Piezoelectric effect
Pressure volume diagram
Pyroelectric effect
Quality of a fluid
Refrigeration

Gas asbsorption
Cycle
Thermoelectric cooling
Vapor compression


Standard conditions for temperature and pressure
T-symmetry
Two dimensional gas








[edit] Wikibooks

Engineering Thermodynamics
Entropy for Beginners


[edit] References


^ Oxford American Dictionary
^ Enrico Fermi (1956). Thermodynamics. Courier Dover Publications. pp. (ix). ISBN 048660361X. OCLC 230763036 54033021. http://books.google.com/books?id=VEZ1ljsT3IwC&printsec=frontcover&dq=thermodynamics&lr=&as_brr=0&sig=ACfU3U24MHXNw_T3n2dj1QHRnPKxNyX7-g#PPP11,M1. 
^ a b c Perrot, Pierre (1998). A to Z of Thermodynamics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-856552-6. OCLC 123283342 38073404. 
^ Clark, John, O.E. (2004). The Essential Dictionary of Science. Barnes & Noble Books. ISBN 0-7607-4616-8. OCLC 58732844 63473130. 
^ Clausius, Rudolf (1850). On the Motive Power of Heat, and on the Laws which can be deduced from it for the Theory of Heat. Poggendorff's Annalen der Physick, LXXIX (Dover Reprint). ISBN 0-486-59065-8. 
^ Van Ness, H.C. (1969). Understanding Thermodynamics. Dover Publications, Inc.. ISBN 0-486-63277-6. OCLC 8846081. 
^ Dugdale, J.S. (1998). Entropy and its Physical Meaning. Taylor and Francis. ISBN 0-7484-0569-0. OCLC 36457809. 
^ Smith, J.M.; Van Ness, H.C., Abbott, M.M. (2005). Introduction to Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics. McGraw Hill. ISBN 0-07-310445-0. OCLC 56491111. 
^ Haynie, Donald, T. (2001). Biological Thermodynamics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-79549-4. OCLC 43993556. 
^ Partington, J.R. (1989). A Short History of Chemistry. Dover. ISBN 0-486-65977-1. OCLC 19353301. 
^ Kelvin, William T. (1849) "An Account of Carnot's Theory of the Motive Power of Heat - with Numerical Results Deduced from Regnault's Experiments on Steam." Transactions of the Edinburg Royal Society, XVI. January 2. Scanned Copy
^ Cengel, Yunus A.; Boles, Michael A. (2005). Thermodynamics - an Engineering Approach. McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-310768-9. 
^ Moran, Michael J. and Howard N. Shapiro, 2008. Fundamentals of Engineering Thermodynamics. 6th ed. Wiley and Sons: 16.
^ Gibbs, Willard (1993). The Scientific Papers of J. Willard Gibbs, Volume One: Thermodynamics. Ox Bow Press. ISBN 0-918024-77-3. OCLC 27974820. 
^ Lewis, Gilbert N.; Randall, Merle (1923). Thermodynamics and the Free Energy of Chemical Substances. McGraw-Hill Book Co. Inc.. 



[edit] Further reading


Goldstein, Martin, and Inge F. (1993). The Refrigerator and the Universe. Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-75325-9. OCLC 32826343.  A nontechnical introduction, good on historical and interpretive matters.

The following titles are more technical:

Cengel, Yunus A., & Boles, Michael A. (2002). Thermodynamics - an Engineering Approach. McGraw Hill. ISBN 0-07-238332-1. OCLC 45791449 52263994 57548906. 
Dunning-Davies, Jeremy (1997). Concise Thermodynamics: Principles and Applications. Horwood Publishing. ISBN 1-8985-6315-2. OCLC 36025958 60273489. 
Kroemer, Herbert & Kittel, Charles (1980). Thermal Physics. W. H. Freeman Company. ISBN 0-7167-1088-9. OCLC 32932988 48236639 5171399. 



[edit] External links

Thermodynamics Data & Property Calculation Websites
Thermodynamics Educational Websites
Thermodynamics at ScienceWorld
History of Thermodynamics
Shakespeare & Thermodynamics
Biochemistry Thermodynamics
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics
Free Steam Tables Online calculator based on IAPWS-IF97








v • d • e

General subfields within physics






Astrophysics · Atomic, molecular, and optical physics · Condensed matter physics · Dynamics (Fluid dynamics · Thermodynamics) · Electromagnetism (Optics) · High energy physics · Mechanics (Classical mechanics · Quantum mechanics · Statistical mechanics) · Relativity (Special relativity · General relativity) · Quantum field theory · Statics (Fluid statics)









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermodynamics"
Categories: Thermodynamics | Chemical engineering | Fundamental physics concepts | Greek loanwordsHidden categories: Articles to be merged since October 2008 | All articles to be merged 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 08:45.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
