













Universal Declaration of Human Rights - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Universal_Declaration_of_Human_Rights";
		var wgTitle = "Universal Declaration of Human Rights";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "31899";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281994452;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Universal Declaration of Human Rights

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Universal Declaration of Human Rights



Eleanor Roosevelt with the Spanish version of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.



Created
1948


Ratified
10 December 1948


Location
Palais de Chaillot, Paris


Authors
John Peters Humphrey (Canada), Rene Cassin (France), P. C. Chang (China), Charles Malik (Lebanon), Eleanor Roosevelt (United States), among others


Purpose
Human rights


The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) is a declaration adopted by the United Nations General Assembly (10 December 1948 at the Palais de Chaillot, Paris). The Guinness Book of Records describes the UDHR as the "Most Translated Document"[1] in the world. The Declaration arose directly from the experience of the Second World War and represents the first global expression of rights to which all human beings are inherently entitled. It consists of 30 articles which have been elaborated in subsequent international treaties, regional human rights instruments, national constitutions and laws. The International Bill of Human Rights consists of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its two Optional Protocols. In 1966 the General Assembly adopted the two detailed Covenants, which complete the International Bill of Human Rights; and in 1976, after the Covenants had been ratified by a sufficient number of individual nations, the Bill took on the force of international law.[2]




Contents


1 History

1.1 Precursors
1.2 Drafting
1.3 Adoption


2 Structure
3 Preamble
4 Human rights set out in the Declaration
5 Commemoration: International Human Rights Day
6 Significance and legal effect

6.1 Significance
6.2 Legal effect


7 Reaction

7.1 Praise
7.2 Censorship
7.3 Criticism

7.3.1 Islamic criticism
7.3.2 Property Rights Criticism
7.3.3 Education
7.3.4 The Right to Refuse to Kill


7.4 Bangkok Declaration


8 See also

8.1 Human rights
8.2 Celebration of the 60th Anniversary of UDHR
8.3 Non-binding agreements
8.4 National human rights law
8.5 International human rights law
8.6 Other


9 Notes and references
10 Further reading
11 External links

11.1 Audiovisual materials







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History

[edit] Precursors
Main article: History of human rights
The ideas and values of human rights can be traced through history and in religious beliefs and cultures around the world. European philosophers of the enlightenment period developed theories of natural law that influenced the adoption of documents such as the Bill of Rights of England, the Bill of Rights in the United States, and the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen in France.
During the World War II, the Allies adopted the Four Freedoms: freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, freedom from fear and freedom from want, as their basic war aims. The United Nations Charter "reaffirmed faith in fundamental human rights, and dignity and worth of the human person" and committed all member states to promote "universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion".[3]
When the atrocities committed by Nazi Germany became apparent after the World War II, the consensus within the world community was that the United Nations Charter did not sufficiently define the rights it referenced.[4][5] A universal declaration that specified the rights of individuals was necessary to give effect to the Charter's provisions on human rights.[6] Such a declaration was proposed by Cuban diplomats Guy Pérez Cisneros and Ernesto Dihigo.[citation needed]

[edit] Drafting
Main article: Drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Canadian John Peters Humphrey was called upon by the United Nations Secretary-General to work on the project and became the Declaration's principal drafter. At the time Humphrey was newly appointed as Director of the Division of Human Rights within the United Nations Secretariat.[7] The Commission on Human Rights, a standing body of the United Nations, was constituted to undertake the work of preparing what was initially conceived as an International Bill of Rights. The membership of the Commission was designed to be broadly representative of the global community with representatives of the following countries serving: Australia, Belgium, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Chile, China, Cuba, Egypt, France, India, Iran, Lebanon, Panama, Philippines, United Kingdom, United States, Soviet Union, Uruguay and Yugoslavia.[8] Well known members of the Commission included Eleanor Roosevelt of the United States, who was Chairman, Jacques Maritain and René Cassin of France, Charles Malik of Lebanon and P. C. Chang of China,[9] among others. Humphrey provided the initial draft which became the working text of the Commission.
According to Globalizing Family Values, the Declaration's pro-family phrases were the result of the Christian Democratic movement's influence on Cassin and Malik.[10]

[edit] Adoption
The Universal Declaration was adopted by the General Assembly on 10 December 1948 by a vote of 48 in favor, 0 against, with 8 abstentions (all Soviet Bloc states [i.e., Byelorussia, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Ukraine, USSR] and Yugoslavia, South Africa and Saudi Arabia).[11]
The following countries voted in favor of the Declaration: Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Iceland, India, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Thailand, Sweden, Syria, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay and Venezuela.[12]
Despite the central role played by Canadian John Humphrey, the Canadian Government at first abstained from voting on the Declaration's draft, but later voted in favour of the final draft in the General Assembly.[13]

[edit] Structure
The underlying structure of the Universal Declaration was introduced in its second draft which was prepared by Rene Cassin. Cassin worked from a first draft prepared by John Peters Humphrey. The structure was influenced by the Code Napoleon, including a preamble and introductory general principles.[14] Cassin compared the Declaration to the portico of a Greek temple, with a foundation, steps, four columns and a pediment. Articles 1 and 2 are the foundation blocks, with their principles of dignity, liberty, equality and brotherhood. The seven paragraphs of the preamble, setting out the reasons for the Declaration, are represented by the steps. The main body of the Declaration forms the four columns. The first column (articles 3–11) constitutes rights of the individual, such as the right to life and the prohibition of slavery. The second column (articles 12–17) constitutes the rights of the individual in civil and political society. The third column (articles 18–21) is concerned with spiritual, public and political freedoms such as freedom of religion and freedom of association. The fourth column (articles 22–27) sets out social, economic and cultural rights. In Cassin's model, the last three articles of the Declaration provide the pediment which binds the structure together. These articles are concerned with the duty of the individual to society and the prohibition of use of rights in contravention of the purposes of the United Nations.[15]

[edit] Preamble
The Universal Declaration begins with a preamble consisting of seven paragraphs followed by a statement "proclaiming" the Declaration.
Each paragraph of the preamble sets out a reason for the adoption of the Declaration. The first paragraph asserts that the recognition of human dignity of all people is the foundation of justice and peace in the world. The second paragraph observes that disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind and that the four freedoms: freedom of speech, belief, freedom from want, and freedom from fear – which is "proclaimed as the highest aspiration" of the people. The third paragraph states that so that people are not compelled to rebellion against tyranny, human rights should be protected by rule of law. The fourth paragraph relates human rights to the development of friendly relations between nations. The fifth paragraph links the Declaration back to the United Nations Charter which reaffirms faith in fundamental human rights and dignity and worth of the human person. The sixth paragraph notes that all members of the United Nations have pledged themselves to achieve, in cooperation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms. The seventh paragraph observes that "a common understanding" of rights and freedoms is of "the greatest importance" for the full realization of that pledge.[16]
These paragraphs are followed by the "proclamation" of the Declaration as a "common standard of achievement" for "all peoples and all nations", so that "all individuals" and "all organs of society" should by teaching and education, promote respect for these rights and freedoms and by progressive measures, national and international, secure their universal and effective recognition and observance.[16]

[edit] Human rights set out in the Declaration
The following reproduces the articles of the Declaration which set out the specific human rights that are recognized in the Declaration.

Article 1 
All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.
Article 2 
Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status. Furthermore, no distinction shall be made on the basis of the political, jurisdictional or international status of the country or territory to which a person belongs, whether it be independent, trust, non-self-governing or under any other limitation of sovereignty.
Article 3 
Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of person.
Article 4 
No one shall be held in slavery or servitude; slavery and the slave trade shall be prohibited in all their forms.
Article 5 
No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Article 6 
Everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person before the law.
Article 7 
All are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to equal protection of the law. All are entitled to equal protection against any discrimination in violation of this Declaration and against any incitement to such discrimination.
Article 8 
Everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the competent national tribunals for acts violating the fundamental rights granted him by the constitution or by law.
Article 9 
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile.
Article 10 
Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal, in the determination of his rights and obligations and of any criminal charge against him.
Article 11


Everyone charged with a penal offence has the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law in a public trial at which he has had all the guarantees necessary for his defence.
No one shall be held guilty of any penal offence on account of any act or omission which did not constitute a penal offence, under national or international law, at the time when it was committed. Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than the one that was applicable at the time the penal offence was committed.


Article 12 
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to attacks upon his honour and reputation. Everyone has the right to the protection of the law against such interference or attacks.
Article 13 


Everyone has the right to freedom of movement and residence within the borders of each state.
Everyone has the right to leave any country, including their own, and to return to their country.


Article 14 


Everyone has the right to seek and to enjoy in other countries asylum from persecution.
This right may not be invoked in the case of prosecutions genuinely arising from non-political crimes or from acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.


Article 15 


Everyone has the right to a nationality.
No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his nationality nor denied the right to change his nationality.


Article 16 


Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry and to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.
Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses.
The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the State.


Article 17 


Everyone has the right to own property alone as well as in association with others.
No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his property.


Article 18 
Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief, and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in teaching, practice, worship and observance.
Article 19 
Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers.
Article 20 


Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and association.
No one may be compelled to belong to an association.


Article 21 


Everyone has the right to take part in the government of their country, directly or through freely chosen representatives.
Everyone has the right of equal access to public service in their country.
The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine elections which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedures.


Article 22 
Everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social security and is entitled to realization, through national effort and international co-operation and in accordance with the organization and resources of each State, of the economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for his dignity and the free development of his personality.
Article 23 


Everyone has the right to work, to free choice of employment, to just and favourable conditions of work and to protection against unemployment.
Everyone, without any discrimination, has the right to equal pay for equal work.
Everyone who works has the right to just and favourable remuneration ensuring for himself and his family an existence worthy of human dignity, and supplemented, if necessary, by other means of social protection.
Everyone has the right to form and to join trade unions for the protection of his interests.


Article 24 
Everyone has the right to rest and leisure, including reasonable limitation of working hours and periodic holidays with pay.
Article 25 


Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services, and the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control.
Motherhood and childhood are entitled to special care and assistance. All children, whether born in or out of wedlock, shall enjoy the same social protection.


Article 26 


Everyone has the right to education. Education shall be free, at least in the elementary and fundamental stages. Elementary education shall be compulsory. Technical and professional education shall be made generally available and higher education shall be equally accessible to all on the basis of merit.
Education shall be directed to the full development of the human personality and to the strengthening of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. It shall promote understanding, tolerance and friendship among all nations, racial or religious groups, and shall further the activities of the United Nations for the maintenance of peace.
Parents have a prior right to choose the kind of education that shall be given to their children.


Article 27 


Everyone has the right freely to participate in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy the arts and to share in scientific advancement and its benefits.
Everyone has the right to the protection of the moral and material interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic production of which he is the author.


Article 28 
Everyone is entitled to a social and international order in which the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration can be fully realized.
Article 29 


Everyone has duties to the community in which alone the free and full development of his personality is possible.
In the exercise of his rights and freedoms, everyone shall be subject only to such limitations as are determined by law solely for the purpose of securing due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others and of meeting the just requirements of morality, public order and the general welfare in a democratic society.
These rights and freedoms may in no case be exercised contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.


Article 30 
Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as implying for any State, group or person any right to engage in any activity or to perform any act aimed at the destruction of any of the rights and freedoms set forth herein.


[edit] Commemoration: International Human Rights Day
Main article: Human Rights Day
The adoption of the Universal Declaration is a significant international commemoration marked each year on 10 December and is known as Human Rights Day or International Human Rights Day. The commemoration is observed by individuals, community and religious groups, human rights organisations, parliaments, governments and the United Nations. Decadal commemorations are often accompanied by campaigns to promote awareness of the Declaration and human rights. 2008 marks the 60th anniversary of the Declaration and is being accompanied by year long activities around the theme "Dignity and justice for all of us".[17]

[edit] Significance and legal effect

[edit] Significance
In the preamble, governments commit themselves and their peoples to progressive measures to secure the universal and effective recognition and observance of the human rights set out in the Declaration. Eleanor Roosevelt supported the adoption the UDHR as a declaration, rather than as a treaty, because she believed that it would have the same kind of influence on global society as the United States Declaration of Independence had within the United States. In this she proved to be correct. Even though not formally legally binding, the Declaration has been adopted in or influenced most national constitutions since 1948. It also serves as the foundation for a growing number of international treaties and national laws and international, regional, national and sub-national institutions protecting and promoting human rights.

[edit] Legal effect
While not a treaty itself, the Declaration was explicitly adopted for the purpose of defining the meaning of the words "fundamental freedoms" and "human rights" appearing in the United Nations Charter, which is binding on all member states. For this reason, the Universal Declaration is a fundamental constitutive document of the United Nations. Many international lawyers, in addition, believe that the Declaration forms part of customary international law and is a powerful tool in applying diplomatic and moral pressure to governments that violate any of its articles. The 1968 United Nations International Conference on Human Rights advised that it "constitutes an obligation for the members of the international community" to all persons. The declaration has served as the foundation for two binding UN human rights covenants, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the principles of the Declaration are elaborated in international treaties such as the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women, the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, the United Nations Convention Against Torture and many more. The Declaration continues to be widely cited by governments, academics, advocates and constitutional courts and individual human beings who appeal to its principles for the protection of their recognised human rights.

[edit] Reaction

[edit] Praise
The Universal Declaration has received praise from a number of notable people. Charles Malik, Lebanese philosopher and diplomat, called it "an international document of the first order of importance,"[18] while Eleanor Roosevelt, first chairwoman of the Commission on Human Rights (CHR) that drafted the Declaration, stated that it "may well become the international Magna Carta of all men everywhere."[19] 10 December 1948. In a speech on 5 October 1995, Pope John Paul II called the UDHR "one of the highest expressions of the human conscience of our time".[citation needed] And in a statement on 10 December 2003 on behalf of the European Union, Marcello Spatafora said that "it placed human rights at the centre of the framework of principles and obligations shaping relations within the international community."[citation needed]

[edit] Censorship
The Cuban regime has ordered copies of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to be burned or otherwise destroyed.[20][21][22] In one instance, an entire shipment of books - which included children's literature and medical textbooks - was destroyed just because State Security found that it contained 8,000 copies of the declaration.[22]

[edit] Criticism

[edit] Islamic criticism
Predominantly Islamic countries such as Sudan, Pakistan, Iran, and Saudi Arabia have criticized the Universal Declaration of Human Rights for its perceived failure to take into the account the cultural and religious context of Islamic countries.[citation needed] In 1982, the Iranian representative to the United Nations, Said Rajaie-Khorassani, articulated the position of his country regarding the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, by saying that the UDHR was "a secular understanding of the Judeo-Christian tradition", which could not be implemented by Muslims without trespassing the Islamic law.[23] On 30 June 2000, Muslim nations that are members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference[24] officially resolved to support the Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam,[25] an alternative document that says people have "freedom and right to a dignified life in accordance with the Islamic Shari’ah".[26]

[edit] Property Rights Criticism
Libertarians and some conservatives believe the positive rights that must be provided by others through forceful extraction (for example taxation) negate other peoples' inalienable rights.[27]

[edit] Education
Some proponents of alternative education, particularly unschooling, take issue with the right to compulsory education stated in Article 26.[28] In the philosophies of John Holt and others, compulsory education itself violates the right of a person to follow their own interests:

No human right, except the right to life itself, is more fundamental than this. A person’s freedom of learning is part of his freedom of thought, even more basic than his freedom of speech. If we take from someone his right to decide what he will be curious about, we destroy his freedom of thought. We say, in effect, you must think not about what interests you and concerns you, but about what interests and concerns us.
– John Holt, Escape from Childhood


[edit] The Right to Refuse to Kill
Groups such as Amnesty International[29] and War Resisters International[30] have advocated for "The Right to Refuse to Kill" to be added to the UDHR. War Resisters International has stated that the right to conscientious objection to military service is primarily derived from, but not yet explicit in, Article 18 of the UDHR: the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion.[30]
Steps have been taken within the UN to make this right more explicit (see Conscientious Objector); but those steps have been limited to secondary, more "marginal" UN documents. That is why Amnesty International would like to have this right brought "out of the margins" and explicitly into the primary document, namely the UDHR itself.[31]

To the rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights one more might, with relevance, be added. It is "The Right to Refuse to Kill." [32]
– Assistant Secretary General of the United Nations, and Nobel Peace Laureate, Sean MacBride, 1974 Nobel Lecture


[edit] Bangkok Declaration
In the Bangkok Declaration adopted by Ministers of Asian states meeting in 1993 in the lead up to the World Conference on Human Rights, Asian governments reaffirmed their commitment to the principles of the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. They stated their view of the interdependence and indivisibility of human rights and stressed the need for universality, objectivity and non-selectivity of human rights.[33]

[edit] See also

[edit] Human rights

History of human rights
Human Rights
Portal: Human rights
Timeline of young people's rights in the United Kingdom
Timeline of young people's rights in the United States


[edit] Celebration of the 60th Anniversary of UDHR

[Bar Ilan University, Israel, 60 Years of the UDHR] [6] Evaluating the Record - 2008
Maryland Law UDHR 60 Conference - October 23-25, 2008
UDHR 60 Connecticut Conference - December 2008
Know Your Rights 2008
Youth Celebrate the 60th Anniversary of the UDHR CASHRA, the John Humphrey Centre and TakingITGlobal join forces
Interfaith Cooperation and the Protection of Human Rights and Dignity. Event celebrating the 60th anniversary of the UN-UDHR


[edit] Non-binding agreements

Cyrus cylinder, Ancient Persia, 559-530 BC
United States Declaration of Independence, July 1776
Declaration of Sentiments, 1848
Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam, 1990
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, 1993
United Nations Millennium Declaration, 2000


[edit] National human rights law

Cáin Adomnáin, 697
Magna Carta, England, 1215
Golden Bull, Hungary, 1222
English Bill of Rights and Scottish Claim of Right, 1689
Virginia Declaration of Rights, June 1776
United States Bill of Rights, completed in 1789, approved in 1791
Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, France 1789
Constitution of the Soviet Union, first 1918, but did not guarantee rights to the middle class
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, 1982


[edit] International human rights law

European Convention on Human Rights, 1950
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, 1954
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 1969
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1976
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1976
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, 1981
Convention on the Rights of the Child, 1990
Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, 2000


[edit] Other

Command responsibility
Declaration on Great Apes, an as-yet unsuccessful effort to extend some human rights to great apes
John Peters Humphrey & film PSA Histori.ca short
Racial equality proposal,1919
Khutbatul Wada', 632


[edit] Notes and references


^ "Universal Declaration of Human Rights Contact Page". Unhchr.ch. http://www.unhchr.ch/udhr/miscinfo/record.htm. Retrieved on 2008-12-10. 
^ Paul Williams, Ed., "The International Bill of Human Rights", Entwhistle, 1981. This is the first book edition (ISBN 0-034558-07-8) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, with a forward by Jimmy Carter.
^ United Nations Charter, preamble and article 56
^ Overview
^ UDHR50: Didn't Nazi tyranny end all hope for protecting human rights in the modern world?
^ UDHR - History of human rights
^ Johannes Morsink, The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, University of Pennsylvania Press, p. 5
^ Morsink, p 4
^ The Declaration was drafted during the Chinese Civil War. P. C. Chang was appointed as a representative by the Republic of China, then recognised government of China, which was driven from mainland China and was later to become the government of Taiwan and nearby islands.
^ Carlson, Allan (12 January 2004. Globalizing Family Values.
^ See http://www.unac.org/rights/question.html under "Who are the signatories of the Declaration?"
^ Yearbook of the United Nations 1948-1949 p 535
^ Schabas, William (1998). "Canada and the Adoption of Universal Declaration of Human Rights" (fee required). McGill Law Journal 43: 403. http://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&lr=&q=info:bhD3YIk9aKUJ:scholar.google.com/&output=viewport. 
^ Glendon, pp 62-64
^ Mary Ann Glendon, A World Made New: Eleanor Roosevelt and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Chapter 10
^ a b Universal Declaration of Human Rights, preamble
^ UDHR 60th Anniversary Activities
^ Statement by Charles Malik as Representative of Lebanon to the Third Committee of the UN General Assembly on the Universal Declaration, 6 November 1948
^ Eleanor Roosevelt: Address to the United Nations General Assembly
^ "Books Ordered Burned or Destroyed by Cuban Courts in April 2003". http://www.placonference.org/2008/handouts/1013_33Marquardt_Steve__120308_Apr09_2008_Time_023803PM.doc. 
^ Ray Bradbury condemns Cuban book burning: 'Fahrenheit 451' author takes stance while U.S. librarians ignore counterparts. http://www.worldnetdaily.com/news/article.asp?ARTICLE_ID=45050. 
^ a b ""Library books burned, buried, dumped": Mystery solved?". March 9, 2000. http://www.cubanet.org/CNews/y00/mar00/10e12.htm. 
^ Littman, David. "Universal Human Rights and Human Rights in Islam". Midstream, February/March 1999 http://web.archive.org/web/20060501234759/http://mypage.bluewin.ch/ameland/Islam.html
^ Organisation of The Islamic Conference
^ "REPORT AND RESOLUTIONS ON POLITICAL, MUSLIM MINORITIES AND COMMUNITIES, LEGAL AND INFORMATION AFFAIRS". The Internet Archive. http://web.archive.org/web/20071012192209/http://oic-oci.org/english/conf/fm/27/27th-fm-political(3).htm. Retrieved on 2008-12-10. 
^ The Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam(5 Aug 1990)
^ See Capitalism Magazine - United Nations Declaration of Human Rights Destroys Individual Rights Retrieved 22 June 2006.
^ Peter Sachs Collopy. "Educational Choice “on the Side of the Child”: Liberalism and Libertarian Education". http://collopy.net/writings/2006/libertarian_education.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-11. 
^ Amnesty International “Out of the margins: the right to conscientious objection to military service in Europe: An announcement of Amnesty International's forthcoming campaign and briefing for the UN Commission on Human Rights” 1 April 1997. Amnesty International, Worldwide Sites, Library, Europe and Central Asia. Retrieved May 9, 2008 [1]
^ a b War Resisters International A Conscientious Objector's Guide to the UN Human Rights System, Parts 1,2&3, Background Information on International Law for COs, Standards which recognise the right to conscientious objection, In treaties. [2] retrieved May 9, 2008
^ Amnesty International “Out of the margins: the right to conscientious objection to military service in Europe: An announcement of Amnesty International's forthcoming campaign and briefing for the UN Commission on Human Rights” 1 April 1997. Amnesty International, Worldwide Sites, Library, Europe and Central Asia. Retrieved May 9, 2008 [3]
^ Sean MacBride “The Imperatives of Survival” Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1974. [4] retrieved May 9, 2008 from The Nobel Foundation – Official website of the Nobel Foundation. (English index page; hyperlink to Swedish site.) From Nobel Lectures, [5] Peace 1971-1980, Editor-in-Charge Tore Frängsmyr, Editor Irwin Abrams, World Scientific Publishing Co., Singapore, 1997
^ "Final Declaration Of The Regional Meeting For Asia Of The World Conference On Human Rights". Law.hku.hk. http://law.hku.hk/lawgovtsociety/Bangkok%20Declaration.htm. Retrieved on 2008-12-10. 



[edit] Further reading

Johannes Morsink, "The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Origins, Drafting and Intent" (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1999).
Universal Declaration of Human Rights pages at Columbia University (Center for the Study of Human Rights), including article by article commentary, video interviews, discussion of meaning, drafting and history.
John Nurser, "For All Peoples and All Nations. Christian Churches and Human Rights". (Geneva: WCC Publications, 2005).


[edit] External links


Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Universal Declaration of Human Rights





Look up universal declaration of human rights in
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Text of the UDHR (English)
Text of the UDHR at the Center for a World in Balance
Official translations of the UDHR
Plain Language version of the UDHR
UDHR Facebook page
Questions and answers about the Universal Declaration
WORLD CONFERENCES ON HUMAN RIGHTS AND MILLENNIUM DECLARATION
Text, Audio, and Video excerpt of Eleanor Roosevelt's Address to the United Nations on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Proposal for a Privacy Protection Guideline on Secret Personal Data Gathering and Transborder Flows of Such Data in the Fight against Terrorism and Serious Crime by Marcel Stuessi
UDHR - Education
Revista Envío - A Declaration of Human Rights For the 21st Century


[edit] Audiovisual materials

Universal Declaration of Human Rights Typographical Animation by Human Rights Action Center
Librivox: Human-read audio recordings in several Languages
Text, Audio, and Video excerpt of Eleanor Roosevelt's Address to the United Nations on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Animated presentation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by Amnesty International, from Youtube (English, 20 minutes and 23 seconds)
Audio: Statement by Charles Malik as Representative of Lebanon to the Third Committee of the UN General Assembly on the Universal Declaration, 6 November 1948.
UN Department of Public Information introduction to the drafters of the Declaration.
UN video archives of speeches on adoption of the Declaration.
Videos introducing each article of the UDHR from RRRT Pacific.
Video add for UDHR article 1 from Youth for Human Rights International.








v • d • e

Human rights










 
Fundamental concepts and philosophies






Natural and legal rights · Claim rights and liberty rights · Negative and positive rights · Individual rights and Group rights
Natural law · Positive law · State sovereignty · Universal jurisdiction










List of Organisations · National institutions







International human rights legal instruments · International human rights law · International humanitarian law







Civil and political rights · Economic, social and cultural rights · Reproductive rights










Human rights by continent








Africa · Asia · Europe · North America · Oceania · South America


















v • d • e

Articles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights










 
General principles








Article 1: Freedom, Egalitarianism, Dignity and Brotherhood
Article 2: Universality of rights
















 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights








Article 1 and 2: Right to freedom from discrimination · Article 3: Right to life, liberty and security of person · Article 4: Freedom from slavery · Article 5: Freedom from torture and cruel and unusual punishment · Article 6: Right to personhood · Article 7: Equality before the law · Article 8: Right to effective remedy from the law · Article 9: Freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention and exile · Article 10: Right to a fair trial · Article 11.1: Presumption of innocence · Article 11.2: Prohibition of retrospective law · Article 12: Right to privacy · Article 13: Freedom of movement · Article 14: Right of asylum · Article 15: Right to a nationality · Article 16: Right to marriage and family life · Article 17: Right to property · Article 18: Freedom of thought, conscience and religion · Article 19: Freedom of opinion and expression · Article 20.1: Freedom of assembly · Article 20.2: Freedom of association · Article 21.1: Right to participation in government · Article 21.2: Right of equal access to public office · Article 21.3: Right to universal suffrage
















 
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights








Article 1 and 2: Right to freedom from discrimination · Article 22: Right to social security · Article 23.1: Right to work · Article 23.2: Right to equal pay for equal work · Article 23.3: Right to just remuneration · Article 23.4: Right to join a trade union · Article 24: Right to rest and leisure · Article 25.1: Right to an adequate standard of living · Article 25.2: Right to special care and assistance for mothers and children · Article 26.1: Right to education · Article 26.2: Human rights education · Article 26.3: Right to choice of education · Article 27.1: Right to participate in culture · Article 27.2: Right to intellectual property
















 
Context, limitations and duties








Article 28: Social order · Article 29.1: Social responsibility  · Article 29.2: Limitations of human rights · Article 29.3: The supremacy of the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Article 30: Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as implying for any State, group or person any right to engage in any activity or to perform any act aimed at the destruction of any of the rights and freedoms set forth herein.











Category:Human rights · Human rights portal












v • d • e

International human rights legal instruments










 
Declarations






Cairo Declaration of Human Rights · Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples · Universal Declaration of Human Rights · American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man · Paris Principles














 
International law






UN Convention Against Torture · Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women · Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination · Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities · Convention on the Rights of the Child · UN Migrant Workers' Convention · International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid · International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance · International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights · International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights














 
Regional law






African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights · European (Conventions on Human Rights · Conventions for the Prevention of Torture · Social Charter) · American Convention on Human Rights · Inter-American Convention (on Forced Disappearance of Persons · to Prevent and Punish Torture · on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of Violence against Women · on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Persons with Disabilities)














 
International humanitarian law






Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide · Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees · Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees · Geneva Conventions · Hague Conventions · Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court












Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_Declaration_of_Human_Rights"
Categories: 1948 in law | Human rights | Human rights instruments | United Nations General Assembly resolutions | History of human rightsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
አማርኛ
Аҧсуа
العربية
Aragonés
Asturianu
Avañe'ẽ
Aymar aru
Bamanankan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Galego
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Қазақша
Kiswahili
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Limburgs
Lingála
Luganda
Magyar
Македонски
मराठी
مصرى
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Oshiwambo
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Sardu
Scots
Shqip
Simple English
SiSwati
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Soomaaliga
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
Taqbaylit
Tetun
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
Walon
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 00:03 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
