











Bear - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Bear";
		var wgTitle = "Bear";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "4400";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280396680;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 


wgOggPlayer.msg = {"ogg-play": "Play", "ogg-pause": "Pause", "ogg-stop": "Stop", "ogg-no-player": "Sorry, your system does not appear to have any supported player software.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload a player\x3c/a\x3e.", "ogg-player-videoElement": "Native browser support", "ogg-player-oggPlugin": "Browser plugin", "ogg-player-cortado": "Cortado (Java)", "ogg-player-vlc-mozilla": "VLC", "ogg-player-vlc-activex": "VLC (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-quicktime-mozilla": "QuickTime", "ogg-player-quicktime-activex": "QuickTime (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-totem": "Totem", "ogg-player-kaffeine": "Kaffeine", "ogg-player-kmplayer": "KMPlayer", "ogg-player-mplayerplug-in": "mplayerplug-in", "ogg-player-thumbnail": "Still image only", "ogg-player-selected": "(selected)", "ogg-use-player": "Use player:", "ogg-more": "More…", "ogg-download": "Download file", "ogg-desc-link": "About this file", "ogg-dismiss": "Close", "ogg-player-soundthumb": "No player", "ogg-no-xiphqt": "You do not appear to have the XiphQT component for QuickTime.\nQuickTime cannot play Ogg files without this component.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload XiphQT\x3c/a\x3e or choose another player."};
wgOggPlayer.cortadoUrl = "http://upload.wikimedia.org/jars/cortado.jar";
wgOggPlayer.extPathUrl = "/w/extensions/OggHandler";


.ogg-player-options {
	border: solid 1px #ccc;
	padding: 2pt;
	text-align: left;
	font-size: 10pt;
}
 <!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Bear

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 



For other uses, see Bear (disambiguation).
"Ursine" redirects here. For the village, see Ursine, Nevada.


Bear
Fossil range: 38–0 Ma

PreЄ




















Є
O
S
D
C
P
T
J
K
Pg
N







Late Eocene - Recent



Bear species, as illustrated in the Cyclopeadia of the natural sciences



Scientific classification





Kingdom:
Animalia


Phylum:
Chordata


Class:
Mammalia


Order:
Carnivora


Suborder:
Caniformia


Superfamily:
Ursoidea


Family:
Ursidae
G. Fischer de Waldheim, 1817





Genera




Ailuropoda
Helarctos
Melursus
Ursus
Tremarctos
Agriarctos †
Amphicticeps †
Amphicynodon †
Arctodus †
Indarctos †
Parictis †
Plionarctos †
Ursavus †
Kolponomos †




Bears are mammals of the family Ursidae. Bears are classified as caniforms, or doglike carnivorans, with the pinnipeds being their closest living relatives. Although there are only eight living species of bear, they are widespread, appearing in a wide variety of habitats throughout the Northern Hemisphere and partially in the Southern Hemisphere. That which pertains to bears is called ursine. Bears are found in the continents of North America, South America, Europe, and Asia.
Common characteristics of modern bears include a large body with stocky legs, a long snout, shaggy hair, plantigrade paws with five nonretractile claws, and a short tail. While the polar bear is mostly carnivorous and the giant panda feeds almost entirely on bamboo, the remaining six species are omnivorous, with largely varied diets including both plants and animals.
With the exceptions of courting individuals and mothers with their young, bears are typically solitary animals. They are sometimes diurnal, but are usually active during the night (nocturnal) or twilight (crepuscular). Bears are aided by an excellent sense of smell, and despite their heavy build and awkward gait, they can run quickly and are adept climbers and swimmers. In autumn some bear species forage large amounts of fermented fruits which affects their behaviour.[1] Bears use shelters such as caves and burrows as their dens, which are occupied by most species during the winter for a long period of sleep similar to hibernation.
Bears have been hunted since prehistoric times for their meat and fur. To this day, they play a prominent role in the arts, mythology, and other cultural aspects of various human societies. In modern times, the bear's existence has been pressured through the encroachment of their habitats and the illegal trade of bears and bear parts, including the Asian bile bear market. The IUCN lists six bear species as vulnerable or endangered, and even "least concern" species such as the brown bear are at risk of extirpation in certain countries. The poaching and international trade of these most threatened populations is prohibited, but still ongoing.




Contents


1 Evolutionary relationships
2 Classification
3 Biology

3.1 Dentition
3.2 Diet & Interspecific Interactions
3.3 Reproduction
3.4 Winter dormancy


4 Relationship with humans

4.1 Bears as food and medicine


5 Culture

5.1 Myth and legend
5.2 Symbolic use
5.3 Figures of speech
5.4 Teddy bears
5.5 Names


6 References
7 Further reading
8 See also
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Evolutionary relationships




Fossil of Cave bear (Ursus spelaeus)


The Ursidae family belongs to the order Carnivora and is one of nine families in the suborder Caniformia, or "doglike" carnivorans. Bears' closest living relatives are the pinnipeds, a clade of three families: Odobenidae (the walrus), Otariidae (fur seals and sea lions), and Phocidae (true or earless seals). Bears comprise eight species in three subfamilies: Ailuropodinae (monotypic with the giant panda), Tremarctinae (monotypic with the Spectacled Bear), and Ursinae (containing six species divided into one to three genera, depending upon authority).




Unlike other carnivora, bears have plantigrade hind feet


The origins of Ursidae can be traced back to the very small and graceful Parictis that had a skull only 7 cm (3 in) long. Parictis first occur in North America in the Late Eocene (ca. 38 million years ago), but this genus did not appear in Eurasia and Africa until the Miocene.[2] The raccoon-sized, dog-like Cephalogale, however, is widely regarded as the most primitive ursid and is ideally suited as a representative basal taxon for the family. Cephalogale first appeared during the middle Oligocene and early Miocene (approximately 20–30 million years ago) in Europe. Cephalogale gave rise to a lineage of early bears of the genus Ursavus. This genus radiated in Asia and ultimately gave rise to the first true bears (genus Ursus) in Europe, 5 million years ago. Even among its primitive species, such as C. minor, it exhibits typical ursid synapomorphic dentition such as posteriorly oriented M2 postprotocrista molars, elongated m2 molars, and a reduction of the premolars. Living members of the ursids are morphologically well defined by their hypocarnivorous (non-strictly meat-eating) dentitions, but fossil ursids include hypercarnivorous (strictly meat-eating) taxa, although they never achieved the extreme hypercarnivory seen in mustelids. Cephalogale was a mesocarnivore (intermediate meat-eater).[3] Other extinct bear genera include Arctodus, Agriarctos, Plionarctos and Indarctos.
It is uncertain whether ursids were in Asia during the late Eocene, although there is some suggestion that a limited immigration from Asia may have produced Parictis in North America due to the major sea level lowstand at ca. 37 Ma, but no Parictis fossils have yet to be found in East Asia. Ursids did, however, become very diversified in Asia later during the Oligocene. Four genera representing two subfamilies (Amphicynodontinae and Hemicyoninae) have been discovered in the Oligocene of Asia: Amphicticeps, Amphicynodon, Pachycynodon, and Cephalogale. Amphicticeps is endemic from Asia and the other three genera are common to both Asia and Europe. This indicates migration of ursids between Asia and Europe during the Oligocene and migration of several taxa from Asia to North America likely occurred later during the late Oligocene or early Miocene. Although Amphicticeps is morphologically closely related to Allocyon, and also to Kolponomos of North America, no single genus of the Ursidae from this time period is known to be common to both Eurasia and North America. Cephalogale, however, do appear in North America in the early Miocene. It is interesting to note that rodents, such as Haplomys and Pseudotheridomys (late Oligocene) and Plesiosminthus and Palaeocastor (early Miocene), are common to both Asia and North America and this indicates that faunal exchange did occur between Asia and North America during the late Oligocene to early Miocene. Ursid migration from Asia to North America would therefore have also been very likely to occur during this time.[4] In the late Neogene three major carnivoran migrations that definitely included ursids are recognized between Eurasia and North America. The first (probably 21–18 Ma) was waves of intermittent dispersals including Amphicynodon, Cephalogale and Ursavus. The second migration occurred about 7–8 Ma and included Agriotherium – this was unusual among ursoids in that it also colonised sub-Saharan Africa. The third wave took place in the early Pliocene 4 Ma, consisting of Ursus.[5]
The giant panda's taxonomy has long been debated. Its original classification by Armand David in 1869 was within the bear genus Ursus, but in 1870 it was reclassified by Alphonse Milne-Edwards to the raccoon family.[6] In recent studies, the majority of DNA analyses suggest that the giant panda has a much closer relationship to other bears and should be considered a member of the family Ursidae.[7] The status of the red panda remains uncertain, but many experts, including Wilson and Reeder, classify it as a member of the bear family. Others place it with the raccoons in Procyonidae or in its own family, the Ailuridae. Multiple similarities between the two pandas, including the presence of false thumbs, are thought to represent convergent evolution for feeding primarily on bamboo.
There is also evidence that, unlike their neighbors elsewhere, the brown bears of Alaska's ABC islands are more closely related to polar bears than they are to other brown bears in the world. Researchers Gerald Shields and Sandra Talbot of the University of Alaska Fairbanks Institute of Arctic Biology studied the DNA of several samples of the species and found that their DNA is different from that of other brown bears. The researchers discovered that their DNA was unique compared to brown bears anywhere else in the world. The discovery has shown that while all other brown bears share a brown bear as their closest relative, those of Alaska's ABC Islands differ and share their closest relation with the polar bear.[8] There is also supposed to be a very rare large bear in China called the blue bear, which presumably is a type of black bear. This animal has never been photographed.
Koalas are often referred to as bears due to their appearance; they are not bears, however, but marsupials.

Classification




Brown Bear Ursus arctos, at the Moscow Zoo






Asiatic Black Bear Ursus thibetanus, at the Wrocław Zoo, Poland






Sun Bear Helarctos malayanus, at the Columbus Zoo






Giant Panda Ailuropoda melanoleuca, "Tian Tian"



Family Ursidae

Subfamily Ailuropodinae

Giant Panda, Ailuropoda melanoleuca
Dwarf Panda, Ailuropoda minor†


Subfamily Tremarctinae

Spectacled Bear, Tremarctos ornatus
Florida Cave Bear, Tremarctos floridanus†
Giant Short-faced Bear, Arctodus simus†
Unnamed short-faced bear species, Arctodus pristinus†
Brazilian Short-faced Bear, Arctotherium brasilense†
Argentine Short-faced Bear, Arctotherium latidens†


Subfamily Ursinae

Brown Bear, Ursus (Ursus) arctos

Subspecies Syrian (Brown) Bear Ursus arctos syriacus
Subspecies Grizzly Bear, Ursus arctos horribilis
Subspecies Kodiak Bear, Ursus arctos middendorffi
Subspecies Himalayan Brown Bear and Himalayan Red Bear, Ursus arctos isabellinus
Subspecies Himalayan Blue Bear, Ursus arctos pruinosus
Subspecies Bergman's Bear, Ursus arctos piscator†?
Subspecies Eurasian Brown Bear Ursus arctos arctos
Gobi bear, Ursus arctos gobiensis (very rare)
Atlas Bear, Ursus arctos crowtheri†


American Black Bear, Ursus (Ursus) americanus

Subspecies Cinnamon Bear, Ursus americanus cinnamomum
Subspecies Kermode Bear, Ursus americanus kermodei


Polar Bear, Ursus maritimus
Asiatic Black Bear, Ursus thibetanus

Formosan Black Bear, Ursus thibetanus formosanus
Ursus thibetanus gedrosianus
Ursus thibetanus japonicus
Ursus thibetanus laniger
Ursus thibetanus mupinensis
Ursus thibetanus thibetanus
Ursus thibetanus ussuricus


Sloth Bear, Melursus ursinus

Subspecies Sri Lankan Sloth Bear Melursus ursinus inornatus
Subspecies Indian Sloth Bear Melursus ursinus ursinus


Sun Bear, Helarctos malayanus

Subspecies Borneo Sun Bear Helarctos malayanus euryspilus


Auvergne Bear, Ursus minimus†
Etruscan Bear, Ursus etruscus†
European Cave Bear, Ursus spelaeus†
MacFarlane's Bear, Ursus (Vetularctos) inopinatus (cryptid; if an authentic species, extinct)
Deninger's bear, Ursus deningeri†





The genera Melursus and Helarctos are sometimes also included in Ursus. The Asiatic black bear and the polar bear used to be placed in their own genera, Selenarctos and Thalarctos which are now placed at subgenus rank.
A number of hybrids have been bred between American black, brown, and polar bears (see Ursid hybrids).

Biology



This section requires expansion.






Despite being quadrupeds, bears can stand and sit similarly to humans.


Bears are generally bulky and robust animals with relatively short legs. Unlike other land carnivorans, bears stand and walk on the soles of their feet rather than on their toes. They distribute their weight toward the hindfeet which makes then look lumbering when they walk. They are still quite fast with the brown bear reaching 30 mph although they are still slower than felines and canines. Bear can stand on their hindfeet and sit up straight with remarkable balance. Bears have non-retractable claws which are used for digging, climbing, tearing and catching prey. Their ears are rounded.

Dentition
Unlike most other members of the Carnivora, bears have relatively undeveloped carnassial teeth, and their teeth are adapted for a diet that includes a significant amount of vegetable matter. The canine teeth are large, and the molar teeth flat and crushing. There is considerable variation in dental formula even within a given species. It has been suggested that this indicates bears are still in the process of evolving from a carnivorous to a predominantly herbivorous diet. Polar bears appear to have secondarily re-evolved fully functional carnassials, as their diet has switched back towards carnivory.[9] The dental formula for living bears is:


Dentition


3.1.2-4.2


3.1.2-4.3



Diet & Interspecific Interactions
Their carnivorous reputation non-withstanding, most bears have adopted a diet of more plant than animal matter and are completely opportunistic omnivores. One exception is the Polar Bear, which has adopted a diet mainly of marine mammals to survive in the Arctic. The other exception is the Giant Panda which has adopted a diet mainly of bamboo. The Sloth Bear, though not as specialized as the previous two species, has lost several front teeth usually seen in bears and developed a long, suctioning tongue in order to feed on the termites and other burrowing insects that they favor. All bears will feed on any food source that becomes available. When taking warm-blooded animals, bears will typically take small or young animals, because of the endurance and potential danger that comes with attacking large prey. Although (besides Polar Bears) both species of black bear and the Brown Bear can sometimes take large prey, such as ungulates. Often, bears will feed on other large animals when they encounter a carcass, whether or not the carcass is claimed by or is the kill of another predator. This competition is the main source of interspecies conflict. Bears are typically the apex predators in their range due to their size and power, and can defend a carcass against nearly all comers. Mother bears also can usually defend their cubs against other predators. The Tiger is the only known predator known to regularly prey on adult bears, including Sloth Bears, Asiatic Black Bears, Giant Pandas, Sun Bears and small Brown Bears.

Reproduction
The bear's courtship period is very brief. Bears in northern climates reproduce seasonally, usually after a period of inactivity similar to hibernation, although tropical species breed all year round. Cubs are born toothless, blind, and bald. The cubs of brown bears, usually born in litters of 1–3, will typically stay with the mother for two full seasons. They feed on their mother's milk through the duration of their relationship with their mother, although as the cubs continue to grow, nursing becomes less frequent and learn to begin hunting with the mother. They will remain with the mother for approximately three years, until she enters the next cycle of estrus and drives the cubs off. Bears will reach sexual maturity in five to seven years. Male bears, especially Polar and Brown Bears, will kill and sometimes devour cubs born to another father in order to induce a female to breed again. Female bears are often successful in driving off males in protection of their cubs, despite being rather smaller.

Winter dormancy








Polar bear mother is nursing her cub


Many bears of northern regions are assumed to hibernate in the winter. While many bear species do go into a physiological state called hibernation or winter sleep, it is not true hibernation. In true hibernators, body temperatures drop to near ambient and heart rate slows drastically, but the animals periodically rouse themselves to urinate or defecate and to eat from stored food. The body temperature of bears, on the other hand, drops only a few degrees from normal and heart rate slows only slightly. They normally do not wake during this "hibernation", and therefore do not eat, drink, urinate or defecate the entire period. Higher body heat and being easily roused may be adaptations, because females give birth to their cubs during this winter sleep. It can therefore be considered a more efficient form of hibernation[citation needed] because they need not awake through the entire period, but they are more quickly and easily awakened at the end of their hibernation. They have to stay in a den for the whole hibernation.

Relationship with humans
See also: Bear danger




Polar bear at Wapusk National Park, Canada


Some species, such as the polar bear, American black bear, Sloth Bear and the brown bear, are dangerous to humans, especially in areas where they have become used to people. On the west coast of Canada, the American black bear has become an integral part of the silviculture industries, specifically treeplanting. The bears are coaxed into areas of harvested forest to "flush out" the other wildlife, i.e. moose, which are a far greater threat to planters. All bears are physically powerful and are likely capable of fatally attacking a person, but they, for the most part, are shy, easily frightened and will avoid humans. The danger that bears pose is often vastly exaggerated, in part by the human imagination. However, when a mother feels her cubs are threatened, she will behave ferociously. It is recommended to give all bears a wide berth because they are behaviorally unpredictable.
Laws have been passed in many areas of the world to protect bears from hunters habitat destruction. Some populated areas with bear populations have also outlawed the feeding of bears, including allowing them access to garbage or other food waste. Bears in captivity have been trained to dance, box, or ride bicycles; however, this use of the animals became controversial in the late 20th century. Bears were kept for baiting in Europe at least since the 16th century.

Bears as food and medicine
Many people enjoy hunting bears and eating them. Their meat is dark and stringy, like a tough cut of beef. In Cantonese cuisine, bear paws are considered a delicacy. The peoples of China, Japan, and Korea use bears' body parts and secretions (notably their gallbladders and bile) as part of traditional Chinese medicine. It is believed more than 12,000 bile bears are kept on farms, farmed for their bile, in China, Vietnam and South Korea.[10] Bear meat must be cooked thoroughly as it can often be infected with trichinellosis. [11] [12] [13]

Culture

Myth and legend




"En uheldig bjørnejakt" (An Unfortunate Bear Hunt) by Theodor Kittelsen.






Onikuma from Ehon Hyaku Monogatari






According to his hagiography, a bear killed Saint Corbinian's pack horse on the way to Rome and so the saint commanded it to carry his load. Once he arrived in Rome, however, he let the bear go.


Some evidence has been brought to light on prehistoric bear worship, see Arctic, Arcturus, Great Bear, Berserker, Kalevala. Anthropologists such as Joseph Campbell have regarded this as a common feature in most of the fishing and hunting-tribes. The prehistoric Finns, along with most Finno-Ugric peoples, considered the bear as the spirit of one's forefathers. This is why the bear was a greatly respected animal, with several euphemistic names. The bear is the national animal of Finland.
This kind of attitude is reflected in the traditional Russian fairy tale "Morozko", whose arrogant protagonist Ivan tries to kill a mother bear and her cubs — and is punished and humbled by having his own head turned magically into a bear's head and being subsequently shunned by human society.
"The Brown Bear of Norway" is a Scottish fairy tale telling the adventures of a girl who married a prince magically turned into a bear, and who managed to get him back into a human form by the force of her love and after many trials and difficulties.
There has been evidence about early bear worship in China and among the Ainu culture as well (see Iomante). Korean people in their mythology identify the bear as their ancestor and symbolic animal. According to the Korean legend, a god imposed a difficult test on a she-bear, and when she passed it the god turned her into a woman and married her.
In addition, the Proto-Indo-European word for bear, *h₂ŕ̥tḱos (ancestral to the Greek arktos, Latin ursus, Welsh arth (cf. Arthur), Albanian ari, Armenian arj, Sanskrit ṛkṣa, Hittite ḫartagga) seems to have been subject to taboo deformation or replacement in some langauges (as was the word for wolf, wlkwos), resulting in the use of numerous unrelated words with meanings like "brown one" (English bruin) and "honey-eater" (Slavic medved).[14] Thus some Indo-European language groups do not share the same PIE root. The theory of the bear taboo is taught to almost all beginning students of Indo-European and historical linguistics; the putative original PIE word for bear is itself descriptive, because a cognate word in Sanskrit is rakṣas, meaning "harm, injury".[15]
Legends of saints taming bears are common in the Alpine zone. In the arms of the bishopric of Freising (see illustration) the bear is the dangerous totem animal tamed by St. Corbinian and made to carry his civilised baggage over the mountains. A bear also features prominently in the legend of St. Romedius, who is also said to have tamed one of these animals and had the same bear carry him from his hermitage in the mountains to the city of Trento. Similar stories are told of Saint Gall and Saint Columbanus. This recurrent motif was used by the Church as a symbol of the victory of Christianity over Paganism, represented by the fiery.[16]
Imaginary bears are a popular feature of many children's stories including Goldilocks and the Three Bears, the Berenstein Bears, and Winnie the Pooh.
The constellations Ursa Major and Ursa Minor represent bears.

Symbolic use
For more details on this topic, see Bears in heraldry.
The Russian bear is a common National personification for Russia (as well as the Soviet Union) and even Germany. The brown bear is Finland's national animal. In the United States, the black bear is the state animal of Louisiana, New Mexico, and West Virginia; the grizzly bear is the state animal of both Montana and California.
Bears appear in the canting arms of Berne and Berlin.
Also, "bear", "bruin", or specific types of bears are popular nicknames or mascots, e.g. for sports teams (Chicago Bears, Boston Bruins); and a bear cub called Misha was mascot of the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow, USSR.
Smokey Bear has become a part of American culture since his introduction in 1944. Known to almost all Americans, he and his message, "Only You Can Prevent Forest Fires" (updated in 2001 to "Only You Can Prevent Wildfires") has been a symbol of preserving woodlands.[17] Smokey wears a hat similar to one worn by many U.S. state police officers, giving rise to the CB slang "bear" or "Smokey" for the highway patrol.





This section looks like an image gallery. Wikipedia is not a collection of images and policy discourages galleries. Please help by moving freely licensed images to Wikimedia Commons, possibly creating a gallery of the same name if one does not already exist. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for further suggestions. (March 2009)










The British Lion, the Persian Cat and the Russian Bear (see The Great Game)









Smokey Bear









"The Three Bears", Arthur Rackham's illustration to English Fairy Tales, by









The saddled "bear of St. Corbinian" the emblem of Freising, here incorporated in the arms of Pope Benedict XVI











The flag of California









Coat of Arms of the Abbey of Saint Gall






Figures of speech
The physical attributes and behaviours of bears are commonly used in figures of speech in English.

In the stock market, a bear market is a period of declining prices. Pessimistic forecasting or negative activity is said to be bearish (due to the stereotypical posture of bears looking downwards), and one who expresses bearish sentiment is a bear. Its opposite is a bull market, and bullish sentiment from bulls.
In gay slang, the term "bear" refers to male individuals who possess physical attributes much like a bear, such as a heavy build, abundant body hair, and commonly facial hair.
A bear hug is typically a tight hug that involves wrapping one's arms around another person, often leaving that person's arms immobile. It was used in the Ronald Reagan political ad "Bear in the woods."
Bear tracking - in the old Western states of the U.S. and to this day in the former Dakota Territory, the expression, "You ain't just a bear trackin'.", is used to mean "You ain't lying" or "That's for sure" or "You're not just blowing smoke". This expression evolved as an outgrowth of the experience pioneer hunters and mountainmen had when tracking bear. Bears often lay down false tracks and are notorious for doubling back on anything tracking them. If you are not following bear tracks, you are not following false trails or leads in your thoughts, words or deeds.
In Korean culture a person is referred to as being "like a bear" when they are stubborn or not sensitive to what is happening around their surroundings. Used as a phrase to call a person "stubborn bear."
The Bible compares King David's "bitter warriors", who fight with such fury that they could overcome many times their number of opponents, with "a bear robbed of her whelps in the field" (2 Book of Samuel, 17, 8 - see [1]). The term "a bereaved bear" (דב שכול), derived from this Biblical source, is still used in the literary Hebrew of contemporary Israel.


Teddy bears
Main article: Teddy bear
Around the world, many children have stuffed animals in the form of bears.

Names
In Scandinavia the word for bear is Björn (or Bjørn), and is a relatively common given name for males. The use of this name is ancient and has been found mentioned in several runestone inscriptions.[18] The name was also used by J.R.R. Tolkien in his book "The Hobbit", where a bear-like character is named Beorn.
The female first name "Ursula", originally derived from a Christian saint's name and common in English- and German-speaking countries, means "Little she-bear" (dimunitive of Latin "ursa"). In Switzerland the male first name "Urs" is especially popular.
In Russian and other Slavic languages, the word for bear, "Medved" (медведь), and variants or derivatives such as Medvedev are common surnames.
The Irish family name "McMahon" means "Son of Bear" in Irish.
One of widely held etymological explanations for the common name "Arthur" is that it originally meant "bear-like".
In East European Jewish communities, the name "Ber" (בער) — Yiddish cognate of "Bear" — has been attested as a common male first name, at least since the 18th century, and was among others the name of several prominent Rabbis. The Yiddish "Ber" is still in use among Orthodox Jewish communities in Israel, the US and other countries.
With the transition from Yiddish to Hebrew under the influence of Zionism, the Hebrew word for "bear", "Dov" (דב), was taken up in contemporary Israel and is at present among the commonly used male first names in that country.
"Ten Bears" (Paruasemana) was the name of a well-known 19th Century chieftain among the Comanche. Also among other Native American tribes, bear-related names are attested.

References


^ "Slovakia warns of tipsy bears". http://www.earthtimes.org/articles/show/241001,slovakia-warns-of-tipsy-bears.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-11. 
^ Kemp, T.S. (2005). The Origin and Evolution of Mammals. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0198507607. 
^ Wang, Xiaoming, Malcolm C. McKenna, and Demberelyin Dashzeveg (2005). "Amphicticeps and Amphicynodon (Arctoidea, Carnivora) from Hsanda Gol Formation, Central Mongolia and Phylogeny of Basal Arctoids with Comments on Zoogeography". American Museum Novitates (3483): 57. http://www.nhm.org/expeditions/rrc/wang/documents/Wangetal2005ShandGolarctoids.pdf. 
^ Wang Banyue and Qiu Zhanxiang (2005). "Notes on Early Oligocene Ursids (Carnivora, Mammalia) from Saint Jacques, Nei Mongol, China" (PDF). Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 279 (279): 116–124. doi:10.1206/0003-0090(2003)279<0116:C>2.0.CO;2. http://digitallibrary.amnh.org/dspace/bitstream/2246/447/22/B279a05.pdf. 
^ Qiu Zhanxiang (2003). "Dispersals of Neogene Carnivorans between Asia and North America" (PDF). Bulletin American Museum of Natural History 279 (279): 18–31. doi:10.1206/0003-0090(2003)279<0018:C>2.0.CO;2. http://digitallibrary.amnh.org/dspace/bitstream/2246/447/25/B279a02.pdf. 
^ Lindburg, Donald G. (2004). Giant Pandas: Biology and Conservation, pp. 7–9. University of California Press
^ Olaf R. P. Bininda-Emonds. "Phylogenetic Position of the Giant Panda". In Lindburg, Donald G. (2004) Giant Pandas: Biology and Conservation, pp. 11–35. University of California Press
^ The Brown Bear: Father of the Polar Bear?, Alaska Science Forum
^ Bunnell, Fred (1984). Macdonald, D.. ed. The Encyclopedia of Mammals. New York: Facts on File. pp. 87. ISBN 0-87196-871-1. 
^ "BBC Test kit targets cruel bear trade". http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/6742671.stm. 
^ "Trichinellosis Associated with Bear Meat". http://www.cdc.gov/MMWR/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5327a2.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-04. 
^ "BBC News - Bear meat poisoning in Siberia". http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/41529.stm. Retrieved on 2006-10-04. 
^ "Finnish Food Safety Authority: Bear meat must be inspected before serving in restaurants". http://www.evira.fi/portal/en/food/current_issues/?id=346. Retrieved on 2006-10-04. 
^ Votruba, Martin. "Bears". Slovak Studies Program. University of Pittsburgh. http://www.pitt.edu/~votruba/qsonhist/bear.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-12. 
^ The Brown One, The Honey Eater, The Shaggy Coat, The Destroyer
^ Michel Pastoreau (2007)L'ours. Historie d'un roi déchu
^ Ad Council : Forest Fire Prevention - Smokey Bear (1944–Present)
^ http://hildebrand.raa.se/arkeologi/uppland.asp



Further reading

Find more about bears on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity
 Ursidae from Wikispecies

Bears of the World, Terry Domico, Photographs by Terry Domico and Mark Newman, Facts on File, Inc, 1988, hardcover, ISBN 0-8160-1536-8
The Bear by William Faulkner
Brunner, Bernd: Bears — A Brief History. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2007


See also


Bear danger
Bear hunting
Celebrity bears
International Bear Association (IBA)
List of fatal bear attacks in North America by decade
List of fictional bears
List of historical bears
List of mammals
Mammal
Mammal classification
"Bear", famous Ronald Reagan anti-Soviet campaign ad
Manbearpig
Sankebetsu brown bear incident
"The Three Bears"
Russian Bear


External links

The Bears Project Information, reports and images of European brown bears and other living species
Grizzly Bear Outreach Project Information on the history, biology, and conservation of North American Grizzly Bears








v • d • e

Extant Carnivora species





Kingdom: Animalia · Phylum: Chordata · Class: Mammalia · Infraclass: Eutheria · Superorder: Laurasiatheria










 
Suborder Feliformia









Nandiniidae





Nandinia


African Palm Civet (N. binotata)









Herpestidae
(Mongooses)





Atilax


Marsh Mongoose (A. paludinosus)







Bdeogale


Bushy-tailed Mongoose (B. crassicauda} · Jackson's Mongoose (B. jacksoni) · Black-footed Mongoose (B. nigripes)







Crossarchus


Alexander's Kusimanse (C. alexandri) · Angolan Kusimanse (C. ansorgei) · Common Kusimanse (C. obscurus) · Flat-headed Kusimanse (C. platycephalus)







Cynictis


Yellow Mongoose (C. penicillata)







Dologale


Pousargues's Mongoose (D. dybowskii)







Galerella


Angolan Slender Mongoose (G. flavescens) · Somalian Slender Mongoose (G. ochracea) · Cape Gray Mongoose (G. pulverulenta) · Slender Mongoose (G. sanguinea)







Helogale


Ethiopian Dwarf Mongoose (H. hirtula) · Common Dwarf Mongoose (H. parvula)







Herpestes


Short-tailed Mongoose (H. brachyurus) · Indian Gray Mongoose (H. edwardsii) · Indian Brown Mongoose (H. fuscus) · Egyptian Mongoose (H. ichneumon) · Small Asian Mongoose (H. javanicus) · Long-nosed Mongoose (H. naso) · Collared Mongoose (H. semitorquatus) · Ruddy Mongoose (H. smithii) · Crab-eating Mongoose (H. urva) · Stripe-necked Mongoose (H. vitticollis)







Ichneumia


White-tailed Mongoose (I. albicauda)







Liberiictus


Liberian Mongoose (L. kuhni)







Mungos


Gambian Mongoose (M. gambianus) · Banded Mongoose (M. mungo)







Paracynictis


Selous' Mongoose (P. selousi)







Rhynchogale


Meller's Mongoose (R. melleri)







Suricata


Meerkat (S. suricatta)









Hyaenidae
(Hyenas)





Crocuta


Spotted Hyena (C. crocuta)







Hyaena


Brown Hyena (H. brunnea) · Striped Hyena (H. hyaena)







Proteles


Aardwolf (P. cristatus)









Felidae

Large family listed below






Viverridae

Large family listed below






Eupleridae

Large family listed below

















 
Family Felidae









Felinae





Acinonyx


Cheetah (A. jubatus)







Caracal


Caracal (C. caracal)







Catopuma


Bay Cat (C. badia) · Asian Golden Cat (C. temminckii)







Felis


Chinese Mountain Cat (F. bieti) · Cat (F. catus) · Jungle Cat (F. chaus) · Pallas' Cat (F. manul) · Sand Cat (F. margarita) · Black-footed Cat (F. nigripes) · Wildcat (F. silvestris)







Leopardus


Pantanal Cat (L. braccatus) · Colocolo (L. colocolo) · Geoffroy's Cat (L. geoffroyi) · Kodkod (L. guigna) · Andean Mountain Cat (L. jacobitus) · Pampas Cat (L. pajeros) · Ocelot (L. pardalis) · Oncilla (L. tigrinus) · Margay (L. wiedii)







Leptailurus


Serval (L. serval)







Lynx


Canadian Lynx (L. canadensis) · Eurasian Lynx (L. lynx) · Iberian Lynx (L. pardinus) · Bobcat (L. rufus)







Pardofelis


Marbled Cat (P. marmorata)







Prionailurus


Leopard Cat (P. bengalensis) · Iriomote Cat (P. iriomotensis) · Flat-headed Cat (P. planiceps) · Rusty-spotted Cat (P. rubiginosus) · Fishing Cat (P. viverrinus)







Profelis


African Golden Cat (P. aurata)







Puma


Cougar (P. concolor) · Jaguarundi (P. yagouaroundi)









Pantherinae





Neofelis


Clouded Leopard (N. nebulosa) · Bornean Clouded Leopard (N. diardi)







Panthera


Lion (P. leo) · Jaguar (P. onca) · Leopard (P. pardus) · Tiger (P. tigris)







Uncia


Snow Leopard (U. uncia)




















 
Family Viverridae (includes Civets)









Paradoxurinae





Arctictis


Binturong (A. binturong)







Arctogalidia


Small-toothed Palm Civet (A. trivirgata)







Macrogalidia


Sulawesi Palm Civet (M. musschenbroekii)







Paguma


Masked Palm Civet (P. larvata)







Paradoxurus


Asian Palm Civet (P. hermaphroditus) · Jerdon's Palm Civet (P. jerdoni) · Golden Palm Civet (P. zeylonensis)









Hemigalinae





Chrotogale


Owston's Palm Civet (C. owstoni)







Cynogale


Otter Civet (C. bennettii)







Diplogale


Hose's Palm Civet (D. hosei)







Hemigalus


Banded Palm Civet (H. derbyanus)









Prionodontinae
(Asiatic linsangs)





Prionodon


Banded Linsang (P. linsang) · Spotted Linsang (P. pardicolor)









Viverrinae





Civettictis


African Civet (C. civetta)







Genetta
(Genets)


Abyssinian Genet (G. abyssinica) · Angolan Genet (G. angolensis) · Bourlon's Genet (G. bourloni) · Crested Servaline Genet (G. cristata) · Common Genet (G. genetta) · Johnston's Genet (G. johnstoni) · Rusty-spotted Genet (G. maculata) · Pardine Genet (G. pardina) · Aquatic Genet (G. piscivora) · King Genet (G. poensis) · Servaline Genet (G. servalina) · Haussa Genet (G. thierryi) · Cape Genet (G. tigrina) · Giant Forest Genet (G. victoriae)







Poiana


Leighton's Linsang (P. leightoni) · African Linsang (P. richardsonii)







Viverra


Malabar Large-spotted Civet (V. civettina) · Large-spotted Civet (V. megaspila) · Malayan Civet (V. tangalunga) · Large Indian Civet (V. zibetha)







Viverricula


Small Indian Civet (V. indica)




















 
Family Eupleridae









Euplerinae





Cryptoprocta


Fossa (C. ferox)







Eupleres


Falanouc (E. goudotii)







Fossa


Malagasy Civet (F. fossana)









Galidiinae





Galidia


Ring-tailed Mongoose (G. elegans)







Galidictis


Broad-striped Malagasy Mongoose (G. fasciata) · Grandidier's Mongoose (G. grandidieri)







Mungotictis


Narrow-striped Mongoose (M. decemlineata)







Salanoia


Brown-tailed Mongoose (S. concolor)




















 
Suborder Caniformia (cont. below)









Ursidae
(Bears)





Ailuropoda


Giant Panda (A. melanoleuca)







Helarctos


Sun Bear (H. malayanus)







Melursus


Sloth Bear (M. ursinus)







Tremarctos


Spectacled Bear (T. ornatus)







Ursus


American Black Bear (U. americanus) · Brown Bear (U. arctos) · Polar bear (U. maritimus) · Asian Black Bear (U. thibetanus)









Mephitidae
(Skunks)





Conepatus
(Hog-nosed
skunks)


Molina's Hog-nosed Skunk (C. chinga) · Humboldt's Hog-nosed Skunk (C. humboldtii) · American Hog-nosed Skunk (C. leuconotus) · Striped Hog-nosed Skunk (C. semistriatus)







Mephitis


Hooded Skunk (M. macroura) · Striped Skunk (M. mephitis)







Mydaus


Sunda Stink Badger (M. javanensis) · Palawan Stink Badger (M. marchei)







Spilogale
(Spotted skunks)


Southern Spotted Skunk (S. angustifrons) · Western Spotted Skunk (S. gracilis) · Eastern Spotted Skunk (S. putorius) · Pygmy Spotted Skunk (S. pygmaea)









Procyonidae





Bassaricyon
(Olingos)


Allen's Olingo (B. alleni) · Beddard's Olingo (B. beddardi) · Bushy-tailed Olingo (B. gabbii) · Harris's Olingo (B. lasius) · Chiriqui Olingo (B. pauli)







Bassariscus


Ring-tailed Cat (B. astutus) · Cacomistle (B. sumichrasti)







Nasua
(Coatis inclusive)


White-nosed Coati (N. narica) · South American Coati (N. nasua)







Nasuella
(Coatis inclusive)


Mountain Coati (N. olivacea)







Potos


Kinkajou (P. flavus)







Procyon


Crab-eating Raccoon (P. cancrivorus) · Raccoon (P. lotor) · Cozumel Raccoon (P. pygmaeus)









Ailuridae





Ailurus


Red Panda (A. fulgens)




















 
Suborder Caniformia (cont. above)









Otariidae
(Eared seals)
(includes fur seals
and sea lions)
(Pinniped inclusive)





Arctocephalus


South American Fur Seal (A. australis) · Australasian Fur Seal (A. forsteri) · Galápagos Fur Seal (A. galapagoensis) · Antarctic Fur Seal (A. gazella) · Juan Fernández Fur Seal (A. philippii) · Brown Fur Seal (A. pusillus) · Guadalupe Fur Seal (A. townsendi) · Subantarctic Fur Seal (A. tropicalis)







Callorhinus


Northern Fur Seal (C. ursinus)







Eumetopias


Steller Sea Lion (E. jubatus)







Neophoca


Australian Sea Lion (N. cinerea)







Otaria


South American Sea Lion (O. flavescens)







Phocarctos


New Zealand Sea Lion (P. hookeri)







Zalophus


California Sea Lion (Z. californianus) · Galápagos Sea Lion (Z. wollebaeki)









Odobenidae
(Pinniped inclusive)





Odobenus


Walrus (O. rosmarus)









Phocidae
(Earless seals)
(Pinniped inclusive)





Cystophora


Hooded Seal (C. cristata)







Erignathus


Bearded Seal (E. barbatus)







Halichoerus


Gray Seal (H. grypus)







Histriophoca


Ribbon Seal (H. fasciata)







Hydrurga


Leopard Seal (H. leptonyx)







Leptonychotes


Weddell Seal (L. weddellii)







Lobodon


Crabeater Seal (L. carcinophaga)







Mirounga
(Elephant seals)


Northern Elephant Seal (M. angustirostris) · Southern Elephant Seal (M. leonina)







Monachus


Mediterranean Monk Seal (M. monachus) · Hawaiian Monk Seal (M. schauinslandi)







Ommatophoca


Ross Seal (O. rossi)







Pagophilus


Harp Seal (P. groenlandicus)







Phoca


Spotted Seal (P. largha) · Harbor Seal (P. vitulina)







Pusa


Caspian Seal (P. caspica) · Ringed Seal (P. hispida) · Baikal Seal (P. sibirica)









Canidae

Large family listed below






Mustelidae

Large family listed below

















 
Family Canidae









Atelocynus

Short-eared Dog (A. microtis)






Canis

Side-striped Jackal (C. adustus) · Golden Jackal (C. aureus) · Coyote (C. latrans) · Gray Wolf (C. lupus) · Black-backed Jackal (C. mesomelas) · Ethiopian Wolf (C. simensis)






Cerdocyon

Crab-eating Fox (C. thous)






Chrysocyon

Maned Wolf (C. brachyurus)






Cuon

Dhole (C. alpinus)






Lycalopex

Culpeo (L. culpaeus) · Darwin's Fox (L. fulvipes) · South American Gray Fox (L. griseus) · Pampas Fox (L. gymnocercus) · Sechuran Fox (L. sechurae) · Hoary Fox (L. vetulus)






Lycaon

African Wild Dog (L. pictus)






Nyctereutes

Raccoon Dog (N. procyonoides)






Otocyon

Bat-eared Fox (O. megalotis)






Speothos

Bush Dog (S. venaticus)






Urocyon

Gray Fox (U. cinereoargenteus) · Island Fox (U. littoralis)






Vulpes

Bengal Fox (V. bengalensis) · Blanford's Fox (V. cana) · Cape Fox (V. chama) · Corsac Fox (V. corsac) · Tibetan Sand Fox (V. ferrilata) · Arctic Fox (V. lagopus) · Kit Fox (V. macrotis) · Pale Fox (V. pallida) · Rüppell's Fox (V. rueppelli) · Swift Fox (V. velox) · Red Fox (V. vulpes) · Fennec Fox (V. zerda)

















 
Family Mustelidae









Lutrinae
(Otters)





Aonyx


African Clawless Otter (A. capensis) · Oriental Small-clawed Otter (A. cinerea)







Enhydra


Sea otter (E. lutris)







Hydrictis


Spotted-necked Otter (H. maculicollis)







Lontra


North American River Otter (L. canadensis) · Marine Otter (L. felina) · Neotropical Otter (L. longicaudis) · Southern River Otter (L. provocax)







Lutra


European Otter (L. lutra) · Hairy-nosed Otter (L. sumatrana)







Lutrogale


Smooth-coated Otter (L. perspicillata)







Pteronura


Giant Otter (P. brasiliensis)









Mustelinae
(including Badgers)





Arctonyx


Hog Badger (A. collaris)







Eira


Tayra (E. barbara)







Galictis


Lesser Grison (G. cuja) · Greater Grison (G. vittata)







Gulo


Wolverine (G. gulo)







Ictonyx


Saharan Striped Polecat (I. libyca) · Striped Polecat (I. striatus)







Lyncodon


Patagonian Weasel (L. patagonicus)







Martes
(Martens)


American Marten (M. americana) · Yellow-throated Marten (M. flavigula) · Beech Marten (M. foina) · Nilgiri Marten (M. gwatkinsii) · European Pine Marten (M. martes) · Japanese Marten (M. melampus) · Fisher (M. pennanti) · Sable (M. zibellina)







Meles


Japanese Badger (M. anakuma) · Asian Badger (M. leucurus) · European Badger (M. meles)







Mellivora


Honey Badger (M. capensis)







Melogale
(Ferret-badgers)


Bornean Ferret-badger (M. everetti) · Chinese Ferret-badger (M. moschata) · Javan Ferret-badger (M. orientalis) · Burmese Ferret-badger (M. personata)







Mustela
(Weasels)


Amazon Weasel (M. africana) · Mountain Weasel (M. altaica) · Ermine (M. erminea) · Steppe Polecat (M. eversmannii) · Colombian Weasel (M. felipei) · Long-tailed Weasel (M. frenata) · Japanese Weasel (M. itatsi) · Yellow-bellied Weasel (M. kathiah) · European Mink (M. lutreola) · Indonesian Mountain Weasel (M. lutreolina) · Black-footed Ferret (M. nigripes) · Least Weasel (M. nivalis) · Malayan Weasel (M. nudipes) · European Polecat (M. putorius) · Siberian Weasel (M. sibirica) · Back-striped Weasel (M. strigidorsa) · Egyptian Weasel (M. subpalmata)







Neovison
(Minks)


American Mink (N. vison)







Poecilogale


African Striped Weasel (P. albinucha)







Taxidea


American Badger (T. taxus)







Vormela


Marbled Polecat (V. peregusna)






















v • d • e

Heraldic creatures





Beasts

Bear • Boar • Bull • Dog • Camelopard • Hind • Kangaroo • Lion • Ox • Stag • Tiger • Wolf







Birds

Cock • Dove • Eagle • Pelican • Rook






Legendary
Creatures

Alce • Basilisk • Biscione • Cockatrice • Dragon • Enfield beast • Griffin • Keythong • Manticore • Martlet • Opinicus • Phoenix • Salamander • Unicorn • Wyvern






Fish

Dolphinfish • Ged • Luce • Scallop






Others

Bat • Bee • Crapaudy • Emmet • Serpent









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bear"
Categories: Bears | National symbols of RussiaHidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | Articles to be expanded since December 2008 | All articles to be expanded | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Aragonés
অসমীয়া
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Башҡорт
Bosanski
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Эрзянь
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
贛語
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
هَوُسَ
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Коми
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Limburgs
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
مَزِروني
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
Nēhiyawēwin / ᓀᐦᐃᔭᐍᐏᐣ
日本語
Nnapulitano
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Seeltersk
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
ייִדיש
Zazaki
中文









 This page was last modified on 29 March 2009, at 11:15.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
