













Native Americans in the United States - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Native_Americans_in_the_United_States";
		var wgTitle = "Native Americans in the United States";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "21217";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282786748;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Native Americans in the United States

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Native Americans
and Alaska Natives




 


Native American Portraits
Joseph Brant · Sequoyah · Pushmataha · Tecumseh
Touch the Clouds · Chief Joseph · Charles Eastman
Holmes Colbert · Jim Thorpe · John Herrington


Total population



American Indian and Alaska Native
One race: 2.5 million are registered [1]
In combination with one or more other races: 1.6 million are registered [2]
1.37% of the US population



Regions with significant populations


 United States
(predominantly the West and South)


Languages


English language
French language
Spanish language
Native American languages


Religion


Protestant
Sacred Pipe
Kiva Religion
Long House
Roman Catholic
Russian Orthodox


Related ethnic groups


Indigenous peoples of the Americas


Native Americans in the United States are the indigenous peoples from the regions of North America now encompassed by the continental United States, including parts of Alaska and the island state of Hawaii. They comprise a large number of distinct tribes, states, and ethnic groups, many of which survive as intact political communities. There has been a wide range of terms used to describe them and no consensus has been reached among indigenous members as to what they collectively prefer to be called. Native Americans have also been known as American Indians, Amerindians, Amerinds, Aboriginal, Indians, Indigenous, Original Americans, First Americans, Red Indians, or Red Men.
Ideologies clashed, old world diseases decimated, religious institutions challenged, and technologies were exchanged in what would be one of the greatest meetings of cultures in the history of the world. European colonization of the Americas led to centuries of conflict and adjustment between Old and New World societies. Most of the written historical record about Native Americans was made by Europeans after initial contact. Native Americans lived in hunter/farmer subsistence societies with significantly different value systems than those of the European colonists. The differences in culture between the Native Americans and Europeans, and the shifting alliances among different nations of each culture, led to great misunderstandings and long-lasting cultural conflicts.
After the colonies revolted against the United Kingdom and established the United States of America, the ideology of Manifest destiny became integral to the American nationalist movement. In the late 18th century, George Washington and Henry Knox conceived of the idea of "civilizing" Native Americans in preperation of American citizenship.[3][4][5][6][7] Assimilation, (whether voluntary as with the Choctaw,[8][9] or forced) became a consistent policy through American administrations. In the early decades of the 19th century, Native Americans of the American Deep South were removed from their homelands to accommodate American expansion. By the American Civil War, many Native American nations had been relocated west of the Mississippi River. Major Native American resistance took place in the form of "Indian Wars," which were frequent up until the 1890s.
Native Americans today have a special relationship with the United States of America. They can be found as members of nations, tribes, or bands of Native Americans who have sovereignty or independence from the government of the United States. Their societies and cultures still flourish amidst a larger immigrated American populace of African, Asian, European, and Middle Eastern peoples. Native Americans, who were not already U.S. citizens, were granted citizenship in 1924 by the Congress of the United States.




Contents


1 History

1.1 Pre-Columbian
1.2 European explorations
1.3 Foundations for freedom
1.4 Colonials revolt


2 Transmuted Native America

2.1 Assimilation

2.1.1 American citizens


2.2 American expansion justification

2.2.1 Indian Appropriations Act of 1871


2.3 Resistance
2.4 Removals and reservations


3 Wars

3.1 Civil War
3.2 World War II


4 Native Americans today

4.1 Societal discrimination, racism and conflicts

4.1.1 Native American mascots in sports


4.2 Blood Quantum
4.3 Depictions by Europeans and Americans
4.4 Terminology differences

4.4.1 Common usage in the United States


4.5 Gambling industry


5 Society, language, and culture

5.1 Ethno-linguistic classification
5.2 Cultural aspects
5.3 Organization

5.3.1 Gens structure
5.3.2 Tribal structure


5.4 Society and art
5.5 Agriculture
5.6 Religion
5.7 Gender roles
5.8 Sports

5.8.1 Team based
5.8.2 Individual based
5.8.3 U.S. Olympics


5.9 Music and art
5.10 Games
5.11 Economy

5.11.1 Barriers to economic development


5.12 Native Americans and African Americans
5.13 Notable Native Americans of the United States
5.14 Population


6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History

[edit] Pre-Columbian
Further information: Pre-Columbian North America and Indigenous peoples of the Americas
According to the still-debated New World migration model, a migration of humans from Eurasia to the Americas took place via Beringia, a land bridge which formerly connected the two continents across what is now the Bering Strait. The minimum time depth by which this migration had taken place is confirmed at c. 12,000 years ago, with the upper bound (or earliest period) remaining a matter of some unresolved contention.[10] These early Paleoamericans soon spread throughout the Americas, diversifying into many hundreds of culturally distinct nations and tribes.[11] According to the oral histories of many of the indigenous peoples of the Americas, they have been living there since their genesis, described by a wide range of traditional creation accounts.

[edit] European explorations
After 1492 European exploration of the Americas revolutionized how the Old and New Worlds perceived themselves. One of the first major contacts, in what would be called the American Deep South, occurred when conquistador Juan Ponce de León landed in La Florida in April of 1513. Ponce de León was later followed by other Spanish explorers, such as Pánfilo de Narváez in 1528 and Hernando de Soto in 1539.




Discovery of the Mississippi by William Henry Powell (1823–1879) is a Romantic depiction of de Soto seeing the Mississippi River for the first time. It hangs in the United States Capitol rotunda.


From the 16th through the 19th centuries, the population of Native Americans declined in the following ways: epidemic diseases brought from Europe; violence and warfare [12] at the hands of European explorers and colonists; displacement from their lands; internal warfare,[13] enslavement; and a high rate of intermarriage.[14][15] Most mainstream scholars believe that, among the various contributing factors, epidemic disease was the overwhelming cause of the population decline of the American natives because of their lack of immunity to new diseases brought from Europe.[16][17][18] With the rapid declines of some populations and continuing rivalries among their own nations, Native Americans sometimes re-organized to form new cultural groups.
European explorers and settlers brought infectious diseases to North America against which the Native Americans had no natural immunity. Chicken pox and measles, though common and rarely fatal among Europeans, often proved deadly to Native Americans. Smallpox proved particularly deadly to Native American populations.[19] Epidemics often immediately followed European exploration and sometimes destroyed entire village populations. While precise figures are difficult to determine, some historians estimate that up to 80% of some Native populations died due to European diseases after first contact. [20] One theory of Columbian exchange suggests explorers from the Christopher Columbus expedition contracted syphilis from indigenous peoples and carried it back to Europe, where it spread widely. Other researchers believe that the disease existed in Europe and Asia before Columbus and his men returned from exposure to indigenous peoples of the Americas, but that they brought back a more virulent form. (See Syphilis.)
In 1618–1619, smallpox wiped out 90% of the Massachusetts Bay Native Americans.[21] Historians believe Mohawk Native Americans were infected after contact with children of Dutch traders in Albany in 1634. The disease swept through Mohawk villages, reaching Native Americans at Lake Ontario in 1636, and the lands of the Iroquois by 1679, as it was carried by Mohawks and other Native Americans who traveled the trading routes.[22] The high rate of fatalities caused breakdowns in Native American societies and disrupted generational exchanges of culture.
Similarly, after initial direct contact with European explorers in the 1770s, smallpox rapidly killed at least 30% of Northwest Coast Native Americans. For the next 80 to 100 years, smallpox and other diseases devastated native populations in the region. Puget Sound area populations once as high as 37,000 were reduced to only 9,000 survivors by the time settlers arrived en masse in the mid-19th century.[23]
Smallpox epidemics in 1780–1782 and 1837–1838 brought devastation and drastic depopulation among the Plains Indians.[24][25] By 1832, the federal government established a smallpox vaccination program for Native Americans (The Indian Vaccination Act of 1832). It was the first program created to address a health problem of American Indians.[26][27]
In the sixteenth century Spaniards and other Europeans brought horses to the Americas. The reintroduction of horses resulted in benefits to Native Americans. As they adopted the animals, they began to change their cultures in substantial ways, especially by extending their ranges. Some of the horses escaped and began to breed and increase their numbers in the wild. (Horses had originated naturally in North America and migrated westward via the Bering Land Bridge to Asia. The early American horse was game for the earliest humans and was hunted to extinction about 7,000 BC, just after the end of the last glacial period.)
The re-introduction of the horse to North America had a profound impact on Native American culture of the Great Plains. The tribes trained and used the horses to ride and to carry packs or pull travois, to expand their territories markedly, more easily exchange goods with neighboring tribes, and more easily hunt game. They fully incorporated the use of horses into their societies, including using the horses to conduct warring raids.

[edit] Foundations for freedom
Further information: Great Law of Peace




Treaty of Penn with Indians by Benjamin West painted in 1827.


For some Europeans, Native American societies reminded them of a conception of a golden age known to them only in folk history.[28] The political theorist Jean Jacques Rousseau wrote that the idea of freedom and democratic ideals was born in the Americas because "it was only in America" that Europeans from 1500 to 1776 knew of societies that were "truly free."[28]


“
Natural freedom is the only object of the policy of the [Native Americans]; with this freedom do nature and climate rule alone amongst them ... [Native Americans] maintain their freedom and find abundant nourishment . . . [and are] people who live without laws, without police, without religion.
”



—- Jean Jacques Rousseau, Jesuit and Savage in New France[28]



The Iroquois nations' political confederacy and democratic government have been credited as influences on the Articles of Confederation and the United States Constitution.[29][30] Historians debate how much the colonists borrowed from existing Native American forms. Several founding fathers had contact with Native American leaders and had learned about their style of government. Prominent figures such as Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Franklin were more involved with their stronger and larger native neighbor-- the Iroquois.


“
As powerful, dense [Mound Builder] populations were reduced to weakened, scattered remnants, political readjustments were necessary. New confederacies were formed. One such was to become a pattern called up by Benjamin Franklin when the thirteen colonies struggled to confederate: "If the Iroquois can do it so can we," he said in substance.
”



—- Bob Ferguson, Choctaw Government to 1830[31]




[edit] Colonials revolt




Yamacraw Creek Native Americans meet with the Trustee of the colony of Georgia in England, July 1734, Notice the Native American boy (in a blue coat) and woman (in a red dress) in European clothing.


During the American Revolution, the newly proclaimed United States competed with the British for the allegiance of Native American nations east of the Mississippi River. Most Native Americans who joined the struggle sided with the British, hoping to use the American Revolutionary War to halt further colonial expansion onto Native American land. Many native communities were divided over which side to support in the war. The first native community to sign a treaty with the new United States Government was the Lenape. For the Iroquois Confederacy, the American Revolution resulted in civil war. The only tribe to ally with the colonials were the Onondaga.
Frontier warfare during the American Revolution was particularly brutal, and numerous atrocities were committed by settlers and native tribes alike. Noncombatants suffered greatly during the war. Military expeditions on each side destroyed villages and food supplies to reduce the ability of people to fight, as in frequent raids in the Mohawk Valley and western New York.[32] The largest of these expeditions was the Sullivan Expedition of 1779, in which American colonial troops destroyed more than 40 Iroquois villages to neutralize Iroquois raids in upstate New York. The expedition failed to have the desired effect: Native American activity became even more determined.


“
American Indians have played a central role in shaping the history of the nation, and they are deeply woven into the social fabric of much of American life ... During the last three decades of the twentieth century, scholars of ethnohistory, of the "new Indian history," and of Native American studies forcefully demonstrated that to understand American history and the American experience, one must include American Indians.
”



—- Robbie Ethridge, Creek Country.[33]



The British made peace with the Americans in the Treaty of Paris (1783), through which they ceded vast Native American territories to the United States without informing the Native Americans, leading immediately to the Northwest Indian War. The United States initially treated the Native Americans who had fought with the British as a conquered people who had lost their lands. Although many of the Iroquois tribes went to Canada with the Loyalists, others tried to stay in New York and western territories and tried to maintain their lands. Nonetheless, the state of New York made a separate treaty with Iroquois and put up for sale 5,000,000 acres (20,000 km2) of land that had previously been their territory. The state established a reservation near Syracuse for the Onondagas who had been allies of the colonists.


“
The Indians presented a reverse image of European civilization which helped America establish a national identity that was neither savage nor civilized.
”



—- Charles Sanford, The Quest for Paradise[31]



The United States was eager to expand, to develop farming and settlements in new areas, and to satisfy land hunger of settlers from New England and new immigrants. The national government initially sought to purchase Native American land by treaties. The states and settlers were frequently at odds with this policy.[34]

[edit] Transmuted Native America




Benjamin Hawkins, seen here on his plantation, teaches Creek Native Americans how to use European technology. Painted in 1805.


European nations sent Native Americans (sometimes against their will) to the Old World as objects of curiosity. They often entertained royalty and were sometimes prey to commercial purposes. Christianization of Native Americans was a charted purpose for some European colonies.
United States policy toward Native Americans had continued to evolve after the American Revolution. George Washington and Henry Knox believed that Native Americans were equals but that their society was inferior. Washington formulated a policy to encourage the "civilizing" process.[4] Washington had a six-point plan for civilization which included,

1. impartial justice toward Native Americans
2. regulated buying of Native American lands
3. promotion of commerce
4. promotion of experiments to civilize or improve Native American society
5. presidential authority to give presents
6. punishing those who violated Native American rights.[6]

Robert Remini, a historian, wrote that "once the Indians adopted the practice of private property, built homes, farmed, educated their children, and embraced Christianity, these Native Americans would win acceptance from white Americans."[5] The United States appointed agents, like Benjamin Hawkins, to live among the Native Americans and to teach them how to live like whites.[3]


“
How different would be the sensation of a philosophic mind to reflect that instead of exterminating a part of the human race by our modes of population that we had persevered through all difficulties and at last had imparted our Knowledge of cultivating and the arts, to the Aboriginals of the Country by which the source of future life and happiness had been preserved and extended. But it has been conceived to be impracticable to civilize the Indians of North America - This opinion is probably more convenient than just.
”



—-Henry Knox to George Washington, 1790s.[35]




[edit] Assimilation
For more details on this topic, see Native American boarding schools .




Portrait of Native Americans from the Cherokee, Cheyenne, Choctaw, Comanche, Iroquois, and Muscogee tribes in American attire. Photos dates from 1868 to 1924.


In the late eighteenth century, reformers starting with Washington and Knox,[36] supported educating native children, in efforts to "civilize" or otherwise assimilate Native Americans to the larger society (as opposed to relegating them to reservations). The Civilization Fund Act of 1819 promoted this civilization policy by providing funding to societies (mostly religious) who worked on Native American improvement.
After the American Civil War and Indian wars in the late 19th century, Native American boarding schools were established, which were often run primarily by or affiliated with Christian missionaries.[37] At this time American society thought that Indian children needed to be acculturated to the general society. The boarding school experience often proved traumatic to Native American children, who were forbidden to speak their native languages, taught Christianity and denied the right to practice their native religions, and in numerous other ways forced to abandon their Native American identities[38] and adopt European-American culture. There were documented cases of sexual, physical and mental abuse occurring at these schools.[39][40]

[edit] American citizens
Native Americans often had a legally ambiguous status in the United States, being neither full citizens of the U.S. nor of a recognized foreign nation. United States laws, especially on the relatively unpopulated frontiers, were applied unevenly. The first documented conviction and execution of white men for murder of American Indians was in 1825, following the Fall Creek Massacre in Indiana in 1824.
The Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 granted U.S. citizenship to all Native Americans. Prior to the passage of the act, nearly two-thirds of Native Americans were already U.S. citizens.[41] The earliest recorded date of Native Americans' becoming U.S. citizens was in 1831 when the Mississippi Choctaw became citizens after the United States Legislature ratified the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek. Under article XIV of that treaty, any Choctaw who elected not to move with the Choctaw Nation could become an American citizen when he registered and if he stayed on designated lands for five years after treaty ratification.
Through the years, Indians became US citizens by:

1. Treaty provision (as with the Mississippi Choctaw)
2. Registration and land allotment under the Dawes Act of February 8, 1887
3. Issuance of Patent in Fee Simple
4. Adopting Habits of Civilized Life
5. Minor Children
6. Citizenship by Birth
7. Becoming Soldiers and Sailors in the U.S. Armed Forces
8. Marriage to a US citizen
9. Special Act of Congress.



“
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That all noncitizen Native Americans born within the territorial limits of the United States be, and they are hereby, declared to be citizens of the United States: Provided, That the granting of such citizenship shall not in any manner impair or otherwise affect the right of any Native American to tribal or other property.
”



—-Indian Citizenship Act of 1924




[edit] American expansion justification




Native Americans flee from the allegorical representation of Manifest Destiny, Columbia, painted in 1872 by John Gast


In July 1845, the New York newspaper editor John L. O’Sullivan coined the phrase “Manifest Destiny,” to explain how the "design of Providence" supported the territorial expansion of the United States.[42] Manifest Destiny had serious consequences for Native Americans since continental expansion implicitly meant the occupation of Native American land. Manifest Destiny was an explanation or justification for expansion and westward movement, or, in some interpretations, an ideology or doctrine which helped to promote the process of civilization. Advocates of Manifest Destiny believed that expansion was not only good, but that it was obvious and certain. The term was first used primarily by Jacksonian Democrats in the 1840s to promote the annexation of much of what is now the Western United States (the Oregon Territory, the Texas Annexation, and the Mexican Cession).


“
What a prodigious growth this English race, especially the American branch of it, is having! How soon will it subdue and occupy all the wild parts of this continent and of the islands adjacent. No prophecy, however seemingly extravagant, as to future achievements in this way [is] likely to equal the reality.
”



—-Rutherford Birchard Hayes, U.S. President, January 1, 1857, Personal Diary.[43]



The age of Manifest Destiny, which came to be known as "Indian Removal", gained ground. Although some humanitarian advocates of removal believed that Native Americans would be better off moving away from whites, an increasing number of Americans regarded the natives as nothing more than "savages" who stood in the way of American expansion. Thomas Jefferson believed that while Native Americans were the intellectual equals of whites, they had to live like the whites or inevitably be pushed aside by them. Jefferson's belief, rooted in Enlightenment thinking, that whites and Native Americans would merge to create a single nation did not last, and he began to believe that the natives should emigrate across the Mississippi River and maintain a separate society.

[edit] Indian Appropriations Act of 1871
In 1871 Congress added a rider to the Indian Appropriations Act to end the United States' recognizing additional Indian tribes or nations, and prohibiting additional treaties.


“
That hereafter no Indian nation or tribe within the territory of the United States shall be acknowledged or recognized as an independent nation, tribe, or power with whom the United States may contract by treaty: Provided, further, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to invalidate or impair the obligation of any treaty heretofore lawfully made and ratified with any such Indian nation or tribe.
”



—-Indian Appropriations Act of 1871[44]




[edit] Resistance




Tecumseh was the Shawnee leader of Tecumseh's War who attempted to organize an alliance of Native American tribes throughout North America.[45]


U.S. government authorities entered into numerous treaties during this period but later abrogated many for various reasons; however, many treaties are considered "living" documents. Major conflicts east of the Mississippi River include the Pequot War, Creek War, and Seminole Wars. Notably, a multi-tribal army led by Tecumseh, a Shawnee chief, fought a number of engagements during the period 1811-12, known as Tecumseh's War. In the latter stages, Tecumseh's group allied with the British forces in the War of 1812 and was instrumental in the conquest of Detroit. St. Clair's Defeat (1791) was the worst U.S. Army defeat by Native Americans in U.S. history.
Native American Nations west of the Mississippi were numerous and were the last to submit to U.S. authority. Conflicts generally known as "Indian Wars" broke out between American government and Native American societies. The Battle of Little Bighorn (1876) was one of the greatest Native American victories. Defeats included the Creek War of 1813-14, the Sioux Uprising of 1862, the Sand Creek Massacre (1864) and the Wounded Knee in 1890.[46] These conflicts were catalysts to the decline of dominant Native American culture.


“
The Indian [was thought] as less than human and worthy only of extermination. We did shoot down defenseless men, and women and children at places like Camp Grant, Sand Creek, and Wounded Knee. We did feed strychnine to red warriors. We did set whole villages of people out naked to freeze in the iron cold of Montana winters. And we did confine thousands in what amounted to concentration camps.
”



— Wellman- The Indian Wars of the West, 1934[47]




[edit] Removals and reservations
Further information: List of Native American reservations in the United States




The Trail of Tears, painted by Robert Lindneux in 1942


In the nineteenth century, the incessant westward expansion of the United States incrementally compelled large numbers of Native Americans to resettle further west, often by force, almost always reluctantly. Native Americans believed this forced relocation illegal, given the Hopewell Treaty of 1785. Under President Andrew Jackson, United States Congress passed the Indian Removal Act of 1830, which authorized the President to conduct treaties to exchange Native American land east of the Mississippi River for lands west of the river. As many as 100,000 Native Americans relocated to the West as a result of this Indian Removal policy. In theory, relocation was supposed to be voluntary and many Native Americans did remain in the East. In practice, great pressure was put on Native American leaders to sign removal treaties.
The most egregious violation of the stated intention of the removal policy took place under the Treaty of New Echota, which was signed by a dissident faction of Cherokees but not the elected leadership. President Jackson rigidly enforced the treaty, which resulted in the deaths of an estimated 4,000 Cherokees on the Trail of Tears. About 17,000 Cherokees, along with approximately 2,000 enslaved blacks held by Cherokees, were removed from their homes.[48]
Native American Removal forced or coerced the relocation of major Native American groups in the Eastern United States, resulting directly and indirectly in the deaths of tens of thousands.[citation needed] Tribes were generally located to reservations where they could more easily be separated from traditional life and pushed into European-American society. Some southern states additionally enacted laws in the 19th century forbidding non-Native American settlement on Native American lands, with the intention to prevent sympathetic white missionaries from aiding the scattered Native American resistance.[49]

[edit] Wars

[edit] Civil War
For more details on this topic, see Native Americans in the American Civil War.




Ely S. Parker was a Union Civil War General who wrote the terms of surrender between the United States and the Confederate States of America.[50] Parker was one of two Native Americans to reach the rank of Brigadier General during the Civil War.


Many Native Americans served in the military during the Civil War.[51] By fighting with the European-Americans, Native Americans hoped to gain favor with the prevailing government by supporting the war effort.[51][52] They also believed war service might mean an end to discrimination and relocation from ancestral lands to western territories.[51] While the war raged and African Americans were proclaimed free, the U.S. government continued its policies of assimilation, submission, removal, or extermination of Native Americans.[51]
General Ely S. Parker, a member of the Seneca tribe, created the articles of surrender which General Robert E. Lee signed at Appomattox Court House on April 9, 1865. Gen. Parker, who served as Gen. Ulysses S. Grant's military secretary and was a trained attorney, was once rejected for Union military service because of his race. At Appomattox, Lee is said to have remarked to Parker, "I am glad to see one real American here," to which Parker replied, "We are all Americans."[51]

[edit] World War II
For more details on this topic, see Native Americans and World War II.
Some 44,000 Native Americans served in the United States military during World War II.[53] Described as the first large-scale exodus of indigenous peoples from the reservations since the removals of the 1800s, the international conflict was a turning point in Native American history. Men of native descent were drafted into the military like other American males. Their fellow soldiers often held them in high esteem, in part since the legend of the tough Indian warrior had become a part of the fabric of American historical legend. White servicemen sometimes showed a lighthearted respect toward American Indian comrades by calling them "chief."
The resulting increase in contact with the world outside of the reservation system brought profound changes to Native American culture. "The war," said the U.S. Indian commissioner in 1945, "caused the greatest disruption of Native life since the beginning of the reservation era", affecting the habits, views, and economic well-being of tribal members.[54] The most significant of these changes was the opportunity—as a result of wartime labor shortages—to find well-paying work. Yet there were losses to contend with as well. Altogether, 1,200 Pueblo people served in World War II; only about half came home alive. In addition many more Navajo served as code talkers for the military in the Pacific. The code they made was never cracked by the Japanese.

[edit] Native Americans today




Portrait of Native Americans from various bands, tribes, and nations from across "Indian country."


In 1975 the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act was passed, marking the culmination of 15 years of policy changes. Related to Indian activism, the Civil Rights Movement and community development aspects of social programs of the 1960s, the Act recognized the need of Native Americans for self-determination. It marked the US government's turn away from the policy of termination, the US government encouraged American Indians' efforts at self government and determining their futures.
There are 562 federally recognized tribal governments in the United States. These tribes possess the right to form their own government, to enforce laws (both civil and criminal), to tax, to establish requirements for membership, to license and regulate activities, to zone and to exclude persons from tribal territories. Limitations on tribal powers of self-government include the same limitations applicable to states; for example, neither tribes nor states have the power to make war, engage in foreign relations, or coin money (this includes paper currency).[55]
Many Native Americans and advocates of Native American rights point out that the US Federal government's claim to recognize the "sovereignty" of Native American peoples falls short, given that the US still wishes to govern Native American peoples and treat them as subject to US law. True respect for Native American sovereignty, according to such advocates, would require the United States federal government to deal with Native American peoples in the same manner as any other sovereign nation, handling matters related to relations with Native Americans through the Secretary of State, rather than the Bureau of Indian Affairs. The Bureau of Indian Affairs reports on its website that its "responsibility is the administration and management of 55,700,000 acres (225,000 km2) of land held in trust by the United States for American Indians, Indian tribes, and Alaska Natives."[56] Many Native Americans and advocates of Native American rights believe that it is condescending for such lands to be considered "held in trust" and regulated in any fashion by a foreign power, whether the US Federal Government, Canada, or any other non-Native American authority.


“
Forced termination is wrong, in my judgment, for a number of reasons. First, the premises on which it rests are wrong ... The second reason for rejecting forced termination is that the practical results have been clearly harmful in the few instances in which termination actually has been tried ... The third argument I would make against forced termination concerns the effect it has had upon the overwhelming majority of tribes which still enjoy a special relationship with the Federal government ... The recommendations of this administration represent an historic step forward in Indian policy. We are proposing to break sharply with past approaches to Indian problems.
”



—- President Richard Nixon, Special Message on Indian Affairs, July 8, 1970.[57]



According to 2003 United States Census Bureau estimates, a little over one third of the 2,786,652 Native Americans in the United States live in three states: California at 413,382, Arizona at 294,137 and Oklahoma at 279,559.[58]
As of 2000, the largest tribes in the U.S. by population were Navajo, Cherokee, Choctaw, Sioux, Chippewa, Apache, Blackfeet, Iroquois, and Pueblo. In 2000, eight of ten Americans with Native American ancestry were of mixed blood. It is estimated that by 2100 that figure will rise to nine out of ten.[59] In addition, there are a number of tribes that are recognized by individual states, but not by the federal government. The rights and benefits associated with state recognition vary from state to state.
Some tribal nations have been unable to establish their heritage and obtain federal recognition. The Muwekma Ohlone of the San Francisco bay area are pursuing litigation in the federal court system to establish recognition.[60] Many of the smaller eastern tribes have been trying to gain official recognition of their tribal status. The recognition confers some benefits, including the right to label arts and crafts as Native American and permission to apply for grants that are specifically reserved for Native Americans. But gaining recognition as a tribe is extremely difficult; to be established as a tribal group, members have to submit extensive genealogical proof of tribal descent.
Native American struggles amid poverty to maintain life on the reservation or in larger society have resulted in a variety of health issues, some related to nutrition and health practices. The community suffers a disproportionately high rate of alcoholism.[61]. In addition, some studies have found high rates of heart disease, diabetes, drug addiction, mental illness and suicide.[citation needed] Agencies working with Native American communities are trying better to respect their traditions and integrate benefits of Western medicine within their own cultural practices.
In July 2000 the Washington state Republican Party[62] adopted a resolution of termination for tribal governments. In 2007 a group of Democrat congressmen and congresswomen introduced a bill in the U.S. House of Representatives to "terminate" the Cherokee Nation.[63] As of 2004, various Native Americans are wary of attempts by others to get control of their reservation lands for natural resources, such as coal and uranium in the West.[64][65][66]
In the state of Virginia, Native Americans face a unique problem. Virginia has no federally recognized tribes. Some analysts attribute this to work by Walter Ashby Plecker, who as registrar of the state's Bureau of Vital Statistics vigorously applied his own interpretation of the one-drop rule. He served from 1912-1946. In 1920 the state's General Assembly passed a law recognizing only two races: "white" and "colored". Plecker believed that the state's Native Americans had been "mongrelized" by intermarriage with African Americans and, further, that some people with partial black heritage were trying to pass as Indians. To Plecker, anyone with any African heritage had to be classified as colored, regardless of appearance and cultural identification. Plecker pressured local governments into reclassifying all Native Americans in the state as "colored", and gave them lists of family surnames to examine for reclassification based on his interpretation of data and the law. This led to the state's destruction of accurate records related to Native American communities and families. Sometimes different members of the same family were split by classification as "white" or "colored". There was no place for primary identification as Native American.[67]




This Census Bureau map depicts the locations of Native Americans in the United States as of 2000.


To achieve federal recognition and its benefits, tribes must prove their continuous existence since 1900. The federal government has maintained this requirement, in part because through participation on councils and committees, federally recognized tribes have been adamant about groups' satisfying the same requirements as they did.[68]
In the early 21st century, Native American communities remain an enduring fixture on the United States landscape, in the American economy, and in the lives of Native Americans. Communities have consistently formed governments that administer services like firefighting, natural resource management, and law enforcement. Most Native American communities have established court systems to adjudicate matters related to local ordinances, and most also look to various forms of moral and social authority vested in traditional affiliations within the community. To address the housing needs of Native Americans, Congress passed the Native American Housing and Self Determination Act (NAHASDA) in 1996. This legislation replaced public housing, and other 1937 Housing Act programs directed towards Indian Housing Authorities, with a block grant program directed towards Tribes.

[edit] Societal discrimination, racism and conflicts




A discriminatory sign posted above a bar. Mid-20th century.




“
He is ignoble—base and treacherous, and hateful in every way. Not even imminent death can startle him into a spasm of virtue. The ruling trait of all savages is a greedy and consuming selfishness, and in our Noble Red Man it is found in its amplest development. His heart is a cesspool of falsehood, of treachery, and of low and devilish instincts ... The scum of the earth!
”



— Mark Twain, 1870, The Noble Red Man (a satire on James Fenimore Cooper's portrayals) [69]



Perhaps because the most well-known Native Americans live on reservations relatively isolated from major population centers, universities have conducted relatively little public opinion research on attitudes toward them among the general public. In 2007 the non-partisan Public Agenda organization conducted a focus group study. Most non-Indians admitted they rarely encountered Native Americans in their daily lives. While sympathetic toward Native Americans and expressing regret over the past, most people had only a vague understanding of the problems facing Native Americans today. For their part, Native Americans told researchers that they believed they continued to face prejudice and mistreatment in the broader society.[70]


“
LeCompte also endured taunting on the battlefield. "They ridiculed him and called him a 'drunken Indian.' They said, 'Hey, dude, you look just like a haji--you'd better run.' They call the Arabs 'haji.' I mean, it's one thing to worry for your life, but then to have to worry about friendly fire because you don't know who in the hell will shoot you?
”



— Tammie LeCompte, May 25, 2007, "Soldier highlights problems in U.S. Army"[71]



Conflicts between the federal government and Native Americans occasionally erupt into violence. Perhaps the more notable late 20th century event was the Wounded Knee incident in small town South Dakota. During the period of expanding civil rights protests, activist members of the American Indian Movement (AIM) had taken control of Wounded Knee. They were protesting issues related to Indian rights and the nearby Pine Ridge Reservation. On February 27, 1973, federal law enforcement officials and the United States military surrounded the town. In the ensuing confrontation, two members of AIM were killed and one United States Marshal was wounded and paralyzed. Leonard Peltier, an AIM activist and leader of the event, was arrested and charged, and at trial convicted of causing the uprising that resulted in the attack on the US marshal. He was sentenced to life in prison.
In 2007, AIM activist John Graham was extradited from Canada to the US to stand trial for killing N.S. Mimaq in 1975. The Native American woman activist was killed years after the Wounded Knee standoff, allegedly for having been an FBI informant at the time.[72][73]

[edit] Native American mascots in sports




A student acting as Chief Osceola, the Florida State University mascot


Main article: Native American mascot controversy
The use of Native American mascots in sports has become a contentious issue in the United States and Canada. Americans have had a history of "playing Indian" that dates back to at least the 1700s.[74] Many individuals admire the heroism and romanticism evoked by the classic Native American warrior image, but numerous Native Americans think use of items associated with them as mascots is both offensive and demeaning. No one can control the use of images and words in a free society, of course, and not everyone agrees that certain images are only negative or offensive in meaning. While many universities and professional sports team no longer use such images without consultation with Native American nations, some lower level schools and sports teams continue to do so.


“
(Trudie Lamb Richmond doesn't) know what to say when kids argue, 'I don't care what you say, we are honoring you. We are keeping our Indian.' ... What if it were 'our black' or 'our Hispanic'?
”



—- Amy D'orio quoting Trudie Lamb Richmond, March 1996, "Indian Chief Is Mascot No More"[75]



In August 2005, the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) banned the use of "hostile and abusive" Native American mascots in postseason tournaments.[76] An exception was made to allow the use of tribal names as long as approved by that tribe (such as the Seminole Tribe of Florida's approving use of their name for the team of Florida State University.)[77][78] The use of Native American-themed team names in U.S. professional sports is widespread. Examples are mascot Chief Wahoo and teams such as the Cleveland Indians and Washington Redskins, considered controversial by some.


“
"Could you imagine people mocking African Americans in black face at a game?" he said. "Yet go to a game where there is a team with an Indian name and you will see fans with war paint on their faces. Is this not the equivalent to black face?"
”



—- "Native American Mascots Big Issue in College Sports",Teaching Tolerance, May 9, 2001[79]




[edit] Blood Quantum
Further information: Blood quantum laws




Five Indians and a Captive, painted by Carl Wimar, 1855


Intertribal and interracial mixing was common among Native American tribes making it difficult to clearly identify to which tribe an individual belonged.[14][15] Bands or entire tribes occasionally split or merged to form more viable groups in reaction to the pressures of climate, disease and warfare.[80] A number of tribes practiced the adoption of captives into their group to replace their members who had been captured or killed in battle. These captives came from rival tribes and later from European settlers. Some tribes also sheltered or adopted white traders and runaway slaves and Native American-owned slaves. So a number of paths to genetic mixing existed.
While in recent years, some commentators suggest high rates of admixture between Native Americans and African Americans, genetic genealogists have found lesser frequency. Experts describe the frequency as 5 percent of African Americans have at least 12.5 percent Native American ancestry (equivalent to one great-grandparent). Of course this means that a greater percentage could have a very small percentage of ancestry, but it also suggests that some estimates of admixture have been too high.[81]
Intermarriage among tribes proved an obstacle to individuals' qualifying for recognition and assistance from the U.S. federal government, or for tribal money and services. In some instances they were allowed to claim only one tribal identity, and sometimes lost rights to land because of that. To receive such support, Native Americans must belong to and be certified by a recognized tribal entity. This has taken a number of different forms as each tribal government makes its own rules while the federal government has its own set of standards. In many cases, qualification is based upon the percentage of Native American blood, or the "blood quantum" of an individual seeking recognition.
To attain such certainty, some tribes have begun requiring genealogical DNA testing.[82] Requirements for tribal membership vary widely by tribe. The Cherokee require descent from a Native American listed on the early 20th century Dawes Rolls. Federal scholarships for Native Americans require the student to be enrolled in a federally recognized tribe and have at least one-quarter Native American descent (equivalent to one grandparent), attested by a Certificate of Degree of Indian Blood card. Tribal rules regarding recognition of members with Native American blood from multiple tribes are equally diverse and complex.




The Captive, painted by Eanger Irving Couse, 1891.


Tribal membership conflicts have led to a number of activist groups, legal disputes and court cases. One example are the Cherokee freedmen, who were descendants of enslaved African Americans once held by the Cherokees. The Cherokees had allied with the Confederate States of America in the American Civil War. After the war, in the 1866 settlement treaty, they were required by the US government to free their slaves and make them citizens of the tribe, just as the US made freedmen citizens of the nation. In the 1970s the Cherokee passed new rules requiring all members to have at least one Indian ancestor on the Dawes Rolls. The Cherokee Freedmen brought suit against the tribe, and appealed the first decision that upheld the tribal decision. In March 2006, the Judicial Appeals Tribunal— the Cherokee Nation's highest court— ruled that Cherokee freedmen are full citizens of the Cherokee Nation. The court declared that the Cherokee freedmen retained citizenship, voting rights and other privileges despite attempts to keep them off the tribal rolls for not having identifiable "Indian" blood. In March 2007, however, the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma passed a referendum that required members to have descent from at least one Native American ancestor on the Dawes Rolls. More than 1200 Freedmen lost their tribal membership after more than 100 years of participation as citizens.
In the 20th century, some people among white ethnic groups seemed more willing to claim descent from an American Indian, often a Cherokee.[83] Descent from "Indian braves" is also sometimes claimed.

[edit] Depictions by Europeans and Americans




Sketch by John White of Roanoke Indians


Native Americans have been depicted by American artists in various ways at different historical periods. During the sixteenth century, the artist John White made watercolors and engravings of the people native to the southeastern states. John White’s images were, for the most part, faithful likenesses of the people he observed.




Roanoke chief, engraving by de Bry


Later the artist Theodore de Bry used White’s original watercolors to make a book of engravings entitled, A briefe and true report of the new found land of Virginia. In his book, de Bry often altered the poses and features of White’s figures to make them appear more European. During the period when White and de Bry were working, when Europeans were first coming into contact with native Americans, Europeans were greatly interested in in native American cultures. Their curiosity created demand for a book like de Bry’s.




"Captain Smith and Pocahontas", relief in the United States Capitol rotunda


Three centuries later, during the construction of the Capitol building in the early nineteenth century, the U.S. government commissioned a series of four relief panels to crown the doorway of the Rotunda. The reliefs encapsulate a vision of European—Native American relations that had assumed mythic historical proportions by the nineteenth century. The four panels depict: The Preservation of Captain Smith by Pocahontas (1825) by Antonio Capellano, The Landing of the Pilgrims (1825) and The Conflict of Daniel Boone and the Indians (1826–27) by Enrico Causici, and William Penn’s Treaty with the Indians (1827) by Nicholas Gevelot. The reliefs present idealized versions of the Europeans and the native Americans, in which the Europeans appear refined and the natives appear ferocious. The Whig representative of Virginia, Henry A. Wise, voiced a particularly astute summary of how Native Americans would read the messages contained in all four reliefs: “We give you corn, you cheat us of our lands: we save your life, you take ours.” While many nineteenth-century images of native Americans conveyed similarly negative messages, artists such as Charles Bird King sought to express a more balanced image of native Americans.
In the 20th century, early portrayals of Native Americans in movies and television roles were first depicted by European-Americans dressed in mock traditional attire. Examples included The Last of the Mohicans (1920), Hawkeye and the Last of the Mohicans (1957), and F Troop (1965-67). In later decades, Native American actors such as Jay Silverheels in The Lone Ranger television series (1949-57) and Iron Eyes Cody came to prominence. Roles of Native Americans were limited and not reflective of Native American culture. In the 1970s some Native Americans roles were improved in movies: Little Big Man (1970), Billy Jack (1971), and The Outlaw Josey Wales (1976) depicted Native Americans in minor supporting roles.
In addition to overtly negative depictions, Native people on US television have also been relegated to secondary, subordinate roles. During the years of the series Bonanza (1959-1973), no major or secondary Native characters appeared on a consistent basis. The series The Lone Ranger (1949-1957), Cheyenne ((1957-1963), and Law of the Plainsman (1959-1963) had Native characters who were essentially aides to the central White characters. This characterization was also a feature of later television pilots and shows such as How the West Was Won. These programs resembled the “sympathetic” yet contradictory film Dances With Wolves of 1990, in which, according to Ella Shohat and Robert Stam, the narrative choice was to relate the Lakotas story as told through a Euro-American voice, for wide impact among a general audience.[84]
During the 1990s, several major films were released in which Native Americans were portrayed with historical accuracy and a sense of agency: Dances with Wolves (1990), The Last of the Mohicans (1992), and Smoke Signals (1998). All employed Native American actors, and had accurate portrayals of culture and languages.
In 2004, Co-Producer Guy Perrotta presented the film Mystic Voices: The Story of the Pequot War (2004), a television documentary on the first major war between colonists and Native peoples in the Americas. Perrotta and Charles Clemmons intended to increase public understanding of the significance of this early event. They believed it had significance not only for northeastern Native Peoples and descendants of English and Dutch colonists, but for all Americans today. The producers wanted to make the documentary as historically accurate and as unbiased as possible. They invited a broadly based Advisory Board, and used scholars, Native Americans, and descendants of the colonists to help tell the story. They elicited personal and often passionate viewpoints from contemporary Americans. The production portrayed the conflict as a struggle between different value systems that included not only the Pequots, but a number of Native American tribes, most of which allied with the English. It not only presents facts, but also seeks to help the viewer better understand the people who fought the War.

[edit] Terminology differences
Further information: Native American name controversy

[edit] Common usage in the United States
The term Native American was originally introduced in the United States by anthropologists as a more accurate term for the indigenous people of the Americas, as distinguished from the people of India. Because of the widespread acceptance of this newer term in and outside of academic circles, some people believe that Indians is outdated or offensive. People from India (and their descendants) who are citizens of the United States are known as Indian Americans or Asian Indians.
Criticism of the neologism Native American, however, comes from diverse sources. Some American Indians have misgivings about the term Native American. Russell Means, a famous American Indian activist, opposes the term Native American because he believes it was imposed by the government without the consent of American Indians. He has also argued that this use of the word Indian derives not from a confusion with India but from a Spanish expression En Dio, meaning "in God".[85] Furthermore, some American Indians question the term Native American because, they argue, it serves to ease the conscience of "white America" with regard to past injustices done to American Indians by effectively eliminating "Indians" from the present.[86] Still others (both Indians and non-Indians) argue that Native American is problematic because "native of" literally means "born in," so any person born in the Americas could be considered "native". However, very often the compound "Native American" will be capitalized in order to differentiate this intended meaning from others. Likewise, "native" (small 'n') can be further qualified by formulations such as "native-born" when the intended meaning is only to indicate place of birth or origin. A 1995 US Census Bureau survey found that more American Indians in the United States preferred American Indian to Native American.[87] Nonetheless, most American Indians are comfortable with Indian, American Indian, and Native American, and the terms are often used interchangeably.[88] The traditional term is reflected in the name chosen for the National Museum of the American Indian, which opened in 2004 on the Mall in Washington, D.C..
Recently, the U.S. Census Bureau has introduced the "Asian-Indian" category to avoid ambiguity when sampling the Indian-American population.

[edit] Gambling industry
Gambling has become a leading industry. Casinos operated by many Native American governments in the United States are creating a stream of gambling revenue that some communities are beginning to use as leverage to build diversified economies. Native American communities have waged and prevailed in legal battles to assure recognition of rights to self-determination and to use of natural resources. Some of those rights, known as treaty rights, are enumerated in early treaties signed with the young United States government. Tribal sovereignty has become a cornerstone of American jurisprudence, and at least on the surface, in national legislative policies. Although many Native American tribes have casinos, they are a source of conflict. Most tribes, especially small ones such as the Winnemem Wintu of Redding, California, feel that casinos and their proceeds destroy culture from the inside out. These tribes refuse to participate in the gambling industry.

[edit] Society, language, and culture

[edit] Ethno-linguistic classification
Main articles: Classification of indigenous peoples of the Americas and Indigenous languages of the Americas




Cultural regions of North American people at the time of European contact.


Far from forming a single ethnic group, Native Americans were divided into several hundred ethno-linguistic groups, most of them grouped into the Na-Dené (Athabaskan), Algic (including Algonquian), Uto-Aztecan, Iroquoian, Siouan-Catawban, Yok-Utian, Salishan and Yuman-Cochimí phyla, besides many smaller groups and several language isolates. Demonstrating genetic relationships has proved difficult due to the great linguistic diversity present in North America.
The indigenous peoples of North America can be classified as belonging to a number of large cultural areas:

Alaska Natives

Arctic: Eskimo-Aleut
Subarctic: Northern Athabaskan


Western United States

Californian tribes: Yok-Utian, Pacific Coast Athabaskan, Coast Miwok, Yurok, Palaihnihan
Plateau tribes: Interior Salish, Plateau Penutian
Great Basin tribes: Uto-Aztecan
Pacific Northwest Coast: Pacific Coast Athabaskan, Coast Salish
Southwestern tribes: Uto-Aztecan, Yuman, Southern Athabaskan


Central United States

Plains Indians: Siouan, Plains Algonquian, Southern Athabaskan


Eastern United States

Northeastern Woodlands tribes: Iroquoian, Central Algonquian, Eastern Algonquian
Southeastern tribes: Muskogean, Siouan, Catawban, Iroquoian



Of the surviving languages, Uto-Aztecan has the most speakers (1.95 million) if the languages in Mexico are considered (mostly due to 1.5 million speakers of Nahuatl); Nadene comes in second with approximately 180,200 speakers (148,500 of these are speakers of Navajo). Na-Dené and Algic have the widest geographic distributions: Algic currently spans from northeastern Canada across much of the continent down to northeastern Mexico (due to later migrations of the Kickapoo) with two outliers in California (Yurok and Wiyot); Na-Dené spans from Alaska and western Canada through Washington, Oregon, and California to the U.S. Southwest and northern Mexico (with one outlier in the Plains). Another area of considerable diversity appears to have been the Southeast; however, many of these languages became extinct from European contact and as a result they are, for the most part, absent from the historical record.

[edit] Cultural aspects




Hopi woman dressing hair of unmarried girl from 1900.


Though cultural features, language, clothing, and customs vary enormously from one tribe to another, there are certain elements which are encountered frequently and shared by many tribes.
Early hunter-gatherer tribes made stone weapons from around 10,000 years ago; as the age of metallurgy dawned, newer technologies were used and more efficient weapons produced. Prior to contact with Europeans, most tribes used similar weaponry. The most common implements were the bow and arrow, the war club, and the spear. Quality, material, and design varied widely. Native American use of fire both helped provide insects for food and altered the landscape of the continent to help the human population flourish.
Large mammals like mammoths and mastodons were largely extinct by around 8,000 B.C. Native Americans switched to hunting other large game, such as bison. The Great Plains tribes were still hunting the bison when they first encountered the Europeans. Acquiring horses from the Spanish and learning to ride in the 17th century greatly altered the natives' culture, changing the way in which they hunted large game. In addition, horses became a central feature of Native lives and a measure of wealth.

[edit] Organization




Zuni girl with pottery jar on her head in 1909



[edit] Gens structure
Early European American scholars described the Native Americans as having a society dominated by clans or gentes (in the Roman model) before tribes were formed. There were some common characteristics:

The right to elect its sachem and chiefs.
The right to depose its sachem and chiefs.
The obligation not to marry in the gens.
Mutual rights of inheritance of the property of deceased members.
Reciprocal obligations of help, defense, and redress of injuries.
The right to bestow names on its members.
The right to adopt strangers into the gens.
Common religious rights, query.
A common burial place.
A council of the gens.[89]


[edit] Tribal structure
Subdivision and differentiation took place between various groups. Upwards of forty stock languages developed in North America, with each independent tribe speaking a dialect of one of those languages. Some functions and attributes of tribes are:

The possession of the gentes.
The right to depose these sachems and chiefs.
The possession of a religious faith and worship.
A supreme government consisting of a council of chiefs.
A head-chief of the tribe in some instances.[89]





Choctaw Eagle Dance, 1835-37, Smithsonian American Art Museum.



[edit] Society and art
Further information: petroglyph, pictogram, petroform, and Native American art
The Iroquois, living around the Great Lakes and extending east and north, used strings or belts called wampum that served a dual function: the knots and beaded designs mnemonically chronicled tribal stories and legends, and further served as a medium of exchange and a unit of measure. The keepers of the articles were seen as tribal dignitaries.[90]
Pueblo peoples crafted impressive items associated with their religious ceremonies. Kachina dancers wore elaborately painted and decorated masks as they ritually impersonated various ancestral spirits. Sculpture was not highly developed, but carved stone and wood fetishes were made for religious use. Superior weaving, embroidered decorations, and rich dyes characterized the textile arts. Both turquoise and shell jewelry were created, as were high-quality pottery and formalized pictorial arts.
Navajo spirituality focused on the maintenance of a harmonious relationship with the spirit world, often achieved by ceremonial acts, usually incorporating sandpainting. The colors—made from sand, charcoal, cornmeal, and pollen—depicted specific spirits. These vivid, intricate, and colorful sand creations were erased at the end of the ceremony.

[edit] Agriculture
Further information: Native American cuisine




Early maize raised by Native Americans


Native American agriculture started about 7,000 years ago in the area of present-day Illinois.[citation needed] The first crop the Native Americans grew was squash. This was the first of several crops the Native Americans learned to domesticate. Others included cotton, sunflower, pumpkins, tobacco, goosefoot, and sump weed.
Agriculture in the southwest started around 4,000 years ago when traders brought cultigens from Mexico. Due to the varying climate, some ingenuity was needed for agriculture to be successful. The climate in the southwest ranged from cool, moist mountains regions, to dry, sandy soil in the desert. Some innovations of the time included irrigation to bring water into the dry regions and the selection of seed based on the traits of the growing plants that bore them. In the southwest, they grew beans that were self-supported, much like the way they are grown today.
In the east, however, they were planted right by corn in order for the vines to be able to "climb" the cornstalks. The most important crop the Native Americans raised was maize. It was first started in Mesoamerica and spread north. About 2,000 years ago it reached eastern America. This crop was important to the Native Americans because it was part of their everyday diet; it could be stored in underground pits during the winter, and no part of it was wasted. The husk was made into art crafts, and the cob was used as fuel for fires. By 800 A.D. the Native Americans had established three main crops — beans, squash, and corn — called the three sisters.
The agriculture gender roles of the Native Americans varied from region to region. In the southwest area, men prepared the soil with hoes. The women were in charge of planting, weeding, and harvesting the crops. In most other regions, the women were in charge of doing everything, including clearing the land. Clearing the land was an immense chore since the Native Americans rotated fields frequently. There is a tradition that Squanto showed the Pilgrims in New England how to put fish in fields to act like a fertilizer, but the truth of this story is debated. Native Americans did plant beans next to corn; the beans would replace the nitrogen which the corn took from the ground, as well as using corn stalks for support for climbing. Indians used controlled fires to burn weeds and clear fields; this would put nutrients back into the ground. If this did not work, they would simply abandon the field to let it be fallow, and find a new spot for cultivation.
Europeans in the eastern part of the continent observed that Natives cleared large areas for cropland. Their fields in New England sometimes covered hundreds of acres. Colonists in Virginia noted thousands of acres under cultivation by Native Americans.[91]
Native Americans commonly used tools such as the hoe, maul, and dibber. The hoe was the main tool used to till the land and prepare it for planting; then it was used for weeding. The first versions were made out of wood and stone. When the settlers brought iron, Native Americans switched to iron hoes and hatchets. The dibber was a digging stick, used to plant the seed. Once the plants were harvested, women prepared the produce for eating. They used the maul to grind the corn into mash. It was cooked and eaten that way or baked as corn bread.[92]

[edit] Religion




Baptism of Pocahontas was painted in 1840. John Gadsby Chapman depicts Pocahontas, wearing white, being baptized Rebecca by Anglican minister Alexander Whiteaker in Jamestown, Virginia; this event is believed to have taken place in 1613 or 1614.


No particular religion or religious tradition is hegemonic among Native Americans in the United States. Most self-identifying and federally recognized Native Americans claim adherence to some form of Christianity, some of these being cultural and religious syntheses unique to the particular tribe. Traditional Native American spiritual rites and ceremonies are maintained by many Americans of both Native and non-Native identity. These spiritualities may accompany adherence to another faith, or can represent a person's primary religious identity. While much Native American spiritualism exists in a tribal-cultural continuum, and as such cannot be easily separated from tribal identity itself, certain other more clearly-defined movements have arisen within "Trad" Native American practitioners, these being identifiable as "religions" in the clinical sense. The Midewiwin Lodge is a traditional medicine society inspired by the oral traditions and prophesies of the Ojibwa (Chippewa) and related tribes. Traditional practices include the burning of sacred herbs (tobacco, sweetgrass, sage, etc.), the sweatlodge, fasting (paramount in "vision quests"), singing and drumming, and the smoking of natural tobacco in a pipe. A practitioner of Native American spiritualities and religions may incorporate all, some or none of these into their personal or tribal rituals.
Another significant religious body among Native peoples is known as the Native American Church. It is a syncretistic church incorporating elements of native spiritual practice from a number of different tribes as well as symbolic elements from Christianity. Its main rite is the peyote ceremony. Prior to 1890, traditional religious beliefs included Wakan Tanka. In the American Southwest, especially New Mexico, a syncretism between the Catholicism brought by Spanish missionaries and the native religion is common; the religious drums, chants, and dances of the Pueblo people are regularly part of Masses at Santa Fe's Saint Francis Cathedral.[93] Native American-Catholic syncretism is also found elsewhere in the United States. (e.g., the National Kateri Tekakwitha Shrine in Fonda, New York and the National Shrine of the North American Martyrs in Auriesville, New York).
Native Americans are the only known ethnic group in the United States requiring a federal permit to practice their religion. The eagle feather law, (Title 50 Part 22 of the Code of Federal Regulations), stipulates that only individuals of certifiable Native American ancestry enrolled in a federally recognized tribe are legally authorized to obtain eagle feathers for religious or spiritual use. Native Americans and non-Native Americans frequently contest the value and validity of the eagle feather law, charging that the law is laden with discriminatory racial preferences and infringes on tribal sovereignty. The law does not allow Native Americans to give eagle feathers to non-Native Americans, a common modern and traditional practice. Many non-Native Americans have been adopted into Native American families, made tribal members and given eagle feathers.

[edit] Gender roles




Dr. Susan La Flesche Picotte was the first Native American woman to become a physician in the United States.


Most Native American tribes had traditional gender roles. In some tribes, such as the Iroquois nation, social and clan relationships were matrilineal and/or matriarchal, although several different systems were in use. One example is the Cherokee custom of wives owning the family property. Men hunted, traded and made war, while women gathered plants, cared for the young and the elderly, fashioned clothing and instruments and cured meat. The cradleboard was used by mothers to carry their baby while working or traveling.[94] However, in some (but not all) tribes a kind of transgender was permitted; see Two-Spirit.
At least several dozen tribes allowed polygyny to sisters, with procedural and economic limits.[89]
Apart from making home, women had many tasks that were essential for the survival of the tribes. They made weapons and tools, took care of the roofs of their homes and often helped their men hunt bison.[95] In some of the Plains Indian tribes there reportedly were medicine women who gathered herbs and cured the ill.[96]
In some of these tribes such as the Sioux girls were also encouraged to learn to ride, hunt and fight.[97] Though fighting was mostly left to the boys and men, there had been cases of women fighting alongside them, especially when the existence of the tribe was threatened.[98]

[edit] Sports
Native American leisure time led to competitive individual and team sports. Early accounts include team games played between tribes with hundreds of players on the field at once. Jim Thorpe, Notah Begay III, and Billy Mills are well known professional athletes.

[edit] Team based




Ball players from the Choctaw and Lakota tribe as painted by George Catlin in the 1830s


Native American ball sports, sometimes referred to as lacrosse, stickball, or baggataway, was often used to settle disputes rather than going to war which was a civil way to settle potential conflict. The Choctaw called it ISITOBOLI ("Little Brother of War");[99] the Onondaga name was DEHUNTSHIGWA'ES ("men hit a rounded object"). There are three basic versions classifed as Great Lakes, Iroquoian, and Southern.[100] The game is played with one or two rackets/sticks and one ball. The object of the game is to land the ball on the opposing team's goal (either a single post or net) to score and prevent the opposing team from scoring on your goal. The game involves as few as twenty or as many as 300 players with no height or weight restrictions and no protective gear. The goals could be from a few hundred feet apart to a few miles; in Lacrosse the field is 110 yards. A Jesuit priest referenced stickball in 1729, and George Catlin painted the subject.

[edit] Individual based




Jim Thorpe was called the "greatest athlete in the world" by king Gustaf V of Sweden






Billy Mills crosses the finish line for the 10,000 meter race at the 1964 Tokyo Olympics






Ancient art, such as this engraved stone plate from Mississippi, often exhibited a sophisticated and well-developed style


Chunke was a game that consisted of a stone shaped disk that was about 1–2 inches in length. The disk was thrown down a 200-foot (61 m) corridor so that it could roll past the players at great speed. The disk would roll down the corridor, and players would throw wooden shafts at the moving disk. The object of the game was to strike the disk or prevent your opponents from hitting it.

[edit] U.S. Olympics
Billy Mills, a Lakota and USMC officer, won the Gold medal in the 10,000 meter run at the 1964 Tokyo Olympics—the only American ever to win the Olympic gold in this event. An unknown prior to the Olympics, he had finished second in the U.S. Olympic trials.
Jim Thorpe, a Sauk and Fox Native American, was an all-round athlete playing football and baseball. Future President Dwight Eisenhower injured his knee while trying to tackle Thorpe. Eisenhower recalled of Thorpe in a 1961 speech, "Here and there, there are some people who are supremely endowed. My memory goes back to Jim Thorpe. He never practiced in his life, and he could do anything better than any other football player I ever saw."[101] In the Olympics, Thorpe could run the 100-yard dash in 10 seconds flat, the 220 in 21.8 seconds, the 440 in 51.8 seconds, the 880 in 1:57, the mile in 4:35, the 120-yard high hurdles in 15 seconds, and the 220-yard low hurdles in 24 seconds.[102] He could long jump 23 ft 6 in and high-jump 6 ft 5 in.[102] He could pole vault 11 feet, put the shot 47 ft 9 in, throw the javelin 163 feet, and throw the discus 136 feet.[102] Thorpe entered the U.S. Olympic trials for both the pentathlon and the decathlon.

[edit] Music and art
Main article: Native American music
Traditional Native American music is almost entirely monophonic, but there are notable exceptions. Native American music often includes drumming and/or the playing of rattles or other percussion instruments but little other instrumentation. Flutes and whistles made of wood, cane, or bone are also played, generally by individuals, but in former times also by large ensembles (as noted by Spanish conquistador de Soto). The tuning of these flutes is not precise and depends on the length of the wood used and the hand span of the intended player, but the finger holes are most often around a whole step apart and, at least in Northern California, a flute was not used if it turned out to have an interval close to a half step.
Performers with Native American parentage have occasionally appeared in American popular music, such as Tina Turner,[103] Rita Coolidge, Wayne Newton, Gene Clark, Buffy Sainte-Marie, Blackfoot, Tori Amos, Redbone, and CocoRosie. Some, such as John Trudell, have used music to comment on life in Native America, and others, such as R. Carlos Nakai integrate traditional sounds with modern sounds in instrumental recordings. A variety of small and medium-sized recording companies offer an abundance of recent music by Native American performers young and old, ranging from pow-wow drum music to hard-driving rock-and-roll and rap.
The most widely practiced public musical form among Native Americans in the United States is that of the pow-wow. At pow-wows, such as the annual Gathering of Nations in Albuquerque, New Mexico, members of drum groups sit in a circle around a large drum. Drum groups play in unison while they sing in a native language and dancers in colorful regalia dance clockwise around the drum groups in the center. Familiar pow-wow songs include honor songs, intertribal songs, crow-hops, sneak-up songs, grass-dances, two-steps, welcome songs, going-home songs, and war songs. Most indigenous communities in the United States also maintain traditional songs and ceremonies, some of which are shared and practiced exclusively within the community.[104]
Native American art comprises a major category in the world art collection. Native American contributions include pottery(Native American pottery), paintings, jewellery, weavings, sculptures, basketry, and carvings. Franklin Gritts, was a Cherokee artist, who taught students from many tribes at Haskell Institute (now Haskell Indian Nations University) in the 1940s, the Golden Age of Native American painters.
The integrity of certain Native American artworks is now protected by an act of Congress that prohibits representation of art as Native American when it is not the product of an enrolled Native American artist.

[edit] Games
All-tes teg-enuk is one type of Native American game. Awithlaknannai is a strategic board game of the Zuni tribe of the New Mexico area.

[edit] Economy




"The King of the Seas in the Hands of the Makahs," photograph taken in 1910 of Makah Native Americans


The Inuit, or Eskimo, prepared and buried large amounts of dried meat and fish. Pacific Northwest tribes crafted seafaring dugouts 40–50 feet long for fishing. Farmers in the Eastern Woodlands tended fields of maize with hoes and digging sticks, while their neighbors in the Southeast grew tobacco as well as food crops. On the Plains, some tribes engaged in agriculture but also planned buffalo hunts in which herds were driven over bluffs. Dwellers of the Southwest deserts hunted small animals and gathered acorns to grind into flour with which they baked wafer-thin bread on top of heated stones. Some groups on the region's mesas developed irrigation techniques, and filled storehouses with grain as protection against the area's frequent droughts.
In the early years, as these native peoples encountered European explorers and settlers and engaged in trade, they exchanged food, crafts, and furs for blankets, iron and steel implements, horses, trinkets, firearms, and alcoholic beverages.

[edit] Barriers to economic development
Today, other than tribes successfully running casinos, many tribes struggle. There are an estimated 2.1 million Native Americans, and they are the most impoverished of all ethnic groups. According to the 2000 Census, an estimated 400,000 Native Americans reside on reservation land. While some tribes have had success with gaming, only 40% of the 562 federally recognized tribes operate casinos.[105] According to a 2007 survey by the U.S. Small Business Administration, only 1 percent of Native Americans own and operate a business.[106] Native Americans rank at the bottom of nearly every social statistic: highest teen suicide rate of all minorities at 18.5%, highest rate of teen pregnancy, highest high school drop out rate at 54%, lowest per capita income, and unemployment rates between 50% to 90%.
The barriers to economic development on Indian reservations often cited by others and two experts Joseph Kalt[107] and Stephen Cornell[108] of the Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development at Harvard University, in their classic report: What Can Tribes Do? Strategies and Institutions in American Indian Economic Development,[109] are as follows (incomplete list, see full Kalt & Cornell report):

Lack of access to capital.
Lack of human capital (education, skills, technical expertise) and the means to develop it.
Reservations lack effective planning.
Reservations are poor in natural resources.
Reservations have natural resources, but lack sufficient control over them.
Reservations are disadvantaged by their distance from markets and the high costs of transportation.
Tribes cannot persuade investors to locate on reservations because of intense competition from non-Indian communities.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs is inept, corrupt, and/or uninterested in reservation development.
Tribal politicians and bureaucrats are inept or corrupt.
On-reservation factionalism destroys stability in tribal decisions.
The instability of tribal government keeps outsiders from investing.
Entrepreneurial skills and experience are scarce.
Non-Indian management techniques will work, but are absent.
Tribal cultures get in the way.

One of the major barriers for overcoming the economic strife is the lack of entrepreneurial knowledge and experience across Indian reservations. “A general lack of education and experience about business is a significant challenge to prospective entrepreneurs,” also says another report on Native American entrepreneurship by the Northwest Area Foundation in 2004. “Native American communities that lack entrepreneurial traditions and recent experiences typically do not provide the support that entrepreneurs need to thrive. Consequently, experiential entrepreneurship education needs to be embedded into school curricula and after-school and other community activities. This would allow students to learn the essential elements of entrepreneurship from a young age and encourage them to apply these elements throughout life.”[110]. One publication devoted to addressing these issues is Rez Biz magazine.

[edit] Native Americans and African Americans
Further information: Black Indians




Members of the Creek (Muscogee) Nation in Oklahoma around 1877, including those of European and African ancestry. L to R, Lochar Harjo, unidentified man, John McGilvry, Silas Jefferson or Hotulko miko (Chief of the Whirlwind).[111]






Mishikinakwa ("Little Turtle")'s forces defeated an American force of nearly 1000 U.S Army soliders and other causualties at the Battle of the Wabash in 1791.


Interracial relations between Native Americans and African Americans has been a part of American history that has been neglected.[112] The earliest record of African and Native American relations occurred in April, 1502, when the first Africans kidnapped were brought to Hispanola to serve as slaves. Some escaped and somewhere inland on Santo Domingo life birthed the first circle of African-Native Americans.[113] In addition, an example of African slaves' escaping from European colonists and being absorbed by American Indians occurred as far back as 1526. In June of that year, Lucas Vasquez de Ayllon established a Spanish colony near the mouth of the Pee Dee River in what is now eastern South Carolina. The Spanish settlement was named San Miquel de Guadalupe. Amongst the settlement were 100 enslaved Africans. In 1526, the first African slaves fled the colony and took refuge with local Native Americans[114]
European Colonists created treaties with Native American tribes requesting the return of any runaway slaves. For example, in 1726, the British Governor of New York exacted a promise from the Iroquois to return all runaway slaves who had joined up with them. This same promise was extracted from the Huron Natives in 1764 and from the Delaware Natives in 1765.[115] Numerous advertisements requested the return of African Americans who had married Native Americans or who spoke a Native-American language. Individuals in some tribes, especially the Cherokee, owned African slaves; however, other tribes incorporated African Americans, slave or freemen, into the tribe. The primary exposure that Africans and Native Americans had to each other came through the institution of slavery, and this is basically because it was the institution of slavery that brought the Africans to America.[116] Records from the time period show several cases of brutal treatment of black slaves by their masters. However, most Native American masters rejected the worst features of southern white bondage.[117] Travelers reported enslaved Africans "in as good circumstances as their masters." A white Indian Agent, Douglas Cooper, upset by the Native American failure to practice a brutal form of bondage, insisted that Native Americans invite white men to live in their villages and "control matters."[117] Though less than 3% of Native Americans owned slaves, bondage created destructive cleavages in their villages and promoted a class hierarchy based on "white blood."[117] Native Americans of mixed white blood stood at the top, "pure" Native Americans next, and people mixed with of African descent were at the bottom.[117] Now most historians believe that most African Americans have significant Native American heritage due to many different circumstances in different families.[118]

[edit] Notable Native Americans of the United States
Further information: List of Native Americans of the United States

[edit] Population




Charles Eastman was one of the first Native Americans to become a Medical Doctor.[119][120]






Chief Seattle was a Suquamish chief who made "one of the most beautiful and profound environmental statements ever made," photo taken in the 1860s






Geronimo was a prominent Native American leader of the Chiricahua Apache who defended his people against the encroachment of the United States on their lands for over 25 years






Swimmer was a noted Cherokee cultural preservationist


In 2006, the U.S. Census Bureau estimated that about 1.0 percent of the U.S. population was of American Indian or Alaska Native descent. This population is unevenly distributed across the country.[121] Below, all 50 states, as well as the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, are listed by the proportion of residents citing American Indian or Alaska Native ancestry, based on 2006 estimates:


Alaska - 13.1%
New Mexico - 9.7%
South Dakota - 8.6%
Oklahoma - 6.8%
Montana - 6.3%
North Dakota - 5.2%
Arizona - 4.5%
Wyoming - 2.2%
Oregon - 1.8%
Washington - 1.5%
Nevada - 1.2%
Idaho - 1.1%
North Carolina - 1.1%
Utah - 1.1%
Minnesota - 1.0%
Colorado - 0.9%
Kansas - 0.9%
Nebraska - 0.9%
Wisconsin - 0.9%
Arkansas - 0.8%
California - 0.7%
Louisiana - 0.6%
Maine - 0.5%
Michigan - 0.5%
Texas - 0.5%
Alabama - 0.4%
Mississippi - 0.4%
Missouri - 0.4%
Rhode Island - 0.4%
Vermont - 0.4%
Florida - 0.3%
Delaware - 0.3%
Hawaii - 0.3%
Iowa - 0.3%
New York - 0.3%
South Carolina - 0.3%
Tennessee - 0.3%
Georgia - 0.2%
Virginia - 0.2%
Connecticut - 0.2%
Illinois - 0.2%
Indiana - 0.2%
Kentucky - 0.2%
Maryland - 0.2%
Massachusetts - 0.2%
New Hampshire - 0.2%
New Jersey - 0.2%
Ohio - 0.2%
West Virginia - 0.2%
Pennsylvania - 0.1%


District of Columbia - 0.3%


Puerto Rico - 0.2%


In 2006, the U.S. Census Bureau estimated that about less than 1.0 percent of the U.S. population was of Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander descent. This population is unevenly distributed across 26 states.[121] Below, are the 26 states that had at least 0.1%. They are listed by the proportion of residents citing Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander ancestry, based on 2006 estimates:


Hawaii - 8.7
Utah - 0.7
Alaska - 0.6
California - 0.4
Nevada - 0.4
Washington - 0.4
Arizona - 0.2
Oregon - 0.2
Alabama - 0.1
Arkansas - 0.1
Colorado - 0.1
Florida - 0.1
Idaho - 0.1
Kentucky - 0.1
Maryland - 0.1
Massachusetts - 0.1
Missouri - 0.1
Montana - 0.1
New Mexico - 0.1
North Carolina - 0.1
Oklahoma - 0.1
South Carolina - 0.1
Texas - 0.1
Virginia - 0.1
West Virginia - 0.1
Wyoming - 0.1



[edit] See also


American Indian Movement
Alaska Natives
American Indian College Fund
American Indians in Children's Literature
Black Indians
Civilization Fund Act
Classification of Native Americans (list of tribes by cultural area)
Company/product names derived from Indigenous peoples
Eagle feather law
European Contact
First Nations
Fur trade (historical treatment)
Gallery of Native Americans with facial hair
Genocide reference by L. Frank Baum
Indian Campaign Medal
Indian Massacres
Indian old field
Indian Removal
Indian Reorganization Act
Indian Territory
Indigenous peoples of the Americas
Inter-Tribal Environmental Council (ITEC)
List of English words from indigenous languages of the Americas
List of Indian reservations in the United States
Lists of Native Americans
List of pre-Columbian civilizations
List of writers from peoples indigenous to the Americas
Medicine man
Medicine wheel
Mississippian culture
Mound builder (people)
NAFPS
National Museum of the American Indian
Native American art
Native American Church
Native American gambling enterprises
Native American languages
Native American mascot controversy
Native American mythology
Native American name controversy
Native American pottery
Native American tribes in Nebraska
Native Americans and World War II
One-Drop Rule
Osceola
Petrosomatoglyph
Population history of American indigenous peoples
Pre-Columbian Africa-Americas contact theories
Residential school
Rez Biz magazine
Seminole Wars
Southeastern Ceremonial Complex
Sports team names/mascots derived from Indigenous peoples
State recognized tribes
Treaties of the United States (includes Native American treaties)
Trail of Tears
Two-Spirit
Uncontacted peoples
Unrecognized tribes
Wíčazo Ša Review



[edit] Notes


^ U.S. Census Bureau. (2001–2005). Profiles of General Demographic Characteristics 2000: 2000 Census of Population and Housing. U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved on 2007-05-23.
^ U.S. Census Bureau. (2001–2005). Profiles of General Demographic Characteristics 2000: 2000 Census of Population and Housing. U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved on 2007-05-23. "In combination with one or more of the other races listed." Figure here derived by subtracting figure for "One race (American Indian and Alaska Native)": 2,475,956, from figure for "Race alone or in combination with one or more other races (American Indian and Alaska Native)": 4,119,301, giving the result 1,643,345. Other races counted in the census include: "White"; "Black or African American"; "Asian"; "Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander"; and "Some other race."
^ a b Perdue, Theda. "Chapter 2 "Both White and Red"". Mixed Blood Indians: Racial Construction in the Early South. The University of Georgia Press. p. 51. ISBN 082032731X. 
^ a b Remini, Robert. ""The Reform Begins"". Andrew Jackson. History Book Club. p. 201. ISBN 0965063107. 
^ a b Remini, Robert. ""Brothers, Listen ... You Must Submit"". Andrew Jackson. History Book Club. p. 258. ISBN 0965063107. 
^ a b Miller, Eric (1994). "George Washington and Indians" (HTML). Eric Miller. http://www.dreric.org/library/northwest.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-05-02. 
^ Jewett, Tom (1996-2009). "Thomas Jefferson's Views Concerning Native Americans" (HTML). Archiving America. http://www.earlyamerica.com/review/2002_summer_fall/tj_views.htm. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ "An Indian Candidate for Congress". Christian Mirror and N.H. Observer, Shirley, Hyde & Co.. July 15, 1830. 
^ Kappler, Charles (1904). "Indian affairs: laws and treaties Vol. II, Treaties" (HTML). Government Printing Office. http://digital.library.okstate.edu/kappler/Vol2/treaties/cho0310.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-16. 
^ See Jacobs 2001 for an extensive review of the evidence for migration timings, and Jacobs 2002 for a survey of migration models.
^ Jacobs (2002).
^ The Wild Frontier: Atrocities During the American-Indian War
^ Native Americans - Huron Tribe
^ a b "Indian Mixed-Blood", Frederick W. Hodge, Handbook of American Indians, 1906
^ a b Minority Politics in Albuquerque - History
^ Smallpox: Eradicating the Scourge
^ Epidemics
^ The Story Of… Smallpox—and other Deadly Eurasian Germs
^ Native American History and Cultures, http://www.meredith.edu/nativeam/setribes.htm Susan Squires and John Kincheloe, syllabus for HIS 943A, Meredith College, 2005, accessed September 19, 2006
^ Greg Lange,"Smallpox epidemic ravages Native Americans on the northwest coast of North America in the 1770s", HistoryLink.org, Online Encyclopedia of Washington State History, 23 Jan 2003, accessed 2 Jun 2008
^ David A. Koplow, Smallpox: The Fight to Eradicate a Global Scourge
^ M. Paul Keesler, "Dutch Children's Disease Kills Thousands of Mohawks", Mohawk: Discovering the Valley of the Crystals, 2004, accessed 2 Jun 2008
^ Greg Lange,["Smallpox epidemic ravages Native Americans on the northwest coast of North America in the 1770s", 23 Jan 2003, HistoryLink.org], The Online Encyclopedia of Washington State History, accessed 9 August 2008
^ "The first smallpox epidemic on the Canadian Plains: In the fur-traders' words", National Institutes of Health
^ Mountain Man Plain Indian Fur Trade
^ Review of J. Diane Pearson, "Lewis Cass and the Politics of Disease: The Indian Vaccination Act of 1832", Project Muse, Johns Hopkins University
^ "The Politics of Sovereignty",Wicazo Sa Review: Vol. 18, No. 2, (Autumn, 2003), pp. 9–35,
^ a b c Jean Jacques Rousseau (1700s). "Ennobling 'Savages'" (HTML). http://www.ratical.org/many_worlds/6Nations/EoL/chp4.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-05. 
^ "The Six Nations: Oldest Living Participatory Democracy on Earth". Ratical.com. http://www.ratical.org/many_worlds/6Nations/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-27. 
^ Armstrong, Virginia Irving. I Have Spoken: American History Through the Voices of the Indians. Pocket Books. p. 14. SBN 671-78555-9. 
^ a b Bob Ferguson (1980). Choctaw Government to 1830. 
^ Wyoming Massacre, Encyclopædia Britannica
^ Ethridge, Robbie. "Introduction". Creek Country: The Creek Indians And Their World. The University of North Carolina Press. p. 1. ISBN 0807854956. 
^ Wilcomb E. Washburn, "Indians and the American Revolution", AmericanRevolution.org, History Channel Network, accessed February 23, 2006.
^ Eric Miller (1994). "Washington and the Northwest War, Part One" (HTML). http://www.dreric.org/library/northwest.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-09-09. 
^ The Great Confusion in Indian Affairs: Native Americans and Whites in the Progressive Era, Tom Holm, http://www.utexas.edu/utpress/excerpts/exholgre.html
^ "What Were Boarding Schools Like for Indian Youth?". authorsden.com. http://www.authorsden.com/visit/viewarticle.asp?AuthorID=2616&id=7375. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ "Long-suffering urban Indians find roots in ancient rituals". California's Lost Tribes. http://www.sacbee.com/static/archive/news/projects/native/day2_main.html. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ "Developmental and learning disabilities". PRSP Disabilities. http://www.prsp.bc.ca. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ "Soul Wound: The Legacy of Native American Schools". Amnesty International USA. http://www.amnestyusa.org/amnestynow/soulwound.html. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ Kappler, Charles (1904). "Indian affairs: laws and treaties Vol. IV, Treaties" (HTML). Government Printing Office. http://digital.library.okstate.edu/kappler/vol4/html_files/v4p1165.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-14. 
^ Worlds Together, Worlds Apart, Robert Tignor, Jeremy Adelman, Stephen Aron, Stephen Kotkin, Suzanne Marchand, Gyan Prakash, Michael Tsin, W.W. Norton & Company, New York, 2000, pg. 274
^ Rutherford Birchard Hayes (1857). "Hayes Quotes: What a prodigious growth this English race, ..." (HTML). http://www.enotes.com/famous-quotes/what-a-prodigious-growth-this-english-race. Retrieved on 2008-09-04. 
^ Onecle (Last modified: November 8, 2005). "Indian Treaties" (HTML). http://law.onecle.com/constitution/article-2/21-indian-treaties.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-31. 
^ Past Notable Native Americans
^ Ralph K. Andrist. MASSACRE!, American Heritage, April 1962
^ Wellman, Paul. "Preface". The Indian Wars of the West. Doubleday & Company, INC.. p. 8. ISBN NONE. 
^ Carter (III), Samuel (1976). Cherokee sunset: A nation betrayed : a narrative of travail and triumph, persecution and exile. New York: Doubleday, p. 232.
^ see Genocides in history#The Americas
^ Ely Parker Famous Native Americans
^ a b c d e W. David Baird et. al (2009-01-05). ""We are all Americans", Native Americans in the Civil War". Native Americans.com. http://www.nativeamericans.com/CivilWar.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-05. 
^ Wiley Britton (2009-01-05). "Union and Confederate Indians in the Civil War "Battles and Leaders of the Civil War"". Civil War Potpourri. http://www.civilwarhome.com/unionconfedindians.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-05. 
^ U.S. Department of Defense. "American Indians in World War II" (HTML). www.defenselink.mil. http://www.defenselink.mil/specials/nativeamerican01/wwii.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-25. 
^ Bernstein, p. 131
^ "The U.S. Relationship To American Indian and Alaska Native Tribes". usinfo.state.gov. http://usinfo.state.gov/eur/Archive/2005/Jan/28-691277.html. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ "Bureau of Indian affairs". http://www.doi.gov/bureau-indian-affairs.html. Retrieved on December 25 2007. 
^ "President Nixon, Special Message on Indian Affairs" (PDF). U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. http://www.epa.gov/tribalportal/pdf/president-nixon70.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-19. 
^ "Annual Estimates by Race Alone" (PDF). US Census.gov. http://www.census.gov/popest/states/asrh/tables/SC-EST2003-04.pdf. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ "Mixing Bodies and Beliefs: The Predicament of Tribes". Columbia Law Review. http://www.google.com/search?q=cache:D-aV4g_I9XQJ:www.law.nyu.edu/kingsburyb/spring04/indigenousPeoples/classmaterials/class10/Class%2010%20Item%20A6%20-%20Gould.doc+genealogy++. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ "The Muwekman Ohlone". muwekma.org. http://www.muwekma.org. Retrieved on 2007-06-22. 
^ "Challenges to Health and Well-Being of Native American Communities". The Provider's Guide to Quality and Culture. http://erc.msh.org/mainpage.cfm?file=5.4.7e.htm&module=provider&language=English. Retrieved on 2007-06-22. , Management of Science of Health
^ "A Resolution by the Native American Caucus". Canku Ota. http://www.turtletrack.org/Issues00/Co07152000/CO_07152000_Resolution.htm. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ http://www.tanasijournal.com/main/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=365&Itemid=1&ed=53
^ "The Genocide and Relocation of the Dine'h (Navajo)". Senaa. http://www.angelfire.com/band/senaaeurope/DRelocation.html. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ "The Black Mesa Syndrome: Indian Lands, Black Gold". Shundahai.org. http://www.shundahai.org/bigmtbackground.html. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ "Big Mountain Update 1 February 1997". LISTSERV at Wayne State University. http://lists.wayne.edu/cgi-bin/wa?A2=ind9703&L=tamha&F=&S=&P=7661. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ "The black-and-white world of Walter Ashby Plecker". Pilotonline.com. http://home.hamptonroads.com/stories/story.cfm?story=74481&ran=162825. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ "The black-and-white world of Walter Ashby Plecker". Pilotonline.com. http://home.hamptonroads.com/stories/story.cfm?story=74481&ran=162825. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ Mark Twain, Blue Corn Comics. "Mark Twain, Indian Hater" (HTML). http://www.bluecorncomics.com/twain.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-26. 
^ "Walking a Mile: A Qualitative Study Exploring How Indians and Non-Indians Think About Each Other". Public Agenda. http://www.publicagenda.org/reports/walking-mile-first-step-toward-mutual-understanding. Retrieved on July 25 2008. 
^ Indian Country Today. "Soldier highlights problems in U.S. Army" (HTML). http://www.indiancountrytoday.com/archive/28148064.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-20. 
^ Hume, Mark (2004-12-07). "Activist pleaded to live, U.S. says; Extradition hearing in Vancouver told about final days of N.S. Mikmaq killed in 1975". The Globe and Mail (Canada) (Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc.): p. A12. 
^ Mickleburgh, Rod (2007-06-27). "Former AIM member loses extradition appeal". The Globe and Mail (Canada): p. A10. 
^ First Peoples, Colin G. Calloway, 2nd Edition, 2004
^ Amy D'orio. "Indian Chief Is Mascot No More". http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9805E4DF1239F932A05750C0A960958260&n=Top%2FReference%2FTimes%20Topics%2FSubjects%2FM%2FMascots. Retrieved on 2008-08-26. 
^ "NCAA Bans Indian Mascots". Online NewsHour. http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/sports/july-dec05/mascots_8-25.html. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ Powell, Robert Andrew (August 25, 2005). "Florida State wins its battle to remain the Seminoles". International Herald Tribune. http://www.iht.com/articles/2005/08/24/sports/COLLEGE.php. Retrieved on 9 August 2008. 
^ "Florida State University thanks Seminoles for historic vote of support". Florida State University. http://www.fsu.com/pages/2005/06/17/historic_vote.html. Retrieved on 9 August 2008. 
^ Teaching Tolerance. "Native American Mascots Big Issue in College Sports" (HTML). http://www.tolerance.org/news/article_tol.jsp?id=165. Retrieved on 2008-08-26. 
^ Y chromosome study sheds light on Athapaskan migration to southwest US
^ Henry Louis Gates, Jr., In Search of Our Roots: How 19 Extraordinary African Americans Reclaimed Their Past, New York: Crown Publishers, 2009, pp.20-21
^ Ancestry in a Drop of Blood (August 30, 2005), by Karen Kaplan. URL accessed on February 20, 2006
^ [1], see also "Genealogy.com: Family Legends and Myths". Genealogy.com. http://www.genealogy.com/90_carmack.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-06.  and [2]
^ Shohat, Ella, and Stam, Robert. Unthinking Eurocentrism: Multiculturalism and the Media. New York: Routledge, 1994
^ "I am an American Indian, not a native American!". Russell Means. http://www.peaknet.net/~aardvark/means.html. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ "What's in a Name? Indians and Political Correctness". All Things Cherokee. http://www.allthingscherokee.com/atc_sub_culture_feat_events_070101.html. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ "Preference for Racial or Ethnic Terminology". Infoplease. http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0762158.html. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ "American Indian versus Native American". Infoplease. http://www.infoplease.com/spot/aihmterms.html. Retrieved on February 8 2006. 
^ a b c Morgan, Lewis H. (1907). Ancient Society. Chicago: Charles H. Kerr & Company. pp. 70–71, 113. 
^ Iroquois History. URL accessed on February 23, 2006.
^ Krech III, Shepard (1999). The ecological Indian: myth and history (1 ed.). New York, New York: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.. p. 107. ISBN 0-393-04755-5. 
^ "American Indian Agriculture". Answers.com. http://www.answers.com/topic/agriculture-american-indians?. Retrieved on February 8 2008. 
^ A Brief History of the Native American Church by Jay Fikes. URL accessed on February 22, 2006.
^ Gender, Encyclopedia of North American Indians, by Beatrice Medicine. URL accessed on February 99, 2006.
^ [3], Native American Women, Indians.org. URL accessed on January 11, 2007.
^ [4], Medicine Women, Bluecloud.org. URL accessed on January 11, 2007.
^ Zinn, Howard (2005). A People's History of the United States: 1492-present. Harper Perennial Modern Classics. ISBN 0-06-083865-5.
^ [5], Women in Battle, Bluecloud.org. URL accessed on January 11, 2007.
^ "Choctaw Indians" (HTML). 2006. http://www.indians.org/articles/choctaw-indians.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-02. 
^ Thomas Vennum Jr., author of American Indian Lacrosse: Little Brother of War (2002-2005). "History of Native American Lacrossee" (HTML). http://www.uslacrosse.org/museum/history.phtml. Retrieved on 2008-09-11. 
^ Botelho, Greg. Roller-coaster life of Indian icon, sports' first star, CNN.com, July 14, 2004, accessed April 23, 2007.
^ a b c Jim Thorpe Is Dead On West Coast at 64, The New York Times, March 29, 1953, accessed April 23, 2007.
^ Turner, T. "I, Tina". Harper Collins. 1987. ISBN 0-380-70097-2
^ Bierhosrt, John (1992). A Cry from the Earth: Music of North American Indians. Ancient City Press. 
^ "NIGA: Indian Gaming Facts". http://www.indiangaming.org/library/indian-gaming-facts/index.shtml. 
^ "Number of U.S. Minority Owned Businesses Increasing". http://www.america.gov/st/diversity-english/2007/December/20071221175918ABretnuH0.3369257.html. 
^ Kalt, Joseph. "Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development". http://www.hks.harvard.edu/hpaied/people/kalt.htm. Retrieved on 2008-06-17. 
^ Cornell, Stephen. "Co-director, Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development". http://udallcenter.arizona.edu/staff/scornell.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-17. 
^ Cornell, S., Kalt, J.. "What Can Tribes Do? Strategies and Institutions in American Indian Economic Development". http://64.233.179.104/scholar?hl=en&lr=&q=cache:Wpg98i7NcJEJ:www.ksg.harvard.edu/hpaied/docs/reloading%2520the%2520dice.pdf+author:%22Cornell%22+intitle:%22What+Can+Tribes+Do%3F+Strategies+and+Institutions+in+...%22+. Retrieved on 2008-06-17. 
^ "Native Entrepreneurship: Challenges and opportunities for rural communities - CFED, Northwest Area Foundation Dec. 2004". http://www.energizingentrepreneurs.org/content/cr.php?id=4&sel=5. 
^ Hudson, Charles The Southeastern Indians, 1976, pg. 479
^ Mary A. Dempsey (1996). "The Indian connection". American Visions. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1546/is_n4_v11/ai_18953815. Retrieved on 2008-09-19. 
^ William Loren Katz (2008). "Black Indians". AfricanAmericans.com. http://www.africanamericans.com/BlackIndians.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-11. 
^ Muslims in American History : A Forgotten Legacy by Dr. Jerald F. Dirks. ISBN 1-59008-044-0 Page 204.
^ Katz WL 1997 p103
^ Angela Y. Walton-Raji (2008). "Tri-Racials: Black Indians of the Upper South". Design © 1997. http://members.aol.com/angelaw859/tri_racials.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-20. 
^ a b c d William Loren Katz (2008). "Africans and Indians: Only in America". William Loren Katz. http://www.williamlkatz.com/Essays/History/AfricansIndians.php. Retrieved on 2008-09-20. 
^ Sherrel Wheeler Stewart (2008). "More Blacks are Exploring the African-American/Native American Connection". BlackAmericaWeb.com. http://www.blackamericaweb.com/site.aspx/bawnews/stateof/nativeroots109. Retrieved on 2008-08-06. 
^ Indian Achievement Award
^ Charles A. Eastman
^ a b US census



[edit] References


Adams, David Wallace. Education for Extinction: American Indians and the Boarding School Experience 1875–1928, University Press of Kansas, 1975. ISBN 0-7006-0735-8 (hbk); ISBN 0-7006-0838-9 (pbk).
Bierhorst, John. A Cry from the Earth: Music of North American Indians. ISBN 0-941270-53-X.
Deloria, Vine. 1969. Custer Died for Your Sins: an Indian Manifesto. New York: Macmillan.
Electronic Code of Federal Regulations (e-CFR), Title 50: Wildlife and Fisheries Part 22-Eagle permits [6]
Hirschfelder, Arlene B.; Byler, Mary G.; & Dorris, Michael. Guide to research on North American Indians. American Library Association (1983). ISBN 0-8389-0353-3.
Johnston, Eric F. The Life of the Native American, Atlanta, GA: Tradewinds Press (2003).
Johnston, Eric. The Life Of the Native. Philadelphia, PA: E.C. Biddle, etc. 1836–44. University of Georgia Library.
Jones, Peter N. Respect for the Ancestors: American Indian Cultural Affiliation in the American West. Boulder, CO: Bauu Press (2005). ISBN 0-9721349-2-1.
Nichols, Roger L. Indians in the United States & Canada, A Comparative History. University of Nebraska Press (1998). ISBN 0-8032-8377-6.
Pohl, Frances K. Framing America. A Social History of American Art. New York: Thames & Hudson, 2002 (pages 54–56 & 105–106 & 110–111)
Shanley, Kathryn Winona. "The Paradox of Native American Indian Intellectualism and Literature", Melus, Vol. 29, 2004
Shanley, Kathryn Winona. "The Indians America Loves to Love and Read: American Indian Identity and Cultural Appropriation", American Indian Quarterly, Vol. 21, No. 4 (Autumn, 1997), pp. 675–702 doi:10.2307/1185719
Krech, Shepard. The Ecological Indian: Myth and History, New York: W.W. Norton, 1999. 352 p. ISBN 0393047555
Shohat, Ella, and Stam, Robert. Unthinking Eurocentrism: Multiculturalism and the Media. New York: Routledge, 1994.
Sletcher, Michael, "North American Indians", in Will Kaufman and Heidi Macpherson, eds., Britain and the Americas: Culture, Politics, and History, New York: Oxford University Press, 2005, 2 vols.
Snipp, C.M. American Indians: The first of this land. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1989.
Sturtevant, William C. (Ed.). Handbook of North American Indians (Vol. 1–20). Washington, D. C.: Smithsonian Institution. (Vols. 1–3, 16, 18–20 not yet published), (1978–present).
Tiller, Veronica E. (Ed.). Discover Indian Reservations USA: A Visitors' Welcome Guide. Foreword by Ben Nighthorse Campbell. Denver, CO: Council Publications, 1992. ISBN 0-9632580-0-1.



[edit] Further reading

Calloway, Colin G., The American Revolution in Indian Country: Crisis and Diversity in Native American Communities (Cambridge University Press, 1995)
Downes, Randolph C., Council Fires on the Upper Ohio: A Narrative of Indian Affairs in the Upper Ohio Valley until 1795 (University of Pittsburgh Press, 1940)
Ellinghaus, Katherine., Taking Assimilation to Heart: Marriages of White Women and Indigenous Men in the United States and Australia, 1887-1937, (Published by U of Nebraska Press, 2006)
Ely, Mike, [mikeely.wordpress.com/interviews/native-blood-the-myth-of-thanksgiving/ Native Blood: The Myth of Thanksgiving] Kasama project, 2007
Graymont, Barbara, The Iroquois in the American Revolution (Syracuse University Press)
O’Donnell, James, Southern Indians in the American Revolution (University of Tennessee Press, 1973)


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Native Americans



A documentary on the Pequot War
American Indian History and Related Issues
American Indians of the Pacific Northwest at the University of Washington Libraries Digital Collections
Bonneville Collection of 19th century photographs of Native Americans at University of South Carolina Library's Digital Collections Page
Houghton Mifflin Encyclopedia of North American Indians
Indian Days of the Long Ago By Thomas L. M’Kenney and James Hall. Publisher: Philadelphia: E.C. Biddle, etc., 1836–44. (searchable facsimile at the University of Georgia Libraries; DjVu & layered PDF)
McKenney and Hall Tribes of North America
Ndakinna Cultural Center Native American Museum & Cultural Center in Vermont
Trail of Tears - The Dream We Dreamed







 
Links to related articles














v • d • e

Demographics of the United States





Demographic history





Economic and social



Affluence · Educational attainment · Homeownership · Household income · Immigration · Income inequality · Language · Middle classes · Personal income · Poverty · Social class · Unemployment by state · Wealth









Religion



Prominent examples: Buddhist Americans · Christian Americans (Catholic Americans, Mormon Americans, Protestant Americans, plus others) · Hindu Americans · Jewish Americans · Muslim Americans · Neopagan Americans · Non-religious Americans · Sikh Americans








Race,
ethnicity,
and ancestry



Ethnic groups in the United States · American people by ethnic or national origin · History of the United States by ethnic group · American culture by ethnicity · Race and ethnicity in the United States Census · Ethnic groups in the United States · Maps of American ancestries · 2000 Census · Race/ethnicity by EEOC · Racism

Major examples: Arab and Middle Eastern Americans · Black Americans (African Americans, African immigrants, Afro-Caribbeans, etc) · Asian Americans (Chinese Americans, Filipino Americans, Indian Americans, Japanese Americans, Pacific Islander Americans, etc.)  · European Americans ("White Americans") · Hispanic and Latino Americans (Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans in the United States, Cuban Americans, etc.) · Jewish Americans (by ethnic origin) · Multiracial Americans · Native Americans (Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, etc.)














v • d • e

 Race in the 2000 United States Census








"American Indian and Alaskan Native"  "Asian"  "Black or African American"  "Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander"  "White"
















v • d • e

Indigenous peoples of the Americas





History

Archaeology of the Americas · Models of migration to the New World · Pre-Columbian trans-oceanic contact · Classification of indigenous peoples of the Americas · Paleo-Indians






European
colonization

European colonization of the Americas · Population history of American indigenous peoples · Columbian Exchange






By country





North America


Canada · United States · Mexico · Central America · West Indies







South America


Argentina · Brazil · Chile · Colombia · Ecuador · Peru · Venezuela









Related topics

Native American name controversy · Indigenous languages of the Americas






Category · Portal












v • d • e

Thanksgiving





History in the United States

Pilgrims • Native American • Samoset • Tisquantum • Wampanoag • Plymouth • National Thanksgiving Proclamation • "Franksgiving" • National Thanksgiving Turkey Presentation






History in Canada

Martin Frobisher • Newfoundland and Labrador • Samuel de Champlain • Halifax






Traditions

Thanksgiving dinner
Parades: Macy's • 6abc-IKEA (Formerly Boscov's) • McDonald's (State Street) • Holidazzle • Celebrate the Season






Songs

"Over the River and through the Woods" • "We Gather Together" • "Alice's Restaurant" • "The Thanksgiving Song"






Society

Black Friday (shopping) • Cyber Monday • List of harvest festivals • Buy Nothing Day






Sports events

American football • Thanksgiving Classic • Turkey Trot • Turkey bowling • Turkey Night Grand Prix






Television specials

A Charlie Brown Thanksgiving • National Dog Show • Oprah's Favorite Things













v • d • e

Rights of Native Americans in the United States





Trials

Cherokee Nation v. Georgia · Worcester v. Georgia · Standing Bear v. Crook · Hodel v. Irving · Cobell v. Kempthorne · Talton v. Mayes · Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock






Acts

Indian Civil Rights Act · Civilization Act · Pueblo Lands Act · Native American Technical Corrections Act · American Indian Religious Freedom Act · Burke Act · Dawes Act · Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act · Indian Child Welfare Act · Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 · Indian Gaming Regulatory Act · Indian Intercourse Act · Indian Removal Act · Indian Reorganization Act · Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act  · Indian Arts and Crafts Act of 1990






Related

Public Law 280 · National Indian Gaming Commission · Native American gambling enterprises · Dawes Rolls · Bureau of Indian Affairs · Eagle feather law · Declaration of Indian Purpose

















Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Native_Americans_in_the_United_States"
Categories: Native American cinema | African American history | African-Native American relations | American culture | History of civil rights in the United States | History of the Thirteen Colonies | History of North America | Native American history | Native American topics | Native American topics art | Indigenous peoples of North AmericaHidden categories: "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Català
Deutsch
فارسی
Français
한국어
日本語
Polski
Português
Simple English
Svenska
தமிழ்
Türkçe
中文









 This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 15:43 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
