













Phoenicia - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Phoenicia";
		var wgTitle = "Phoenicia";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "24202";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283025503;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Phoenicia

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses of "Phoenicia", see Phoenicia (disambiguation).






Φοινίκη
Canaan






1200 BC – 333 BC
 →









Map of Phoenicia


Capital
Byblos
(1200 BC – 1000 BC)
Tyre
(1000 BC - 333BC)


Language(s)
Phoenician, Greek, Punic


Religion
Phoenician polytheism


Government
Kingship (City-states)


King


 - ca. 1000 BC
Ahiram


 - 969 BC - 936 BC
Hiram I


 - 820 BC - 774 BC
Pygmalion of Tyre


Historical era
Classical antiquity


 - Byblos becomes the predominant Phoenician center
1200 BC


 - Tyre, under the reign of Hiram I, becomes the dominant city-state
969 BC


 - Pygmalion founds Carthage
814 BC


 - Cyrus the Great conquers Phoenicia
333 BC


Population


 - 1200 BC[1] est.
200,000 





Phoenicia (Phoenician: , Canaan or Kana'an, nonstandardly, Phenicia; pronounced /fɨˈnɪʃiə/[2], Greek: Φοινίκη: Phoiníkē, Latin: Phœnicia) was an ancient civilization centered in the north of ancient Canaan, with its heartland along the coastal regions of modern day Lebanon, extending to parts of Israel, Syria and the Palestinian territories. Phoenician civilization was an enterprising maritime trading culture that spread across the Mediterranean during the period 1550 BCE to 300 BCE. Though ancient boundaries of such city-centered cultures fluctuated, the city of Tyre seems to have been the southernmost. Sarepta (modern day Sarafand) between Sidon and Tyre, is the most thoroughly excavated city of the Phoenician homeland. The Phoenicians often traded by means of a galley, a man-powered sailing vessel and are credited with the invention of the bireme.[3]
It is uncertain to what extent the Phoenicians viewed themselves as a single ethnicity. Their civilization was organized in city-states, similar to ancient Greece. Each city-state was an independent unit politically, although they could come into conflict, be dominated by another city-state, or collaborate in leagues or alliances. Tyre and Sidon were the most powerful of the Phoenician states in the Levant, but were not as powerful as the North African ones.[citation needed]
The Phoenicians were also the first state-level society to make extensive use of the alphabet, and the Canaanite-Phoenician alphabet is generally believed to be the ancestor of almost all modern alphabets. Phoenicians spoke the Phoenician language, which belongs to the group of Canaanite languages in the Semitic language family. Through their maritime trade, the Phoenicians spread the use of the alphabet to North Africa and Europe where it was adopted by the Greeks, who later passed it on to the Romans and Etruscans.[4] In addition to their many inscriptions, there were a considerable number of other types of written sources left by the Phoenicians, which have not survived. Evangelical Preparation by Eusebius of Caesarea quotes extensively from Philo of Byblos and Sanchuniathon.




Contents


1 Etymology
2 Origins
3 Cultural and Economic "Empire"
4 Important cities and colonies
5 Trade
6 Language and literature
7 Art
8 Gods

8.1 Attested 2nd Millennium
8.2 Attested 1st Millennium


9 Decline
10 Influence in the Mediterranean region
11 In the Bible
12 See also
13 References
14 Bibliography
15 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Etymology
The name Phoenician, through Latin punicus, comes from Greek phoînix, often suggested as "Tyrian purple, crimson; murex" (from phoinos "blood red"[5]). The Phoenician's nickname "Purple People" came from the purple dye they manufactured for royalty in Mesopotamia and Mogador.

[edit] Origins



History of Lebanon
series



Ancient History


Phoenicia


Ancient history of Lebanon


Foreign Rule


Assyrian Rule


Babylonian Rule


Persian Rule


Macedonian Rule


Roman Rule


Byzantine Rule


Arab Era


Ottoman Rule


French Rule


Topical


Modern Lebanon


Timeline of Lebanese history


Archaeologists argue that the Phoenicians are simply the descendants of coastal-dwelling Canaanites, who over the centuries developed a particular seagoing culture and skills. Other suggestions are that Phoenician culture must have been inspired from external sources (Egypt, North Africa etc.), that the Phoenicians were sea-traders from the Land of Punt who co-opted the Canaanite population; or that they were connected with the Minoans, or the Sea Peoples or the Philistines further south; or even that they represent the maritime activities of the coastal Israelite tribes like Dan, who from the Song of Deborah in Judges, are listed as being "amongst their ships".




Phoenician sarcophagus found in Cadiz, Spain; now in Archaeological Museum of Cádiz. The sarcophagus is thought to have been designed and paid for by a Phoenician merchant, and made in Greece with Egyptian influence.


The Middle East Phoenician - Aramaic derivative 'Semitic language' gave some evidence of invasion at the site of Byblos, which may suggest origins in the highly disputed 'wave of Semitic migration' that hit the Fertile Crescent between ca. 2300 and 2100 BC, some scholars, including Sabatino Moscati believe that the Phoenicians' ethnogenesis included prior non-Semitic people of the area, suggesting a mixture between two populations. Both Sumerian and Akkadian armies had reached the Mediterranean in this area from the beginning of recorded Hebrew history, but very little is known of Phoenicia before it was conquered by Thutmoses IIIof Egypt around 1500 BC. The Amarna correspondence (ca. 1411-1358 BC) reveals that Amorites and Hittites were defeating the Phoenician cities that had been vassals to Egypt, especially Rib-Addi of Byblos and Abi-Milku/Abimelech of Tyre, but between 1350 and 1300 BC Phoenicia was reconquered by Egypt. Over the next century Ugarit flourished, but was permanently destroyed at the end of it (ca. 1200 BC).
In terms of archaeology, language, and religion, there is little to set the Phoenicians apart as markedly different from other local cultures of Canaan, because they were Canaanites themselves. However, they are unique in their remarkable seafaring achievements. Indeed, in the Amarna tablets of the 14th century BC they call themselves Kenaani orKinaani (Canaanites). Note, however, that the Amarna letters predate the invasion of the Sea Peoples by over a century. Much later in the 6th century BC, Hecataeus of Miletus writes that Phoenicia was formerly called χνα, a name Philo of Byblos later adopted into his mythology as his eponym for the Phoenicians: "Khna who was afterwards called Phoinix". Egyptian seafaring expeditions had already been made to Byblos to bring back "cedars of Lebanon" as early as the third millennium BC.
Stories of their emigrating from various places to the eastern Mediterranean are probably founded in 'oral fact', but researchers are pursuing DNA tests to verify this assertion. A written reference, Herodotus's account (written c. 440 BC) refers to a memory from 800 years earlier, which may be subject to question in the fullness of genetic results. (History, I:1).


“
According to the Persians best informed in history, the Phoenicians began the quarrel. These people, who had formerly dwelt on the shores of the Erythraean Sea, having migrated to the Mediterranean and settled in the parts which they now inhabit, began at once, they say, to adventure on long voyages, freighting their vessels with the wares of Egypt and Assyria...
”


An example of a 19th century view is that of John Denison Baldwin who thought that the ancient Phoenicians were of Cushite or Hamite origin. Speaking of their stupendous architectural remains, he wrote:- The Cushite origin of these cities is so plain that those most influenced by the strange monomania which transforms the Phoenicians into Semites now admit that the Cushites were the civilizers of Phoenicia. “Prehistoric Nations” pg 145.
TV journalist Gerhard Herm asserts that, because the Phoenicians' legendary sailing abilities are not well attested before the invasions of the Sea Peoples around 1200 BC, that these Sea Peoples would have merged with the local population to produce the Phoenicians, whom he says gained these abilities rather suddenly at that time. There is also archaeological evidence that the Philistines, often thought of as related to the Sea Peoples, were culturally linked to Mycenaean Greeks, who were also known to be great sailors even in this period.
The question of the Phoenicians' origin persists. Archaeologists have pursued the origin of the Phoenicians for generations, basing their analyses on excavated sites, the remains of material culture, contemporary texts set into contemporary contexts, as well as linguistics. In some cases, the debate is characterized by modern cultural agendas. Ultimately, the origins of the Phoenicians are still unclear: where they came from and just when (or if) they arrived, and under what circumstances, are all still energetically disputed.
Spencer Wells of the Genographic Project has conducted genetic studies which demonstrate that male populations of Lebanon, Malta, Spain and other areas which are past Phoenician settlements, share a common m89 chromosome Y type,[6] while male populations which are related with the Minoans or with the Sea Peoples have completely different genetic markers. This implies that Minoans and Sea Peoples probably didn't have any ancestral relation with the Phoenicians.[2][3]
In 2004, two Harvard University educated geneticists and leading scientists of the National Geographic Genographic Project, Dr. Pierre Zalloua and Dr. Spencer Wells identified the haplogroup of the Phoenicians as haplogroup J2, with avenues open for future research. As Dr. Wells commented, "The Phoenicians were the Canaanites—and the ancestors of today's Lebanese."[7] The male populations of Tunisia and Malta were also included in this study and shown to share overwhelming genetic similarities with the Lebanese-Phoenicians. In 2008, scientists from the Genographic Project announce that "as many as 1 in 17 men living today on the coasts of North Africa and southern Europe may have a Phoenician direct male-line ancestor." [4] See Genetics of the Ancient World.

[edit] Cultural and Economic "Empire"




An ancient Phoenician coin.


Fernand Braudel remarked in The Perspective of the World that Phoenicia was an early example of a "world-economy" surrounded by empires. The high point of Phoenician culture and seapower is usually placed ca. 1200–800 BC.
Many of the most important Phoenician settlements had been established long before this: Byblos, Tyre, Sidon, Simyra, Aradus, and Berytus all appear in the Amarna tablets; and indeed, the first appearance in archaeology of cultural elements clearly identifiable with the Phoenician zenith is sometimes dated as early as the third millennium BC.
This league of independent city-state ports, with others on the islands and along other coasts of the Mediterranean Sea, was ideally suited for trade between the Levant area, rich in natural resources, and the rest of the ancient world. Suddenly, during the early Iron Age, in around 1200 BC an unknown event occurred, historically associated with the appearance of the Sea Peoples from the north who were perhaps driven south by crop failures and mass starvation following the eruption at the island Thera. The powers that had previously dominated the area, notably the Egyptians and the Hittites, became weakened or destroyed; and in the resulting power vacuum a number of Phoenician cities established themselves as significant maritime powers.
Authority seems to have stabilized because it derived from three power-bases: the king; the temple and its priests; and councils of elders. Byblos soon became the predominant center from where they proceeded to dominate the Mediterranean and Erythraean (Red) Sea routes, and it is here that the first inscription in the Phoenician alphabet was found, on the sarcophagus of Ahiram (ca. 1200 BC). However, by around 1000 BC Tyre and Sidon had taken its place, and a long hegemony was enjoyed by Tyre beginning with Hiram I (969-936 BC), who subdued a rebellion in the colony of Utica[citation needed]. The priest Ittobaal (887-856 BC) ruled Phoenicia as far north as Beirut, and part of Cyprus. Carthage was founded in 814 BC under Pygmalion (820-774 BC). The collection of city-kingdoms constituting Phoenicia came to be characterized by outsiders and the Phoenicians themselves as Sidonia or Tyria, and Phoenicians and Canaanites alike came to be called Zidonians or Tyrians, as one Phoenician conquest came to prominence after another.

[edit] Important cities and colonies




Map of Phoenician and Greek colonies at about 550 BC (with German legend).


From the 10th century BC, their expansive culture established cities and colonies throughout the Mediterranean. Canaanite deities like Baal and Astarte were being worshipped from Cyprus to Sardinia, Malta, Sicily, Spain, Portugal, and most notably at Carthage in modern Tunisia.
In the Phoenician homeland:

Arka
Arwad (Classical Aradus)
Berut (Greek Βηρυτός; Latin Berytus;
Arabic بيروت; English Beirut)
Botrys (modern Batroun)
Gebal (Greek Byblos)
Safita
Sarepta (modern Sarafand)





Sidon
Tripoli
Tyre
Ugarit
Zemar (Sumur)




Phoenician colonies, including some of lesser importance (this list might be incomplete):




Located in modern Algeria

Cirta (modern Constantine)
Malaca (modern Guelma)
Igigili (modern Jijel)
Hippo (modern Annaba)
Ikosium (modern Algiers)
Iol (modern Cherchell)


Located in modern Cyprus

Kition (modern Larnaca)


Located in modern Italy

Mainland

Genoa


Sardinia

Karalis (modern Cagliari)
Nora
Olbia
Sulci[8]
Tharros


Sicily

Ziz, Classical Lilybeaum (modern Marsala)
Motya
Panormos (modern Palermo)
Solus (modern Solunto)




Located in modern Libya

Leptis Magna
Oea (modern Tripoli)
Sabratha


The Mediterranean islands of Malat (modern Malta)

Maleth (modern Mdina)[9]
Għajn Qajjet[10]
Tas-Silġ[11]
Mtarfa[12]
Qallilija[13]
Ras il-Wardija in Gozo[11]


Located in modern Mauritania

Cerne


Located in modern Morocco

Acra
Arambys[14]
Caricus Murus
Gytta
Lixus (modern Larache)
Tingis (modern Tangier)






Located in modern Spain

Abdera (modern Adra)
Abyla (modern Ceuta)
Akra Leuke (modern Alicante)
Gadir (modern Cádiz)
Ibossim (modern Ibiza)
Malaca (modern Málaga)
Onoba (modern Huelva)
Qart Hadašt (Greek Νέα Καρχηδόνα; Latin Carthago Nova; Spanish Cartagena)
Rusadir (modern Melilla)
Sexi (modern Almuñécar)


Located in modern Portugal

Olissipona (modern Lisboa)
Ossonoba (modern Faro)


Located in modern Tunisia

Hadrumetum (modern Susat)
Hippo Diarrhytos (modern Bizerte)
Qart Hadašt (Greek Καρχηδόνα; Latin Carthago; English Carthage)
Thapsus (near modern Bekalta)
Utica


Located in modern Turkey

Phoenicus (modern Finike)


Other colonies

Calpe (modern Gibraltar)
Gunugu
Thenae
Tipassa
Sundar
Surya
Shobina
Tara







[edit] Trade




Map of Phoenicia and trade routes


The Phoenicians were amongst the greatest traders of their time and owed a great deal of their prosperity to trade. The Phoenicians' initial trading partners were the Greeks, with whom they used to trade wood, slaves, glass and a Tyrian Purple powder. This powder was used by the Greek elite to color clothes and other garments and was not available anywhere else. Without trade with the Greeks they would not be known as Phoenicians, as the word for Phoenician is derived from the Ancient Greek word phoinikèia meaning "purple".
In the centuries following 1200 BC, the Phoenicians formed the major naval and trading power of the region. Phoenician trade was founded on Tyrian Purple, a violet-purple dye derived from the Murex sea-snail's shell, once profusely available in coastal waters of the eastern Mediterranean Sea but exploited to local extinction. James B. Pritchard's excavations at Sarepta in present day Lebanon revealed crushed Murex shells and pottery containers stained with the dye that was being produced at the site. The Phoenicians established a second production center for the purple dye in Mogador, in present day Morocco. Brilliant textiles were a part of Phoenician wealth, and Phoenician glass was another export ware.
From elsewhere they obtained other materials, perhaps the most important being silver from Iberian Peninsula and tin from Great Britain, the latter of which when smelted with copper (from Cyprus) created the durable metal alloy bronze. Strabo states that there was a highly lucrative Phoenician trade with Britain for tin.
The Phoenicians established commercial outposts throughout the Mediterranean, the most strategically important being Carthage in North Africa, directly across the narrow straits in below). However, ancient Gaelic mythologies of origin attribute a Phoenician/Scythian influx to Ireland by a leader called Fenius Farsa. Others also sailed south along the coast of Africa. A Carthaginian expedition led by Hanno the Navigator explored and colonized the Atlantic coast of Africa as far as the Gulf of Guinea; and according to Herodotus, a Phoenician expedition sent down the Red Sea by pharaoh Necho II of Egypt (c. 600 BC) even circumnavigated Africa and returned through the Pillars of Hercules in three years.

[edit] Language and literature
Main articles: Phoenician languages, Phoenician alphabet, and Alphabet
The Phoenicians are credited with spreading the Phoenician alphabet throughout the Mediterranean world.[15] It was a variant of the Semitic alphabet of the Canaanite area developed centuries earlier in the Sinai region, or in central Egypt. Phoenician traders disseminated this writing system along Aegean trade routes, to coastal Anatolia, the Minoan civilization of Crete, Mycenean Greece, and throughout the Mediterranean.
This alphabet has been termed an abjad or a script that contains no vowels. A cuneiform abjad originated to the north in Ugarit, a Canaanite city of northern Syria, in the 14th century BC. Their language, Phoenician, is classified as in the Canaanite subgroup of Northwest Semitic. Its later descendant in North Africa is termed Punic.




Sarcophagus of a Phoenician woman (c. 400 BC.) found in the necropolis of Magharat Tabloun in Sidon (The Louvre)


The earliest known inscriptions in Phoenician come from Byblos and date back to ca. 1000 BC. Phoenician inscriptions are found in Lebanon, Syria, Israel, Cyprus and other locations, as late as the early centuries of the Christian Era. In Phoenician colonies around the western Mediterranean, beginning in the 9th century BC, Phoenician evolved into Punic. Punic Phoenician was still spoken in the 5th century CE: St. Augustine, for example, grew up in North Africa and was familiar with the language.

[edit] Art
Phoenician art had no unique characteristic that could be identified with. This is due to the fact that Phoenicians were influenced by foreign designs and artistic cultures mainly from Egypt, Greece and Assyria. Phoenicians who were taught on the banks of the Nile and the Euphrates gained a wide artistic experience and finally came to create their own art, which was an amalgam of foreign models and perspectives.[16] In an article from The New York Times, published on January 5, 1879, Phoenician art was described by the following:

He entered into other men's labors and made most of his heritage. The Sphinx of Egypt became Asiatic, and its new form was transplanted to Nineveh on the one side and to Greece on the other. The rosettes and other patterns of the Babylonian cylinders were introduced into the handiwork of Phoenicia, and so passed on to the West, while the hero of the ancient Chaldean epic became first the Tyrian Melkarth, and then the Herakles of Hellas.


[edit] Gods
Further information: Canaanite religion



[edit] Attested 2nd Millennium

Adonis
Amen (Amun)
Astarte
Baal Saphon
Baalat Gebal "Lady of Byblos"
Baal Shemen consort of Baalat Gebal
El
Eshmun
Isis
Melqart
Osiris
Shed
Venerable Reshef (Reshef of the Arrow)

Gebory-Kon


[edit] Attested 1st Millennium

Chusor
Dagon
Eshmun-Melqart
Milkashtart
Reshef-Shed
Shed-Horon
Tanit-Astarte





[edit] Decline




The Siege of Tyre by Andre Castaigne


Cyrus the Great conquered Phoenicia in 539 BC. Phoenicia was divided into four vassal kingdoms by the Persians: Sidon, Tyre, Arwad, and Byblos, and prospered, furnishing fleets for the Persian kings. However, Phoenician influence declined after this. It is also reasonable to suppose that much of the Phoenician population migrated to Carthage and other colonies following the Persian conquest, as it is roughly then (under King Hanno) that we first hear of Carthage as a powerful maritime entity. In 350 or 345 BC a rebellion in Sidon led by Tennes was crushed by Artaxerxes III, and its destruction was described, perhaps too dramatically, by Diodorus Siculus.
Alexander the Great took Tyre in 332 BC following the Siege of Tyre. Alexander was exceptionally harsh to Tyre, executing 2000 of the leading citizens, but he maintained the king in power. He gained control of the other cities peacefully: the ruler of Aradus submitted; the king of Sidon was overthrown. The rise of Hellenistic Greece gradually ousted the remnants of Phoenicia's former dominance over the Eastern Mediterranean trade routes, and Phoenician culture disappeared entirely in the motherland. However, its North African offspring, Carthage, continued to flourish, mining iron and precious metals from Iberia, and using its considerable naval power and mercenary armies to protect its commercial interests, until it was finally destroyed by Rome in 146 BC at the end of the Punic Wars.
As for the Phoenician homeland, following Alexander it was controlled by a succession of Hellenistic rulers: Laomedon (323 BC), Ptolemy I (320), Antigonus II (315), Demetrius (301), and Seleucus (296). Between 286 and 197 BC, Phoenicia (except for Aradus) fell to the Ptolemies of Egypt, who installed the high priests of Astarte as vassal rulers in Sidon (Eshmunazar I, Tabnit, Eshmunazar II). In 197 BC, Phoenicia along with Syria reverted to the Seleucids, and the region became increasingly Hellenized, although Tyre actually became autonomous in 126 BC, followed by Sidon in 111. Syria, including Phoenicia, were seized by king Tigranes the Great from 82 until 69 BC when he was defeated by Lucullus, and in 65 BC Pompey finally incorporated it as part of the Roman province of Syria.

[edit] Influence in the Mediterranean region




Cadmus fighting the dragon. Side A of a black-figured amphora from Euboea, ca. 560–550 BC, Louvre


Phoenician culture had a huge effect upon the cultures of the Mediterranean basin in the early Iron Age, and had also been affected in reverse. For example, in Phoenicia, the tripartite division between Baal, Mot and Yam seems to have been influenced by the Greek division between Zeus, Hades and Poseidon. Phoenician temples in various Mediterranean ports sacred to Phoenician Melkart, during the classical period, were recognized as sacred to Hercules. Stories like the Rape of Europa, and the coming of Cadmus also draw upon Phoenician influence.
The recovery of the Mediterranean economy after the late Bronze Age collapse, seems to have been largely due to the work of Phoenician traders and merchant princes, who re-established long distance trade between Egypt and Mesopotamia in the 10th century BC. The Ionian revolution was, at least in legend, led by philosophers such as Thales of Miletus or Pythagoras, both of whom had Phoenician fathers. Phoenician motifs are also present in the Orientalising period of Greek art, and Phoenicians also played a formative role in Etruscan civilisation in Tuscany.
There are many countries and cities around the world that derive their names from the Phoenician Language. Below is a list with the respective meanings:

Altiburus: City in Algeria, SW of Carthage. From Phoenician: "Iltabrush"
Bosa: City in Sardinia: From Phoenician "Bis'en"
Cadiz: City in Spain: From Phoenician "Gadir"
Dhali (Idalion): City in Central Cyprus: From Phoenician "Idyal"
Erice: City in Sicily: From Phoenician "Eryx"
Malta: Island in the Mediterranean: From Phoenician "Malat" ('refuge')
Marion: City in West Cyprus: From Phoenician "Aymar"
Oed Dekri: City in Algeria: From Phoenician: "Idiqra"
Spain: From Phoenician: "I-Shaphan", meaning "Land of Hyraxes". Later Latinized as "Hispania"


[edit] In the Bible
Hiram (also spelled Huran) associated with the building of the temple.


“
2 Chronicles 2:13—The son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and his father [was] a man of Tyre, skillful to work in gold, silver, brass, iron, stone, timber, royal purple(from the Murex), blue, and in crimson, and fine linens; also to grave any manner of graving, and to find out every device which shall be put to him...
”


This is the architect of the Temple, Hiram Abiff of Masonic lore. They are vastly famous for their purple dye.
Later, reforming prophets railed against the practice of drawing royal wives from among foreigners: Elijah execrated Jezebel, the princess from Tyre who became a consort of King Ahab and introduced the worship of her gods.
Long after Phoenician culture had flourished, or Phoenicia had existed as any political entity, Hellenized natives of the region where Canaanites still lived were referred to as "Syro-Phoenician", as in the Gospel of Mark 7:26: "The woman was a Greek, a Syrophoenician by birth..."
The word Bible itself ultimately derives through Greek from the word Byblos which means Book, and not from the Hellenised Phoenician city of Byblos (which was called Gebal), before it was named by the Greeks as Byblos. The Greeks called it Byblos because it was through Gebal that bublos (Bύβλος ["Egyptian papyrus"]) was imported into Greece. Present day Byblos is under the current Arabic name of Jbeil (جبيل Ǧubayl) derived from Gebal.

[edit] See also

Phoenicianism
Punic
Carthage
Names of the Levant


[edit] References


^ "Phoenicia" (in English). The Encyclopedia of World History, Sixth edition. Houghton Mifflin Company. 2001. 1. http://www.bartleby.com/67/109.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-11. 
^ Oxford English Dictionary
^ Casson, Lionel (December 1 1995). Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World. The Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 57–58. ISBN 978-0801851308. http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=sDpMh0gK2OUC&oi=fnd&pg=PA3&dq=+bireme+Assyrian+Casson&ots=SzGT0dkwlq&sig=zyJHXe3O3BzTfuNZjMtm7NaoXNw#PPA57,M1. 
^ Edward Clodd, Story of the Alphabet (Kessinger) 2003:192ff
^ Gove, Philip Babcock, ed. Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language Unabridged. Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster, 1993.
^ "In the Wake of the Phoenicians: DNA study reveals a Phoenician-Maltese link". National Geographic. 8 January 2008. http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/ngm/0410/feature2/online_extra.html. 
^ Phoenicians - One-third of Maltese found to have ancient Phoenician DNA National Geographic Magazine, October 2004 - The Malta Independent Online. Accessed on March 10, 2008
^ Claudian, B. Gild. 518
^ http://www.edrichton.com/MdinaHistory.htm History of Mdina
^ J.G. Baldacchino & T.J. Dunbabin, “Rock tomb at Għajn Qajjet, near Rabat, Malta”, Papers of the British School at Rome, 21 (1953) 32-41.
^ a b http://members.ziggo.nl/bezver/romans.html A History of Malta
^ Annual Report on the Working of the Museum Department 1926-27, Malta 1927, 8; W. Culican, “The repertoire of Phoenician pottery”, Phönizier im Westen, Mainz 1982, 45-82.
^ Annual Report on the Working of the Museum Department 1916-7, Malta 1917, 9-10.
^ C. Michael Hogan, Mogador: promontory fort, The Megalithic Portal, ed. A. Burnham, Nov. 2, 2007 [1]
^ Beck, Roger B.; Linda Black, Larry S. Krieger, Phillip C. Naylor, Dahia Ibo Shabaka, (1999). World History: Patterns of Interaction. Evanston, IL: McDougal Littell. ISBN 0-395-87274-X. 
^ "Phoenician Art" (.pdf). The New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/mem/archive-free/pdf?_r=1&res=9800E4DF123EE73BBC4D53DFB7668382669FDE&oref=slogin. Retrieved on 2008-06-20. 



[edit] Bibliography

Aubet, Maria Eugenia, The Phoenicians and the West: Politics, Colonies and Trade, tr. Mary Turton (Bryn Mawr Classical Review, 2001: review)
The History of Phoenicia, first published in 1889 by George Rawlinson is available under Project Gutenberg at: http://digital.library.upenn.edu/webbin/gutbook/lookup?num=2331 Rawlinson's 19th century text needs updating for modern improvements in historical understanding.
Todd, Malcolm; Andrew Fleming (1987). The South West to AD 1,000 (Regional history of England series No.:8). Harlow, Essex: Longman. ISBN 0-582-49274-2 (Paperback), 0-582-49273-4 (hardback). , for a critical examination of the evidence of Phoenician trade with the South West of the U.K
Markoe, Glenn (2000). Phoenicians. University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-226135 (hardback). 
Thiollet, Jean-Pierre, Je m'appelle Byblos, H & D, Paris, 2005. ISBN 2 914 266 04 9


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Phoenicia 



Information on Canaan and Phoenicians
The quest for the Phoenicians in South Lebanon









v • d • e

Phoenician cities and colonies








Algeria: Hippo Regius · Ikosium · Guelma · Tipaza · Cyprus: Kition · Israel: Ashkelon · Caesarea · Italy: Genoa · Karalis · Lilybaeum · Motya · Nora · Olbia · Panormus · Solki · Soluntum · Tharros · Lebanon: Arqa  · Berut · Botrys · Gebal  · Sarepta · Sur · Sydon · Lybia: Leptis Magna · Oea · Sabratha · Malta: Gozo · Mauritania: Cerne · Morocco: Arambys · Caricus Murus · Lixus · Tingis · Portugal: Olissipona · Ossonoba · Spain: Abdera · Abyla · Akra Leuke · Gadir · Ibossim · Malaca · Onoba · Qart Hadašt · Rusadir · Sexi · Syria: Amrit · Arwad · Safita · Ugarit · Tunisia: Carthage · Hadrumetum · Hippo Diarrhytos · Kerkouane · Leptis Parva · Thapsus · Utica · Turkey: Myriandrus · Phoenicus · Gibraltar


















v • d • e

A History of Empires





Ancient empires

Akkadian · New Kingdom of Egypt · Neo-Assyrian · Hittite · Medes · Achaemenid Persian · Macedonian (Ptolemaic · Seleucid) · Maurya · Gupta · Qin · Han · Parthian · Roman (Western Roman · Eastern Roman) · Sassanid






Medieval empires

Byzantine · Hunnic · Arab (Rashidun · Umayyad · Abbasid · Fatimid · Almohad) · Ghaznavid · Great Seljuq · Khwarezmian · Timurid · Chola · Mongol · Serbian · Bulgarian · Carolingian · Holy Roman · Angevin · Mali · Tang · Song · Yuan · Inca Empire · Srivijaya






Modern empires

Maratha · Mughal · Ming · Qing · Ottoman · Safavid · Afsharid · Zand · Qajar · Ethiopian · Portuguese · Spanish · Iberian · Dutch · British · French Napoleonic · French colonial · German · German colonial · Russian · Swedish · Austro-Hungarian · Brazil · Japan









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phoenicia"
Categories: Former countries in Asia | 1200 BC establishments | 333 BC disestablishments | Civilizations | PhoeniciaHidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | Former country articles requiring maintenance | Articles containing Greek language text | Articles containing Latin language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kiswahili
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Malti
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
中文









 This page was last modified on 10 April 2009, at 18:50 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
