













Silicon Valley - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Silicon_Valley";
		var wgTitle = "Silicon Valley";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "26976";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282051396;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Silicon Valley

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For the valley nicknamed "Silicone Valley" see San Fernando Valley.




A view of downtown San Jose, the "Capital of Silicon Valley."


Silicon Valley is the southern part of the San Francisco Bay Area in Northern California, United States. The term originally referred to the region's large number of silicon chip innovators and manufacturers, but eventually came to refer to all the high-tech businesses in the area; it is now generally used as a metonym for the high-tech sector. Despite the development of other high-tech economic centers throughout the United States, Silicon Valley continues to be the leading high-tech hub because of its large number of engineers and venture capitalists. Geographically, Silicon Valley encompasses the northern part of the Santa Clara Valley and adjacent communities.




Contents


1 Origin of the term
2 History
3 Social Roots of information technology revolution in America

3.1 Roots in radio and military technology
3.2 Stanford Industrial Park
3.3 Silicon transistor
3.4 Venture capital firms
3.5 The rise of software
3.6 Internet bubble


4 Economy

4.1 Notable companies
4.2 Notable government facilities


5 Universities
6 Cities
7 See also
8 Further reading
9 References
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Origin of the term
The term Silicon Valley was coined by Ralph Vaerst, a Northern California entrepreneur. Its first published use is credited to Don Hoefler, a friend of Vaerst's, who used the phrase as the title of a series of articles in the weekly trade newspaper Electronic News. The series, entitled "Silicon Valley USA," began in the paper's issue dated January 11, 1971.[1] Valley refers to the Santa Clara Valley, located at the southern end of San Francisco Bay, while Silicon refers to the high concentration of companies involved in the semiconductor and computer industries that were concentrated in the area. These firms slowly replaced the orchards which gave the area its initial nickname, the Valley of Heart's Delight.

[edit] History

Perhaps the strongest thread that runs through the Valley's past and present is the drive to "play" with novel technology, which, when bolstered by an advanced engineering degree and channeled by astute management, has done much to create the industrial powerhouse we see in the Valley today.[2]






Looking west over northern San Jose (downtown is at far left) and other parts of Silicon Valley



Since the early twentieth century, Silicon Valley has been home to a vibrant, growing electronics industry. The industry began through experimentation and innovation in the fields of radio, television, and military electronics. Stanford University, its affiliates, and graduates have played a major role in the evolution of this area.

[edit] Social Roots of information technology revolution in America
It was in Silicon Valley that the integrated circuit, the microprocessor, the microcomputer, among other key technologies, were developed, and has been the site of electronic innovation for over four decades, sustained by about a quarter of a million information technology workers. Silicon Valley was formed as a milieu of innovations by the convergence on one site of new technological knowledge; a large pool of skilled engineers and scientists from major universities in the area; generous funding from an assured market with Defense Department; the development of an efficient network of venture capital firms; and, in the very early stage, the institutional leadership of Stanford University. [3]

[edit] Roots in radio and military technology
The San Francisco Bay Area had long been a major site of U.S. Navy research and technology. In 1909, Charles Herrold started the first radio station in the United States with regularly scheduled programming in San Jose. Later that year, Stanford University graduate Cyril Elwell purchased the U.S. patents for Poulsen arc radio transmission technology and founded the Federal Telegraph Corporation (FTC) in Palo Alto. Over the next decade, the FTC created the world's first global radio communication system, and signed a contract with the U.S. Navy in 1912.[2]
In 1933, Air Base Sunnyvale, California was commissioned by the United States Government for the use as a Naval Air Station (NAS) to house the airship USS Macon in Hangar One. The station was renamed NAS Moffett Field, and between 1933 and 1947, US Navy blimps were based here.[4] A number of technology firms had set up shop in the area around Moffett to serve the Navy. When the Navy gave up its airship ambitions and moved most of its West Coast operations to San Diego, NACA (the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, forerunner of NASA) took over portions of Moffett for aeronautics research. Many of the original companies stayed, while new ones moved in. The immediate area was soon filled with aerospace firms such as Lockheed.

[edit] Stanford Industrial Park
After World War II, universities were experiencing enormous demand due to returning students. To address the financial demands of Stanford's growth requirements, and to provide local employment opportunities for graduating students, Frederick Terman proposed the leasing of Stanford's lands for use as an office park, named the Stanford Industrial Park (later Stanford Research Park). Leases were limited to high technology companies. Its first tenant was Varian Associates, founded by Stanford alumni in the 1930s to build military radar components. However, Terman also found venture capital for civilian technology start-ups . One of the major success stories was Hewlett-Packard. Founded in Packard's garage by Stanford graduates William Hewlett and David Packard, Hewlett-Packard moved its offices into the Stanford Research Park slightly after 1953. In 1954, Stanford created the Honors Cooperative Program to allow full-time employees of the companies to pursue graduate degrees from the University on a part-time basis. The initial companies signed five-year agreements in which they would pay double the tuition for each student in order to cover the costs. Hewlett-Packard has become the largest personal computer manufacturer in the world, and transformed the home printing market when it released the first ink jet printer in 1984. In addition, the tenancy of Eastman Kodak and General Electric made Stanford Industrial Park a center of technology in the mid-1990s.[5][6]

[edit] Silicon transistor
In 1953, William Shockley left Bell Labs in a disagreement over the handling of the invention of the transistor. After returning to California Institute of Technology for a short while, Shockley moved to Mountain View, California in 1956, and founded Shockley Semiconductor Laboratory. Unlike many other researchers who used germanium as the semiconductor material, Shockley believed that silicon was the better material for making transistors. Shockley intended to replace the current transistor with a new three-element design (today known as the Shockley diode), but the design was considerably more difficult to build than the "simple" transistor. In 1957, Shockley decided to end research on the silicon transistor. As a result, eight engineers left the company to form Fairchild Semiconductor. Two of the original employees of Fairchild Semiconductor, Robert Noyce and Gordon Moore, would go on to found Intel.[7]

[edit] Venture capital firms
By the early 1970s there were many semiconductor companies in the area, computer firms using their devices, and programming and service companies serving both. Industrial space was plentiful and housing was still inexpensive. The growth was fueled by the emergence of the venture capital industry on Sand Hill Road, beginning with Kleiner Perkins in 1972; the availability of venture capital exploded after the successful $1.3 billion IPO of Apple Computer in December 1980.

[edit] The rise of software
Although semiconductors are still a major component of the area's economy, Silicon Valley has been most famous in recent years for innovations in software and Internet services. Silicon Valley has significantly influenced computer operating systems, software, and user interfaces.
Using money from NASA and the U.S. Air Force, Doug Engelbart invented the mouse and hypertext-based collaboration tools in the mid-1960s, while at Stanford Research Institute (now SRI International). When Engelbart's Augmentation Research Center declined in influence due to personal conflicts and the loss of government funding, Xerox hired some of Engelbart's best researchers. In turn, in the 1970s and 1980s, Xerox's Palo Alto Research Center (PARC) played a pivotal role in object-oriented programming, graphical user interfaces (GUIs), Ethernet, PostScript, and laser printers.
While Xerox marketed equipment using its technologies, for the most part its technologies flourished elsewhere. The diaspora of Xerox inventions led directly to 3Com and Adobe Systems, and indirectly to Cisco, Apple Computer and Microsoft. Apple's Macintosh GUI was largely a result of Steve Jobs' visit to PARC and the subsequent hiring of key personnel.[8] Microsoft's Windows GUI is based on Apple's work, more or less directly.[9] Cisco's impetus stemmed from the need to route a variety of protocols over Stanford's campus Ethernet.

[edit] Internet bubble
Silicon Valley is generally considered to have been the center of the dot-com bubble which started from the mid-1990s and collapsed after the NASDAQ stock market began to decline dramatically in April 2000. During the bubble era, real estate prices reached unprecedented levels. For a brief time, Sand Hill Road was home to the most expensive commercial real estate in the world, and the booming economy resulted in severe traffic congestion.
Even after the dot-com crash, Silicon Valley continues to maintain its status as one of the top research and development centers in the world. A 2006 Wall Street Journal story found that 13 of the 20 most inventive towns in America were in California, and 10 of those were in Silicon Valley. [10] San Jose led the list with 3,867 utility patents filed in 2005, and number two was Sunnyvale, at 1,881 utility patents.[11]

[edit] Economy
According to a 2008- study by AeA in 2006 Silicon Valley was the third largest (cybercity) high-tech center in the United States, behind the New York metropolitan area and Washington metropolitan area, with 225,300 high-tech jobs. The Bay Area as a whole however, of which Silicon Valley is a part, would rank first with 386,000 high-tech jobs. Silicon Valley has the highest concentration of high-tech workers of any metropolitan area, with 285.9 out of every 1,000 private-sector workers.
The Silicon Valley has the highest average high-tech salary at $144,800. The region is the biggest high-tech manufacturing center in the United States.[12] The unemployment rate of the region was 9.4% in January 2009, up from 7.8% in the previous month.[13]

[edit] Notable companies
See also: Category:Companies based in Silicon Valley
Thousands of high technology companies are headquartered in Silicon Valley; among those, the following are in the Fortune 1000:




Adobe Systems






Apple Inc.






eBay






Google






Hewlett-Packard






Intel






Intuit






Nvidia






Oracle






Yahoo!






Advanced Micro Devices (AMD)



Adobe Systems
Advanced Micro Devices (AMD)
Agilent Technologies
Apple Inc.
Applied Materials
Business Objects
Cisco Systems
eBay
Google
Hewlett-Packard
Intel
Intuit
Juniper Networks
LSI Logic
National Semiconductor
NetApp
Nvidia
Oracle Corporation
SanDisk
Sun Microsystems
Symantec
Yahoo!

Additional notable companies headquartered (or with a significant presence) in Silicon Valley include (some defunct or subsumed):

3Com (headquartered in Marlborough, Massachusetts)
Actel
Actuate Corporation
Adaptec
Aeria Games and Entertainment
Amdahl
Aricent
Asus
Atari
Atmel
Broadcom
BEA Systems
Cypress Semiconductor
Facebook
Force10
Foundry Networks
Fujitsu (headquartered in Tokyo, Japan)
Hitachi Global Storage Technologies
IBM Almaden Research Center
Logitech
Maxtor
McAfee
Memorex (acquired by Imation and moved to Cerritos, California)
Micron (headquartered in Boise, Idaho)
Microsoft (headquartered in Redmond, Washington)
Netflix
Netscape (acquired by AOL)
NeXT Computer, Inc. (acquired by Apple)
Opera Software
OPPO
Palm, Inc.
PalmSource, Inc. (acquired by ACCESS)
PayPal (now part of eBay)
PlayPhone
Rambus
Redback Networks (acquired by Ericsson)
SAP AG (headquartered in Walldorf, Germany)
Siemens (headquartered in Berlin and Munich, Germany)
Silicon Graphics
Silicon Image
Solectron (acquired by Flextronics)
Sony
SRI International
SunPower
Tesla Motors
Tellme Networks (acquired by Microsoft)
TiVo
VA Software (Slashdot)
WebEx (acquired by Cisco Systems)
Western Digital
VeriSign
Veritas Software (acquired by Symantec)
VMware (acquired by EMC)
Xilinx
Zoran Corporation

Silicon Valley is also home to the high-tech superstore retail chain Fry's Electronics.

[edit] Notable government facilities

Moffett Federal Airfield
NASA Ames Research Center
Onizuka Air Force Station


[edit] Universities

San José State University
Santa Clara University
Stanford University


[edit] Cities
A number of cities are located in Silicon Valley (in alphabetical order):

Campbell
Cupertino
East Palo Alto (San Mateo County)
Fremont (Alameda County)
Los Altos
Los Altos Hills
Los Gatos
Menlo Park (San Mateo County)
Milpitas
Mountain View
Palo Alto
San Jose
Santa Clara
Saratoga
Sunnyvale

Cities sometimes associated with the region:

Foster City
Gilroy
Morgan Hill
Newark (Alameda County)
Redwood City (San Mateo County, home to Oracle, Electronic Arts and PDI/DreamWorks)
Santa Cruz[14]


[edit] See also

List of attractions in Silicon Valley
List of places with 'Silicon' names
List of research parks around the world
List of technology centers around the world
Pirates of Silicon Valley — Movie about the early development of Microsoft and Apple.
Science park
Silicon Forest
Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition
Sustainable Silicon Valley (SSV)


[edit] Further reading

Making Silicon Valley: Innovation and the Growth of High Tech, 1930–1970 by Christophe Lécuyer, MIT Press (2006)
Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution by Steven Levy, Garden City, New York: Anchor Press/Doubleday (1984)
Behind the Silicon Curtain: The Seductions of Work in a Lonely Era, Dennis Hayes, London: Free Association Books (1989)
Silicon Valley, Inc.: Ruminations on the Demise of a Unique Culture, The San Jose Mercury News (1997)
Cultures@Silicon Valley, J. A. English-Lueck, Stanford: Stanford University Press (2002)
The Silicon Valley of Dreams: Environmental Injustice, Immigrant Workers, and the High-Tech Global Economy, David Naguib Pellow and Lisa Sun-Hee Park, New York University Press (2003)
What the Dormouse Said: How the Sixties Counterculture Shaped the Personal Computer Industry, John Markoff, Viking (2005)
Silicon Follies: A Dot. Comedy, Thomas Scoville, Pocket Books (2000)
The Silicon Boys: And Their Valleys Of Dreams, David A. Kaplan, Harper Perinneal (April 2000), ISBN 0-688-17906-1
Cities of knowledge: Cold War science and the search for the next Silicon Valley, Margaret Pugh O’Mara, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, (2005)
Accidental Empires: How the boys of Silicon Valley make their millions, battle foreign competition, and still can't get a date, Robert X. Cringely, Addison-Wesley Publishing, (1992), ISBN 0-201-57032-7


[edit] References


^ Don Hoefler profile from NetValley.com
^ a b Timothy J. Sturgeon, Massachusetts Institute of Technology | Timothy J. Sturgeon, Massachusetts Institute of Technology SV GlobalizationPDF (90.0 KiB)
^ The Information Technology Revolution by Marvel Castells (On the history of formation of Silicon Valley by Rogers and Larsen 1984 and Malone 1985)
^ moffettfieldmuseum
^ 1984 printer
^ SV History
^ Goodheart July 2, 2006
^ Graphical User Interface (GUI) from apple-history.com
^ Inventors of the Modern Computer: The History of the Graphical User Interface or GUI - The Apple Lisa by Mary Bellis
^ Reed Albergotti, "The Most Inventive Towns in America," Wall Street Journal, 22-23 July 2006, P1.
^ Ibid.
^ Silicon Valley and N.Y. still top tech rankings
^ Silicon Valley unemployment rate jumps to 9.4 percent
^ Silicon Valley. "Silicon Valley Online". http://www.siliconvalleyonline.org/cities.html#santacruz. Retrieved on 2007-11-11. 



[edit] External links




San Francisco Bay Area portal




California's Historic Silicon Valley
Douglas Engelbart
Growth of a Silicon Empire by Henry Norr published at the end of 1999 in the San Francisco Chronicle
How Silicon Valley Came to BePDF (90.0 KiB)
Red tile roofs in Bangalore: Stanford's look copied in Silicon Valley and beyond
Silicon Valley 150 for beginning of 2004 as a PDF filePDF
Stanford Linear Accelerator center
The Silicon Valley Cultures Project
Website focused on Silicon Valley news, backed by the San Jose Mercury News
Silicon Valley looks towards 2009








v • d • e

Silicon Valley in California





Cities

Campbell • Cupertino • East Palo Alto • Fremont • Los Altos • Los Altos Hills • Los Gatos • Menlo Park • Milpitas • Mountain View • Newark • Palo Alto • Redwood City • San Jose • San Mateo • Santa Clara • Saratoga • Sunnyvale






Colleges and Universities

Carnegie Mellon University - West Coast Campus • Cogswell Polytechnical College • De Anza College • Evergreen Valley College • Foothill College • Menlo College • Mission College • National Hispanic University • Northwestern Polytechnic University • San Jose City College • San José State University • Santa Clara University • Stanford University • University of California, Berkeley • University of California, Santa Cruz






Companies (including subsidiaries and
defuncts based in or around the area

3Com • Actuate • Adaptec • Adobe Systems • AMD • Agilent Technologies • Amdahl • Apple Inc. • Applied Materials • Aricent • Asus • Atari • Atmel • BEA Systems • Business Objects • Cisco Systems • Computer Literacy Bookstore • Cypress Semiconductor • eBay • Electronic Arts • Foundry Networks • Fry's Electronics • Fujitsu • Gaia Online • Google • Hewlett-Packard • Hitachi Global Storage Technologies • Intel • Intuit • Juniper Networks • Knight-Ridder • Logitech • LSI Logic • Magellan Navigation • Marvell Technology Group • Maxtor • McAfee • Memorex • Microsoft • National Semiconductor • Netscape • Network Appliance • NeXT • Nintendo of America • Nvidia • Opera Software • OPPO Digital • Oracle Corporation • Palm, Inc. • PalmSource • PayPal • Rambus • Redback Networks • SAP AG • SanDisk • Silicon Graphics • Silicon Image • Solectron • Sony • SRI International • Sun Microsystems • Symantec • Symyx • Taligent • Tesla Motors • Tellme Networks • TiVo • VA Software • WebEx • VeriSign • Veritas Software • VMware • Xilinx • Yahoo!













v • d • e

San Jose and Silicon Valley attractions





Arboreta/Gardens

Arizona Cactus Garden · Chinese Cultural Garden · Emma Prusch Farm Park · Hakone Gardens · Japanese Friendship Garden · Overfelt Gardens · SJ Municipal Rose Garden · Stanford Arboretum · Villa Montalvo Arboretum






Cultural

American Musical Theatre of SJ · Ballet San Jose · Cathedral Basilica of St. Joseph · De Saisset Museum · MLK Library · Gurdwara Sahib · Ira F. Brilliant Center for Beethoven Studies · Mexican Heritage Plaza · Opera San Jose · Rosicrucian Egyptian Museum · SJ City Hall · SJ Flea Market · SJ Museum of Art · SJ Rep Theatre · Steinway Society · Viet Museum · Villa Montalvo · Vivace Youth Chorus






Event venues

Buck Shaw Stadium · HP Pavilion at San Jose · SC Convention Center · SJ Civic Auditorium · SJ Convention Center · SJ Municipal Stadium · Shoreline Amphitheatre · Spartan Stadium






Events

BayCon · Cinequest Film Festival · FanimeCon · FurCon · Gilroy Garlic Festival · LiveStrong Challenge · SJ Holiday Parade · SJ Jazz Festival · Stanford Jazz Festival






Historical

Circle of Palms · Hangar One · History Park at Kelley Park · Packard's garage · Peralta Adobe · Portuguese Historical Museum · Rengstorff House · SJ Museum of Quilts & Textiles · Winchester Mystery House






Parks/Trails

Almaden Quicksilver County Park · Alum Rock Park · Bay Area Ridge Trail · Castle Rock State Park · Ed Levin Park · Grant Ranch Park · Guadalupe River Trail · Henry W. Coe State Park · Kelley Park · Lake Cunningham · Los Alamitos Creek Trail · Los Gatos Creek Trail · Plaza de César Chávez · Rancho San Antonio · Rosicrucian Park · Sanborn Park · SF Bay Trail · Shoreline Park · Stevens Creek Trail · Vasona Park






Science/Tech/Education

Children's Discovery Museum · Computer History Museum · Intel Museum · Laser Quest · Lick Observatory · NASA Ames Research Center · SJSU · SCU · Stanford · The Tech Museum of Innovation






Shopping

Cupertino Square · Eastridge · Great Mall · Pruneyard · San Antonio · Santana Row · Stanford · Oakridge · Valley Fair · Westgate






Theme parks

Billy Jones Wildcat Railroad · Gilroy Gardens · Great America · Happy Hollow Park & Zoo · Raging Waters






Vineyards/Wineries

Byington Vineyard · J Lohr Vineyards and Wines · Mountain Winery · Picchetti Brothers Winery · Savannah-Chanelle Vineyards














v • d • e


 



State of California


Sacramento (capital)









Topics



Climate · Culture · Demographics · Districts · Economy · Elections · Geography · Government · History · Politics · Californians · Visitor attractions · List of California-related topics








Regions



Antelope Valley · Big Sur · Cascade Range · Central Coast · Central Valley · Channel Islands · Coachella Valley · Conejo Valley · Cucamonga Valley · Death Valley · Desert · East Bay (SF) · Eastern California · Emerald Triangle · Gold Country · Great Basin · Greater Los Angeles · Inland Empire · Inner Los Angeles Area · Lake Tahoe · Los Angeles Basin · Lost Coast · Mojave · North Bay (SF) · North Coast · Northern California · Owens Valley · Oxnard Plain · San Francisco Peninsula · Pomona Valley · Sacramento Valley · San Bernardino Valley · San Fernando Valley · San Francisco Bay Area · San Joaquin Valley · Santa Clara Valley · Santa Clarita Valley · Shasta Cascade · Sierra Nevada · Silicon Valley · South Bay (SF) · Southern California · Tri-Valley · Upstate California · Victor Valley · Wine Country · Yosemite · List of protected areas within California








Metro areas



Bakersfield · Chico · El Centro · Fresno · Hanford–Corcoran · Los Angeles–Long Beach–Glendale · Madera · Modesto · Merced · Napa · Oakland–Fremont–Hayward · Oxnard–Thousand Oaks–Ventura · Redding · Riverside–San Bernardino–Ontario · Sacramento–Arden-Arcade–Roseville · Salinas · San Diego–Carlsbad–San Marcos · San Francisco–San Mateo–Redwood City · San Jose–Sunnyvale–Santa Clara · San Luis Obispo–Paso Robles · Santa Ana–Anaheim–Irvine · Santa Barbara–Santa Maria–Goleta · Santa Cruz–Watsonville· Santa Rosa–Petaluma · Stockton · Vallejo–Fairfield · Visalia–Porterville · Yuba City








Micro areas



Bishop · Clearlake · Crescent City · Eureka–Arcata–Fortuna · Phoenix Lake-Cedar Ridge · Red Bluff · Susanville · Truckee–Grass Valley · Ukiah








Counties



Alameda · Alpine · Amador · Butte · Calaveras · Colusa · Contra Costa · Del Norte · El Dorado · Fresno · Glenn · Humboldt · Imperial · Inyo · Kern · Kings · Lake · Lassen · Los Angeles · Madera · Marin · Mariposa · Mendocino · Merced · Modoc · Mono · Monterey · Napa · Nevada · Orange · Placer · Plumas · Riverside · Sacramento · San Benito · San Bernardino · San Diego · San Francisco · San Joaquin · San Luis Obispo · San Mateo · Santa Barbara · Santa Clara · Santa Cruz · Shasta · Sierra · Siskiyou · Solano · Sonoma · Stanislaus · Sutter · Tehama · Trinity · Tulare · Tuolumne · Ventura · Yolo · Yuba








Coordinates: 37°22′N 122°02′W﻿ / ﻿37.37°N 122.04°W﻿ / 37.37; -122.04



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silicon_Valley"
Categories: Silicon Valley | Economy of the San Francisco Bay Area | Geography of Santa Clara County, California | High-technology business districts | Subregions of the San Francisco Bay Area | Santa Clara County, California | Valleys of California | Venture capital 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
한국어
हिन्दी
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Македонски
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 06:19.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
