













Mont Saint-Michel - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Mont_Saint-Michel";
		var wgTitle = "Mont Saint-Michel";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "275515";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280934293;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Mont Saint-Michel

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Mont-Saint-Michel and its Bay*


UNESCO World Heritage Site







State Party
 France


Type
Cultural


Criteria
i, iii, vi


Reference
80


Region**
Europe


Coordinates
48°38′08″N 1°30′40″W﻿ / ﻿48.63556°N 1.51111°W﻿ / 48.63556; -1.51111Coordinates: 48°38′08″N 1°30′40″W﻿ / ﻿48.63556°N 1.51111°W﻿ / 48.63556; -1.51111


Inscription history


Inscription
1979  (3rd Session)


* Name as inscribed on World Heritage List.
** Region as classified by UNESCO.


For the island off the coast of Cornwall, United Kingdom, see St Michael's Mount.
Le Mont-Saint-Michel (English: St Michael's Mount) is a rocky tidal island and a commune in Normandy, France. It is located approximately one kilometre off the country's north coast, at the mouth of the Couesnon River near Avranches.




Contents


1 Formation
2 Tidal island
3 History

3.1 Development


4 Design
5 Tides
6 Administration
7 Mont-Saint-Michel in modern culture
8 References
9 See also
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Formation
In prehistoric times the bay was land. As sea levels rose erosion shaped the coastal landscape over millions of years. Several blocks of granite or granulite emerged in the bay, having resisted the wear and tear of the ocean better than the surrounding rocks. These included Lillemer, the Mont-Dol, Tombelaine and Mont Tombe, later called Mont-Saint-Michel.

[edit] Tidal island




Mont-Saint-Michel seen from Spot Satellite


Le Mont-Saint-Michel was previously connected to the mainland via a thin natural land bridge, which before modernization was covered at high tide and revealed at low tide. This has been compromised by several developments. Over the centuries, the coastal flats have been polderised to create pasture. Thus the distance between the shore and the south coast of Mont-Saint-Michel has decreased. The Couesnon River has been canalised, reducing the flow of water and thereby encouraging a silting-up of the bay. In 1879, the land bridge was fortified into a true causeway. This prevented the tide from scouring the silt round the mount.




At low tide surrounded by mud flats - seen from the air


On 16 June 2006, the French prime minister and regional authorities announced a €164 million project (Projet Mont-Saint-Michel[1]) to build a hydraulic dam that will help remove the accumulated silt and make Mont-Saint-Michel an island again. It is expected to be completed by 2012.[2]

[edit] History




The Mont-Saint-Michel from the south






The Mont-Saint Michel


Mont-Saint-Michel was used in the sixth and seventh centuries as an Armorican stronghold of Romano-Breton culture and power, until it was ransacked by the Franks, thus ending the trans-channel culture that had stood since the departure of the Romans in AD 460.
Before the construction of the first monastic establishment in the 8th century, the island was called "monte tombe". According to legend, St. Michael the Archangel appeared to St. Aubert, bishop of Avranches, in 708 and instructed him to build a church on the rocky islet. Aubert repeatedly ignored the angel's instruction, until St. Michael burned a hole in the bishop's skull with his finger.[3]
The mount gained strategic significance in 933 when William "Long Sword", William I, Duke of Normandy, annexed the Cotentin Peninsula, definitively placing the mount in Normandy. It is depicted in the Bayeux Tapestry, which commemorates the 1066 Norman conquest of England. Ducal patronage financed the spectacular Norman architecture of the abbey in subsequent centuries.
In 1067, the monastery of Mont-Saint-Michel gave its support to duke William of Normandy in his claim to the throne of England. It was rewarded with properties and grounds on the English side of the Channel, including a small island located at the west of Cornwall, which, modelled after the Mount, became a Norman priory named St Michael's Mount of Penzance.
During the Hundred Years' War the English made repeated assaults on the island but were unable to seize it, partly because of the abbey's improved fortifications. Les Michelettes, two wrought-iron bombards left by the English in their failed 1423–24 siege of Mont-Saint-Michel, are still displayed near the outer defense wall.




Some of the old buildings in the village


The wealth and influence of the abbey extended to many daughter foundations, including St Michael's Mount in Cornwall. However, its popularity and prestige as a centre of pilgrimage waned with the Reformation, and by the time of the French Revolution there were scarcely any monks in residence. The abbey was closed and converted into a prison, initially to hold clerical opponents of the republican régime. High-profile political prisoners followed, but by 1836 influential figures, including Victor Hugo, had launched a campaign to restore what was seen as a national architectural treasure. The prison was finally closed in 1863, and the mount was declared a historic monument in 1874. The Mont-Saint-Michel and its bay were added to the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites in 1979, as they rank very high on such World Heritage Site criteria as cultural, historical, and architectural significance, as well as human-created and natural beauty.[4]

[edit] Development








10th century









11th to 12th century









17th to 18th century









20th century






[edit] Design




Plan of the mount by Eugène Viollet-le-Duc


William de Volpiano, the Italian architect who had built the Abbey of Fécamp in Normandy, was chosen as building contractor by Richard II of Normandy in the 11th century. He designed the Romanesque church of the abbey, daringly placing the transept crossing at the top of the mount. Many underground crypts and chapels had to be built to compensate for this weight; these formed the basis for the supportive upward structure that can be seen today. Today Mont-Saint-Michel is seen as a Gothic-style church.
Robert de Thorigny, a great supporter of Henry II of England (who was also Duke of Normandy), reinforced the structure of the buildings and built the main façade of the church in the 12th century. In 1204 the Breton Guy de Thouars, allied to the King of France, undertook the siege of the Mount. After having set fire to the village and having massacred the population, he was obliged to beat a retreat under the powerful walls of the Abbey. Unfortunately, the fire which he himself lit extended to the buildings, and the roofs fell prey to the flames. Horrified by the cruelty and the exactions of his Breton ally, Philip Augustus offered Abbot Jourdain a grant for the construction of a new Gothic-style architectural set which included the addition of the refectory and cloister.
Charles VI is credited with adding major fortifications to the abbey-mount, building towers, successive courtyards and strengthening the ramparts.

[edit] Tides




Thick mud is exposed on the banks of the river Couesnon at low tide.


The tides in the area change quickly, and have been described by Victor Hugo as "à la vitesse d'un cheval au galop" or "as swiftly as a galloping horse".
The tides can vary greatly, at roughly 14 metres between high and low water marks. Popularly nicknamed "St. Michael in peril of the sea" by medieval pilgrims making their way across the flats, the mount can still pose dangers for visitors who avoid the causeway and attempt the hazardous walk across the sands from the neighbouring coast. The danger of drowning from coastal tides after getting caught in quicksand continues to claim lives.[citation needed]
Polderisation and occasional flooding created salt marsh meadows that were found to be ideally suited to grazing sheep. The well-flavoured meat that results from the diet of the sheep in the pré salé (salt meadow) makes agneau de pré-salé (salt meadow lamb), a local specialty that may be found on the menus of restaurants that depend on income from the many visitors to the mount.

[edit] Administration
The islet belongs to the French commune of Le Mont-Saint-Michel, of the Manche département, in the Basse-Normandie région. Population (1999): 50. The nearest major town, with an SNCF train station, is Pontorson. Mont-Saint-Michel belongs to the Organization of World Heritage Cities.
The Mont-Saint-Michel has also been the subject of traditional, but nowadays good-humoured, rivalry between Normans and Bretons. Bretons claim that, since the Couesnon River marks the traditional boundary between Normandy and Brittany, it is only because the river has altered its course over the centuries that the mount is on the Norman side of the frontier. This legend amuses the frontier inhabitants who know that the border is not located on the Couesnon river itself but on the mainland at 4 km in the west, at the foot of the solid mass of Saint-Brelade.




Statue of Archangel Michael atop the spire






The spire of Mont-Saint-Michel is visible from the courtyard outside the abbey.






The entrance to the abbey of Mont-Saint-Michel leading out into the courtyard in front of the abbey.



[edit] Mont-Saint-Michel in modern culture

Mont-Saint-Michel is featured in the 1950 Powell and Pressburger film The Elusive Pimpernel.[5]
Mont-Saint-Michel and the ancient forest of Quokelunde are plot devices in the 1955 book for young readers, The Mystery Of Mont Saint-Michel by Michel Rouzé, translated by George Libaire; Henry Holt and Company - New York - 1955 (The original 1953 French novel: Le Forêt de Quokelunde; Editions Bourrelier - Paris - 1953)
The Mont-Saint-Michel was featured in the 1985 IMAX film Chronos, in which an aerial view of the incoming tides are shown using time lapse video.
The 1990 Bernt Amadeus Capra film Mindwalk was filmed on the mount.
Mike Oldfield composed instrumental track dedicated to the Mont-Saint-Michel and released it on the Voyager album in 1996.
Cornish electronic music artist Aphex Twin released a song entitled "Mt Saint Michel + Saint Michaels Mount".
The castle was featured in the Disneyland Paris ride The Timekeeper.
The Mont was featured in Impressions de France, a movie shown at Epcot in Orlando, Florida.
Mont-Saint-Michel was also featured in a scene in the 2004 animated Disney movie Mickey, Donald, Goofy: The Three Musketeers, in which Captain Pete of the Musketeers attempted to drown Mickey Mouse in order to carry out his plot to take over France's monarchy as king without interruption. Pete even mentions it by name, telling Mickey before leaving the dungeon, "Enjoy your stay at the Mont Saint-Michel—they say the tide comes in faster than horses!" This is in reference to the cathedral's history as a jail for political prisoners, as well as Victor Hugo's description of the tides.
According to the Making Of featurettes on the Extended Edition DVDs, the Mont-Saint-Michel, was an inspiration for the design of Minas Tirith in the 2003 film The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King, directed by Peter Jackson.
The Mont-Saint-Michel was featured in Onimusha 3: Demon Siege. The Genma had taken control of it and used it to house the time folder. The Mont-Saint-Michel was destroyed after the time folder exploded.
The location, including the tidal speed, is featured in Sharon Kay Penman's medieval mystery, Prince of Darkness.
In Bernard Cornwell's book The Winter King, the island is given the name Ynys Trebes and is the capital of the Armorican kingdom of Benoic. The book also gives a fictionalized portrayal of its destruction by the Franks.
In 1913, the American intellectual Henry Brooks Adams wrote Mont-Saint-Michel and Chartres[6], celebrating the unity of medieval society, especially as represented in the great cathedrals of France.
In La promesse de l'ange, a novel by Frederic Lenoir and Violette Cabesos,[7] the main action takes place in the Mont-Saint-Michel.
Appeared in the Roxette music video "Queen of Rain"
French composer Claude Debussy frequented the island and possibly drew inspiration from not only the legend of the mythical city of Ys, but also Mont-Saint-Michel's cathedral for his piano prelude La Cathedrale Engloutie.[8]
French author Maxime Chattam used the Mont-Saint-Michel as one of the main locations in his book Le Sang du Temps[9]
Seen in the cover of Japanese musician Erika Sawajiri's debut single Free.
Seen in the cover of the North American release of Castlevania: Symphony of the Night.
Is referenced in Strike Witches, as their base of operations is an ornate castle that resembles Mont Saint-Michel.
Mont-Saint-Michel is used as inspiration for the novelette "The Bloody Chamber" by Angela Carter.


[edit] References


^ Projet Mont-Saint-Michel
^ La Baie, June 2007, p.4, in French
^ Catholic encyclopedia [1]
^ UNESCO [2]
^ The Elusive Pimpernel
^ Adams, Henry (1905). Mont-Saint-Michel and Chartres. self-published. http://books.google.com/books?id=RYIRp86RIgEC. 
^ Lenoir, Frederic; Violette Cabesos (2004). La promesse de l'ange. Albin Michel. ISBN 9782226150811 (in French). 
^ Debussy's: La Cathedrale Engloutie
^ Chattam, Maxime (2005). Le Sang du Temps. Michel Lafon. ISBN 9782749902524 (in French). 



INSEE population figures


[edit] See also

Manoir de Brion
La Mère Poulard
St Michael's Mount


[edit] External links

Mont-Saint-Michel Celebrates 1,300 yrs of History




Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Mont-Saint-Michel



Mont Saint-Michel travel guide from Wikitravel
Official Mont-Saint Michel Tourist site (English version)








v • d • e

World Heritage Sites in France








Abbey Church of Saint-Savin-sur-Gartempe · Amiens Cathedral · Roman and Romanesque Monuments, Arles · Papal Palace, Episcopal Ensemble and Avignon Bridge, Avignon · Belfries of Belgium and France (with Belgium) · Bordeaux, Port of the Moon · Bourges Cathedral · Canal du Midi · Gulf of Porto (Calanches de Piana • Gulf of Girolata • Scandola Reserve) · Carcassonne · Cathedral of Notre-Dame, former Abbey of Saint-Remi and Palace of Tau, Reims · Cathedral of Chartres · Cistercian Abbey of Fontenay · Fortifications of Vauban · Le Havre · Loire Valley between Sully-sur-Loire and Chalonnes · Lyon · Mont Saint-Michel and its Bay · Lagoons of New Caledonia: Reef Diversity and Associated Ecosystems · Fontainebleau Palace and Park · Palace and Park of Versailles · Paris – Banks of the Seine · Place Stanislas, Place de la Carrière and Place d'Alliance, Nancy · Pont du Gard · Prehistoric Sites and Decorated Caves of the Vézère Valley · Provins · Pyrénées - Mont Perdu (with Spain) · Routes of Santiago de Compostela · Roman Theatre and its Surroundings and the "Triumphal Arch" of Orange · Royal Saltworks of Arc-et-Senans · Saint-Émilion · Strasbourg – Grande Île · Vézelay Church and Hill
















v • d • e

Communes of the Manche department 






Acqueville · Agneaux · Agon-Coutainville · Airel · Amfreville · Amigny · Ancteville · Anctoville-sur-Boscq · Angey · Angoville-au-Plain · Angoville-sur-Ay · Anneville-en-Saire · Anneville-sur-Mer · Annoville · Appeville · Argouges · Aucey-la-Plaine · Auderville · Audouville-la-Hubert · Aumeville-Lestre · Auvers · Auxais · Avranches · Azeville · Bacilly · La Baleine · Barenton · Barfleur · Barneville-Carteret · La Barre-de-Semilly · Baubigny · Baudre · Baudreville · Baupte · La Bazoge · Beauchamps · Beaucoudray · Beauficel · Beaumont-Hague · Beauvoir · Bellefontaine · Belval · Benoîtville · Bérigny · Beslon · Besneville · Beuvrigny · Beuzeville-au-Plain · Beuzeville-la-Bastille · Biéville · Biniville · Bion · Biville · Blainville-sur-Mer · Blosville · La Bloutière · Boisroger · Boisyvon · Bolleville · La Bonneville · Bourguenolles · Boutteville · Braffais · Brainville · Branville-Hague · Brécey · Brectouville · Bréhal · Bretteville · Bretteville-sur-Ay · Breuville · Brévands · Bréville-sur-Mer · Bricquebec · Bricquebosq · Bricqueville-la-Blouette · Bricqueville-sur-Mer · Brillevast · Brix · Brouains · Brucheville · Buais · Cambernon · Cametours · Camprond · Canisy · Canteloup · Canville-la-Rocque · Carantilly · Carentan · Carnet · Carneville · Carolles · Carquebut · Catteville · Catz · Cavigny · Céaux · Cérences · Cerisy-la-Forêt · Cerisy-la-Salle · La Chaise-Baudouin · Les Chambres · Champcervon · Champcey · Champeaux · Champrepus · Les Champs-de-Losque · Chanteloup · La Chapelle-Cécelin · La Chapelle-en-Juger · La Chapelle-Urée · Chasseguey · Chaulieu · Chavoy · Chef-du-Pont · Le Chefresne · Cherbourg-Octeville · Chérencé-le-Héron · Chérencé-le-Roussel · Les Chéris · Chèvreville · Chevry · Clitourps · Coigny · La Colombe · Colomby · Condé-sur-Vire · Contrières · Cosqueville · Coudeville-sur-Mer · Coulouvray-Boisbenâtre · Courcy · Courtils · Coutances · Couvains · Couville · Crasville · Créances · Les Cresnays · Cretteville · La Croix-Avranchin · Crollon · Crosville-sur-Douve · Cuves · Dangy · Denneville · Le Dézert · Digosville · Digulleville · Domjean · Donville-les-Bains · Doville · Dragey-Ronthon · Ducey · Écausseville · Écoquenéauville · Éculleville · Émondeville · Équeurdreville-Hainneville · Équilly · Éroudeville · L'Étang-Bertrand · Étienville · La Feuillie · Fermanville · Ferrières · Fervaches · Feugères · Fierville-les-Mines · Flamanville · Fleury · Flottemanville · Flottemanville-Hague · Folligny · Fontenay · Fontenay-sur-Mer · Foucarville · Fourneaux · Le Fresne-Poret · Fresville · Gathemo · Gatteville-le-Phare · Gavray · Geffosses · Genêts · Ger · Giéville · La Glacerie · Glatigny · La Godefroy · La Gohannière · Golleville · Gonfreville · Gonneville · Gorges · Gouberville · Gourbesville · Gourfaleur · Gouvets · Gouville-sur-Mer · Graignes-Mesnil-Angot · Le Grand-Celland · Granville · Gratot · Gréville-Hague · Grimesnil · Grosville · Guéhébert · Guilberville · Le Guislain · Le Ham · Hambye · Hamelin · Hardinvast · Hauteville-la-Guichard · Hauteville-sur-Mer · Hautteville-Bocage · La Haye-Bellefond · La Haye-d'Ectot · La Haye-du-Puits · La Haye-Pesnel · Héauville · Hébécrevon · Helleville · Hémevez · Hérenguerville · Herqueville · Heugueville-sur-Sienne · Heussé · Hiesville · Hocquigny · Le Hommet-d'Arthenay · Houesville · Houtteville · Huberville · Hudimesnil · Huisnes-sur-Mer · Husson · Hyenville · Isigny-le-Buat · Jobourg · Joganville · Juilley · Jullouville · Juvigny-le-Tertre · Lamberville · La Lande-d'Airou · Lapenty · Laulne · Lengronne · Lessay · Lestre · Liesville-sur-Douve · Lieusaint · Lingeard · Lingreville · Lithaire · Les Loges-Marchis · Les Loges-sur-Brécey · Lolif · Longueville · Le Loreur · Le Lorey · Lozon · La Lucerne-d'Outremer · Le Luot · La Luzerne · Macey · Magneville · La Mancellière-sur-Vire · Marcey-les-Grèves · Marchésieux · Marcilly · Margueray · Marigny · Martigny · Martinvast · Maupertuis · Maupertus-sur-Mer · La Meauffe · Méautis · Le Mesnil · Le Mesnil-Adelée · Le Mesnil-Amand · Le Mesnil-Amey · Le Mesnil-Aubert · Le Mesnil-au-Val · Le Mesnilbus · Le Mesnil-Eury · Le Mesnil-Garnier · Le Mesnil-Gilbert · Le Mesnil-Herman · Le Mesnillard · Le Mesnil-Opac · Le Mesnil-Ozenne · Le Mesnil-Rainfray · Le Mesnil-Raoult · Le Mesnil-Rogues · Le Mesnil-Rouxelin · Le Mesnil-Tôve · Le Mesnil-Véneron · Le Mesnil-Vigot · Le Mesnil-Villeman · La Meurdraquière · Millières · Milly · Mobecq · Les Moitiers-d'Allonne · Les Moitiers-en-Bauptois · Montabot · Montaigu-la-Brisette · Montaigu-les-Bois · Montanel · Montbray · Montchaton · Montcuit · Montebourg · Montfarville · Montgardon · Monthuchon · Montjoie-Saint-Martin · Montmartin-en-Graignes · Montmartin-sur-Mer · Montpinchon · Montrabot · Montreuil-sur-Lozon · Mont Saint-Michel · Montsurvent · Montviron · Moon-sur-Elle · Morigny · Morsalines · Mortain · Morville · La Mouche · Moulines · Moyon · Muneville-le-Bingard · Muneville-sur-Mer · Nay · Négreville · Néhou · Le Neufbourg · Neufmesnil · Neuville-au-Plain · Neuville-en-Beaumont · Néville-sur-Mer · Nicorps · Notre-Dame-de-Cenilly · Notre-Dame-de-Livoye · Notre-Dame-d'Elle · Notre-Dame-du-Touchet · Nouainville · Octeville-l'Avenel · Omonville-la-Petite · Omonville-la-Rogue · Orglandes · Orval · Ouville · Ozeville · Parigny · Percy · Périers · La Pernelle · Les Perques · Perriers-en-Beauficel · Le Perron · Le Petit-Celland · Picauville · Pierreville · Les Pieux · Pirou · Placy-Montaigu · Le Plessis-Lastelle · Plomb · Poilley · Pontaubault · Pont-Hébert · Pontorson · Ponts · Portbail · Précey · Précorbin · Prétot-Sainte-Suzanne · Querqueville · Quettehou · Quettetot · Quettreville-sur-Sienne · Quibou · Quinéville · Raids · Rampan · Rauville-la-Bigot · Rauville-la-Place · Ravenoville · Reffuveille · Regnéville-sur-Mer · Reigneville-Bocage · Remilly-sur-Lozon · Réthoville · Réville · La Rochelle-Normande · Rocheville · Romagny · Roncey · La Ronde-Haye · Rouffigny · Rouxeville · Le Rozel · Sacey · Saint-Amand · Saint-André-de-Bohon · Saint-André-de-l'Épine · Saint-Aubin-de-Terregatte · Saint-Aubin-des-Préaux · Saint-Aubin-du-Perron · Saint-Barthélemy · Saint-Brice · Saint-Brice-de-Landelles · Saint-Christophe-du-Foc · Saint-Clair-sur-l'Elle · Saint-Clément-Rancoudray · Saint-Côme-du-Mont · Saint-Cyr · Saint-Cyr-du-Bailleul · Saint-Denis-le-Gast · Saint-Denis-le-Vêtu · Saint-Ébremond-de-Bonfossé · Sainte-Cécile · Sainte-Colombe · Sainte-Croix-Hague · Sainte-Geneviève · Sainte-Marie-du-Bois · Sainte-Marie-du-Mont · Sainte-Mère-Église · Sainteny · Sainte-Pience · Sainte-Suzanne-sur-Vire · Saint-Floxel · Saint-Fromond · Saint-Georges-d'Elle · Saint-Georges-de-Bohon · Saint-Georges-de-la-Rivière · Saint-Georges-de-Livoye · Saint-Georges-de-Rouelley · Saint-Georges-Montcocq · Saint-Germain-d'Elle · Saint-Germain-des-Vaux · Saint-Germain-de-Tournebut · Saint-Germain-de-Varreville · Saint-Germain-le-Gaillard · Saint-Germain-sur-Ay · Saint-Germain-sur-Sèves · Saint-Gilles · Saint-Hilaire-du-Harcouët · Saint-Hilaire-Petitville · Saint-Jacques-de-Néhou · Saint-James · Saint-Jean-de-Daye · Saint-Jean-de-la-Haize · Saint-Jean-de-la-Rivière · Saint-Jean-de-Savigny · Saint-Jean-des-Baisants · Saint-Jean-des-Champs · Saint-Jean-du-Corail · Saint-Jean-du-Corail-des-Bois · Saint-Jean-le-Thomas · Saint-Jores · Saint-Joseph · Saint-Laurent-de-Cuves · Saint-Laurent-de-Terregatte · Saint-Lô · Saint-Lô-d'Ourville · Saint-Louet-sur-Vire · Saint-Loup · Saint-Malo-de-la-Lande · Saint-Marcouf · Saint-Martin-d'Aubigny · Saint-Martin-d'Audouville · Saint-Martin-de-Bonfossé · Saint-Martin-de-Cenilly · Saint-Martin-de-Landelles · Saint-Martin-des-Champs · Saint-Martin-de-Varreville · Saint-Martin-le-Bouillant · Saint-Martin-le-Gréard · Saint-Martin-le-Hébert · Saint-Maur-des-Bois · Saint-Maurice-en-Cotentin · Saint-Michel-de-la-Pierre · Saint-Michel-de-Montjoie · Saint-Nicolas-de-Pierrepont · Saint-Nicolas-des-Bois · Saint-Ovin · Saint-Pair-sur-Mer · Saint-Patrice-de-Claids · Saint-Pellerin · Saint-Pierre-d'Arthéglise · Saint-Pierre-de-Coutances · Saint-Pierre-de-Semilly · Saint-Pierre-Église · Saint-Pierre-Langers · Saint-Planchers · Saint-Pois · Saint-Quentin-sur-le-Homme · Saint-Rémy-des-Landes · Saint-Romphaire · Saint-Samson-de-Bonfossé · Saint-Sauveur-de-Pierrepont · Saint-Sauveur-la-Pommeraye · Saint-Sauveur-Lendelin · Saint-Sauveur-le-Vicomte · Saint-Sébastien-de-Raids · Saint-Senier-de-Beuvron · Saint-Senier-sous-Avranches · Saint-Symphorien-des-Monts · Saint-Symphorien-le-Valois · Saint-Vaast-la-Hougue · Saint-Vigor-des-Monts · Sartilly · Saussemesnil · Saussey · Savigny · Savigny-le-Vieux · Sébeville · Sénoville · Servigny · Servon · Sideville · Siouville-Hague · Sortosville · Sortosville-en-Beaumont · Sottevast · Sotteville · Soulles · Sourdeval · Sourdeval-les-Bois · Subligny · Surtainville · Surville · Taillepied · Tamerville · Tanis · Le Tanu · Le Teilleul · Tessy-sur-Vire · Teurthéville-Bocage · Teurthéville-Hague · Le Theil · Théville · Tirepied · Tocqueville · Tollevast · Tonneville · Torigni-sur-Vire · Tourlaville · Tourville-sur-Sienne · Tréauville · Trelly · Tribehou · La Trinité · Troisgots · Turqueville · Urville · Urville-Nacqueville · Vains · Valcanville · Le Valdécie · Valognes · Le Val-Saint-Père · Varenguebec · Varouville · Le Vast · Vasteville · Vaudreville · Vaudrimesnil · Vauville · La Vendelée · Vengeons · Ver · Vergoncey · Vernix · Vesly · Vessey · Les Veys · Le Vicel · Videcosville · Vidouville · Vierville · Villebaudon · Villechien · Villedieu-les-Poêles · Villiers-Fossard · Villiers-le-Pré · Vindefontaine · Virandeville · Virey · Le Vrétot · Yquelon · Yvetot-Bocage






 



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mont_Saint-Michel"
Categories: World Heritage Sites in France | Communes of Manche | Islands of Normandy | Islands of France | Tidal islands | Benedictine monasteries in France | Buildings and structures in Normandy | Ramsar sites in France | Landmarks in FranceHidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Français
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Piemontèis
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Vèneto
Volapük
中文









 This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 20:30 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
