













Chandigarh - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Chandigarh";
		var wgTitle = "Chandigarh";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "211915";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281710803;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Chandigarh

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Chandigarh


City of Beauty / City Beautiful











The Open Hand Monument










 Chandigarh 



Location of Chandigarh




Country
 India


District(s)
1


Established
1953


Capital
Chandigarh


Largest city
Chandigarh


Population
• Density
900,635[1] (29)
• 7,900 /km2 (20,461 /sq mi)


Language(s)
Hindi, Punjabi and English


Time zone
IST (UTC+5:30)


Area
• Elevation
114 km² (44 sq mi)
• 350 m (1,148 ft)




Codes



• Telephone
• +172







ISO 3166-2
IN-CH




Footnotes
The city of Chandigarh comprises all of the union territory's area.




Website
chandigarh.nic.in/








Seal of Chandigarh


Coordinates: 30°45′N 76°47′E﻿ / ﻿30.75°N 76.78°E﻿ / 30.75; 76.78
Chandigarh  pronunciation (help·info) (Hindi: चंडीगढ़, Punjabi: ਚੰਡੀਗੜ੍ਹ), also called The Beautiful City, is a city in India that serves as the capital of two states, Punjab and Haryana, and is a union territory of India. The name translates from Hindi to English as "the fort of Chandi", Chandi being a Hindu Goddess.
Known internationally for its architecture and urban planning, Chandigarh is home to numerous architectural projects of Le Corbusier, Pierre Jeanneret, Matthew Nowicki, and Albert Mayer. The city boasts a high standard of living with the highest per capita income in the country and tops the list of Indian States and Union Territories with a Human Development Index of 0.987.[2]




Contents


1 History
2 Geography
3 Architecture and urban planning
4 Chandigarh UT Administration
5 Demographics
6 Economy
7 Education
8 Housing and utilities
9 Transport
10 Sporting venues
11 Gardens
12 Media

12.1 Newspapers


13 Notable residents
14 Major Academic Works
15 References
16 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
After the partition of British India into the two nations of India and Pakistan in 1947, the region of Punjab was also split between India and Pakistan. The Indian state of Punjab required a new capital city to replace Lahore, which became part of Pakistan during the partition. After several plans to make additions to existing cities were found to be infeasible for various reasons, the decision to construct a new and planned city was undertaken. The city derives its name from Chandi Mandir, a temple of goddess Chandi, located in nearby Panchkula District of Haryana. The word Chandigarh literally means "the fort of Chandi".
Of all the new town schemes in independent India, the Chandigarh project quickly assumed prime significance, because of the city's strategic location as well as the personal interest of Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of independent India. Commissioned by Nehru to reflect the new nation's modern, progressive outlook, Nehru famously proclaimed Chandigarh to be "unfettered by the traditions of the past, a symbol of the nation's faith in the future." Several buildings and layouts in Chandigarh were designed by the French (born Swiss) architect and urban planner, Le Corbusier, in the 1950s. Le Corbusier was in fact the second architect of the city, after the initial master plan was prepared by the American architect-planner Albert Mayer who was working with the Poland-born architect Matthew Nowicki. It was only after Nowicki's untimely death in 1950 that Le Corbusier was pulled into the project.
On 1 November,1966, the newly-formed Indian state of Haryana was carved out of the eastern portion of the Punjab, in order to create Haryana as a majority Hindi speaking state, while the western portion of Punjab retained a mostly Punjabi language-speaking majority and remained as the current day Punjab. However, the city of Chandigarh was on the border, and was thus created into a union territory to serve as capital of both these states. Chandigarh was due to be transferred to Punjab in 1986, in accordance with an agreement signed in August 1985 by Rajiv Gandhi, the then Prime Minister of India, with Sant Harchand Singh Longowal of the Akali Dal. This was to be accompanied by the creation of a new capital for Haryana, but the transfer had been delayed. There is currently a discussion about which villages in southern districts of Punjab should be transferred to Haryana, and about which Punjabi-speaking villages should be transferred to Punjab.
On 15 July 2007,Chandigarh became the first Indian city to go smoke-free. Smoking at public places has been strictly prohibited and considered as a punishable act by Chandigarh Administration[3]. That was followed up by a complete ban on polythene bags with effect from 2 October 2008, the birthday of Mahatma Gandhi[4].

[edit] Geography




Sukhna Lake


Chandigarh is located near the foothills of the Shivalik range of the Himalayas in Northwest India. It covers an area of approximately 44 sq mi or 114 km². and shares its borders with the states of Haryana in the south and Punjab in the north. The exact cartographic co-ordinates of Chandigarh are 30°44′N 76°47′E﻿ / ﻿30.74°N 76.79°E﻿ / 30.74; 76.79.[5] It has an average elevation of 321 metres (1053 feet).


Climate chart for Chandigarh


J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D




 
 
33
 
20
6




 
 
39
 
23
8




 
 
30
 
28
13




 
 
9
 
35
19




 
 
28
 
38
23




 
 
145
 
39
25




 
 
280
 
34
24




 
 
308
 
33
23




 
 
133
 
33
22




 
 
22
 
32
17




 
 
9
 
27
11




 
 
22
 
22
7




average temperatures in °C
precipitation totals in mm
source: World Weather Information Service




Imperial conversion



J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D




 
 
1.3
 
69
43




 
 
1.5
 
74
47




 
 
1.2
 
83
56




 
 
0.4
 
94
66




 
 
1.1
 
101
74




 
 
5.7
 
101
78




 
 
11
 
93
75




 
 
12
 
91
74




 
 
5.2
 
92
71




 
 
0.9
 
89
63




 
 
0.4
 
81
51




 
 
0.9
 
72
44




average temperatures in °F
precipitation totals in inches







The surrounding districts are of Mohali, Patiala and Ropar in Punjab and Panchkula and Ambala in Haryana. The boundary of the state of Himachal Pradesh are not too far from its north. Chandigarh has a sub-tropical continental monsoon climate characterized by a seasonal rhythm: hot summers, slightly cold winters, unreliable rainfall and great variation in temperature (-1 °C to 41.2 °C). In winter, frost sometimes occurs during December and January. The average annual rainfall is 1110.7 mm. The city also receives occasional winter rains from the west.
Average temperature

Summer: The temperature in summer (from Mid-May to Mid-June) may rise to a maximum of 46.5 °C (rarely). Temperatures generally remain between 35 °C to 40 °C.
Monsoon: During monsoon(from mid-June to mid-September), Chandigarh receives moderate to heavy rainfall and sometimes heavy to very heavy rainfall (generally during the month of August or September). Usually, the rain bearing monsoon winds blow from south-west/ south-east. Mostly, the city receives heavy rain from south (which is mainly a persistent rain) but it generally receives most of its rain during monsoon either from North-west or North-east. Maximum amount of rain received by the city of Chandigrah during monsoon season is 195.5 mm in a single day.
Autumn: In autumn (from Mid-March to April), the temperature may rise to a maximum of 36 °C. Temperatures usually remain between 16° to 27° in autumn. The minimum temperature is around 13 °C.
Winter: Winters (November to Mid-March) are quite cool and it can sometimes get quite chilly in Chandigarh. Average temperatures in the winter remain at (max) 7 °C to 15 °C and (min) -2 °C to 5 °C. Rain usually comes from the west during winters and it is usually a persistent rain for 2-3 days with sometimes hail-storms.
Spring: The climate remains quite pleasant during the spring season (from mid-February to mid-March and then from mid-September to mid-October). Temperatures vary between (max) 16 °C to 25 °C and (min) 9 °C to 18 °C.


[edit] Architecture and urban planning
Le Corbusier's plan of modern Chandigarh Taking over from Albert Mayer, Le Corbusier produced a plan for Chandigarh that conformed to the modern city planning principles of Congrès International d'Architecture Moderne CIAM, in terms of division of urban functions, an anthropomorphic plan form, and a hierarchy of road and pedestrian networks. This vision of Chandigarh, contained in the innumerable conceptual maps on the drawing board together with notes and sketches had to be translated into brick and mortar. Le Corbusier retained many of the seminal ideas of Mayer and Nowicki, like the basic framework of the master plan and its components: The Capitol, City Center, besides the University, Industrial area, and linear parkland. Even the neighborhood unit was retained as the basic module of planning. However, the curving outline of Mayer and Nowicki was reorganized into a mesh of rectangles, and the buildings were characterized by an "honesty of materials". Exposed brick and boulder stone masonry in its rough form produced unfinished concrete surfaces, in geometrical structures. This became the architectural form characteristic of Chandigarh, set amidst landscaped gardens and parks.
The initial plan had two phases: the first for a population of 150,000 and the second taking the total population to 500,000. Le Corbusier divided the city into units called "sectors", each representing a theoretically self-sufficient entity with space for living, working and leisure. The sectors were linked to each other by a road and path network developed along the line of the 7 Vs, or a hierarchy of seven types of circulation patterns. At the highest point in this network was the V1, the highways connecting the city to others, and at the lowest were the V7s, the streets leading to individual houses. Later a V8 was added: cycle and pedestrian paths. The Palace Assembly, designed by Le Corbusier The city plan is laid down in a grid pattern. The whole city has been divided into rectangular patterns, forming identical looking sectors, each sector measures 800 m x 1200 m. The sectors were to act as self-sufficient neighbourhoods, each with its own market, places of worship, schools and colleges - all within 10 minutes walking distance from within the sector. The original two phases of the plan delineated sectors from 1 to 47, with the exception of 13 (Number 13 is considered unlucky). The Assembly, the secretariat and the high court, all located in Sector - 1 are the three monumental buildings designed by Le Corbusier in which he showcased his architectural genius to the maximum. The city was to be surrounded by a 16 kilometer wide greenbelt that was to ensure that no development could take place in the immediate vicinity of the town, thus checking suburbs and urban sprawl; hence is famous for its greenness too.
While leaving the bulk of the city's architecture to other members of his team, Le Corbusier took responsibility for the overall master plan of the city, and the design of some of the major public buildings including the High Court, Assembly, Secretariat, the Museum and Art Gallery, School of Art and the Lake Club. Le Corbusier's most prominent building, the Court House, consists of the High court, which is literally higher than the other, eight lower courts. Most of the other housing was done by Le Corbusier's cousin Pierre Jeanneret, the English husband and wife team of Maxwell Fry and Jane Drew, along with a team of nine Indian architects. The city in its final form, while not resembling his previous city projects like the Ville Contemporaine or the Ville Radieuse, was an important and iconic landmark in the history of town planning. It continues to be an object of interest for architects, planners, historians and social scientists. Chandigarh has two satellite cities: Panchkula and Mohali. Sometimes, the triangle of these three cities is collectively called the Chandigarh Tricity.

[edit] Chandigarh UT Administration
Chandigarh Administration is under the control of the Administrator who is appointed under the provisions of Art 239 of the Constitution. The administrative control of Chandigarh is under the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Governor of Punjab is the Administrator of Chandigarh. The Adviser to the Administrator, a very senior officer belonging to one of the All India Services, is second in command after the Administrator. He generally belongs to the AGMU cadre of the Indian Administrative Service.

The Deputy Commissioner, an officer belonging to the Indian Administrative Service, is the in-charge of the General Administration in the Chandigarh UT.
The Senior Superintendent of Police, an officer belonging to the Indian Police Service, is responsible for maintaining Law & Order and related issues in the Chandigarh UT.
The Deputy Conservator of Forests, an officer belonging to the Indian Forest Service, is responsible for the management of the Forests, Environment, Wild-Life and Pollution Control in the Chandigarh UT.

The above three officers are from AGMU cadre or Punjab cadre or Haryana cadre of the All India Services.

[edit] Demographics




Hindu Temple on the outskirts of the city




Chandigarh Population


Census
Pop.

 %±


1961
119,881


—



1971
257,251

114.6%


1981
451,610

75.6%


1991
642,015

42.2%


2001
900,635

40.3%


source:Census of India [6]


As of 2001[update] India census,[7] Chandigarh had a population of 900,635, making for a density of about 7900 persons per square kilometre. Males constitute 56% of the population and females 44%. The sex ratio is 777 females for every 1,000 males–which is the lowest in the country. Chandigarh has an average literacy rate of 81.9%, higher than the national average of 64.8%; with male literacy of 86.1% and female literacy of 76.5%. About 12% of the population is under 6 years of age. The main religions in Chandigarh are Hinduism (78.6%), Sikhism (16.1%), Islam (3.9%), and Christianity (0.8%).[8] Hindi and Punjabi are the main languages spoken in Chandigarh, although these days English has also gained some popularity. People speaking Tamil form the third biggest linguistic group in Chandigarh. (Census of India 1991). A small number of people also speak Urdu. However, the most common language for informal communication, especially among the youth of the city is Hindi.Punjabi now a days is much more popular than Hindi in Chandigarh.
A significant percentage of the population of Chandigarh consists of people who had moved here from the neighboring states of Punjab and Haryana to fill up the large number of vacancies in various government departments that were established in Chandigarh.

[edit] Economy
The government is a major employer in Chandigarh with three governments having their base here. A significant percentage of Chandigarh’s population therefore consists of people who are either working for one of these governments or have retired from government service. For this reason, Chandigarh is often called a “Pensioner's Paradise”. There are about 15 medium to large industrial including two in the Public sector. In addition Chandigarh has over 2500 units are registered under small scale sector. The important industries are paper manufacturing, basic metals and alloys and machinery. Other industries are relating to food products, sanitary ware, auto parts, machine tools, pharmaceuticals and electrical appliances. Yet, with a Per Capita Income of Rs. 99,262, Chandigarh is the richest city in India.[9] Chandigarh's gross state domestic product for 2004 is estimated at $2.2 billion in current prices.
Chandigarh has a well developed market and banking infrastructure. Nearly all the major banks in the country have registered their presence in Chandigarh. Most banks with a pan India presence have their zonal/regional offices present in Chandigarh. The Bank Square in Sector 17 in Chandigarh has a large presence of such offices all in one section of the commercial sector.[citation needed]
Three major trade promotion organizations have their offices in Chandigarh. These are: Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry, (FICCI) the PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PHDCCI) and the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) which has its regional headquarters at Sector 31, Chandigarh.
The defence forces have a significant presence in Chandigarh, apart from the Indian Airforce base in Sector 31 and the nearby Cantonment in Chandimandir, the city is the base for sourcing supplies for the Leh Laddakh and Siachen region of defence operations.[citation needed]
Chandigarh IT Park (also Chandigarh Technology Park) is the city's attempt to break into the IT world. Chandigarh's infrastructure, proximity to Delhi, Punjab and Haryana, and the IT talent pool attracts IT businesses looking for office space in the area. Major Indian firms and multinational corporations including FCS Software Solutions Ltd., Second Foundation (India) Pvt Ltd. (Now Fidelity Information Services), Quark, Infosys, Dell, Webart Softech, Miracle Studios and S J Edutech, have offices in the city and it's suburbs. According to a recent Global Services Survey conducted by Cyber Media, Chandigarh is ranked 9th in the top 50 cities identified globally as ‘emerging outsourcing and IT services destinations.’[10]

[edit] Education
Main article: List of educational institutions in Chandigarh




Gandhi Bhavan built by Pierre Jeanneret for Panjab University


Chandigarh is known for its quality school education.[citation needed] The schools are affiliated to different types of school curricula. The colleges in Chandigarh include GGDSD College (Sector 32), DAV College (Sector 10), MCM DAV College (Sector 36), Government College for Girls (Sector 11 and 42), Government College for Men (Sector 11), Home Science College for Girls (Sector 10) , Guru Gobind Singh College (Sector 26),Government Teacher Training College (Chandigarh, India) and Government Teacher Training College. There are model schools set up by the government in various sectors, originally aimed to cater the needs of each sector. It is a major study hub for students all over Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, J&K and Uttaranchal, and also for the students from South-East Asia.
Chandigarh also houses many prominent institutes of higher learning, such as:

University Business School
IMTECH (Institute for Microbial Technology)
Indo Swiss Training Centre
Punjab Engineering College
PGIMER (Postgraduate Institute for Medical Education and Research)
Panjab University
University Institute of Engineering and Technology
GMCH (Government Medical College and Hospital)
Government College of Fine Arts, Sector 10
Chandigarh College of Engineering and Technology (CCET)
Chandigarh College of Architecture
National Institute of Technical Teachers Training and Research (NITTTR)
DAV College, Sector 10.

Also located in neighboring Mohali, Chandigarh College of Education for Women (CCEW),SASIITR, Chandigarh College of Pharmacy (CCP) and Chandigarh College of Hotel Management and Catering Technology (CCHM).The Indian Institute of Science Education Research (IISER) Mohali has been established as an autonomous academic institution in 2007 by the Ministry of Human Resources and Development, Government of India, New Delhi, to carry out research in frontier areas of science and provide quality science education at the undergraduate and postgraduate level. The National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER) located in nearby Mohali is the first national level institute in pharmaceutical sciences with a proclaimed objective of becoming a center of excellence for advanced studies and research in pharmaceutical sciences. Chandigarh's satellite town of Mohali is home for Center for Development of Advanced Computing's northmost branch C-DAC Mohali that is engaged in research on state-of-the-art topics including Telemedicine.
Some of the notable schools in Chandigarh are:

Shivalik Public School,Sector 41 B
Bhavan Vidyalaya Chandigarh,Sector 27
St. John's High School Chandigarh, Sector 26
St. Kabir Public School Chandigarh, Sector 26
St. Stephen's School Chandigarh, Sector 45 B
Carmel Convent School, Sector 9
Sacred Heart School, Sector 26
St Anne's Convent School, Sector 32 D
St Xavier's Sr. Sec. School, Sector 44 C
Government Model Schools in various sectors ( notably Sector 16 and 35)
Manav Mangal High School, Sector 21


[edit] Housing and utilities
A 2007 study by the Asian Development Bank showed that Chandigarh has the best water supply in India, supplying water 12 hours a day compared to 4.3 hour average of the 20 studied cities.[11]

[edit] Transport




Punbus connects the city to other parts of Punjab


Chandigarh has the largest number of vehicles per capita.[12] Wide, well maintained roads and ample parking space all over the city, make it convenient to use private vehicles for local transport.
Public buses run by the Chandigarh Transport Undertaking (CTU), an undertaking of the Chandigarh Administration, provide local transport as well as inter-state transport services.[13]
The Chandigarh Traffic Police oversees the implementation of the traffic rules, and is widely credited for a fairly orderly traffic system. The Traffic Park in Sector 23 introduces children, rickshaw-pullers and new drivers to traffic safety.[14]
Rickshaws are common for traveling short distances, especially by school-going children, housewives and the elderly. Auto-rickshaws are limited, and most often ply to and from the ISBT. Most heavy traffic roads now have rickshaw lanes, which the rickshaw-pullers must adhere to compulsorily.
The city also boasts of a well established network of modern radio cabs using cars like Tata Indigo, Fiat Siena and Maruti Esteem.
Chandigarh is well connected by road. The two main National Highways (NH) connecting Chandigarh with the rest of the country are: NH 22 (Ambala - Kalka - Shimla - Kinnaur) and NH 21 (Chandigarh - Leh). Chandigarh has two Inter-State Bus Terminus (ISBT), one for the North, East and South located in Sector 17, which has regular bus services to most major cites in Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, and Uttarakhand, as well as the national capital Delhi, which is about 240 km away. And a second in Sector 43 for the Western section, mainly Punjab, some parts of Himachal and Jammu and Kashmir.
Chandigarh has a railway station located about 10 km. away from the ISBT. Regular train connections are available to the national capital New Delhi and to some other junctions like Kalka, Ambala, Amritsar, Bhiwani,Lucknow, Patna,Howrah, Mumbai, Chennai, Trivandrum and Sri Ganganagar.
Chandigarh also has a domestic airport located nearly 12 kilometers from the ISBT. Its name is Chandigarh Airport. Jet Airways, JetLite,Air India, and Kingfisher Airlines operate regular flights from Chandigarh to New Delhi and Mumbai. The airport is under process of becoming an international airport and is negotiating with several airlines including SilkAir and Kingfisher for international flights to Singapore and Bangkok, among other South East Asian countries [15]
In the near future, the city will also see a Metro Rail[16], and an international airport. They are both approved by the governments, and are now at the design step to finalize the project design.

[edit] Sporting venues




Football field in the city






The popular sector-42 Hockey stadium



Table Tennis Hall, Sector 23
Punjab Cricket Association Stadium, Mohali
Chandigarh Cricket Stadium, (Sector- 16)
Chandigarh Golf Club, Sector 6
Panchkula Golf Club, Sector 3
Hockey Stadium, Sector 42
Carrom Stadium (Chandigarh Carrom Association), St. Stephens School, Sec - 45
Roller Skating Rink, Sector 10
Badminton Hall, Sector 7
Swimming Pool Sector 23
Shooting Range, Patiali Rao
Athletic Club, Sector 7


[edit] Gardens




The winning flower from Rose Fest 2006






Waterfall at Rock Garden, Chandigarh that was created by Nek Chand



Rose Garden, Sector 16


Bougenvilla Garden, Sector 3


Japanese Garden, Sector 16


Topiary Park, Sector 35


Fragrance Garden, Sector 36


Leisure Valley, Sector 10


Terraced Garden, Sector 33


Sukhna Lake Park, Sector 6


Cactus Garden, Panchkula, Sector 5


Rock Garden, Sector 1


Rajendra Park, Sector 1


Botanical Garden,khuda lahora


Bamboo Valley, Sector 23


[edit] Media

[edit] Newspapers
English




A radio tower, modeled on the Eiffel Tower in Paris



The Tribune - Punjab's oldest newspaper [Circulated in the Chandigarh, Panchkula, Mohali, Ludhiana, Bathinda, Jalandhar, Amritsar, Delhi, Himachal regions]
The Indian Express - National daily published from Chandigarh.
Hindustan Times - National daily published from Chandigarh.
The Times of India - National Daily.(Sub-Circulatories - The Times Of Chandigarh), The Economic Times , The Business Times]
The Pioneer- National daily published from Chandigarh.
Business Line- Business daily newspaper.
The Hindu- National daily.
The Economic Times - Business daily newspaper.

Hindi

Dainik Bhaskar - National Hindi daily published from Chandigarh.
Amar Ujala - National Hindi daily published from Chandigarh.
Dainik Tribune - Sister concern of The Tribune and gets published from Chandigarh
Punjab Kesari - National Hindi Daily
Hindustan - National Hindi daily published from Chandigarh.

Punjabi

Punjabi Tribune - Sister concern of The Tribune.
Desh Sewak - Punjab newspaper associated with political party CPI(M).
Rozana Spokesman - Punjabi newspaper.New entrant.
Jagbani - Punjabi edition of Punjab Kesari
Apna Punjab - a popular Punjabi newspaper also published in the USA (first started from New York)


[edit] Notable residents

Jeev Milkha Singh, The first Indian golfer to become a member of the European Tour
Ashok Malhotra, Indian Cricketer
Kapil Dev, Indian Cricketer
Milkha Singh, Athlete
Yograj Singh, former Indian cricketer, legendary Punjabi movie actor
Yuvraj Singh, son of Yograj Singh, Indian cricketer
Jaspal Bhatti, Actor & comedian
Ramesh Kumar Nibhoria, Winner of Ashden Award also known as Green Oscar
Poonam Dhillon, Hindi Film Actress
Abhinav Bindra, Gold Medalist in Rifle Shooting at Olympics.
Dr. Rajiv Pathak, Noted Biophysicst,Omar Mukhtar University at Al- Baida, Libya
Nek Chand, Designer of the famous Rock Garden.


[edit] Major Academic Works

Evenson, Norma. Chandigarh. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1966.
Fry, Maxwell and Drew, Jane. Chandigarh and Planning Development in India, London: Journal of the Royal Society of Arts, No.4948, 1 April 1955, Vol.CIII, pages 315-333. I. The Plan, by E. Maxwell Fry, II. Housing, by Jane B. Drew.
Joshi, Kiran. Documenting Chandigarh: The Indian Architecture of Pierre Jeanneret, Edwin Maxwell Fry and Jane Drew. Ahmedabad: Mapin Publishing in association with Chandigarh College of Architecture, 1999. ISBN-10 189020613X
Kalia, Ravi. Chandigarh: The Making of an Indian City. New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Nangia, Ashish. Re-locating Modernism: Chandigarh, Le Corbusier and the Global Postcolonial. PhD Dissertation, University of Washington, 2008.
Perera, Nihal. "Contesting Visions: Hybridity, Liminality and Authorship of the Chandigarh Plan" Planning Perspectives 19 (2004): 175-199
Prakash, Vikramaditya. Chandigarh’s Le Corbusier: The Struggle for Modernity in Postcolonial India. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2002.
Sarin, Madhu. Urban Planning in the Third World: The Chandigarh Experience. London: Mansell Publishing, 1982.


[edit] References

^ Indian Census
^ http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/Chandigarhs_per_capita_income_highest_in_India/articleshow/3487128.cms Chandigarh's per capita income highest in India]
^ http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/Cities/Chandigarh/Smoke_out_smoking_violations_/articleshow/3551323.cms
^ http://chandigarh.nic.in/WriteReadData%5Cnotification%5Cnot_env684_300708.pdf
^ Falling Rain Genomics, Inc - Chandigarh
^ "Census population" (in English) (PDF). Census of India. http://sampark.chd.nic.in. http://sampark.chd.nic.in/images/State_2006/StatisticalAbstract2004/Areapopulation/area_pop_tab2.1.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-06-04. 
^ "Census of India 2001: Data from the 2001 Census, including cities, villages and towns (Provisional)". Census Commission of India. Archived from the original on 2004-06-16. http://web.archive.org/web/20040616075334/http://www.censusindia.net/results/town.php?stad=A&state5=999. Retrieved on 2008-11-01. 
^ Indian Census
^ Chandigarh's the richest of 'em all
^ The Hindu Business Line
^ ADB 2007, p. 3
^ http://www.deccanherald.com/deccanherald/jun132006/national181232006612.asp
^ CITCO
^ Chandigarh traffic police, promoting road safety, traffic safety, India road signs & rules, safe responsible driving, first aid India
^ City Beautiful to get its first international flight in August - ExpressIndia.Com
^ Deccan Herald - Metro comes to Chandigarh


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Chandigarh



Chandigarh travel guide from Wikitravel
Chandigarh Administration
Chandigarh Administration Official Site
Chandigarh travel guide
Chandigarh Photos









v • d • e

States and territories of India





States

Andhra Pradesh · Arunachal Pradesh · Assam · Bihar · Chhattisgarh · Goa · Gujarat · Haryana · Himachal Pradesh · Jammu and Kashmir · Jharkhand · Karnataka · Kerala · Madhya Pradesh · Maharashtra · Manipur · Meghalaya · Mizoram · Nagaland · Orissa · Punjab · Rajasthan · Sikkim · Tamil Nadu · Tripura · Uttar Pradesh · Uttarakhand · West Bengal







Union Territories

Andaman and Nicobar Islands · Chandigarh · Dadra and Nagar Haveli · National Capital Territory of Delhi · Daman and Diu · Lakshadweep · Puducherry













v • d • e

 State and Union Territory capitals of India








Agartala · Aizawl · Bangalore · Bhopal · Bhubaneswar · Chandigarh · Chennai (Madras) · Daman and Diu · Dehradun · Delhi · Dispur · Gandhinagar · Gangtok · Hyderabad · Imphal · Itanagar · Jaipur · Jammu(in winter) · Kavaratti · Kohima · Kolkata (Calcutta) · Lucknow · Mumbai (Bombay) · Panaji · Patna · Puducherry · Port Blair · Raipur · Ranchi · Shillong · Shimla · Silvassa · Srinagar(in summer) · Thiruvananthapuram (Trivandrum)















v • d • e

Million-plus cities in India








Agra · Ahmedabad · Allahabad · Amritsar · Aurangabad · Bangalore · Bhopal · Chandigarh · Chennai · Coimbatore · Delhi · Faridabad · Ghaziabad · Howrah · Hyderabad · Indore · Jabalpur · Jaipur · Jodhpur · Kalyan-Dombivali · Kanpur · Kolkata · Lucknow · Ludhiana · Meerut · Mumbai · Mysore · Nagpur · Nashik · Navi Mumbai · Patna · Pimpri Chinchwad · Pune · Rajkot · Ranchi · Solapur · Srinagar · Surat · Thane · Vadodara · Varanasi · Visakhapatnam











Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chandigarh"
Categories: Chandigarh | Cities and towns in Chandigarh | Indian Union Territory capitals | Planned cities in India | Settlements established in 1948 | States and territories of India | Union Territories of IndiaHidden categories: Articles containing Hindi language text | Articles containing Punjabi language text | Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2001 | All articles containing potentially dated statements | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Eesti
Español
Français
ગુજરાતી
हिन्दी
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Kapampangan
ქართული
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
नेपाल भाषा
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
संस्कृत
Simple English
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
Українська
اردو
Tiếng Việt
Winaray
ייִדיש
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 15:17.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
