













Racism in the United States - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Racism_in_the_United_States";
		var wgTitle = "Racism in the United States";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "2162835";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 284549404;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Racism in the United States

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
Racism in the United States has been a major issue since the colonial era. Historically, the country has been dominated by a settler society of religiously and ethnically diverse Whites. The heaviest burdens of racism in the country have historically fallen upon Native Americans, Asian Americans, African Americans, Latin Americans, Irish Americans and some other immigrant groups and their descendants.
Major racially structured institutions include slavery, Indian reservations, segregation, residential schools (for Native Americans), internment camps, and affirmative action. Racial stratification has occurred in employment, housing, education and government. Formal racial discrimination was largely banned in the mid-20th century, and it came to be perceived as socially unacceptable and/or morally repugnant as well, yet racial politics remain a major phenomenon.
Racist attitudes, or prejudice, are still held by moderate portions of the U.S population. Members of every American ethnic group have perceived racism in their dealings with other groups.[1][2]




Contents


1 History by targeted racial group

1.1 Racism against Native Americans

1.1.1 Discrimination, marginalization
1.1.2 Native American owned slaves
1.1.3 Assimilation efforts into American society


1.2 Racism against African Americans

1.2.1 Slavery and emancipation
1.2.2 Nadir of American race relations
1.2.3 American Civil Rights movement


1.3 Discrimination and racism against Asian-Americans
1.4 Discrimination against Latin Americans
1.5 West Coast racism
1.6 Hate crimes
1.7 Antisemitism
1.8 Anti-White racism
1.9 Racism against Middle Easterners and Muslims

1.9.1 Racism against Iranians




2 Racism as a factor in U.S. foreign policy
3 Conflicts between racial and ethnic minorities

3.1 Argument against minority-minority racism
3.2 African and Mexican American gang violence
3.3 Hispanics and Whites
3.4 New Immigrant African Americans and African Americans


4 Stereotypes and prejudice

4.1 Stereotypical images in the entertainment media
4.2 Contemporary images and protests
4.3 Congressional hearing


5 Segregation and integration

5.1 History
5.2 Contemporary issues
5.3 Laws regarding race
5.4 Court cases regarding race


6 Institutional racism

6.1 Immigration
6.2 Wealth creation
6.3 Impact on health
6.4 Health care inequality


7 Affirmative action
8 Anti-Civil Rights leaders
9 Current hate groups
10 Anti-racism

10.1 Counter-racist organizations


11 See also
12 External links
13 References





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History by targeted racial group

[edit] Racism against Native Americans
Main article: Native Americans in the United States




Members of the Muscogee (Creek) Nation in Oklahoma around 1877. Notice the European and African ancestry members. The Creek were originally from the Alabama region.


Native Americans, who had lived on the North America continent for at least 15,000 years, had an enormously complex impact on American history and racial relations. During the colonial and independent periods, a long series of conflicts were waged, with the primary objective of obtaining resources of Native Americans. Through wars, massacres, forced displacement (such as in the Trail of Tears), and the imposition of treaties, land was taken and numerous hardships imposed. In 1540 CE, the first racial strife was with Spainard Hernando de Soto's expedition who enslaved and murdered many New World communities. In the early 1700s, the English had enslaved nearly 800 Choctaws.[3] After the creation of the United States, the idea of Indian removal gained momentum. However, some Native Americans choose to remain and avoided removal where they were subjected to racist institutions in their ancient homeland . The Choctaws in Mississippi described their situation in 1849, "we have had our habitations torn down and burned, our fences destroyed, cattle turned into our fields and we ourselves have been scourged, manacled, fettered and otherwise personally abused, until by such treatment some of our best men have died."[4] Joseph B. Cobb, who moved to Mississippi from Georgia, described Choctaws as having "no nobility or virtue at all, and in some respect he found blacks, especially native Africans, more interesting and admirable, the red man's superior in every way. The Choctaw and Chickasaw, the tribes he knew best, were beneath contempt, that is, even worse than black slaves."[5]
Ideological expansionist justification (Manifest Destiny) included stereotyped perceptions of all Native Americans as "merciless Indian savages" (as described in the United States Declaration of Independence) despite successful American efforts at civilization as proven with the Cherokee, Chickasaw, Creek, and Choctaw. The most egregious attempt occurred with the California gold rush, the first two years of which saw the deaths of thousands of Native Americans. Under Mexican rule in California, Indians were subjected to de facto enslavement under a system of peonage. While in 1850, California formally entered the Union as a free state, with respect to the issue of slavery, the practice of Indian indentured servitude was not outlawed by the California Legislature until 1863.[6]
Military and civil resistance by Native Americans has been a constant feature of American history. So too have a variety of debates around issues of sovereignty, the upholding of treaty provisions, and the civil rights of Native Americans under U.S. law.

[edit] Discrimination, marginalization
Once their territories were incorporated into the United States, surviving Native Americans were denied equality before the law and often treated as wards of the state.[7][verification needed] Many Native Americans were relegated to reservations—constituting just 4% of U.S. territory—and the treaties signed with them violated. Tens of thousands of American Indians and Alaska Natives were forced to attend a residential school system which sought to reeducate them in white settler American values, culture and economy, to "kill the Indian, sav[ing] the man."[8]
Further dispossession continued through concessions for industries such as oil, mining and timber and through division of land through legislation such as the Allotment Act. These concessions have raised problems of consent, exploitation of low royalty rates, environmental injustice, and gross mismanagement of funds held in trust, resulting in the loss of $10–40 billion.[9] The Worldwatch Institute notes that 317 reservations are threatened by environmental hazards, while Western Shoshone land has been subjected to more than 1,000 nuclear explosions.[10]

[edit] Native American owned slaves
Before removal, some Southern Native American tribes owned African American slaves. The Cherokee, Choctaw, and Chickasaw were known to have had slaves. Just as they adopted European American culture (Christianity, yeoman farming techniques, and educational institutions), they also adopted slavery. But unlike the United States before Emancipation, African Americans (and European Americans) were allowed to become citizens of their respective Native American nations; however, it was rare for a African Americans to become citizens of Native American nations. For example, a small number of "Free People of Color" lived in many Native American nations as Cherokee, Choctaw, or Creek citizens.[11]

[edit] Assimilation efforts into American society




Benjamin Hawkins, seen here on his plantation, teaches Creek Native Americans how to use European technology. Painted in 1805.


George Washington and Henry Knox believed that Native Americans were equals but that their society was inferior. The government appointed agents, like Benjamin Hawkins, to live among the Indians and to teach them, through example and instruction, how to live like whites.[12] Washington formulated a policy to encourage the "civilizing" process.[13] Washington had a six-point plan for civilization which included,

1. impartial justice toward Native Americans
2. regulated buying of Native American lands
3. promotion of commerce
4. promotion of experiments to civilize or improve Native American society
5. presidential authority to give presents
6. punishing those who violated Native American rights.[14]

The Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 granted U.S. citizenship to all Native Americans. Prior to the passage of the act, nearly two-thirds of Native Americans were already U.S. citizens.[15] The earliest recorded date of Native Americans becoming U.S. citizens was in 1831 when the Mississippi Choctaw became citizens after the United States Legislature ratified the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek. Under article XIV of that treaty, any Choctaw who elected not to move to Native American Territory could become an American citizen when he registered and if he stayed on designated lands for five years after treaty ratification. Citizenship could also be obtained by:

1. Treaty Provision (as with the Mississippi Choctaw)
2. Allotment under the Act of February 8, 1887
3. Issuance of Patent in Fee Simple
4. Adopting Habits of Civilized Life
5. Minor Children
6. Citizenship by Birth
7. Becoming Soldiers and Sailors in the U.S. Armed Forces
8. Marriage
9. Special Act of Congress.



“
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That all noncitizen Native Americans born within the territorial limits of the United States be, and they are hereby, declared to be citizens of the United States: Provided, That the granting of such citizenship shall not in any manner impair or otherwise affect the right of any Native American to tribal or other property.
”



—-Indian Citizenship Act of 1924



While formal equality has been legally granted, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders remain among the most economically disadvantaged groups in the country, and according to National mental health studies, American Indians are the most affected racial group to suffer from high levels of alcoholism, depression and suicide.[original research?]

[edit] Racism against African Americans
Main article: African American history

[edit] Slavery and emancipation
In colonial America, before slavery became completely based on racial lines, thousands of African slaves served European colonists, alongside other Europeans serving a term of indentured servitude.[16] In some cases for African slaves, a term of service meant freedom and a land grant afterward, but these were rarely awarded, and few former slaves became landowners this way.[citation needed] In a precursor to the American Revolution, Nathaniel Bacon led a revolt in 1676 against the Governor of Virginia and the system of exploitation he represented: exploitation of poorer colonists by the increasingly wealthy landowners where poorer people, regardless of skin color, fought side by side. However, Bacon died, probably of dysentery; hundreds of participants in the revolt were lured to disarm by a promised amnesty; and the revolt lost steam.[17]
Slaves were primarily used for agricultural labor, notably in the production of cotton and tobacco. Black slavery in the Northeast was common until the early 19th century, when many Northeastern states abolished slavery. Slaves were used as a labor force in agricultural production, shipyards, docks, and as domestic servants. In both regions, only the wealthiest Americans owned slaves.[citation needed] In contrast, poor whites recognized that slavery devalued their own labor. The social rift along color lines soon became ingrained in every aspect of colonial American culture.[citation needed] Approximately one Southern family in four held slaves prior to war. According to the 1860 U.S. census, there were about 385,000 slaveowners out of approximately 1.5 million white families.[18]
Although the Constitution had banned the importation of new African slaves in 1808, and in 1820 slave trade was equated with piracy, punishable by death,[19] the practice of chattel slavery still existed for the next half century. All slaves in only the areas of the Confederate States of America that were not under direct control of the United States government were declared free by the Emancipation Proclamation, which was issued on January 1, 1863 by President Abraham Lincoln.[20] It should be noted that the Emancipation Proclamation did not apply to areas loyal to, or controlled by, the Union, thus the document only freed slaves where the Union still had not regained the legitimacy to do so. Slavery was not actually abolished in the United States until the passage of the 13th Amendment which was declared ratified on December 6, 1865.[21]
About 4 million black slaves were freed in 1865. Ninety-five percent of blacks lived in the South, comprising one third of the population there as opposed to one percent of the population of the North. Consequently, fears of eventual emancipation were much greater in the South than in the North.[22] Based on 1860 census figures, 8% of all white males aged 13 to 43 died in the civil war, including 6% in the North and an extraordinary 18% in the South.[23] Despite this, post-emancipation America was not free from racism; discriminatory practices continued in the United States with the existence of Jim Crow laws, educational disparities and widespread criminal acts against people of color.

[edit] Nadir of American race relations
Main articles: Nadir of American race relations  and Mass racial violence in the United States




The mob-style lynching of Will James, Cairo, Illinois, 1909.


The new century saw a hardening of institutionalized racism and legal discrimination against citizens of African descent in the United States. Although technically able to vote, poll taxes, acts of terror (often perpetuated by groups such as the Ku Klux Klan, founded in the Reconstruction South), and discriminatory laws such as grandfather clauses kept black Americans disenfranchised particularly in the South but also nationwide following the Hayes election at the end of the Reconstruction era in 1877. In response to de jure racism, protest and lobbyist groups emerged, most notably, the NAACP (National Association for the Advancement of Colored People) in 1909.
This time period is sometimes referred to as the nadir of American race relations because racism in the United States was worse during this time than at any period before or since. Segregation, racial discrimination, and expressions of white supremacy all increased. So did anti-black violence, including lynchings and race riots.
In addition, racism which had been viewed primarily as a problem in the Southern states, burst onto the national consciousness following the Great Migration, the relocation of millions of African Americans from their roots in the Southern states to the industrial centers of the North after World War I, particularly in cities such as Boston, Chicago, and New York (Harlem). In northern cities, racial tensions exploded, most violently in Chicago, and lynchings--mob-directed hangings, usually racially motivated--increased dramatically in the 1920s.

[edit] American Civil Rights movement
Main article: American Civil Rights movement




Civil Rights marchers at the Lincoln Memorial


Prominent African American politicians, entertainers and activists pushed for civil rights throughout the twentieth century, quite noticeably during the 1930s and 1940s with noted allies including First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt, who facilitated singer Marian Anderson's famous 1939 Easter concert when segregated venues would not accommodate her.[24]
Activists, particularly A. Philip Randolph agitated for civil rights throughout the Great Depression and World War II years, organizing protest marches and seeking government concessions. The efforts of civil rights activists began to bear fruit with the issuance of wartime Executive Order 8802, signed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt on June 25, 1941 to prohibit racial discrimination in the national defense industry. [25] This was followed by Executive Order 9981 by President Harry S. Truman in July 1948, which banned racial segregation in the American armed forces, and the creation of the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights in 1957. The 1950s and 1960s saw the peaking of the American Civil Rights Movement and the desegregation of schools under the 1954 Supreme Court case Brown v. Board and the organizing of widespread protests across the nation under a younger generation of leaders.[26]
The pastor and activist Martin Luther King, Jr. was the catalyst for many nonviolent protests in the 1960s which led to the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.[27] This signified a change in the social acceptance of legislative racism in America and a profound increase in the number of opportunities available for people of color in the United States.[27] While substantial gains were made in the succeeding decades through middle class advancement and public employment, black poverty and lack of education[28] deepened in the context of de-industrialization.[26]
In the 2008 United States presidential election White Americans played major role in electing the first black president Barack Obama.[29] While technically President Harding had some black ancestry, Obama is the first to be acknowledged for his black ancestry.

[edit] Discrimination and racism against Asian-Americans




A Sinophobic cartoon called "Yellow terror" appearing in the United States in 1899


See also: Sinophobia and Chinese American history
In the Pacific States, racism was primarily directed against the resident Asian immigrants. Several immigration laws discriminated against the Asians, and at different points the ethnic Chinese or other groups were banned from entering the United States.[30] Nonwhites were prohibited from testifying against whites, a prohibition extended to the Chinese by People v. Hall.[31] The Chinese were often subject to harder labor on the First Transcontinental Railroad and often performed the more dangerous tasks such as using dynamite to make pathways through the mountains.[32] The San Francisco Vigilance Movement, although ostensibly a response to crime and corruption, also systematically victimized Irish immigrants, and later this was transformed into mob violence against Chinese immigrants.[citation needed] Legal discrimination of Asian minorities was furthered with the passages of the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, which banned the entrance of virtually all ethnic Chinese immigrants into the United States until 1943.
During World War II, the United States created internment camps for Japanese American citizens in fear that they would be used as spies for the Japanese. [33] The executive order hasn't affected any Japanese populations in the Eastern US and the large Japanese population in Hawaii.

[edit] Discrimination against Latin Americans





This section may contain original research or unverified claims. Please improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details. (May 2007)


Americans of Latin American ancestry (often categorized as "Hispanic") come from a wide variety of racial and ethnic backgrounds; however, Latin Americans have often been viewed as a monolithic group by other Americans. Some claim that Latinos are often portrayed as passionate, hypersexual, violent, lazy, or macho in literature, films, television and music.
Some argue that recent increases in illegal Hispanic immigration have spurred anti-Latino sentiment (particularly in areas of the United States that have previously seen few Hispanic immigrants), and that the illegal immigration debate has generated nativism. Also, some criticize what they say are racist claims that Latin Americans are "taking over" white Anglo-American society, especially in the Southwestern United States, home to most American Latinos.
Latinos are not all distinguishable as a racial minority. For example, Leander Perez's ancestors were mainly Isleños who immigrated to the New Orleans area in the late 1700s, yet Leander had the appearance of, and was considered by almost everyone, to be a white man. Many Cuban Americans, particularly those from the exile generation that arrived immediately after the Communist domination of the island, are also largely integrated into American society.
The Zoot Suit Riots were vivid incidents of racial violence against Latinos (e.g. Mexican-Americans) in Los Angeles in 1943. Naval servicemen stationed in a Latino neighborhood conflicted with youth in the dense neighborhood. Frequent confrontations between small groups and individuals had intensified into several days of non-stop rioting. Large mobs of servicemen would enter civilian quarters looking to attack Mexican American youths, some of whom were wearing zoot suits, a distinctive exaggerated fashion popular among that group.[34] The disturbances continued unchecked, and even assisted, by the local police for several days before based commanders declared downtown Los Angeles and Mexican American neighborhoods off-limits to servicemen.[35]

[edit] West Coast racism
The Pacific and Western states were often portrayed to those on the East Coast as more liberal in terms of race relations in the 1960s and 1970s, but California legally allowed racial segregation of public facilities until the 1950s and other forms of racism were felt there as well.
See also: History of Oregon Racial Discrimination
A variety of laws were enacted to prevent African American migration to the Pacific Northwest. While slavery was criminalized in the Oregon Territory in 1844, a so-called lash law required that all blacks (slave or free) be whipped twice annually was enacted in June of that year. An exclusion law, barring African Americans from entering the territory was passed in 1847, repealed in 1854, and added to the new Oregon state constitution in 1857. While African Americans have been present at some level since 1805, the demographic reverberations of these laws remain today.[36]

[edit] Hate crimes
Most hate crimes in the United States target victims on the basis of race or ethnicity (for Federal purposes, crimes targeting Hispanics based on that identity are considered based on ethnicity. Leading forms of bias cited in the FBI's Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program, based on law enforcement agency filings are: anti-black, anti-Jewish, anti-white, anti-homosexual, and anti-Hispanic bias in that order in both 2004 and 2005.[37] There are more hate crimes against whites than against Hispanics, Asians, American-Indians and multiple-race groups - a statistically expected trend given that there far more whites than other ethnic groups put together. By contrast, the National Criminal Victimization Survey, finds that per capita rates of hate crime victimization varied little by race or ethnicity, and the differences are not statistically significant.[38]
The New Century Foundation, a white nationalist organization founded by Jared Taylor, argues that blacks are more likely than whites to commit hate crimes, and that FBI figures inflate the number of hate crimes committed by whites by counting Hispanics as "white".[39] Other analysts are sharply critical of the NCF's findings, referring to the criminological mainstream view that "Racial and ethnic data must be treated with caution. ... Existing research on crime has generally shown that racial or ethnic identity is not predictive of criminal behavior with data which has been controlled for social and economic factors."[40] NCF's methodology and statistics are further sharply criticized as flawed and deceptive by anti-racist activists Tim Wise and the Southern Poverty Law Center.[41][42]
The first post-Jim Crow era hate crime to make sensational media attention was the beating death of Vincent Chin, an Asian American of Chinese descent in 1982. He was attacked by a mob of white assiliants, they were recently laid off from a Detroit area auto factory job and blamed the Japanese for their individual unemployment. Chin, was not Japanese but the assiliants testified at the criminal court case that he "looked like a Jap", an ethnic slur described Japanese and other Asians, and were angry enough to beat him to death. The assiliants were charged with murder and imprisoned for life.[citation needed]

[edit] Antisemitism
Main article: Antisemitism in the United States
Antisemitism has also played a role in America. During the late 1800s and early 1900s, hundreds of thousands of Ashkenazi Jews were escaping the pogroms of Russia and Eastern Europe. They boarded boats from ports on the Baltic Sea and in Northern Germany, and largely arrived at Ellis Island, New York.[43]
It is thought by Leo Rosten, in his book, 'The Joys of Yiddish', that as soon as they left the boat, they were subject to racism from the port immigration authorities. The derogatory term 'kike' was adopted when referring to Jews (because they often could not write so they may have signed their immigration papers with circles - or kikel in Yiddish).[44]
From the 1910s, the Southern Jewish communities were attacked by the Ku Klux Klan, who objected to Jewish immigration, and often used 'The Jewish Banker' in their propaganda. In 1915, Texas-born, New York Jew Leo Frank was lynched by the newly re-formed Klan, after being convicted of rape and sentenced to death (his punishment was commuted to life imprisonment).[45]
The events in Nazi Germany also attracted attention from America. Jewish lobbying for intervention in Europe drew opposition from the isolationists, amongst whom was Father Charles Coughlin, a well known radio priest, who was known to be critical of Jews, believing that they were leading America into the war.[46] He preached in weekly, overtly anti-Semitic sermons and, from 1936, began publication of a newspaper, Social Justice, in which he printed anti-Semitic accusations such as The Protocols of the Elders of Zion.[46]
A number of Jewish organizations, Christian organizations, Muslim organizations, and academics consider the Nation of Islam to be anti-Semitic. Specifically, they claim that the Nation of Islam has engaged in revisionist and antisemitic interpretations of the Holocaust and exaggerates the role of Jews in the African slave trade.[47] The Jewish Anti-Defamation League (ADL) alleges that NOI Health Minister, Abdul Alim Muhammad, has accused Jewish doctors of injecting blacks with the AIDS virus,[48] an allegation that Dr. Abdul Alim Muhammad has denied.

[edit] Anti-White racism
In the United States, there have been crimes committed against White Americans on the basis of their ethnicity. One series of unprovoked crimes that specifically targeted White Americans is the Zebra murders that occurred in San Francisco between 1973 and 1974. The Zebra murders were carried out by a group known as Death Angels (a radical splinter group of the Nation of Islam) that intended to kill whites to spread terror and earn favor and status within their sect. The final death count varies depending on which killings are included, but it is believed to account for more than 71 murders in addition to numerous rapes and attempted murders.[citation needed]
Another series of crimes that specifically targeted whites is the 2002 Beltway sniper attacks which planned to kill six whites a day for 30 days,[49] and resulted in 10 deaths and 3 critical injuries. One of the snipers Lee Boyd Malvo testified that John Allen Muhammad was driven by hatred of America because of its "slavery, hypocrisy and foreign policy" and his belief that "the white man is the devil."
According to the Southern Poverty Law Center, national anti-white hate groups that are currently active include Nation of Islam and New Black Panther Party.
According to FBI statistics from 1995-2002, Whites are the second most targeted group for racially motivated hate crime in New York City.[50]

[edit] Racism against Middle Easterners and Muslims
Main articles: Anti-Arabism and Islamophobia




An Assyrian church vandalized in Detroit (2007). Assyrians, although not Arabs and mostly Christians, often face backlash in the US for their Middle Eastern background.[51]


Racism against Arab Americans[52] may rise concomittantly with tensions between the American government and the Arab world. Following the September 11, 2001 attacks in the United States, discrimination and racialized violence has markedly increased against Arab Americans and many other religious and cultural groups.[53]
Iraqis in particular were demonized which led to hatred towards Arabs and Iranians living in the United States and elsewhere in the western world.[54][55] There have been attacks against Arabs not only on the basis of their religion (Islam), but also on the basis of their ethnicity; numerous Christian Arabs have been attacked based on their appearances.[56]In addition, non-Arabs who are mistaken for Arabs because of perceived "similarities in appearance" have been collateral victims of anti-Arabism.
Persian people (who constitute a completely different set of ethnic groups than Arabs), as well as South Asians of different ethnic/religious backgrounds (Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs) have been stereotyped as "Arabs". The case of Balbir Singh Sodhi, a Sikh who was murdered at a Phoenix gas station by a white supremacist for "looking like an Arab terrorist" (because of the turban that is a requirement of Sikhism), as well as that of Hindus being attacked for "being Muslims" have achieved prominence and criticism following the September 11 attacks.[57][58]

[edit] Racism against Iranians
Main article: Anti-Iranian sentiment




A man holding a sign that reads "deport all Iranians" and "get the hell out of my country" during a protest of the Iran hostage crisis in Washington, D.C. in 1979.


The November 1979 Iranian hostage crisis of the U.S. embassy in Tehran precipitated a wave of anti-Iranian sentiment in the United States, directed both against the new Islamic regime and Iranian nationals and immigrants. Even though such sentiments gradually declined after the release of the hostages at the start of 1981, they sometimes flare up. In response, some Iranian immigrants to the U.S. have distanced themselves from their nationality and instead identify primarily on the basis of their ethnic or religious affiliations.[59]
Ann Coulter called Iranians "ragheads."[60] Brent Scowcroft called the Iranian people "rug merchants."[61]
Since the 1980s and especially since the 1990s Hollywood's depiction of Iranians has gradually shown signs of vilifying Iranians.[62] Hollywood network productions such as 24 [63], John Doe, On Wings of Eagles (1986)[64], Escape From Iran: The Canadian Caper (1981)[65], and JAG almost regularly host Persian speaking villains in their storylines. On May 9, 1997, CBS aired an episode of JAG in which several Hamas terrorists take a Washington hospital under siege. According to the film, they spoke in fluent "Persian", not "Arabic".[citation needed]
Some of Hollywood's "stereotypical"[66] and anti-Iranian movies include: The Peacemaker (in which a character, apparently without any context, says "fuck Iran"), The Hitman (in which several mobs join together to demolish an Iranian mob operating in Canada), MadHouse (partially centering upon a wealthy Iranian who is in the process of divorcing his American wife. In one scene, the wife, speaking to her Iranian husband utters "you goddamn towel heads, sand rats"), The Naked Gun, Under Siege, The Delta Force, Into the Night, Down and Out in Beverly Hills, Threads, The Final Options, and Silver Bears.

[edit] Racism as a factor in U.S. foreign policy





This article is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add inline citations to guard against copyright violations and factual inaccuracies. (August 2008)


The earliest decades of expansionist United States foreign policy making was often accompanied by racialist ideological justifications. While pursuing a series of expansionist wars (see "Racism against Native Americans" above), American leaders embraced and ideology of white racial supremacy. George Washington predicted at the end of the U.S. Revolutionary War, “The gradual extension of our settlements will as certainly cause the savage, as the wolf, to retire; both being beasts of prey, tho' they differ in shape."[67] The successful slave revolution in Haiti alarmed the United States leadership, and the country refused diplomatic recognition for decades. The United States conquest of Florida and the Seminole Wars were fought in part to confront the danger of "mingled hordes of lawless Indians and negroes," in the words of President John Quincy Adams.[68]
Early 20th-century President Theodore Roosevelt declared, "The most ultimately righteous of all wars is a war with savages" and openly spoke of cementing the rule of "dominant world races."[68] In line with the concepts of the "Manifest Destiny" of white Anglo-Americans to conquer lands inhabited by "inferior" races of Native Americans and Mexicans, and the "White Man's Burden" of Europeans' obligation to introduce civilization to the "primitive" people of Africa, Asia and the Pacific, American foreign policy in the early 20th century had racial overtones of a "superior" race destined to rule the world.
Critics such as Gore Vidal and Noam Chomsky have suggested that racism has played a significant role in U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East and its treatment of the Arabs. Various critics have suggested that racism along with strategic and financial interests motivated the Bush Administration to attack Iraq even though the Baathist regime of Saddam Hussein did not possess weapons of mass destruction nor had any ties to Al Qaida.[69][70][71] On the other hand, some scholars believe that the United States has softened racial restrictions based on foreign policy concerns. For example, Congress eliminated racial bars on Asian immigration during World War II and the Vietnam War to recognize American allies.[72] When the Supreme Court decided Brown v. Board of Education, the government argued that the Supreme Court should rule against racial segregation to counter Communist propaganda and improve America's image overseas.[73]

[edit] Conflicts between racial and ethnic minorities

[edit] Argument against minority-minority racism
Minority racism is sometimes considered controversial because of theories of power in society. Some theories of racism insist that racism can only exist in the context of social power to impose it upon others.[74]

[edit] African and Mexican American gang violence
There has been ongoing violence between between African American and Mexican American gangs, particularly in Los Angeles, California.[75][76][77][78] There have been reports of racially motivated attacks against African Americans who have moved into neighborhoods occupied mostly by Mexican Americans, and vice versa.[79][80] According to gang experts and law enforcement agents, a longstanding race war between the Mexican Mafia and the Black Guerilla family, a rival African American prison gang, has generated such intense racial hatred among Mexican Mafia leaders, or shot callers, that they have issued a "green light" on all blacks. This amounts to a standing authorization for Latino gang members to prove their mettle by terrorizing or even murdering any blacks sighted in a neighborhood claimed by a gang loyal to the Mexican Mafia.[3] There have been several significant riots in California prisons where Mexican American inmates and African Americans have targeted each other particularly, based on racial reasons.[81][82]

[edit] Hispanics and Whites
Recently there has also been an increase in racial violence between whites and Hispanic immigrants.[83]

[edit] New Immigrant African Americans and African Americans
The rapid growth in African immigrants has came into conflict with American blacks.[84][85]

[edit] Stereotypes and prejudice





Please help improve this article or section by expanding it. Further information might be found on the talk page. (October 2007)






This racist postcard from the 1900s shows the casual denigration of black women. It states "I know you're not particular to a fault / Though I'm not sure you'll never be sued for assault / You're so fond of women that even a wench / Attracts your gross fancy despite her strong stench"



[edit] Stereotypical images in the entertainment media
Popular culture (songs, theater) for European-American audiences in the nineteenth century created and perpetuated negative stereotypes of African-Americans. One key symbol of racism against African Americans was the use of blackface. Directly related to this was the institution of minstrelsy.

[edit] Contemporary images and protests
Increasing numbers of African-American activists have asserted that rap music videos utilize African-American performers commonly enacting tropes of scantily clothed women and men as thugs or pimps. Church organized groups have protested outside the residence of Phillipe Dauman (Upper East Side (New York, NY)) (president and chief executive officer of Viacom) and the residence of Debra L. Lee (Northwest Washington DC) (chairman and chief executive of Black Entertainment Television, a unit of Viacom). Rev. Donald Coates, leader of a protest organization formed around the issue of the videos, "Enough is Enough!" said, “In the wake of the Imus affair, I began to think that the African-American community must be consistent in its outrage.” The Clifton, Maryland ministered has also said, “Why are these corporations making these images normative and mainstream?” . . . . “I can talk about this in the church until I am blue in the face, but we need to take it outside.” The NAACP and the National Congress of Black Women also have called for the reform of images on videos and on television. Julian Bond said that in a segregated society, people get their impressions of other groups from what they see in videos and what they hear in music.[86][87][88][89]
In a similar vein, activists protested against the BET show, Hot Ghetto Mess, which satirizes the culture of working-class African-Americans. The protests resulted in the change of the television show name to We Got to Do Better.[86]

[edit] Congressional hearing
In September, 2007 Rep. Bobby Rush (D-Illinois) initiated a Congressional hearing on African-American images in the media, “From Imus to Industry: The Business of Stereotypes and Degrading Images.” [86]

[edit] Segregation and integration
Main article: Racial segregation in the United States

[edit] History
The Jim Crow Laws were state and local laws enacted in the Southern and border states of the United States and enforced between 1876 and 1965. They mandated "separate but equal" status for black Americans. In reality, this led to treatment and accommodations that were almost always inferior to those provided to white Americans. The most important laws required that public schools, public places and public transportation, like trains and buses, have separate facilities for whites and blacks. (These Jim Crow Laws were separate from the 1800-66 Black Codes, which had restricted the civil rights and civil liberties of African Americans.) State-sponsored school segregation was declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of the United States in 1954 in Brown v. Board of Education. Generally, the remaining Jim Crow laws were overruled by the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act; none were in effect at the end of the 1960s.
Segregation continued even after the demise of the Jim Crow laws. Data on house prices and attitudes toward integration from suggest that in the mid-twentieth century, segregation was a product of collective actions taken by whites to exclude blacks from their neighborhoods.[90] Segregation also took the form of redlining, the practice of denying or increasing the cost of services, such as banking, insurance, access to jobs,[91] access to health care,[92] or even supermarkets[93] to residents in certain, often racially determined,[94] areas. Although in the United States informal discrimination and segregation have always existed, the practice called "redlining" began with the National Housing Act of 1934, which established the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). The practice was fought first through passage of the Fair Housing Act of 1968 (which prevents redlining when the criteria for redlining are based on race, religion, gender, familial status, disability, or ethnic origin), and later through the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977, which requires banks to apply the same lending criteria in all communities.[95] Although redlining is illegal some argue that it continues to exist in other forms.

[edit] Contemporary issues
Black-White segregation is declining fairly consistently for most metropolitan areas and cities. Despite these pervasive patterns, many changes for individual areas are small.[96] Thirty years after the civil rights era, the United States remains a residentially segregated society in which Blacks and Whites inhabit different neighborhoods of vastly different quality.[97][98]
Some researchers suggest that racial segregation may lead to disparities in health and mortality. Thomas LaVeist (1989; 1993) tested the hypothesis that segregation would aid in explaining race differences in infant mortality rates across cities. Analyzing 176 large and midsized cities, LaVeist found support for the hypothesis. Since LaVeist's studies, segregation has received increased attention as a determinant of race disparities in mortality.[99] Studies have shown that mortality rates for male and female African Americans are lower in areas with lower levels of residential segregation. Mortality for male and female Whites was not associated in either direction with residential segregation.[100]
Researchers Sharon A. Jackson, Roger T. Anderson, Norman J. Johnson and Paul D. Sorlie found that, after adjustment for family income, mortality risk increased with increasing minority residential segregation among Blacks aged 25 to 44 years and non-Blacks aged 45 to 64 years. In most age/race/gender groups, the highest and lowest mortality risks occurred in the highest and lowest categories of residential segregation, respectively. These results suggest that minority residential segregation may influence mortality risk and underscore the traditional emphasis on the social underpinnings of disease and death.[101] Rates of heart disease among African Americans are associated with the segregation patterns in the neighborhoods where they live (Fang et al. 1998). Stephanie A. Bond Huie writes that neighborhoods affect health and mortality outcomes primarily in an indirect fashion through environmental factors such as smoking, diet, exercise, stress, and access to health insurance and medical providers.[102] Moreover, segregation strongly influences premature mortality in the US.[103]

[edit] Laws regarding race
Main article: Race legislation in the United States





Please help improve this article or section by expanding it. Further information might be found on the talk page. (October 2007)



[edit] Court cases regarding race

[edit] Institutional racism
Institutional racism is the theory that aspects of the structure, pervasive attitudes, and established institutions of society disadvantage some racial groups, although not by an overtly discriminatory mechanism.[104] There are several factors that play into institutional racism, including but not limited to: accumulated wealth/benefits from racial groups that have benefited from past discrimination, educational and occupational disadvantages faced by non-native English speakers in the United States, ingrained stereotypical images that still remain in the society (e.g. black men are likely to be criminals).[105]

[edit] Immigration
Access to United States citizenship was restricted by race, beginning with the Naturalization Act of 1790 which refused naturalization to "non-whites." Many in the modern United States forget the institutionalized prejudice against white followers of Roman Catholicism who immigrated from countries such as Ireland, Germany, Italy and France.[106] Other efforts include the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act and the 1924 National Origins Act.[107][108] The Immigration Act of 1924 was aimed at further restricting the Southern and Eastern Europeans who had begun to enter the country in large numbers beginning in the 1890s. While officially prohibited, U.S. officials continue to differentially apply laws on illegal immigration depending on national origin (essentially declining to enforce immigration laws against citizens of rich countries who overstay their visas) and personal economy (differentially awarding visas to foreign nationals based on bank accounts, properties and so on).

[edit] Wealth creation
Massive racial differentials in account of wealth remain in the United States: between whites and African Americans, the gap is a factor of ten.[109] An analyst of the phenomenon, Thomas Shapiro, professor of law and social policy at Brandeis University argues, “The wealth gap is not just a story of merit and achievement, it’s also a story of the historical legacy of race in the United States.”[110] Differentials applied to the Social Security Act (which excluded agricultural workers, a sector that then included most black workers), rewards to military officers, and the educational benefits offered returning soldiers after World War II. Pre-existing disparities in wealth are exacerbated by tax policies that reward investment over waged income, subsidize mortgages, and subsidize private sector developers.[111]

[edit] Impact on health
See also: Race and health
In the US racial differences in health and quality of life often persist even at equivalent socioeconomics levels. Individual and institutional discrimination, along with the stigma of inferiority, can adversely affect health. Residence in poor neighborhoods, racial bias in medical care, the stress of experiences of discrimination and the acceptance of the societal stigma of inferiority can have deleterious consequences for health.[112] Using The Schedule of Racist Events (SRE), an 18-item self-report inventory that assesses the frequency of racist discrimination. Hope Landrine and Elizabeth A. Klonoff found that racist discrimination is rampant in the lives of African Americans and is strongly related to psychiatric symptoms.[113] A study on racist events in the lives of African American women found that lifetime experiences of racism were positively related to lifetime history of both physical disease and frequency of recent common colds. These relationships were largely unaccounted for by other variables. Demographic variables such as income and education were not related to experiences of racism. The results suggest that racism can be detrimental to African American's well being.[114] The physiological stress caused by racism has been documented in studies by Claude Steele, Joshua Aronson, and Steven Spencer on what they term "stereotype threat."[115] Kennedy et al. found that both measures of collective disrespect were strongly correlated with black mortality (r = 0.53 to 0.56), as well as with white mortality (r = 0.48 to 0.54). These data suggest that racism, measured as an ecologic characteristic, is associated with higher mortality in both blacks and whites.[116]

[edit] Health care inequality
See also: Race and health
They are major racial differences in access to health care and in the quality of health care provided. A study published in the American Journal of Public Health estimated that: "over 886,000 deaths could have been prevented from 1991 to 2000 if African Americans had received the same care as whites." The key differences they cited were lack of insurance, inadequate insurance, poor service, and reluctance to seek care.[117] A history of government-sponsored experimentation, such as the notorious Tuskegee Syphilis Study has left of legacy of African American distrust of the medical system.[118]
Inequalities in health care may also reflect a systemic bias in the way medical procedures and treatments are prescribed for different ethnic groups. Raj Bhopal writes that the history of racism in science and medicine shows that people and institutions behave according to the ethos of their times and warns of dangers to avoid in the future.[119] Nancy Krieger contended that much modern research supported the assumptions needed to justify racism. Racism she writes underlies unexplained inequities in health care, including treatment for heart disease,[120] renal failure,[121] bladder cancer,[122] and pneumonia.[123] Raj Bhopal writes that these inequalities have been documented in numerous studies. The consistent and repeated findings that black Americans receive less health care than white Americans—particularly where this involves expensive new technology.[124]

[edit] Affirmative action
Main article: Affirmative action in the United States
Affirmative action is a policy or program intended to promote access to education or employment for minority groups and women. Motivation for affirmative action policies is to redress the effects of past discrimination and to encourage public institutions such as universities, hospitals, and police forces to be more representative of the population.
Affirmative action programs may include targeted recruitment efforts, preferential treatment given to applicants from historically disadvantaged groups, and in some cases the use of quotas. Most American universities and some employers practice affirmative action.[citation needed]
Some opponents of affirmative action view the greater access by women and minority groups to be at the expense of groups considered dominant (typically white men). In their view, these policies demonstrate an overt preference for applicants from particular backgrounds over better-qualified (or equally-qualified) candidates from other backgrounds. Some opponents of affirmative action believe the only consideration in choosing between applicants should be merit. Some also criticize affirmative action because they believe it perpetuates racial division instead of minimizing the importance of race in American society.[125]
Supporters of affirmative action believe that the perceived injustice to the dominant group is not supported by facts. They point to statistics that suggest that affirmative action has not resulted in fewer opportunities for white people. For example, white enrollment in universities has increased along with minority enrollment. In 1973, 30% of white high school graduates attended universities; in 1993, after widespread implementation of affirmative action policies, that number had risen to 42%.[126] Some supporters of affirmative action point out that, even in the absence of affirmative action, college admissions rarely are purely merit-based: athletes, musicians, and legacy students (children of alumni) have always been given preferential treatment. For example, Harvard University admits 35-40% of legacy applicants, and a rejected white applicant is more likely to have been displaced by a legacy student than by one who benefited from affirmative action.[citation needed]

[edit] Anti-Civil Rights leaders
The following list are of US personages well known for their opposition to either equal and or Civil Rights for minorities:

Benjamin Harrison, President who did not veto the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act
Woodrow Wilson, President who reintroduced segregation into the Federal Government
Henry Cabot Lodge, Senator who was proponent of Anglo-Saxon racial superiority and of the Immigration Restriction League
Jesse Helms, Senator
Ben Tillman, Governor and Senator
Roger B. Taney, Chief Justice who ruled the Dred Scott decision.
Pierce Butler, Supreme Court Justice
James Clark McReynolds, Supreme Court Justice
George Sutherland, Supreme Court Justice
Strom Thurmond, Senator who conducted the longest filibuster (24 hours and 18 minutes) in opposition to the Civil Rights Act of 1957.


[edit] Current hate groups
Main article: Hate groups
Supremacist, separatist, racist, and hate groups still operate in the United States. The Ku Klux Klan, the National Alliance, Minuteman Project, National Socialist Movement (United States), Aryan Nations, Westboro Baptist Church, Nation of Islam, League of the South, New Black Panther Party, Nation of Aztlán, Nation of Yahweh, Jewish Task Force, the Jewish Defense League, and the White Order of Thule are among the institutions most commonly identified in this way.

[edit] Anti-racism
Main article: Anti-racism

[edit] Counter-racist organizations
Further information: NAACP, Congress of Racial Equality, and Anti-Racist Action

[edit] See also

Affirmative Action
American Civil Rights Movement Timeline
Anti-Irish racism
Bigotry
Civil rights
Eugenics
Italian American internment
Japanese American internment
Jena Six
Kill Haole Day
List of race riots
List of racism-related topics
Judicial racism
Racial equality proposal
Mass racial violence in the United States
Manifest Destiny
Nationalism
Nativism
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights
Immigration
White privilege
Racism by country
White power


[edit] External links

From Imus to Industry: The Business of Stereotypes and Degrading Images -Reprint of Lisa Fager testimony on stereotyping in media


[edit] References





This article's citation style may be unclear. The references used may be clearer with a different or consistent style of citation, footnoting, or external linking.




^ AFP: US minorities don't trust each other
^ Deep Divisions, Shared Destiny - A Poll of Black, Hispanic, and Asian Americans on Race Relations
^ Brescia, William (Bill). "Chapter 2, French-Choctaw Contact, 1680s-1763". Tribal Government, A New Era. Philadelphia, Mississippi: Choctaw Heritage Press. p. 8. 
^ Walter, Williams. "Three Efforts at Development among the Choctaws of Mississippi". Southeastern Indians: Since the Removal Era. Athens, Georgia: University of Georgia Press. 
^ Hudson, Charles. "The Ante-Bellum Elite". Red, White, and Black; Symposium on Indians in the Old South. University of Georgia Press. p. 80. SBN 820303089. 
^ Castillo, Edward D. (1998). Short Overview of California Indian History", California Native American Heritage Commission.
^ "Our Daily Bleed..." (html). http://www.eskimo.com/~recall/bleed/0303.htm. Retrieved on 2008-01-28. 
^ Ward Churchill, Kill the Indian, Save the Man, 2006.
^ United States Senate, Oversight Hearing on Trust Fund Litigation, Cobell v. Kempthorne. See also, Cobell v. Norton.
^ Winona LaDuke, All Our Relations: Native Struggles for Land and Life, 1999, p. 2-3.
^ We-sa ( The Cat ). "Cherokee by Blood". http://www.cherokeebyblood.com/blackindians.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-11. 
^ Perdue, Theda. "Chapter 2 "Both White and Red"". Mixed Blood Indians: Racial Construction in the Early South. The University of Georgia Press. p. 51. ISBN 082032731X. 
^ Remini, Robert. ""The Reform Begins"". Andrew Jackson. History Book Club. p. 201. ISBN 0965063107. 
^ Miller, Eric (1994). "George Washington And Indians" (HTML). Eric Miller. http://www.dreric.org/library/northwest.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-05-02. 
^ Kappler, Charles (1904). "Indian affairs: laws and treaties Vol. IV, Treaties" (HTML). Government Printing Office. http://digital.library.okstate.edu/kappler/vol4/html_files/v4p1165.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-14. 
^ The curse of Cromwell
^ "Bacon, Nathaniel". The World Book Encyclopedia. World Book. 1992. pp. 18. ISBN 0-7166-0092-7. 
^ Alonzo L. Hamby, George Clack, and Mildred Sola Neely. Outline of US History. A publication of the US Department of State.
^ The legal and diplomatic background to the seizure of foreign vessels
^ Emancipation Proclamation (1863)
^ XIII - Slavery Abolished The Avalon Project
^ James McPherson, Drawn with the Sword, page 15
^ The Deadliest War
^ "February 26, 1939 Eleanor Roosevelt Resigns from the Daughters of the American Revolution," Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum.
^ Ronald Takaki, A Different Mirror: A History of Multicultural America (New York: Little, Brown & Co., 1993), 397.
^ a b Ronald Takaki, A Different Mirror: A History of Multicultural America (New York: Little, Brown & Co., 1993), 400-414.
^ a b Frances Fox Piven and Richard A. Cloward, Poor People’s Movements: Why They Succeed, How They Fail (New York: Vintage Books, 1979 [1977]), ch. 4.
^ JBHE Statistical Shocker of the Year
^ White Americans play major role in electing the first black president, Los Angeles Times
^ Immigration...Chinese:Exclusion
^ Text of People v. Hall decision
^ Ronald Takaki, A Different Mirror: A History of Multicultural America (New York: Little, Brown & Co., 1993), 196-98.
^ Internment of German Americans in the United States during World War II
^ Richard Griswold del Castillo, "The Los Angeles "Zoot Suit Riots" Revisited: Mexican and Latin American Perspectives," Mexican Studies/Estudios Mexicanos, Vol. 16, No. 2. (Summer, 2000), pp. 367-391.
^ Arthur C. Verge, "The Impact of the Second World War on Los Angeles," The Pacific Historical Review, Vol. 63, No. 3, Fortress California at War: San Francisco, Los Angeles, Oakland, and San Diego, 1941-1945. (Aug., 1994), pp. 306-7.
^ Timeline of Black History in the Pacific Northwest
^ Hate Crime Statistics, 2004. Hate Crime Statistics, 2005.
^ [www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/hcrvp.pdf Hate Crime Reported by Victims and Police], Bureau of Justice Statistics Special Report, November 2005, NCJ 209911.
^ The Color of Crime, 1999.
^ Preface to Minnesota's official crime data reports, quoted in Southern Poverty Law Center, Coloring Crime.
^ Tim Wise, "The Color of Deception: Race, Crime and Sloppy Social Science," 2004.
^ Southern Poverty Law Center, Coloring Crime.
^ Ronald Takaki, A Different Mirror: A History of Multicultural America (New York: Little, Brown & Co., 1993), 277-283.
^ Rosten, Leo (1968) "The Joys of Yiddish"
^ Phagan, 1987, p. 27, states that "everyone knew the identity of the lynchers" (putting the words in her father's mouth). Oney, 2003, p. 526, quotes Carl Abernathy as saying, "They'd go to a man's office and talk to him or ... see a man on the job and talk to him," and an unidentified lyncher as saying "The organization of the body was more open than mysterious."
^ a b Father Charles Edward Coughlin (1891-1971) By Richard Sanders, Editor, Press for Conversion!
^ H-ANTISEMITISM OCCASIONAL PAPERS, NO. 1M
^ Nation of Islam
^ The sniper's plan: kill six whites a day for 30 days
^ What factors lead to cross-sectional variation in anti-White hate crime on the community district level?, American Society of Criminology (ASC)
^ "Arab American Institute Still Deliberately Claiming Assyrians Are Arabs" (in English). Assyrian International News Agency. 
^ Leonard, Karen. University of California, Irvine. Western Knight Center. "American Muslims:South Asian Contributions to the Mix." 2005. July 28, 2007. [1]
^ United States
^ The Free Press - Independent News Media - War in Iraq
^ Demonization of Muslims Caused the Iraq Abuse
^ Attacks on Arab Americans (PBS)
^ Hindu Beaten Because He's Muslim, Mistaken Anti-Islam Thugs Pummel, Hogtie And Stab Deliveryman - CBS News
^ "ADL Condemns Hate Crime Against Hindu". http://www.adl.org/presrele/hatcr_51/4277_51.asp. Retrieved on 2008-07-18. 
^ Bozorgmehr, Mehdi (2001-05-02). "No solidarity: Iranians in the U.S.". The Iranian. http://www.Iranian.com/Opinion/2001/May/Iranians/index.html#3a. Retrieved on 2007-02-02. 
^ Ann Coulter 'Raghead' Comments Spark Blogger Blacklash - 02/13/2006
^ "Charlie Rose interviews Zbigniew Brzezinski, Henry Kissinger and Brent Scowcroft", International Herald Tribune
^ See detailed analysis in: The U.S. Media and the Middle East: Image and Perception. Praeger, 1997; Greenwood, 1995.
^ Media Matters - Conservatives continue to use Fox's 24 to support hawkish policies
^ Tv View; 'On Wings Of Eagles' Plods To Superficial Heights - New York Times
^ Escape from Iran: The Canadian Caper (1981) (TV)
^ Iranian.com | Archive Pages
^ Quoted in Noam Chomsky, Year 501: The Conquest Continues, (Boston: South End Press, 1993), 22.
^ a b Quoted in Noam Chomsky, Year 501: The Conquest Continues, (Boston: South End Press, 1993), 24.
^ MERIP Interventions: Behind the Battles Over US Middle East Studies, by Zachary Lockman
^ Racism in Reporting, Jingoism as Foreign Policy (by Kristen Schurr) - Media Monitors Network
^ [2]
^ Gabriel J. Chin, The Civil Rights Revolution Comes to Immigration Law: A New Look at the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, 75 North Carolina Law Review 273 (1996)
^ Mary L. Dudziak, "Desegregation as a Cold War Imperative," 41 Stanford Law Review 61 (1988)
^ For example, Catherine A. Hansman, Leon Spencer, Dale Grant, Mary Jackson, "Beyond Diversity: Dismantling Barriers in Education," Journal of Instructional Psychology, March 1999
^ Andrew Blankstein And Joel Rubin. L.A.’s top cops at odds: William Bratton, Lee Baca disagree on role of race in gang violence. [[Los Angeles Times]], June 13, 2008.
^ Race relations | Where black and brown collide | Economist.com
^ Riot Breaks Out At Calif. High School, Melee Involving 500 People Erupts At Southern California School
^ California Prisons on Alert After Weekend Violence : NPR
^ A bloody conflict between Hispanic and black gangs is spreading across Los Angeles
^ The Hutchinson Report: Thanks to Latino Gangs, There’s a Zone in L.A. Where Blacks Risk Death if They Enter
^ JURIST - Paper Chase: Race riot put down at California state prison
^ Racial segregation continues in California prisons
^ Late-night snack soured by racially motivated violence
^ African immigrants face bias from blacks
^ Racism not always black and white
^ a b c Felicia R. Lee, "Protesting Demeaning Images in Media" "New York Times" November 5, 2007 http://www.nytimes.com/2007/11/05/arts/05enou.html
^ Marissa Newhall, "Channeling Their Discontent, 500 Gather at Executive's D.C. Home to Protest Stereotypes," Washington Post, September 16, 2007
^ Enough is Enough! website: http://www.enoughisenoughcampaign.com/
^ What About Our Daughters?
^ The Rise and Decline of the American Ghetto David M. Cutler, Edward L. Glaeser, Jacob L. Vigdor The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 107, No. 3 (Jun., 1999), pp. 455-506
^ Racial Discrimination and Redlining in Cities
^ See: Race and health
^ In poor health: Supermarket redlining and urban nutrition, Elizabeth Eisenhauer, GeoJournal Volume 53, Number 2 / February, 2001
^ How East New York Became a Ghetto by Walter Thabit. ISBN 0814782671. Page 42.
^ Comeback Cities: A Blueprint for Urban Neighborhood Revival By Paul S. Grogan, Tony Proscio. ISBN 0813339529. Published 2002. Page 114.

The goal was not to relax lending restrictions but rather to get banks to apply the same criteria in the inner-city as in the suburbs.


^ Inequality and Segregation R Sethi, R Somanathan - Journal of Political Economy, 2004
^ SEGREGATION AND STRATIFICATION: A Biosocial Perspective Douglas S. Massey Du Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race (2004), 1: 7-25 Cambridge University Press
^ Inequality and Segregation Rajiv Sethi and Rohini Somanathan Journal of Political Economy, volume 112 (2004), pages 1296–1321
^ ..
^ Hart KD, Kunitz SJ, Sell RR, Mukamel DB (March 1998). "Metropolitan governance, residential segregation, and mortality among African Americans". Am J Public Health 88 (3): 434–8. doi:10.2105/AJPH.88.3.434. PMID 9518976. PMC: 1508338. http://www.ajph.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=9518976. 
^ Jackson SA, Anderson RT, Johnson NJ, Sorlie PD (April 2000). "The relation of residential segregation to all-cause mortality: a study in black and white". Am J Public Health 90 (4): 615–7. doi:10.2105/AJPH.90.4.615. PMID 10754978. PMC: 1446199. http://www.ajph.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=10754978. 
^ THE CONCEPT OF NEIGHBORHOOD IN HEALTH AND MORTALITY RESEARCH
^ Cooper RS, Kennelly JF, Durazo-Arvizu R, Oh HJ, Kaplan G, Lynch J (2001). "Relationship between premature mortality and socioeconomic factors in black and white populations of US metropolitan areas". Public Health Rep 116 (5): 464–73. PMID 12042610. 
^ What is Institutional and Structural Racism? ERASE RACISM
^ Bullock III, C. S. & Rodgers Jr., H. R. (1976) "Institutional Racism: Prerequisites, Freezing, and Mapping". Phylon 37 (3), 212-223.
^ Roman Catholics and Immigration in Nineteenth-Century America by Julie Byrne, Dept. of Religion, Duke University, National Humanities Center
^ Chinese Exclusion Act (1882)
^ Immigration Act of 1924 HistoricalDocuments.com
^ Thomas M. Shapiro, The Hidden Cost of Being African American: How Wealth Perpetuates Inequality, 2004.
^ Quoted in AP, "Census report: Broad racial disparities persist," Nov 14, 2006.
^ George Lipsitz, "The Possessive Investment in Whiteness: Racialized Social Democracy and the "White" Problem in American Studies," American Quarterly, Vol. 47, No. 3. (Sep., 1995), pp. 369-387.
^ Williams DR (1999). "Race, socioeconomic status, and health. The added effects of racism and discrimination". Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 896: 173–88. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.1999.tb08114.x. PMID 10681897. 
^ The Schedule of Racist Events: A Measure of Racial Discrimination and a Study of Its Negative Physical and Mental Health Consequences Journal of Black Psychology, Vol. 22, No. 2, 144-168 (1996)
^ Kwate NO, Valdimarsdottir HB, Guevarra JS, Bovbjerg DH (June 2003). "Experiences of racist events are associated with negative health consequences for African American women". J Natl Med Assoc 95 (6): 450–60. PMID 12856911. 
^ Blascovich J, Spencer SJ, Quinn D, Steele C (May 2001). "African Americans and high blood pressure: the role of stereotype threat". Psychol Sci 12 (3): 225–9. doi:10.1111/1467-9280.00340. PMID 11437305. 
^ Kennedy BP, Kawachi I, Lochner K, Jones C, Prothrow-Stith D (1997). "(Dis)respect and black mortality". Ethn Dis 7 (3): 207–14. PMID 9467703. 
^ Woolf SH, Johnson RE, Fryer GE, Rust G, Satcher D (December 2004). "The health impact of resolving racial disparities: an analysis of US mortality data". Am J Public Health 94 (12): 2078–81. doi:10.2105/AJPH.94.12.2078. PMID 15569956. PMC: 1448594. http://www.ajph.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=15569956. 
^ "The History of Black 'Paranoia',” ch. 3 of Alexander Cockburn and Jeffrey St. Clair, Whiteout: The CIA, Drugs, and the Press, London: Verso, 1998.
^ Bhopal R (June 1998). "Spectre of racism in health and health care: lessons from history and the United States". BMJ 316 (7149): 1970–3. PMID 9641943. PMC: 1113412. http://bmj.com/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=9641943. 
^ Oberman A, Cutter G (September 1984). "Issues in the natural history and treatment of coronary heart disease in black populations: surgical treatment". Am. Heart J. 108 (3 Pt 2): 688–94. doi:10.1016/0002-8703(84)90656-2. PMID 6332513. 
^ Kjellstrand CM (June 1988). "Age, sex, and race inequality in renal transplantation". Arch. Intern. Med. 148 (6): 1305–9. doi:10.1001/archinte.148.6.1305. PMID 3288159. 
^ Mayer WJ, McWhorter WP (June 1989). "Black/white differences in non-treatment of bladder cancer patients and implications for survival". Am J Public Health 79 (6): 772–5. doi:10.2105/AJPH.79.6.772. PMID 2729474. PMC: 1349641. http://www.ajph.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=2729474. 
^ Yergan J, Flood AB, LoGerfo JP, Diehr P (July 1987). "Relationship between patient race and the intensity of hospital services". Med Care 25 (7): 592–603. doi:10.1097/00005650-198707000-00003. PMID 3695664. 
^ , (May 1990). "Black-white disparities in health care". JAMA 263 (17): 2344–6. doi:10.1001/jama.263.17.2344. PMID 2182918. 
^ Cultural whiplash: the unforeseen consequences of America's crusade against racial discrimmination / Patrick Garry (2006) ISBN 1581825692
^ Myths and Fact about Affirmative Action









v • d • e

Life in the United States








Affluence · Culture · Crime · Education (attainment) · Health care · Health insurance · Holidays · Household income · Homelessness · Homeownership · Human rights · Income inequality · Labor unions · Languages · Middle class · Passenger vehicle transport · Personal income · Political ideologies · Poverty · Racism · Religion · Social class · Social issues · Sports · Standard of living · Wealth















v • d • e

Demographics of the United States





Demographic history





Economic and social



Affluence · Educational attainment · Homeownership · Household income · Immigration · Income inequality · Language · Middle classes · Personal income · Poverty · Social class · Unemployment by state · Wealth









Religion



Prominent examples: Buddhist Americans · Christian Americans (Catholic Americans, Mormon Americans, Protestant Americans, plus others) · Hindu Americans · Jewish Americans · Muslim Americans · Neopagan Americans · Non-religious Americans · Sikh Americans








Race,
ethnicity,
and ancestry



Ethnic groups in the United States · American people by ethnic or national origin · History of the United States by ethnic group · American culture by ethnicity · Race and ethnicity in the United States Census · Ethnic groups in the United States · Maps of American ancestries · 2000 Census · Race/ethnicity by EEOC · Racism

Major examples: Arab and Middle Eastern Americans · Black Americans (African Americans, African immigrants, Afro-Caribbeans, etc) · Asian Americans (Chinese Americans, Filipino Americans, Indian Americans, Japanese Americans, Pacific Islander Americans, etc.)  · European Americans ("White Americans") · Hispanic and Latino Americans (Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans in the United States, Cuban Americans, etc.) · Jewish Americans (by ethnic origin) · Multiracial Americans · Native Americans (Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, etc.)














v • d • e

United States topics





History





Timeline


Pre-Columbian · Colonial era (Thirteen Colonies) · Declaration of Independence · American Revolution (War) · Territorial changes · American Civil War · Reconstruction era · African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954) · World War I · Great Depression · World War II (Home front) · Cold War · Korean War · African-American Civil Rights Movement (1955–1968) · Feminist Movement · Vietnam War  · Post-Cold War (1991-present) · War on Terrorism (War in Afghanistan · Iraq War)







Topics


Demographic · Economic · Military · Postal · Technological and industrial · Inventions · Discoveries









Federal
government








   


Law
Constitution
Bill of Rights
Civil liberties
Federalism
Separation of powers
Law enforcement
Department of Justice
Federal Bureau of Investigation




Legislature - Congress
House of Representatives
Senate
Vice President
Executive - President
Executive Office
Cabinet / executive departments
Independent agencies
Policies




Judiciary - Supreme Court
Federal courts
Courts of appeal
District courts
Intelligence
Intelligence Community
Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
National Security Agency




Armed Forces
Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard














Politics

State governments  · Local governments  · Elections (Electoral College) · Divisions · Ideologies · Parties (Democratic Party · Republican Party · Third parties) · Scandals · Political status of Puerto Rico · Red states and blue states · Uncle Sam






Geography

Cities, towns, and villages · Counties · Extreme points · Islands · Mountains (Peaks · Appalachian · Rocky) · National Park System · Regions (New England · Mid-Atlantic · Southern · Midwestern · Great Plains · Northwestern · Southwestern · Pacific · Western) · Rivers (Mississippi · Missouri · Colorado) · States · Territory · Water supply and sanitation






Economy

Banking · Communications · Companies · Federal Reserve System · Insurance · Standard of living (Personal income · Household income · Homeownership · Income inequality) · Tourism · Transportation (Airports · Numbered Highways · Interstate Highway System · Passenger vehicles · Railroads · Trucking industry) · Dollar · Wall Street  · Public debt






Society

Adolescent sexuality · Crime · Demographics · Education · Health care · Health insurance · Incarceration · Languages (American English · Spanish) · Media · People · Public holidays · Religion · Social class (Affluence · American Dream · Middle class · Educational attainment · Poverty · Professional and working class conflict) · Sports






Culture

Literature (Beat Generation · Folklore · Harlem Renaissance · Poetry · Transcendentalism) · Architecture · Cuisine · Dance · Fashion · Flag · Music (Classical · Folk · Popular · Country · Blues · Jazz · Rock and roll) · Radio · Television / Cinema (Hollywood) · Visual arts (Abstract expressionism)






Issues

Abortion · Affirmative action · Exceptionalism · Anti-Americanism · Capital punishment · Drug policy / Prohibition · Energy policy · Environmental movement · Gun politics · Health care reform · Human rights · Immigration (Mexico barrier · Third Border Initiative) · Obesity · Racism · Same-sex marriage






Portal












v • d • e

Racism





History of racism

Apartheid · The Holocaust · Racism in the United States · Anti-racism · Civil rights movement







Racist ideologies

White supremacy · Black supremacy · Social Darwinism · Nazism · Aryanism · Ketuanan Melayu






Acts of racism

Institutional racism · State racism · Racial profiling · Racism by country · Hate speech · Racial segregation · Stereotype · Scientific racism · Slavery · Crime of apartheid






Racial violence

Ethnic cleansing · Hate crime · Race war · Genocide · Lynching






Racism against groups

Native Americans · Arabs · Armenians · Blacks · Chinese · Hispanics · Irish · Italians · Japanese · Jews · Mexicans · Poles · Roma people · Russians · South Asians · East Asians · Whites






Racist groups

Ku Klux Klan · Neo-Nazis · Grey Wolves · South African National Party · Nation of Islam · New Black Panthers ·






Anti-racist groups
and movements

NAACP · Anti-Defamation League · Anti-Fascist Action · Civil Rights Movement · Fighting Discrimination (Human Rights First) · Southern Poverty Law Center · Searchlight









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Racism_in_the_United_States"
Categories: Racism in the United StatesHidden categories: All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing factual verification since May 2007 | All pages needing factual verification | All articles that may contain original research | Articles that may contain original research since May 2007 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles to be expanded since October 2007 | All articles to be expanded | Wikipedia references cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Español
日本語
Русский









 This page was last modified on 18 April 2009, at 02:51 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
