













SETI - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "SETI";
		var wgTitle = "SETI";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "28153";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282107463;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); SETI

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the search for extra-terrestrial intelligence.  For other uses, see Seti.




Screen shot of SETI@home (Enhanced 5.27) BOINC software for internet-connected computers in the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence


Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence (SETI) is the collective name for a number of activities to detect intelligent extraterrestrial life. The general approach of SETI projects is to survey the sky to detect the existence of transmissions from a civilization on a distant planet – an approach widely endorsed by the scientific community as hard science (see, e.g., claims in Skeptical Inquirer [1]). The United States Government contributed to SETI early on, but recent work has been primarily funded by private sources.
There are great challenges in searching across the sky for a first transmission that could be characterized as intelligent, since its direction, spectrum and method of communication are all unknown beforehand. SETI projects necessarily make assumptions to narrow the search, and thus no exhaustive search has so far been conducted.




Contents


1 SETI's experiments with radios

1.1 Early work, the "Wow!" signal, and SERENDIP
1.2 Sentinel, META, and BETA
1.3 MOP and Project Phoenix
1.4 The SETI League and Project Argus
1.5 SETI@home
1.6 Allen Telescope Array
1.7 SETI Net
1.8 Interstellar Message Realized and Paper Projects


2 Optical SETI experiments
3 Probe SETI and SETA experiments
4 Where are they?
5 Public information
6 Criticism

6.1 Is "active" SETI dangerous?


7 See also
8 References and notes
9 Further reading
10 External links

10.1 Organizations
10.2 Academic journals, reports and publications
10.3 Videos
10.4 Articles and FAQs
10.5 News







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] SETI's experiments with radios

[edit] Early work, the "Wow!" signal, and SERENDIP
In 1960, Cornell University astronomer Frank Drake performed the first modern SETI experiment, named "Project Ozma", after the Queen of Oz in L. Frank Baum's fantasy books. Drake used a 26-meter-diameter radio telescope at Green Bank, West Virginia, to examine the stars Tau Ceti and Epsilon Eridani near the 1.420 gigahertz marker frequency. A 400 kilohertz band was scanned around the marker frequency, using a single-channel receiver with a bandwidth of 100 hertz. The information was stored on tape for off-line analysis. He found nothing of great interest.
The first SETI conference took place at Green Bank in 1961. The Soviets took a strong interest in SETI during the 1960s and performed a number of searches with omnidirectional antennas in the hope of picking up powerful radio signals. American astronomer (and occasional TV host) Carl Sagan and Soviet astronomer Iosif Shklovskii together wrote the pioneering book in the field, Intelligent Life in the Universe which was published in 1966.[2]
The first 360 feet (110 m) wide, 500 feet (150 m) long, and 70 feet (21 m) high Kraus-style radio telescope was powered up in 1963. In the March 1955 issue of Scientific American, Dr. John Kraus, Professor Emeritus and McDougal Professor of Electrical Engineering and Astronomy at the Ohio State University, described a concept to scan the cosmos for natural radio signals using a flat-plane radio telescope equipped with a parabolic reflector. Within two years, his concept was approved for construction by the Ohio State University. With $71,000 total in grants from the National Science Foundation, construction began on a 20-acre plot in Delaware, Ohio. This Ohio State University radio telescope was called Big Ear. Later, it began the world's first continuous SETI program, called the Ohio State University SETI program.
In 1971, NASA funded a SETI study that involved Drake, Bernard Oliver of Hewlett-Packard Corporation, and others. The resulting report proposed the construction of an Earth-based radio telescope array with 1,500 dishes known as "Project Cyclops". The price tag for the Cyclops array was $10 billion USD. Cyclops was not built, but the report[3] formed the basis of much SETI work that followed.
In 1974, a largely symbolic attempt was made at the Arecibo Observatory to send a message to other worlds. It was sent towards the globular star cluster M13, which is 25,000 light years from Earth.




The WOW! Signal


The OSU SETI program gained fame on August 15, 1977 when Dr. Jerry R. Ehman, a project volunteer, witnessed a startlingly strong signal received by the telescope. He quickly circled the indication on a printout and scribbled the phrase “Wow!” in the margin. This signal, dubbed the Wow! signal, is considered by some[who?] to be the most likely candidate from an artificial, extraterrestrial source ever discovered, but it has not been detected again in several additional searches.
In 1979 the University of California, Berkeley launched a SETI project named "Search for Extraterrestrial Radio Emissions from Nearby Developed Intelligent Populations (SERENDIP)".[4] In 1986, UC Berkeley initiated their second SETI effort, SERENDIP II, and has continued with two more SERENDIP efforts to the present day.

[edit] Sentinel, META, and BETA
In 1980, Carl Sagan, Bruce Murray, and Louis Friedman founded the U.S. Planetary Society, partly as a vehicle for SETI studies.
In the early 1980s, Harvard University physicist Paul Horowitz took the next step and proposed the design of a spectrum analyzer specifically intended to search for SETI transmissions. Traditional desktop spectrum analyzers were of little use for this job, as they sampled frequencies using banks of analog filters and so were restricted in the number of channels they could acquire. However, modern integrated-circuit digital signal processing (DSP) technology could be used to build autocorrelation receivers to check far more channels. This work led in 1981 to a portable spectrum analyzer named "Suitcase SETI" that had a capacity of 131,000 narrow band channels. After field tests that lasted into 1982, Suitcase SETI was put into use in 1983 with the 26-meter Harvard/Smithsonian radio telescope at Harvard, Massachusetts. This project was named "Sentinel", and continued into 1985.
Even 131,000 channels weren't enough to search the sky in detail at a fast rate, so Suitcase SETI was followed in 1985 by Project "META", for "Megachannel Extra-Terrestrial Assay". The META spectrum analyzer had a capacity of 8.4 million channels and a channel resolution of 0.05 hertz. An important feature of META was its use of frequency doppler shift to distinguish between signals of terrestrial and extraterrestrial origin. The project was led by Horowitz with the help of the Planetary Society, and was partly funded by movie maker Steven Spielberg. A second such effort, META II, was begun in Argentina in 1990 to search the southern sky. META II is still in operation, after an equipment upgrade in 1996.
The follow-on to META was named "BETA", for "Billion-channel ExtraTerrestrial Assay", and it commenced observation on October 30, 1995. The heart of BETA's processing capability consisted of 63 dedicated fast Fourier transform (FFT) engines, each capable of performing a 222-point complex FFTs in two seconds, and 21 general-purpose personal computers equipped with custom digital signal processing boards. This allowed BETA to receive 250 million simultaneous channels with a resolution of 0.5 hertz per channel. It scanned through the microwave spectrum from 1.400 to 1.720 gigahertz in eight hops, with two seconds of observation per hop. An important capability of the BETA search was rapid and automatic re-observation of candidate signals, achieved by observing the sky with two adjacent beams, one slightly to the east and the other slightly to the west. A successful candidate signal would first transit the east beam, and then the west beam and do so with a speed consistent with Earth's sidereal rotation rate. A third receiver observed the horizon to veto signals of obvious terrestrial origin. On March 23, 1999 the 26-meter radio telescope on which Sentinel, META and BETA were based was blown over by strong winds and seriously damaged. This forced the BETA project to cease operation.

[edit] MOP and Project Phoenix




Sensitivity vs range for SETI radio searches. The diagonal lnes show transmitters of different effective powers. The X axis is the sensitivity of the search. The Y axis on the right is the range in light years, and on the left is the number of sun-like stars within this range. The vertical line labeled SS is the typical sensitivity achieved by a full sky search, such as BETA above. The vertical line labeled TS is the typical sensitivity achieved by a targeted search such as Phoenix. Source, NASA technical report CP-2156, 1979.


In 1992, the U.S. government funded an operational SETI program, in the form of the NASA "Microwave Observing Program (MOP)". MOP was planned as a long-term effort, performing a "Targeted Search" of 800 specific nearby stars, along with a general "Sky Survey" to scan the sky. MOP was to be performed by radio dishes associated with the NASA Deep Space Network, as well as a 43-meter dish at Green Bank and the big Arecibo dish. The signals were to be analyzed by spectrum analyzers, each with a capacity of 15 million channels. These spectrum analyzers could be ganged to obtain greater capacity. Those used in the Targeted Search had a bandwidth of 1 hertz per channel, while those used in the Sky Survey had a bandwidth of 30 hertz per channel.
MOP drew the attention of the U.S. Congress, where the program was strongly ridiculed, and was canceled a year after its start. SETI advocates did not give up, and in 1995 the nonprofit SETI Institute of Mountain View, California, resurrected the work under the name of Project "Phoenix", backed by private sources of funding. Project Phoenix, under the direction of Dr. Jill Tarter, previously Project Scientist for the NASA project, is a continuation of the Targeted Search program, studying roughly 1,000 nearby Sun-like stars. Seth Shostak also worked on Project Phoenix. From 1995 through March 2004, Phoenix conducted observing campaigns at the 64-meter Parkes radio telescope in Australia, the 140-foot (43 m) Telescope of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in West Virginia, USA, and the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico. The project observed the equivalent of 800 stars over the available channels in the frequency range from 1200 to 3000 MHz. The search was sensitive enough to pick up transmitters with 1 GW EIRP to a distance of about 200 light years. (A typical airport radar has this much peak power, but is only on about 1/1000 of the time, and would not have been detected in this survey.)

[edit] The SETI League and Project Argus
Founded in 1994 in response to the US Congress cancellation of the NASA SETI program, The SETI League, Inc. is a membership-supported nonprofit organization with 1500 members in 62 countries on all seven continents. This grass-roots alliance of amateur and professional radio astronomers is headed by executive director emeritus Prof. H. Paul Shuch, the engineer credited with developing the world's first commercial home satellite TV receiver. Many SETI League members are licensed radio amateurs and microwave experimenters. Others are digital signal processing experts and computer enthusiasts.
The SETI League pioneered the conversion of 3 to 5 metre diameter backyard satellite TV dishes into research-grade radio telescopes of modest sensitivity. [5] The organization concentrates on coordinating a global network of small, amateur-built radio telescopes under Project Argus, an all-sky survey seeking to achieve real-time coverage of the entire sky. Project Argus was conceived as a continuation of the all-sky survey component of the late NASA SETI program (the targeted search having been continued by the SETI Insititute's Project Phoenix). There are currently 143 Project Argus radio telescopes operating in 27 countries. Project Argus instruments typically exhibit sensitivity on the order of 10–23 Watts/square metre, or roughly equivalent to that achieved by the Ohio State University Big Ear radio telescope in 1977, when it detected the landmark "Wow!" candidate signal.
The name "Argus" derives from the mythical Greek guard-beast who had 100 eyes, and could see in all directions at once. In the SETI context, the name has been used for radio telescopes in fiction (Arthur C. Clarke, "Imperial Earth"; Carl Sagan, "Contact"), was the name initially used for the NASA study ultimately known as "Cyclops," and is the name given to an omnidirectional radio telescope design being developed at the Ohio State University.

[edit] SETI@home
Main article: SETI@home




SETI@home logo


SETI@home is an extremely popular volunteer computing project that was launched by U.C. Berkeley in May 1999. It was funded originally by The Planetary Society and Paramount pictures and later by the State of California. The project is run by director David P. Anderson and chief scientist Dan Werthimer. Any individual can become involved with SETI research by downloading and running the SETI@home software package, which then runs signal analysis on a "work unit" of data recorded from the central 2.5 MHz wide band of the SERENDIP IV instrument. The results are then automatically reported back to UC Berkeley. Over 5 million computer users in more than 200 countries have signed up for SETI@home and have collectively contributed over 19 billion hours of computer processing time.[6][7] As of January 29, 2008 the Seti@home achieves an average throughput of 387 TeraFLOPS, making it equivalent to the second fastest supercomputer on Earth.[8] Radio source SHGb02+14a is the most interesting signal analyzed to date.

[edit] Allen Telescope Array
Main article: Allen Telescope Array
The SETI Institute is now collaborating with the Radio Astronomy Laboratory at UC Berkeley to develop a specialized radio telescope array for SETI studies, something like a mini-Cyclops array. The new array concept is named the "Allen Telescope Array" (ATA) (formerly, One Hectare Telescope [1HT]) after the project's benefactor Paul Allen. Its sensitivity will be equivalent to a single large dish more than 100 meters in diameter. The array is being constructed at the Hat Creek Observatory in rural northern California.[9]
The full array is planned to consist of 350 or more Gregorian radio dishes, each 6.1 meters (20 ft) in diameter. These dishes are the largest producible with commercially available satellite television dish technology. The ATA was planned for a 2007 completion date, at a very modest cost of $25 million USD. The SETI Institute provides money for building the ATA while UC Berkeley designs the telescope and provides operational funding. Berkeley astronomers will use the ATA to pursue other deep space radio observations. The ATA is intended to support a large number of simultaneous observations through a technique known as "multibeaming", in which DSP technology is used to sort out signals from the multiple dishes. The DSP system planned for the ATA is extremely ambitious.
The first portion of the array became operational in October 2007 with 42 antennas. Completion of the full 350 element array will depend on funding and the technical results from the 42-element sub-array.
CNET publishes an article and pictures about the Allen Telescope Array (ATA) on December 12, 2008.[10][11]

[edit] SETI Net
SETI Net is a private search system created by a single individual. It is closely affiliated with the SETI League and is one of the project Argus stations (DM12jw).
The SETI Net station consists of off-the-shelf, consumer-grade electronics to minimize cost and to allow this design to be replicated as simply as possible. It has a 3-meter parabolic antenna that can be directed in azimuth and elevation, an LNA that covers the 1420 MHz spectrum, a receiver to reproduce the wideband audio, and a standard PC computer as the control device and for deploying the detection algorithms.
The antenna can be pointed and locked to one sky location, enabeling the system to integrate on it for long periods. Currently the Wow! signal area is being monitored when it is above the horizon, but all search data is collected and made available on the internet archive.
SETI Net started operation in the early 1980s as a way to learn about the science of the search, and has developed several software packages for the amateur SETI community. It has provided an astronomical clock, a file manager to keep track of SETI data files, a spectrum analyzer optimized for amateur SETI, remote control of the station from the internet, and other packages.

[edit] Interstellar Message Realized and Paper Projects
First Interstellar Radio Message (IRM), "Arecibo Message", was transmitted in Nov, 1974 from Arecibo Radar Telescope. IRMs Cosmic Call, Teen Age Message, and Cosmic Call 2 were transmitted in 1999, 2001, and 2003 from Eupatoria Planetary Radar, more info in Communication with Extraterrestrial Intelligence and Active SETI.
Directed by Douglas Vakoch at SETI in Mountain View, the Interstellar Message Composition Project is charged with sending messages to extraterrestrials that convey basic scientific or mathematical principles, as well as human altruism. Vackoch's idea is to send a message of reciprocal altruism because hopefully any extraterrestrials would reciprocate with a reply back.
Vakoch has founded "Encoding Altruism", a workshop that started in 2003 in Paris that brings together anthropologists, philosophers, physicists, astronomers, theologians, musicians, and artists to address the challenge of communicating with extraterrestrials in a language and syntax that would be intelligible to an alien civilization.
Vakoch's most recent research is highlighted through Greater Good Science Center, University of California, Berkeley.

[edit] Optical SETI experiments
While most SETI sky searches have studied the radio spectrum, some SETI researchers have considered the possibility that alien civilizations might be using powerful lasers for interstellar communications at optical wavelengths. The idea was first suggested in a paper published in the British journal Nature in 1961, and in 1983 Charles Townes, one of the inventors of the laser, published a detailed study of the idea in the US journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Most SETI researchers agreed with the idea. The 1971 Cyclops study discounted the possibility of optical SETI, reasoning that construction of a laser system that could outshine the bright central sun of a remote star system would be too difficult. Now some SETI advocates, such as Frank Drake, have suggested that such a judgment was too conservative. Early 21st century humans have no means of knowing how a superior technology is communicating or would communicate. Negative results may simply mean humans are making the wrong searches.
There are two problems with optical SETI. The first problem is that lasers are highly "monochromatic", that is, they emit light only on one frequency, making it troublesome to figure out what frequency to look for. However, according to the uncertainty principle, emitting light in narrow pulses results in a broad spectrum of emission; the spread in frequency becomes higher as the pulse width becomes narrower, making it easier to detect an emission.
The other problem is that while radio transmissions can be broadcast in all directions, lasers are highly directional. This means that a laser beam could be easily blocked by clouds of interstellar dust, and Earth would have to cross its direct line of fire by chance to receive it.
Optical SETI supporters have conducted paper studies[12] of the effectiveness of using contemporary high-energy lasers and a ten-meter focus mirror as an interstellar beacon. The analysis shows that an infrared pulse from a laser, focused into a narrow beam by such a mirror, would appear thousands of times brighter than the Sun to a distant civilization in the beam's line of fire. The Cyclops study proved incorrect in suggesting a laser beam would be inherently hard to see.
Such a system could be made to automatically steer itself through a target list, sending a pulse to each target at a constant rate. This would allow targeting of all Sun-like stars within a distance of 100 light-years. The studies have also described an automatic laser pulse detector system with a low-cost, two-meter mirror made of carbon composite materials, focusing on an array of light detectors. This automatic detector system could perform sky surveys to detect laser flashes from civilizations attempting contact.
In the 1980s, two Soviet researchers conducted a short optical SETI search, but turned up nothing. During much of the 1990s, the optical SETI cause was kept alive through searches by Stuart Kingsley, a dedicated British amateur living in the US state of Ohio.
Several optical SETI experiments are now in progress. A Harvard-Smithsonian group that includes Paul Horowitz designed a laser detector and mounted it on Harvard's 155 centimeter (61 inch) optical telescope. This telescope is currently being used for a more conventional star survey, and the optical SETI survey is "piggybacking" on that effort. Between October 1998 and November 1999, the survey inspected about 2,500 stars. Nothing that resembled an intentional laser signal was detected, but efforts continue. The Harvard-Smithsonian group is now working with Princeton University to mount a similar detector system on Princeton's 91-centimeter (36-inch) telescope. The Harvard and Princeton telescopes will be "ganged" to track the same targets at the same time, with the intent being to detect the same signal in both locations as a means of reducing errors from detector noise.
The Harvard-Smithsonian group is now building a dedicated all-sky optical survey system along the lines of that described above, featuring a 1.8-meter (72-inch) telescope. The new optical SETI survey telescope is being set up at the Oak Ridge Observatory in Harvard, Massachusetts.
The University of California, Berkeley, home of SERENDIP and SETI@home, is also conducting optical SETI searches. One is being directed by Geoffrey Marcy, an extrasolar planet hunter, and involves examination of records of spectra taken during extrasolar planet hunts for a continuous, rather than pulsed, laser signal. The other Berkeley optical SETI effort is more like that being pursued by the Harvard-Smithsonian group and is being directed by Dan Werthimer of Berkeley, who built the laser detector for the Harvard-Smithsonian group. The Berkeley survey uses a 76-centimeter (30-inch) automated telescope and an older laser detector built by Werthimer.

[edit] Probe SETI and SETA experiments
The possibility of using interstellar messenger probes in the search for extraterrestrial intelligence was first suggested by Ronald N. Bracewell in 1960 (see Bracewell probe), and the technical feasibility of this approach was demonstrated by the British Interplanetary Society's starship study Project Daedalus in 1978. Starting in 1979, Robert Freitas advanced arguments [13] [14] [15] for the proposition that physical space-probes are a superior mode of interstellar communication to radio signals. See Voyager Golden Record.
In recognition that any sufficiently advanced interstellar probe in the vicinity of Earth could easily monitor our terrestrial Internet, Invitation to ETI was established by Prof. Allen Tough in June, 1996, as a Web-based SETI experiment inviting such spacefaring probes to establish contact with humanity. The project's 100 Signatories includes prominent physical, biological, and social scientists, as well as artists, educators, entertainers, philosophers and futurists. Prof. H. Paul Shuch, executive director emeritus of The SETI League, serves as the project's Principal Investigator.
In a September 2004 paper featured on the cover of Nature [16], Christopher Rose and Gregory Wright showed that inscribing a message in matter and transporting it to the destination is vastly more energy efficient than communication using electromagnetic waves if the message can tolerate delivery delay beyond light transit time [17] [18] [19]. Thus, a solarcentric Search for Extraterrestrial Artifacts (SETA) [20] would seem to be favored over the more traditional radio or optical searches.
Much like the "preferred frequency" concept in SETI radio beacon theory, the Earth-Moon or Sun-Earth libration orbits [21] might therefore constitute the most universally convenient parking places for automated extraterrestrial spacecraft exploring arbitrary stellar systems. A viable long-term SETI program may be founded upon a search for these objects.
In 1979, Freitas and Valdes conducted a photographic search of the vicinity of the Earth-Moon triangular libration points L4 and L5, and of the solar-synchronized positions in the associated halo orbits, seeking possible orbiting extraterrestrial interstellar probes, but found nothing to a detection limit of about 14th magnitude.[21] The authors conducted a second, more comprehensive photographic search for probes in 1982 [22] that examined the five Earth-Moon Lagrangian positions and included the solar-synchronized positions in the stable L4/L5 libration orbits, the potentially stable nonplanar orbits near L1/L2, Earth-Moon L3, and also L2 in the Sun-Earth system. Again no extraterrestrial probes were found to limiting magnitudes of 17-19th magnitude near L3/L4/L5, 10-18th magnitude for L1/L2, and 14-16th magnitude for Sun-Earth L2.
In June 1983, Valdes and Freitas [23] used the 26 m radiotelescope at Hat Creek Radio Observatory to search for the tritium hyperfine line at 1516 MHz from 108 assorted astronomical objects, with emphasis on 53 nearby stars including all visible stars within a 20 light-year radius. The tritium frequency was deemed highly attractive for SETI work because (1) the isotope is cosmically rare, (2) the tritium hyperfine line is centered in the SETI waterhole region of the terrestrial microwave window, and (3) in addition to beacon signals, tritium hyperfine emission may occur as a byproduct of extensive nuclear fusion energy production by extraterrestrial civilizations. The wideband- and narrowband-channel observations achieved sensitivities of 5-14 x 10-21 W/m²/channel and 0.7-2 x 10-24 W/m²/channel, respectively, but no detections were made.

[edit] Where are they?
Main article: Fermi paradox
Italian physicist Enrico Fermi suggested in the 1950s that if technologically advanced civilizations are common in the universe, then they should be detectable in one way or another. (According to those who were there,[24] Fermi either asked "Where are they?" or "Where is everybody?")
The Fermi paradox can be stated more completely as follows:

The size and age of the universe incline us to believe that many technologically advanced civilizations must exist. However, this belief seems logically inconsistent with our lack of observational evidence to support it. Either (1) the initial assumption is incorrect and technologically advanced intelligent life is much rarer than we believe, or (2) our current observations are incomplete and we simply have not detected them yet, or (3) our search methodologies are flawed and we are not searching for the correct indicators.

Possible explanations for the paradox suggest, for example, that while simple life may well be abundant in the universe, intelligent life may be exceedingly rare. In 2000, Peter Ward, professor of Biology and of Earth and Space Sciences at the University of Washington authored a book claiming the Rare Earth hypothesis. In short, the theory claims that the emergence of complex multicellular life (metazoa) on Earth required an extremely unlikely combination of astrophysical and geological events and circumstances. This hypothesis contradicts the principle of mediocrity, which SETI takes as an assumption.
Another suggestion, made by astrophysicist Ray Norris in 2000[25] (and subsequently by Allen Tough[26]) was that gamma-ray burst events are sufficiently frequent to sterilize vast swaths of galactic real-estate. This idea was subsequently popularized by physicist Arnon Dar, and described in the show Death Star on PBS Nova.[27]
Science writer Timothy Ferris has posited that since galactic societies are most likely only transitory, an obvious solution is an interstellar communications network, or a type of library consisting mostly of automated systems. They would store the cumulative knowledge of vanished civilizations and communicate that knowledge through the galaxy. Ferris calls this the "Interstellar Internet", with the various automated systems acting as network "servers". If such an Interstellar Internet exists, the hypothesis states, communications between servers are mostly through narrow-band, highly directional radio or laser links. Intercepting such signals is, as discussed earlier, very difficult. However, the network could maintain some broadcast nodes in hopes of making contact with new civilizations. Although somewhat dated in terms of "information culture" arguments, not to mention the obvious technological problems of a system that could work effectively for billions of years and requires multiple lifeforms agreeing on certain basics of communications technologies, this hypothesis is actually testable (see below).
An alternate hypothesis is that evolutionary pressures in many environments favor species which rapidly consume available resources once they achieve dominance. By the time they have achieved sufficient technology to come to the notice of other civilizations, they are already well on their way to exhausting the resources of their host planet.

[edit] Public information
The International Academy of Astronautics (IAA) has a long-standing SETI Permanent Study Group (SPSG, formerly called the IAA SETI Committee), which addresses matters of SETI science, technology, and international policy. The SPSG meets in conjunction with the International Astronautical Congress (IAC) held annually at different locations around the world, and sponsors two SETI Symposia at each IAC.
In 2005, the International Academy of Astronautics established the SETI: Post-Detection Science and Technology Taskgroup (Chairman, Professor Paul Davies) "to act as a Standing Committee to be available to be called on at any time to advise and consult on questions stemming from the discovery of a putative signal of extraterrestrial intelligent (ETI) origin." It will use, in part, the Rio Scale to evaluate the importance of releasing the information to the public.

[edit] Criticism





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2008)


As various SETI projects have continued, some have criticized early claims by researchers now seen to be too "euphoric" or "optimistic." For example, Peter Schenkel, while remaining a supporter of SETI projects, has written that "[i]n light of new findings and insights, it seems appropriate to put excessive euphoria to rest and to take a more down-to-earth view ... We should quietly admit that the early estimates — that there may be a million, a hundred thousand, or ten thousand advanced extraterrestrial civilizations in our galaxy — may no longer be tenable."[28] Clive Trotman presents some sobering but realistic calculations emphasizing the timeframe dimension.[29]
SETI has also occasionally been the target of criticism by those who suggest that it is a form of pseudoscience. In particular, critics allege that no observed phenomena suggest the existence of extraterrestrial intelligence, and furthermore that the assertion of the existence of extraterrestrial intelligence has no good Popperian criteria for falsifiability. [30]
In response, SETI advocates note, among other things, that the Drake Equation was never a hypothesis, and so never intended to be testable, nor to be "solved"; it was merely a clever representation of the agenda for the world's first scientific SETI meeting in 1961, and it serves as a tool in formulating testable hypotheses. Further, they note that the existence of intelligent life on Earth is a plausible reason to expect it elsewhere, and that individual SETI projects have clearly defined "stop" conditions. Many detractors have not considered the collection and processing of data, the first order of business, and the refining of those data streams, in the case of SETI through algorithm optimization. To justify SETI projects does not require an acceptance of the Drake equation. Science proceeds through hypothesis. If one were to only take what was at face value observable, many scientific phenomena never would have been discovered.
The search for extraterrestrial intelligence is not an assertion that extraterrestrial intelligence exists, and conflating the two can be seen as a straw man argument. There is an effort to distinguish the SETI projects from UFOlogy, the study of UFOs, which many consider to be pseudoscience. In Skeptical Inquirer, Mark Moldwin argued that the important differences between the two projects were the acceptance of SETI by the mainstream scientific community and that "[t]he methodology of SETI leads to useful scientific results even in the absence of discovery of alien life."[31]

[edit] Is "active" SETI dangerous?
Active SETI (also known as METI = "Messaging to Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence") consists of sending signals into space in the hope that they will be picked up by an alien intelligence. Some feel that this activity contains improbable but real dangers and ought to be discussed more broadly before it is undertaken.
The concern over SETI was raised by the science journal Nature in an editorial in October 2006, which commented on a recent meeting of the International Academy of Astronautics SETI study group. The editor said, “It is not obvious that all extraterrestrial civilizations will be benign, or that contact with even a benign one would not have serious repercussions” (Nature Vol 443 12 Oct 06 p 606). Astronomer and science fiction author David Brin has expressed similar concerns.[32]
As was suggested by Richard Carrigan, a particle physicist at the US Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Illinois, 'passive' SETI could also be dangerous in the style of computer viruses.[33]
To lend a quantitative basis to discussions of the risks of transmitting deliberate messages from Earth, the SETI Permanent Study Group of the International Academy of Astronautics adopted in 2007 a new analytical tool, the San Marino Scale.[34] Developed by Prof. Ivan Almar and Prof. H. Paul Shuch, the scale evaluates the significance of transmissions from Earth as a function of signal intensity and information content. Its adoption suggests that not all such transmissions are equal, thus each must be evaluated separately before establishing blanket international policy regarding Active SETI.
But some scientists consider these fears about the dangers of METI as panic and irrational superstition; see, for example, Alexander L. Zaitsev's papers: Sending and Searching for Interstellar Messages and Detection Probability of Terrestrial Radio Signals by a Hostile Super-civilization.

[edit] See also




Active SETI
Alien language
SETI@home
Communication with Extraterrestrial Intelligence
Extraterrestrial life
Astrobiology
Xenology
Drake equation
Fermi paradox
Invitation to ETI




First contact
Wow! signal
Carl Sagan
Iosif Shklovsky
Darwin Mission
Terrestrial Planet Finder
Big Ear: The Ohio State University Radio Observatory
Contact, a novel by SETI advocate Carl Sagan, later made into a film
Space archaeology





[edit] References and notes


^ Mark Moldwin, Why SETI is science and UFOlogy is not, Skeptical Inquirer, Nov-Dec, 2004.
^ Sagan, Carl; Iosif Shklovskii (1966). Intelligent Life in the Universe. 
^ NASA Technical Report CR-114445 - Project Cyclops: A design study of a system for detecting extraterrestial intelligent life. 14.5 MB pdf file.
^ "SERENDIP". UC Berkeley. http://seti.ssl.berkeley.edu/serendip/. Retrieved on 2006-06-12. 
^ Chown, Marcus (1997, 19 April). "The Alien Spotters". New Scientist: 28. http://www.newscientist.com/article/mg15420784.500-the-alien-spotters.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-13. 
^ "SETI@home Classic — Current Total Statistics". http://seticlassic.ssl.berkeley.edu/totals.html. Retrieved on 2006-06-12. 
^ "BOINCstats". http://www.boincstats.com/. Retrieved on 2008-01-29. 
^ BOINC Stats
^ "Allen Telescope Array General Overview". SETI Institute. http://www.seti.org/site/pp.asp?c=ktJ2J9MMIsE&b=179146. Retrieved on 2006-06-12. 
^ http://news.cnet.com/8301-13772_3-10121889-52.html
^ http://news.cnet.com/2300-11397_3-6248324-1.html?tag=mncol
^ Exers, Ronald, D. Cullers, J. Billingham, L. Scheffer (editors) (2003). SETI 2020: A Roadmap for the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence. SETI Press. ISBN 0-9666335-3-9. 
^ Interstellar probes - A new approach to SETI - by Robert A. Freitas Jr.
^ Debunking the Myths of Interstellar Probes - by Robert A. Freitas Jr.
^ The Case for Interstellar Probes - by Robert A. Freitas Jr.
^ Nature Magazine - Volume 431 Number 7004 pp1-109, issue (2 September 2004)
^ Nature Magazine - with registration
^ Inscribed matter as an energy efficient means of communication with an extraterrestrial civilization - winlab.rutgers.edu
^ Cosmic Communications - winlab.rutgers.edu
^ The Search for Extraterrestrial Artifacts (SETA) - by Robert A. Freitas Jr., Xenology Research Institute
^ a b A Search for Natural or Artificial Objects Located at the Earth-Moon Libration Points - by Robert A. Freitas Jr. and Francisco Valdes
^ A Search for Objects near the Earth-Moon Lagrangian Points - by Francisco Valdes and Robert A. Freitas Jr.
^ A Search for the Tritium Hyperfine Line from Nearby Stars - by Francisco Valdes and Robert A. Freitas Jr.
^ Eric Jones, "Where is everybody?", An account of Fermi's question", Los Alamos Technical report LA-10311-MS, March, 1985.
^ "How old is ET". Acta Astraonautica 2-9: 731–733. 2000. 
^ Tough, Allen (2000), When SETI Succeeds: The Impact of High-Information Contact, Bellevue, Washington: Foundation For the Future, ISBN 0-9677252-2-4 
^ NOVA Online | Death Star
^ SETI Requires a Skeptical Reappraisal (Skeptical Inquirer May/June 2006)
^ Trotman, Clive (2004) The Feathered Onion - Creation of Life in the Universe. Wiley. ISBN 0470871873
^ Internet Archive Wayback Machine
^ In a recent Skeptical Inquirer article, ‘Why SETI IS Science and UFOlogy Is Not: A Space Science Perspective on Boundaries’ (V
^ LF Special Report: Shouting at the cosmos
^ http://home.fnal.gov/~carrigan/SETI/SETI%20Hacker_AC-03-IAA-8-3-06.doc
^ International Academy of Astronautics, SETI Permanent Study Group



[edit] Further reading

McConnell, Brian; Chuck Toporek (2001). Beyond Contact: A Guide to SETI and Communicating with Alien Civilizations. O'Reilly. ISBN 0-596-00037-5. 
Perelmuter, J.M. (2006). The Sinusoidal Spaghetti. iUniverse. ISBN 0-595-41713-2. 
MJ Carlotto (2007). "Detecting Patterns of a Technological Intelligence in Remotely Sensed Imagery". J British Interplanetary Society 60: 28-39. http://spsr.utsi.edu/articles/markjbis2007.pdf. 
John B Campbell (2006). "Archaeology and direct imaging of exoplanets". in C. Aime & F. Vakili. Proceedings of the International Astronomical Union. Cambridge University Press. pp. 247 ff. ISBN 0-521-85607-8. http://eprints.jcu.edu.au/1027/1/S1743921306009392a.pdf. 


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: SETI 





[edit] Organizations

International Academy of Astronautics
IAA SETI Permanent Study Group
SETI Institute
SETI Research UK
The SETI League
SETI Post-Detection taskgroup
SETI@home, the shared computing project
The Planetary Society
Invitation to ETI
SPSR The Society for Planetary SETI Research
The Columbus Optical SETI Observatory, Dr. Stuart A, Kingsley
Open SETI Initiative – Gerry Zeitlin's site concerned with reforming SETI's approach
Big Ear Memorial Website - discovered the "Wow! signal" and has entry in Guinness Book of Records
NAAPO, North American AstroPhysical Observatory (formerly Big Ear)
SETI Net, Single developer amateur SETI station


[edit] Academic journals, reports and publications

Contact in Context (peer-reviewed online scholarly journal)
SearchLites (quarterly newsletter of The SETI League, Inc.)
SETI Principles as defined from the Department of Space Studies of the Southwest Research Institute (PDF File)
Harvard University SETI page
Mark Elowitz's Web site on Exobiology and SETI
The Search For Extraterrestrial Intelligence (NASA SP-419, 1977)
When SETI Succeeds: The Impact of High-Information Contact by Allen Tough
How old is ET? by Ray Norris


[edit] Videos

VIDEO on SETI by Canadian astrophysicist Doctor P
Video presentation and tour of the Ohio State University Radio Telescope, "Big Ear," associated with the Wow! signal: [1], [2], [3]



[edit] Articles and FAQs

SHOUTING AT THE COSMOS...Or How SETI has Taken a Worrisome Turn Into Dangerous Territory by David Brin
Where Is Everybody? : an essay by Arthur C. Clarke on SETI
Searching for Good Science: The Cancellation of NASA's SETI Program (PDF) – By Stephen J. Garber, NASA History Office. Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, Vol. 52, pp. 3–12, 1999. Provides more details on the elimination of SETI funding by the US Congress in 1993.
ET Might Write, Not Radiate
Cirkovic, Milan M., and Bradbury, R. J., 200n, "Galactic Gradients, Postbiological Evolution, and the Apparent Failure of SETI."
SETI: Searching for Life – Article series in Sky & Telescope magazine
IT & SETI: The Role of Computer Technology in the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence
SETI@home FAQ for newsgroups alt.sci.seti and sci.astro.seti
Has SETI Been Barking Up the Wrong Tree (Mostly?)
How SETI Works
Rio Scale


[edit] News

First Contact Within 20 Years: Shostak – From SpaceDaily.com, 22 July 2004 (based on calculations to be published in Acta Astronautica)
"Top stars picked in alien search". BBC News. 2006-02-19. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/4728228.stm. Retrieved on 2006-08-13. 







Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SETI"
Categories: Extraterrestrial life | SETI | Interstellar messages | Space explorationHidden categories: All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since April 2009 | Articles needing additional references from January 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


বাংলা
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
मराठी
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
O'zbek
Polski
Português
Русский
Shqip
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 13:39.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
