













Theistic evolution - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Theistic_evolution";
		var wgTitle = "Theistic evolution";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "328815";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280822996;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Theistic evolution

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
Theistic evolution and evolutionary creationism are similar concepts that assert that classical religious teachings about God are compatible with much or all of the modern scientific understanding about biological evolution. In short, theistic evolutionists believe that there is a God, that he is (in some way) the creator of the material universe and (by consequence) all life within, and that biological evolution is simply a natural process within that creation. Evolution, according to this view, is simply a tool that God created and employed to help life grow and flourish.
Theistic evolution is not a theory in the scientific sense, but a particular view about how the science of evolution relates to religious belief and interpretation. Theistic evolution supporters can be seen as one of the groups who reject the conflict thesis regarding the relationship between religion and science —that is, they hold that religious teachings about creation and scientific theories of evolution need not contradict. In describing early proponents of this viewpoint, it is sometimes described as Christian Darwinism.[1] A very similar view is evolutionary creationism.[2]




Contents


1 Terminology
2 Acceptance
3 Definition
4 Spectrum of viewpoints

4.1 Christianity

4.1.1 Contemporary Christian denominations

4.1.1.1 Anglicanism
4.1.1.2 Church of the Nazarene
4.1.1.3 Eastern Orthodox Church
4.1.1.4 Roman Catholic Church




4.2 Deism
4.3 Evolutionary creationism
4.4 Islam

4.4.1 Ahmadiyya


4.5 Judaism


5 Proponents

5.1 Evolutionary biologists who were also theists
5.2 Contemporary advocates of theistic evolution


6 Criticism
7 Relationship to intelligent design
8 See also
9 References
10 Books
11 External links

11.1 Proponents of theistic evolution
11.2 Creationist opponents of theistic evolution







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Terminology
The term was used by National Center for Science Education executive director Eugenie Scott to refer to the part of the overall spectrum of beliefs about creation and evolution holding the theological view that God creates through evolution. It covers a wide range of beliefs about the extent of any intervention by God, with some approaching deism in rejecting continued intervention. Others see intervention at critical intervals in history in a way consistent with scientific explanations of speciation, but with similarities to the ideas of Progressive Creationism that God created "kinds" of animals sequentially.[3]

[edit] Acceptance
This view is accepted (or at least not rejected) by major Christian churches, including the Roman Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodox Church and some mainline Protestant denominations; some Jewish denominations; and other religious groups that lack a literalist stance concerning some holy scriptures. Various biblical literalists have accepted or noted openness to this stance, including theologian B.B. Warfield and evangelist Billy Graham.
With this approach toward evolution, scriptural creation stories are typically interpreted as being allegorical in nature. Both Jews and Christians have considered the idea of the creation history as an allegory (instead of a historical description) long before the development of Darwin's theory. An example in Christianity would be the earlier writings by St. Augustine (4th century), though he later rejected allegory in favor of literal interpretation. By this Augustine meant that in Genesis 1 the terms "light", "day", and "morning" hold a spiritual, rather than physical, meaning, and that this spiritual morning is just as literal as physical morning. Augustine recognizes that the creation of a spiritual morning is as much a historical event as the creation of physical light.[4] Three noted Jewish examples are that of the writings of Philo of Alexandria (1st century),[5] Maimonides (12th century) and Gersonides (13th century).[6][7]
Theistic evolutionists argue that it is inappropriate to use Genesis as a scientific text, since it was written in a pre-scientific age and originally intended for religious instruction; as such, seemingly chronological aspects of the creation accounts should be thought of in terms of a literary framework. Theistic evolutionists may believe that creation is not literally a week long process but a process beginning in the time of Genesis and continuing through all of time, including today. This view affirms that God created the world and was the primary causation of our being, while scientific changes such as evolution are part of "creatia continua" or continuing creation which is still occurring in the never ending process of creation. Changes such as these caused by science are part of a secondary causation that changes us within the framework of the world God has created with primary causation.[clarification needed (incoherent)] This is one possible way of interpreting biblical scriptures, such as Genesis, that seem to be in opposition to scientific theories, such as evolution.[8]
The term evolutionary creationism refers to an understanding of God that transcends yet includes normal time and space, with nature having no existence independent of God. It allows interpretations consistent with both literal and poetic readings of Genesis and objective science.[citation needed]

[edit] Definition


“
....creationism has come to mean some fundamentalistic, literal, scientific interpretation of Genesis. Judaic-Christian faith is radically creationist, but in a totally different sense. It is rooted in a belief that everything depends upon God, or better, all is a gift from God.
”



—Fr George Coyne, Director, Vatican Observatory, 1978-2006



Theistic evolution holds that the theist's acceptance of evolutionary biology is not fundamentally different from the acceptance of other sciences, such as astronomy or meteorology. The latter two are also based on a methodological assumption of naturalism to study and explain the natural world, without assuming the existence or nonexistence of the supernatural. In this view, it is held both religiously and scientifically correct to reinterpret ancient religious texts in line with modern-day scientific findings about evolution. St. Anselm described theology as "Faith seeking understanding"[9] and theistic evolutionists believe that this search for understanding extends to scientific understanding.[citation needed] In light of this view, authors writing on the subject, such as Ted Peters and Martinez Hewlett, say that "The best science and our best thinking about God belong together."[8] Peters and Hewlett see science as a means of evaluating, understanding, and using to our benefit the intricacies of the world that God has created for us.
This synthesis of science with the teleology underlying faith and religious teachings can still be described as creationism in holding that divine intervention brought about the origin of life or that divine Laws govern formation of species, but in the creation-evolution controversy its proponents generally take the "evolutionist" side. For this reason, some on both sides prefer to use the term "theistic evolution" over "evolutionary creationism" to describe this belief.[citation needed]

[edit] Spectrum of viewpoints
Many religious organizations accept evolutionary theory, though their related theological interpretations vary. Additionally, individuals or movements within such organizations may not accept evolution, and stances on evolution may have adapted (or evolved) throughout history.

[edit] Christianity
See also: Allegorical interpretations of Genesis and Framework interpretation (Genesis)
Evolution contradicts a literalistic interpretation of Genesis; however, according to Roman Catholicism and most contemporary Protestant Churches, biblical literalism in the creation account is not mandatory. Christians have considered allegorical interpretations of Genesis since long before the development of Darwin's theory of evolution, or Hutton's principle of uniformitarianism. A notable example is St. Augustine (4th century), who, on theological grounds, argued that everything in the universe was created by God in the same instant, and not in six days as a plain reading of Genesis would require.[4] Modern theologians such as Meredith G. Kline and Henri Blocher have advocated what has become known as the literary framework interpretation of the days of Genesis.

[edit] Contemporary Christian denominations
Many Christian denominations support or accept theistic evolution. For example, on 12 February 2006, the 197th anniversary of Charles Darwin's birth was commemorated by "Evolution Sunday" where the message that followers of Christ do not have to choose between biblical stories of creation and evolution was taught in classes and sermons at many Methodist, Lutheran, Episcopalian, Presbyterian, Unitarian, Congregationalist, United Church of Christ, Baptist and community churches.[10]
Additionally, the National Council of Churches USA has issued a teaching resource to "assist people of faith who experience no conflict between science and their faith and who embrace science as one way of appreciating the beauty and complexity of God's creation." This resource cites the Episcopal Church, according to whom the stories of creation in Genesis "should not be understood as historical and scientific accounts of origins but as proclamations of basic theological truths about creation."[11]
The positions of particular denominations are discussed below.

[edit] Anglicanism
Although Anglicans (including the Episcopal Church in the United States of America, the Church of England and others) believe that the Bible "contains all things necessary to salvation," nonetheless "science and Christian theology can complement one another in the quest for truth and understanding." Specifically on the subject of creation/evolution, Anglicans view "Big Bang cosmology" as being "in tune with both the concepts of creation out of nothing and continuous creation." Their position is clearly set out in the Catechism of Creation Part II: Creation and Science.[12] In an interview, the Archbishop of Canterbury Dr Rowan Williams expressed his thought that "creationism is, in a sense, a kind of category mistake, as if the Bible were a theory like other theories. Whatever the biblical account of creation is, it's not a theory alongside theories... My worry is creationism can end up reducing the doctrine of creation rather than enhancing it."[13] His view is that creationism should not be taught in schools.

[edit] Church of the Nazarene
The Church of the Nazarene, an evangelical Christian denomination, sees "knowledge acquired by science and human inquiry equal to that acquired by divine revelation," and, while the church "'believes in the Biblical account of creation' and holds that God is the sole creator, it allows latitude 'regarding the "how" of creation.'"[14]
While Richard G. Colling, author of Random Designer[15] and professor at Olivet Nazarene University, received criticism from elements within the denomination in 2007 for his book (published in 2004),[16] Darrel R. Falk of Point Loma Nazarene published a similar book in 2004,[17] and Karl Giberson of Eastern Nazarene, the first Nazarene scholar to publish with Oxford University Press, has published four books since 1993 on the tensions between science and religion,[18] including his most recently published Saving Darwin.[19]
Theologians of note in the denomination whose work on science and religion shows the promise of cooperation include Thomas Jay Oord (Science of Love, The Altruism Reader), Michael Lodahl God of Nature and of Grace), and Samuel M. Powell (Participating in God). These theologians see no major problem reconciling theology with the general theory of evolution.
The Nazarene Manual, a document crafted to provide Biblical guidance and denominational expression for Church members, states: "The Church of the Nazarene believes in the biblical account of creation (“In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth . . .”—Genesis 1:1). We oppose any godless interpretation of the origin of the universe and of humankind. However, the church accepts as valid all scientifically verifiable discoveries in geology and other natural phenomena, for we firmly believe that God is the Creator. (Articles I.1., V. 5.1, VII.) (2005)[20]

[edit] Eastern Orthodox Church
The Eastern Orthodox Church is divided in two large categories, which might be labeled as compatibilism and incompatibilism.
On the one hand, compatibilists hold that science and theology are compatible and view them as complementary revelations of God. As God is the source of both his specific revelation of himself in the Christian faith and the source of the general revelation of himself in nature, the findings of science and theology cannot really contradict; the contradictions must be merely apparent and a resolution possible which is faithful to the truth of God's revelation. Nicozisin (Father George) is a compatibilist[21].
On the other hand, incompatibilists hold that science can be incompatible with faith. They usually argue either that science is philosophically based on a kind of naturalism or that God's specific revelation is infallible and therefore trumps the findings of human reason in the case of any conflict between them. This is often based on a suspicion of human reason to arrive at reliable conclusions in the first place. Bufeev, S. V, is an incompatibilist[22].

[edit] Roman Catholic Church
Main article: Evolution and the Roman Catholic Church
The position of the Roman Catholic Church on the theory of evolution has changed over the last two centuries from a large period of no official mention, to a statement of neutrality in the 1950s, to limited guarded acceptance in recent years, rejecting the materialistic and reductionist philosophies behind it, and insisting that the human soul was immediately infused by God, and the reality of a single ancestor (commonly called monogenism) for the human race. The Church does not argue with scientists on matters such as the age of the earth and the authenticity of the fossil record, seeing such matters as outside its area of expertise. Papal pronouncements, along with commentaries by cardinals, indicate that the Church is aware of the general findings of scientists on the gradual appearance of life. The Church's stance is that the temporal appearance of life has been guided by God, but the Church has thus far declined to define in what way that may be.
The official Church's position remains a focus of controversy and is fairly non-specific, stating only that faith and the origin of man's material body "from pre-existing living matter" are not in conflict, and that the existence of God is required to explain the spiritual component of man's origin.[citation needed]
Catholic schools do not teach theistic evolution as part of their science curriculum. They teach the facts of evolution and the scientific theory of its mechanisms. This is essentially the same biological curriculum taught in public schools and secular universities.

[edit] Deism
See also: Deism
Deism is belief in a God or first cause based on reason, rather than on faith or revelation. Most deists believe that God does not interfere with the world or create miracles. Some deists believe that a Divine Creator initiated a universe in which evolution occurred, by designing the system and the natural laws, although many deists believe that God also created life itself, before allowing it to be subject to evolution. They find it to be undignified and unwieldy for a deity to make constant adjustments rather than letting evolution elegantly adapt organisms to changing environments. Other deists take the stronger position that God ceased to exist after setting in motion the laws of the universe.
One recently converted deist is philosopher and professor Antony Flew, who became a deist in December 2004. Professor Flew, a former atheist, now argues that recent research into the origins of life supports the theory that some form of intelligence was involved. Whilst accepting subsequent Darwinian evolution, Flew argues that this cannot explain the complexities of the origins of life. He also stated that the investigation of DNA "has shown, by the almost unbelievable complexity of the arrangements which are needed to produce [life], that intelligence must have been involved",[23] though he subsequently retracted this statement in an interview with Joan Bakewell for BBC Radio 4 in March 2005: "What I was converted to was the existence of an Aristotelian God, and Aristotle's God had no interest in human affairs at all."[24][relevant? – discuss]

[edit] Evolutionary creationism
Evolutionary creationism, states that the Creator God uses evolution to bring about his plan. Eugenie Scott and Niles Eldredge state in Evolution Vs. Creationism that it is in fact a type of evolution, as well as that it is "hardly distinguishable from Theistic Evolution".[2]

[edit] Islam
See also: Islamic creationism
Some Muslims believe in evolutionary creationism, especially among the Liberal movements within Islam.
More literalist Muslims, including followers of Wahhabism, reject origin of species from a common ancestor by evolution as incompatible with the Qur'an. However, even amongst Muslims who accept evolution, many believe that humanity was a special creation by God. For example, Shaikh Nuh Ha Mim Keller, an American Muslim and specialist in Islamic law has argued in Islam and Evolution[25] that a belief in macroevolution is not incompatible with Islam, as long as it is accepted that "Allah is the Creator of everything" (Qur'an 13:16) and that Allah specifically created humanity (in the person of Adam; Qur'an 38:71-76). Shaikh Keller states in his conclusion however:

"As for claim that man has evolved from a non-human species, this is unbelief (kufr) no matter if we ascribe the process to Allah or to "nature," because it negates the truth of Adam's special creation that Allah has revealed in the Qur'an. Man is of special origin, attested to not only by revelation, but also by the divine secret within him, the capacity for ma'rifa or knowledge of the Divine that he alone of all things possesses. By his God-given nature, man stands before a door opening onto infinitude that no other creature in the universe can aspire to. Man is something else."


[edit] Ahmadiyya
See also: Ahmadiyya views of Evolution
The Ahmadiyya Movement are perhaps the only denomination in Islam that actively promote the theory of evolution[26]. Ahmadis reject both the Creationism and Intelligent Design models. In support of the concepts of macroevolution, Ahmadis believe that mankind had gradually evolved from different species (i.e apes). Furthermore, Ahmadis regard Adam as the being the first Prophet of God - as opposed to being the first man on Earth[27]. Rather than adopting the Darwinist's approach of natural selection, Ahmadis promote the idea of "guided evolution" viewing each stage of the evolutionary process has been selectively woven to an intricate level by one monotheistic diety[28].

[edit] Judaism
See also: Judaism and evolution
In general, three of the four major denominations of Judaism (Reconstructionist, Reform, and Conservative) accept theistic evolution. Within Orthodoxy, there is much debate about the issue. Most Modern Orthodox groups accept theistic evolution and most Ultra-Orthodox groups do not. This disagreement was most vociferous in the Natan Slifkin controversy which arose when a number of prominent Ultra-Orthodox Rabbis banned books written by Rabbi Natan Slifkin which explored the idea of theistic evolution within Jewish tradition. These Rabbis forming part of Jewish opposition to evolution considered that his books were heresy as they indicated that the Talmud is not necessarily correct about scientific matters such as the age of the Earth.
Advocates of theistic evolution within Judaism follow two general approaches. Either the creation account in the Torah is not to be taken as a literal text, but rather as a symbolic work, or, alternatively, that the 'days' do not refer to 24-hour periods (justified by how the first day in the biblical account actually precedes the creation of the sun and earth by which 24 hour days are reckoned). In the latter view, Jewish scholars point out how the order of creation in Genesis corresponds to the scientific description of the development of life on Earth--the sun, then earth, then oceans, then oceanic plant life, fish preceding land-based life, with mammals and finally humans last--and in no way specifies the method of creation in a manner prohibitive of evolution.

[edit] Proponents

[edit] Evolutionary biologists who were also theists
Although evolutionary biologists have often been agnostics (most notably Thomas Huxley and Charles Darwin) or atheists (most notably Richard Dawkins), from the outset many have had a belief in some form of theism. These have included Alfred Russel Wallace (1823–1913), who in a joint paper with Charles Darwin in 1858, proposed the theory of evolution by natural selection. Wallace, in his later years, was effectively a deist who believed that "the unseen universe of Spirit" had interceded to create life as well as consciousness in animals and (separately) in humans.
An early example of this kind of approach came from computing pioneer Charles Babbage who published his unofficial Ninth Bridgewater Treatise in 1837, putting forward the thesis that God had the omnipotence and foresight to create as a divine legislator, making laws (or programs) which then produced species at the appropriate times, rather than continually interfering with ad hoc miracles each time a new species was required.
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin (1881–1955) was a noted geologist and paleontologist as well as a Jesuit Priest who wrote extensively on the subject of incorporating evolution into a new understanding of Christianity. Initially suppressed by the Roman Catholic Church, his theological work has had considerable influence and is widely taught in Catholic and most mainline Protestant seminaries.
Both Ronald Fisher (1890–1962) and Theodosius Dobzhansky (1900–1975), were Christians and architects of the modern evolutionary synthesis. Dobzhansky, a Russian Orthodox, wrote a famous 1973 essay entitled Nothing in Biology Makes Sense Except in the Light of Evolution espousing evolutionary creationism:

"I am a creationist and an evolutionist. Evolution is God's, or Nature's, method of creation. Creation is not an event that happened in 4004 BC; it is a process that began some 10 billion years ago and is still under way... Does the evolutionary doctrine clash with religious faith? It does not. It is a blunder to mistake the Holy Scriptures for elementary textbooks of astronomy, geology, biology, and anthropology. Only if symbols are construed to mean what they are not intended to mean can there arise imaginary, insoluble conflicts... the blunder leads to blasphemy: the Creator is accused of systematic deceitfulness."

The role of Scripture in relation to science is captured by an oft-quoted phrase: "The Bible tell us how to go to heaven, not how the heavens go." The phrase is especially heard in discussions of the relation between cosmology and theology. In the realm of biology and theology, the saying coined by Thomas Jay Oord is perhaps more appropriate: "The Bible tells us how to find abundant life, not the details of how life became abundant."

[edit] Contemporary advocates of theistic evolution





The lists in this section may contain items that are not notable, encyclopedic, or helpful. Please help out by removing such elements and incorporating appropriate items into the main body of the article. (March 2009)


Contemporary biologists and geologists who are Christians and theistic evolutionists include:

Paleontologist Robert T. Bakker
R. J. Berry, Professor of Genetics at University College London
Microbiologist Richard G. Colling of Olivet Nazarene University, author of Random Designer: Created from Chaos to Connect with Creator
Biologist Francis Collins, director of the Human Genome Project and author of The Language of God: A Scientist Presents Evidence for Belief in which he has suggested the term BioLogos for theistic evolution
Biologist Darrel Falk of Point Loma Nazarene University, author of Coming to Peace with Science
Biologist Denis Lamoureux of St. Joseph's College, University of Alberta, Canada who has co-authored with evolution critic Phillip E. Johnson Darwinism Defeated? The Johnson-Lamoureux Debate on Biological Origins (Regent College, 1999)
Evangelical Christian and geologist Keith B. Miller of Kansas State University, who compiled an anthology Perspectives on an Evolving Creation (Eerdmans, 2003)
Kenneth R. Miller, professor of biology at Brown University, author of Finding Darwin's God (Cliff Street Books, 1999), in which he states his belief in God and argues that "evolution is the key to understanding God" (Dr. Miller has also called himself "an orthodox Catholic and an orthodox Darwinist" in the 2001 PBS special "Evolution")
Biologist Joan Roughgarden at Stanford University is author of various books including Evolution and Christian Faith: Reflections of an Evolutionary Biologist
Paleobiologist Prof. Simon Conway Morris of Cambridge University, well known for his groundbreaking work on the Burgess Shale fossils and the Cambrian explosion, and author of Life's Solution: Inevitable Humans in a Lonely Universe

Philosophers, theologians, and physical scientists who have supported the evolutionary creationist model include:

Eco-theologian Fr. Thomas Berry
Fr. George Coyne of the Vatican Observatory
Physicist Karl Giberson of Eastern Nazarene College, author of several books: Worlds Apart: The Unholy War between Religion and Science, Species of Origins: America’s Search for a Creation Story, The Oracles of Science: Celebrity Scientists Versus God and Religion, and Saving Darwin.
Theologian-philosopher John Haught of Georgetown University
Martinez Hewlett, co-author of the book Can You Believe in God And Evolution?
Biochemist and theologian Alister McGrath, Professor of Historical Theology at the University of Oxford
Theologian-philosopher Thomas Jay Oord of Northwest Nazarene University (known for saying, "The Bible tells us how to find abundant life, not the details of how life became abundant.")
Pope John Paul II, who is famous for praising evolutionary biology and calling its accounts of human origins "more than a hypothesis"[29]
Ted Peters, co-author of the book Can You Believe in God And Evolution?
Physicist and theologian Rev. John Polkinghorne of Cambridge University
Theologian Rev. Keith Ward, former Regius Professor of Divinity at the University of Oxford, author of God, Chance, and Necessity
Theologian-philosopher Rev. Michał Heller, professor of philosophy at the Pontifical Academy of Theology in Kraków, Poland, and an adjunct member of the Vatican Observatory staff.
Theologian-philosopher catholic archbishop Józef Życiński, professor of philosophy at the Pontifical Academy of Theology in Kraków, Poland.


[edit] Criticism
The major criticism of theistic evolution by non-theistic evolutionists focuses on its essential belief in a supernatural creator. By the application of Occam's razor, sufficient explanation of the phenomena of evolution is provided for non-theistic evolutionists by the principle of natural selection, and the intervention or direction of a supernatural entity is not required. In the words of Richard Dawkins, "the illusion of design in the living world is explained with far greater economy … by Darwinian natural selection".[30]
Young Earth creationists criticise theistic evolution on theological grounds, finding it hard to reconcile the nature of a loving God with the process of evolution, in particular, the existence of death and suffering before the Fall of Man. They consider that it undermines central biblical teachings by regarding the creation account as a myth, a parable, or an allegory, instead of believing that it is a historical report. They also fear that a capitulation to what they call "atheistic" naturalism will confine God to the gaps in scientific explanations, undermining biblical doctrines, such as God's incarnation through Christ.[31]

[edit] Relationship to intelligent design



This section requires expansion.


See also: Intelligent design
Some adherents of theistic evolution hold that the deity both designed the universe and has a continuing part in its development, and feel that a term they favour has been hijacked by the proponents of the viewpoint called "Intelligent design". One notable proponent of theistic evolution, Francis Collins is a critic of Intelligent design.

[edit] See also

American Scientific Affiliation
Biblical cosmology
BioLogos
Cosmogony
Cosmological argument
Existence
Natural theology
Arthur Peacocke
Theism
Timeline of the Big Bang
Timeline of the Universe
Ultimate fate of the universe
The Challenge of Creation


[edit] References


^ The Creationists Expanded Edition, pp 34-38
^ a b Evolution Vs. Creationism, Eugenie Scott, Niles Eldredge, p62-63
^ The Creation/Evolution Continuum by Eugenie Scott, National Center for Science Education
^ a b Davis A. Young, "The Contemporary Relevance of Augustine's View of Creation" from Perspectives on Science and Christian Faith 40.1
^ "Allegorical Interpretation, I" from The Works of Philo Judaeus, translated by C.D. Yonge at the Internet Archive
^ The Guide for the Perplexed 2:17
^ Milchamot Hashem 6:8
^ a b Can You Believe in God and Evolution, Ted Peters and Matrinez Hewlett
^ St Anselm (1077–1078). "Preface". Proslogion. http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Proslogion. 
^ Churches urged to challenge Intelligent Design -20/02/06
^ Science, Religion, and the Teaching of Evolution in Public School Science Classes (pdf), The National Council of Churches Committee on Public Education and Literacy, Teaching Evolution, March 2006
^ Catechism of Creation Part II: Creation and Science
^ The Guardian, March 21, 2006
^ "Can God Love Darwin, Too?" by Sharon Begley, Newsweek, Sept. 17, 2007 issue
^ Random Designer: Created from Chaos to Connect with the Creator, Browning Press, 2004, ISBN 0975390406
^ "Can God Love Darwin, Too?" by Sharon Begley, Newsweek, Sept. 17, 2007 issue
^ Coming to Peace with Science: Bridging the Worlds Between Faith and Biology, InterVarsity Press, 2004, ISBN 0830827420
^ Worlds Apart: The Unholy War between Religion and Science, Beacon Hill Press, 1993 ISBN 0834115042
With Donald Yerxa, Species of Origins: America's Search for a Creation Story, Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2002 ISBN 0742507645
With Mariano Artigas, The Oracles of Science: Celebrity Scientist Versus God and Religion, Oxford University Press, 2006 ISBN 0195310721
^ "Can God Love Darwin, Too?" by Sharon Begley, Newsweek, Sept. 17, 2007 issue
^ Manual, p.371
^ http://www.orthodoxresearchinstitute.org/articles/dogmatics/nicozisin_creationism.htm
^ http://www.creatio.orthodoxy.ru/sbornik/sbufeev_whynot_english.html
^ Atheist Philosopher, 81, Now Believes in God | LiveScience
^ BBC interview, Professor Antony Flew March 22, 2005.
^ Evolution and Islam
^ ITL: Jesus and the Indian Messiah - Every Wind of Doctrine
^ http://textonly.itl-usa.org/ahmadi/ahmadi13.html
^ http://www.alislam.org/library/articles/Guided_evolution_and_punctuated_equilibrium-20081104MN.pdf
^ Pope John Paul II, "Truth Cannot Contradict Truth", New Advent, ed. Kevin Knight, 15 Feb 2009 <http://www.newadvent.org/library/docs_jp02tc.htm>
^ Dawkins, R. The God Delusion (Transworld Publishers, 2006; ISBN 0-618-68000-4)
^ answersingenesis.org: 10 dangers of theistic evolution



[edit] Books

Miller, Kenneth R.; (1999) Finding Darwin's God: A Scientist's Search for Common Ground Between God and Evolution ISBN 0-0609-3049-7
Miller, Keith B.; (2003) Perspectives on an Evolving Creation ISBN 0-8028-0512-4
Falk, Darrel; (2004) Coming to Peace with Science: Bridging the Worlds Between Faith and Biology ISBN 0-8308-2742-0
Collins, Francis; (2006) The Language of God: A Scientist Presents Evidence for Belief ISBN 0-7432-8639-1


[edit] External links

About: Agnosticism/Atheism on 'Theistic Evolution & Evolutionary Creationism' by Austin Cline; overview of various viewpoints
What is Creationism? by Mark Isaak, presents various forms of creationism
What is Evolution? by Laurence Moran, presents a standard definition for evolution
Answers In Creation old earth creationism, but open to theistic evolution
Evolution & Creation: A Theosophic Synthesis Surveys critical problems in Darwinist explanations and common theistic views; explores ancient and modern "excluded middle" alternatives
US Catholic News - Creationists Hijack Intelligent Design
The Vatican's View of Evolution: The Story of Two Popes by Doug Linder (2004)
Nobel Prize winner Charles Townes on evolution and "intelligent design"
Spectrum of Creation Beliefs From Flat Earthism to Atheistic Evolutionism, including Theistic Evolution
OrthodoxWiki article on Evolution.


[edit] Proponents of theistic evolution

Nothing in Biology Makes Sense Except in the Light of Evolution by Theodosius Dobzhansky (see also: Wikipedia's article)
Kenneth R Miller's homepage
God and Evolution — part of the talk.origins Archive
Message to the Pontifical Academy of Sciences: On Evolution subtitled "Truth Cannot Contradict Truth", by Pope John Paul II, 22 October 1996.
On Cosmology and Fundamental Physics, by Pope John Paul II, 3 October 1981.
Communion and Stewardship: Human Persons Created in the Image of God Statement on creation and evolution from the International Theological Commission headed by Cardinal Ratzinger (now Pope Benedict XVI), 23 July 2004.
Science Does Not Need God, or Does It? A Catholic Scientist Looks at Evolution transcript of talk by astronomer George V. Coyne, S.J.
Perspectives on Theistic Evolution An examination of both the theological and scientific aspects of theistic evolution.
The "Clergy Letter" Project signed by thousands of clergy supporting evolution and faith
DMD Publishing Co. home page Essays arguing that even a literal treatment of Genesis requires theistic evolution.
Thomas Jay Oord Science of Love: The Wisdom of Well-Being, Templeton, 2003.
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Le Milieu Divin (Tome 4: Essai de vie intérieure), Seuil (1 January 1998) ISBN 2-02-020136-4
Denis R Alexander, Can a Christian believe in evolution?, The Evangelical Alliance, 12 May 2006
Let There Be Light: An Orthodox Theory of Human Evolution For the 21st Century, John P. Maletis, Theandros, Vol. 5 No.3
Norman Hughes, Professor Emeritus of Biology, Pepperdine University. See his letter to the Journal of the American Scientific Affiliation and the response by Apologetics Press.


[edit] Creationist opponents of theistic evolution

Why is evolution so dangerous for Christians to believe? (articles from Creation Ministries International)
The Compromise Road by Henry M. Morris




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theistic_evolution"
Categories: Wikipedia articles with off-topic sections | Creationism | Evolution | Religious viewsHidden categories: All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2009 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2007 | Cleanup from March 2009 | Wikipedia laundry list cleanup | Articles to be expanded since March 2007 | All articles to be expanded 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Български
Deutsch
Español
한국어
Lietuvių
Nederlands
Polski
Português
Română
Simple English
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
中文









 This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 08:21.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
