











Johannes Brahms - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Johannes_Brahms";
		var wgTitle = "Johannes Brahms";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "16339";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280007991;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 


wgOggPlayer.msg = {"ogg-play": "Play", "ogg-pause": "Pause", "ogg-stop": "Stop", "ogg-no-player": "Sorry, your system does not appear to have any supported player software.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload a player\x3c/a\x3e.", "ogg-player-videoElement": "Native browser support", "ogg-player-oggPlugin": "Browser plugin", "ogg-player-cortado": "Cortado (Java)", "ogg-player-vlc-mozilla": "VLC", "ogg-player-vlc-activex": "VLC (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-quicktime-mozilla": "QuickTime", "ogg-player-quicktime-activex": "QuickTime (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-totem": "Totem", "ogg-player-kaffeine": "Kaffeine", "ogg-player-kmplayer": "KMPlayer", "ogg-player-mplayerplug-in": "mplayerplug-in", "ogg-player-thumbnail": "Still image only", "ogg-player-selected": "(selected)", "ogg-use-player": "Use player:", "ogg-more": "More…", "ogg-download": "Download file", "ogg-desc-link": "About this file", "ogg-dismiss": "Close", "ogg-player-soundthumb": "No player", "ogg-no-xiphqt": "You do not appear to have the XiphQT component for QuickTime.\nQuickTime cannot play Ogg files without this component.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload XiphQT\x3c/a\x3e or choose another player."};
wgOggPlayer.cortadoUrl = "http://upload.wikimedia.org/jars/cortado.jar";
wgOggPlayer.extPathUrl = "/w/extensions/OggHandler";


.ogg-player-options {
	border: solid 1px #ccc;
	padding: 2pt;
	text-align: left;
	font-size: 10pt;
}
 <!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Johannes Brahms

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







Johannes Brahms


Johannes Brahms (pronounced [joːˈhanəs ˈbʁaːms]) (May 7, 1833 – April 3, 1897), composer and pianist, was one of the leading musicians of the Romantic period. Born in Hamburg, Brahms spent much of his professional life in Vienna, Austria, where he was a leader of the musical scene. In his lifetime, Brahms's popularity and influence were considerable; following a comment by the nineteenth century conductor Hans von Bülow, he is sometimes grouped with Johann Sebastian Bach and Ludwig van Beethoven as one of the Three Bs.
Brahms composed for piano, for chamber ensembles, for symphony orchestra, and for voice and chorus. An accomplished pianist, he gave the first performance of many of his own works; he also worked with the leading performers of his time, including the virtuoso pianist Clara Schumann and the violinist Joseph Joachim. Many of his works have become staples of modern concert repertoire. Brahms, an uncompromising perfectionist, destroyed many works and left some unpublished.
Brahms was at once a traditionalist and an innovator. His music is firmly rooted in the structures and compositional techniques of the Baroque and classical masters. He was a master of counterpoint, the complex and highly disciplined method of composition for which Bach is famous. Yet within these structures, Brahms created bold new approaches to harmony and timbre which challenged existing notions of tonal music. His contribution and craftsmanship has been admired by subsequent figures as diverse as Arnold Schoenberg and Edward Elgar. Brahms's works were a starting point and an inspiration for a generation of composers, including Schoenberg, who eventually abandoned tonality.




Contents


1 Life

1.1 Early years
1.2 Meeting Joachim and Liszt
1.3 Brahms and Schumann
1.4 Detmold and Hamburg
1.5 Years of popularity
1.6 Later years


2 Music of Brahms

2.1 Works
2.2 Style and influences
2.3 Influence


3 Personality
4 Media
5 Further reading
6 References
7 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Life

Early years
Brahms's father, Johann Jakob Brahms, came to Hamburg from Schleswig-Holstein, seeking a career as a town musician. He was proficient on several instruments, but found employment mostly playing the horn and double bass. He married Johanna Henrika Christiane Nissen, a seamstress, who was seventeen years older than he was. Initially, they lived near the city docks, in the Gängeviertel quarter of Hamburg, for six months before moving to a small house on the Dammtorwall, located on the northern perimeter of Hamburg in the Inner Alster.




Photograph from 1891 of the building in Hamburg where Brahms was born. Brahms's family occupied part of the first floor, behind the two double windows on the left hand side.


Johann Jakob gave his son his first musical training. He studied piano from the age of seven with Otto Friedrich Willibald Cossel. It is a long-told tale that Brahms was forced in his early teens to play the piano in bars that doubled as brothels; recently Brahms scholar Kurt Hoffman has suggested that this legend is false. Since Brahms himself clearly originated the story, however, some have questioned Hoffman's theory.[1][2]
For a time, Brahms also learned the cello, although his progress was cut short when his teacher absconded with Brahms' instrument.[citation needed] After his early piano lessons with Otto Cossel, Brahms studied piano with Eduard Marxsen, who had studied in Vienna with Ignaz von Seyfried (a pupil of Mozart) and Carl Maria von Bocklet (a close friend of Schubert). The young Brahms gave a few public concerts in Hamburg, but did not become well known as a pianist until he made a concert tour at the age of nineteen. In later life, he frequently took part in the performance of his own works, whether as soloist, accompanist, or participant in chamber music. He was the soloist at the premieres of both his Piano Concerto No. 1 in 1859 and his Piano Concerto No. 2 in 1881. He conducted choirs from his early teens, and became a proficient choral and orchestral conductor.

Meeting Joachim and Liszt
He began to compose quite early in life, but later destroyed most copies of his first works; for instance, Louise Japha, a fellow-pupil of Marxsen, reported a piano sonata that Brahms had played or improvised at the age of 11. His compositions did not receive public acclaim until he went on a concert tour as accompanist to the Hungarian violinist Eduard Reményi in April and May 1853. On this tour he met Joseph Joachim at Hanover, and went on to the Court of Weimar where he met Franz Liszt, Peter Cornelius, and Joachim Raff. According to several witnesses of Brahms' meeting with Liszt (at which Liszt performed Brahms' Scherzo, Op. 4 at sight), Reményi was offended by Brahms' failure to praise Liszt's Sonata in B minor wholeheartedly (Brahms supposedly fell asleep during a performance of the recently composed work), and they parted company shortly afterwards. Brahms later excused himself, saying that he could not help it, having been exhausted by his travels.




Brahms in 1853



Brahms and Schumann
Joachim had given Brahms a letter of introduction to Robert Schumann, and after a walking tour in the Rhineland Brahms took the train to Düsseldorf, and was welcomed into the Schumann family on arrival there. Schumann, amazed by the 20 year-old's talent, published an article entitled "Neue Bahnen" (New Paths) in the October 28, 1853 issue of the journal Neue Zeitschrift für Musik alerting the public to the young man who he claimed was "destined to give ideal expression to the times."[3] This pronouncement was received with some skepticism outside Schumann's immediate circle, and may have increased Brahms' naturally self-critical need to perfect his works and technique. While he was in Düsseldorf, Brahms participated with Schumann and Albert Dietrich in writing a sonata for Joachim; this is known as the F-A-E Sonata. He became very attached to Schumann's wife, the composer and pianist Clara, fourteen years his senior, with whom he would carry on a lifelong, emotionally passionate, but probably platonic, relationship. Brahms never married, despite strong feelings for several women and despite entering into an engagement, soon broken off, with Agathe von Siebold in Göttingen in 1859. After Schumann's attempted suicide and subsequent confinement in a mental sanatorium near Bonn in February 1854, Brahms was the main intercessor between Clara and her husband, and found himself virtually head of the household.

Detmold and Hamburg
After Schumann's death at the sanatorium in 1856, Brahms divided his time between Hamburg, where he formed and conducted a ladies' choir, and the principality of Detmold, where he was court music-teacher and conductor. He first visited Vienna in 1862, staying there over the winter, and in 1863 was appointed conductor of the Vienna Singakademie. Though he resigned the position the following year and entertained the idea of taking up conducting posts elsewhere, he based himself increasingly in Vienna and soon made his home there. From 1872 to 1875 he was director of the concerts of the Vienna Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde; afterwards he accepted no formal position. He declined an honorary doctorate of music from University of Cambridge in 1877, but accepted one from the University of Breslau in 1879, and composed the Academic Festival Overture as a gesture of appreciation.
He had been composing steadily throughout the 1850s and 60s, but his music had evoked divided critical responses and the Piano Concerto No. 1 had been badly received in some of its early performances. His works were labelled old-fashioned by the 'New German School' whose principal figures included Liszt and Richard Wagner. Brahms admired some of Wagner's music and admired Liszt as a great pianist, but the conflict between the two schools, known as the War of the Romantics, soon embroiled all of musical Europe. In the Brahms camp were his close friends: Clara Schumann, the influential music critic Eduard Hanslick and the leading Viennese surgeon Theodor Billroth. In 1860 Brahms attempted to organize a public protest against some of the wilder excesses of their music.[citation needed] His manifesto, which was published prematurely with only three supporting signatures, was a failure and he never engaged in public polemics again.

Years of popularity
It was the premiere of A German Requiem, his largest choral work, in Bremen in 1868 that confirmed Brahms's European reputation and led many to accept that he had fulfilled Schumann's prophecy. This may have given him the confidence finally to complete a number of works that he had wrestled with over many years, such as the cantata Rinaldo, his first string quartet, third piano quartet, and most notably his first symphony. This appeared in 1876, though it had been begun (and a version of the first movement seen by some of his friends) in the early 1860s. The other three symphonies then followed in 1877, 1883, and 1885. From 1881 he was able to try out his new orchestral works with the court orchestra of the Duke of Meiningen, whose conductor was Hans von Bülow.
Brahms frequently traveled, for both business (concert tours) and pleasure. From 1878 onwards he often visited Italy in the springtime, and usually sought out a pleasant rural location in which to compose during the summer. He was a great walker and especially enjoyed spending time in the open air, where he felt that he could think more clearly.
In 1889, one Theo Wangemann, a representative of American inventor Thomas Edison visited the composer in Vienna and invited him to make an experimental recording. He played an abbreviated version of his first Hungarian dance on the piano. The recording was later issued on an LP of early piano performances (compiled by Gregor Benko); while the spoken introduction to the short piece of music is quite clear, the piano playing is largely inaudible due to heavy surface noise. Nevertheless, this remains the earliest recording made by a major composer. Analysts and scholars remain divided, however, as to whether the voice that introduces the piece is that of Wangemann or of Brahms.[4]
In 1889 Brahms was named an honorary citizen of Hamburg, until 1948 the only one born in Hamburg. [5]




Brahms' grave in the Zentralfriedhof (Central Cemetery), Vienna.



Later years
In 1890, the 57 year-old Brahms resolved to give up composing. However, as it turned out, he was unable to abide by his decision, and in the years before his death he produced a number of acknowledged masterpieces. His admiration for Richard Mühlfeld, clarinetist with the Meiningen orchestra, moved him to compose the Clarinet Trio Op. 114, Clarinet Quintet Op. 115 (1891), and the two Clarinet Sonatas Op. 120 (1894). He also wrote several cycles of piano pieces, Opp. 116-119, the Four Serious Songs (Vier ernste Gesänge), Op. 121 (1896), and the Eleven Chorale Preludes for organ, Op. 122 (1896).
While completing the Op. 121 songs, Brahms developed cancer (sources differ on whether this was of the liver or pancreas). His condition gradually worsened and he died on April 3, 1897. Brahms is buried in the Zentralfriedhof in Vienna.

Music of Brahms

Works
See also: List of compositions by Johannes Brahms
Brahms wrote a number of major works for orchestra, including two serenades, four symphonies, two piano concertos (No. 1 in D minor; No. 2 in B flat major), a Violin Concerto, a Double Concerto for violin and cello, and two orchestral overtures, the Academic Festival Overture and the Tragic Overture.
His large choral work A German Requiem is not a setting of the liturgical Missa pro defunctis, but a setting of texts which Brahms selected from the Lutheran Bible. The work was composed in three major periods of his life. An early version of the second movement was first composed in 1854, not long after Robert Schumann's attempted suicide, and this was later used in his first piano concerto. The majority of the Requiem was composed after his mother's death in 1865. The fifth movement was added after the official premiere in 1868, and the work was published in 1869.
Brahms's works in variation form include the Variations and Fugue on a Theme by Handel and the Paganini Variations, both for solo piano, and the Variations on a Theme by Joseph Haydn in versions for two pianos and for orchestra. The final movement of the Fourth Symphony (Op. 98) is formally a passacaglia.
His chamber works include three string quartets, two string quintets and two string sextets, a clarinet quintet, a clarinet trio, a horn trio, a piano quintet, three piano quartets and four piano trios (the fourth being "opus posthumous"). He composed several instrumental sonatas with piano, including three for violin, two for cello and two for clarinet (which were subsequently arranged for viola by the composer). His solo piano works range from his early piano sonatas and ballades to his late sets of character pieces. Brahms was a significant Lieder composer, who wrote over 200 songs. His chorale preludes for organ op. 122, which he wrote shortly before his death, have become an important part of the organist's repertoire.
Brahms strongly preferred writing absolute music that does not refer to an explicit scene or narrative, and he never wrote an opera or a symphonic poem.
Despite his reputation as a serious composer of large, complex musical structures, some of Brahms's most widely known and most commercially successful compositions during his life were small-scale works of popular intent aimed at the thriving contemporary market for domestic music-making; indeed, during the 20th century the influential American critic B. H. Haggin, rejecting more mainstream views, argued in his various guides to recorded music that Brahms was at his best in such works and much less successful in larger forms. Among the most cherished of these lighter works by Brahms are his sets of popular dances—the Hungarian Dances, the Waltzes Op. 39 for piano duet, and the Liebeslieder Waltzes for vocal quartet and piano—and some of his many songs, notably the Wiegenlied, Op. 49 No. 4 (published in 1868). This last was written (to a folk text) to celebrate the birth of a son to Brahms' friend Bertha Faber and is universally known as Brahms' Lullaby.

Style and influences
Brahms maintained a Classical sense of form and order in his works – in contrast to the opulence of the music of many of his contemporaries. Thus many admirers (though not necessarily Brahms himself) saw him as the champion of traditional forms and "pure music," as opposed to the New German embrace of program music.
Brahms venerated Beethoven: in the composer's home, a marble bust of Beethoven looked down on the spot where he composed, and some passages in his works are reminiscent of Beethoven's style. The main theme of the finale of Brahms's First Symphony is reminiscent of the main theme of the finale of Beethoven's Ninth, and when this resemblance was pointed out to Brahms he replied that any ass – jeder Esel – could see that.
A German Requiem was partially inspired by his mother's death in 1865, but also incorporates material from a Symphony he started in 1854, but abandoned following Schumann's suicide attempt. He once wrote that the Requiem "belonged to Schumann". The first movement of this abandoned Symphony was re-worked as the first movement of the First Piano Concerto.
Brahms also loved the Classical composers Mozart and Haydn. He collected first editions and autographs of their works, and edited performing editions. He also studied the music of pre-classical composers, including Giovanni Gabrieli, Johann Adolph Hasse, Heinrich Schütz and especially Johann Sebastian Bach. His friends included leading musicologists, and with Friedrich Chrysander he edited an edition of the works of François Couperin. He looked to older music for inspiration in the arts of strict counterpoint; the themes of some of his works are modelled on Baroque sources, such as Bach's The Art of Fugue in the fugal finale of Cello Sonata No. 1, or the same composer's Cantata No. 150 in the passacaglia theme of the Fourth Symphony's finale.
The early Romantic composers also had a major influence on Brahms, particularly Schumann who encouraged Brahms as a young composer. Brahms often met Robert and Clara Schumann. During his stay in Vienna in 1862-3, Brahms became particularly interested in the music of Franz Schubert.[6] The latter's influence may be identified in works by Brahms dating from the period, such as the two piano quartets Op. 25 and Op. 26, and the Piano Quintet which alludes to Schubert's String Quintet and Grand Duo for piano four hands.[7][6] There is less evidence for influence of Chopin and Mendelssohn on Brahms, although occasionally one can find in his works what seems to be an allusion to one of their works (for example, Brahms's Scherzo, Op. 4 alludes to Chopin's Scherzo in B-flat minor;[8] the scherzo movement in Brahms's Piano Sonata in F minor, Op. 5 alludes to the finale of Mendelssohn's Piano Trio in C minor[9]).
Brahms considered giving up composition when it seemed that other composers' innovations in extended tonality would result in the rule of tonality being broken altogether. Although Wagner became fiercely critical of Brahms as the latter grew in stature and popularity, he was enthusiastically receptive of the early Variations and Fugue on a Theme by Handel; Brahms himself, according to many sources (Swafford, 1999), deeply admired Wagner's music, confining his ambivalence only to the dramaturgical precepts of Wagner's theory.
Brahms wrote settings for piano and voice of 144 German folk songs, and many of his lieder reflect folk themes or depict scenes of rural life. His Hungarian dances were among his most profitable compositions.
Although Brahms's religious views are not clear, one of his greatest influences was the Bible. He read especially Luther's translation. His "Requiem" employs biblical texts to convey a humanist message, and focus on the living rather than the dead. Author Walter Niemann declared, "The fact that Brahms began his creative activity with the German folk song and closed with the Bible reveals...the true religious creed of this great man of the people." Others see Brahms as more of a cultural Lutheran who embraced the cultural aspects of his upbringing but may or may not have adopted the religious beliefs.[10]
Writing in The New Oxford Companion to Music, Denis Arnold concludes, '...his appeal to musicians lies in the quality of his craftsmanship. His wider appeal surely lies in the essential conflict between the depth of emotion so often evident yet hidden behind his natural reserve. ...'

Influence
Brahms's point of view looked both backward and forward; his output was often bold in its exploration of harmony and rhythm. As a result he was an influence on composers of both conservative and modernist tendencies. Within his lifetime his idiom left an imprint on several composers within his personal circle who were strong admirers of his music, such as Heinrich von Herzogenberg, Robert Fuchs, and Julius Röntgen, as well as on Gustav Jenner, who was Brahms's only formal composition pupil. Antonín Dvořák, who received substantial assistance from Brahms, deeply admired his music and was influenced by it in several works such as the D minor Symphony, Op. 70 and the F minor Piano Trio, Op. 65. Features of the 'Brahms style' were absorbed in a more complex synthesis with other contemporary (chiefly Wagnerian) trends by Hans Rott, Wilhelm Berger and Max Reger, while the British composers Parry and Elgar, and the Swede Wilhelm Stenhammar all testified to learning much from Brahms's example. It was Elgar who said, "I look at the Third Symphony of Brahms and I feel like a pygmy."[11] Ferruccio Busoni's early music shows much Brahmsian influence, and Brahms took an interest in him, though Busoni later tended to disparage Brahms. Towards the end of his life Brahms offered substantial encouragement to Ernö Dohnányi, and also to Alexander Zemlinsky. Their early chamber works (and those of Béla Bartók, who was friendly with Dohnányi) show a thoroughgoing absorption of the Brahmsian idiom. Zemlinsky, moreover, was in turn the teacher of Arnold Schoenberg, and Brahms was apparently impressed by two movements of Schoenberg's early Quartet in D major which Zemlinsky showed him. In 1933 Schoenberg wrote an essay "Brahms the Progressive" (re-written 1947) which drew attention to Brahms's fondness for motivic saturation and irregularities of rhythm and phrase; in his last book (Structural Functions of Harmony, 1948) he analysed Brahms's 'enriched harmony' and exploration of remote tonal regions. These efforts paved the way for a re-evaluation of Brahms's reputation in the 20th century. Schoenberg went so far as to orchestrate one of Brahms's piano quartets. Schoenberg's pupil Anton Webern, in his 1933 lectures posthumously published under the title The Path to the New Music, claimed Brahms as one who had anticipated the developments of the Second Viennese School, and Webern's own Op. 1, an orchestral passacaglia, is clearly in part a homage to and development of the variation techniques of the passacaglia-finale of Brahms's Fourth Symphony.
Brahms was honoured by the German Hall of Fame, the Walhalla temple. On 14 September 2000 he was introduced there as 126th "rühmlich ausgezeichneter Teutscher" and 13th composer among them, with a bust by sculptor Milan Knobloch.[12]

Personality
Like Beethoven, Brahms was fond of nature and often went walking in the woods around Vienna. He often brought penny candy with him to hand out to children. To adults Brahms was often brusque and sarcastic, and he sometimes alienated other people. His pupil Gustav Jenner wrote, "Brahms has acquired, not without reason, the reputation for being a grump, even though few could also be as lovable as he.[13]" He also had predictable habits which were noted by the Viennese press such as his daily visit to his favourite "Red Hedgehog" tavern in Vienna and the press also particularly took into account his style of walking with his hands firmly behind his back complete with a caricature of him in this pose walking alongside a red hedgehog. Those who remained his friends were very loyal to him, however, and he reciprocated with equal loyalty and generosity.




Johann Strauss II (left) and Johannes Brahms (right) photographed in Vienna


Brahms was a lifelong friend of Johann Strauss II though they were very different as composers. Brahms even struggled to get to the Theater an der Wien in Vienna for the premiere of Strauss's operetta Die Göttin der Vernunft in 1897 before his death. Perhaps the greatest tribute that Brahms could pay to Strauss was his remark that he would have given anything to have written The Blue Danube waltz. An anecdote dating around the time Brahms became acquainted with Strauss is that when Strauss's wife Adele asked Brahms to autograph her fan, he wrote a few notes from the "Blue Danube" waltz, and then cheekily inscribed the words "Alas, not by Brahms!"
Starting in the 1860s, when his works sold widely, Brahms was financially quite successful. He preferred a modest life style, however, living in a simple three-room apartment with a housekeeper. He gave away much of his money to relatives, and anonymously helped support a number of young musicians.
Brahms was an extreme perfectionist. He destroyed many early works — including a Violin Sonata he performed with Reményi and violinist Ferdinand David — and once claimed to have destroyed 20 string quartets before he issued his official First in 1873. Over the course of several years, he changed an original project for a Symphony in D minor into a piano concerto, his first. In another instance of devotion to detail, he labored over the official First Symphony for almost fifteen years, from about 1861 to 1876. Even after its first few performances, Brahms destroyed the original slow movement and substituted another before the score was published. (A conjectural restoration of the original slow movement has been published by Robert Pascall.) Another factor that contributed to Brahms's perfectionism was that Schumann had announced early on that Brahms was to become the next great composer like Beethoven, a prediction that Brahms was determined to live up to. This prediction hardly added to the composer's self-confidence, and may have contributed to the delay in producing the First Symphony. However, Clara Schumann noted before that Brahms's First Symphony was a product that was not reflective of Brahms's real nature. She felt that the final exuberant movement was "too brilliant," as she was encouraged by the dark and tempestuous opening movement she had seen in an early draft. However, she recanted in accepting the Second Symphony, which has often been seen in modern times as one of his sunniest works. Other contemporaries, however, found the first movement especially dark, and Reinhold Brinkmann, in a study of Symphony No. 2 in relation to 19th century ideas of melancholy, has published a revealing letter from Brahms to the composer and conductor Vinzenz Lachner in which Brahms confesses to the melancholic side of his nature and comments on specific features of the movement that reflect this.

Media





Intermezzo in C major, Op. 119, No. 3









Ossip Gabrilowitsch plays for Welte-Mignon on July 4, 1905.




Hungarian Dance No. 5









Arthur Nikisch plays for Welte-Mignon on February 9, 1906




Intermezzo Op. 116 No. 4














Intermezzo Op. 76 No. 7









Brahms's Intermezzo Op. 76, No. 7, is representative of his middle works for piano




Schicksalslied














Waltz No. 1









Sixteen Waltzes for piano, four hands (Opus 39), in B major




Waltz No. 2









Sixteen Waltzes for piano, four hands (Opus 39), in E major




Waltz No. 3









Sixteen Waltzes for piano, four hands (Opus 39), in G-sharp minor




Waltz No. 4









Sixteen Waltzes for piano, four hands (Opus 39), in E minor




Waltz No. 5









Sixteen Waltzes for piano, four hands (Opus 39), in E major




Waltz No. 6









Sixteen Waltzes for piano, four hands (Opus 39), in C-sharp major




Waltz No. 7









Sixteen Waltzes for piano, four hands (Opus 39), in C-sharp minor




Waltz No. 8









Sixteen Waltzes for piano, four hands (Opus 39), in B-flat major




Waltz No. 9









Sixteen Waltzes for piano, four hands (Opus 39), in D minor




Waltz No. 10









Sixteen Waltzes for piano, four hands (Opus 39), in G major




Waltz No. 11









Sixteen Waltzes for piano, four hands (Opus 39), in B minor




Waltz No. 12









Sixteen Waltzes for piano, four hands (Opus 39), in E major




Waltz No. 13









Sixteen Waltzes for piano, four hands (Opus 39), in B major




Waltz No. 14









Sixteen Waltzes for piano, four hands (Opus 39), in G-sharp minor




Waltz No. 15









Sixteen Waltzes for piano, four hands (Opus 39), in A-flat major




Waltz No. 16









Sixteen Waltzes for piano, four hands (Opus 39), in C-sharp minor




Hungarian Dance No. 5 in G minor














Hungarian Dance No. 6 in D major














Op.45 Ein Deutsches Requiem - (01) Selig sind, die da Leid tragen














Op.45 Ein Deutsches Requiem - (02) Denn alles Fleisch, es ist wie Gras














Op.45 Ein Deutsches Requiem - (03) Herr, lehre doch mich














Op.45 Ein Deutsches Requiem - (04) Wie lieblich sind deine Wohnungen














Op.45 Ein Deutsches Requiem - (05) Ihr habt nun Traurigkeit














Op.45 Ein Deutsches Requiem - (06) Denn wir haben hie keine bleibende Statt














Op.45 Ein Deutsches Requiem - (07) Selig sind die Toten














Sonata for Two Pianos in F minor, 1st movement









Performed by Neal and Nancy O'Doan




Sonata for Two Pianos in F minor, 2nd movement









Performed by Neal and Nancy O'Doan




Sonata for Two Pianos in F minor, 3rd movement









Performed by Neal and Nancy O'Doan




Sonata for Two Pianos in F minor, 4th movement









Performed by Neal and Nancy O'Doan




Wondrous cool









(3.6 Mb)




Rhapsody in B minor - Op. 79 No. 1














Double Concerto in A minor, 2nd movement














Double Concerto in A minor, 3rd movement














Cello Sonata in E minor, 2nd movement














Cello Sonata in F, opus 99, 1st movement














Cello Sonata in F, opus 99, 2nd movement














Cello Sonata in F, opus 99, 3rd movement














Cello Sonata in F, opus 99, 4th movement














Variations on a Theme by Joseph Haydn, theme and variations 1-3









Arrangement for two pianos, performed by Neal and Nancy O'Doan




Variations on a Theme by Joseph Haydn, variation 4









Arrangement for two pianos, performed by Neal and Nancy O'Doan




Variations on a Theme by Joseph Haydn, variations 5 and 6









Arrangement for two pianos, performed by Neal and Nancy O'Doan




Variations on a Theme by Joseph Haydn, variation 7









Arrangement for two pianos, performed by Neal and Nancy O'Doan




Variations on a Theme by Joseph Haydn, variation 8 and finale









Arrangement for two pianos, performed by Neal and Nancy O'Doan




Chaconne for piano with left hand only









transcription of the Chaconne from J. S. Bach's Solo Violin Partita 2, BWV 1004




Academic Festival Overture, Op. 80









Performed by the Skidmore College Orchestra. Courtesy of Musopen




Concerto in A minor, Op. 102 'Double Concerto' - I. Allegro









Performed by the Skidmore College Orchestra. Courtesy of Musopen




Concerto in A minor, Op. 102 'Double Concerto' - II. Andante









Performed by the Skidmore College Orchestra. Courtesy of Musopen




Concerto in A minor, Op. 102 'Double Concerto' - II. Vivace non Troppo









Performed by the Skidmore College Orchestra. Courtesy of Musopen




klavierstucke, op. 118 - ii. intermezzo









Performed by Carlos Gardels. Courtesy of Musopen




Clarinet Quintet - 1. Allegro









Performed by William McColl and the Orford String Quartet




Clarinet Quintet - 2. Adagio









Performed by William McColl and the Orford String Quartet




Clarinet Quintet - 3. Andantino









Performed by William McColl and the Orford String Quartet




Clarinet Quintet - 4. Con Moto









Performed by William McColl and the Orford String Quartet




Piano Quartet in G minor - 1. Allegro









Performed by Roxana Pavel Goldstein (violin), Elias Goldstein (viola), Stephen Balderston (cello), and Mathew Ganong (piano)




Piano Quartet in G minor - 2. Allegro, ma non troppo









Performed by Roxana Pavel Goldstein (violin), Elias Goldstein (viola), Stephen Balderston (cello), and Mathew Ganong (piano)




Piano Quartet in G minor - 3. Andante con Moto









Performed by Roxana Pavel Goldstein (violin), Elias Goldstein (viola), Stephen Balderston (cello), and Mathew Ganong (piano)




Piano Quartet in G minor - 4. Presto, Rondo alla Zingarese









Performed by Roxana Pavel Goldstein (violin), Elias Goldstein (viola), Stephen Balderston (cello), and Mathew Ganong (piano)







Problems playing the files? See media help.





Further reading

Johannes Brahms: Life and Letters, ISBN 0-19-816234-0 by Brahms himself, edited by Styra Avins, translated by Josef Eisinger (1998). A biography by way of comprehensive footnotes to a comprehensive collection of Brahms' letters (some translated into English for the first time). Elucidates some previously contentious matters, such as Brahms' reasons for declining the Cambridge invitation.
Brahms, His Life and Work, by Karl Geiringer, photographs by Irene Geiringer (1987, ISBN 0-306-80223-6). A biog and discussion of his musical output, supplemented by and cross-referenced with the body of correspondence sent to Brahms.
Charles Rosen discusses a number of Brahms's imitations of Beethoven in Chapter 9 of his Critical Entertainments: Music Old and New (2000; Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, ISBN 0-674-17730-4).
Brahms by Malcolm MacDonald is a biography and also discussion of virtually everything Brahms composed, along with chapters examining his position in Romantic music, his devotion to Early Music, and his influence on later composers. (Dent 'Master Musicians' series, 1990; 2nd edition Oxford, 2001, ISBN 0-19-816484-X
Johannes Brahms: A Biography, by Jan Swafford. A comprehensive (752 pages) look at the life and works of Brahms. (1999; Vintage, ISBN 0-679-74582-3)
Late Idyll: The Second Symphony of Johannes Brahms, by Reinhold Brinkmann, translated by Peter Palmer. An analysis of Symphony No.2 and meditation of its position in Brahms' career and in relation to 19th century ideas of melancholy. (1995, Harvard, ISBN 0-674-51175-1)


References


^ Kurt Hoffman, Johannes Brahms und Hamburg (Reinbek, 1986) (in German: includes detailed refutation of the traditional story of Brahms playing piano in brothels, using the writings of those who knew the young Brahms, as well as evidence of the Hamburg's close regulation of those places, preventing the employment of children)
^ Swafford, Jan (2001). "Did the Young Brahms Play Piano in Waterfront Bars?". 19th-century Music Vol. 24 (No. 3): pp. 268–275. doi:10.1525/ncm.2001.24.3.268. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0148-2076(200121)24%3A3%3C268%3ADTYBPP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-H. Retrieved on 2007-10-30. 
^ "Robert Schumann's Artikel Neue Bahnen". http://w3.rz-berlin.mpg.de/cmp/brahms_bahnen.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-30. 
^
‹ The template below (YouTube) is being considered for deletion. See templates for deletion to help reach a consensus. ›
J. Brahms plays excerpt of Hungarian Dance No. 1 (2:10) at YouTube
^ Stadt Hamburg Ehrenbürger (German) Retrieved on June 17, 2008
^ a b James Webster, "Schubert's sonata form and Brahms' first maturity (II)", 19th-century Music 3(1) (1979), pp. 52-71.
^ Donald Francis Tovey, "Franz Schubert" (1927), rpt. in Essays and Lectures on Music (London, 1949), p. 123. Cf. his similar remarks in "Tonality in Schubert" (1928), rpt. ibid., p. 151.
^ Charles Rosen, "Influence: plagiarism and inspiration", 19th-century Music 4(2) (1980), pp. 87-100.
^ H. V. Spanner, "What is originality?", The Musical Times 93(1313) (1952), pp. 310-311.
^ Beller-McKenna, Daniel. Brahms and the German Spirit. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass. 2004, ISBN 0-674-01318-2
^ MacDonald, Brahms (1990), p. 406.
^ "Johannes Brahms hält Einzug in die Walhalla". Bayerisches Staatsministerium für Wissenschaft, Forschung und Kunst. 2000-09-14. http://www.stmwfk.bayern.de/pressearchiv/2000/09/sept124.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-23. 
^ Brahms as Man, Teacher, and Artist



External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Johannes Brahms



The Lied and Art Song Texts Page created and mantained from Emily Ezust Texts of the Lieder of Brahms with translations in various languages.
"What's late about late Brahms?": an article in the TLS by Peter Williams, November 7 2007
The Voice of Brahms[dead link] and Brahms at the Piano. Information about the recording made by Thomas Edison in 1889 of Brahms playing part of his Hungarian Dance No. 1 in G minor.
Johannes Brahms: list of works from w3.rz-berlin.mpg.de/cmp/
Program notes on Brahms's First Symphony by Michael Steinberg
Orchestral arrangement of Intermezzo from Six Piano Pieces Op 118 No 2.(also link to Opus 118 no 4)
Photo of Brahms as a young man in 1853
Johannes Brahms in the German National Library catalogue (German)

Sheet music

Brahms's Complete Piano Works[dead link] Free Public Domain Scores in PDF
www.kreusch-sheet-music.net Brahms' piano works
Free scores of Brahms' Lieder and orchestral works in GIF format from the Variations Project at Indiana University. Last accessed 2008-08-14.
Free scores by Brahms in the International Music Score Library Project
Free scores by Johannes Brahms in the Choral Public Domain Library (ChoralWiki)
Works by Johannes Brahms at Project Gutenberg
Free scores by Johannes Brahms in the Werner Icking Music Archive (WIMA)

Recordings

Free audio MP3 of some Brahms' works OnClassical - Creative Commons BY-NC-SA, 1.0 - licensed
Johannes Brahms - Violin Sonatas MP3 Creative Commons Recording
Kunst der Fuge: Johannes Brahms - MIDI files Daily limit of 5 files.
Brahms cylinder recordings, from the Cylinder Preservation and Digitization Project at the University of California, Santa Barbara Library.
Classic Cat - Brahms - mp3s
Performances of works by Johannes Brahms in MIDI and MP3 formats at Logos Virtual Library




Persondata


NAME
Brahms, Johannes


ALTERNATIVE NAMES



SHORT DESCRIPTION
Composer, Conductor, Pianist


DATE OF BIRTH
May 7, 1833(1833-05-07)


PLACE OF BIRTH
Hamburg, Germany


DATE OF DEATH
April 3, 1897


PLACE OF DEATH
Vienna, Austria





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johannes_Brahms"
Categories: 1833 births | 1897 deaths | German composers | Romantic composers | Viennese composers | German classical pianists | Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class) | Royal Philharmonic Society Gold Medallists | Hamburg musicians | Walhalla enshrinees | Composers for pipe organ | Burials at the ZentralfriedhofHidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2007 | All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead external links since January 2008 | Articles with dead external links since August 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Aragonés
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Gaelg
Galego
한국어
Հայերեն
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kiswahili
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Magyar
Македонски
Монгол
Nederlands
日本語
Plattdüütsch
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Piemontèis
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
Volapük
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 13:55.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
