











Miguel de Cervantes - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Miguel_de_Cervantes";
		var wgTitle = "Miguel de Cervantes";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "19444";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282062483;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["autoconfirmed"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Miguel de Cervantes

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"Cervantes" redirects here. For other uses, see Cervantes (disambiguation).


Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra



Portrait of Cervantes,[a] by Juan Martínez de Jáuregui y Aguilar (c. 1600)


Born
September 29, 1547 (1547-09-19)
Alcalá de Henares, Spain


Died
April 23, 1616 (1616-04-24) (aged 68)
Madrid, Spain


Occupation
Novelist, poet and playwright







Influences






Chivalric romance, Italian Renaissance















Influenced






the novel, Guram Dochanashvili










Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra[b] (Spanish pronunciation: [miˈɣel ðe θerˈβantes saˈβeðɾa] in modern Spanish; October 9, 1547 – April 23, 1616) was a Spanish novelist, poet, and playwright. His magnum opus, Don Quixote, considered the first modern novel by many,[1] is a classic of Western literature and is regularly regarded among the best novels ever written. His work is considered among the most important in all of literature.[2] His influence on the Spanish language has been so great, that Spanish is often called la lengua de Cervantes (The language of Cervantes).[3] He has been dubbed el Príncipe de los Ingenios the Prince of Wits.
Cervantes, born at Alcalá de Henares, was the fourth of seven children of Rodrigo de Cervantes, a surgeon born at Alcalá de Henares in a family whose origins may have been of the minor gentry, and wife, married in 1543, Leonor de Cortinas, who died on October 19, 1593. The family moved from town to town, and little is known of Cervantes's early years. In 1569, Cervantes moved to Italy, where he entered as valet into the service of Giulio Acquaviva, a wealthy priest who was elevated to cardinal the next year. By then Cervantes had enlisted as a soldier in a Spanish infantry regiment and continued his military life until 1575, when he was captured by Algerian pirates. He was ransomed by his captors and the Trinitarians and returned to his family in Madrid.
In 1585, Cervantes published a pastoral novel, La Galatea. Because of financial problems, Cervantes worked as a purveyor for the Spanish Armada, and later as a tax collector. In 1597 discrepancies in his accounts of three years previous landed him in the Crown Jail of Seville. In 1605 he was in Valladolid, just when the immediate success of the first part of his Don Quijote, published in Madrid, signaled his return to the literary world. In 1607, he settled in Madrid, where he lived and worked until his death. During the last nine years of his life, Cervantes solidified his reputation as a writer; he published the Exemplary Novels (Novelas ejemplares) in 1613, the Journey to Parnassus in 1614, and in 1615, the Ocho comedias y ocho entremeses and the second part of Don Quixote. Carlos Fuentes noted that, "Cervantes leaves open the pages of a book where the reader knows himself to be written."[4]




Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Birth and early life
1.2 Military history and captivity
1.3 Literary pursuits
1.4 Death


2 Works

2.1 Novels

2.1.1 La Galatea
2.1.2 Don Quixote
2.1.3 Novelas Ejemplares
2.1.4 Los Trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda


2.2 Poetry

2.2.1 Viaje del Parnaso


2.3 Plays

2.3.1 La Numancia




3 Cervantes' historical importance and influence
4 Ethnic and Religious Heritage
5 Notes
6 References

6.1 More information
6.2 Online sources


7 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Biography

Birth and early life
Miguel de Cervantes was born in Alcalá de Henares, a Castilian city about 15 miles from Madrid, probably on September 29 (the feast day of St. Michael) 1547. The actual date of his birth was determined from records in the church register. He was baptized on October 9.[2] Miguel's father Rodrigo was a barber-surgeon, who set bones, performed bloodlettings, and attended "lesser medical needs". [5] His mother was the third daughter of a nobleman, who lost his fortune and had to sell his daughter into matrimony. This led to a very awkward marriage and several affairs on the father's part.[6]
Little is known of Cervantes' early years. He was a brash young man and possessed a very idealistic nature. This is later reflected in his literary work, such as El Trabajo de San Juan. It seems that he spent much of his childhood moving from town to town with his family. During this time he met a young barmaid, Josefina Catalina De Parez. The couple fell madly in love and plotted to run away together. Sadly her father discovered their plans and forbade Josefina from ever seeing Cervantes again. It seems that, much like Dickens' father, Miguel's father was embargoed for debt. The court records of the proceedings show a very poor household. While some of his biographers argue that he studied at the University of Salamanca, there is no solid evidence for supposing that he did so.[c] There has been speculation also that Cervantes studied with the Jesuits in Córdoba or Sevilla.[7]

Military history and captivity

File:The Battle of Lepanto on Paolo Veronese.jpeg
The Battle of Lepanto by Paolo Veronese (c. 1572, oil on canvas, 169 x 137 cm, Gallerie dell'Accademia, Venice)


The reasons that forced Cervantes to leave Castilla remain uncertain. Whether he was a "student" of the same name, a "sword-wielding fugitive from justice", or fleeing from a royal warrant of arrest, for having wounded a certain Antonio de Sigura in a duel, is another mystery.[8] In any event, in going to Italy, Cervantes was doing what many young Spaniards of the time did to further their careers in one way or another. Rome would reveal to the young artist its ecclesiastic pomp, ritual, and majesty. In a city teeming with ruins Cervantes could focus his attention on Renaissance art, architecture, and poetry (knowledge of Italian literature is so readily discernible in his own productions) and on rediscovering antiquity. He could find in the ancients "a powerful impetus to revive the contemporary world in light of its accomplishments".[9] Thus, Cervantes' continuing desire for Italy, as revealed in his later works, was in part a desire for a return to the Renaissance.[10]
By 1570 Cervantes had enlisted as a soldier in a regiment of the Spanish naval elite corps, Infantería de Marina, stationed in Naples, then a possession of the Spanish crown. He was there for about a year before he saw active service. In September 1571 Cervantes sailed on board the Marquesa, part of the galley fleet of the Holy League (a coalition of the Pope, Spain, Venice, Republic of Genoa, Duchy of Savoy, the Knights of Malta, and others, under the command of John of Austria) that defeated the Ottoman fleet on October 7 in the Gulf of Lepanto near Corinth. Though taken down with fever, Cervantes refused to stay below, and begged to be allowed to take part in the battle, saying that he would rather die for his God and his king than keep under cover. He fought bravely on board a vessel, and received three gunshot wounds – two in the chest, and one which rendered his left arm useless, resulting in amputation. In Journey to Parnassus he was to say that he "had lost the movement of the left hand for the glory of the right" (he was thinking of the success of the first part of Don Quixote). Cervantes always looked back on his conduct in the battle with pride: he believed that he had taken part in an event that would shape the course of European history.


"What I cannot help taking amiss is that he[d] charges me with being old and one-handed, as if it had been in my power to keep time from passing over me, or as if the loss of my hand had been brought about in some tavern, and not on the grandest occasion the past or present has seen, or the future can hope to see. If my wounds have no beauty to the beholder's eye, they are, at least, honourable in the estimation of those who know where they were received; for the soldier shows to greater advantage dead in battle than alive in flight."


Miguel de Cervantes (Don Quixote – Part II, "The Author's Preface" translated by John Ormsby)


After the Battle of Lepanto Cervantes remained in hospital for around six months, before his wounds were sufficiently healed to allow his joining the colors again.[11] From 1572 to 1575, based mainly in Naples, he continued his soldier's life: he participated in expeditions to Corfu and Navarino, and saw the fall of Tunis and La Goletta to the Turks in 1574.[12]
On 6 or 7 September 1575 Cervantes set sail on the galley Sol from Naples to Barcelona, Spain, with letters of commendation to the king from the duke de Sessa and Don Juan himself.[13] On the morning of September 26, as the Sol approached the Catalan coast, it was attacked by Algerian corsairs. After significant resistance, in which the captain and many crew members were killed, the surviving passengers were taken to Algiers as captives.[14] After five years spent as a slave in Algiers, and four unsuccessful escape attempts, he was ransomed by his parents and the Trinitarians and returned to his family in Madrid. Not surprisingly, this period of Cervantes' life supplied subject matter for several of his literary works, notably the Captive's tale in Don Quixote and the two plays set in Algiers – El Trato de Argel (The Treaty of Algiers) and Los Baños de Argel (The Baths of Algiers) – as well as episodes in a number of other writings, although never in straight autobiographical form.[2]




"The pen is the language of the soul; as the concepts that in it are generated, such will be its writings." – Miguel de Cervantes at the National Library, Spain -



Literary pursuits
Main article: Don Quixote
In Toledo, Esquivias, on 12 December 1584, he married the much younger Catalina de Salazar y Palacios (Toledo, Esquivias – Madrid, 31 October 1626) daughter of Fernando de Salazar y Vozmediano and wife Catalina de Palacios, and whose uncle Alonso de Quesada y Salazar is said to have inspired the character of Don Quixote. During the next 20 years he led a nomadic existence, working as a purchasing agent for the Spanish Armada and as a tax collector. He suffered a bankruptcy and was imprisoned at least twice (1597 and 1602) for irregularities in his accounts. Between the years 1596 and 1600 he lived primarily in Seville. In 1606 Cervantes settled permanently in Madrid, where he remained for the rest of his life. In 1585 Cervantes published his first major work, La Galatea, a pastoral romance, at the same time that some of his plays, now lost – except for El Trato de Argel (wherein he dealt with the life of Christian slaves in Algiers) and El Cerco de Numancia – were playing on the stages of Madrid. La Galatea received little contemporary notice; and Cervantes never wrote the continuation for it, which he repeatedly promised. Cervantes next turned his attention to the drama, hoping to derive an income from that source; but the plays which he composed failed to achieve their purpose. Aside from his plays, his most ambitious work in verse was Viaje del Parnaso (1614) – an allegory which consisted largely of a rather tedious though good-natured review of contemporary poets. Cervantes himself realized that he was deficient in poetic gifts.
If a remark which Cervantes himself makes in the prologue of Don Quixote is to be taken literally, the idea of the work (though hardly the writing of its First Part, as some have maintained) occurred to him in prison at Argamasilla de Alba in La Mancha. Cervantes' idea was to give a picture of real life and manners, and to express himself in clear language. The intrusion of everyday speech into a literary context was acclaimed by the reading public. The author stayed poor until 1605, when the first part of Don Quixote appeared. Although it did not make Cervantes rich, it brought him international appreciation as a man of letters. (He wrote many plays, only two of which have survived, and short novels.) The vogue obtained by Cervantes's story of Don Quixote led to the publication of a continuation of it by an unknown writer, who masqueraded under the name of Alonso Fernández de Avellaneda. In self-defence Cervantes produced his own continuation, or Second Part, of Don Quixote, which made its appearance in 1615. (Nota Bene: Cervantes had already promised the publication of a second part of Don Quixote in 1613 in the foreword to the Novelas Ejemplares, a year before the publication of Avellanda's book. It is therefore anachronistic to say that he produced his continuation "in self-defence".)
For the world at large, interest in Cervantes centers particularly on Don Quixote, which has been regarded chiefly as a novel of purpose. It is stated again and again that he wrote it in order to satirize the romances of chivalry, and to challenge the popularity of a form of literature, which for much more than a century had been a fad with the general public.
Don Quixote certainly reveals much narrative power, considerable humor, a mastery of dialogue, and a forceful style. Of the two parts written by Cervantes, the first is the more popular with the general public – containing the famous episodes of the tilting at windmills, the attack on the flock of sheep, the vigil in the courtyard of the inn, and the episode with the barber and the shaving basin. The second part is inferior in humorous effect, but shows more constructive insight, better delineation of character, improved style, and more realism and probability in its action.
In 1613 he published a collection of tales, the Exemplary Novels, some of which had been written earlier. On the whole, the Exemplary Novels are worthy of the fame of Cervantes: they bear the same stamp of genius as Don Quixote does. The picaroon strain, already made familiar in Spain through the Picaresque novels of Lazarillo de Tormes and his successors, appears in one or another of them, especially in the Rinconete y Cortadillo, which is the best of all. In 1614 he published the Viaje del Parnaso and in 1615 the Eight Comedies and Eight New Interludes. At the same time, Cervantes continued working on Los Trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, a novel of adventurous travel, completed just before his death, and appearing posthumously in January 1617.

Death
Cervantes died in Madrid on 23 April 1616.[15] In honour of the date on which both Miguel de Cervantes and William Shakespeare died, UNESCO established April 23 as the International Day of the Book.[16]
The Encyclopedia Hispanica claims that the date widely quoted as Cervantes' date of death, namely April 23, is actually the date on his tombstone, which, in accordance with the traditions of the time, would be the date of his burial, rather than the date of his death. If this is true, then, according to Hispanica, it means that Cervantes probably died on April 22 and was buried on April 23, but the true date of his death is unknown.
Of his burial-place nothing is known, except that he was buried, in accordance with his will, in the neighboring convent of Trinitarian nuns. Isabel de Saavedra, Cervantes' daughter, was supposedly a member of this convent. A few years afterwards the nuns moved to another convent and carried their dead with them. Whether the remains of Cervantes were included in the removal or not no one knows, and the clue to their final resting place is now lost.




The statue of Miguel de Cervantes at the harbor of Nafpactos



Works

Novels
Cervantes's novels, listed chronologically, are as follows:

La Galatea (1585): a pastoral romance in prose and verse, based upon the genre introduced into Spain by Jorge de Montemayor's Diana (1559). Its theme is the fortunes and misfortunes in love of a number of shepherds and shepherdesses, who spend their life singing and playing musical instruments.
El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha (1605): First volume of Don Quixote.
Novelas Ejemplares (1613): a collection of twelve short stories of varied types about the social, political, and historical problems of Cervantes' Spain:


La Gitanilla (The Gypsy Girl)
El Amante Liberal (The Generous Lover)
Rinconete y Cortadillo (Rinconete & Cortadillo)
La Española Inglesa (The English Spanish Lady)
El Licenciado Vidriera (The Lawyer of Glass)
La Fuerza de la Sangre (The Power of Blood)
El Celoso Extremeño (The Jealous Man From Extremadura)
La Ilustre Fregona (The Illustrious Kitchen-Maid)
Novela de las Dos Doncellas (The Novel of the Two Damsels)
Novela de la Señora Cornelia (The Novel of Lady Cornelia)
Novela del Casamiento Engañoso (The Novel of the Deceitful Marriage)
El Coloquio de los Perros (The Dialogue of the Dogs)


Segunda Parte del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha (1615): Second volume of Don Quixote.
Los Trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda (1617).


Los Trabajos is the best evidence not only of the survival of Byzantine novel themes but also of the survival of forms and ideas of the Spanish novel of the second Renaissance. In this work, published after the author's death, Cervantes relates the ideal love and unbelievable vicissitudes of a couple, who, starting from the Arctic regions, arrive in Rome, where they find a happy ending to their complicated adventures.


La Galatea
La Galatea, the pastoral romance, which Cervantes wrote in his youth, is an imitation of the Diana of Jorge de Montemayor and bears an even closer resemblance to Gil Polo's continuation of that romance. Next to Don Quixote and the Novelas Ejemplares, it is particularly worthy of attention, as it manifests in a striking way the poetic direction in which the genius of Cervantes moved even at an early period of life.

Don Quixote
Main article: Don Quixote







Statues of Don Quixote (left) and Sancho Panza (right)










IV centenary of Don Quixote of La Mancha (1605-2005)





Don Quixote (spelled "Quijote" in modern Spanish) is two separate books that cover the adventures of Don Quixote, also known as the knight or man of La Mancha, a hero who carries his enthusiasm and self-deception to unintentional and comic ends. On one level, Don Quixote works as a satire of the romances of chivalry, which ruled the literary environment of Cervantes' time. However, the novel also allows Cervantes to illuminate various aspects of human nature, by using the ridiculous example of the delusional Quixote. Because the novel, particularly the first part, was written in individually published sections, the composition includes several incongruities. Cervantes himself however pointed out some of these errors in the preface to the second part; but he disdained to correct them, because he conceived that they had been too severely condemned by his critics.
Cervantes felt a passion for the vivid painting of character. Don Quixote is noble-minded, an enthusiastic admirer of everything good and great, yet having all these fine qualities accidentally blended with a relative kind of madness. He is paired with a character of opposite qualities, Sancho Panza, a man of low self-esteem, who is a compound of grossness and simplicity.
Don Quixote is cited as the first classic model of the modern romance or novel, and it has served as the prototype of the comic novel. The humorous situations are mostly burlesque, and it includes satire. Don Quixote is one of the Encyclopedia Britannica's Great Books of the Western World, and the Russian author Fyodor Dostoyevsky called it "the ultimate and most sublime work of human thinking".[citation needed]

Novelas Ejemplares
It would be scarcely possible to arrange the other works of Cervantes according to a critical judgment of their importance, for the merits of some consist in the admirable finish of the whole, while others exhibit the impress of genius in the invention, or some other individual feature.
A distinguished place must however be assigned to the Novelas Ejemplares[17] ("Moral or Instructive Tales"). They are unequal in merit as well as in character. Cervantes doubtless intended that they should be to the Spaniards nearly what the novellas of Boccaccio were to the Italians. Some are mere anecdotes; some are romances in miniature; some are serious, some comic; and all are written in a light, smooth, conversational style.
Four of them are perhaps of less interest than the rest: El Amante Liberal, La Señora Cornelia, Las Dos Doncellas, and La Española Inglesa. The theme common to these is basically the traditional one of the Byzantine novel: pairs of lovers separated by lamentable and complicated happenings are finally reunited and find the happiness they have longed for. The heroines are all of most perfect beauty and of sublime morality; they and their lovers are capable of the highest sacrifices; and they exert their souls in the effort to elevate themselves to the ideal of moral and aristocratic distinction which illuminates their lives.
In El Amante Liberal, to cite an example, the beautiful Leonisa and her lover Ricardo are carried off by Turkish pirates. Both fight against serious material and moral dangers. Ricardo conquers all obstacles, returns to his homeland with Leonisa, and is ready to renounce his passion and to hand Leonisa over to her former lover in an outburst of generosity; but Leonisa's preference naturally settles on Ricardo in the end.
Another group of "exemplary" novels is formed by La Fuerza de la Sangre, La Ilustre Fregona, La Gitanilla, and El Celoso Extremeño. The first three offer examples of love and adventure happily resolved, while the last unravels itself tragically. Its plot deals with the old Felipe Carrizales, who, after traveling widely and becoming rich in America, decides to marry, taking all the precautions necessary to forestall being deceived. He weds a very young girl – and isolates her from the world, by having her live in a house with no windows facing the street. But in spite of his defensive measures, a bold youth succeeds in penetrating the fortress of conjugal honour; and one day Carrizales surprises his wife in the arms of her seducer. Surprisingly enough he pardons the adulterers, recognizing that he is more to blame than they, and dies of sorrow over the grievous error he has committed. Cervantes here deviated from literary tradition, which demanded the death of the adulterers; but he transformed the punishment inspired, or rather required, by the social ideal of honour into a criticism of the responsibility of the individual.
Rinconete y Cortadillo, El Casamiento Engañoso, El Licenciado Vidriera, and El Coloquio de los Perros, four works of art which are concerned more with the personalities of the characters who figure in them than with the subject matter, form the final group of these stories. The protagonists are, respectively, two young vagabonds, Rincón and Cortado, Lieutenant Campuzano, a student – Tomás Rodaja (who goes mad and believes himself to have been changed into a witty man of glass, offering Cervantes the opportunity to make profound observations) and finally two dogs, Cipión and Berganza, whose wandering existence serves to mirror the most varied aspects of Spanish life. El colloquio de los perros features even more sardonic observations on the Spanish society of the time.
Rinconete y Cortadillo is one of the most delightful of Cervantes' works. Its two young vagabonds come to Seville, attracted by the riches and disorder that the sixteenth-century commerce with the Americas had brought to that metropolis. There they come into contact with a brotherhood of thieves, the Thieves' Guild, led by the unforgettable Monipodio, whose house is the headquarters of the Sevillian underworld. Under the bright Andalusian sky, people and objects take form with the brilliance and subtle drama of a Velázquez.[citation needed] A distant and discreet irony endows the figures, insignificant in themselves, as they move within a ritual pomp that is in sharp contrast with their morally deflated lives. The solemn ritual of this band of ruffians is all the more comic for being presented in Cervantes' drily humorous style.

Los Trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda




Title page of Persiles and Segismunda.







This article contains weasel words, vague phrasing that often accompanies biased or unverifiable information. Such statements should be clarified or removed. (April 2009)


The romance of Persiles and Sigismunda, which Cervantes finished shortly before his death, must be regarded as an interesting appendix to his other works. The language and the whole composition of the story exhibit the purest simplicity, combined with singular precision and polish. The idea of this romance was not new, and scarcely deserved to be reproduced in a new manner; but it appears that Cervantes, at the close of his glorious career, took a fancy to imitate Heliodorus. He has maintained the interest of the situations; but the whole work is merely a romantic description of travels, rich enough in fearful adventures, both by sea and land. Real and fabulous geography and history are mixed together in an absurd and monstrous manner; and the second half of the romance, in which the scene is transferred to Spain and Italy, does not exactly harmonize with the spirit of the first half.

Poetry
Some of his poems are found in La Galatea. He also wrote Dos Canciones a la Armada Invencible. His best work however is found in the sonnets, particularly Al Túmulo del Rey Felipe en Sevilla. Among his most important poems, Canto de Calíope, Epístola a Mateo Vázquez, and the Viaje del Parnaso (Journey to Parnassus – 1614) stand out. The latter is his most ambitious work in verse, an allegory which consists largely of reviews of contemporary poets.
Compared to his ability as a novelist, Cervantes is often considered a mediocre poet, although he himself always harbored a hope that he would be recognized for having poetic gifts.

Viaje del Parnaso




Frontispiece of the Viaje (1614).


The prose of the Galatea, which is in other respects so beautiful, is occasionally overloaded with epithet. Cervantes displays a totally different kind of poetic talent in the Viaje del Parnaso, a work which cannot properly be ranked in any particular class of literary composition, but which, next to Don Quixote, is considered by a few the most exquisite production of its author. Many critics, however, would argue with that, citing the Novelas Ejemplares and the Entemeses as the finest examples of his work next to Don Quixote.

Plays
Comparisons have also diminished the reputation of his plays; but two of them (El Trato de Argel and La Numancia – 1582) made a big impact and were not surpassed until Lope de Vega appeared.
The first of these, El Trato de Argel, is written in five acts. Based on his experiences as a captive of the Moors, the play deals with the life of Christian slaves in Algiers. The other play, Numancia, is a description of the siege of Numantia by the Romans. It is stuffed with horrors, and has been described as utterly devoid of the requisites of dramatic art.
Cervantes's later production consists of 16 dramatic works, among which are eight full-length plays:
El Gallardo Español, Los Baños de Argel, La Gran Sultana, Doña Catalina de Oviedo, La Casa de los Celos, El Laberinto de Amor, the cloak and dagger play La Entretenida, El Rufián Dichoso, and finally Pedro de Urdemalas, a sensitive play about a picaro, who joins a group of Gypsies for love of a girl.
He also wrote eight short farces (entremeses): El Juez de los Divorcios, El Rufián Viudo Llamado Trampagos, La Elección de los Alcaldes de Daganzo, La Guarda Cuidadosa (The Vigilant Sentinel), El Vizcaíno Fingido, El Retablo de las Maravillas, La Cueva de Salamanca, and El Viejo Celoso (The Jealous Old Man).
These plays and entremeses made up Ocho Comedias y Ocho Entremeses Nuevos, Nunca Representados (Eight Comedies and Eight New Interludes, Never Before Acted) which appeared in 1615. Cervantes' entremeses, whose dates and order of composition are not known, must not have been performed in their time. Faithful to the spirit of Lope de Rueda, Cervantes endowed them with novelistic elements, such as simplified plot, the type of description normally associated with the novel, and character development. The dialogue is sensitive and agile.
Cervantes includes some of his dramas among those productions with which he was himself most satisfied, and he seems to have regarded them with self-complacency in proportion to their neglect by the public. This conduct has sometimes been attributed to a spirit of contradiction and sometimes to vanity. That the penetrating and profound Cervantes should have so mistaken the limits of his dramatic talent would not be sufficiently accounted for had he not unquestionably proved by his tragedy of Numantia how pardonable was the self-deception of which he could not divest himself.
Cervantes was entitled to consider himself endowed with a genius for dramatic poetry; but he could not preserve his independence in the conflict that he had to maintain with the Spanish public, who required certain conditions of dramatic composition; and when he sacrificed his independence, and submitted to rules imposed by others, his invention and language were reduced to the level of a poet of inferior talent. The intrigues, adventures, and surprises, which in that age characterized the Spanish drama (and which, we may assume, characterize all drama in every age) were ill suited to the genius of Cervantes. His natural style was too profound and precise to be reconciled to fantastical ideas, expressed in irregular verse; but he was Spaniard enough[citation needed] to be gratified with dramas which as a poet he could not imitate; and he imagined himself capable of imitating them, because he would have shone in another species of dramatic composition had the public taste accommodated itself to his genius.

La Numancia
Main article: La Numancia
This play is a dramatization of the long and brutal siege of the Celtiberian town Numantia, Hispania, by the Roman forces of Scipio Africanus.
Cervantes invented, along with the subject of his piece, a peculiar style of tragic composition; and, in doing so, he did not pay much regard to the theory of Aristotle. His object was to produce a piece full of tragic situations, combined with the charm of the marvellous. In order to accomplish this goal, Cervantes relied heavily on allegory and on mythological elements.
The tragedy is written in conformity with no rules, save those which the author prescribed for himself, for he felt no inclination to imitate the Greek forms. The play is divided into four acts, jornadas; and no chorus is introduced. The dialogue is sometimes in tercets, and sometimes in redondillas, and for the most part in octaves – without any regard to rule.

Cervantes' historical importance and influence




Cervantes: Image from a 19th century German book on the history of literature


Cervantes' novel Don Quixote has had a tremendous influence on the development of prose fiction. It has been translated into all major languages and has appeared in 700 editions. The first translation was in English, made by Thomas Shelton in 1608, but not published until 1612. Shakespeare had evidently read Don Quixote, but it is most unlikely that Cervantes had ever heard of Shakespeare. Carlos Fuentes raised the possibility that Cervantes and Shakespeare were the same person (see Shakespearean authorship question). Francis Carr has suggested that Francis Bacon wrote Shakespeare's plays and Don Quixote.[18]
Both possibilities are highly unlikely, especially the Shelton one. Shelton renders some Spanish idioms into English so literally that they sound nonsensical when translated - as an example he always translates the word dedos as fingers, not realizing that dedos can also mean inches. (In the original Spanish, for instance, a phrase such as una altura de quince dedos , which makes perfect sense in Spanish, would mean fifteen inches high in English, but a translator who renders it too literally would translate it as fifteen fingers high.)
Don Quixote has been the subject of a variety of works in other fields of art, including operas by the Italian composer Giovanni Paisiello, the French Jules Massenet, and the Spanish Manuel de Falla, a Russian ballet by the Russian-German composer Ludwig Minkus, a tone poem by the German composer Richard Strauss, a German film (1933) directed by G. W. Pabst, a Soviet film (1957) directed by Grigori Kozintsev, a 1965 ballet (no relation to the one by Minkus) with choreography by George Balanchine, and an American musical – Man of La Mancha (1965) – by Dale Wasserman, Mitch Leigh, and Joe Darion. Man of La Mancha was made into a film in 1972, directed by Arthur Hiller.
Don Quixote 's influence can be seen in the work of Smollett, Defoe, Fielding, and Sterne, as well as in the classic 19th-century novelists Scott, Dickens, Flaubert, Melville, and Dostoevsky, and in the works of James Joyce and Jorge Luis Borges. The theme of the novel also inspired the 19th-century French artists Honoré Daumier and Gustave Doré.
The Euro coins of €0.10, €0.20, and €0.50 made for Spain bear the portrait and signature of Cervantes.
The Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes, a digital library, hosted by the University of Alicante, the largest digital archive of Spanish-language historical and literary works in the world, is named after Cervantes.

Ethnic and Religious Heritage
There is ongoing debate over Cervantes' family origins. While it was long assumed that Cervantes was an Old Christian, more modern scholarship has increasingly concurred that he likely descended from a so-called converso background.[19]
Advocates of the New Christian theory, first set forth by Americo Castro, often suggest Cervantes' mother was a converso. The theory is almost exclusively supported by circumstantial evidence, but would explain some mysteries of Cervantes' life.[20] It has been supported by authors such as Anthony Cascardi and Canavaggio. Others, such as Claudio Sánchez-Albornoz (or Francisco Olmos Garcia, who considers it a "tired issue" and only supported by Americo Castro) reject the theory strongly.[21]

Notes

a. ^  The most reliable and accurate portrait of the writer to date is that provided by Cervantes himself in the Exemplary Novels (translated by Walter K. Kelly):[22]


“
This person whom you see here, with an oval visage, chestnut hair, smooth open forehead, lively eyes, a hooked but well-proportioned nose, and silvery beard that twenty years ago was golden, large moustaches, a small mouth, teeth not much to speak of, for he has but six, in bad condition and worse placed, no two of them corresponding to each other, a figure midway between the two extremes, neither tall nor short, a vivid complexion, rather fair than dark, somewhat stooped in the shoulders, and not very lightfooted: this, I say, is the author of Galatea, Don Quixote de la Mancha, The Journey to Parnassus, which he wrote in imitation of Cesare Caporali Perusino, and other works which are current among the public, and perhaps without the author's name. He is commonly called MIGUEL DE CERVANTES SAAVEDRA.
”


 

— Miguel de Cervantes, Exemplary Novels (Author's Preface)



b. ^  His signature spells Cerbantes with a b; but he is now known after the spelling Cervantes, used by the printers of his works. Saavedra was the surname of a distant relative. He adopted it as his second surname after his return from the Barbary Coast.[23] The earliest documents signed with Cervantes' two names, Cervantes Saavedra, appear several years after his repatriation. He began adding the second surname (Saavedra, a name that did not correspond to his immediate family) to his patronymic in 1586-1587 in official documents related to his marriage to Catalina de Salazar.[24]
c. ^  The only evidence is a statement by Professor Tomas González, that he once saw an old entry of the matriculation of a Miguel de Cervantes.[25] No subsequent scholar has been successful in verifying this statement. In any case, there were at least two other Miguels born about the middle of the century.
d. ^  "He" refers to the writer of a spurious Part II of Don Quixote (Second Volume of the Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha) known under the pseudonym Alonso Fernández de Avellaneda. Avellaneda had referred to Cervantes as an "old and one-handed" man.


References


^ Harold Bloom on Don Quixote, the first modern novel | Books | The Guardian
^ a b c "Cervantes, Miguel de". Encyclopaedia Britannica. 2002. 
^ (in Spanish) (PDF)La lengua de Cervantes. Ministerio de la Presidencia de España. http://www.cepc.es/rap/Publicaciones/Revistas/2/REP_031-032_288.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-08-24. 
^ Fuentes, Carlos. Myself with Others: Selected Essays. (1988).
^ William Byron, "Cervantes. A Biography", Doubleday & Company: Garden City, NY, 1978, pp. 23-32.
^ Moorcock p 386
^ "Cervantes, Miguel de". The Encyclopedia Americana. 1994. 
^ 'The Enigma of Cervantine Genealogy, 118
^ F.A. de Armas, Cervantes and the Italian Renaissance, 32
* F.A. de Armas, Quixotic Frescoes, 5
^ F.A. de Armas, Cervantes and the Italian Renaissance, 33
^ J. Fitzmaurice-Kelly, The Life of Cervantes, 9
^ M.A. Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, 220
^ J. Fitzmaurice-Kelly, The Life of Cervantes, 41
^ M.A. Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, 236
^ C. Calvo, Shakespeare and Cervantes in 1916, 78.
^ World Book and Copyright Day — April 23, 2006, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
^ . The Spanish title of novelas is misleading. In modern Spanish it means novels, but Cervantes used it to mean the shorter Italian novella. Read the Novel article for the terminological problem.
^ Francis Carr, Who Wrote Don Quixote? (London: Xlibris Corporation, 2004).
^ See for example, Rosa Rossi. Tras las huellas de Cervantes. Perfil inédito del autor del Quijote. Trans. Juan Ramón Capella. Madrid: Trotta, 2002 and Howard Mancing, The Cervantes Encyclopedia. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 2004 (2 vols).
^ Cervantes: A Biography by William Byron, Pg 32
^ Cervantes and His Postmodern Constituencies by Anne J. Cruz, Carroll B. Johnson, Pg 116
^ M. de Cervantes, The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Exemplary Novels of Cervantes
^ M.A. Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, 191-192
* C. Slade, Introduction, xxiv
^ M.A. Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, 191-192
^ J. Fitzmaurice-Kelly, The Life of Cervantes, 9
* J. Ormsby, About Cervantes and Don Quixote



More information


Armas, Frederick A. de (2002). "Cervantes and the Italian Renaissance". The Cambridge Companion to Cervantes By Anthony Joseph Cascardi. Cambridge University. ISBN 0-521-66387-3. 
Armas, Frederick A. de (2006). "The Exhilaration of Italy". Quixotic Frescoes: Cervantes and Italian Renaissance Art. University of Toronto Press. ISBN 0-802-09074-5. 
"Cervantes, Miguel de". The Encyclopedia Americana. Grolier Incorporated. 1994. 
"Cervantes, Miguel de". Encyclopaedia Britannica. 2002. 
Calvo, Clara (2004). "Shakespeare and Cervantes in 1916: The Politics of Language". Shifting the Scene: Shakespeare in European Culture By Ladina Bezzola Lambert, Balz Engler. University of Delaware Press. ISBN 0-874-13860-4. 
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James (2005). "The Youth of Cervantes". The Life of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 1-417-97000-6. 
Garcés, María Antonia (2002). "An Erotics of Creation". Cervantes in Algiers: a Captive's Tale. Vanderbilt University Press. ISBN 0-826-51470-7. 
Lokos, Ellen (1998). "The Politics of Identity and the Enigma of Cervantine Genealogy". Cervantes and his Postomodern Consituencies by Ann J. Cruz. Routledge (UK). ISBN 0-815-33206-8. 
Qualia, Charles B. (January 1949). "Cervantes, Soldier and Humanist". The South Central Bulletin (The Johns Hopkins University Press) 9 (No.1): 1+10–11. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0038-321X(194901)9%3A1%3C1%2B10%3ACSAH%3E2.0.CO%3B2-U. 



Online sources


Canavaggio, Jean. "Miguel de Cervantes (1547-1616): Life and Portrait". The Cervantes Project. http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/cervantes/biography/new_english_cerv_bio.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-04. 
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. "E-book of The Exemplary Novels of Cervantes (Translated by Walter K. Kelly)". The Project Gutenberg. http://www.gutenberg.org/files/14420/14420-8.txt. Retrieved on 2007-01-01. 
Ormsby, John. "Don Quixote – Translator's Preface – About Cervantes And Don Quixote". The University of Adelaide Library. http://etext.library.adelaide.edu.au/c/cervantes/c41d/preface1.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-02. 
"World Book and Copyright Day – April 23, 2006". United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). http://portal.unesco.org/culture/en/ev.php-URL_ID=5125&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-17. 



External links

Find more about Miguel de Cervantes on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity


Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de.


Works by Miguel de Cervantes at Project Gutenberg
Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes Spanish web site with multiple Cervantes links and audio of whole of Don Quixote
Famous Hispanics
The Cervantes Project with biographies and chronology



Persondata


NAME
Cervantes, Miguel de


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de; De Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel


SHORT DESCRIPTION
Spanish novelist, poet and playwright


DATE OF BIRTH
September 29, 1547(1547-09-29)


PLACE OF BIRTH
Alcalá de Henares, Spain


DATE OF DEATH
April 23, 1616


PLACE OF DEATH
Madrid, Spain


  



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miguel_de_Cervantes"
Categories: 1547 births | 1616 deaths | Spanish amputees | Barbary pirates | Renaissance writers | Spanish dramatists and playwrights | Spanish novelists | Spanish poets | Roman Catholic writersHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2009 | Articles with weasel words from April 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Aragonés
مصرى
Asturianu
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bikol Central
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Gaeilge
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kiswahili
Latina
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Malti
मराठी
Монгол
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
O'zbek
Pangasinan
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
Taqbaylit
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
Vèneto
Volapük
Võro
粵語
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 07:46.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
