













We Didn't Start the Fire - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "We_Didn\'t_Start_the_Fire";
		var wgTitle = "We Didn\'t Start the Fire";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "304467";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281700246;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 


wgOggPlayer.msg = {"ogg-play": "Play", "ogg-pause": "Pause", "ogg-stop": "Stop", "ogg-no-player": "Sorry, your system does not appear to have any supported player software.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload a player\x3c/a\x3e.", "ogg-player-videoElement": "Native browser support", "ogg-player-oggPlugin": "Browser plugin", "ogg-player-cortado": "Cortado (Java)", "ogg-player-vlc-mozilla": "VLC", "ogg-player-vlc-activex": "VLC (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-quicktime-mozilla": "QuickTime", "ogg-player-quicktime-activex": "QuickTime (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-totem": "Totem", "ogg-player-kaffeine": "Kaffeine", "ogg-player-kmplayer": "KMPlayer", "ogg-player-mplayerplug-in": "mplayerplug-in", "ogg-player-thumbnail": "Still image only", "ogg-player-selected": "(selected)", "ogg-use-player": "Use player:", "ogg-more": "More…", "ogg-download": "Download file", "ogg-desc-link": "About this file", "ogg-dismiss": "Close", "ogg-player-soundthumb": "No player", "ogg-no-xiphqt": "You do not appear to have the XiphQT component for QuickTime.\nQuickTime cannot play Ogg files without this component.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload XiphQT\x3c/a\x3e or choose another player."};
wgOggPlayer.cortadoUrl = "http://upload.wikimedia.org/jars/cortado.jar";
wgOggPlayer.extPathUrl = "/w/extensions/OggHandler";


.ogg-player-options {
	border: solid 1px #ccc;
	padding: 2pt;
	text-align: left;
	font-size: 10pt;
}
 <!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); We Didn't Start the Fire

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


“We Didn't Start the Fire”





Single by Billy Joel
from the album Storm Front


Released
November 10, 1989


Format
7" single, 12" single, CD


Genre
Rock


Length
4:49


Label
Columbia Records


Writer(s)
Billy Joel


Producer
Mick Jones, Billy Joel


Certification
Gold (RIAA)


Billy Joel singles chronology





"This Is the Time"
(1987)
"We Didn't Start the Fire"
(1989)
"Leningrad"
(1990)





"We Didn't Start the Fire" is a song by Billy Joel that makes reference to a catalog of headline events during his lifetime, from March 1949 to 1989, when the song was released on his album Storm Front. The events are mixed with a refrain asserting "we didn't start the fire". The song was a number-one hit in the U.S.
The song and music video have been interpreted as a rebuttal to criticism of Joel's Baby Boomer generation, from both its preceding and succeeding generations. The song's title and refrain imply that the frenzied and troubled state which others were criticizing had been the state of the world since long before his generation's time, but that this was being ignored by their critics.




Contents


1 History
2 Music video
3 Chart positions
4 Historical items referred to in the song
5 Parodies and other cultural references
6 References
7 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2008)


Joel explained that he wrote this song due to his interest in history. He commented that he would have wanted to be a history teacher if he had not become a musician. Unlike most of Joel's songs, the lyrics were written before the melody, owing to the somewhat unusual style of the song. Nevertheless, the song was a huge commercial success and provided Billy Joel with his third Billboard #1 hit.
"We Didn't Start the Fire" was written by Joel after a conversation with John Lennon's son Sean. Sean was complaining that he was growing up in troubled times.
Although the song ranked #1 in the U.S., and #7 in the UK, Blender magazine ranked "We Didn't Start the Fire" #41 on its list of the "50 Worst Songs Ever".[1] "We Didn't Start the Fire" also appeared in the same spot on VH1's 50 Most Awesomely Bad Songs Ever, a collaboration with Blender in 2004.
This song could be classified as a patter song characterized by its moderately fast tempo with rapid succession of rhythmic lyrics.

[edit] Music video
A music video for the single was directed by Chris Blum.[2] It chronicles a middle-class husband and wife and their goal of the American Dream: a home, careers and children. This is juxtaposed with the tumultuous social times of the second half of the 20th century (e.g., bra burning). The singer acts as an omnipotent observer. The chorus shows Joel beating on a table while a backdrop of famous photographs (Lee Harvey Oswald's assassination and Nguyễn Văn Lém's execution, among others) are consumed in flames.

[edit] Chart positions


Chart (1989)
Peak
position


ARC Weekly Top 40
1


Austrian Singles Chart
7


Dutch Top 40
11[3]


German Media Control Charts
4


Australian ARIA Charts
2


UK Singles Chart
7


U.S. Billboard Hot 100
1


U.S. Billboard Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks
5


U.S. Billboard Mainstream Rock Tracks
6



[edit] Historical items referred to in the song










"We Didn't Start the Fire" (1989)









"We Didn't Start the Fire" lists historical events in stream of consciousness.









Problems listening to this file? See media help.


Stream of consciousness in style, the song could be considered a natural successor to songs such as "Subterranean Homesick Blues", "Life Is a Rock (But the Radio Rolled Me)" and "It's the End of the World as We Know It (And I Feel Fine)", as it consists of a series of unrelated images in a rapid-fire, half-spoken, half-sung vocal style.
The following events are in chronological order, the order as they appear in the song. In the actual song they are slightly reworded and are occasionally punctuated by the chorus and other lyrical elements. Events from a variety of contexts, such as popular entertainment, foreign affairs, and sports, are intermingled, giving an impression of the culture of the time as a whole. There are 121 items listed in the song.

1949

Harry Truman is inaugurated as U.S. president after being elected in 1948 to his own term; previously he was sworn in following the death of Franklin D. Roosevelt. He authorized the use of atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan during World War II. August 6, 1945 and August 9, 1945 respectively.
Doris Day enters the public spotlight with the films My Dream Is Yours and It's a Great Feeling as well as popular songs like "It's Magic"; divorces her second husband.
Red China as the Communist Party of China wins the Chinese Civil War, establishing the People's Republic of China.
Johnnie Ray signs his first recording contract with Okeh Records, although he would not become popular for another two years.
South Pacific, the prize winning musical, opens on Broadway on April 7.
Walter Winchell is an aggressive radio and newspaper journalist credited with inventing the gossip column.
Joe DiMaggio is injured early in the season but makes a comeback in June and leads the New York Yankees to win the World Series.

1950

Joe McCarthy, the U.S. Senator, gains national attention and begins his anti-communist witch-hunt crusade with his Lincoln Day speech.
Richard Nixon is first elected to the United States Senate.
Studebaker, a popular car company, is beginning its financial downfall.
Television is becoming widespread (in black and white format) and becomes the most popular means of advertising.
North Korea, South Korea engage in warfare as North Korea attacks on June 25, beginning the Korean War.
Marilyn Monroe soars in popularity with five new movies including The Asphalt Jungle and All About Eve, and attempts suicide after the death of lover Johnny Hyde. Monroe would later (1954) be married for a brief time to Joe DiMaggio (the person mentioned in the previous verse).

1951

Ethel and Julius Rosenberg were convicted on March 29 for espionage. They maintained that they were innocent even at their executions.
H-Bomb is in the middle of its development as a nuclear weapon, announced in early 1950 and first tested in late 1952.
Sugar Ray Robinson, the boxer, obtains the world's middleweight title.
Panmunjeom, the border village in Korea, is the location of truce talks between the parties of the Korean War.
Marlon Brando is nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in A Streetcar Named Desire.
The King and I, musical, opens on Broadway on March 29.
The Catcher in the Rye, a controversial novel by J. D. Salinger, is published.

1952

Dwight D. Eisenhower is first elected as U.S. president, winning by a landslide margin of 442 to 89 electoral votes.
Vaccine for polio is privately tested by Jonas Salk.
Queen Elizabeth II (then Princess Elizabeth) succeeds to the throne of the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth Realms upon the death of George VI of the United Kingdom.
Rocky Marciano defeats Jersey Joe Walcott, becoming the world Heavyweight champion.
Liberace has a popular 1950s television show for his musical entertainment.
George Santayana, philosopher, essayist, poet, and novelist, dies on September 26.

1953

Joseph Stalin dies on March 5, yielding his position as leader of the Soviet Union.
Georgy Maksimilianovich Malenkov succeeds Stalin for six months following his death. Malenkov had presided over Stalin's purges of party "enemies", but would be spared a similar fate by Nikita Khrushchev mentioned later in verse.
Gamal Abdel Nasser acts as the true power behind the new Egyptian nation as Muhammad Naguib's minister of the interior.
Sergei Prokofiev, the composer, dies on March 5, the same day as Stalin.
Winthrop Rockefeller establishes Winrock Enterprises and Winrock Farms atop Petit Jean Mountain near Morrilton, Arkansas.
Roy Campanella, an African American baseball catcher for the Brooklyn Dodgers, receives the National League's Most Valuable Player award for the second time.
Communist bloc is a group of communist nations dominated by the Soviet Union at this time.

1954

Roy Cohn resigns as Joseph McCarthy's chief counsel and enters private practice with the fall of McCarthy.
Juan Perón spends his last full year as President of Argentina before a September 1955 coup.
Arturo Toscanini is at the height of his fame as a conductor, performing regularly with the NBC Symphony Orchestra on national radio.
Dacron is an early artificial fiber made from the same plastic as polyester.
Battle of Dien Bien Phu. A village in North Vietnam falls to Viet Minh forces under Vo Nguyen Giap, leading to the creation of North Vietnam and South Vietnam as separate states.
"Rock Around the Clock" is a hit single released by Bill Haley & His Comets in May, spurring worldwide interest in rock and roll.

1955

Albert Einstein dies on April 18 at the age of 76.
James Dean achieves success with East of Eden and Rebel Without a Cause, gets nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor, and dies in a car accident on September 30.
1955 World Series as the Brooklyn Dodgers win the World Series for the only time. (There is cheering in the background of the song during this line.)
Davy Crockett is a Disney television series about the legendary frontiersman of the same name. The show was a huge hit with young boys and inspired a short-lived "coonskin cap" craze. Davy Crockett is also the name of a contemporary tactical nuclear recoilless rifle.
Peter Pan is broadcast on TV live and in color from the 1954 version of the stage musical starring Mary Martin on March 7. Disney released an animated version the previous year.
Elvis Presley signs with RCA Records on November 21, beginning his pop career.
Disneyland opens on July 17 as Walt Disney's first theme park.

1956

Brigitte Bardot appears in her first mainstream film And God Created Woman and establishes an international reputation as a French "sex kitten".
Budapest is the site of the 1956 Hungarian Revolution.
Alabama is the site of the Montgomery Bus Boycott which ultimately led to the removal of the last race laws in the USA.
Nikita Khrushchev makes his famous Secret Speech denouncing Stalin's "cult of personality" on February 23.
Princess Grace Kelly releases her last film, High Society, and marries Prince Rainier III of Monaco.
Peyton Place, the best-selling novel by Grace Metalious, is published. Though mild compared to today's prime time, it shocked the reserved values of the '50s.
Suez Crisis The Suez Crisis boils as Egypt nationalizes the Suez Canal on October 29.

1957

Little Rock, Arkansas is the site of an anti-integration standoff, as Governor Orval Faubus stops the Little Rock Nine from attending Little Rock Central High School and President Dwight D. Eisenhower deploys the 101st Airborne Division to counteract him.
Boris Pasternak, the Russian author, publishes his famous novel Doctor Zhivago.
Mickey Mantle is in the middle of his career as a famous New York Yankees' outfielder and American League All-Star for the sixth year in a row.
Jack Kerouac publishes his first novel in seven years, On the Road.
Sputnik is the first artificial satellite, launched by the Soviet Union on October 4, the start of the space race.
Zhou Enlai, Premier of the People's Republic of China, survives an assassination attempt on the Charter jet Kashmir Princess.
The Bridge on the River Kwai is released as a film adaptation of the 1954 novel and receives seven Academy Awards.

1958

Lebanon is engulfed in a political and religious crisis that eventually involves US Intervention.
Charles de Gaulle is elected first president of the French Fifth Republic following the Algerian Crisis.
California baseball begins as the Brooklyn Dodgers and New York Giants move to California and become the Los Angeles Dodgers and San Francisco Giants. They are the first major league teams west of Kansas City.
Charles Starkweather homicides capture the attention of Americans, killing eleven people before he is caught in a massive manhunt in Douglas, Wyoming.
Thalidomide: Mothers taking the drug Thalidomide had children born with congenital birth defects caused by the sleeping aid and antiemetic, which was also used at times (although not in the USA) to treat morning sickness.

1959

Buddy Holly dies in a plane crash on February 3 with Ritchie Valens and J. P. Richardson ("The Big Bopper"), in a day that had a devastating impact on the country and youth culture. The event was immortalized by Don McLean as "The Day the Music Died" in his famous tribute song American Pie. (As an intro to this stanza, Billy Joel mimics Buddy Holly's trademark "hiccup" style, singing a-UH-uh-oh...).
Ben-Hur wins eleven Academy Awards as a film based around the New Testament starring Charlton Heston.
Monkeys in space: Able and Miss Baker are the first living beings to successfully return to Earth from space aboard the flight Jupiter AM-18.
Mafia are the center of attention for the FBI and public attention builds to this organized crime society with a historically Sicilian-American origin.
Hula hoops reach 100 million in sales as the latest toy fad.
Fidel Castro comes to power after a revolution in Cuba and visits the United States later that year on an unofficial twelve-day tour.
Edsel: Production of this car marketing disaster (Ford spent $400 million developing it) ends after only three years.

1960

Lockheed U-2: An American U-2 spy plane was shot down over the Soviet Union, causing the U-2 Crisis of 1960.
Syngman Rhee was rescued by the CIA after being forced to resign as leader of South Korea for allegedly fixing an election and embezzling more than twenty million U.S. dollars.
Payola was publicized due to Dick Clark's testimony before Congress and Alan Freed's public disgrace.
John F. Kennedy beats Richard Nixon in the November 8 general election amongst allegations of vote fraud.
Chubby Checker popularizes the dance The Twist with his song of the same name (see "The Twist").
Psycho: An Alfred Hitchcock thriller, based on a pulp novel by Robert Bloch and adapted by Joseph Stefano, which becomes a landmark in graphic violence and cinema sensationalism. The screeching violins heard briefly in the background are a trademark of the film's soundtrack.
Congo Crisis: The Democratic Republic of the Congo was declared independent of Belgium on June 30, with Joseph Kasavubu as President and Patrice Lumumba as Prime Minister. The Belgians, however, had other plans (see Secession of Katanga).

1961

Ernest Hemingway commits suicide on July 2 after a long battle with depression.
Adolf Eichmann, a "most wanted" Nazi war criminal, is traced to Argentina and captured by Mossad agents. He is covertly taken to Israel where he is put on trial for crimes against humanity in Germany during World War II, convicted, and hanged.
Stranger in a Strange Land: Written by Robert A. Heinlein, is a breakthrough best-seller with themes of sexual freedom and liberation.
Bob Dylan: After a New York Times review by critic Robert Shelton, Bob Dylan is signed to Columbia Records.
Berlin: The Berlin Wall, which forcibly separated West Berlin from East Berlin and the rest of East Germany, was erected on August 13th to prevent citizens escaping to the West.
Bay of Pigs Invasion: Failed attempt by United States-trained Cuban exiles to invade Cuba and overthrow Fidel Castro.

1962

Lawrence of Arabia: The Academy Award-winning film based on the life of T. E. Lawrence starring Peter O'Toole premiers in America on December 16.
Beatlemania: The Beatles, a British pop/rock group, gain Ringo Starr as drummer and Brian Epstein as manager, and join the EMI's Parlophone label. They soon become the world's most famous group, with the word "Beatlemania" adopted by the press for their fans' unprecedented enthusiasm. It also began the British Invasion in the United States.
University of Mississippi: James Meredith integrates the University of Mississippi (known as Ole Miss).
John Glenn: Flew the first American manned orbital mission termed "Friendship 7" on February 20.
Sonny Liston beats Floyd Patterson: Sonny Liston and Floyd Patterson fight for the world heavyweight championship on September 25, ending in a round-one knockout. This match marked the first time Patterson had ever been knocked out and one of only eight losses in his entire career.

1963

Pope Paul VI: Pope Paul VI is elected to the papacy.
Malcolm X makes infamous statement "The chickens have come home to roost" about the Kennedy assassination, thus causing the Nation of Islam to censure him.
Profumo Affair: The British Secretary of State for War has a relationship with a showgirl, and then lies when questioned about it before the House of Commons. When the truth came out, it led to his own resignation and undermined the credibility of the Prime Minister.
John F. Kennedy assassination: President John F. Kennedy is assassinated on November 22 while riding in an open convertible through Dallas.

1965

Birth control: In the early 1960s, oral contraceptives, popularly known as "the pill", first go on the market and are extremely popular. Griswold v. Connecticut in 1965 challenged a Connecticut law prohibiting contraceptives. In 1968, Pope Paul VI released a papal encyclical entitled Humanae Vitae which declared artificial birth control a sin.
Ho Chi Minh: A Vietnamese Communist, who served as President of Vietnam from 1954–1969. March 2nd Operation Rolling Thunder begins bombing of the "Ho Chi Minh Trail" supply line from North Viet Nam to the Viet Cong rebels in the south. March 8th first US combat troops, 3,500 marines, land in South Vietnam.

1968

Richard Nixon: Former Vice President Nixon is elected in the 1968 presidential election of the United States.

1969

Space Race: Apollo 11, the first manned lunar landing, successfully lands on the moon.
Woodstock Festival: Famous rock and roll festival of 1969 that came to be the epitome of the counterculture movement.

1974

Watergate scandal: Political scandal involving a hotel break-in, eventually leading to President Nixon's resignation.
Punk rock: The Ramones form, with the Sex Pistols following in 1975, bringing in the punk era. The movement went beyond the music to a cultural attitude of rebellion against authority as a way of life, the reverberations of which are still being felt today.

1977 (Note that these two items, while later chronologically than the two 1976 items, come immediately before them in the song.)

Menachem Begin becomes Prime Minister of Israel in 1977 and negotiates the Camp David Accords with Egypt's president in 1978.
Ronald Reagan: President of the United States from 1981 to 1989; first attempted in 1976 to run for president.

1976 (Note that these two items, while earlier chronologically than the two 1977 items, come immediately after them in the song)

Palestine: The Palestine Liberation Organization is admitted as a member of Arab League; see history of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Aircraft hijacking: Numerous aircraft hijackings took place, specifically, the Palestinian hijack of Air France Flight 139 and the subsequent Operation Entebbe in Uganda

1979

Ayatollahs in Iran: During the Iranian Revolution of 1979, the West-backed and U.S.-installed Shah is overthrown as the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini gains power after years in exile.
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan: Following their move into Afghanistan, Soviet forces fight a ten-year war, from 1979 to 1989.

1983

Wheel of Fortune: A hit television game show which has been TV's highest-rated syndicated program since 1983.
Sally Ride: In 1983 she becomes the first American woman in space. Dr. Ride's quip from space "Better than an E-ticket," harkens back to the opening of Disneyland mentioned earlier, with the E-ticket purchase needed for the best rides.
Heavy metal, suicide: In the 1980s Ozzy Osbourne and the bands Metallica and Judas Priest were brought to court by parents who accused the musicians of hiding subliminal pro-suicide messages in their music. (Billy Joel himself has stated on his website that even though the two terms are separated by a comma they are collectively one item.)
Trade deficit: Persistent US trade deficits.
Homeless Vietnam veterans: Veterans of the Vietnam war, including many disabled ex-military, are reported to be left homeless and impoverished, the country unable to yet handle its failure to succeed.
AIDS: A collection of symptoms and infections in humans resulting from the specific damage to the immune system caused by infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). It is first detected and recognized in the 1980s, on its way to becoming a pandemic.
Crack cocaine: Refers to crack cocaine, a popular drug in the mid-to-late 1980s.

1984

Bernhard Goetz: On December 22, Goetz shot four young men who he said were threatening him on a New York City subway. Goetz was charged with attempted murder but was acquitted of the charges, though convicted of carrying an unlicensed gun.

1988

Syringe Tide: Medical waste was found washed up on beaches in New Jersey after being illegally dumped at sea. Before this event, waste dumped in the oceans was an "out of sight, out of mind" affair. This has been cited as one of the crucial turning points in popular opinion on environmentalism.

1989

China's Martial law: On May 20, China declares martial law, enabling them to use force of arms against protesting students to end the Tiananmen Square protests.
Rock and Roller, Cola wars: Soft drink giants Coke and Pepsi each run marketing campaigns using popular music stars to reach the young adult demographic.

Of the 56 individuals mentioned by name in the song, the following nine are still alive as of March, 2009: Doris Day, Queen Elizabeth II, Brigitte Bardot, Fidel Castro, Chubby Checker, Bob Dylan, John Glenn, Sally Ride, and Bernhard Goetz. Johnnie Ray was the first person mentioned in the song, still alive when it was released, to die (on 24 February 1990). The most recent to die was Floyd Patterson, on 11 May 2006.
Johnnie Ray, Joe DiMaggio, Richard Nixon, Roy Campanella, Mickey Mantle, Floyd Patterson, Menachem Begin, Marlon Brando, and Ronald Reagan were all alive when the song was released but have died since.
Only two individuals, John F. Kennedy and Richard Nixon, are mentioned by name twice in the song.
The only U.S. Presidents in office from 1949 to 1989 not mentioned in the song are Lyndon Johnson, Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter.

[edit] Parodies and other cultural references





This article may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail which may only interest a specific audience. Please relocate any relevant information, and remove excessive trivia, praise, criticism, lists and collections of links. (July 2008)



"They'll Never Stop The Simpsons": In the episode "Gump Roast", The Simpsons plays this parody while showing various stills from the series up to that point.


The Song "Cheif Didn't Start the Fire" is a song by Center Feild Rock.


"We Like Barney Fife": a parody song by novelty group Guns 'N' Moses (one of many names used by IceMark, composed of Mark Jonathan Davis and Rob "Iceman" Izenberg[4]), centered around the characters and landmarks of The Andy Griffith Show, primarily around Deputy Barney Fife of Mayberry. This then segues into an audio trailer for "Barney on the Fourth of July", a spoof of the movie Born on the Fourth of July. (One notable clever point is the interesting counterpoint between the melody of the refrain of "We Didn't Start the Fire" and the Andy Griffith Show theme music, "The Fishin' Hole".)


"Pet Names for Genitalia": a song listing increasingly absurd euphemisms for "penis" and circulated on the Internet. Though commonly misattributed to "Weird Al" Yankovic, Tom Green, Dane Cook, or South Park, it is generally unknown who wrote it. It is possible that it was first written by the British comedy music duo the Amateur Transplants.


Coca Cola (Coke) in Latin America launched a TV campaign about the 2006 FIFA World Cup, in which they use the score of this song like a chant.[5]


On Late Night with Conan O'Brien Conan O'Brien has occasionally suggested that the show will turn over a new leaf in terms of its comedic direction and stop doing comedy bits that don't make any sense. He then consults with the Cactus Chef playing "We Didn't Start the Fire" on the flute for confirmation. The Cactus Chef promptly plays "We Didn't Start the Fire" on his flute.


In Ricky Gervais's stand-up show Politics, he references the song, saying "It's basically a list", then quoting the first verse and commenting, "That's not a song. That is a conversation with Rain Man."


"Ryan Started the Fire": In The Office episode "The Fire", Dunder-Mifflin Scranton catches fire. After the smoke clears, Michael and Dwight discover that it was Ryan who started the fire, after leaving a cheese pita in the toaster-oven. Dwight "wrote" a song based on this while trying to find Michael's cell phone in the smoky building. They then tease Ryan by singing "Ryan Started the Fire". The "Joe McCarthy... ...Marilyn Monroe" was left in verbatim.


Around December 2007 JibJab released a video parody of the song called In 2007, which is about the year 2007 in review.


On Comedy Central's Night of Too Many Stars benefit concert they sang a rendition of it titled "We Didn't Start Autism" in which they said the name of every person who had donated that night.


On the "Subway Hero" episode of 30 Rock, Tracy Jordan (Tracy Morgan) dances to the song in his dressing room of TGS. His CD begins to repeat Richard Nixon and Jordan pokes his stereo with a screwdriver, shocking him and triggering a dream sequence where he meets Nixon (Played by Alec Baldwin) who tries to persuade him to join the Republican Party.


A version created by the National Broadcasting Corporation (NBC) based on over forty years of television news footage is available on YouTube.[6] In this version, however, Stranger in a Strange Land seems to refer to Jane Fonda in Vietnam as well as "suicide" referring to the televised suicide of Budd Dwyer during a press conference. Also, an anachronistic shot of the U.S.S. Arizona burning following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor during World War II is used for "South Pacific," rather than imagery from the 1949 Broadway musical.


Cornell University also boasts its own parody of the song entitled "We Didn't Go To Harvard" sung by Cornell's original A Cappella group, Cayuga's Waiters. This version references a number of well-known campus occurrences and places of note and is popular enough with the student body to warrant its own t-shirt.


Rapper Necro sampled the song on a song for his album The Pre-Fix For Death, called "You Did It".


German comedian Otto Waalkes sometimes plays a parody at live shows called "Wir haben Grund zum Feiern" (We have a reason to party) in which he lists different kinds of booze.


"We Didn't Start the Pyre", by Marc Ander. All of the names listed are celebrities who died of smoking-related diseases.


[edit] References


^ Run for Your Life! It's the 50 Worst Songs Ever! from Blender.com. Retrieved on May 3, 2008.
^ [1]
^ Dutch Top 40 1989. Retrieved 2009-01-08.
^ "Dr. Demento Hits". MJD's Intergalactic Comedy Hacienda. http://mich.ideatown.com/mdemento.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-09. 
^ [2]
^ YouTube - tv IS history (We Didn't Start The Fire)



[edit] External links

Flash Version with lyrics, years and images
An in depth history from the BBC's h2g2 site
History Summary from 1949-1989 by Ron Kurtus
The song with flash animation accompaniment



Preceded by
"Blame It on the Rain" by Milli Vanilli
Billboard Hot 100 number one single
December 9, 1989- December 16, 1989
Succeeded by
"Another Day in Paradise" by Phil Collins









v • d • e

Billy Joel





Studio albums

Cold Spring Harbor • Piano Man • Streetlife Serenade • Turnstiles • The Stranger • 52nd Street • Glass Houses • The Nylon Curtain • An Innocent Man • The Bridge • Storm Front • River of Dreams • Fantasies & Delusions






Live albums

Songs in the Attic • Kohuept • 2000 Years: The Millennium Concert • 12 Gardens Live






Compilations

Greatest Hits, Vols. 1-3 • The Essential Billy Joel • Piano Man: The Very Best of Billy Joel • My Lives






Singles

"Piano Man" • "Worse Comes to Worst" • "Travelin' Prayer" • "The Entertainer" • "New York State of Mind" • "Just the Way You Are" • "Movin' Out (Anthony's Song)" • "Only the Good Die Young" • "She's Always a Woman" • "The Stranger" • "My Life" • "Big Shot" • "Honesty" • "Until the Night" • "All for Leyna" • "You May Be Right" • "It's Still Rock and Roll to Me" • "Don't Ask Me Why" • "Sometimes a Fantasy" • "Say Goodbye to Hollywood" (Live) • "She's Got a Way" (Live) • "Pressure" • "Allentown" • "Goodnight Saigon" • "Tell Her About It" • "Uptown Girl" • "An Innocent Man" • "The Longest Time" • "Leave a Tender Moment Alone" • "This Night" • "Keeping the Faith" • "You're Only Human (Second Wind)" • "The Night Is Still Young" • "Modern Woman" • "A Matter of Trust" • "Baby Grand" • "This Is the Time" • "We Didn't Start the Fire" • "Leningrad" • "I Go to Extremes" • "And So It Goes" • "That's Not Her Style" • "The Downeaster 'Alexa'" • "Shameless" • "All Shook Up" • "The River of Dreams" • "All About Soul" • "No Man's Land" • "Lullabye (Goodnight, My Angel)" • "To Make You Feel My Love" • "Hey Girl" • "All My Life" • "Christmas in Fallujah"






See also

Discography • Movin' Out • Fantasies & Delusions









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/We_Didn%27t_Start_the_Fire"
Categories: 1989 singles | ARC Weekly Top 40 number-one singles | Billy Joel songs | Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles | List songsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from May 2008 | All articles needing style editing | Wikipedia articles needing style editing from July 2008 | Articles with trivia sections from July 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
Español
Français
日本語
Svenska









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 14:00 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
