













Paul is dead - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Paul_is_dead";
		var wgTitle = "Paul is dead";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "126392";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280792320;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Paul is dead

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 




"Paul McCartney Dead: The Great Hoax", a magazine reporting on the rumours concerning McCartney.


"Paul is dead" is an urban legend alleging that Paul McCartney of The Beatles died in 1966 and was replaced by a look-alike and sound-alike.
The legend hinges on supposed hints among the Beatles' many recordings and presumed to be deliberately placed by The Beatles or others. Hundreds have been cited at various times; they include statements heard when a song is played backwards, symbolic interpretations of obscure lyrics, and ambiguous imagery on album covers. Some of these have become well known, such as the fact that on the cover of Abbey Road, McCartney is the only barefooted Beatle and is out of step with the others.
It is often unclear how many proponents of this story spread it as a joke, as opposed to a real conspiracy theory. The rumour has been the subject of much sociological examination, since its development, growth, and rebuttal took place very publicly.
A claim that a hoax was perpetrated by The Beatles themselves, either as a joke or to stimulate record sales, has been denied by the band members.




Contents


1 Background
2 The story of the alleged death
3 References

3.1 By members of the Beatles
3.2 By others


4 Notes
5 References
6 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Background
The first known printing of this urban legend was in the Drake University paper, the Times-Delphic, on September 17, 1969. The rumours surrounding McCartney began in earnest on October 12, 1969, when someone telephoned Russ Gibb (a radio DJ on WKNR-FM in Dearborn, Michigan serving the Detroit market). Identifying himself as "Tom" (allegedly Tom Zarski[1] of Eastern Michigan University), the caller announced that McCartney was dead. He also asked Gibb to play "Revolution 9" backwards. Gibb thought he heard "Turn me on, dead man."[2] Gibb also produced (with John Small and Dan Carlisle) The Beatle Plot, an hour-long radio show on the rumour. The show aired on WKNR-FM in late 1969 and has been repeated in the years since on Detroit radio.
Fred Labour and John Gray, juniors at the University of Michigan, published a review of Abbey Road called "McCartney Dead; New Evidence Brought to Light", itemizing various "clues" of McCartney's death on Beatles album covers, in the October 14, 1969 issue of the Michigan Daily.[3] Terry Knight, a former Detroit DJ and then singer on Capitol Records, had visited the Beatles in London for the August 1968 White Album session during which Ringo Starr walked out. Although Terry's song, "Saint Paul", was written about the impending breakup of The Beatles, it was picked up by radio stations in autumn 1969 as a tribute to "the late" Paul McCartney.[4]
The rumour gained momentum when Roby Yonge, an overnight disc jockey on the Top 40 station WABC in New York, discussed it "incoherently" on October 21, 1969. Yonge was immediately fired for making the broadcast.[5][6] WABC, a 50,000-watt clear-channel station, could be heard clearly in 38 states, and as far as Africa's Atlantic coast.[7] Soon, national and international media picked up on the story and a new "Beatle craze" took off. Celebrity lawyer F. Lee Bailey hosted an hour-long television special in which he both prosecuted and defended the claims, concluding ultimately that the rumor was unprovable.
The rumour is the subject of several books, including American journalist Andru J. Reeve's 1994 book Turn Me On, Dead Man (ISBN 1-4184-8294-3) and English author Benjamin Fitzpatrick's 1997 book, Rumours from John, George, Ringo and Me.
"Paul is dead" analyst Joel Glazier hypothesized[8] in 1978 that John Lennon's love of wordplay and studio editing may have been responsible for some clues in later albums, but that after cult-leader Charles Manson claimed The Beatles were hiding references to an upcoming racial war in their song "Helter Skelter", the band members chose not to reveal the joke.
The advent of the Internet gave "Paul is dead" rumours new life, with some websites claiming that photographic evidence proves that the McCartney before and after late 1966 could not be the same man.

[edit] The story of the alleged death
The most common tale is that on Wednesday, 9 November 1966 at 5 am, McCartney, while working on the Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band album, stormed out of a recording session after an argument with the other Beatles and rode off in his Aston Martin which he subsequently crashed into a lamp post, and died.[5]
The story was pieced together from the lyrics of multiple Beatles songs. The most common narrative includes the following pieces of evidence:

"He didn't notice that the lights had changed" ("A Day in the Life").
He then crashed into a lamp-post (a car crash sound is heard in "Revolution 9" and "A Day in the Life").
He was pronounced dead on a "Wednesday morning at 5 o'clock as the day begins" ("She's Leaving Home")
Nobody found this out because the news was withheld: "Wednesday morning papers didn't come" ("Lady Madonna").
A funeral procession was held days later, as was supposedly implied on the Abbey Road album cover by the Beatles' clothing. (John Lennon dressed all in white, like a clergyman. Ringo Starr wore a black suit as an undertaker would. Paul McCartney wore a suit without shoes, a common custom for corpses being buried, and walked out of step with the other Beatles. George Harrison's denim outfit resembled that of a gravedigger.)
Adding fuel to the legend is the ending of "Strawberry Fields Forever". Some believed John said "I buried Paul" in a slow deep voice over the final refrain. He later denied that, stating that he had said "cranberry sauce".

According to believers, McCartney was replaced with the winner of a McCartney look-alike contest. The name of this look-alike has been recorded as William Shears Campbell, Billy Shears (the name of the fictitious leader of Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band), William Sheppard (based on the alleged inspiration for the song "The Continuing Story of Bungalow Bill"), or some combination of the names.[9]




McCartney during the filming of the "Rain" video, showing the chipped tooth and scar from the moped crash at the end of the previous year


There is no evidence of any crash in which McCartney was involved, although during the first week of January 1967, McCartney's custom-made Mini Cooper was wrecked by a friend on the M1 Motorway outside London. McCartney was involved in a moped crash on December 26, 1965, which resulted in a chipped tooth and the scar on his lip that can be seen on promotional videos for the "Paperback Writer"/"Rain" single, made shortly after the crash, in May 1966.[9] According to McCartney, his desire to hide the scar on his lip was the impetus to grow a moustache.

[edit] References

[edit] By members of the Beatles

Lennon joked about the rumour in the years following its initial growth and, in his solo years, referred to it in his vengeful song to McCartney titled "How Do You Sleep?" from the 1971 Imagine album, commenting, "Those freaks was right when they said you was dead."[10]
McCartney responded to the rumours with the tongue-in-cheek cover with his 1993 live album Paul Is Live, sending up both the Abbey Road cover and its "hidden clues".
At the end of the Simpsons episode Lisa the Vegetarian, during the ending of the song Maybe I'm Amazed, Paul McCartney gives a refererence to the Paul-is-dead-speculations with a backmasked message saying "Oh, by the way, I'm not dead."
On a segment of Saturday Night Live in which Paul McCartney was a guest, Chris Farley, asked him, of the rumor: "That was a hoax, right?" McCartney assured him that he is not really dead.[11]


[edit] By others

The Rutles, a parody of The Beatles, included a couple of "Paul is dead" parodies.
The 1972 National Lampoon Album, Radio Dinner featured several mock numbered clues, including a short backwards track saying, "I'm dead!" in a Liverpudlian accent.
The Simpsons television show has included many references to the story. [12]
John Safran's Music Jamboree contains a segment about the conspiracy with by a mock George Harrison-is-dead conspiracy, following Harrison's death in 2001.
The Onion's Our Dumb Century collection includes a fake headline from January 21, 1981, that reads, "Secret Album-Cover Clues Reveal John Lennon Is Dead."
In the film Sleepless in Seattle, Tom Hanks's character, Sam Baldwin, comes home to find his son, Jonah, listening to an album and declaring "Dad, this is incredible. If you play it backward it says 'Paul is dead.'" [13]
In October 1974, the National Lampoon Radio Hour aired a skit titled "Rip Van Ripple" which told the story of a reporter picking-up a hippie hitchhiker who had gotten wasted in 1966 and passed out for eight years.




Hitchhiker: Hey, is Paul McCartney still dead?
Reporter: No, he's alive again.




In a 1987 edition of American Top 40, host Casey Kasem revisited the "Paul Is Dead" era as a related story to the Bananarama song "I Heard a Rumour". The following year, Dick Clark featured a similar story on Rock, Roll and Remember.
On his album FM & AM, George Carlin included "Son of WINO" in which he says "Here on the Scott Lame Show, we'll be listening to the new John Lennon single, which if you play it backwards at slow speed, it screws up your needle!"
Many bands have referenced the rumour in their music, including:

SR-71 released a song called "Paul McCartney" on their debut album Now You See Inside which references that Paul is dead.
The Union Underground wrote a song called "Turn Me On, Mr. Dead Man", a reference to the "Revolution 9" clue "Turn me on, dead man".



false)

In early 2009 on the Colbert report, Stephen Colbert made reference in a skit about a news article relates to excess of caffeine causing delusions of ghost. Colbert then made a number of humorous references of previous episodes where he had encountered unreal things. For he last reference he stated that "But how could I have been interviewing Paul McCartney, when he's dead!."


[edit] Notes


^ In June, 2003, WKNR located and identified Zarski as the "Tom" who contacted Gibb. Zarski wrote his recollections of the contact, which recollections were published on WKNR's web site.
^ reverse speech on records reversespeech.com - Retrieved: 5 August 2007
^ McCartney interview - barefoot: Jan 31, 1974 rollingstone.com - Retrieved: 5 August 2007
^ Tribute to "the late" Paul McCartney furious.com - Retrieved: 5 August 2007
^ a b Yonge pulled off the air tesco.net- Retrieved: 9 August 2007
^ Roby Yonge: Disc Jockey mac.com - Retrieved: 5 August 2007
^ Musicradio 77 WABC musicradio77.com - Retrieved: 5 August 2007
^ Joel Glazier, "Paul Is Dead... Miss Him, Miss Him", Strawberry Fields Forever #31 (1978), pp. 21-22.
^ a b The Beatles Bible: Paul Is Dead - Retrieved: 16 October 2008
^ ten wackiest pranks: Mar 27, 2001 rollingstone.com - Retrieved: 5 August 2007
^ http://video.aol.com/video-detail/chris-farley-interview-paul-mc-cartney-snl/3026001319
^ The Simpsons & Beatles' references snpp.com - Retrieved: 5 August 2007
^ Sleepless in Seattle script imsdb.com - Retrieved: 5 August 2007




[edit] References


Reeve, Andru J. (1994, 2004). Turn Me On, Dead Man: The Beatles and the "Paul is Dead" Hoax. AuthorHouse Publishing. ISBN 1-4184-8294-3.



[edit] External links

Officially Pronounced Dead? Detailing the history and over 375 clues of the conspiracy.
Is Paul Dead? Turn me on dead man! The Original Radio Show
Paul is Dead Hoax Allegedly first website dedicated to the Paul is Dead Hoax.
Jeff Milner's Backmasking Site Forward and reverse audio examples of "I'm So Tired" and "Revolution 9"
Who Buried Paul McCartney? Dutch Documentary by Wouter van Opdorp
Paul-Is-Dead CD Analysis Free 64 minute in-depth CD analysis and lecture.
Who Buried Paul? Lecture includes images and audio clips
More on the Rumour
Photographic analysis of Paul before and after his alleged death
Site refuting the above photographic analysis
Paul Is Dead (2000) at the Internet Movie Database, the German film based on a boy's finding out about the rumour and search for the murderer
A Tribute to James Paul McCartney Contains photo analysis of Paul and "Billy Shears"
Paul is dead?!? Treatise refuting the Hoax
Article








v • d • e

Paul McCartney





Studio albums

McCartney · Ram · McCartney II · Tug of War · Pipes of Peace · Press to Play · Снова в СССР · Flowers in the Dirt · Off the Ground · Flaming Pie · Run Devil Run · Driving Rain · Chaos and Creation in the Backyard · Memory Almost Full






With Wings

Wild Life · Red Rose Speedway · Band on the Run · Venus and Mars · Wings at the Speed of Sound · London Town · Back to the Egg






With The Fireman

Strawberries Oceans Ships Forest · Rushes · Electric Arguments






Live albums

Wings Over America · Tripping the Live Fantastic · Tripping the Live Fantastic: Highlights! · Unplugged (The Official Bootleg) · Paul Is Live · Back in the U.S. · Back in the World · Amoeba's Secret






Compilations

Wings Greatest · All the Best! · Wingspan: Hits and History






Soundtracks

The Family Way · Give My Regards to Broad Street






Experimental albums

Thrillington · Liverpool Sound Collage · Twin Freaks






Classical albums

Paul McCartney's Liverpool Oratorio · Paul McCartney's Standing Stone · Paul McCartney's Working Classical · Ecce Cor Meum






Tours

Wings University Tour · Wings Over Europe Tour · Wings 1973 UK Tour · Wings Over the World tour · Wings UK Tour 1979 · The Paul McCartney World Tour · The New World Tour · Driving Tour · Back In The U.S. Tour · Back in the World tour · '04 Summer Tour · The 'US' Tour






Filmography

James Paul McCartney (1973) · Wings Over the World (1979) · Concert for Kampuchea (1980) · Rockshow (1980) · Back To The Egg (1981) · Give My Regards to Broad Street (1984) · Get Back (1991) · Paul Is Live - The New World Tour (1993) · In The World Tonight (1997) · Live at the Cavern Club (1999) · Wingspan (2001) · Back in the U.S. (2002) · Paul McCartney in Red Square (2003) · Between Chaos and Creation (2005) · Chaos and Creation at Abbey Road (2005) · The Space Within US (2006) · The McCartney Years (2007)






Related articles

Discography · The Beatles · The Fireman · Linda McCartney · Heather Mills · MPL Communications · Paul is dead · Paul McCartney's concert tours · Paul McCartney´s Awards  · Paul McCartney Concerts since 2000






PaulMcCartney.com












v • d • e

The Beatles





John Lennon · Paul McCartney · George Harrison · Ringo Starr
Pete Best · Stuart Sutcliffe





Studio albums (UK)

Please Please Me · With The Beatles · A Hard Day's Night · Beatles for Sale · Help! · Rubber Soul · Revolver · Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band · The Beatles · Yellow Submarine · Abbey Road · Let It Be






Studio albums (US editions)

Introducing... The Beatles · Meet The Beatles! · The Beatles' Second Album · A Hard Day's Night · Something New · The Beatles' Story · Beatles '65 · The Early Beatles · Beatles VI · Help! · Rubber Soul · Yesterday and Today · Revolver · Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band · Magical Mystery Tour · The Beatles · Yellow Submarine · Abbey Road  · Let It Be






UK original EPs

Long Tall Sally · Magical Mystery Tour






Post-breakup albums

Live at the BBC · Anthology 1 · Anthology 2 · Anthology 3 · Let It Be… Naked · Love · Solo albums






Compilations

1962–1966 · 1967–1970 · Past Masters · Yellow Submarine Songtrack · 1






Filmography

A Hard Day's Night · Help! · Magical Mystery Tour · Yellow Submarine · Let It Be






Videography

The Beatles at Shea Stadium · The Beatles Anthology · All Together Now






Discography

Songs · Bootlegs · Outtakes






Management

Allan Williams · Brian Epstein · Allen Klein · Derek Taylor · Lee Eastman · Neil Aspinall · Peter Brown · Mal Evans · Alistair Taylor · Apple Records · Dick James






Production

George Martin · Geoff Emerick · Norman Smith · Ken Scott · Phil Spector · Jeff Lynne · Chris Thomas · Giles Martin · Abbey Road Studios · Dave Dexter, Jr.






Related people

Eric Clapton · Klaus Voormann · Harry Nilsson · Cynthia Lennon · Yoko Ono · Linda McCartney · Pattie Boyd · Jane Asher · Maureen Starkey · Olivia Harrison · Billy Preston · Rory Storm · Tony Sheridan · Horst Fascher · Andy White · Jimmy Nicol · Astrid Kirchherr · Magic Alex · Tony Barrow · Ken Mansfield · Peter Shotton · The Beatles' wives






History

The Quarrymen · Decca audition · Line-ups · Beatlemania · Paul is dead · Breakup · Reunions






Related articles

Record sales · Love · Lennon/McCartney · Fifth Beatle · The Beatles (TV series) · British Invasion · The Ed Sullivan Show · Apple Corps · Northern Songs · Harrisongs · Startling Music · The Beatles Anthology · The Rutles · Artists who have covered The Beatles · Songs covered by The Beatles · Beatles-Platz · Jeff Lynne and The Beatles · The Beatles: Rock Band · List of The Beatles concerts · The Compleat Beatles  · Rubber Soul Project













v • d • e

Conspiracy theories





Core topics

Conspiracy (civil) · Conspiracy (crime) · Conspiracy (political) · Cabal · List of conspiracy theories · Conspiracy fiction · Conspiracy thriller






New World Order theories

Bilderberg Group · Bohemian Grove · Skull and Bones · Trilateral Commission · Freemasons · Club of Rome · Illuminati · Black helicopters · ODESSA · The Protocols of the Elders of Zion · Judaeo-Masonic-Marxist plot · Eurabia · North American Union






False flag theories

Sinking of the RMS Lusitania (1915) · Reichstag Fire (1933) · Operation Gladio · USS Liberty incident (1967) · Pan Am Flight 103 (1988) · Russian apartment bombing (1999) · Oklahoma City bombing (1995) · Port Arthur Massacre (1996) · TWA Flight 800 (1996)  · 9/11 conspiracy theories (2001) · Madrid Train Bombing (2004) · London Bombings (2005)






Assassination theories

Eric V of Denmark (1286) · Abraham Lincoln (1865) · Franz Ferdinand (1914) · Phar Lap (1932) · Marilyn Monroe (1962) · John F. Kennedy (1963) · Malcolm X (1965) · Robert F. Kennedy (1968) · Martin Luther King Jr. (1968) · Pope John Paul I (1978) · Olof Palme (1986) · Kurt Cobain (1994) · Yitzhak Rabin (1995) · Diana, Princess of Wales (1997) · David Kelly (2003) · Alexander Litvinenko (2006) · Benazir Bhutto (2007)






UFO theory

Alien Abduction · Roswell Incident (1947) · Mantell Incident (1948) · Men in Black · Area 51






Other theories

Soviet Space Program (1957-1966) · Paul McCartney's death (1966) · Apollo Moon Landing hoax (1969) · Elvis Presley's survival (1977) · Mind Control · AIDS origins · AIDS denialism · CIA drug trafficking · New Coke (1985) · Waco Siege (1993) · SARS (2003) · Reptilian humanoid · Global Warming  · Titanic alternative theories  · Barack Obama's citizenship · Lavender Mafia/Homintern/Gay Mafia · Jesuit conspiracy · Scottish mafia






Verified conspiracies

Dreyfus affair (1894) · Affaire Des Fiches (1904-1905) · Gleiwitz incident (1939) · Watergate (1972) · Project MKULTRA (1975) · Operation Mockingbird · Operation Northwoods · Iran-Contra Affair









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_is_dead"
Categories: Paul McCartney | Conspiracy theories | Urban legends 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Български
Català
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Français
한국어
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Nederlands
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Suomi
Svenska









 This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 03:45.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
