













Japanese calendar - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Japanese_calendar";
		var wgTitle = "Japanese calendar";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "174995";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 278692767;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Japanese calendar

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 










Koinobori, flags decorated like koi, are popular decorations around Children's Day










This mural on the wall of Shin-Ochanomizu subway station in Tokyo celebrates Hazuki, the eighth month.





Since January 1, 1873, Japan has used the Gregorian calendar, with local names for the months and mostly fixed holidays. Before 1873, a lunisolar calendar was in use, which was adapted from the Chinese calendar.[1] Japanese eras are still in use.




Contents


1 Years
2 Months

2.1 Traditional Names


3 Subdivisions of the month
4 Days of the month
5 National holidays

5.1 Timeline of changes to the national holidays


6 Seasonal days

6.1 24 Sekki
6.2 Zassetsu


7 Seasonal festivals
8 Rokuyō
9 April 1
10 See also
11 References
12 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Years
Since the adoption of the Gregorian calendar, three different systems for counting years have been used in Japan:

The western Anno Domini (Common Era) (西暦, seireki) designation
The Japanese era name (年号, nengō) based on the reign of the current emperor, the year 2009 being Heisei 21
The imperial year (皇紀, kōki) based on the mythical founding of Japan by Emperor Jimmu in 660 BC.

Of these three, the first two are still in current use; Japan-Guide.com provides a convenient converter between the two. The imperial calendar was used from 1873 to the end of World War II.

[edit] Months
The modern Japanese names for the months literally translate to "first month", "second month", and so on. The corresponding number is combined with the suffix -gatsu (month):

January 一月 (ichigatsu)
February 二月 (nigatsu)
March 三月 (sangatsu)
April 四月 (shigatsu)
May 五月 (gogatsu)
June 六月 (rokugatsu)
July 七月 (shichigatsu)
August 八月 (hachigatsu)
September 九月 (kugatsu)
October 十月 (jūgatsu)
November 十一月 (jūichigatsu)
December 十二月 (jūnigatsu)

(Note that using Arabic numerals, as 3月, is extremely common in everyday communication, almost the norm.)

[edit] Traditional Names
In addition, every month has a traditional name, still used by some in fields such as poetry; of the twelve, shiwasu is still widely used today. The opening paragraph of a letter or the greeting in a speech might borrow one of these names to convey a sense of the season. Some, such as yayoi and satsuki, do double duty as given names (for women). These month names also appear from time to time on jidaigeki, contemporary television shows and movies set in the Edo period or earlier.
The name of month: (pronunciation, literal meaning) (Note: the old Japanese calendar was an adjusted lunar calendar based on the Chinese calendar, and the year - and with it the months - started anywhere from about 3 to 7 weeks later than the modern year, so it is not really appropriate to equate the first month with January.)

1st month of the lunar calendar - 睦月 (mutsuki, affection month)
2nd month of the lunar calendar - 如月 or 衣更着 (kisaragi or kinusaragi, changing clothes)
3rd month of the lunar calendar - 弥生 (yayoi, new life; the beginning of spring)
4th month of the lunar calendar - 卯月 (uzuki, u-no-hana month; the u-no-hana is a flower, genus Deutzia)
5th month of the lunar calendar - 皐月 or 早月 or 五月(satsuki, fast month)
6th month of the lunar calendar - 水無月 (minatsuki or minazuki, month of water — the 無 character, which normally means "not", is here ateji, that is, used only for the sound "na". In this name the na is actually a possessive particle, so Minazuki means "month of water," not "month without water", and some say this is in reference to the flooding of the rice fields.[2] Some have suggested, however, that the name "waterless month" would have been appropriate since this month would have been the month after the end of the monsoon rains.)
7th month of the lunar calendar - 文月 (fumizuki, book month)
8th month of the lunar calendar - 葉月 (hazuki, leaf month)
9th month of the lunar calendar - 長月 (nagatsuki, long month)
10th month of the lunar calendar - 神無月 (kaminazuki or kannazuki, "month without gods - but analogous to the name of the 6th month, the 無 character here could be the same possessive particle "na", making this "month of the gods") In Izumo province, modern-day Shimane Prefecture, this is emended to 神有月 or 神在月 (kamiarizuki, roughly "month with gods"), as all the gods are believed to gather there for an annual meeting at the Izumo Shrine.
11th month of the lunar calendar - 霜月 (shimotsuki, frost month)
12th month of the lunar calendar - 師走 (shiwasu, priests run; it is named so because priests are busy making end of the year prayers and blessings.)


[edit] Subdivisions of the month
Japan uses a seven-day week, aligned with the Western calendar. The seven day week, with names for the days corresponding directly to those used in Europe, was brought to Japan around AD 800. The system was used for astrological purposes and little else until 1876, shortly after Japan officially adopted the Western calendar. Fukuzawa Yukichi was a key figure in the decision to adopt this system as the source for official names for the days of the week. The names come from the five visible planets, which in turn are named after the five Chinese elements (wood, fire, earth, metal, water), and from the moon and sun (yin and yang).


Japanese
Romanization
Element
English name


日曜日
nichiyōbi
Sun
Sunday


月曜日
getsuyōbi
Moon
Monday


火曜日
kayōbi
Fire (Mars)
Tuesday


水曜日
suiyōbi
Water (Mercury)
Wednesday


木曜日
mokuyōbi
Wood/Tree (Jupiter)
Thursday


金曜日
kin'yōbi
Metal/Gold (Venus)
Friday


土曜日
doyōbi
Earth (Saturn)
Saturday


Japan also divides the month roughly into three 10-day periods. Each is called a jun (旬). The first is jōjun (上旬); the second, chūjun (中旬); the last, gejun (下旬). These are frequently used to indicate approximate times, for example, "the temperatures are typical of the jōjun of April"; "a vote on a bill is expected during the gejun of this month."

[edit] Days of the month
Each day of the month has a semi-systematic but irregularly formed name:


1
一日
tsuitachi (sometimes ichijitsu)
17
十七日
jūshichinichi


2
二日
futsuka
18
十八日
jūhachinichi


3
三日
mikka
19
十九日
jūkunichi


4
四日
yokka
20
二十日
hatsuka (or nijūnichi)


5
五日
itsuka
21
二十一日
nijūichinichi


6
六日
muika
22
二十二日
nijūninichi


7
七日
nanoka
23
二十三日
nijūsannichi


8
八日
yōka
24
二十四日
nijūyokka


9
九日
kokonoka
25
二十五日
nijūgonichi


10
十日
tōka
26
二十六日
nijūrokunichi


11
十一日
jūichinichi
27
二十七日
nijūshichinichi


12
十二日
jūninichi
28
二十八日
nijūhachinichi


13
十三日
jūsannichi
29
二十九日
nijūkunichi


14
十四日
jūyokka
30
三十日
sanjūnichi


15
十五日
jūgonichi
31
三十一日
sanjūichinichi


16
十六日
jūrokunichi
 


(Note that using Arabic numerals, as 14日, is extremely common in everyday communication, almost the norm.)
Tsuitachi is a worn-down form of tsukitachi, which means the first of the month. In the traditional calendar, the last day of the month was called 晦日 misoka. Nowadays, the terms for the numbers 28-31 plus nichi are much more common. However, misoka is much used in contracts, etc., specifying that a payment should be made on or by the last day of the month, whatever the number is. The last day of the year is 大晦日 ōmisoka (the big last day), and that term is still in use.

[edit] National holidays
Main article: Holidays of Japan
Notes: Single days between two national holidays are taken as a bank holiday. This applies to May 4, which is a holiday each year. When a national holiday falls on a Sunday the next day that is not a holiday (usually a Monday) is taken as a holiday.


Date
English name
Local name
Romanization


January 1
New Year's Day
元日
Ganjitsu


2nd Monday of January
Coming-of-age Day
成人の日
Seijin no hi


February 11
National Foundation Day†
建国記念の日
Kenkoku kinen no hi


March 20 or March 21
Vernal Equinox Day
春分の日
Shunbun no hi


April 29
Shōwa Day *
昭和の日
Shōwa no hi


May 3
Constitution Memorial Day *
憲法記念日
Kenpō kinenbi


May 4
Greenery Day *
みどり(緑)の日
Midori no hi


May 5
Children's Day *
子供の日
Kodomo no hi


3rd Monday of July
Marine Day
海の日
Umi no hi


3rd Monday of September
Respect for the Aged Day
敬老の日
Keirō no hi


September 23 or September 24
Autumnal Equinox Day
秋分の日
Shūbun no hi


2nd Monday of October
Health-Sports Day
体育の日
Taiiku no hi


November 3
Culture Day
文化の日
Bunka no hi


November 23
Labour Thanksgiving Day
勤労感謝の日
Kinrō kansha no hi


December 23
The Emperor's Birthday
天皇誕生日
Tennō tanjōbi


† Traditional date on which according to legend Emperor Jimmu founded Japan in 660 BC.
* Part of Golden Week

[edit] Timeline of changes to the national holidays

1948 - The following national holidays were introduced: New Year's Day, Coming-of-Age Day, Constitution Memorial Day, Children's Day, Autumnal Equinox Day, Culture Day, Labour Thanksgiving Day.
1966 - Health and Sports Day was introduced in memory of the 1964 Tokyo Olympics. Vernal Equinox Day was also introduced.
1985 - Reform to the national holiday law made May 4, sandwiched between two other national holidays also a holiday.
1989 - After Emperor Showa died on January 7, the Emperor's Birthday became December 23 and Greenery Day took place of the former Emperor's birthday.
2000, 2003 - Happy Monday System (ハッピーマンデー制度 Happī Mandē Seido) moved several holidays to Monday. Starting with 2000: Coming-of-Age Day (formerly January 15), and Health and Sports Day (formerly October 10). Starting with 2003: Marine Day (formerly July 20), and Respect for the Aged Day (formerly September 15).
2005, 2007 - According to a May 2005 decision, starting with 2007 Greenery Day will be moved from April 29 to May 4 replacing a generic national holiday (国民の休日 ,kokumin no kyūjitsu?) that existed after 1985 reform, while April 29 will be known as Shōwa Day.
2009 - September 22 may become sandwiched between two holidays, which would make this day a national holiday.


[edit] Seasonal days
Some days have special names to mark the change in seasons. The 24 Sekki (二十四節気 Nijūshi sekki) are days that divide a year in the Lunisolar calendar into twenty four equal sections. Zassetsu (雑節) is a collective term for the seasonal days other than the 24 Sekki. 72 Kō (七十二候 Shichijūni kō) days are made from dividing the 24 Sekki of a year further by three. Some of these names, such as Shunbun, Risshū and Tōji, are still used quite frequently in everyday life in Japan.

[edit] 24 Sekki

Risshun (立春): February 4 - Beginning of spring
Usui (雨水): February 19 - Rain water
Keichitsu (啓蟄): March 5 - awakening of hibernated (insects)
Shunbun (春分): March 20 - Vernal equinox, middle of spring
Seimei (清明): April 5 - Clear and bright
Kokuu (穀雨): April 20 - Grain rain
Rikka (立夏): May 5 - Beginning of summer
Shōman (小満): May 21 - Grain full
Bōshu (芒種): June 6 - Grain in ear
Geshi (夏至): June 21 - Summer solstice, middle of summer
Shōsho (小暑): July 7 - Small heat
Taisho (大暑): July 23 - Large heat
Risshū (立秋): August 7 - Beginning of autumn
Shosho (処暑): August 23 - Limit of heat
Hakuro (白露): September 7 - White dew
Shūbun (秋分): September 23 - Autumnal equinox, middle of autumn
Kanro (寒露): October 8 - Cold dew
Sōkō (霜降): October 23 - Frost descent
Rittō (立冬): November 7 - Beginning of winter
Shōsetsu (小雪): November 22 - Small snow
Taisetsu (大雪): December 7 - Large snow
Tōji (冬至): December 22 - Winter solstice, middle of winter
Shōkan (小寒): January 5 Small Cold - a.k.a. 寒の入り (Kan no iri) entrance of the cold
Daikan (大寒): January 20 - Major cold

Days can vary by ±1 day. See also: Jieqi.

[edit] Zassetsu


Day
Kanji
Romaji
Comment


January 17
冬の土用
Fuyu no doyō
 


February 3
節分
Setsubun
The eve of Risshun by one definition.


March 21
春社日
Haru shanichi
Also known as 春社 (Harusha, Shunsha).


March 18 - March 24
春彼岸
Haru higan
The seven days surrounding Shunbun.


April 17
春の土用
Haru no doyō
 


May 2
八十八夜
Hachijū hachiya
Literally meaning 88 nights (since Risshun).


June 11
入梅
Nyūbai
Literally meaning entering tsuyu.


July 2
半夏生
Hangeshō
One of the 72 Kō. Farmers take five days off in some regions.


July 15
中元
Chūgen
Sometimes considered a Zassetsu.


July 20
夏の土用
Natsu no doyō
 


September 1
二百十日
Nihyaku tōka
Literally meaning 210 days (since Risshun).


September 11
二百二十日
Nihyaku hatsuka
Literally meaning 220 days.


September 20 - September 26
秋彼岸
Aki higan
 


September 22
秋社日
Aki shanichi
Also known as 秋社 (Akisha, Shūsha).


October 20
秋の土用
Aki no doyō
 


Shanichi days can vary as much as ±5 days. Chūgen has a fixed day. All other days can vary by ±1 day.
Many zassetsu days occur on multiple seasons:

Setsubun (節分) refers to the day before each season, or the eves of Risshun, Rikka, Rishū, and Rittō; especially the eve of Risshun.


Doyō (土用) refers to the 18 days before each season, especially the one before fall which is known as the hottest period of a year.


Higan (彼岸) is the seven middle days of spring and autumn, with Shunbun at the middle of the seven days for spring, Shūbun for fall.


Shanichi (社日) is the Tsuchinoe (戊) day closest to Shunbun (middle of spring) or Shūbun (middle of fall), which can be as much as -5 to +4 days away from Shunbun/Shūbun.


[edit] Seasonal festivals
The following are known as the five seasonal festivals (節句 sekku, also 五節句 go sekku). The Sekku were made official holidays during Edo era.

January 7 (1/7) - 人日 (Jinjitsu), 七草の節句 (Nanakusa no sekku)
March 3 (3/3) - 上巳 (Jōshi, Jōmi), 桃の節句 (Momo no sekku)

雛祭り (Hina matsuri), Girls' Day.


Tango (端午): May 5 (5/5)

端午の節句 (Tango no sekku), 菖蒲の節句 (Ayame no sekku)
Boys' Day. Overlaps with the national holiday Children's Day.


July 7 (7/7) - 七夕 (Shichiseki, Tanabata), 星祭り (Hoshi matsuri )
September 9 (9/9) - 重陽 (Chōyō), 菊の節句 (Kiku no sekku)

Not Sekku:

January 1 - Japanese New Year
August 15 - Obon
December 31 - Ōmisoka


[edit] Rokuyō
The rokuyō (六曜) are a series of six days that supposedly predict whether there will be good or bad fortune during that day. The rokuyō are still commonly found on Japanese calendars and are often used to plan weddings and funerals, though most people ignore them in ordinary life. The rokuyō are also known as the rokki (六輝). In order, they are:


Kanji
Romanization
Meaning


先勝
Senshō
Good luck before noon, bad luck after noon. Good day for beginnings (in the morning).


友引
Tomobiki
Bad things will happen to your friends. Funerals avoided on this day (tomo = friend, biki = pull, thus a funeral might pull friends toward the deceased). Typically crematoriums are closed this day.


先負
Senbu
Bad luck before noon, good luck after noon.


仏滅
Butsumetsu
Symbolizes the day Buddha died. Considered the most unlucky day. Weddings are best avoided. Some Shinto shrines close their offices on this day.


大安
Taian
The most lucky day. Good day for weddings and events like shop openings.


赤口
Shakkō
The hour of the horse (11 am - 1 pm) is lucky. The rest is bad luck.


The rokuyō days are easily calculated from the Japanese Lunisolar calendar. Lunisolar January 1 is always senshō, with the days following in the order given above until the end of the month. Thus, January 2 is tomobiki, January 3 is senbu, and so on. Lunisolar February 1st restarts the sequence at tomobiki. Lunisolar March 1st restarts at senbu, and so on for each month. The last six months repeat the patterns of the first six, so July 1 = senshō, December 1st is shakkō and the moon-viewing day of "August 15th" is always a "butsumetsu."
This system did not become popular in Japan until the end of the Edo period.

[edit] April 1
The first day of April has broad significance in Japan. It marks the beginning of the government's fiscal year.[3] Many corporations follow suit. In addition, corporations often form or merge on that date. In recent years, municipalities have preferred it for mergers. On this date, many new employees begin their jobs, and it is the start of many real-estate leases. The school year begins on April 1. (For more see also academic term)

[edit] See also

Holidays of Japan
Calendar
Chinese calendar
Japanese era name
Jikkan Jūnishi
List of kigo


[edit] References


^ "The Japanese Calendar History". National Diet Library, Japan. 2002. http://www.ndl.go.jp/koyomi/e/history/02_index2.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-19. [ National Diet Library, Japan "The Japanese Calendar"-Calendar History 2]
^ みなづき 【 ▽ 水無月/ ▽ 六月】の意味 国語辞典 - goo辞書 (Retrieved on March 21, 2009)
^ "THE JAPANESE FISCAL YEAR AND MISCELLANEOUS DATA" (PDF). Japan International Research Center for Agricultural Sciences. 2003. http://www.jircas.affrc.go.jp/english/publication/annual/2002/169.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-08. 



[edit] External links

Japanese calendar tables and zodiac signs, in Kanji, Hiragana, Romaji, and English,
Japanese calendar history by the National Diet Library
The Lunar Calendar in Japan
The Japanese Lunar Calendar Mechanics of the Japanese lunar calendar and hints on using NengoCalc (see below)
Koyomi no page in Japanese
Koyomi no hanashi in Japanese
Rokuyō calculator in Japanese
Rokuyō calendar in English
Convert Western Years to Japanese Years converts Gregorian calendar years to Japanese Emperor Era years (known as nengo)
Japanese Year Dates Detailed explanations of Reign years, Era years, Cyclic years, Western years, Imperial years
NengoCalc (Tool for converting Japanese dates into Western equivalents)
This Year in Japan Shows what the current year in Japan is








v • d • e

Calendars (list)





Wide use

Astronomical · Gregorian· Islamic · ISO
Calendar types: Lunisolar · Solar · Lunar






Selected use

Akan · Assyrian · Armenian · Attic · Aztec (Tonalpohualli – Xiuhpohualli) · Babylonian · Bahá'í · Bengali · Berber · Bikram Samwat · Buddhist · Burmese · Byzantine ·Celtic · Chinese · Coptic · Egyptian · Ethiopian · French Republican · Germanic · Hebrew · Hellenic · Hindu · Indian · Iranian · Irish · Japanese · Javanese · Juche · Julian · Korean · Lithuanian · Malayalam · Maya (Tzolk'in – Haab') · Minguo · Nanakshahi · Nepal Sambat · Pawukon · Pentecontad · Rapa Nui · Roman · Rumi · Soviet · Tamil · Thai (Lunar – Solar) · Tibetan · Vietnamese· Xhosa · Yoruba · Zoroastrian
Calendar types: Runic · Mesoamerican (Long Count – Calendar round)
Christian variants: Julian calendar · Calendar of saints · Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendar · Liturgical year






Rarely used

Darian calendar · Discordian calendar






Display types and applications

Perpetual calendar · Wall calendar · Economic calendar









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Japanese_calendar"
Categories: Calendars | Japanese culture | Specific calendars | Public holidays in JapanHidden categories: Articles containing Japanese language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Français
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
ქართული
Bahasa Melayu
日本語
Polski
Slovenščina
ไทย
中文









 This page was last modified on 21 March 2009, at 07:01.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
