













Formula One - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Formula_One";
		var wgTitle = "Formula One";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "10854";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281775040;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [""];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [""];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Formula One

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"F1" redirects here. For other uses, see F1 (disambiguation).

Formula One


The Formula One logo.


Category
Single seaters


Country or region
International


Inaugural season
1947[1]


Drivers
20


Teams
10


Engine suppliers
BMW, Ferrari, Mercedes, Renault, Toyota


Drivers' champion
 Lewis Hamilton


Constructors' champion
 Ferrari


Official website
Formula1.com


 Current season




Formula One


Current season summary


2009 Formula One season


Related articles



History of Formula One
Formula One regulations
Formula One cars
Formula One engines
Formula One racing
Future of Formula One



Lists


Drivers
(GP Winners · Champions · Runners-up)
Constructors
(GP Winners · Champions · Runners-up)
Seasons · Grands Prix · Circuits
(Race Promoters' Trophy winners)
Pointscoring systems
Engines · National colors
Sponsorship liveries
Racing flags · TV broadcasters
People · Fatal accidents
Drivers who never qualified
Red-flagged Grands Prix



Records



Drivers (Wins)
Constructors (Wins)
Tyres · Races



See also




FIA
FISA
FIA World Motor Sport Council
Formula One Group
Formula One Constructors Association
Formula One Teams Association
Grand Prix Drivers' Association





v • d • e



Formula One, abbreviated to F1, and currently officially referred as the FIA Formula One World Championship [2] is the highest class of auto racing sanctioned by the Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA). The "formula" in the name refers to a set of rules to which all participants and cars must comply. The F1 season consists of a series of races, known as Grands Prix, held on purpose-built circuits, and to a lesser extent, former public roads and closed city streets. The results of each race are combined to determine two annual World Championships, one for the drivers and one for the constructors, with both drivers and constructor teams[citation needed] required to be holders of valid Super Licences, the highest class racing licence issued by the FIA.[3]
Formula One cars race at high speeds, up to 360 km/h (220 mph) with engines revving up to a limit of 18,000 RPM. The cars are capable of pulling in excess of 5 G-forces in some curves. The performance of the cars is highly dependent on electronics (although traction control and driving aids have been banned since 2007), aerodynamics, suspension and on tyres. The formula has seen many evolutions and changes through the history of the sport.
Europe is Formula One's traditional centre, where all of the teams are based, and where around half the races take place. However, the sport's scope has expanded significantly in recent years and Grands Prix are held all over the world. Events in Europe and the Americas have been dropped in favour of races in Asia and the Middle East - of the eighteen races in 2008, nine are outside Europe.
Formula One is a massive television event, with millions of people watching on TV each race worldwide, the Formula One Group being the legal holder of the commercial rights. As the world's most expensive sport,[4] its economic effect is significant, and its financial and political battles are widely covered. On average about 55 million people all over the world watch Formula One races live. Its high profile and popularity makes it an obvious merchandising environment, which leads to very high investments from sponsors, translating into extremely high budgets for the constructor teams. However, mostly since year 2000, due to the always increasing expenditures, several teams, including works teams from car makers and those teams with minimum support from the automotive industry or other F1 teams, have gone bankrupt or been bought out by companies that want to easily establish a racing team within the sport.




Contents


1 History

1.1 The return of racing (1950–1958)
1.2 The 'Garagistes' (1959–1980)
1.3 Big business (1981–2000)
1.4 The manufacturers' return (2000–2009)
1.5 Outside the World Championship

1.5.1 European non-championship racing
1.5.2 South African Formula One championship
1.5.3 British Formula One Series




2 Racing and strategy

2.1 Qualifying
2.2 The race
2.3 Points system


3 Constructors

3.1 2009 teams


4 Drivers

4.1 2009 drivers
4.2 Feeder series
4.3 Beyond F1


5 2009 Calendar
6 Grands Prix
7 Circuits
8 Cars and technology
9 Revenue and Profits
10 Future
11 Television
12 Distinction between Formula One and World Championship races
13 See also
14 References

14.1 Notes
14.2 Bibliography
14.3 External links







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Main article: History of Formula One

See 2008 Formula One season for details of the 2008 season

The Formula One series has its roots in the European Grand Prix Motor Racing (q.v. for pre-1947 history) of the 1920s and 1930s. The "formula" is a set of rules which all participants and cars must meet. Formula One was a new formula agreed after World War II in 1946, with the first non-championship races being held that year. A number of Grand Prix racing organisations had laid out rules for a World Championship before the war, but due to the suspension of racing during the conflict, the World Drivers' Championship was not formalised until 1947. The first world championship race was held at Silverstone, United Kingdom in 1950. A championship for constructors followed in 1958. National championships existed in South Africa and the UK in the 1960s and 1970s. Non-championship Formula One races were held for many years but, due to the rising cost of competition, the last of these occurred in 1983.[5]
The sport's title, Formula One, indicates that it is intended to be the most advanced and most competitive of the FIA's racing formula.[citation needed]

[edit] The return of racing (1950–1958)




Juan Manuel Fangio's 1951 title-winning Alfa Romeo 159.


The first Formula One World Championship was won by Italian Giuseppe Farina in his Alfa Romeo in 1950, barely defeating his Argentine teammate Juan Manuel Fangio. However Fangio won the title in 1951, 1954, 1955, 1956 & 1957 (His record of five World Championship titles stood for 45 years until German driver Michael Schumacher took his sixth title in 2003), his streak interrupted after an injury by two-time champion Alberto Ascari of Ferrari. Although the UK's Stirling Moss was able to compete regularly, he was never able to win the World Championship, and is now widely considered to be the greatest driver never to have won the title.[6][7] Fangio, however, is remembered for dominating Formula One's first decade and has long been considered the "grand master" of Formula One.[citation needed]
The period was dominated by teams run by road car manufacturers—Alfa Romeo, Ferrari, Mercedes Benz and Maserati - all of whom had competed before the war. The first seasons were run using pre-war cars like Alfa's 158. They were front engined, with narrow treaded tyres and 1.5 litre supercharged or 4.5 litre naturally aspirated engines. The 1952 and 1953 world championships were run to Formula Two regulations, for smaller, less powerful cars, due to concerns over the number of Formula One cars available.[8] When a new Formula One, for engines limited to 2.5 litres, was reinstated to the world championship in 1954, Mercedes-Benz introduced the advanced W196, which featured innovations such as desmodromic valves and fuel injection as well as enclosed streamlined bodywork. Mercedes won the drivers championship for two years, before withdrawing from all motorsport in the wake of the 1955 Le Mans disaster.[9]

[edit] The 'Garagistes' (1959–1980)




Stirling Moss at the Nürburgring in 1961.


The first major technological development, Cooper's re-introduction of mid-engined cars (following Ferdinand Porsche's pioneering Auto Unions of the 1930s), which evolved from the company's successful Formula 3 designs, occurred in the 1950s. Australian Jack Brabham, World Champion in 1959, 1960 and 1966, soon proved the new design's superiority. By 1961, all regular competitors had switched to mid-engined cars.[10]
The first British World Champion was Mike Hawthorn, who drove a Ferrari to the title in 1958. However, when Colin Chapman entered F1 as a chassis designer and later founder of Team Lotus, British racing green came to dominate the field for the next decade. Between Jim Clark, Jackie Stewart, John Surtees, Jack Brabham, Graham Hill, and Denny Hulme, British teams and Commonwealth drivers won twelve world championships between 1962 and 1973.
In 1962, Lotus introduced a car with an aluminium sheet monocoque chassis instead of the traditional space frame design. This proved to be the greatest technological breakthrough since the introduction of mid-engined cars. In 1968, Lotus painted Imperial Tobacco livery on their cars, thus introducing sponsorship to the sport.[11]
Aerodynamic downforce slowly gained importance in car design from the appearance of aerofoils in the late 1960s. In the late 1970s, Lotus introduced ground effect aerodynamics that provided enormous downforce and greatly increased cornering speeds (though the concept had previously been used on Jim Hall's Chaparral 2J in 1970). So great were the aerodynamic forces pressing the cars to the track, (up to 5 times the car's weight), that extremely stiff springs were needed to maintain a constant ride height, leaving the suspension virtually solid, depending entirely on the tyres for any small amount of cushioning of the car and driver from irregularities in the road surface.[12]

[edit] Big business (1981–2000)




Nigel Mansell's Williams FW10 from 1985.






Damon Hill's Williams FW18 from 1996. The FW18 was one of the most successful cars of the era.


Beginning in the 1970s, Bernie Ecclestone rearranged the management of Formula One's commercial rights; he is widely credited with transforming the sport into the billion-dollar business it is today.[13][14] When Ecclestone bought the Brabham team in 1971 he gained a seat on the Formula One Constructors' Association and in 1978 became its President. Previously the circuit owners controlled the income of the teams and negotiated with each individually, however Ecclestone persuaded the teams to "hunt as a pack" through FOCA.[14] He offered Formula One to circuit owners as a package which they could take or leave. In return for the package almost all are required to surrender trackside advertising.[13]
The formation of the Fédération Internationale du Sport Automobile (FISA) in 1979 set off the FISA-FOCA war, during which FISA and its president Jean-Marie Balestre clashed repeatedly with FOCA over television revenues and technical regulations.[15] The Guardian said of FOCA that Ecclestone and Max Mosley "used it to wage a guerrilla war with a very long-term aim in view." FOCA threatened to set up a rival series, boycotted a Grand Prix and FISA withdrew its sanction from races.[13] The result was the 1981 Concorde Agreement, which guaranteed technical stability, as teams were to be given reasonable notice of new regulations.[16] Although FISA asserted its right to the TV revenues, it handed the administration of those rights to FOCA.[citation needed]
FISA imposed a ban on ground effect aerodynamics in 1983.[17] By then, however, turbocharged engines, which Renault had pioneered in 1977, were producing over 700 bhp (520 kW) and were essential to be competitive. By 1986, a BMW turbocharged engine achieved a flash reading of 5.5 bar pressure, estimated to be over 1,300 bhp (970 kW) in qualifying for the Italian Grand Prix. The following year power in race trim reached around 1,100 bhp (820 kW), with boost pressure limited to only 4.0 bar.[18] These cars were the most powerful open-wheel circuit racing cars ever. To reduce engine power output and thus speeds, the FIA limited fuel tank capacity in 1984 and boost pressures in 1988 before banning turbocharged engines completely in 1989.[19]
The development of electronic driver aids began in the 1980s. Lotus began to develop a system of active suspension which first appeared in 1982 on the F1 Lotus 91 and Lotus Esprit road car. By 1987, this system had been perfected and was driven to victory by Ayrton Senna in the Monaco Grand Prix that year. In the early 1990s, other teams followed suit and semi-automatic gearboxes and traction control were a natural progression. The FIA, due to complaints that technology was determining the outcome of races more than driver skill, banned many such aids for 1994. This led to cars that were previously dependent on electronic aids becoming very "twitchy" and difficult to drive (notably the Williams FW16), and many observers felt that the ban on driver aids was a ban in name only as they "have proved difficult to police effectively".[20]
The teams signed a second Concorde Agreement in 1992 and a third in 1997, which expired on the last day of 2007.[21]
On the track, the McLaren and Williams teams dominated the 1980s and 1990s, with Brabham also being competitive in the early part of the 1980s, winning two drivers' championships with Nelson Piquet. Powered by Porsche, Honda, and Mercedes-Benz, McLaren won sixteen championships (seven constructors', nine drivers') in that period, while Williams used engines from Ford, Honda, and Renault to also win sixteen titles (nine constructors', seven drivers'). The rivalry between racing legends Ayrton Senna and Alain Prost became F1's central focus in 1988, and continued until Prost retired at the end of 1993. Senna died at the 1994 San Marino Grand Prix after crashing into a wall on the exit of the notorious curve Tamburello, having taken over Prost's lead drive at Williams that year. The FIA worked to improve the sport's safety standards since that weekend, during which Roland Ratzenberger also lost his life in an accident during Saturday qualifying. No driver has died on the track at the wheel of a Formula One car since, though two track marshals have lost their lives, one at the 2000 Italian Grand Prix,[22] and the other at the 2001 Australian Grand Prix.[22]
Since the deaths of Ayrton Senna, Roland Ratzenberger and Gilles Villeneuve, the FIA has used safety as a reason to impose rule changes which otherwise, under the Concorde Agreement, would have had to be agreed upon by all the teams - most notably the changes introduced for 1998. This so called 'narrow track' era resulted in cars with smaller rear tyres, a narrower track overall and the introduction of 'grooved' tyres to reduce mechanical grip. There would be four grooves, on the front and rear - although initially three on the front tyres in the first year - that ran through the entire circumference of the tyre. The objective was to reduce cornering speeds and to produce racing similar to rain conditions by enforcing a smaller contact patch between tyre and track. This, according to the FIA, was to promote driver skill and provide a better spectacle.[citation needed]
Results have been mixed as the lack of mechanical grip has resulted in the more ingenious designers clawing back the deficit with aerodynamic grip - pushing more force onto the tyres through wings, aerodynamic devices etc - which in turn has resulted in less overtaking as these devices tend to make the wake behind the car 'dirty' (turbulent) preventing other cars from following closely, due to their dependence on 'clean' air to make the car stick to the track. The grooved tyres also had the unfortunate side effect of initially being of a harder compound, to be able to hold the groove tread blocks, which resulted in spectacular accidents in times of aerodynamic grip failure (e.g., rear wing failures), as the harder compound could not grip the track as well.
Drivers from McLaren, Williams, Renault (formerly Benetton) and Ferrari, dubbed the "Big Four", have won every World Championship from 1984 to the present day. Due to the technological advances of the 1990s, the cost of competing in Formula One rose dramatically. This increased financial burden, combined with four teams' dominance (largely funded by big car manufacturers such as Mercedes-Benz), caused the poorer independent teams to struggle not only to remain competitive, but to stay in business. Financial troubles forced several teams to withdraw. Since 1990, twenty-eight teams have pulled out of Formula One. This has prompted former Jordan owner Eddie Jordan to say that the days of competitive privateers are over.[23]

[edit] The manufacturers' return (2000–2009)




Michael Schumacher won five consecutive titles with Ferrari.


Michael Schumacher and Ferrari won an unprecedented five consecutive drivers’ championships and six consecutive constructors’ championships between 1999 and 2004. Schumacher set many new records, including those for Grand Prix wins (91), wins in a season (13 of 18), and most drivers' championships (7).[24] Schumacher's championship streak ended on September 25, 2005 when Renault driver Fernando Alonso became Formula One’s youngest champion at that time. In 2006, Renault and Alonso won both titles again. Schumacher retired at the end of 2006 after sixteen years in Formula One.
During this period the championship rules were frequently changed by the FIA with the intention of improving the on-track action and cutting costs.[25] Team orders, legal since the championship started in 1950, were banned in 2002 after several incidents in which teams openly manipulated race results, generating negative publicity, most famously by Ferrari at the 2002 Austrian Grand Prix. Other changes included the qualifying format, the points scoring system, the technical regulations and rules specifying how long engines and tyres must last. A 'tyre war' between suppliers Michelin and Bridgestone saw lap times fall, although at the 2005 United States Grand Prix at Indianapolis seven out of ten teams did not race when their Michelin tyres were deemed unsafe for use. During 2006, Max Mosley outlined a ‘green’ future for Formula One, in which efficient use of energy would become an important factor.[26] And the tyre war ended, as Bridgestone became the sole tyre supplier to Formula One for the 2007 season.
Since 1983, Formula One had been dominated by specialist race teams like Williams, McLaren and Benetton, using engines supplied by large car manufacturers like Mercedes-Benz, Honda, Renault and Ford. Starting in 2000, with Ford’s creation of the largely unsuccessful Jaguar team, new manufacturer-owned teams entered Formula One for the first time since the departure of Alfa Romeo and Renault at the end of 1985. By 2006, the manufacturer teams–Renault, BMW, Toyota, Honda and Ferrari–dominated the championship, taking five of the first six places in the constructors' championship. The sole exception was McLaren, which is part-owned by Mercedes Benz. Through the Grand Prix Manufacturers Association (GPMA) they negotiated a larger share of Formula One’s commercial profit and a greater say in the running of the sport.[citation needed]

[edit] Outside the World Championship
Currently, the terms "Formula One race" and "World Championship race" are effectively synonymous; since 1984, every Formula One race has counted towards the World Championship, and every World Championship race has been to Formula One regulations. This has not always been the case, and in the earlier history of Formula One many races took place outside the world championship.

[edit] European non-championship racing
In the early years of Formula One, before the world championship was established, there were around twenty races held from late Spring to early Autumn in Europe, although not all of these were considered significant. Most competitive cars came from Italy, particularly Alfa Romeo. After the start of the world championship these non-championship races continued. In the 1950s and 1960s, there were many Formula One races which did not count for the World Championship (e.g., in 1950, a total of twenty-two Formula One races were held, of which only six counted towards the World Championship). In 1952 and 1953, when the world championship was run for Formula Two cars, a full season of non-championship Formula One racing took place. Some races, particularly in the UK, including the Race of Champions, Oulton Park International Gold Cup and International Trophy, were attended by the majority of the world championship contenders. These became less common through the 1970s and 1983 saw the last non-championship Formula One race: The 1983 Race of Champions at Brands Hatch, won by reigning World Champion Keke Rosberg in a Williams Cosworth in a close fight with American Danny Sullivan.[5]

[edit] South African Formula One championship
Main article: South African Formula One Championship
South Africa's flourishing domestic Formula One championship ran from 1960 through to 1975. The frontrunning cars in the series were recently retired from the world championship although there was also a healthy selection of locally built or modified machines. Frontrunning drivers from the series usually contested their local World Championship Grand Prix, as well as occasional European events, although they had little success at that level.[citation needed]

[edit] British Formula One Series
Main article: British Formula One Series
The old fashioned DFV helped make the UK domestic Formula One series possible between 1978 and 1980. As in South Africa a generation before, second hand cars from manufacturers like Lotus and Fittipaldi Automotive were the order of the day, although some, such as the March 781, were built specifically for the series. In 1980, the series saw South African Desiré Wilson become the only woman to win a Formula One race when she triumphed at Brands Hatch in a Wolf WR3.[27]

[edit] Racing and strategy
Main articles: Formula One racing and Formula One regulations




Nick Heidfeld and Nico Rosberg on the street circuit of Albert Park in the 2008 Australian Grand Prix.


A Formula One Grand Prix event spans a weekend, beginning with two free practice sessions on Friday (except in Monaco, where Friday practices are moved to Thursday), and one free practice on Saturday. Additional drivers (commonly known as third drivers) are allowed to run on Fridays, but only two cars may be used per team, requiring a race driver to give up their seat. A Qualifying session is held after the last free practice session. This session determines the starting order for the race.[28][29]

[edit] Qualifying
A knock-out qualifying system determines the starting order of the race. The qualifying session is split into three phases. In the first phase, all twenty cars are permitted on the track for a twenty minute qualification session. Only their fastest time will count and drivers may complete as many laps as they wish. At the end of the first session, the slowest five cars are eliminated and will take no further part in qualifying. These cars will make up the last five grid positions in the order of their times.[30]
The times for the fifteen remaining cars are reset for the next fifteen minute session. The slowest five cars will make up the grid in positions 11 to 15 in the order of their times set in this session.[30]
The recorded fastest times for the ten remaining cars are then wiped in preparation for the final (ten minute) session referred to as the 'Pole Position Shootout'. At the end of this period, the cars will be arranged on the grid in positions one to ten in accordance to their fastest lap time. In the first two sessions, cars may run any fuel load and drivers knocked out after those sessions may refuel ahead of the race. However, the top-ten drivers must start the race with whatever fuel was left in the car at the end of the final qualifying session.[31] For all the sessions, if a driver starts a timed lap before the chequered flag falls for the end of that session, their time will count even if they cross the finishing line well after the session has ended.[30]

[edit] The race
The race begins with a warm-up formation lap, after which the cars assemble on the starting grid in the order they qualified. If a driver stalls before the parade lap and the rest of the field pass him, then he must start from the back of the grid. If he manages to drive off and at least one car is behind him, he is permitted to retake his original position. A racer may also elect to start from pit-lane if he has any last minute problems with the car. If they choose to do this, they must wait for all cars to pass pit-lane before they may begin the race.[32]
A light system above the track indicates the start of the race. The race distance is equal to the least number of complete laps which exceed a distance of 305 km (190 mi) (although Monaco is 260 km (160 mi)), and are limited to two hours. In practice they usually last about ninety minutes. Throughout the race, drivers may make one or more pit stops in order to refuel and change tyres. Teams are supplied with tyres exclusively from Bridgestone. Bridgestone have developed four tyre compounds of which they then select two for the teams to use at a given race event. Drivers must use both tyre compounds during a race for at least one stint except when it rains and drivers switch to either intermediate or extreme wets, then they are no longer required to use both sets of dry tyres. Creating the usage of both types of tyres was introduced in the hope of bringing more excitement to the sport. The softer of the available compounds for the weekend's tyres can be seen with a green stripe on the tyre's sidewall. When a driver comes around to lap another, the latter must move out of the way within three blue flags (waved by the trackside marshals), or face a penalty from the race stewards.[33]

[edit] Points system
Main article: List of Formula One World Championship pointscoring systems
Various systems for awarding championship points have been used since 1950. From 2010, it is possible that the winner of the two annual championships may be the driver with the most wins and the team with the most points at the end of the season. In the case of a tie in wins, the drivers' championship would be awarded to the driver having the higher number of points; if these are equal, second place finishes are considered, and so on. The scoring system where by the driver with the most wins (as opposed to most accumulated points) becomes world champion was due to be introduced for the 2009 season, however following protests from F1 teams and drivers this rule change has been deferred until a possible 2010 introduction.[34] The points system therefore remains unchanged for 2009.
To receive points a racer need not finish the race, but at least 90% of the winner's race distance must be completed. Therefore, it is possible for a driver to receive some points even though he retired before the end of the race. In that case the scoring is based on the distance completed in comparison to other drivers. It is also possible for the lower points not to be awarded because insufficient drivers completed 90% of the winner's distance. The system could be revised prior to the start of the 2010 season.


1st place
10 points


2nd place
8 points


3rd place
6 points


4th place
5 points


5th place
4 points


6th place
3 points


7th place
2 points


8th place
1 point



[edit] Constructors
See also: List of Formula One constructors, List of Formula One drivers, List of Formula One people, List of Formula One World Drivers' Champions, and List of Formula One World Constructors' Champions




Ferrari have competed in every season, and hold the record for most titles.






The McLaren team won all but one race in 1988 with Honda as its engine partner, and remains a championship contender in the present day.


Since 1984 Formula One teams have been required to build the chassis in which they compete, and consequently the terms "team" and "constructor" became more or less interchangeable. This requirement distinguishes the sport from series such as the IndyCar Series which allows teams to purchase chassis, and "spec series" such as GP2, which require all cars be kept to an identical specification.
The sport's 1950 debut season saw eighteen teams compete, but due to high costs many dropped out quickly. In fact, such was the scarcity of competitive cars for much of the first decade of Formula One that Formula Two cars were admitted to fill the grids. Ferrari is the only still-active team which competed in 1950.
Early manufacturer involvement came in the form of a "factory team" or "works team" (that is, one owned and staffed by a major car company), such as those of Alfa Romeo, Ferrari or Renault. After having virtually disappeared by the early 1980s, factory teams made a comeback in the 1990s and 2000s and now form half the grid with Ferrari, BMW, Renault, Toyota and Honda either setting up their own teams or buying out existing ones. Mercedes-Benz owns 40% of the McLaren team and manufactures the team's engines. Factory teams currently make up the top competitive teams; in mid-2008 factory teams occupied the top 5 positions in the Constructors' Championship. Ferrari holds the record for having won the most Constructors' Championships (fifteen).
Companies such as Climax, Repco, Cosworth, Hart, Judd and Supertec, which had no direct team affiliation, often sold engines to teams that could not afford to manufacture them. In the early years independently owned Formula One teams sometimes also built their engines, though this became less common with the increased involvement of major car manufacturers such as BMW, Ferrari, Honda, Mercedes-Benz, Renault and Toyota, whose large budgets rendered privately built engines less competitive. Cosworth was the last independent engine supplier, but lost its last customers after the 2006 season. Beginning in 2007, the manufacturers' deep pockets and engineering ability took over, eliminating the last of the independent engine manufacturers. It is estimated that the big teams spend €100 to €200 million ($125-$250 million) per year per manufacturer on engines alone.[35][36]
In the 2007 season, for the first time since the 1984 rule, two teams used chassis built by other teams. Super Aguri started the season using a modified Honda Racing's RA106 chassis (used by Honda in the 2006 season), while Scuderia Toro Rosso used a modified Red Bull Racing RB3 chassis (same as the one used by Red Bull in the 2007 season). Such a decision did not come as a surprise because of spiraling costs and the fact that Super Aguri is partially owned by Honda and Toro Rosso is half owned by Red Bull. Formula One team Spyker raised a complaint against this decision, and other teams such as McLaren and Ferrari have officially confirmed that they support the campaign. Because of this use of other teams' chassis, the 2006 season could have been the last one in which the terms "team" and "constructor" were truly interchangeable. This attracted the Prodrive team to F1 to the 2008 season, where it intended to run a customer car. After not being able to secure a package from McLaren, Prodrive's intention to enter the 2008 season was dropped after Williams threatened legal action against them. Now, it seems that customer cars concept will be formally banned in 2010. [37]
Although teams rarely disclose information about their budgets, it is estimated that they range from US$66 million to US$400 million each.[38]
Entering a new team in the Formula One World Championship requires a £25 million (about US$47 million) up-front payment to the FIA, which is then repaid to the team over the course of the season. As a consequence, constructors desiring to enter Formula One often prefer to buy an existing team: B.A.R.'s purchase of Tyrrell and Midland's purchase of Jordan allowed both of these teams to sidestep the large deposit and secure the benefits that the team already had, such as TV revenue.

[edit] 2009 teams
The following teams are signed with Formula One Management and make up the Formula One Teams Association:

Ferrari
McLaren-Mercedes
BMW Sauber
Renault
Toyota
Toro Rosso-Ferrari
Red Bull-Renault
Williams-Toyota
Force India-Mercedes
Brawn-Mercedes


[edit] Drivers




The Formula One Drivers' Trophy.


Each driver is assigned a number. The previous season's champion is designated number 1, with his team-mate given number 2. Numbers are then assigned in order according to each team's position in the previous season's constructors' championship. The number 13 is not used.
There have been exceptions to this rule, such as in 1993 and 1994, when the current World Drivers' Champion (Nigel Mansell and Alain Prost, respectively) was no longer competing in Formula One. In this case the drivers for the team of the previous year's champion are given numbers 0 (Damon Hill, on both occasions) and 2 (Prost himself and Ayrton Senna—replaced after his death by David Coulthard and occasionally Nigel Mansell–respectively). The number 13 has not been used since 1976, before which it was occasionally assigned at the discretion of individual race organisers. Before 1996, only the world championship winning driver and his team generally swapped numbers with the previous champion–the remainder held their numbers from prior years, as they had been originally set at the start of the 1974 season. For many years, for example, Ferrari held numbers 27 and 28, regardless of their finishing position in the world championship.
Michael Schumacher holds the record for having won the most Drivers' Championships, with seven. Jochen Rindt became the only posthumous World Champion after a fatal accident at the 1970 Italian Grand Prix.

[edit] 2009 drivers


Team
Constructor
Chassis
Engine
Tyre
No.[39]
Race Drivers
Test Driver(s)


 Vodafone McLaren Mercedes
McLaren
MP4-24[40]
Mercedes FO 108W
B
1
 Lewis Hamilton[41]
 Pedro de la Rosa[42]
 Gary Paffett[42]


2
 Heikki Kovalainen[43]


 Scuderia Ferrari Marlboro
Ferrari
F60[44]
Ferrari 056
B
3
 Felipe Massa[45]
 Luca Badoer[46]
 Marc Gené[46]


4
 Kimi Räikkönen[47]


 BMW Sauber F1 Team
BMW Sauber
F1.09[48]
BMW P86/9
B
5
 Robert Kubica[49]
 Christian Klien
 Marko Asmer[49]


6
 Nick Heidfeld[49]


 ING Renault F1 Team
Renault
R29[50]
Renault RS27
B
7
 Fernando Alonso[51]
 Romain Grosjean[52]


8
 Nelson Piquet Jr.[51]


 Panasonic Toyota Racing
Toyota
TF109[48]
Toyota RVX-09
B
9
 Jarno Trulli[53]
 Kamui Kobayashi[54]


10
 Timo Glock[55]


 Scuderia Toro Rosso
Toro Rosso
STR4
Ferrari 056
B
11
 Sébastien Bourdais[56]
 Brendon Hartley[57]


12
 Sébastien Buemi[58]


 Red Bull Racing
Red Bull
RB5
Renault RS27
B
14
 Mark Webber[59]
 David Coulthard[60]
 Brendon Hartley[57]


15
 Sebastian Vettel[61]


 AT&T WilliamsF1 Team
Williams
FW31[62]
Toyota RVX-09
B
16
 Nico Rosberg[63]
 Nicolas Hülkenberg[63]


17
 Kazuki Nakajima[63]


 Force India F1 Team
Force India
VJM02
Mercedes FO 108W[64]
B
20
 Adrian Sutil[65]
 Vitantonio Liuzzi[65]


21
 Giancarlo Fisichella[65]


 Brawn GP Formula One Team[66]
Brawn
BGP 001[66]
Mercedes FO 108W[66]
B
22
 Jenson Button[67]
 Alexander Wurz[68]


23
 Rubens Barrichello[69]



[edit] Feeder series




GP2 is the current main feeder series for F1.


For the most part F1 drivers start in Karting and then come up through traditional European single seater series like Formula Ford, Formula Renault, Formula 3, and finally GP2. The GP2 series started in 2005 and all three champions have gone on to race in F1. Before GP2, Formula Two and then Formula 3000 had filled the role of the last major "stepping stone" into F1. 2006 GP2 champion Lewis Hamilton became the first F2, F3000 or GP2 champion to win the Formula One driver's title in 2008.[70] Drivers are not required to have competed at this level before entering Formula One. British F3 has long been considered one of the best places to spot F1 talent, with champions including Nigel Mansell, Ayrton Senna and Mika Häkkinen having moved straight from that series to Formula One. Again, though, it is possible to be picked earlier, as was the case with Kimi Räikkönen, who went straight from Formula Renault to an F1 drive.
American Championship Car Racing has also contributed to the Formula One grid. Champions Mario Andretti and Jacques Villeneuve, as well as Michael Andretti, Juan Pablo Montoya, Cristiano da Matta and Sébastien Bourdais have all moved to F1 from America, with varying degrees of success. Alessandro Zanardi raced in Formula 1 from 1991 to 1994, entering 27 races with little success, but his successful career in CART, winning the championship in 1997 and 1998, gave him the opportunity to return to Formula 1 in 1999. However, he failed to score a single point during the season.
Other drivers have taken different paths to F1; Damon Hill raced motorbikes, and Michael Schumacher raced in sports cars, albeit after climbing through the junior single seater ranks. To race, however, the driver must hold an FIA Super Licence–ensuring that the driver has the requisite skills, and will not therefore be a danger to others. Some drivers haven't had the license when first signed to a F1 team. Kimi Räikkönen received the license despite having only 23 car races to his credit.

[edit] Beyond F1




The DTM has become a popular destination for retired F1 drivers.






Some former F1 drivers have moved to NASCAR.


Most F1 drivers retire before their mid-30s; however, many keep racing in disciplines which are less physically demanding. The German touring car championship, the DTM, is a popular category involving ex-drivers such as two-times F1 champion Mika Häkkinen, Ralf Schumacher and Jean Alesi, and some F1 drivers have left to race in America–Nigel Mansell and Emerson Fittipaldi duelled for the 1993 IndyCar title, and Juan Pablo Montoya, Scott Speed and Jacques Villeneuve have moved to NASCAR. Some drivers have gone to A1GP (Narain Karthikeyan), and some, such as Gerhard Berger and Alain Prost, returned to F1 as team owners. A series for former Formula One drivers, called Grand Prix Masters, ran briefly in 2005 and 2006.[71] Others have become pundits for TV coverage such as Martin Brundle for ITV (and subsequently BBC) and Jean Alesi for Italian national network RAI and David Coulthard for the BBC. Others, such as Damon Hill and Jackie Stewart take active roles in motorsport in their own countries.

[edit] 2009 Calendar
After several revisions, the FIA published the 2009 Formula One World Championship race calendar on 5 November 2008[72]


Round
Official Race Title
Grand Prix
Circuit
City / Location
Date
Time[73]
Laps


Local
UTC


1
 ING Australian Grand Prix
Australian GP
Melbourne Grand Prix Circuit
Melbourne, Victoria
29 March
17:00
06:00
58


2
 Petronas Malaysian Grand Prix
Malaysian GP
Sepang International Circuit
Kuala Lumpur
5 April
17:00
09:00
56


3
 Chinese Grand Prix
Chinese GP
Shanghai International Circuit
Shanghai
19 April
15:00
07:00
56


4
 Gulf Air Bahrain Grand Prix
Bahrain GP
Bahrain International Circuit
Sakhir, Manama
26 April
15:00
12:00
57


5
 Gran Premio de España Telefónica
Spanish GP
Circuit de Catalunya
Barcelona
10 May
14:00
12:00
66


6
 Grand Prix de Monaco
Monaco GP
Circuit de Monaco
Monte Carlo
24 May
14:00
12:00
78


7
 ING Turkish Grand Prix
Turkish GP
Istanbul Park
Istanbul
7 June
15:00
12:00
58


8
 Santander British Grand Prix
British GP
Silverstone Circuit
Silverstone
21 June
13:00
12:00
60


9
 Großer Preis Santander von Deutschland
German GP*
Nürburgring
Nürburg
12 July
14:00
12:00
60


10
 ING Magyar Nagydíj
Hungarian GP
Hungaroring
Budapest
26 July
14:00
12:00
70


11
 Telefónica Grand Prix of Europe
European GP*
Valencia Street Circuit
Valencia
23 August
14:00
12:00
57


12
 ING Belgian Grand Prix
Belgian GP
Circuit de Spa-Francorchamps
Spa
30 August
14:00
12:00
44


13
 Gran Premio Santander d'Italia
Italian GP
Autodromo Nazionale Monza
Monza
13 September
14:00
12:00
53


14
 SingTel Singapore Grand Prix†
Singapore GP
Marina Bay Street Circuit
Singapore
27 September
20:00
12:00
61


15
 Fuji Television Japanese Grand Prix
Japanese GP
Suzuka Circuit
Suzuka
4 October
14:00
05:00
53


16
 Grande Prêmio do Brasil
Brazilian GP
Autódromo José Carlos Pace
São Paulo
18 October
14:00
16:00
71


17
 Etihad Airways Abu Dhabi Grand Prix
Abu Dhabi GP
Yas Marina Circuit‡
Abu Dhabi
1 November
15:00
11:00
55


† Night Race
‡ New Circuit
* Since the 1995 season, Grands Prix held at the Nürburgring have been titled something other than the "German Grand Prix" due to a dispute with the Hockenheimring over naming rights. With the issue still in dispute at the end of the 2008 season it was reported that either the Nürburgring or Valencia Street Circuit Grand Prix would change titles.[74] The FIA calendar currently lists the Nürburgring race as the German Grand Prix, and the Valencia race as the European Grand Prix.[75]

[edit] Grands Prix
See also: List of Formula One Grands Prix




Cars wind through the infield section of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway at the 2003 United States Grand Prix.


The number of Grands Prix held in a season has varied over the years. Only seven races comprised the inaugural 1950 world championship season; over the years the calendar has almost tripled in size. Though the number of races had stayed at sixteen or seventeen since the 1980s, it reached nineteen in 2005.
Six of the original seven races took place in Europe; the only non-European race that counted towards the World Championship in 1950 was the Indianapolis 500, which, due to lack of participation by F1 teams, since it required cars with different specifications from the other races, was later replaced by the United States Grand Prix. The F1 championship gradually expanded to other non-European countries as well. Argentina hosted the first South American grand prix in 1953, and Morocco hosted the first African World Championship race in 1958. Asia (Japan in 1976) and Oceania (Australia in 1985) followed. The current seventeen races are spread over the continents of Europe, Asia, Oceania and South America.
Traditionally each nation has hosted a single Grand Prix, which carries the name of the country. If a single country hosts multiple Grands Prix in a year they receive different names. For instance, a European country (such as Britain, Germany or Spain) which has hosted two Grands Prix has the second one known as the European Grand Prix, while Italy's second grand prix was named after nearby republic of San Marino. Similarly, as two races were scheduled in Japan in 1994/1995, the second event was known as the Pacific Grand Prix. In 1982, the United States hosted three Grands Prix.
The Grands Prix, some of which have a history that pre-dates the Formula One World Championship, are not always held on the same circuit every year. The British Grand Prix, for example, though held every year since 1950, alternated between Brands Hatch and Silverstone from 1963 to 1986. The only other race to have been included in every season is the Italian Grand Prix. The World Championship event has taken place exclusively at Monza with just one exception: in 1980, it was held at Imola, host to the San Marino Grand Prix until 2006.
One of the newest races on the Grand Prix calendar, held in Bahrain, represents Formula One's first foray into the Middle East with a high-tech purpose-built desert track. The Bahrain Grand Prix, and other new races in China and Turkey, present new opportunities for the growth and evolution of the Formula One Grand Prix franchise while new facilities also raise the bar for other Formula One racing venues around the world. In order to make room on the schedule for the newer races, older or less successful events in Europe and the Americas have been dropped from the calendar, such as these in Argentina, Austria, Mexico, San Marino, and the United States.
In 2007 it was confirmed that new Grands Prix would be added to the calendar. The first was the Singapore Grand Prix in September 2008, which had the honour of the first night race ever held in Formula One.[76] The second was the Indian Grand Prix which will be held in Delhi, India.[77] Other changes included the removal of the United States Grand Prix from the calendar,[78] and the move of the European Grand Prix to Valencia, Spain.[79]

[edit] Circuits
See also: List of Formula One circuits




Autódromo José Carlos Pace in São Paulo hosts the Brazilian Grand Prix.






The Autodromo Nazionale Monza, home to the Italian Grand Prix, is one of the oldest circuits still in use in Formula One.






Countries in red have hosted the Formula One Grand Prix in the past, countries in green are 2008 hosts, and countries in yellow will host in the near future.


A typical circuit usually features a stretch of straight road on which the starting grid is situated. The pit lane, where the drivers stop for fuel and tyres during the race, and where the teams work on the cars before the race, is normally located next to the starting grid. The layout of the rest of the circuit varies widely, although in most cases the circuit runs in a clockwise direction. Those few circuits that run anticlockwise (and therefore have predominantly left-handed corners) can cause drivers neck problems due to the enormous lateral forces generated by F1 cars pulling their heads in the opposite direction to normal.
Most of the circuits currently in use are specially constructed for competition. The current street circuits are Monaco, Melbourne, Valencia, and Singapore, although races in other urban locations come and go (Las Vegas and Detroit, for example) and proposals for such races are often discussed–most recently London and Paris. Several other circuits are also completely or partially laid out on public roads, such as Spa-Francorchamps. The glamour and history of the Monaco race are the primary reasons why the circuit is still in use, since it is thought not to meet the strict safety requirements imposed on other tracks. Three-time World champion Nelson Piquet famously described racing in Monaco as "like riding a bicycle around your living room"[citation needed].
Circuit design to protect the safety of drivers is becoming increasingly sophisticated, as exemplified by the new Bahrain International Circuit, added in 2004 and designed–like most of F1's new circuits–by Hermann Tilke. Several of the new circuits in F1, especially those designed by Tilke, have been criticised as lacking the "flow" of such classics as Spa-Francorchamps and Imola. His redesign of the Hockenheim circuit in Germany for example, while providing more capacity for grandstands and eliminating extremely long and dangerous straights, has been frowned upon by many who argue that part of the character of the Hockenheim circuits was the long and blinding straights into dark forest sections. These newer circuits, however, are generally agreed to meet the safety standards of modern Formula One better than the older ones.
The most recent addition to the F1 calendar is Valencia[79] and Singapore (which hosted the first night race in F1 history).[80] Also Abu Dhabi has been confirmed as the last race for the 2009 season[81] and a Formula 1 Grand Prix will be held in India for the first time in 2010.[82] The races in Canada and France will not be part of the calendar as of 2009

[edit] Cars and technology
Main article: Formula One car




A birdseye view of the rear of a 2006 McLaren MP4-21.


Modern Formula One cars are mid-engined open cockpit, open wheel single-seaters. The chassis is made largely of carbon fibre composites, rendering it light but extremely stiff and strong. The whole car, including engine, fluids and driver, weighs only 605 kg—the minimum weight set by the regulations. The construction of the cars is typically lighter than the minimum and so they are ballasted up to the minimum weight. The race teams take advantage of this by placing this ballast at the extreme bottom of the chassis, thereby locating the centre of gravity as low as possible in order to improve handling and weight transfer.[83]
The cornering speed of Formula One cars is largely determined by the aerodynamic downforce that they generate, which pushes the car down onto the track. This is provided by 'wings' mounted at the front and rear of the vehicle, and by ground effect created by low pressure air under the flat bottom of the car. The aerodynamic design of the cars is very heavily constrained to limit performance and the current generation of cars sport a large number of small winglets, 'barge boards' and turning vanes designed to closely control the flow of the air over, under and around the car.
The other major factor controlling the cornering speed of the cars is the design of the tyres. Since 1998, tyres in Formula One have not been 'slicks' (tyres with no tread pattern) as in most other circuit racing series. Instead, each tyre has four large circumferential grooves on its surface designed to limit the cornering speed of the cars.[84] Slick tyres will return to Formula One in the 2009 season. Suspension is double wishbone or multilink all round with pushrod operated springs and dampers on the chassis. Carbon-Carbon disc brakes are used for reduced weight and increased frictional performance. These provide a very high level of braking performance and are usually the element which provokes the greatest reaction from drivers new to the formula.
Engines must be 2.4 litre naturally aspirated V8s, with many other constraints on their design and the materials that may be used. Engines run on unleaded fuel closely resembling publicly available petrol.[85] The oil which lubricates and protects the engine from overheating is very similar in viscosity to water. The 2006 generation of engines spun up to 20,000 RPM and produced up to 780 bhp (580 kW).[86] For 2007 engines were restricted to 19,000 RPM with limited development areas allowed, following the engine specification freeze from the end of 2006.[87] For the 2009 Formula One season the engines have been further restricted to 18,000 RPM. [88]
A wide variety of technologies–including active suspension, ground effect and turbochargers–are banned under the current regulations. Despite this the current generation of cars can reach speeds of up to 350 km/h (220 mph) at some circuits.[89] A Honda Formula One car, running with minimum downforce on a runway in the Mojave desert achieved a top speed of 415 km/h (258 mph) in 2006. According to Honda the car fully met the FIA Formula One regulations.[90] Even with the limitations on aerodynamics, at 160 km/h (99 mph) aerodynamically generated downforce is equal to the weight of the car and the often repeated claim that Formula One cars create enough downforce to 'drive on the ceiling' remains possible in principle, although it has never been put to the test. At full speed, downforce of two and a half times the car's weight can be achieved. The downforce means that the cars can achieve a lateral force with a magnitude of up to five times that of the force of gravity (5g) in cornering–a high-performance road car like the Ferrari Enzo only achieves around 1g.[91] Consequently in corners the driver's head is pulled sideways with a force equivalent to the weight of 20 kg. Such high lateral forces are enough to make breathing difficult and the drivers need supreme concentration and fitness to maintain their focus for the one to two hours that it takes to complete the race.

[edit] Revenue and Profits




Estimated budget split of an F1 team based on the 2006 season.


Formula 1 is a profitable exercise for most parties involved. The TV channels make profits from broadcasting the races. The teams get a slice of the money raised from the sale of broadcasting rights as well as from the sponsor's logos on their cars.
The cost of building a brand new permanent circuit like in Shanghai can be up to hundreds of millions of dollars, but the cost of converting a public road such as Albert Park into a temporary circuit is much less. However permanent circuits can generate revenue all year round from leasing the track for private races and also other races such as MotoGP. The Shanghai circuit cost over $300 million.[92] The owners are hoping to break-even by 2014. The Istanbul Park circuit cost $150 million to build.[93]
Not all circuits make profits–for example, Albert Park made a loss of $32 million in 2007.[94]
In March 2007, F1 Racing published its annual estimates of spending by Formula One teams. The total spending of all eleven teams in 2006 was estimated at $2.9 billion. This was broken down as follows; Toyota $418.5 million, Ferrari $406.5 m, McLaren $402 m, Honda $380.5 m, BMW Sauber $355 m, Renault $324 m, Red Bull $252 m, Williams $195.5 m, Midland F1/Spyker-MF1 $120 m, Toro Rosso $75 m, and Super Aguri $57 million.
Costs vary greatly from team to team; in 2006 teams such as Honda, Toyota, McLaren-Mercedes and Ferrari are estimated to have spent approximately $200 million on engines, Renault spent approximately $125 million and Cosworth's 2006 V8 was developed for $15 million.[95] In contrast to the 2006 season on which these figures are based, the 2007 sporting regulations ban all performance related engine development.[96]

[edit] Future
Main article: Future of Formula One
See also: 2009 Formula One season, 2010 Formula One season, and 2011 Formula One season
Formula One went through a difficult period in the early 2000s. Viewing figures dropped, and fans expressed their loss of interest due to the dominance of Michael Schumacher and Scuderia Ferrari.[97] Viewing figures are seeing some signs of recovery due to the varied seasons since 2005. Ferrari's and Schumacher's 5 year domination ended in 2005 as Renault became the top team in Formula One, with Fernando Alonso becoming the new (and youngest ever at the time) World Champion. There has since been a resurgence of interest in the sport, especially in Alonso's home country of Spain, and Lewis Hamilton's home country of Great Britain. In 2006, twenty-two teams applied for the final twelfth team spot available for the 2008 season. The spot was eventually awarded to former B.A.R. and Benetton team principal David Richards' Prodrive organization, but the team pulled out of the 2008 season in November 2007.




A sign displaying that the safety car (SC) is deployed. Safety is of paramount concern in contemporary F1.


The FIA is responsible for making rules to combat the spiralling costs of Formula One racing (which affects the smaller teams the most) and for ensuring the sport remains as safe as possible, especially in the wake of the deaths of Ayrton Senna and Roland Ratzenberger in 1994. To this end the FIA have instituted a number of rule changes, including new tyre restrictions, multi-race engines and reductions on downforce. Safety and cost have traditionally been paramount in all rule-change discussions. More recently the FIA has added efficiency to its priorities. Currently the FIA and manufacturers are discussing adding bio-fuel engines and regenerative braking for the 2011 season. FIA President Max Mosley believes F1 must focus on efficiency to stay technologically relevant in the automotive industry as well as keep the public excited about F1 technology.
After being banned since 1998, slick tyres will return to Formula One racing in 2009.[98]
In the interest of making the sport truer to its role as a World Championship, FOM president Bernie Ecclestone has initiated and organised a number of Grands Prix in new countries and continues to discuss new future races. The sport's rapid expansion into new areas of the globe also leaves some question as to which races will be cut.

[edit] Television
See also: List of Formula One broadcasters
Formula One can be seen live or tape delayed in almost every country and territory around the world and attracts one of the largest global television audiences. The 2006 Brazilian Grand Prix attracted an average live global TV audience of eighty-three million viewers, with a total of 154 million viewers tuning in to watch at least some part of the event.[99] Official figures from FOM for 2006 that state Formula One television broadcasts were witnessed by 580 million unique viewers during the 2005 season[100] and average viewing figures for 1995–1999 were 50 billion.[101] It is a massive television event; the cumulative television audience was calculated to be 54 billion for 2001 season, broadcast to two hundred countries.[102]
In 2005, the Canadian Grand Prix in Montréal was the most watched of the races, and the third most watched sporting event in the world.[103]
During the early 2000s, Formula One Administration created a number of trademarks, an official logo, and an official website for the sport in an attempt to give it a corporate identity. Ecclestone experimented with a digital television package (known colloquially as Bernievision), which was launched at the 1996 German Grand Prix in cooperation with German digital television service "DF1", thirty years after the first GP colour TV broadcast, the 1967 German Grand Prix. This service offered the viewer several simultaneous feeds (such as super signal, onboard, top of field, backfield, highlights, pit lane, timing), which were produced with cameras, technical equipment and staff different from those used for the conventional coverage. It was introduced in many countries over the years, but was shut down after the 2002 season for financial reasons.
TV stations all take what is known as the 'World Feed', either produced by the FOM (Formula One Management) or the 'host broadcaster'. The only station that has any difference is 'Premiere'—a German channel that offers all sessions live and interactive, with features such as the onboard channel. This service was more widely available around Europe until the end of 2002, when the cost of a whole different feed for the digital interactive services was thought too much. This was in large part because of the failure of the 'F1 Digital +' Channel launched through Sky Digital in the United Kingdom. Prices were too high for viewers, considering they could watch both the qualifying and the races themselves free on ITV.
Bernie Ecclestone had announced that F1 will adopt the HD format near the end of the 2007 season. However, details of the races to be covered and the means of showing the content have yet to be announced. Also it was announced early in 2008 that the BBC would be broadcasting F1 for five years starting in 2009, regaining the rights from ITV who had been broadcasting it since 1997.[104] However, on 31 December 2008, Roger Mosey, Director of BBC Sport announced that F1 would not be broadcast on BBC HD[105] because "no HD world feed is available".[106]

[edit] Distinction between Formula One and World Championship races
Currently the terms "Formula One race" and "World Championship race" are effectively synonymous; since 1984, every Formula One race has counted towards the World Championship, and every World Championship race has been to Formula One regulations. But the two terms are not interchangeable. Consider that:

the first Formula One race was held in 1947, whereas the World Championship did not start until 1950.
in the 1950s and 1960s there were many Formula One races which did not count for the World Championship (e.g., in 1950, a total of twenty-two Formula One races were held, of which only six counted towards the World Championship). The number of non-championship Formula One events decreased throughout the 1970s and 1980s, to the point where the last non-championship Formula One race was held in 1983.
the World Championship was not always exclusively composed of Formula One events:

The World Championship was originally established as the "World Championship for Drivers", i.e., without the term "Formula One" in the title. It only officially became the Formula One World Championship in 1981.
From 1950 to 1960, the Indianapolis 500 counted towards the World Championship. This race was run to AAA/USAC regulations, rather than to Formula One regulations. Only one of the world championship regulars, Alberto Ascari in 1952, competed at Indianapolis during this period.
From 1952 to 1953, all races counting towards the World Championship (except the Indianapolis 500) were run to Formula Two regulations. Note that Formula One was not "changed to Formula Two" during this period; the Formula One regulations remained the same, and numerous Formula One races were staged during this time.



The distinction is most relevant when considering career summaries and "all time lists". For example, in the List of Formula One drivers, Clemente Biondetti is shown with 1 race against his name. Biondetti actually competed in four Formula One races in 1950, but only one of these counted for the World Championship. Similarly, several Indy 500 winners technically won their first world championship race, though most record books choose to ignore this and instead only record regular participants.

[edit] See also




Formula One portal




2009 Formula One season
2008 Formula One season
GP2 (F1's feeder series)
A1 Grand Prix
F1 Racing (magazine)
Fantasy F1
Formula Two
List of Formula One circuits
Regenerative brake


[edit] References

[edit] Notes


^ The formula was defined in 1946; the first Formula One race was in 1947; the first World Championship season was 1950.
^ http://www.fia.com/en-GB/sport/championships/f1/Pages/SeasonGuide.aspx
^ http://www.fia.com/resources/documents/1797101136__Appendix_L_a.pdf
^ http://sports.espn.go.com/rpm/racing/f1/news/story?id=3611184
^ a b "The last of the non-championship races". www.forix.com. Archived from the original on 2007-02-27. http://web.archive.org/web/20070227105027/http://www.forix.com/8w/roc83.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-17. 
^ Lawton, James (2007-08-28). "Moss can guide Hamilton through chicane of celebrity". The Independent (Newspaper Publishing). 
^ Henry, Alan (2007-03-12). "Hamilton's chance to hit the grid running". The Guardian. http://sport.guardian.co.uk/formulaone/story/0,,2032039,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-30. 
^ "Decade seasons 1950 - 1959". Autocourse. Archived from the original on 2007-08-07. http://web.archive.org/web/20070807233339/http://www.autocoursegpa.com/season_decade~decade_id~1.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-17. 
^ Tuckey, Bill (1994-01-28). "Moss returns to scene of GP victory". The Age (The Age Company).  "the all-conquering Mercedes-Benz cars... When the Germans withdrew from racing after the Le Mans 24-hour tragedy" 
^ "Ferguson P99". gpracing.net. Archived from the original on 2006-02-25. http://www.gpracing.net192.com/cars/data/186.cfm. Retrieved on 2007-11-17.  The Ferguson P99, a four-wheel drive design, was the last front-engined F1 car to enter a world championship race. It was entered in the 1961 British Grand Prix, the only front-engined car to compete that year.
^ Bartunek, Robert-Jan (2007-09-18). "Sponsorship, the big business behind F1". CNN.com. Cable News Network. http://edition.cnn.com/2007/SPORT/09/18/behind.sponsorship/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-08. 
^ Staniforth, Allan (1994). Competition Car Suspension. Haynes. p. 96. ISBN 0-85429-956-4. 
^ a b c Williams, Richard (1997-03-28). "The Formula for Striking It Rich". The Guardian (Guardian Newspapers). 
^ a b "Face value: Mr Formula". The Economist (Economist Newspapers): p. 72. 1997-03-05. 
^ Blunsden, John (1986-12-20). "Filling Balestre's shoes is no job for a back-seat driver". Financial Times. 
^ Roebuck, Nigel "Power struggles and techno wars" Sunday Times 1993-03-07
^ Hamilton, Maurice (1998-03-08). "Pros and cons of being just Williams; A quiet achiever keeps his head down as the new season gets under way with familiar high anxiety and a squealing over brakes". The Observer (Guardian Newspapers). 
^ Bamsey, Ian; Benzing, Enrico; Stanniforth, Allan; Lawrence, Mike (1988). The 1000 BHP Grand Prix cars. Guild Publishing. pp. 8–9. ISBN 0854296174.  BMW's performance at the Italian GP is the highest qualifying figure given in Bamsey. The estimate is from Heini Mader, who maintained the engines for the Benetton team. It should be noted that maximum power figures from this period are necessarily estimates; BMW's dynamometer, for example, was only capable of measuring up to 1,100 bhp (820 kW). Figures higher than this are estimated from engine plenum pressure readings. Power in race trim at that time was lower than for qualifying due to the need for greater reliability and fuel efficiency during the race.
^ "The technology behind Formula 1 racing cars". The Press (The Christchurch Press Company). 2005-12-26.  "rivalling the 1200hp turbocharged monsters that eventually had to be banned in 1989" 
^ Baldwin, Alan (2001-02-17). "F1 Plans Return of Traction Control". The Independent (Newspaper Publishing). 
^ "Who owns what in F1 these days?". Grandprix.com. Archived from the original on 2007-03-12. http://web.archive.org/web/20070312003448/http://www.grandprix.com/ft/ftjs031.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-17. 
^ a b "F1's pressing safety question". http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/motorsport/formula_one/1203620.stm. Retrieved on 2007-12-26. 
^ "Jordan: Privateer era is over". ITV-F1.com. 2006-08-24. http://www.itv-f1.com/News_Article.aspx?PO_ID=33854. Retrieved on 2006-09-12. 
^ "Schumacher makes history". BBC Sport. 2002-07-21. http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/motorsport/formula_one/2141834.stm. Retrieved on 2006-09-12. 
^ "FIA Rules & Regulations Sporting Regulations: 2006 season changes". www.formula1.com. http://www.formula1.com/insight/rulesandregs/13/995.html. Retrieved on 2006-05-11. 
^ "The last of the non-championship races". www.forix.com. Archived from the original on 2006-10-17. http://web.archive.org/web/20061017063932/http://www.fia.com/automotive/issue5/sport/article9.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-17. 
^ "Desiré Wilson". www.f1rejects.com. Archived from the original on 2007-06-05. http://web.archive.org/web/20070605215016/http://www.f1rejects.com/drivers/wilson/biography.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-17. 
^ "Practice and qualifying". www.formula1.com. 2008-01-29. http://www.formula1.com/inside_f1/rules_and_regulations/sporting_regulations/6838/. Retrieved on 2008-07-02. 
^ "Driver changes and additional drivers". www.formula1.com. 2008-02-26. http://www.formula1.com/inside_f1/rules_and_regulations/sporting_regulations/6846/. Retrieved on 2008-07-02. 
^ a b c "Practice and qualifying". www.formula1.com. 2008-02-26. http://www.formula1.com/inside_f1/rules_and_regulations/sporting_regulations/6838/fia.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.  After the demise of the Super Aguri team during the 2008 season, the rules were changed slightly. See "Team demise changes F1 qualifying". www.bbc.co.uk. 2008-05-08. http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/motorsport/formula_one/7391106.stm. Retrieved on 2008-07-03. 
^ "2008 Formula One sporting regulations" (PDF). http://argent.fia.com/web/fia-public.nsf/475632E46002BEDAC125744F004312F4/$FILE/F1.SPORTING.REGULATIONS.19-05-2008.pdf. 
^ "Race start procedure". www.formula1.com. 2008-02-26. http://www.formula1.com/inside_f1/rules_and_regulations/sporting_regulations/6838/fia.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-03. 
^ "Flags". www.formula1.com. 2003-06-21. http://www.formula1.com/inside_f1/understanding_the_sport/5282.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-03. 
^ "FIA to consult teams on 2010 scoring change". www.manipef1.com. 2009-03-25. http://www.manipef1.com/news/articles/8923/. Retrieved on 2009-03-25. 
^ Formula 1 : News Cosworth - F1-Live.com
^ http://www.speedtv.com/articles/auto/formulaone/27851/
^ "Formula 1 : Interview - Toro Rosso’s Gerhard Berger". Formula 1. 23 May 2008. http://www.formula1.com/news/interviews/2008/3/7527.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-23. 
^ "McLaren is F1's biggest spender". F1i. 16 June 2006. http://www.f1i.com/content/view/4377/0/. Retrieved on 2007-01-07. 
^ "FIA revises final 2009 entry list". autosport.com. 2009-03-26. http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/73897. Retrieved on 2009-03-26. 
^ "McLaren MP4-24 to launch on January 16". ITV-F1.com. 2008-12-02. http://www.itv-f1.com/news_article.aspx?id=44692. Retrieved on 2008-12-02. 
^ "McLaren extend Hamilton's contract". Autosport.com (Haymarket Publications). 2008-01-18. http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/64757. Retrieved on 2009-03-17. 
^ a b "New McLaren title-challenger revealed". itv-f1.com. 2009-01-16. http://www.itv-f1.com/News_Article.aspx?id=44937. Retrieved on 2009-01-16. 
^ "McLaren confirm Kovalainen for 2009". Autosport. 2008-07-31. http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/69523. Retrieved on 2008-07-31. 
^ Noble, Jonathan (2009-01-10). "Ferrari move new car launch to Mugello". autosport.com. http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/72709. Retrieved on 2009-01-10. 
^ "Massa to stay at Ferrari through 2010". Autosport.com (Haymarket Publications). 2007-10-16. http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/63353. Retrieved on 2009-03-17. 
^ a b "Ferrari retain Badoer, Gene as testers". Autosport. 2008-09-29. http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/71012. Retrieved on 2008-09-29. 
^ "Ferrari confirm Raikkonen to end of 2010". formula1.com. 2008-09-12. http://www.formula1.com/news/headlines/2008/9/8365.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-12. 
^ a b "BMW, Toyota confirm launch dates". F1-live.com. 2008-11-26. http://en.f1-live.com/f1/en/headlines/news/detail/081126103518.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-12-02. 
^ a b c "Kubica and Heidfeld stay with BMW". BBC Sport. 2008-10-06. http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/motorsport/formula_one/7654412.stm. 
^ "Renault to launch R29 in Portugal". gpupdate.net. 2008-12-12. http://f1.gpupdate.net/en/news/2008/12/12/renault-to-launch-r29-in-portugal/. Retrieved on 2008-12-12. 
^ a b "The ING Renault F1 Team confirms its 2009 driver line-up". ING Renault F1 Team. 2008-11-05. http://www.ing-renaultf1.com/en/. Retrieved on 2008-11-05. 
^ "F1: Renault unveil the R29". F1-Live.com. 2009-01-19. http://en.f1-live.com/f1/en/headlines/news/detail/090119110015.shtml. Retrieved on 2009-01-19. 
^ "Trulli signs new Toyota contract". BBCsport. 2006-07-28. http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/motorsport/formula_one/5114258.stm. Retrieved on 2006-10-20. 
^ "Kobayashi stays on as Toyota reserve". autosport.com. 2009-01-15. http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/72788. Retrieved on 2009-01-15. 
^ "Toyota to retain Glock for 2009". itv-f1.com. 2008-08-04. http://www.itv-f1.com/News_Article.aspx?id=43592. Retrieved on 2008-08-04. 
^ Beer, Matt (2009-02-06). "Bourdais confirmed at Toro Rosso". Autosport. Haymarket Publications. http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/73147. Retrieved on 2009-02-06. 
^ a b "Hartley gets double role". grandprix.com. 2009-03-10. http://www.grandprix.com/ns/ns21235.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-11. 
^ "Toro Rosso confirm Buemi for 2009". autosport.com. 2009-01-09. http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/72695. Retrieved on 2009-01-09. 
^ "Red Bull extend Webber's contract". Autosport.com (Haymarket Publications). 2008-07-03. http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/68805. Retrieved on 2009-03-17. 
^ "Coulthard confirms retirement decision". ITV-F1. 2008-07-03. http://www.itv-f1.com/News_Article.aspx?id=43194. 
^ "Sebastian Vettel to join Red Bull for 2009". The Official Formula 1 Website. 2008-07-17. http://www.formula1.com/news/headlines/2008/7/8098.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-17. 
^ "Williams confirm 2009 launch". Autosport.com (Haymarket Publications). 2008-12-18. http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/72526. Retrieved on 2009-03-17. 
^ a b c "Williams names unchanged line-up for '09". crash.net. 2008-10-01. http://www.crash.net/motorsport/f1/news/169799-0/williams_names_unchanged_line-up_for_'09.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-01. 
^ "Force India confirm Mercedes deal". autosport.com. 2008-11-08. http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/72063. Retrieved on 2008-11-08. 
^ a b c "Force India to retain complete driver line-up for 2009 season". Force India Formula One. 2008-12-14. http://www.forceindiaf1.com/news.aspx?nid=181&rt=4. Retrieved on 2008-12-15. 
^ a b c "Brawn GP takes over Honda Racing". autosport.com. 2009-03-05. http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/73577. Retrieved on 2009-03-06. 
^ "Jenson Button profile". Brawn GP.com. 2009-03-13. http://www.brawngp.com/pdf/jb.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-03-13. 
^ http://formula-one.speedtv.com/article/f1-wurz-stays-on-at-brawn-gp/
^ "Rubens Barrichello profile". Brawn GP.com. 2009-03-13. http://www.brawngp.com/pdf/rba.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-03-13. 
^ Jack Brabham, F1 champion in 1959, 1960 and 1966, won the French Formula Two championship in 1966, but there was no international F2 championship that year.
^ "Masters series officially wound up". Autosport. http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/64156. Retrieved on 2008-07-04. 
^ World Motor Sport Council - Decisions, 2008-11-05, http://www.fia.com/en-GB/mediacentre/pressreleases/wmsc/wmsc08/Pages/wmsc_051108.aspx 
^ "2009 FIA Formula One World Championship - Circuit and Lap Information". FIA. 2009-01-27. http://www.fia.com/en-GB/mediacentre/pressreleases/f1releases/2009/Pages/f1_lap_info09.aspx. Retrieved on 2009-03-17. 
^ "Valencia GP set for name change". Autosport. http://www.autosport.com/news/grapevine.php/id/70091. 
^ "FIA race calendar". FIA. http://www.fia.com/en-GB/sport/calendar/Pages/circuit1.aspx. 
^ The Official Formula 1 Website
^ The Official Formula 1 Website
^ Indianapolis Motor Speedway
^ a b The Official Formula 1 Website
^ Singapore the big winner in first night Grand Prix:Guardian.co.uk
^ The Official Formula 1 Website: FIA announces provisional 2009 Formula One calendar
^ The Official Formula 1 Website: India to host first Grand Prix in New Delhi in 2011
^ "FIA Sporting Regulations - Scrutineering and weighing". Formula 1. http://www.formula1.com/inside_f1/rules_and_regulations/sporting_regulations/6840/. Retrieved on 2008-05-23. 
^ "Tyres". www.formula1.com. http://www.formula1.com/inside_f1/understanding_the_sport/5283.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-04. 
^ "FIA Sporting Regulations - Fuel". Formula 1. http://www.formula1.com/inside_f1/rules_and_regulations/technical_regulations/6852/default.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-23. 
^ Renault F1 engine listing [1], Retrieved 1 June 2007
^ "FIA Sporting Regulations - Engine". Formula 1. http://www.formula1.com/inside_f1/rules_and_regulations/technical_regulations/6851/. Retrieved on 2008-05-23. 
^ "FIA Formula One World Championship - 2009 Technical Regulations". FIA. http://argent.fia.com/web/fia-public.nsf/7C4F8D883039AF6AC125757D00369C58/$FILE/1-2009_F1_TECHNICAL_REGULATIONS_Showing-Alterations_17-03-2009.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-04-04. 
^ Grand Prix of Italy www.fia.comRetrieved 12 October 2006
^ Challenge Alan [2], Retrieved 20 January 2007
^ Ferrari Enzo www.fast-autos.net Retrieved 15 March 2007
^ BBC SPORT | Motorsport | Formula One | High price takes shine off F1
^ ::Pioneer Investors
^ F1 Preview: Australian organizers confident of GP future, but rule out night racing - International Herald Tribune
^ "The real cost of F1" F1 Racing (March 2007) Haymarket Publishing
^ "2007 FIA Regulations". www.mclaren.com. Vodafone McLaren Mercedes. http://www.mclaren.com/f1season/regulations.php. Retrieved on 2007-05-23. 
^ "F1Corporate article on Modern F1 Racing". http://www.f1corporate.com/content/formula-one-racing. Retrieved on 2008-12-17. 
^ "F1 teams to test slick tires at Jerez". Formule 1 Race Report via Racing-Live. 2007-11-21. http://en.f1-live.com/f1/en/headlines/news/detail/071121092728.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-11-25. 
^ "F1 World’s most watched TV sports events: 2006 Rank & Trends report". Initiative. 2007-01-19. http://initiative.com/static/prDec2006.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-30. 
^ "Official: F1 needs more tits!". Pitpass. 2006-10-03. http://www.pitpass.com/fes_php/pitpass_news_item.php?fes_art_id=29548. Retrieved on 2007-06-26. 
^ "FIA Summary of Television Statistics" (PDF). FIA. 2000-02-22. http://www.fia.com/resources/documents/887837386__22_02_2000_F1_TV_Figures.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-06-26. 
^ BBC Sports, F1 viewing figures drop, 26 February 2002. Retrieved on 10 March 2007. The cumulative figure, which exceeds the total population of the planet by many times, counts all viewers who watch F1 on any programme at any time during the year.
^ Most watched TV sporting events of 2005 - A special report from Initiative
^ "F1 to offer High Definition TV Coverage". Autosport. 2007-05-13. http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/58776. Retrieved on 2007-06-25. 
^ Mosey, Roger (2008-12-31). "Plenty to look forward to in 2009 - comment 27". BBC SPORT - Sport Editors' Blog. BBC. http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/sporteditors/2008/12/plenty_to_look_forward_to_in_2.html#comment27. Retrieved on 2009-01-07. 
^ Mosey, Roger (2009-01-07). "Plenty to look forward to in 2009 - comment 77". BBC SPORT - Sport Editors' Blog. BBC. http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/sporteditors/2008/12/plenty_to_look_forward_to_in_2.html#comment77. Retrieved on 2009-01-07. 



[edit] Bibliography


Arron, Simon & Hughes, Mark (2003). The Complete Book of Formula One. Motorbooks International. ISBN 0-7603-1688-0.
"FIA Archive". (2004). Federation Internationale de l'Automobile. Retrieved 25 October 2004.
"Formula One Regulations". (2004). Federation Internationale de l'Automobile. Retrieved 23 October 2004.
Gross, Nigel et al. (1999). "Grand Prix Motor Racing". In, 100 Years of Change: Speed and Power (pp. 55–84). Parragon.
Hayhoe, David & Holland, David (2006). Grand Prix Data Book (4th edition). Haynes, Sparkford, UK. ISBN 1-84425-223-X.
Higham, Peter (2003). The international motor racing guide. David Bull, Phoenix, AZ, USA. ISBN 1-893618-20-X.
"Insight". (2004). The Official Formula 1 Website. Retrieved 25 October 2004.
Jones, Bruce (1997). The Ultimate Encyclopedia of Formula One. Hodder & Stoughton.
Jones, Bruce (1998). Formula One: The Complete Stats and Records of Grand Prix Racing. Parragon.
Jones, Bruce (2003). The Official ITV Sport Guide: Formula One Grand Prix 2003. Carlton. Includes foreword by Martin Brundle. ISBN 1-84222-813-7.
Jones, Bruce (2005). The Guide to 2005 FIA Formula One World Championship : The World's Bestselling Grand Prix Guide]. Carlton. ISBN 1-84442-508-8.
Lang, Mike (1981–1992). Grand Prix! volumes 1–4. Haynes, Sparkford, UK.
Menard, Pierre (2006). The Great Encyclopedia of Formula 1, 5th edition. Chronosport, Switzerland. ISBN 2847070516
Miltner, Harry (2007). Race Travel Guide 2007. egoth: Vienna, Austria. ISBN 978-3-902480-34-7
Small, Steve (2000). Grand Prix Who's Who (3rd edition). Travel Publishing, UK. ISBN 1-902007-46-8.
Tremayne, David & Hughes, Mark (1999). The Concise Encyclopedia of Formula One. Parragon



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Formula One



Official sites


Formula1.com—The official site of Formula One Management; contains schedules, race results, live timing during each race, the official F1 shop, and some news.
Current regulations—from the FIA website
Drivers Hall of Fame—A list of World Champions with links to short biographies from the official Formula 1 website.


News and reference


autosport.com—Motorsport news, articles and analysis. Formerly known as AtlasF1
F1 News from Planet F1
TotalF1.com — Formula 1 news portal
GrandPrix.com — F1 news and a Grand Prix encyclopedia
F1 at BBC Sport — News, pictures, and commentary from BBC, F1's British broadcasters
2008 F1 Spotters Guide — (PDF)


History


AutocourseGPA.com — historical results and statistics and images since 1950
F1DB—Results, statistics
4mula1—Results and statistics since 1950









v • d • e

Constructors and drivers competing in the 2009 Formula One championship









McLaren
Ferrari
BMW Sauber
Renault
Toyota
Toro Rosso
Red Bull
Williams
Force India
Brawn


1 Hamilton
2 Kovalainen
3 Massa
4 Räikkönen
5 Kubica
6 Heidfeld
7 Alonso
8 Piquet
9 Trulli
10 Glock
11 Bourdais
12 Buemi
14 Webber
15 Vettel
16 Rosberg
17 Nakajima
20 Sutil
21 Fisichella
22 Button
23 Barrichello
















v • d • e

Formula One World Championship seasons






1950 · 1951 · 1952 · 1953 · 1954 · 1955 · 1956 · 1957 · 1958 · 1959
1960 · 1961 · 1962 · 1963 · 1964 · 1965 · 1966 · 1967 · 1968 · 1969
1970 · 1971 · 1972 · 1973 · 1974 · 1975 · 1976 · 1977 · 1978 · 1979
1980 · 1981 · 1982 · 1983 · 1984 · 1985 · 1986 · 1987 · 1988 · 1989
1990 · 1991 · 1992 · 1993 · 1994 · 1995 · 1996 · 1997 · 1998 · 1999
2000 · 2001 · 2002 · 2003 · 2004 · 2005 · 2006 · 2007 · 2008







Current season: 2009







Future seasons: 2010 · 2011






        



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formula_One"
Categories: Formula One | Formula racing series | Racing formulasHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Asturianu
Boarisch
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Gaeilge
Galego
한국어
Հայերեն
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Қазақша
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Limburgs
Magyar
Македонски
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
West-Vlams
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 21:26.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
