













Classics - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Classics";
		var wgTitle = "Classics";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "5178";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281467640;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Classics

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Classics (disambiguation).
"Classical literature" redirects here. For literature in classical languages outside the Graeco-Roman sphere, see ancient literature.




Bust of Homer.


Classics is the branch of the Humanities comprising the languages, literature, philosophy, history, art, archaeology and other culture of the ancient Mediterranean World; especially Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome during Classical Antiquity (Bronze Age ca. BC 3000 – Dark Ages ca. AD 500). Initially, study of the Classics (the period’s literature) was the principal study in the humanities. Traditionally, the Classics studied the Mediterranean civilisations of Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome, yet, Ancient Egypt was beyond the discipline. Contemporary classicists study a broader Classics field that comprises the Oriental ancient Mediterranean World, thus, Orientalist scholars concentrate upon the near and far Eastern Mediterranean civilisations — the Persian Empire, the kingdoms of Ancient India, et al.




Contents


1 History of the Western Classics
2 Legacy of the Classical World
3 Sub-disciplines within the classics

3.1 Forebears of the Classical World
3.2 Philology
3.3 Archaeology
3.4 Art history
3.5 Civilization and history
3.6 Philosophy


4 Classical Greece
5 Classical Rome
6 Famous Classicists
7 Modern Quotations About
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History of the Western Classics
The word “classics” derives from the Latin adjective classicus: “belonging to the highest class of citizens”, connoting superiority, authority, and perfection. The first application of “Classic” to a writer was by Aulus Gellius, a second-century Roman writer who, in the miscellany Noctes Atticae (19, 8, 15), refers to a writer as a Classicus scriptor, non proletarius (“A distinguished, not a commonplace writer”). Such classification began with the Greeks’ ranking their cultural works, with the word canon (“carpenter’s rule”). Moreover, early Christian Church Fathers used canon to rank the authoritative texts of the New Testament, preserving them, given the expense of vellum and papyrus and mechanical book reproduction, thus, being comprehended in a canon ensured a book’s preservation as the best of a civilisation. Contemporarily, the Western canon defines the best of Western culture. In the ancient world, at the Alexandrian Library, scholars coined the Greek term Hoi enkrithentes (“the admitted”, “the included”) to identify the writers in the canon.
The method of study in the Classical World was “Philo’s Rule”: μεταχάραττε τὸ θεῖον νόμισμα (“Metacharatte to theion nomisma”) — the law of strict continuity in preserving words and ideas. Although the definitions of words and ideas might broaden, continuity (preservation) requires retention of their original arete (excellence, virtue, goodness).[citation needed] “Philo’s Rule” imparts intellectual and æsthetic appreciation of “the best which has been thought and said in the world”. To wit, Oxford classicist Edward Copleston said that classical education “communicates to the mind . . . a high sense of honour, a disdain of death in a good cause, [and] a passionate devotion to the welfare of one’s country”, [1] thus concurring with Cicero that: “All literature, all philosophical treatises, all the voices of antiquity are full of examples for imitation, which would all lie unseen in darkness without the light of literature”.

[edit] Legacy of the Classical World
The Classical languages of the Ancient Mediterranean world influenced every Western European language, imparting to each a learned vocabulary of international application, thus, Latin was the international lingua franca in matters diplomatic, scientific, philosophic, and religious, until the seventeenth century. In turn, the Classical languages continued, Latin evolved into the Romance languages and Ancient Greek into Modern Greek and its dialects. Moreover, it is in the specialised science and technology vocabularies that the Latin influence in English and the Greek influence in English are notable, however, it is Ecclesiastical Latin (a dialect), the Roman Catholic Church’s official tongue, that remains a living legacy of the classical word to the contemporary world.

[edit] Sub-disciplines within the classics
One of the most notable characteristics of the modern study of classics is the diversity of the field. Although traditionally focused on ancient Greece and Rome, the study now encompasses the entire ancient Mediterranean world, thus expanding their studies to Northern Africa and the Middle East.

[edit] Forebears of the Classical World
The Classical civilization did not develop in isolation; the ancient Greeks were partially indebted to their geographical proximity to much older cultures. But their originality and achievements are undeniable.

Ancient Egypt
Babylonia
Phoenicia
India
China/Manchuria


[edit] Philology
Traditionally, classics was essentially the philology of ancient texts. Although now less dominant, philology retains a central role. One definition of classical philology describes it as "the science which concerns itself with everything that has been transmitted from antiquity in the Greek or Latin language. The object of this science is thus the Graeco-Roman, or Classical, world to the extent that it has left behind monuments in a linguistic form."[2] Of course, classicists also concern themselves with other languages than Classical Greek and Latin including Linear A, Linear B, Sanskrit, Hebrew, Oscan, Etruscan, and many more. Before the invention of the printing press, texts were reproduced by hand and distributed haphazardly. As a result, extant versions of the same text often differ from one another. Some classical philologists, known as textual critics, seek to synthesize these defective texts to find the most accurate version.

[edit] Archaeology
Main article: Classical archaeology
Classical archæology is the investigation of the physical remains of the great Mediterranean civilizations of Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome. The archæologists’ field, laboratory, library, and documentation work make available the extant literary and linguistic cultural artefacts to the field’s sub-disciplines, such as Philology. Like-wise, archæologists rely upon the philology of ancient literatures in establishing historic contexts among the classic-era remains of Mesopotamia, Egypt, Greece, and Rome.

[edit] Art history
Some art historians focus their study of the development of art on the classical world. Indeed, the art and architecture of Ancient Rome and Greece is very well regarded and remains at the heart of much of our art today. For example, Ancient Greek architecture gave us the Classical Orders: Doric order, Ionic order, and Corinthian order. The Parthenon is still the architectural symbol of the classical world.
Greek sculpture is well known and we know the names of several Ancient Greek artists: for example, Phidias.

[edit] Civilization and history
With philology, archæology, and art history, scholars seek understanding of the history and culture of a civilisation, through critical study of the extant literary and physical artefacts, in order to compose and establish a continual historic narrative of the Ancient World and its peoples. The task is difficult, given the dearth of physical evidence; for example, Sparta was a leading Greek city-state, yet little evidence of it survives to study, and what is available comes from Athens, Sparta’s principal rival; like-wise, the Roman Empire destroyed most evidence (cultural artefacts) of earlier, conquered civilizations, such as that of the Etruscans.

[edit] Philosophy
Main article: Ancient philosophy
Pythagoras coined the word philosophy (“love of wisdom”), the work of the “Philosopher” who seeks understanding of the world as it is, thus, most classics scholars know that the roots of Western philosophy originate in Greek philosophy, the works of Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and the Stoics.

[edit] Classical Greece
Main article: Ancient Greece topics


Greek Philosophy
Greek Mythology and religion
Greek Science
Greek History
Greek Literature
Greek Language




The Presocratics pre-date Socrates.

The 6th C. BC Milesians (Miletus, Ionia), are the earliest.
Thales
Anaximander
Anaximenes


Heraclitus
Pythagoras
Xenophanes

The Eleatics worked in Elea, Magna Graecia.
Parmenides
Zeno


The Atomists

Leucippus
Democritus


The Sophists

Gorgias
Protagoras
Antiphon


Socrates
Plato
Aristotle
Epicureanism
Stoicism
Zeno of Citium
Cleanthes
Chrysippus
Panaetius
Posidonius
Epictetus
Scepticism
Neoplatonism




Greek mythology
Greek religion




Greek astronomy and geography
Ptolemy
Greek mathematics

Euclid


Greek medicine

Hippocrates
Galen






The Minoan civilization
The Mycenaean civilization
The Dark Ages
Classical Greece
Alexander the Great
The Hellenistic period
Roman conquest of Greece
The Byzantine (Roman) Empire




Greek literature
Poets

Bucolic poetry

Theocritus


Didactic poetry

Hesiod


Epic poetry

Homer


Lyric poetry

Alcaeus of Mytilene
Alcman
Archilochus
Bacchylides
Mimnermus
Pindar
Sappho
Semonides
Simonides of Ceos
Tyrtaeus




Playwrights
Tragedians

Aeschylus
Euripides
Sophocles


Comic playwrights

Aristophanes
Menander


Prose writers

Historiography

Herodotus
Plutarch
Polybius
Thucydides
Xenophon


Oratory

Aeschines
Demosthenes
Isocrates
Lysias


Other

Lucian
Plato








Aeolic dialect
Ancient Greek
Attic dialect
Doric dialect
Greek alphabet
Homeric Greek
Ionic dialect
Koine





[edit] Classical Rome
Main articles: Ancient Rome and Culture of Ancient Rome


Roman Philosophy
Roman mythology and religion
Roman Science
Roman History
Roman Literature
Latin Language




Seneca the Younger
Cicero
Lucretius
Marcus Aurelius




Roman mythology
Roman religion




Agriculture

Cato the Elder
Columella
Varro



Astrology/Astronomy



Manilius


Architecture/Engineering

Frontinus
Vitruvius






Periods
The founding of Rome
Roman Kingdom
Roman Republic
Roman Empire
The fall of Rome
Topics

The Samnite Wars
The Pyrrhic War
The Punic Wars

The First Punic War
The Second Punic War
The Third Punic War


The Social War
The Gallic Wars
The Civil war between Antony and Octavian
The Germanic Wars






Poets

Didactic poetry
Ovid
Virgil
Drama
Plautus
Seneca the Younger
Terence
Elegiac poetry
Catullus
Ovid
Propertius
Tibullus
Epic poetry
Ennius
Lucan
Ovid
Virgil
Statius
Epigram
Martial
Lyric poetry
Catullus
Horace
Satire
Horace
Juvenal
Persius


Prose writers

Epistolary writers
Cicero
Pliny the younger
Seneca
Encyclopedia
Pliny the Elder
Apuleius
Petronius
History
Caesar
Livy
Sallust
Suetonius
Tacitus
Oratory
Rhetoric
Quintilian
Satire
Petronius
Seneca the Younger






Latin
Classical Latin
Vulgar Latin





[edit] Famous Classicists
Throughout the history of the Western world, many classicists have gone on to gain acknowledgement outside the field.

James A. Baker III, Republican politician and former Treasury Secretary and Secretary of State, graduated in 1952 with a B.A. in Classics from Princeton University.
George Berkeley, philosopher, read Classics at Trinity College, Dublin, where he was also Junior Lecturer in Greek
Jerry Brown, former governor of California and former mayor of Oakland, majored in Classics at the University of California.
John Buchan, writer and politician, who served as Governor General of Canada..
William S. Cohen, Republican politician and former US Secretary of Defense, majored in Latin at Bowdoin College in Brunswick, Maine and graduated cum laude in 1962.
W.E.B. du Bois, Afro-American civil rights leader, historian and sociologist, was a professor of Greek and Latin at Wilberforce University, Ohio.
James Garfield, twentieth president of the United States, briefly taught Classics at what is now Hiram College.
John William Fletcher, one of Methodism's first great theologians, studied Classics in Geneva.
Sir James George Frazer, poet and anthropologist.
Charles Geschke, founder of Adobe Systems, studied Classics at Xavier University and received a Bachelor of Arts in Classics.
William Gladstone, nineteenth century British Prime Minister, studied classics at Oxford University
Jane Ellen Harrison, an early twentieth-century academic per re ancient Greek religion [3]
Garret Augustus Hobart, Vice President of the United States under William McKinley.
A.E. Housman, best known to the public as a poet and the author of A Shropshire Lad, was the most accomplished (and feared) textual critic of his generation and held the Kennedy Professorship of Latin at Trinity College, Cambridge from 1911 until his death in 1936.
Boris Johnson, Conservative politician (MP for Henley June 2001 - June 2008) and Mayor of London since May 2008.
Martha Kearney, journalist and broadcaster, self-confessed "lapsed Classicist".
Anthony James Leggett, Nobel Prize winner in physics who studied Greats at Balliol College, Oxford before switching to physics.
Chris Martin, singer with band Coldplay.
Karl Marx, philosopher and political thinker, studied Latin and Greek and received a Ph.D. for a dissertation on ancient Greek philosophy, entitled "The Difference between the Democritean and Epicurean Philosophy of Nature." His classical background is reflected in his philosophies—indeed the term "proletariat" which he coined came from that Latin word referring to the lowest class of citizen.
John Milton, author of Paradise Lost and English Civil War era political activist, studied, like most at the time, Latin and Greek texts. This classical background is quite obvious in Paradise Lost.
Theodor Mommsen, author of History of Rome and works on Roman Law; German politician, delegate in the Reichstag of the Empire.
Friedrich Nietzsche, renowned philosopher, earned a Ph.D. and became Professor of Classics at the University of Basel in Switzerland.
Toni Morrison, noted author and Nobel Prize winner, studied classics at Howard University.[4]
Nick Owen, presenter of Midlands Today
Ruth Padel, writer, scholar and poet.
Katherine Parkinson, actress who plays the character of Jen Baber in The IT Crowd.
Enoch Powell, British Conservative and later Ulter Unionist politician, who wrote and edited texts on Herodotus.
Joanne Rowling, author of the Harry Potter series, studied Classics at Exeter University
J.R.R. Tolkien, writer and scholar, who originally studied Classics but changed to English.
Ted Turner, media mogul, studied Classics before being expelled from Brown University.
Peter Weller, an actor most famous for playing the titular role in Robocop, holds a Master's Degree in Roman Art and is a frequent lecturer at Syracuse University.
Oscar Wilde, famous 19th Century playwright, studied Classics at Trinity College, Dublin and Magdalen College, Oxford
P.G. Wodehouse, writer, playwright, lyricist and creator of Jeeves, studied Classics at Dulwich College.
Robert Greene, writer and author of "48 Laws of Power", "Art of Seduction" and "33 Strategies of War" holds a Classics Degree from the University of Wisconsin-Madison.


[edit] Modern Quotations About

"Nor can I do better, in conclusion, than impress upon you the study of Greek literature, which not only elevates above the vulgar herd but leads not infrequently to positions of considerable emolument."
—Thomas Gaisford, Christmas sermon, Christ Church, Oxford.
"I would make them all learn English: and then I would let the clever ones learn Latin as an honour, and Greek as a treat."
—Sir Winston Churchill, Roving Commission: My Early Life
"He studied Latin like the violin, because he liked it."
—Robert Frost, The Death of the Hired Man
"I enquire now as to the genesis of a philologist and assert the following: 1. A young man cannot possibly know what the Greeks and Romans are. 2. He does not know whether he is suited for finding out about them."
—Friedrich Nietzsche, Unzeitgemässe Betrachtungen
"A classic is something that everybody wants to have read and nobody wants to read."
—Mark Twain, The Disappearance of Literature.
"I doubt whether classical education ever has been or can be successfully carried out without corporal punishment."
—George Orwell
"It's economically illiterate. A degree in Classics or Philosophy can be as valuable as anything else."
—Boris Johnson


[edit] See also




Classics portal




Main list: List of basic topics in classical studies


Digital Classicist
Humanism
Literae Humaniores
Loeb Classical Library
Philology
Western culture
Western World


Ancient Greece
Ancient Rome
Classical scholars
Classics journals


[edit] Notes


^ Edward Copleston, The Victorians and Ancient Greece, Richard Jenkyns, 60.
^ J. and K. Kramer, La filologia classica, 1979 as quoted by [Christopher S. Mackay|http://www.ualberta.ca/~csmackay/Philology.html]
^ Newnham College Cambridge: Newnham Biographies
^ Howard University Department of English Website: http://www.coas.howard.edu/english/legends-Morrison.html



[edit] References

Dictionaries


Biographical Dictionary of North American Classicists by Ward W. Briggs, Jr. (editor). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994 (hardcover, ISBN 0-313-24560-6).
Classical Scholarship: A Biographical Encyclopedia (Garland Reference Library of the Humanities) by Ward W. Briggs and William M. Calder III (editors). New York: Taylor & Francis, 1990 (hardcover, ISBN 0-8240-8448-9).
Dictionary of British classicists, 1500–1960 by Richard B. Todd (General editor). Bristol: Thoemmes Continuum, 2004 (ISBN 1-85506-997-0).

Reviewed by Mary Beard in The Times Literary Supplement, April 15, 2005.


An Encyclopedia of the History of Classical Archaeology, edited by Nancy Thomson de Grummond. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1996 (hardcover, ISBN 0-313-22066-2; ISBN 0-313-30204-9 (A–K); ISBN 0-313-30205-7 (L–Z)).
Harper's Dictionary of Classical Literature and Antiquities, ed. by Harry Thurston Peck. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1896; 2nd ed., 1897; New York: Cooper Square Publishers, 1965.
Medwid, Linda M. The Makers of Classical Archaeology: A Reference Work. New York: Humanity Books, 2000 (hardcover, ISBN 1-57392-826-7).
The New Century Classical Handbook, ed. by Catherine B. Avery. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1962.
The Oxford Classical Dictionary, ed. by Simon Hornblower and Antony Spawforth, revised 3rd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2003 (ISBN 0-19-860641-9).
The Oxford Companion to Classical Literature, ed. by M.C. Howatson. New York: Oxford University Press, 1989.


Miscellaneous


Beard, Mary; Henderson, John. Classics: A very short introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995 (paperback, ISBN 0-19-285313-9); 2000 (new edition, paperback, ISBN 0-19-285385-6).
Briggs, Ward W.; Calder, III, William M. Classical scholarship: A biographical encyclopedia (Garland reference library of the humanities). London: Taylor & Francis, 1990 (ISBN 0-8240-8448-9).
Forum: Class and Classics:

Krevans, Nita. "Class and Classics: A Historical Perspective," The Classical Journal, Vol. 96, No. 3. (2001), p. 293.
Moroney, Siobhan. "Latin, Greek and the American Schoolboy: Ancient Languages and Class Determinism in the Early Republic", The Classical Journal, Vol. 96, No. 3. (2001), pp. 295–307.
Harrington Becker, Trudy. "Broadening Access to a Classical Education: State Universities in Virginia in the Nineteenth Century", The Classical Journal, Vol. 96, No. 3. (2001), pp. 309–322.
Bryce, Jackson. "Teaching the Classics", The Classical Journal, Vol. 96, No. 3. (2001), pp. 323–334.


Knox, Bernard. The Oldest Dead White European Males, And Other Reflections on the Classics. New York; London: W.W. Norton & Co., 1993.
Macrone, Michael. Brush Up Your Classics. New York: Gramercy Books, 1991. (Guide to famous words, phrases and stories of Greek classics.)
Nagy, Péter Tibor. "The meanings and functions of classical studies in Hungary in the 18th–20th century", in The social and political history of Hungarian education (ISBN 963-200-511-2).
Wellek, René. "Classicism in Literature", in Dictionary of the History of Ideas, Studies of Selected Pivotal Ideas, ed. by Philip P. Wiener. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1968.
Winterer, Caroline. The Mirror of Antiquity: American Women and the Classical Tradition, 1750–1900. Ithaca, NY; London: Cornell University Press, 2007 (hardcover, ISBN 978-0-8014-4163-9).


[edit] External links



At Wikiversity you can learn more about classics at:
The School of Classics




Find more about Classics on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

The Classical Association, the largest classical organization in the UK.
The American Classical League, the largest classics organization in the US, mainly a Latin, Greek, and Humanities teacher resource center
The National Junior Classical League, the largest youth-oriented Classics organization in the world, with US and international chapters, and membership for all middle- and high-school students of the Classics
Classical Resources on Internet at the Department of Classical Philology, University of Tartu.
De Imperatoribus Romanis: An Online Encyclopedia of Roman Emperors
Electronic Resources for Classicists by the University of California, Irvine.
Illustrated History of the Roman Empire
The Online Medieval and Classical Library
The Perseus Digital Library








v • d • e

Ancient Greece topics





Timeline

Cycladic civilization · Minoan civilization · Mycenaean civilization · Greek Dark Ages · Archaic period · Classical Greece · Hellenistic Greece · Roman Greece






Places

Aegean Sea · Hellespont · Macedon · Sparta · Athens · Corinth · Thebes · Thermopylae · Antioch · Alexandria · Pergamon · Miletus · Ephesus · Delphi · Delos  · Olympia · Troy · Rhodes · Crete · Peloponnesus  · Cyprus






Life

Agriculture · Cuisine · Democracy · Economy · Education · Law · Medicine · Pederasty · Prostitution · Religion · Slavery · Technology · Olympic Games  · Warfare  · Wine






People





Philosophers


Anaxagoras · Anaximander · Anaximenes · Antisthenes · Aristotle · Democritus · Diogenes of Sinope · Epicurus · Empedocles · Heraclitus · Leucippus · Gorgias · Parmenides · Plato · Protagoras · Pythagoras · Socrates · Thales · Zeno







Authors


Aeschylus · Aesop · Aristophanes · Euripides · Herodotus · Hesiod · Homer · Lucian · Menander · Pindar · Plutarch · Polybius · Sappho · Sophocles · Theognis of Megara · Thucydides · Xenophon







Others


Alexander the Great · Lycurgus · Leonidas · Alcibiades · Demosthenes · Pericles · Solon · Themistocles · Archimedes · Hippocrates · Aspasia · Milo of Croton









Buildings

Parthenon · Temple of Artemis · Acropolis · Ancient Agora · Temple of Zeus at Olympia · Temple of Hephaestus · Samothrace temple complex






Arts

Architecture · Coinage · Literature · Music · Pottery · Sculpture · Theatre






Language

Proto-Greek · Mycenaean  · Homeric · Dialects (Aeolic • Arcadocypriot • Attic • Doric • Ionic • Locrian • Macedonian) · Koine













v • d • e

Lists in Wikipedia






Outline of knowledge · Topic lists (article indexes) · Glossaries · Countries · People · Timelines









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classics"
Categories: Ancient Greece | Ancient Rome | Classical studies | HumanitiesHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Brezhoneg
Català
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Hrvatski
Íslenska
עברית
Кыргызча
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Русский
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
ไทย
Українська
اردو









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 09:07.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
