













Hildegard of Bingen - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Hildegard_of_Bingen";
		var wgTitle = "Hildegard of Bingen";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "13684";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281930818;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 


wgOggPlayer.msg = {"ogg-play": "Play", "ogg-pause": "Pause", "ogg-stop": "Stop", "ogg-no-player": "Sorry, your system does not appear to have any supported player software.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload a player\x3c/a\x3e.", "ogg-player-videoElement": "Native browser support", "ogg-player-oggPlugin": "Browser plugin", "ogg-player-cortado": "Cortado (Java)", "ogg-player-vlc-mozilla": "VLC", "ogg-player-vlc-activex": "VLC (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-quicktime-mozilla": "QuickTime", "ogg-player-quicktime-activex": "QuickTime (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-totem": "Totem", "ogg-player-kaffeine": "Kaffeine", "ogg-player-kmplayer": "KMPlayer", "ogg-player-mplayerplug-in": "mplayerplug-in", "ogg-player-thumbnail": "Still image only", "ogg-player-selected": "(selected)", "ogg-use-player": "Use player:", "ogg-more": "More…", "ogg-download": "Download file", "ogg-desc-link": "About this file", "ogg-dismiss": "Close", "ogg-player-soundthumb": "No player", "ogg-no-xiphqt": "You do not appear to have the XiphQT component for QuickTime.\nQuickTime cannot play Ogg files without this component.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload XiphQT\x3c/a\x3e or choose another player."};
wgOggPlayer.cortadoUrl = "http://upload.wikimedia.org/jars/cortado.jar";
wgOggPlayer.extPathUrl = "/w/extensions/OggHandler";


.ogg-player-options {
	border: solid 1px #ccc;
	padding: 2pt;
	text-align: left;
	font-size: 10pt;
}
 <!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Hildegard of Bingen

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Saint Hildegard







Illumination from the Liber Scivias showing Hildegard receiving a vision and dictating to her scribe and secretary


Sibyl of the Rhine


Born
1098, Bermersheim vor der Höhe


Died
September 17, 1179 (aged 81), Bingen am Rhein


Venerated in
Roman Catholic Church


Canonized
No formal canonization, but her name is in the Roman Martyrology[1]


Major shrine
Eibingen Abbey


Feast
September 17


Hildegard of Bingen (German: Hildegard von Bingen; Latin: Hildegardis Bingensis; 1098 – 17 September 1179), also known as Blessed Hildegard and Saint Hildegard, was a German abbess, author, counselor, linguist, naturalist, scientist, philosopher, physician, herbalist, poet, channeller, visionary and composer. Elected a magistra by her fellow nuns in 1136, she founded the monasteries of Rupertsberg in 1150 and Eibingen in 1165.
She is a composer with an extant biography from her own time. One of her works, the Ordo Virtutum, is an early example of liturgical drama.[2]
She wrote theological, botanical and medicinal texts, as well as letters, liturgical songs, poems, and the first surviving morality play, while supervising brilliant miniature Illuminations.




Contents


1 Biography
2 Works
3 Significance
4 Media
5 Bibliography
6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography




Hildegard's preaching tours


Hildegard was raised in a family of free nobles. She was the 10th child, sickly from birth. In her Vita, Hildegard explains that from a very young age she had experienced visions.
Perhaps due to Hildegard's visions, or as a method of political positioning, Hildegard's parents, Hildebert and Mechthilde, offered her as a tithe to the church. The date of Hildegard's enclosure in the church is contentious. Her vita tells us she was enclosed with another older nun Jutta at the age of eight, though Jutta's enclosure date is known to be in 1112, at which time Hildegard would have been fourteen. Some scholars speculate that Hildegard was placed in the care of Jutta, the daughter of Count Stephan II of Sponheim, at the age of eight, before the two women were enclosed together six years later.[3] In any case, Hildegard and Jutta were enclosed at Disibodenberg in the Palatinate Forest in what is now Germany. Jutta was also a visionary and thus attracted many followers who came to visit her at the enclosure. Hildegard also tells us that Jutta taught her to read and write, but that she was unlearned and therefore incapable of teaching Hildegard Biblical interpretation.
Upon Jutta's death in 1136, Hildegard was unanimously elected as "magistra," or leader, of her sister community by her fellow nuns. Abbot Kuno, the Abbot of Disibodenberg, also asked Hildegard to be Prioress. Hildegard, however, wanted more independence for herself and her nuns and asked Abbot Kuno to allow them to move to Rupertsberg. When the abbot declined Hildegard's proposition, Hildegard went over his head and received the approval of Archbishop Henry I of Mainz. Abbot Kuno did not relent, however, until Hildegard was stricken by an illness that kept her paralyzed and unable to move from her bed, an event that she attributed to God's unhappiness at her not following his orders to move her nuns to Rupertsberg. It was only when the Abbot himself could not move Hildegard that he decided to grant the nuns their own monastery.[4] Hildegard and about twenty nuns thus moved to the St. Rupertsberg monastery in 1150, where Volmar served as provost, as well as Hildegard's confessor and scribe. In 1165 Hildegard founded a second convent for her nuns at Eibingen.
Hildegard was hesitant to share her visions, confiding only to Jutta, who in turn told Volmar, Hildegard's tutor and, later, secretary. Throughout her life, she continued to have many visions, and in 1141, at the age of 42, Hildegard received a vision she believed to be an instruction from God, to "write down that which you see and hear." Still hesitant to record her visions, Hildegard became physically ill. In her first theological text, Scivias, or "Know the Ways," Hildegard describes her struggle within:

But I, though I saw and heard those things, refused to write for a long time through doubt and bad opinion and the diversity of human words, not with stubbornness but in the exercise of humility, until, laid low by the scourge of God, I fell upon a bed of sickness; then, compelled at last by many illnesses, and by the witness of a certain noble maiden of good conduct [the nun Richardis von Stade] and of that man whom I had secretly sought and found, as mentioned above, I set my hand to the writing. While I was doing it, I sensed, as I mentioned before, the deep profundity of scriptural exposition; and, raising myself from illness by the strength I received, I brought this work to a close - though just barely - in ten years. [...] And I spoke and wrote these things not by the invention of my heart or that of any other person, but as by the secret mysteries of God I heard and received them in the heavenly places. And again I heard a voice from Heaven saying to me, 'Cry out therefore, and write thus!'[5]

Hildegard's vivid description of the physical sensations which accompanied her visions have been diagnosed by neurologist (and popular author) Oliver Sacks as symptoms of migraine, in particular because of her description of light. Sacks, as well as other scholars, argue that the illuminations that appear in Hildegard's manuscripts confirm that Hildegard suffered from 'scintillating scotoma.'[6]
Hildegard's vita was begun by Godfrey of Disibodenberg under Hildegard's supervision.

[edit] Works
Attention in recent decades to women of the medieval church has led to a great deal of popular interest in Hildegard, particularly of her music. Between 70 and 80 compositions have survived, which is one of the largest repertoires among medieval composers. Hildegard is the first composer whose biography is known.[7]
One of her better known works, Ordo Virtutum, or Play of the Virtues, is a morality play. The morality play consists of monophonic melodies for the Anima (human soul) and 16 Virtues. There is also one speaking part for the Devil. Scholars assert that the role of the Devil would have been played by Volmar, while the Hildegard's nuns would have played the parts of Anima and the Virtues.[8]
In addition to the Ordo Virtutum Hildegard composed many liturgical songs that were collected into a cycle called the Symphonia armoniae celestium revelationum. Her music is described as monophonic; that is, consisting of exactly one melodic line, and designed for limited instrumental accompaniment. Hildegard's compositional style is characterized by soaring soprano vocalisations, often well outside of the normal range of chant at the time.[9] Additionally, scholars such as Margot Fassler and Marianna Richert Pfau describe Hildegard's music as highly melismatic, often with recurrent melodic units, and also note her close attention to the relationship between music and text, which was a rare occurrence in monastic chant of the twelfth century.[10]
In addition to her music, Hildegard also wrote three books of visions, the first of which, her Scivias ("Know the Way"), was completed in 1151. Liber vitae meritorum ("Book of Life's Merits") and De operatione Dei ("Of God's Activities", also known as Liber divinorum operum or "Book of Divine Works") followed. In these volumes, the last of which was completed when she was about 75, Hildegard first describes each vision, then interprets them through Biblical exegesis. The narrative of her visions was richly decorated under her direction, with transcription assistance was provided by the monk Volmar and nun Richardis. The book was celebrated in the Middle Ages, in part because of the approval given to it by Pope Eugenius III, and was later copied in Paris in 1513.
Aside from her books of visions, Hildegard also wrote her Physica, a text on the natural sciences, as well as Causae et Curae. In both texts Hildegard describes the natural world around her, including the cosmos, animals, plants, stones, and minerals. She is particularly interested in the healing properties of plants, animals, and stones, though she also questions God's effect on man's health.[11]




Alphabet by Hildegard von Bingen, Litterae ignotae, which she used for her language Lingua Ignota


Hildegard also invented an alternative alphabet. The text of her writing and compositions reveals Hildegard's use of this form of modified medieval Latin, encompassing many invented, conflated and abridged words. Due to her inventions of words for her lyrics and a constructed script, many conlangers look upon her as a medieval precursor. Scholars believe that Hildegard used her Lingua Ignota to increase solidarity among her nuns.[12]
Hildegard's musical, literary, and scientific writings are housed primarily in two manuscripts: the Dendermonde manuscript and the Riesenkodex. The Dendermonde manuscript was copied under Hildegard's supervision at Rupertsberg, while the Riesencodex was copied in the century after Hildegard's death.





Mutterschaft aus dem Geiste und dem Wasser (Motherhood from the Spirit and the Water), 1165


Hildegard's visionary writings maintain that virginity is the highest level of the spiritual life; however, she also wrote about secular life, including motherhood. In several of her texts, Hildegard describes a female orgasm:

When a woman is making love with a man, a sense of heat in her brain, which brings with it sensual delight, communicates the taste of that delight during the act and summons forth the emission of the man's seed. And when the seed has fallen into its place, that vehement heat descending from her brain draws the seed to itself and holds it, and soon the woman's sexual organs contract, and all the parts that are ready to open up during the time of menstruation now close, in the same way as a strong man can hold something enclosed in his fist.[13]

In addition, there are many instances, both in her letters and visions, that decry the misuse of carnal pleasures. For instance, in Scivias Book II Vision Six.78:

God united man and woman, thus joining the strong to the weak, that each might sustain the other. But these perverted adulterers change their virile strength into perverse weakness, rejecting the proper male and female roles, and in their wickedness they shamefully follow Satan, who in his pride sought to split and divide Him Who is indivisible. They create in themselves by their wicked deeds a strange and perverse adultery, and so appear polluted and shameful in my sight...


...a woman who takes up devilish ways and plays a male role in coupling with another woman is most vile in My sight, and so is she who subjects herself to such a one in this evil deed...


...And men who touch their own genital organ and emit their semen seriously imperil their souls, for they excite themselves to distraction; they appear to Me as impure animals devouring their own whelps, for they wickedly produce their semen only for abusive pollution...


...When a person feels himself disturbed by bodily stimulation let him run to the refuge of continence, and seize the shield of chastity, and thus defend himself from uncleanness. (translation by Mother Columba Hart and Jane Bishop)[14]


[edit] Significance




"Universal Man" illumination from Hildegard's Liber Divinorum Operum, 1165


Hildegard communicated with popes such as Eugene III and Anastasius IV, statesmen such as Abbot Suger, German emperors such as Frederick I Barbarossa, and other notable figures such as Saint Bernard of Clairvaux, who advanced her work, at the behest of her abbot, Kuno, at the Synod of Trier in 1147 and 1148.
Many abbots and abbesses asked her for prayers and opinions on various matters. She traveled widely during her four preaching tours. She had several rather fanatic followers, including Guibert of Gembloux, who wrote frequently to Hildegard and eventually became her secretary after Volmar passed away in 1173. In addition, Hildegard influenced several monastic women of her time and the centuries that followed; in particular, she engaged in correspondence with another nearby visionary, Elisabeth of Schonau.[15]
Contributing to Christian European rhetorical traditions, She “authorized herself as a theologian” through alternative rhetorical arts [16]. Due to church limitation on public, discursive rhetoric, the medieval rhetorical arts included: preaching, letter writing, poetry, and the encyclopedic tradition [17]. Hildegard’s participation in these arts speaks to her significance as a female rhetorician, transcending banns on women’s social participation and interpretation of scriptures. While Hildegard was barred access from preaching through homilies or sermons, her prophesies served as a means of preaching most of her life [18]. Engaged in rhetoric by writing the first morality or mystery play, she was able to disseminate her message to large audiences [19]. The correspondence she kept with the outside world both spiritual and social transgressed the cloister, as a space of female confinement and served to document Hildegard’s grand style and strict formatting of medieval letter writing [20]. The poetry and music of Hildegard’s Symphonia is described by as Sapphonic, or pertaining to Sappho, connecting her to a history of female rhetoricians [21].
In recent years, Hildegard has become of particular interest to feminist scholars. Her reference to herself as a member of the "weaker sex" and her rather constant belittling of women, though at first seemingly problematic, must be considered within the context of the patriarchal church hierarchy. Hildegard frequently referred to herself as an unlearned woman, completely incapable of Biblical exegesis. Such a statement on her part, however, worked to her advantage because it made her statements that all of her writings and music came from visions of the Divine more believable, therefore giving Hildegard the authority to speak in a time when few women were permitted a voice.[22] Hildegard used her voice to condemn church practices she disagreed with, in particular simony.
Hildegard has also become a figure of reverence within the contemporary New Age movement, mostly due to her holistic and natural view of healing, as well as her status as a mystic. She was the inspiration for Dr. Gottfried Hertzka's "Hildegard-Medicine," and is the namesake for June Boyce-Tillman's Hildegard Network, a healing center that focuses on a holistic approach to wellness.[23]
Hildegard was one of the first persons for whom the canonization process was officially applied, but the process took so long that four attempts at canonization were not completed, and she remained at the level of her beatification.
Hildegard's name was taken up in the Roman Martyrology at the end of the sixteenth century. Her feast day is September 17. Hildegard’s Parish and Pilgrimage Church house the relics of Hildegard, including an altar encasing her remains, in Eibingen near Rüdesheim.





Anglicanism portal



Hildegard of Bingen appears in the calendar of saints in various Anglican churches. In both the Church of England and ECUSA she is commemorated with a Lesser Festival on 17 September.

[edit] Media










"O frondens virga"









From Ordo Virtutum









Problems listening to this file? See media help.



[edit] Bibliography




Primary sources

Editions and manuscripts of Hildegard's works


Wiesbaden, Hessische Landesbibliothek, Hs. 2 (Riesen Codex) or Wiesbaden Codex (ca. 1180-85)
Dendermonde, Belgium, St.-Pieters-&-Paulusabdij Cod. 9 (Villarenser codex) (ca. 1174/75)
Otto Muller Verlag Salzburg 1969: Hildegard von Bingen: Lieder (modern edition in adapted square notation)
Muenchen, University Library, MS2∞156
Leipzig, University Library, St. Thomas 371
Paris, Bibl. Nat. MS 1139
Hildegardis Bingensis, Epistolarium pars prima I-XC edited by L. Van Acker, Corpus Christianorum Continuatio Mediaevalis CCCM 91A (Turnhout: Brepols, 1991)
Hildegardis Bingensis, Epistolarium pars secunda XCI-CCLr edited by L. Van Acker, Corpus Christianorum Continuatio Mediaevalis CCCM 91A (Turnhout: Brepols, 1993)
Hildegardis Bingensis, Epistolarium pars tertia CCLI-CCCXC edited by L. Van Acker and M. Klaes-Hachmoller, Corpus Christianorum Continuatio Mediaevalis XCIB (Turnhout: Brepols, 2001)
Hildegardis Bingensis, Scivias. A. Führkötter, A. Carlevaris eds., Corpus Christianorum Scholars Version vols. 43, 43A. (Turnhout: Brepols, 2003)
Hildegardis Bingensis, Liber vitae meritorum. A. Carlevaris ed. Corpus Christianorum Continuatio Mediaevalis CCCM 90 (Turnhout: Brepols, 1995)
Hildegardis Bingensis, Liber divinorum operum. A. Derolez and P. Dronke eds., Corpus Christianorum Continuatio Mediaevalis CCCM 92 (Turnhout: Brepols, 1996)






Other sources


Friedrich Wilhelm Emil Roth, "Glossae Hildigardis", in: Elias Steinmeyer and Eduard Sievers eds., Die Althochdeutschen Glossen, vol. III. Zürich: Wiedmann, 1895, 1965, pp. 390-404.
Analecta Sanctae Hildegardis, in Analecta Sacra vol. 8 edited by Jean-Baptiste Pitra (Monte Cassino, 1882).
Patrologia Latina vol. 197 (1855).
Explanatio Regulae S. Benedicti
Explanatio Symboli S. Athanasii
Homeliae LVIII in Evangelia.
Hymnodia coelestis.
Ignota lingua, cum versione Latina
Liber divinorum operum simplicis hominis (1163-73/74)
Liber vitae meritorum (1158-63)
Libri simplicis et compositae medicinae.
Physica, sive Subtilitatum diversarum naturarum creaturarum libri novem
Scivias seu Visiones (1141-51)
Solutiones triginta octo quaestionum
Tractatus de sacramento altaris.
Vita S. Disibodi
Vita S. Ruperti







[edit] See also

A Hildegard FAQ Sheet
Hildegard of Bingen bibliography and discography


[edit] Notes


^ http://www.catholic.org/encyclopedia/view.php?id=5777
^ Some writers have speculated a distant origin for opera in this piece, though without any evidence. See: [1]; alt Opera, with capitalization, see Florentine Camerata or municipality in the province of Milan, Italy. [2] and [3]
^ Michael McGrade, "Hildegard von Bingen," in Die Musik in Geschichte und Gegenwart: allgemeine Enzyklopaldie der Musik, 2nd edition, T.2, Vol. 8, ed. Ludwig Fischer (Kassel and New York: Bahrenreiter, 1994).
^ McGrade, "Hildegard," MGG.
^ Hildegard von Bingen, Scivias, trans. by Columba Hart and Jane Bishop with an Introduction by Barbara J. Newman, and Preface by Caroline Walker Bynum (New York: Paulist Press, 1990) 60-61.
^ Oliver Sacks, Migraine: Understanding a Common Disorder (Berkeley, 1985), 106-108.
^ Hildegard of Bingen
^ Audrey Ekdahl Davidson. “Music and Performance: Hildegard of Bingen’s Ordo Virtutum.” The Ordo Virtutum of Hildegard of Bingen: Critical Studies, (Kalamazoo, MI: Western Michigan University, 1992), 1-29.
^ Bruce Holsinger, . “The Flesh of the Voice: Embodiment and the Homoerotics of Devotion in the Music of Hildegard von Bingen (1098-1179).” Signs: Journal Of Women in Culture and Society 19 (1993): 92-125.
^ Margot Fassler. “Composer and Dramatist: ‘Melodious Singing and the Freshness of Remorse,’” Voice of the Living Light: Hildegard of Bingen and Her World, ed. Barbara Newman (Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London: University of California Press, 1998), 149-175; Marianna Richert-Pfau, “Mode and Melody Types in Hildegard von Bingen’s Symphonia,” Sonus 11 (1990): 53-71.
^ Hildegard von Bingen, Causae et Curae (Holistic Healing), trans. by Manfred Pawlik and Patrick Madigan, ed. by Mary Palmquist and John Kulas (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, Inc., 1994); Hildegard von Bingen, Physica, trans. Priscilla Throop (Rochester, Vermont: Healing Arts Press, 1998); Glaze, Florence Eliza. “Medical Writer: ‘Behold the Human Creature,’” Voice of the Living Light: Hildegard of Bingen and Her World, ed. Barbara Newman (Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London: University of California Press, 1998), 125-148.
^ Barbara J. Newman, "Introduction" to Hildegard, Scivias, 13.
^ Flanagan, Sabina. (1998). Hildegard of Bingen, 1098–1179: A Visionary Life. Routledge. p. 97.
^ Hildegard, Scivias, 279.
^ Hildegard von Bingen, The Letters of Hildegard of Bingen, trans. by Joseph L. Baird and Radd K. Ehrman (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994/1998).
^ Dietrich, Julia. “The Visionary Rhetoric of Hildegard of Bingen.” Listening to Their Voices: The Rhetorical Activities of Historic Women. Ed. Molly Meijer Wertheimer. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1997. 202-214.
^ Herrick, James A. The History of Rhetoric: an introduction. 4th ed. Boston: Allyn Bacon, 2005.
^ Ruether, Rosemary Radford. Visionary Women. Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress, 2002. 6-13.
^ Maddocks, Fiona. Hildegard of Bingen: The Woman of Her Age. New York: Doubleday, 2001. 1-45.
^ Dietrich, Julia. “The Visionary Rhetoric of Hildegard of Bingen.” Listening to Their Voices: The Rhetorical Activities of Historic Women. Ed. Molly Meijer Wertheimer. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1997. 202-214.
^ Holsinger, Bruce W. Music, Body, and Desire in Medieval Culture. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2001. 123-135.
^ Barbara Newman, “Hildegard of Bingen: Visions and Validation,” Church History 54 (1985): 163-175; Barbara Newman, Sister of Wisdom: St. Hildegard’s Theology of the Feminine, (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1987).
^ June Boyce-Tillman, “Hildegard of Bingen at 900: The Eye of a Woman,” The Musical Times 139, no. 1865 (Winter, 1998): 31-36.



[edit] References

Sweet, Victoria. Rooted in the Earth, Rooted in the Sky: Hildegard of Bingen and Premodern Medicine. New York and London: Routledge, 2006. Pp. xviii, 326.
Bent, Ian D. and Marianne Pfau. “Hildegard of Bingen.” The New Grove Dictionary of	Music and Musicians, 2nd edition, Volume 11. Edited by Stanley Sadie and John Tyrell. New York: Grove, 2001.
Boyce-Tillman, June. “Hildegard of Bingen at 900: The Eye of a Woman.” The Musical Times 139, no. 1865 (Winter, 1998): 31-36.
Davidson, Audrey Ekdahl. “Music and Performance: Hildegard of Bingen’s Ordo Virtutum.” The Ordo Virtutum of Hildegard of Bingen: Critical Studies. Kalamazoo, MI: Western Michigan University, 1992.
Fassler, Margot. “Composer and Dramatist: ‘Melodious Singing and the Freshness of Remorse.’” Voice of the Living Light: Hildegard of Bingen and Her World. Edited by Barbara Newman. Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London: University of California Press, 1998.
Glaze, Florence Eliza. “Medical Writer: ‘Behold the Human Creature.’” Voice of the Living Light: Hildegard of Bingen and Her World. Edited by Barbara Newman. Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London: University of California Press, 1998.
Hildegard von Bingen. Causae et Curae (Holistic Healing). Trans. by Manfred Pawlik and Patrick Madigan. Edited by Mary Palmquist and John Kulas. Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, Inc., 1994.
________. The Letters of Hildegard of Bingen. Trans. by Joseph L. Baird and Radd K. Ehrman. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994/1998.
________. Physica. Trans. Priscilla Throop. Rochester Vermont: Healing Arts Press, 1998.
________. Scivias. Trans. by Columba Hart and Jane Bishop. Introduction by Barbara J. Newman. Preface by Caroline Walker Bynum. New York: Paulist Press, 1990.
Holsinger, Bruce Wood. “The Flesh of the Voice: Embodiment and the Homoerotics of Devotion in the Music of Hildegard von Bingen (1098-1179).” Signs: Journal Of Women in Culture and Society 19 (1993): 92-125.
McGrade, Michael. “Hildegard von Bingen.” Die Musik in Geschichte und Gegenwart: allgemeine Enzyklopaldie der Musik, 2nd edition, T. 2, Volume 8. Edited by Ludwig Fischer. Kassel, New York: Bahrenreiter, 1994.
Newman, Barbara. “Hildegard of Bingen: Visions and Validation.” Church History 54 (1985): 163-175.
________. “‘Sibyl of the Rhine’: Hildegard’s Life and Times.” Voice of the Living Light: Hildegard of Bingen and Her World. Edited by Barbara Newman. Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London: University of California Press, 1998.
________. Sister of Wisdom: St. Hildegard’s Theology of the Feminine. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1987.
Richert-Pfau, Marianna. “Mode and Melody Types in Hildegard von Bingen’s Symphonia.” Sonus 11 (1990): 53-71.
Dietrich, Julia. “The Visionary Rhetoric of Hildegard of Bingen.” Listening to Their Voices: The Rhetorical Activities of Historic Women. Ed. Molly Meijer Wertheimer. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1997. 202-214.
Bennett, Judith M. and C. Warren Hollister. Medieval Europe: A Short History. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006. 289.
Holsinger, Bruce W. Music, Body, and Desire in Medieval Culture. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2001. 123-135.
Ruether, Rosemary Radford. Visionary Women. Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress, 2002. 6-13.
Maddocks, Fiona. Hildegard of Bingen: The Woman of Her Age. New York: Doubleday, 2001. 1-45.


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Hildegard von Bingen



International Society of Hildegard von Bingen Studies
Catholic Encyclopedia
Hildegard of Bingen Documents, History, Sites to see today, etc.
New Advent's Page on Hildegard of Bingen
Source
Discography
Biography and Prayers of Hildegard
Another discography
Church of St. Hildegard in Eibingen, Germany with information about Hildegard von Bingen and the Eibinger Hildegardisshrine
The Reconstruction of the Monastry on the Rupertsberg
Free scores by Hildegard von Bingen in the Werner Icking Music Archive (WIMA)

This article incorporates text from the Encyclopædia Britannica, Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.







v • d • e

Catholic Church





Organizations, Papacy, Teachings and Liturgical Traditions





History

Jesus · Twelve Apostles · Early Christianity · History of the Papacy · Councils · Crusades · Missions · Great Schism of East · Great Schism of West · Reformation · Counter-Reformation · Roman Catholicism by country







Hierarchy

Pope · Cardinals · Patriarchs · Major Archbishops · Primates · Metropolitans · Archbishops · Diocesan Bishops






Theology

Trinity · Original sin · One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church · Worship · Divine Grace · Salvation · Sermon on the Mount · The Ten Commandments · Dogma · Body and Soul






Sacraments

Baptism · Confirmation · Eucharist · Penance · Anointing of the Sick · Holy Orders · Matrimony






Mariology

Mariology · Veneration · History of Mariology · Mariology of the saints · Mariology of the popes · Marian Doctrines · Mother of God · Perpetual Virginity · Immaculate Conception  · Assumption






Doctors of
the Church

Albertus Magnus · Ambrose · Anselm of Canterbury · Anthony of Padua · Thomas Aquinas · Athanasius of Alexandria · Augustine of Hippo · Basil of Caesarea · Bede · Robert Bellarmine · Bernard of Clairvaux · Bonaventure · Petrus Canisius · Catherine of Siena · Peter Chrysologus · John Chrysostom · Cyril of Alexandria · Cyril of Jerusalem · Peter Damian · Ephrem the Syrian · Francis de Sales · Gregory the Great · Gregory of Nazianzus · Hilary of Poitiers · Isidore of Seville · Jerome · John of Damascus · John of the Cross · Lawrence of Brindisi · Leo the Great · Alphonsus Liguori · Thérèse de Lisieux · Teresa of Ávila






Pope Benedict XVI

Conclave · Theology · Works · Deus Caritas Est · Sacramentum Caritatis · Summorum Pontificum · Spe Salvi






Preceding Popes

Pope John Paul II · Pope Paul VI · Pope John XXIII · Pope Pius XII · Pope Pius XI · Pope Benedict XV · Pope Pius X · Pope Leo XIII · Pope Pius IX






Orders & Societies

Assumptionist · Augustinian Order · Benedictines · Capuchin Order · Carmelites · Carthusians · Congregations of Holy Cross · Dominican Order · Franciscan orders · Jesuits · Oratory of Saint Philip Neri






Vatican II

Definition of the Church · Gaudium et Spes · Lumen Gentium · Nostra Aetate






Particular Churches
sorted by
Liturgical Traditions

Alexandrian · Coptic · Ethiopic · Antiochian · Maronite · Syriac · Syro-Malankara · Armenian · Armenian · Byzantine · Albanian · Belarusian · Bulgarian · Croatian · Greek · Hungarian · Italo-Greek · Macedonian · Melkite · Romanian · Russian · Ruthenian · Slovak · Ukrainian · East Syrian · Chaldean · Syro-Malabar · Roman · Ambrosian · Sarum · Mozarabic · Anglican Use · Latin · Priestly Fraternity of St. Peter






 Pope Portal  Catholicism Portal












v • d • e

History of the Roman Catholic Church





General

History of the Roman Catholic Church · History of the Papacy · Ecumenical Councils · Timeline of the Roman Catholic Church · History of Christianity · Role of the Roman Catholic Church in civilization · Art in Roman Catholicism · Roman Catholic religious order · Christian monasticism · Papal States







Church beginnings

Jesus · Twelve Apostles · Saint Peter · Paul the Apostle · Council of Jerusalem · Saint Stephen · John the Apostle · Ignatius of Antioch · Irenaeus · Pope Victor I · Tertullian · Apostolic Fathers






Constantine to
Pope Gregory I

Constantine I and Christianity · Arianism · Basilica of St. John Lateran · First Council of Nicaea · Pope Sylvester I · First Council of Constantinople · Canon · Jerome · Vulgate · Council of Ephesus · Council of Chalcedon · Benedict of Nursia · Second Council of Constantinople · Pope Gregory I · Gregorian Chant






Early Middle Ages

Third Council of Constantinople · Saint Boniface · Iconclasm · Second Council of Nicaea · Charlemagne · Pope Leo III · Fourth Council of Constantinople · East-West Schism






High Middle Ages

Pope Urban II · Investiture Controversy · Crusades · First Council of the Lateran · Second Council of the Lateran · Third Council of the Lateran · Pope Innocent III · Latin Empire of Constantinople · Saint Francis of Assisi · Fourth Council of the Lateran · Inquisition · First Council of Lyon · Second Council of Lyon · Bernard of Clairvaux · Thomas Aquinas






Late Middle Ages

Pope Boniface VIII · Avignon Papacy · Pope Clement V · Council of Vienne · Knights Templar · Catherine of Siena · Pope Alexander VI






Protestant Reformation &
Counter-Reformation

Protestant Reformation · Counter-Reformation · Thomas More · Pope Leo X · Society of Jesus · Francis Xavier · Dissolution of the Monasteries · Council of Trent · Pope Pius V · Tridentine Mass · Robert Bellarmine






Baroque Period to
French Revolution

Pope Innocent XI · Pope Benedict XIV · Suppression of the Society of Jesus · Anti-clericalism · Pope Pius VI · Shimabara Rebellion · Edict of Nantes · Dechristianisation of France during the French Revolution






19th century

Pope Pius VII · Pope Pius IX · Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary · Our Lady of Lourdes · First Vatican Council · Papal infallibility · Pope Leo XIII · Rerum Novarum






20th century

Pope Pius X · Our Lady of Fátima · Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII · Pope Pius XII · Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary · Pope John XXIII · Second Vatican Council · Pope Paul VI · Pope John Paul I · Pope John Paul II






21st century

Pope Benedict XVI · World Youth Day 2008






 Pope Portal  Catholicism Portal












v • d • e

History of Roman Catholic theology





Theologians · Teachings · Heresies





General History

History of the Roman Catholic Church · Early Christianity · History of the Papacy · Ecumenical Councils · Timeline of the Roman Catholic Church · History of Christianity · History of Christian theology







Church beginnings

Epistles of Clement · Didache · Ignatius of Antioch · Epistle of Barnabas · Justin Martyr · Irenaeus · Tertullian · Origen · Antipope Novatian · Cyprian






Constantine to
Pope Gregory I

Arianism · Pelagianism · Nestorianism · Monophysitism · Monothelitism · Pope Leo I · Ambrose · Augustine of Hippo






Early Middle Ages

Iconoclasm · Transubstantiation Dispute · Predestination Disputes






High Middle Ages

Thomas Aquinas · Thomism · Anselm of Canterbury · Peter Abelard · Decretum Gratiani · Bernard of Clairvaux · Peter Lombard · Hildegard of Bingen · Saint Dominic · Saint Francis of Assisi · Bonaventure · Albertus Magnus






Mysticism & Reforms

Duns Scotus · Dante Alighieri · William of Ockham · Catherine of Siena · Brigit of Sweden · Johannes Tauler · Heinrich Seuse · Nicholas of Kues · Thomas à Kempis






Protestant Reformation and
Counter-Reformation

Thomas More · John Fisher · Thomas Cajetan · Johann Eck · Ignatius of Loyola · Francis Xavier · Teresa of Ávila · John of the Cross · Petrus Canisius · Robert Bellarmine · Francis de Sales






Baroque Period to
French Revolution

Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet · Francisco Suárez · François Fénelon · Jansenism · Blaise Pascal · Saint Alphonsus Liguori · Saint Louis de Montfort · Alfonso Muzzarelli · Louis Thomassin · Jean de La Fontaine






19th century

John Henry Newman · Gaetano Sanseverino · Giovanni Maria Cornoldi · Clemens Maria Hofbauer · Johann Michael Sailer · Johann Joseph von Görres · Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler · Giuseppe Pecci · Joseph Hergenröther · Tommaso Maria Zigliara






20th-21st century

Romano Guardini · Sebastiaan Tromp · Raimondo Spiazzi · Gabriel Roschini · Hugo Rahner · Henri de Lubac · Pope Pius XII · Pierre Teilhard de Chardin · Hans Urs von Balthasar · Yves Congar · Karl Rahner · Edward Schillebeeckx · Marie-Dominique Chenu · Louis Bouyer · Étienne Gilson · Hans Küng · Jean Daniélou · Pope John Paul II · Pope Benedict XVI






 Pope Portal  Catholicism Portal












v • d • e

Calendars of Saints and Commemorations





Anglican Communion

List of Anglican Church Calendars· Church of England· Anglican Church of Australia· Anglican Church of Canada· The Episcopal Church · Anglican Church of Korea · Province of Melanesia · Scottish Episcopal Church · Hong Kong Sheng Kung Hui · Anglican Church of Southern Africa







Eastern Orthodox

Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendar






Oriental Orthodox

Coptic calendar · Armenian Apostolic Church






Protestant churches

Lutheran commemorations






Roman Catholic

Current Roman Rite Calendar · Tridentine Calendar · General Roman Calendar of 1954 · General Roman Calendar of 1962









Persondata


NAME
Hildegard of Bingen


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Blessed Hildegard; Saint Hildegard


SHORT DESCRIPTION
German abbess, author, counselor, linguist, naturalist, scientist, philosopher, physician, herbalist, poet, visionary and composer


DATE OF BIRTH
1098


PLACE OF BIRTH



DATE OF DEATH
17 September 1179


PLACE OF DEATH






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hildegard_of_Bingen"
Categories: Liturgical calendars | Beatified people | Christian mystics | German Christian theologians | Female philosophers | German saints | German Roman Catholic saints | Female saints | German spiritual writers | German writers | German women writers | Inventors of writing systems | Women of medieval Germany | Medieval composers | Medieval drama | German Roman Catholic nuns | German Roman Catholic abbesses | Walhalla enshrinees | Women classical composers | Women artists | Herbalists | Manuscript illuminators | 12th-century women writers | 1098 births | 1179 deaths | Romanesque artists | 12th-century venerated ChristiansHidden categories: Articles containing German language text | Articles containing Latin language text | Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Français
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Latina
Lëtzebuergesch
Limburgs
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 17:45.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
