













John von Neumann - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "John_von_Neumann";
		var wgTitle = "John von Neumann";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "15942";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281612021;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); John von Neumann

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"von Neumann" redirects here. For other uses, see von Neumann (disambiguation).


John von Neumann



John von Neumann in the 1940s



Born
December 28, 1903(1903-12-28)
Budapest, Austria-Hungary


Died
February 8, 1957 (aged 53)
Washington, D.C., United States


Residence
United States


Nationality
American


Ethnicity
Jewish–Hungarian


Fields
Mathematician


Institutions
University of Berlin
Princeton University
Institute for Advanced Study
Site Y, Los Alamos


Alma mater
University of Pázmány Péter
ETH Zürich


Doctoral advisor
Leopold Fejér


Doctoral students
Donald B. Gillies
Israel Halperin
John P. Mayberry


Other notable students
Paul Halmos
Clifford Hugh Dowker


Known for
Game theory
von Neumann algebras
von Neumann architecture
Von Neumann cellular automaton
Von Neumann universal constructor
Von Neumann entropy
Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory
Utility theory
Von Neumann universe
Von Neumann conjecture
Von Neumann's inequality
Stone–von Neumann theorem
Minimax theorem
Von Neumann extractor
Direct integral


Notable awards
Enrico Fermi Award (1956)


Religious stance
Roman Catholic; previously agnostic; born to a non-practicing Jewish family


Signature





Quantum mechanics







Uncertainty principle


Introduction to...
Mathematical formulation of...


Background


Classical mechanics
Old quantum theory
Interference · Bra-ket notation
Hamiltonian




Fundamental concepts


Quantum state · Wave function
Superposition · Entanglement
Measurement · Uncertainty
Exclusion · Duality
Decoherence · Ehrenfest theorem · Tunneling





Experiments


Double-slit experiment
Davisson–Germer experiment
Stern–Gerlach experiment
Bell's inequality experiment
Popper's experiment
Schrödinger's cat
Elitzur-Vaidman bomb-tester
Quantum eraser




Formulations


Schrödinger picture
Heisenberg picture
Interaction picture
Matrix mechanics
Sum over histories




Equations


Schrödinger equation
Pauli equation
Klein–Gordon equation
Dirac equation
Bohr Theory and Balmer-Rydberg Equation




Interpretations


Copenhagen · Ensemble
Hidden variable theory · Transactional
Many-worlds · Consistent histories
Relational · Quantum logic · Pondicherry




Advanced topics


Quantum field theory
Quantum gravity
Theory of everything




Scientists


Planck · Einstein · Bohr · Sommerfeld · Bose · Kramers · Heisenberg· Born · Jordan · Pauli · Dirac · de Broglie ·Schrödinger · von Neumann · Wigner · Feynman · Candlin · Bohm · Everett · Bell · Wien






This box: view • talk • edit



John von Neumann (Hungarian: margittai Neumann János Lajos) (December 28, 1903 – February 8, 1957) was a Hungarian American[1] mathematician who made major contributions to a vast range of fields,[2] including set theory, functional analysis, quantum mechanics, ergodic theory, continuous geometry, economics and game theory, computer science, numerical analysis, hydrodynamics (of explosions), and statistics, as well as many other mathematical fields. He is generally regarded as one of the foremost mathematicians of the 20th century.[1] The mathematician Jean Dieudonné called von Neumann "the last of the great mathematicians."[3] Even in the city in the time that produced Szilárd (1898), Wigner (1902), and Teller (1908) his brilliance stood out.[4] Most notably, von Neumann was a pioneer of the application of operator theory to quantum mechanics, a principal member of the Manhattan Project and the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton (as one of the few originally appointed), and a key figure in the development of game theory[5][2] and the concepts of cellular automata[2] and the universal constructor. Along with Edward Teller and Stanislaw Ulam, von Neumann worked out key steps in the nuclear physics involved in thermonuclear reactions and the hydrogen bomb.




Contents


1 Biography
2 Logic and set theory
3 Quantum mechanics
4 Economics and game theory
5 Nuclear weapons
6 Computer science
7 Politics and social affairs
8 Personality
9 Honors
10 Selected works
11 See also
12 Biographical material
13 Notes
14 References
15 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography
The eldest of three brothers, von Neumann was born Neumann János Lajos (in Hungarian the family name comes first) in Budapest, Hungary, to a wealthy non-practicing Jewish family.[6] His father was Neumann Miksa (Max Neumann), a lawyer who worked in a bank. His mother was Kann Margit (Margaret Kann). Von Neumann's ancestors had originally immigrated to Hungary from Russia.
János, nicknamed "Jancsi" (Johnny), was a prodigy who showed aptitudes for languages, memorization, and mathematics. He entered the German-speaking Lutheran Fasori Gimnázium in Budapest in the year 1911. Although he attended school at the grade level appropriate to his age, his father hired private tutors to give him advanced instruction in those areas in which he had displayed an aptitude. In 1913, his father was rewarded with ennoblement for his service to the Austro-Hungarian empire. (After becoming semi-autonomous in 1867 Hungary had found itself in need of a vibrant mercantile class.) The Neumann family thus acquiring the name margittai, Neumann János became margittai Neumann János (John Neumann of Margitta), which he later changed to the German Johann von Neumann. He received his Ph.D. in mathematics (with minors in experimental physics and chemistry) from Pázmány Péter University in Budapest at the age of 22.[2] He simultaneously earned his diploma in chemical engineering from the ETH Zurich in Switzerland[2] at the behest of his father, who wanted his son to invest his time in a more financially viable endeavour than mathematics. Between 1926 and 1930 he taught as a privatdozent at the University of Berlin, the youngest in its history. By age 25 he had published 10 major papers, and by 30, nearly 36.[citation needed]
Max von Neumann died in 1929. In 1930 von Neumann, his mother, and his brothers emigrated to the United States. He anglicized Johann to John, keeping the Austrian-aristocratic surname of von Neumann, whereas his brothers adopted surnames Vonneumann and Neumann (using the de Neumann form briefly when first in the U.S.).
Von Neumann was invited to Princeton University, New Jersey in 1930, and, subsequently, was one of four people selected for the first faculty of the Institute for Advanced Study (two of the others were Albert Einstein and Kurt Gödel), where he was a mathematics professor from its formation in 1933 until his death.
In 1937 von Neumann became a naturalized citizen of the US. In 1938 von Neumann was awarded the Bôcher Memorial Prize for his work in analysis.
Von Neumann married twice. He married Mariette Kövesi in 1930, just prior to emigrating to the United States. They had one daughter (von Neumann's only child), Marina, who is now a distinguished professor of international trade and public policy at the University of Michigan. The couple divorced in 1937. In 1938 von Neumann married Klari Dan, whom he had met during his last trips back to Budapest prior to the outbreak of World War II. The von Neumanns were very active socially within the Princeton academic community, and it is from this aspect of his life that many of the anecdotes which surround von Neumann's legend originate.
In 1955 von Neumann was diagnosed with what was either bone or pancreatic cancer,[7] possibly caused by exposure to radiation during his witnessing of atomic bomb tests. Von Neumann died a year and a half following the initial diagnosis, in great pain. While at Walter Reed Hospital in Washington, D.C., he invited a Roman Catholic priest, Father Anselm Strittmatter, O.S.B., to visit him for consultation (a move which shocked some of von Neumann's friends).[8] The priest then administered to him the last Sacraments.[9] He died under military security lest he reveal military secrets while heavily medicated. John von Neumann was buried at Princeton Cemetery in Princeton, Mercer County, New Jersey.[10]




Gravestone of John von Neumann


Von Neumann wrote 150 published papers in his life; 60 in pure mathematics, 20 in physics, and 60 in applied mathematics. His last work, published in book form as The Computer and the Brain, gives an indication of the direction of his interests at the time of his death.

[edit] Logic and set theory





This section is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add inline citations to guard against copyright violations and factual inaccuracies. (April 2007)


The axiomatization of mathematics, on the model of Euclid's Elements, had reached new levels of rigor and breadth at the end of the 19th century, particularly in arithmetic (thanks to Richard Dedekind and Giuseppe Peano) and geometry (thanks to David Hilbert). At the beginning of the twentieth century, set theory, the new branch of mathematics discovered by Georg Cantor, and thrown into crisis by Bertrand Russell with the discovery of his famous paradox (on the set of all sets which do not belong to themselves), had not yet been formalized.
The problem of an adequate axiomatization of set theory was resolved implicitly about twenty years later (by Ernst Zermelo and Abraham Fraenkel) by way of a series of principles which allowed for the construction of all sets used in the actual practice of mathematics, but which did not explicitly exclude the possibility of the existence of sets which belong to themselves. In his doctoral thesis of 1925, von Neumann demonstrated how it was possible to exclude this possibility in two complementary ways: the axiom of foundation and the notion of class.
The axiom of foundation established that every set can be constructed from the bottom up in an ordered succession of steps by way of the principles of Zermelo and Fraenkel, in such a manner that if one set belongs to another then the first must necessarily come before the second in the succession (hence excluding the possibility of a set belonging to itself.) In order to demonstrate that the addition of this new axiom to the others did not produce contradictions, von Neumann introduced a method of demonstration (called the method of inner models) which later became an essential instrument in set theory.
The second approach to the problem took as its base the notion of class, and defines a set as a class which belongs to other classes, while a proper class is defined as a class which does not belong to other classes. Under the Zermelo/Fraenkel approach, the axioms impede the construction of a set of all sets which do not belong to themselves. In contrast, under the von Neumann approach, the class of all sets which do not belong to themselves can be constructed, but it is a proper class and not a set.
With this contribution of von Neumann, the axiomatic system of the theory of sets became fully satisfactory, and the next question was whether or not it was also definitive, and not subject to improvement. A strongly negative answer arrived in September 1930 at the historic mathematical Congress of Königsberg, in which Kurt Gödel announced his first theorem of incompleteness: the usual axiomatic systems are incomplete, in the sense that they cannot prove every truth which is expressible in their language. This result was sufficiently innovative as to confound the majority of mathematicians of the time. But von Neumann, who had participated at the Congress, confirmed his fame as an instantaneous thinker, and in less than a month was able to communicate to Gödel himself an interesting consequence of his theorem: namely that the usual axiomatic systems are unable to demonstrate their own consistency. It is precisely this consequence which has attracted the most attention, even if Gödel originally considered it only a curiosity, and had derived it independently anyway (it is for this reason that the result is called Gödel's second theorem, without mention of von Neumann.)

[edit] Quantum mechanics
At the International Congress of Mathematicians of 1900, David Hilbert presented his famous list of twenty-three problems considered central for the development of the mathematics of the new century. The sixth of these was the axiomatization of physical theories. Among the new physical theories of the century the only one which had yet to receive such a treatment by the end of the 1930s was quantum mechanics. QM found itself in a condition of foundational crisis similar to that of set theory at the beginning of the century, facing problems of both philosophical and technical natures. On the one hand, its apparent non-determinism had not been reduced to an explanation of a deterministic form. On the other, there still existed two independent but equivalent heuristic formulations, the so-called matrix mechanical formulation due to Werner Heisenberg and the wave mechanical formulation due to Erwin Schrödinger, but there was not yet a single, unified satisfactory theoretical formulation.
After having completed the axiomatization of set theory, von Neumann began to confront the axiomatization of QM. He immediately realized, in 1926, that a quantum system could be considered as a point in a so-called Hilbert space, analogous to the 6N dimension (N is the number of particles, 3 general coordinate and 3 canonical momentum for each) phase space of classical mechanics but with infinitely many dimensions (corresponding to the infinitely many possible states of the system) instead: the traditional physical quantities (e.g. position and momentum) could therefore be represented as particular linear operators operating in these spaces. The physics of quantum mechanics was thereby reduced to the mathematics of the linear Hermitian operators on Hilbert spaces. For example, the famous uncertainty principle of Heisenberg, according to which the determination of the position of a particle prevents the determination of its momentum and vice versa, is translated into the non-commutativity of the two corresponding operators. This new mathematical formulation included as special cases the formulations of both Heisenberg and Schrödinger, and culminated in the 1932 classic The Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. However, physicists generally ended up preferring another approach to that of von Neumann (which was considered elegant and satisfactory by mathematicians). This approach was formulated in 1930 by Paul Dirac.
Von Neumann's abstract treatment permitted him also to confront the foundational issue of determinism vs. non-determinism and in the book he demonstrated a theorem according to which quantum mechanics could not possibly be derived by statistical approximation from a deterministic theory of the type used in classical mechanics. This demonstration contained a conceptual error, but it helped to inaugurate a line of research which, through the work of John Stuart Bell in 1964 on Bell's Theorem and the experiments of Alain Aspect in 1982, demonstrated that quantum physics requires a notion of reality substantially different from that of classical physics.

[edit] Economics and game theory
Von Neumann's first significant contribution to economics was the minimax theorem of 1928. This theorem establishes that in certain zero sum games with perfect information (i.e., in which players know at each time all moves that have taken place so far), there exists a strategy for each player which allows both players to minimize their maximum losses (hence the name minimax). When examining every possible strategy, a player must consider all the possible responses of the player's adversary and the maximum loss. The player then plays out the strategy which will result in the minimization of this maximum loss. Such a strategy, which minimizes the maximum loss, is called optimal for both players just in case their minimaxes are equal (in absolute value) and contrary (in sign). If the common value is zero, the game becomes pointless.
Von Neumann eventually improved and extended the minimax theorem to include games involving imperfect information and games with more than two players. This work culminated in the 1944 classic Theory of Games and Economic Behavior (written with Oskar Morgenstern). The public interest in this work was such that The New York Times ran a front page story, something which only Einstein had previously elicited.
Von Neumann's second important contribution in this area was the solution, in 1937, of a problem first described by Léon Walras in 1874, the existence of situations of equilibrium in mathematical models of market development based on supply and demand. He first recognized that such a model should be expressed through disequations and not equations, and then he found a solution to Walras' problem by applying a fixed-point theorem derived from the work of L. E. J. Brouwer. The lasting importance of the work on general equilibria and the methodology of fixed point theorems is underscored by the awarding of Nobel prizes in 1972 to Kenneth Arrow, in 1983 to Gerard Debreu, and in 1994 to John Nash who had improved von Neumann's theory in his Princeton Ph.D thesis.
Von Neumann was also the inventor of the method of proof, used in game theory, known as backward induction (which he first published in 1944 in the book co-authored with Morgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic Behaviour).[11]

[edit] Nuclear weapons


John von Neumann's wartime Los Alamos ID badge photo.


Beginning in the late 1930s von Neumann began to take more of an interest in applied (as opposed to pure) mathematics. In particular, he developed an expertise in explosions—phenomena which are difficult to model mathematically. This led him to a large number of military consultancies, primarily for the Navy, which in turn led to his involvement in the Manhattan Project. The involvement included frequent trips by train to the project's secret research facilities in Los Alamos, New Mexico.[2]
Von Neumann's principal contribution to the atomic bomb itself was in the concept and design of the explosive lenses needed to compress the plutonium core of the Trinity test device and the "Fat Man" weapon that was later dropped on Nagasaki. While von Neumann did not originate the "implosion" concept, he was one of its most persistent proponents, encouraging its continued development against the instincts of many of his colleagues, who felt such a design to be unworkable. The lens shape design work was completed by July 1944.
In a visit to Los Alamos in September 1944, von Neumann showed that the pressure increase from explosion shock wave reflection from solid objects was greater than previously believed if the angle of incidence of the shock wave was between 90° and some limiting angle. As a result, it was determined that the effectiveness of an atomic bomb would be enhanced with detonation some kilometers above the target, rather than at ground level.[12]
Beginning in the spring of 1945, along with four other scientists and various military personnel, von Neumann was included in the target selection committee responsible for choosing the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki as the first targets of the atomic bomb. Von Neumann oversaw computations related to the expected size of the bomb blasts, estimated death tolls, and the distance above the ground at which the bombs should be detonated for optimum shock wave propagation and thus maximum effect.[13] The cultural capital Kyoto, which had been spared the firebombing inflicted upon militarily significant target cities like Tokyo in World War II, was von Neumann's first choice, a selection seconded by Manhattan Project leader General Leslie Groves. However, this target was dismissed by Secretary of War Henry Stimson, who had been impressed with the city during a visit while Governor General of the Philippines.[14]
On July 16, 1945, with numerous other Los Alamos personnel, von Neumann was an eyewitness to the first atomic bomb blast, conducted as a test of the implosion method device, 35 miles (56 km) southeast of Socorro, New Mexico. Based on his observation alone, von Neumann estimated the test had resulted in a blast equivalent to 5 kilotons of TNT, but Enrico Fermi produced a more accurate estimate of 10 kilotons by dropping scraps of torn-up paper as the shock wave passed his location and watching how far they scattered. The actual power of the explosion had been between 20 and 22 kilotons.[12]
After the war, Robert Oppenheimer remarked that the physicists involved in the Manhattan project had "known sin". Von Neumann's response was that "sometimes someone confesses a sin in order to take credit for it".
Von Neumann continued unperturbed in his work and became, along with Edward Teller, one of those who sustained the hydrogen bomb project. He then collaborated with Klaus Fuchs on further development of the bomb, and in 1946 the two filed a secret patent on "Improvement in Methods and Means for Utilizing Nuclear Energy", which outlined a scheme for using a fission bomb to compress fusion fuel to initiate a thermonuclear reaction. (Herken, pp. 171, 374). Though this was not the key to the hydrogen bomb — the Teller-Ulam design — it was judged to be a move in the right direction.

[edit] Computer science
Von Neumann's hydrogen bomb work was also played out in the realm of computing, where he and Stanislaw Ulam developed simulations on von Neumann's digital computers for the hydrodynamic computations. During this time he contributed to the development of the Monte Carlo method, which allowed complicated problems to be approximated using random numbers. Because using lists of "truly" random numbers was extremely slow for the ENIAC, von Neumann developed a form of making pseudorandom numbers, using the middle-square method. Though this method has been criticized as crude, von Neumann was aware of this: he justified it as being faster than any other method at his disposal, and also noted that when it went awry it did so obviously, unlike methods which could be subtly incorrect.
While consulting for the Moore School of Electrical Engineering on the EDVAC project, von Neumann wrote an incomplete set of notes titled the First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC. The paper, which was widely distributed, described a computer architecture in which data and program memory are mapped into the same address space. This architecture became the de facto standard and can be contrasted with a so-called Harvard architecture, which has separate program and data memories on a separate bus. Although the single-memory architecture became commonly known by the name von Neumann architecture as a result of von Neumann's paper, the architecture's description was based on the work of J. Presper Eckert and John William Mauchly, inventors of the ENIAC at the University of Pennsylvania.[15] With very few exceptions, all present-day home computers, microcomputers, minicomputers and mainframe computers use this single-memory computer architecture.
Von Neumann also created the field of cellular automata without the aid of computers, constructing the first self-replicating automata with pencil and graph paper. The concept of a universal constructor was fleshed out in his posthumous work Theory of Self Reproducing Automata.[16] Von Neumann proved that the most effective way of performing large-scale mining operations such as mining an entire moon or asteroid belt would be by using self-replicating machines, taking advantage of their exponential growth.
He is credited with at least one contribution to the study of algorithms. Donald Knuth cites von Neumann as the inventor, in 1945, of the merge sort algorithm, in which the first and second halves of an array are each sorted recursively and then merged together.[17] His algorithm for simulating a fair coin with a biased coin[18] is used in the "software whitening" stage of some hardware random number generators.
He also engaged in exploration of problems in numerical hydrodynamics. With R. D. Richtmyer he developed an algorithm defining artificial viscosity that improved the understanding of shock waves. It is possible that we would not understand much of astrophysics, and might not have highly developed jet and rocket engines without that work. The problem was that when computers solve hydrodynamic or aerodynamic problems, they try to put too many computational grid points at regions of sharp discontinuity (shock waves). The artificial viscosity was a mathematical trick to slightly smooth the shock transition without sacrificing basic physics.

[edit] Politics and social affairs
Von Neumann obtained at the age of 29 one of the first five professorships at the new Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey (another had gone to Albert Einstein). He was a frequent consultant for the Central Intelligence Agency, the United States Army, the RAND Corporation, Standard Oil, IBM, and others.
Throughout his life von Neumann had a respect and admiration for business and government leaders; something which was often at variance with the inclinations of his scientific colleagues. He enjoyed associating with persons in positions of power, and this led him into government service.[19]
As President of the Von Neumann Committee for Missiles, and later as a member of the United States Atomic Energy Commission, from 1953 until his death in 1957, he was influential in setting U.S. scientific and military policy. Through his committee, he developed various scenarios of nuclear proliferation, the development of intercontinental and submarine missiles with atomic warheads, and the controversial strategic equilibrium called mutual assured destruction (aka the M.A.D. doctrine). During a Senate committee hearing he described his political ideology as "violently anti-communist, and much more militaristic than the norm".
Von Neumann's interest in meteorological prediction led him to propose manipulating the environment by spreading colorants on the polar ice caps in order to enhance absorption of solar radiation (by reducing the albedo), thereby raising global temperatures. He also favored a preemptive nuclear attack on the USSR, believing that doing so could prevent it from obtaining the atomic bomb.[20]

[edit] Personality
Although von Neumann invariably wore a conservative grey flannel business suit - he was even known to play tennis wearing his business suit - he enjoyed throwing large parties at his home in Princeton, occasionally twice a week.[21] Despite being a notoriously bad driver, he nonetheless enjoyed driving (frequently while reading a book) - occasioning numerous arrests as well as accidents. He reported one of his car accidents in this way: "I was proceeding down the road. The trees on the right were passing me in orderly fashion at 60 miles per hour. Suddenly one of them stepped in my path."[22] (The von Neumanns would return to Princeton at the beginning of each academic year with a new car.)
A committed hedonist, von Neumann liked to eat and drink heavily; his wife, Klara, said that he could count everything except calories. He enjoyed yiddish and "off-color" humor (especially limericks).[citation needed].

[edit] Honors
The John von Neumann Theory Prize of the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS, previously TIMS-ORSA) is awarded annually to an individual (or group) who have made fundamental and sustained contributions to theory in operations research and the management sciences.
The IEEE John von Neumann Medal is awarded annually by the IEEE "for outstanding achievements in computer-related science and technology."
The John von Neumann Lecture is given annually at the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) by a researcher who has contributed to applied mathematics, and the chosen lecturer is also awarded a monetary prize.
The crater Von Neumann on the Moon is named after him.
The John von Neumann Computing Center in Princeton, New Jersey (40°20′55″N 74°35′32″W﻿ / ﻿40.348695°N 74.592251°W﻿ / 40.348695; -74.592251﻿ (John von Neumann Computing Center)) was named in his honour.
The professional society of Hungarian computer scientists, John von Neumann Computer Society, is named after John von Neumann[23]
On May 4, 2005 the United States Postal Service issued the American Scientists commemorative postage stamp series, a set of four 37-cent self-adhesive stamps in several configurations. The scientists depicted were John von Neumann, Barbara McClintock, Josiah Willard Gibbs, and Richard Feynman.
The John von Neumann Award of the Rajk László College for Advanced Studies was named in his honour, and is given every year from 1995 to professors, who had on outstanding contribution at the field of exact social sciences, and through their work they had a heavy influence to the professional development and thinking of the members of the college.

[edit] Selected works



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: John von Neumann



Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879-1931. Harvard Univ. Press.

1923. On the introduction of transfinite numbers, 346-54.
1925. An axiomatization of set theory, 393-413.


1932. Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Beyer, R. T., trans., Princeton Univ. Press. 1996 edition: ISBN 0-691-02893-1
1944. (with Oskar Morgenstern) Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. Princeton Univ. Press. 2007 edition: ISBN 978-0-691-13061-3
1966. (with Arthur W. Burks) Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata. Univ. of Illinois Press.[16]
1963. Collected Works of John von Neumann, 6 Volumes. Pergamon Press


[edit] See also


Stone–von Neumann theorem
Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory
Von Neumann algebra
Von Neumann architecture
Von Neumann bicommutant theorem
Von Neumann conjecture
Von Neumann entropy
Von Neumann programming languages
Von Neumann regular ring
Von Neumann universal constructor
Von Neumann universe
Self-replicating spacecraft



PhD Students


Donald B. Gillies, Ph.D. student[24]
Israel Halperin, Ph.D. student[25][24]
Jim Mayberry, Ph.D. student[24]


[edit] Biographical material

Norman Macrae, 1999. John von Neumann: The Scientific Genius Who Pioneered the Modern Computer, Game Theory, Nuclear Deterrence, and Much More. Reprinted by the American Mathematical Society.
Aspray, William, 1990. John von Neumann and the Origins of Modern Computing.
Chiara, Dalla, Maria Luisa and Giuntini, Roberto 1997, La Logica Quantistica in Boniolo, Giovani, ed., Filosofia della Fisica (Philosophy of Physics). Bruno Mondadori.
Goldstine, Herman, 1980. The Computer from Pascal to von Neumann.
Halmos, Paul R., 1985. I Want To Be A Mathematician Springer-Verlag
Hashagen, Ulf, 2006: Johann Ludwig Neumann von Margitta (1903-1957). Teil 1: Lehrjahre eines jüdischen Mathematikers während der Zeit der Weimarer Republik. In: Informatik-Spektrum 29 (2), S. 133-141.
Hashagen, Ulf, 2006: Johann Ludwig Neumann von Margitta (1903-1957). Teil 2: Ein Privatdozent auf dem Weg von Berlin nach Princeton. In: Informatik-Spektrum 29 (3), S. 227-236.
Heim, Steve J., 1980. John von Neumann and Norbert Weiner: From Mathematics to the Technologies of Life and Death MIT Press
Poundstone, William. Prisoner's Dilemma: John von Neumann, Game Theory and the Puzzle of the Bomb. 1992.
Redei, Miklos (ed.), 2005 John von Neumann: Selected Letters American Mathematical Society
Ulam, Stanisław, 1983. Adventures of a Mathematician Scribner's
Vonneuman, Nicholas A. John von Neumann as Seen by His Brother ISBN 0-9619681-0-9
1958, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 64.
1990. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society Symposia in Pure Mathematics 50.
John von Neumann 1903-1957, biographical memoir by S. Bochner, National Academy of Sciences, 1958


Popular periodicals


Good Housekeeping Magazine, September 1956 Married to a Man Who Believes the Mind Can Move the World
Life Magazine, February 25, 1957 Passing of a Great Mind


Video


John von Neumann, A Documentary (60 min.), Mathematical Association of America


[edit] Notes


^ a b "John von Neumann". Encarta. Microsoft. 2008. http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia_761579159/Neumann_John_von.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-28. 
^ a b c d e f Ed Regis (1992-11-08). "Johnny Jiggles the Planet". The New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9E0CE7D91239F93BA35752C1A964958260. Retrieved on 2008-02-04. 
^ Dictionary of Scientific Bibliography, ed. C. C. Gillispie, Scibners, 1981
^ Doran, p. 2
^ Nelson, David (2003). The Penguin Dictionary of Mathematics. London: Penguin. pp. 178–179. ISBN 0-141-01077-0. 
^ Doran, p. 1
^ While there is a general agreement that the initially discovered bone tumor was a secondary growth, sources differ as to the location of the primary cancer. While Macrae gives it as pancreatic, the Life magazine article says it was prostate.
^ The question of whether or not von Neumann had formally converted to Catholicism upon his marriage to Mariette Kövesi (who was Catholic) is addressed by Halmos (ref. 5). He was baptised Roman Catholic but he certainly was not a practicing member of that religion after his divorce.
^ Halmos, P.R. The Legend of Von Neumann, The American Mathematical Monthly, Vol. 80, No. 4. (Apr., 1973), pp. 382-394
^ John von Neumann at Find a Grave[1]
^ John MacQuarrie. "Mathematics and Chess". School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, Scotland. http://www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/~history/Projects/MacQuarrie/Chapters/Ch4.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-18.  "Others claim he used a method of proof, known as 'backwards induction' that was not employed until 1953, by von Neumann and Morgenstern. Ken Binmore (1992) writes, Zermelo used this method way back in 1912 to analyze Chess. It requires starting from the end of the game and then working backwards to its beginning. (p.32)" 
^ a b Lillian Hoddeson ... . With contributions from Gordon Baym ...; "Lillian Hoddeson, Paul W. Henriksen, Roger A. Meade, Catherine Westfall (1993). Critical Assembly: A Technical History of Los Alamos during the Oppenheimer Years, 1943-1945. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-44132-3. 
^ Rhodes, Richard (1986). The Making of the Atomic Bomb. New York: Touchstone Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-81378-5. 
^ Groves, Leslie (1962). Now It Can Be Told: The Story of the Manhattan Project. New York: Da Capo. ISBN 0-306-80189-2. 
^ The mistaken name for the architecture is discussed in John W. Mauchly and the Development of the ENIAC Computer, part of the online ENIAC museum, in Robert Slater's computer history book, Portraits in Silicon, and in Nancy Stern's book From ENIAC to UNIVAC .
^ a b von Neumann, John (1966). "Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata." (Scanned book online). www.walenz.org. http://www.walenz.org/vonNeumann/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-18. 
^ Knuth, Donald (1998). The Art of Computer Programming: Volume 3 Sorting and Searching. Boston: Addison-Wesley. pp. 159. ISBN 0-201-89685-0. 
^ von Neumann, John (1951). "Various techniques used in connection with random digits". National Bureau of Standards Applied Math Series 12: 36. 
^ see MAA documentary, especially comments by Morgenstern regarding this aspect of von Neumann's personality
^ See, e.g., Macrae page 332 and Heims, pages 236 - 247.
^ See Macrae pp. 170 -171
^ "John von Neumann" (in English) (HTML). http://scidiv.bcc.ctc.edu/Math/vonNeumann.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-11. 
^ "Introducing the John von Neumann Computer Society". John von Neumann Computer Society. http://www.njszt.hu/neumann/neumann.head.page?nodeid=210. Retrieved on 2008-05-20. 
^ a b c "Mathematics Genealogy Project: John (Janos) Von Neumann". http://www.genealogy.ams.org/id.php?id=53213. Retrieved on 2008-02-23. 
^ While Israel Halperin's thesis advisor is often listed as Salomon Bochner, this may be because "Professors at the university direct doctoral theses but those at the Institute do not. Unaware of this, in 1934 I asked von Neumann if he would direct my doctoral thesis. He replied Yes." (Israel Halperin, "The Extraordinary Inspiration of John von Neumann", Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics, vol. 50 (1990), pp. 15-17).



[edit] References
This article was originally based on material from the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing, which is licensed under the GFDL.


Doran, Robert S.; John Von Neumann, Marshall Harvey Stone, Richard V. Kadison, American Mathematical Society (2004). Operator Algebras, Quantization, and Noncommutative Geometry: A Centennial Celebration Honoring John Von Neumann and Marshall H. Stone. American Mathematical Society Bookstore. ISBN 9780821834022. http://books.google.com/books?id=m5bSoD9XsfoC&pg=PA1. 
Heims, Steve J. (1980). John von Neumann and Norbert Wiener, from Mathematics to the Technologies of Life and Death. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. ISBN 0262081059. 
Herken, Gregg (2002). Brotherhood of the Bomb: The Tangled Lives and Loyalties of Robert Oppenheimer, Ernest Lawrence, and Edward Teller. 
Israel, Giorgio; Ana Millan Gasca (1995). The World as a Mathematical Game: John von Neumann, Twentieth Century Scientist. 
Macrae, Norman (1992). John von Neumann: The Scientific Genius Who Pioneered the Modern Computer, Game Theory, Nuclear Deterrence, and Much More. Pantheon Press. ISBN 0679413081. 
Slater, Robert (1989). Portraits in Silicon. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. pp. p.23–33. ISBN 0262691310. 



[edit] External links

O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "John von Neumann", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive 
von Neumann's contribution to economics — International Social Science Review
von Neumann biography — University of St. Andrews, Scotland
Von Neumann vs. Dirac — from Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Edward Teller talking about von Neumann on Peoples Archive.
A Discussion of Artificial Viscosity
John von Neumann Postdoctoral Fellowship - Sandia National Laboratories
Von Neumann's Universe, audio talk by George Dyson
John von Neumann's 100th Birthday, article by Stephen Wolfram on Neumann's 100th birthday.
John von Neumann at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
His biography at Hungary.hu
Bibliography of von Neumann's works
Annotated bibliography for John von Neumann from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues
Budapest Tech Polytechnical Institution - John von Neumann Faculty of Informatics
John Von Neumann Memorial at Find A Grave



Persondata


NAME
von Neumann, John


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Neumann János Lajos Margittai (Hungarian)


SHORT DESCRIPTION
Mathematician and polymath


DATE OF BIRTH
December 28, 1903(1903-12-28)


PLACE OF BIRTH
Budapest, Austria-Hungary


DATE OF DEATH
February 8, 1957


PLACE OF DEATH
Washington DC, United States





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_von_Neumann"
Categories: 1903 births | 1957 deaths | ETH Zurich alumni | Institute for Advanced Study faculty | Hungarian immigrants to the United States | People who emigrated to escape Nazism | Computer pioneers | Computer designers | Manhattan Project people | Game theorists | Calculating prodigies | Cellular automatists | Scientists in stochastics | Monte Carlo methods | 20th-century mathematicians | Austrian nobility | Hungarian nobility | Hungarian mathematicians | Hungarian physicists | Hungarian computer scientists | Hungarian-American Jews | American mathematicians | Converts to Roman Catholicism | Converts from Judaism to Roman Catholicism | Hungarian Roman Catholics | Jewish American scientists | Jewish inventors | Rossby Medalists | Presidential Medal for Merit recipients | Enrico Fermi Award recipients | Princeton University faculty | Cancer deaths in Washington, D.C. | Burials at Princeton CemeteryHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2008 | Wikipedia articles incorporating text from FOLDOC 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Asturianu
বাংলা
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Galego
文言
한국어
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kiswahili
Kreyòl ayisyen
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
മലയാളം
मराठी
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Piemontèis
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
Volapük
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 01:16.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
