













Rumi - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Rumi";
		var wgTitle = "Rumi";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "16433";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282148594;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Rumi

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the Persian poet and philosopher.  For other uses, see Rumi (disambiguation).

Rumi

Persian Muslim Philosopher
Medieval





Full name
Jalāl ad-Dīn Muḥammad Rumi


Born
1207


Died
17 December 1273


School/tradition
Sufi


Main interests
lyric poetry, music


Notable ideas
Persian poetry, Ney, Persian philosophy, Sufi philosophy, and Sufi dance




Influenced by
Attār, Sanā'ī, Abu Sa'īd Abulḫayr, Ḫaraqānī, Bayazīd Bistāmī, Šamse Tabrīzī






Influenced
Sir Mohammad Iqbāl, Tāhir ul-Qadrī, Kazi Nazrul Islam, Abdolkarim Soroush




Mawlānā Jalāl ad-Dīn Muḥammad Balkhī (مولانا جلال الدین محمد بلخى), also known as Jalāl ad-Dīn Muḥammad Rūmī (جلال‌الدین محمد رومی), but known to the English-speaking world simply as Rumi,[1] (30 September 1207 – 17 December 1273), was a 13th-century Persian[2][3] poet, Islamic jurist, theologian, and mystic.[4] Rūmī is a descriptive name meaning "the Roman" since he lived most of his life in an area called Rūm because it was once ruled by the Byzantine Empire.[5]
According to tradition, Rumi was born in Balkh, Bactria, in contemporary Afghanistan, which at that time was part of the Persian Empire, and was the hometown of his father's family. Scholars, however, believe that he was born in Wakhsh,[6] a small town located at the river Wakhsh in what is now Tajikistan. Wakhsh belonged to the larger province of Balkh, and in the year Rumi was born, his father was an appointed scholar there.[6] Both these cities were at the time included in the Greater Persian cultural sphere of Khorāsān, the easternmost province of historical Persia,[7] and were part of the Khwarezmian Empire.
His birthplace[8] and native language[9] both indicate a Persian heritage. Due to quarrels between different dynasties in Khorāsān, opposition to the Khwarizmid Shahs who were considered devious by Bahā ud-Dīn Walad (Rumi's father)[10] or fear of the impending Mongol cataclysm,[11] his father decided to migrate westwards. Rumi's family traveled west, first performing the Hajj and eventually settling in the Anatolian city Konya (capital of the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum, now located in Turkey). This was where he lived most of his life, and here he composed one of the crowning glories of Persian literature which profoundly affected the culture of the area.[12]
He lived most of his life under the Sultanate of Rum, where he produced his works[13] and died in 1273 CE. He was buried in Konya and his shrine became a place of pilgrimage.[14] Following his death, his followers and his son Sultan Walad founded the Mawlawīyah Sufi Order, also known as the Order of the Whirling Dervishes, famous for its Sufi dance known as the samāʿ ceremony.
Rumi's works are written in the New Persian language. A Persian literary renaissance (in the 8th/9th century) started in regions of Sistan, Khorāsān and Transoxiana[15]and by the 10th/11th century, it reinforced the Persian language as the preferred literary and cultural language in the Persian Islamic world. Although Rumi's works were written in Persian, Rumi's importance is considered to transcend national and ethnic borders. His original works are widely read in their original language across the Persian-speaking world. Translations of his works are very popular in other countries. His poetry has influenced Persian literature as well as the literature of the Urdu, Bengali, Arabic and Turkish languages. His poems have been widely translated into many of the world's languages and transposed into various formats; BBC News has described him as the "most popular poet in America".[16]




Contents


1 Life
2 Teachings
3 Major works

3.1 Poetic works
3.2 Prose works


4 Philosophical outlook

4.1 Rumi's universality


5 Legacy

5.1 Rumi and the Persian world
5.2 The Mawlawī Sufi Order
5.3 Rumi's religious denomination
5.4 Rumi and orthodox Islam
5.5 Eight hundredth anniversary celebrations


6 See also
7 Bibliography

7.1 English translations
7.2 Further reading

7.2.1 On Rumi's life and work
7.2.2 On Persian literature




8 References
9 External links

9.1 On-line texts and translations of Rumi
9.2 On Rumi
9.3 Criticism







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Life




Mawlānā's tomb. Konya,Turkey


Rumi was born in Khorāsān, possibly in or near the city of Balkh. His life is described in Shams ud-Din Ahmad Aflāki's Manāqib ul-Ārifīn (written between 1318 and 1353). Rumi's father was Bahā ud-Dīn Walad, a theologian, jurist and a mystic from Balkh, who was also known during his lifetime as Sultan al-Ulama or "Sultan of the Scholars". His mother was Mu'mina Khātūn.
When the Mongols invaded Central Asia sometime between 1215 and 1220, Baha ud-Din Walad, with his whole family and a group of disciples, set out westwards. On the road to Anatolia, Rumi encountered one of the most famous mystic Persian poets, 'Attar, in the Iranian city of Nishapur, located in the province of Khorāsān. 'Attar immediately recognized Rumi's spiritual eminence. He saw the father walking ahead of the son and said, "Here comes a sea followed by an ocean." He gave the boy his Asrārnāma, a book about the entanglement of the soul in the material world. This meeting had a deep impact on the eighteen-year-old Rumi, and later on became the inspiration for his works.
From Nishapur, Walad and his entourage set out for Baghdad, meeting many of the scholars and Sufis of the city.[17] From there they went to Baghdad, and Hejaz and performed the pilgrimage at Mecca. The migrating caravan then passed through Damascus, Malatya, Erzincan, Sivas, Kayseri and Nigde. They finally settled in Karaman for seven years; Rumi's mother and brother both died there. In 1225, Rumi married Gowhar Khatun in Karaman. They had two sons: Sultan Walad and Ala-eddin Chalabi. When his wife died, Rumi married again and had a son, Amir Alim Chalabi, and a daughter, Malakeh Khatun.
On 1 May 1228, most likely as a result of the insistent invitation of 'Alā' ud-Dīn Key-Qobād, ruler of Anatolia, Baha' ud-Din came and finally settled in Konya in Anatolia within the westernmost territories of the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm.
Baha' ud-Din became the head of a madrassa (religious school) and when he died, Rumi, aged twenty-five, inherited his position. One of Baha' ud-Din's students, Sayyed Burhan ud-Din Muhaqqiq Termazi, continued to train Rumi in the religious and mystical doctrines of Rumi's father. For nine years, Rumi practiced Sufism as a disciple of Burhan ud-Din until the latter died in 1240 or 1241. Rumi's public life then began: he became a teacher who preached in the mosques of Konya and taught his adherents in the madrassah.
During this period, Rumi also travelled to Damascus and is said to have spent four years there.
It was his meeting with the dervish Shams-e Tabrizi on 15 November 1244 that completely changed Rumi's life. Shams had traveled throughout the Middle East searching and praying for someone who could "endure my company". A voice said to him, "What will you give in return?" Shams replied, "My head!" The voice then said, "The one you seek is Jalal ud-Din of Konya." On the night of 5 December 1248, as Rumi and Shams were talking, Shams was called to the back door. He went out, never to be seen again. It is believed that Shams was murdered with the connivance of Rumi's son, 'Ala' ud-Din; if so, Shams indeed gave his head for the privilege of mystical friendship.




Rumi, on a Persian/Iranian stamp.


Rumi's love for, and his bereavement at the death of, Shams found their expression in an outpouring of music, dance, and lyric poems, Divan-e Shams-e Tabrizi. He himself went out searching for Shams and journeyed again to Damascus. There, he realized:


Why should I seek? I am the same as
He. His essence speaks through me.
I have been looking for myself![18]


For more than ten years after meeting Shams, Mawlana had been spontaneously composing ghazals (Persian poems), and these had been collected in the Divan-i Kabir or Diwan Shams Tabrizi. Rumi found another companion in Salaḥ ud-Din-e Zarkub, a goldsmith. After Salah ud-Din's death, Rumi's scribe and favorite student, Hussam-e Chalabi, assumed the role of Rumi's companion. One day, the two of them were wandering through the Meram vineyards outside Konya when Hussam described to Rumi an idea he had had: "If you were to write a book like the Ilāhīnāma of Sanai or the Mantiq ut-Tayr of 'Attar, it would become the companion of many troubadours. They would fill their hearts from your work and compose music to accompany it." Rumi smiled and took out a piece of paper on which were written the opening eighteen lines of his Masnavi, beginning with:


Listen to the reed and the tale it tells,
How it sings of separation...[19]


Hussam implored Rumi to write more. Rumi spent the next twelve years of his life in Anatolia dictating the six volumes of this masterwork, the Masnavi, to Hussam.
In December 1273, Rumi fell ill; he predicted his own death and composed the well-known ghazal, which begins with the verse:


How doest thou know what sort of king I have within me as companion?
Do not cast thy glance upon my golden face, for I have iron legs.[20]


Rumi died on 17 December 1273 in Konya; his body was interred beside that of his father, and a splendid shrine, the Yeşil Türbe (Green Tomb, قبه الخضراء), was erected over his place of burial. His epitaph reads:


When we are dead, seek not our tomb in the earth, but find it in the hearts of men. [21]



[edit] Teachings




A page of a copy circa 1503 of the Diwan-e Shams-e Tabriz-i


The general theme of Rumi's thought, like that of other mystic and Sufi poets of Persian literature, is essentially that of the concept of tawhīd – union with his beloved (the primal root) from which/whom he has been cut off and become aloof – and his longing and desire to restore it.
The Masnavi weaves fables, scenes from everyday life, Qur’anic revelations and exegesis, and metaphysics into a vast and intricate tapestry. Rumi is considered an example of Insan-e Kamil — Perfect Man, the perfected or completed human being. In the East, it is said of him that he was "not a prophet — but surely, he has brought a scripture".
Rumi believed passionately in the use of music, poetry, and dance as a path for reaching God. For Rumi, music helped devotees to focus their whole being on the divine, and to do this so intensely that the soul was both destroyed and resurrected. It was from these ideas that the practice of "whirling" dervishes developed into a ritual form. His teachings became the base for the order of the Mevlevi which his son Sultan Walad organized. Rumi encouraged samāʿ, listening to music and turning or doing the sacred dance. In the Mevlevi tradition, samāʿ represents a mystical journey of spiritual ascent through mind and love to the Perfect One. In this journey, the seeker symbolically turns towards the truth, grows through love, abandons the ego, finds the truth, and arrives at the Perfect. The seeker then returns from this spiritual journey, with greater maturity, to love and to be of service to the whole of creation without discrimination with regard to beliefs, races, classes, and nations.
According to Shahram Shiva, one reason for Rumi's popularity is that

Rumi is able to verbalize the highly personal and often confusing world of personal/spiritual growth and mysticism in a very forward and direct fashion. He does not offend anyone, and he includes everyone. The world of Rumi is neither exclusively the world of a Sufi, nor the world of a Hindu, nor a Jew, nor a Christian; it is the highest state of a human being — a fully evolved human. A complete human is not bound by cultural limitations; he touches every one of us. Today, Rumi's poems can be heard in churches, synagogues, Zen monasteries, as well as in the downtown New York art/performance/music scene.

According to Professor Majid M. Naini [2], Rumi's life and transformation provide true testimony and proof that people of all religions and backgrounds can live together in peace and harmony. Rumi’s visions, words, and life teach us how to reach inner peace and happiness so we can finally stop the continual stream of hostility and hatred and achieve true, global peace and harmony.
In other verses in the Masnavi, Rumi describes in detail the universal message of love:


Lover's nationality is separate from all other religions,
The lover's religion and nationality is the Beloved (God).




The lover’s cause is separate from all other causes
Love is the astrolabe of God's mysteries.[22]



[edit] Major works
Main articles: Diwan-e Shams-e Tabrizi and Masnavi
Rumi's poetry is often divided into various categories: the quatrains (rubayāt) and odes (ğazal) of the Divan, the six books of the Masnavi, The Discourses, The Letters, and the almost unknown Six Sermons.

[edit] Poetic works




Maṭnawīye Ma'nawī
Mevlâna museum, Konya, Turkey




Rumi's major work is the Maṭnawīye Ma'nawī (Spiritual Couplets; مثنوی معنوی), a six-volume poem regarded by some Sufis[23] as the Persian-language Qur'an. It is considered by many to be one of the greatest works of mystical poetry.


Rumi's other major work is the Dīwān-e Kabīr (Great Work) or Dīwān-e Shams-e Tabrīzī (The Works of Shams of Tabriz; دیوان شمس تبریزی named in honor of Rumi's great friend and inspiration, the dervish Shams) and comprising some forty thousand verses. Several reasons have been offered for Rumi's decision to name his masterpiece after Shams; some argue that since Rumi would not have been a poet without Shams, it is apt that the collection be named after him.


[edit] Prose works

Fihi Ma Fihi (In It What's in It, Persian: فیه ما فیه) provides a record of seventy-one talks and lectures given by Rumi on various occasions to his disciples. It was compiled from the notes of his various disciples, so Rumi did not author the work directly.[24] An English translation from the Persian was first published by A.J. Arberry as Discourses of Rumi(New York: Samuel Weiser, 1972), and a translation of the second book by Wheeler Thackston, Sign of the Unseen(Putney, VT: Threshold Books, 1994).


Majāles-e Sab'a (Seven Sessions, Persian: مجالس سبعه) contains seven Persian sermons (as the name implies) or lectures given in seven different assemblies. The sermons themselves give a commentary on the deeper meaning of Quran and Hadeeth. The sermons also include quotations from poems of Sana'i, 'Attar, and other poets, including Rumi himself. As Aflakī relates, after Shams-e Tabrīzī, Rumi gave sermons at the request of notables, especially Salāh al-Dīn Zarkūb.[25]


Makatib (The Letters, Persian: مکاتیب) is the book containing Rumi's letters in Persian to his disciples, family members, and men of state and of influence. The letters testify that Rumi kept very busy helping family members and administering a community of disciples that had grown up around them.


[edit] Philosophical outlook
Rumi was an evolutionary thinker in the sense that he believed that the spirit after devolution from the divine Ego undergoes an evolutionary process by which it comes nearer and nearer to the same divine Ego.[26] All matter in the universe obeys this law and this movement is due to an inbuilt urge (which Rumi calls "love") to evolve and seek enjoinment with the divinity from which it has emerged. Evolution into a human being from an animal is only one stage in this process. The doctrine of the Fall of Adam is reinterpreted as the devolution of the Ego from the universal ground of divinity and is a universal, cosmic phenomenon.[27] This synthesis of evolution and creationism is a culmination of the ideas of Plotinus and of previous Muslim philosophers like Al Farabi. The French philosopher Henri Bergson's idea of life being creative and evolutionary is similar, though unlike Bergson, Rumi believes that there is a specific goal to the process: the attainment of God. For Rumi, God is the ground as well as the goal of all existence.


“

I died as a mineral and became a plant,
I died as plant and rose to animal,
I died as animal and I was Man.
Why should I fear? When was I less by dying?
Yet once more I shall die as Man, to soar
With angels bless'd; but even from angelhood
I must pass on: all except God doth perish.
When I have sacrificed my angel-soul,
I shall become what no mind e'er conceived.
Oh, let me not exist! for Non-existence
Proclaims in organ tones,
To Him we shall return.

”


از جمادی مُردم و نامی شدم — وز نما مُردم بحیوان سرزدم
مُردم از حیوانی و آدم شدم — پس چه ترسم کی ز مردم کم شدم
حملهء دیگر بمیرم از بشر — تا برآرم از ملایک بال و پر
وز ملک هم بایدم جستن ز جو — کل شییء هالک الاوجهه
بار دیگر از ملک پران شوم — آنچه اندر وهم ناید آن شوم
پس عدم گردم عدم چو ارغنون — گویدم کانا الیه راجعون

[edit] Rumi's universality
It is often said that the teachings of Rumi are universal in nature.[28] For Rumi, religion was mostly a personal experience and not limited to logical arguments or perceptions of the senses.[29] Creative love, or the urge to rejoin the spirit to divinity, was the goal towards which every thing moves.[29] The dignity of life, in particular human life (which is conscious of its divine origin and goal), was important.[29]


I searched for God among the Christians and on the Cross and therein I found Him not.
I went into the ancient temples of idolatry; no trace of Him was there.
I entered the mountain cave of Hira and then went as far as Qandhar but God I found not.
With set purpose I fared to the summit of Mount Caucasus and found there only 'anqa's habitation.
Then I directed my search to the Kaaba, the resort of old and young; God was not there even.
Turning to philosophy I inquired about him from ibn Sina but found Him not within his range.
I fared then to the scene of the Prophet's experience of a great divine manifestation only a "two bow-lengths' distance from him" but God was not there even in that exalted court.
Finally, I looked into my own heart and there I saw Him; He was nowhere else.



[edit] Legacy

Rumi's universality


What can I do, Submitters to God? I do not know myself.
I am neither Christian nor Jew, neither Zoroastrian nor Muslim,
I am not from east or west, not from land or sea,
not from the shafts of nature nor from the spheres of the firmament,
not of the earth, not of water, not of air, not of fire.
I am not from the highest heaven, not from this world,
not from existence, not from being.
I am not from India, not from China, not from Bulgar, not from Saqsin,
not from the realm of the two Iraqs, not from the land of Khurasan
I am not from the world, not from beyond,
not from heaven and not from hell.
I am not from Adam, not from Eve, not from paradise and not from Ridwan.
My place is placeless, my trace is traceless,
no body, no soul, I am from the soul of souls.
I have chased out duality, lived the two worlds as one.
One I seek, one I know, one I see, one I call.
He is the first, he is the last, he is the outer, he is the inner.
Beyond "He" and "He is" I know no other.
I am drunk from the cup of love, the two worlds have escaped me.
I have no concern but carouse and rapture.
If one day in my life I spend a moment without you
from that hour and that time I would repent my life.
If one day I am given a moment in solitude with you
I will trample the two worlds underfoot and dance forever.
O Sun of Tabriz (Shams Tabrizi), I am so tipsy here in this world,
I have no tale to tell but tipsiness and rapture.



Rumi's importance transcends national and ethnic borders.[30][not in citation given] Readers of the Persian language in Iran, Afghanistan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan see him as one of their most significant classical poets and an influence on many poets through history.[31][not in citation given] Rumi has also had a great influence on Turkish literature through the centuries.[32]
Rumi's poetry forms the basis of much classical Iranian and Afghanistani music.[33] Contemporary classical interpretations of his poetry are made by Muhammad Reza Shajarian (Iran), Shahram Nazeri (Iran), Davood Azad (Iran) and Ustad Mohammad Hashem Cheshti (Afghanistan). To many modern Westerners, his teachings are one of the best introductions to the philosophy and practice of Sufism. Pakistan's National Poet, Muhammad Iqbal, was also inspired by Rumi's works and considered him to be his spiritual leader, addressing him as "Pir Rumi" in his poems (the honorific Pir literally means "old man", but in the sufi/mystic context it means founder, master, or guide).[34]
Rumi's work has been translated into many of the world's languages, including Russian, German, Urdu, Turkish, Arabic, French, Italian, and Spanish, and is being presented in a growing number of formats, including concerts, workshops, readings, dance performances, and other artistic creations. The English interpretations of Rumi's poetry by Coleman Barks have sold more than half a million copies worldwide,[35] and Rumi is one of the most widely read poets in the United States.[36]
Recordings of Rumi poems have made it to Billboard's Top 20 list. A selection of Deepak Chopra's editing of the translations by Fereydoun Kia of Rumi's love poems has been performed by Hollywood personalities such as Madonna, Goldie Hawn, Philip Glass and Demi Moore. Shahram Shiva's CD, Rumi: Lovedrunk, has been very popular in the Internet's music communities, such as MySpace.com.

[edit] Rumi and the Persian world

پارسی گو گرچه تازی خوشتر است — عشق را خود صد زبان دیگر است


Say all in Persian even if Arabic is better – Love will find its way through all languages on its own.

Rumi's poetry reflects the richness of Iranian culture and represents the literary environment of Khorasan, the medieval center of the Persian world.
These cultural, historical and linguistic ties between Rumi and the Iranian world have made Rumi an iconic Persian and Iranian poet. Rumi's poetry is displayed on the walls of many cities across the Persian-speaking world, sung in Persian music, and read in school books. Persian speakers literally live Rumi's poetry.

[edit] The Mawlawī Sufi Order
Main articles: Mevlevi and Sema
The Mawlawī Sufi order (Mawlawīyah or Mevlevi, as it is known in Turkey) was founded in 1273 by Rumi's followers after his death.[37] His first successor in the rectorship of the order was Husam Chalabi himself , after whose death in 1284 Rumi's younger and only surviving son, Sultan Walad (died 1312), favorably known as author of the mystical Maṭnawī Rabābnāma, or the Book of the Rabab, was installed as grand master of the order.[38] The leadership of the order has been kept within Rumi's family in Konya uninterruptedly since then.[39]




Rumi's tomb in Konya, Turkey


The Mawlawī Sufis, also known as Whirling Dervishes, believe in performing their dhikr in the form of samāʿ. During the time of Rumi (as attested in the Manāqib ul-Ārefīn of Aflākī), his followers gathered for musical and "turning" practices.
Rumi was himself a notable musician who played the robāb, although his favorite instrument was the ney or reed flute.[40] The music accompanying the samāʿ consists of settings of poems from the Maṭnawī and Dīwān-e Kabīr, or of Sultan Walad's poems.[40] The Mawlawīyah was a well-established Sufi order in the Ottoman Empire, and many of the members of the order served in various official positions of the Caliphate. The center for the Mawlawiyyah was in Konya. There is also a Mawlawī monastery (درگاه, dargāh) in Istanbul near the Galata Tower in which the samāʿ is performed and accessible to the public. The Mawlawī order issues an invitation to people of all backgrounds:


“
Come, come, whoever you are,
Wanderer, idolater, worshiper of fire,
Come even though you have broken your vows a thousand times,
Come, and come yet again.
Ours is not a caravan of despair.[41]

”





During Ottoman times, the Mawlawīyah produced a number of notable poets and musicians, including Sheikh Ghalib, Ismail Rusuhi Dede of Ankara, Esrar Dede, Halet Efendi, and Gavsi Dede, who are all buried at the Galata Mawlawī Khāna (Turkish: Mevlevi-Hane) in Istanbul.[42] Music, especially that of the ney, plays an important part in the Mawlawiyyah, and thus much of the traditional, oriental music that Westerners associate with Turkey originates from the Mawlawī order.
With the foundation of the modern, secular Republic of Turkey, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk removed religion from the sphere of public policy and restricted it exclusively to that of personal morals, behavior, and faith. On 13 December 1925, a law was passed closing all the tekkes (or tekeyh) (dervish lodges) and zāwiyas (chief dervish lodges), and also the centers of veneration to which pilgrimages (ziyārat) were made. Istanbul alone had more than 250 tekkes as well as small centers for gatherings of various fraternities; this law dissolved the Sufi Orders, prohibited the use of mystical names, titles and costumes pertaining to their titles, impounded the Orders' assets, and banned their ceremonies and meetings. The law also provided penalties for those who tried to re-establish the Orders. Two years later, in 1927, the Mausoleum of Mevlana in Konya was allowed to reopen as a Museum.[43]
In the 1950s, the Turkish government began allowing the Whirling Dervishes to perform once a year in Konya. The Mawlānā festival is held over two weeks in December; its culmination is on 17 December, the Urs of Mawlānā (anniversary of Rumi's death), called Šabe Arūs (شب عروس) (Persian meaning "nuptial night"), the night of Rumi's union with God.[44] In 1974, the Whirling Dervishes were permitted to travel to the West for the first time.

[edit] Rumi's religious denomination
According to Edward G. Browne, the three most prominent mystical Persian poets Rumi, Sana'i and Attar were all Sunni muslims and their poetry abound with praise for the first two caliphs Abu Bakr and Umar ibn al-Khattāb[45]. According to Annemarie Schimmel, the tendency among Shia authors to include leading mystical poets such as Rumi and Attar among their own ranks, became stronger after the introduction of Twelver Shia as the state religion in the Safavid Empire in 1501[46].

[edit] Rumi and orthodox Islam
The idea that Rumi cared little for orthodox Islam has been put forward in translations of poems sometimes attributed to him but which are not the work of Rumi. Some writers have even claimed or suggested that Rumi was not really a Muslim, because they believe that the line


na tarsā na yahūdam man na gabram na musalmānam
نه ترسا، نه یهودم من، نه گبرم نه مسلمانم
(not a Christian, nor a Jew I am, not a Zoroastrian, nor a Muslim.)


expresses Rumi's true attitude toward Islam. However, the poem in which that line occurs is not in the earliest manuscripts, and probably is not a genuine Rumi poem.[citation needed] R.A. Nicholson first published a translation of this line in 1898, but he admitted that, "[t]he original text does not occur in any of the editions or MSS used by me" (p. 281). Furthermore, this should not be interpreted literally, since this is just another form of a central theme in all Rumi's poetry: the enlightened being who has transcended religions into the complete man.
Rumi's actual approach to Islam is clarified by his quatrain:


Man banda-ye qur'ānam, agar jān dāram
man khāk-e rah-e muhammad-e mukhtāram
gar naql konad joz īn kas az goftāram
bēzāram azō waz-īn sokhan bēzāram.


,


I am the servant of the Qur'an as long as I have life.
I am the dust on the path of Muhammad, the Chosen One.
If anyone quotes anything except this from my sayings,
I am quit of him and outraged by these words.[47]


Seyyed Hossein Nasr states:

One of the greatest living authorities on Rûmî in Persia today, Hâdî Hâ'irî, has shown in an unpublished work that some 6,000 verses of the Dîwân and the Mathnawî are practically direct translations of Qur'ânic verses into Persian poetry.[48]

Rumi states in his Dīwān:

The Sufi is hanging on to Muhammad, like Abu Bakr.[49]


Make your intellect a sacrifice in the presence of Muhammad, and say, "God is sufficient for me, since God is enough for satisfying me.[50]


[edit] Eight hundredth anniversary celebrations
Mawlana Jalal-ud-Dine Balkhi-Rumi is one of the greatest spiritual masters and mystic poets of Islamic civilization. In Afghanistan, he is known as "Mawlana", in Iran as "Mawlawi", and in Turkey, "Mevlana".




A postage stamp honoring Rumi


At the proposal of the Permanent Delegations of Afghanistan, Egypt, and Turkey, and as approved by its Executive Board and General Conference in conformity with its mission of “constructing in the minds of men the defences of peace”, UNESCO was associated with the celebration, in 2007, of the eight hundredth anniversary of Rumi's birth.[51] The commemoration at UNESCO itself took place on 6 September 2007;[52] UNESCO issued a medal in Rumi's name in the hope that it would prove an encouragement to those who are engaged in research on and dissemination of Rumi's ideas and ideals, which would, in turn, enhance the diffusion of the ideals of UNESCO.[53][54]
The Afghan Ministry of Culture and Youth established a national committee which organized an international seminar to celebrate the birth and life of the great ethical philosopher and world-renowned poet. This grand gathering of the intellectuals, diplomats, and followers of Maulana was held in Kabul and in Balkh.[55]
On 30 September 2007, Iranian school bells were rung throughout the country in honor of Mowlana.[56] Also in that year, Iran held a Rumi Week from 26 October to 2 November. An international ceremony and conference were held in Tehran; the event was opened by the Iranian president and the chairman of the Iranian parliament. Scholars from twenty-nine countries attended the events, and 450 articles were presented at the conference.[57] Iranian musician Shahram Nazeri was awarded the Légion d'honneur and Iran's House of Music Award in 2007 for his renowned works on Rumi masterpieces.[58] 2006 was declared as the "International Mozart Year" by UNESCO.[59].[60]
Also on 30 September 2007, Turkey celebrated Rumi’s eight-hundredth birthday with a giant Whirling Dervish ritual performance of the samāʿ, which was televised using forty-eight cameras and broadcast live in eight countries. Ertugrul Gunay, of the Ministry of Culture and Tourism of Turkey, stated, "Three hundred dervishes are scheduled to take part in this ritual, making it the largest performance of sama in history."[61]

[edit] See also




Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm


Seljuk Dynastic Empire


On Persian culture


Persian people
Tajiks
List of Persian poets and authors
Persian literature
Persian philosophy
Persian Mysticism
Mastan Ensemble


Spiritual Islam


Sufism
Nimatullahi


Other


Sant Mat
Mercan Dede
Blind men and an elephant
Monsters of Grace




Rumi experts


Badiozzaman Forouzanfar
Abdolhossein Zarinkoob
William Chittick
Shahram Shiva
Majid M. Naini
Abdolkarim Soroush
Hossein Elahi Ghomshei
Annemarie Schimmel
Seyyed Hossein Nasr
Dariush Shayegan
François Pétis de la Croix
Jalal Homaei
Rahim Arbab




English translators of Rumi poetry


Coleman Barks
Ravan A. G. Farhadi
William Chittick
Majid M. Naini
Shahram Shiva
James W. Redhouse
Reynold A. Nicholson
Nader Khalili





[edit] Bibliography

[edit] English translations

"MA-AARIF-E-MATHNAVI A commentary of the Mathnavi of Maulana Jalaluddin Rumi (R.A.)", by Hazrat Maulana Hakim Muhammad Akhtar Saheb (D.B.), 1997. [62]
The Sufi Path of Love: The Spiritual Teachings of Rumi, by William Chittick, Albany: SUNY Press, 1983.
The Mysteries of the Universe and Rumi's Discoveries on the Majestic Path of Love, by Majid M. Naini, Universal Vision & Research, 2002 ISBN 0-9714600-0-0 www.naini.net
The Mesnevi of Mevlānā Jelālu'd-dīn er-Rūmī. Book first, together with some account of the life and acts of the Author, of his ancestors, and of his descendants, illustrated by a selection of characteristic anecdotes, as collected by their historian, Mevlānā Shemsu'd-dīn Ahmed el-Eflākī el-'Arifī, translated and the poetry versified by James W. Redhouse, London: 1881. Contains the translation of the first book only.
Masnaví-i Ma'naví, the Spiritual Couplets of Mauláná Jalálu'd-din Muhammad Rúmí, translated and abridged by E. H. Whinfield, London: 1887; 1989. Abridged version from the complete poem. On-line editions at sacred-texts.com and on wikisource.
The Masnavī by Jalālu'd-din Rūmī. Book II, translated for the first time from the Persian into prose, with a Commentary, by C.E. Wilson, London: 1910.
The Mathnawí of Jalálu'ddín Rúmí, edited from the oldest manuscripts available, with critical notes, translation and commentary by Reynold A. Nicholson, in 8 volumes, London: Messrs Luzac & Co., 1925–1940. Contains the text in Persian. First complete English translation of the Mathnawí.
Rending The Veil: Literal and Poetic Translations of Rumi, translated by Shahram Shiva Hohm Press, 1995 ISBN 0-934252-46-7. Recipient of Benjamin Franklin Award.
Hush, Don't Say Anything to God: Passionate Poems of Rumi, translated by Shahram Shiva Jain Publishing, 1999 ISBN 0-87573-084-1.
The Essence Of Rumi's Masnevi (Including His Life and Works), from Prof. Dr. Erkan TÜRKMEN
The Essential Rumi, translated by Coleman Barks with John Moyne, A. J. Arberry, Reynold Nicholson, San Francisco: Harper Collins, 1996 ISBN 0-06-250959-4; Edison (NJ) and New York: Castle Books, 1997 ISBN 0-7858-0871-X. Selections.
The Illuminated Rumi, translated by Coleman Barks, Michael Green contributor, New York: Broadway Books, 1997 ISBN 0-7679-0002-2.
The Masnavi: Book One, translated by Jawid Mojaddedi, Oxford World's Classics Series, Oxford University Press, 2004 ISBN 0-19-280438-3. Translated for the first time from the Persian edition prepared by Mohammad Estelami with an introduction and explanatory notes. Awarded the 2004 Lois Roth Prize for excellence in translation of Persian literature by the American Institute of Iranian Studies.
Divani Shamsi Tabriz, translated by Nevit Oguz Ergin as Divan-i-kebir, published by Echo Publications, 2003 ISBN 188799128X.
The rubais of Rumi: insane with love, translations and commentary by Nevit Oguz Ergin and Will Johnson, Inner Traditions, Rochester, Vermont, 2007, ISBN 978-1-59477-183-5.
The Masnavi: Book Two, translated by Jawid Mojaddedi, Oxford World's Classics Series, Oxford University Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-19-921259-0. The first ever verse translation of the unabridged text of Book Two, with an introduction and explanatory notes.
The quatrains of Rumi: Complete translation with Persian text, Islamic mystical commentary, manual of terms, and concordance, translated by Ibrahim W. Gamard and A. G. Rawan Farhadi, 2008.


[edit] Further reading

[edit] On Rumi's life and work

Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Islamic Art and Spirituality, Albany: SUNY Press, 1987, chapters 7 and 8.
William Chittick, The Sufi Doctrine of Rumi: Illustrated Edition, Bloomington: World Wisdom, 2005.
Annemarie Schimmel, The Triumphal Sun: A Study of the Works of Jalaloddin Rumi, Albany: SUNY Press, 1993.
Majid M. Naini, The Mysteries of the Universe and Rumi's Discoveries on the Majestic Path of Love, Universal Vision & Research, 2002, ISBN 0-9714600-0-0
Franklin Lewis, Rumi Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2000. ISBN 1-85168-214-7
Leslie Wines, Rumi: A Spiritual Biography, New York: Crossroads, 2001 ISBN 0-8245-2352-0.
Rumi's Thoughts, edited by Seyed G Safavi, London: London Academy of Iranian Studies, 2003.
Şefik Can, Fundamentals of Rumi's Thought: A Mevlevi Sufi Perspective, Sommerset (NJ): The Light Inc., 2004 ISBN 1-932099-79-4.


[edit] On Persian literature

E.G. Browne, History of Persia, four volumes, 1998 ISBN 0-7007-0406-X. 2,256 pages, and twenty-five years in the writing.
Jan Rypka, History of Iranian Literature, Reidel Publishing Company; 1968 OCLC 460598. ISBN 90-277-0143-1


[edit] References


^ NOTE: Transliteration of the Arabic alphabet into English varies. One common transliteration is Mowlana Jalaluddin Rumi; the usual brief reference to him is simply Rumi or Balkhi. His given name, Jalāl ad-Dīn Muhammad, literally means "Majesty of Religion"
^ C.E. Bosworth/B.G. Fragner, "Tādjīk", in Encyclopaedia of Islam, Online Edition: "... In Islamic usage, eventually came to designate the Persians, as opposed to Turks [...] the oldest citation for it which Schaeder could find was in verses of Djalāl al-Dīn Rūmī ..."
^ B. Ghafurov, "Todjikon", 2 vols., Dushanbe 1983-5
^ "Islamica Magazine: Mawlana Rumi and Islamic Spirituality". http://www.islamicamagazine.com/issue-13/mawlana-jalal-al-din-rumi-and-islamic-spirituality.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-10. 
^ Schwartz, Stephen (May 14, 2007) "The Balkin Front." Weekly Standard.
^ a b Annemarie Schimmel, "I Am Wind, You Are Fire," p. 11. She refers to a 1989 article by the German scholar, Fritz Meier:


Tajiks and Persian admirers still prefer to call Jalaluddin 'Balkhi' because his family lived in Balkh before migrating westward. However, their home was not in the actual city of Balkh, since the mid-eighth century a center of Muslim culture in (Greater) Khorasan. Rather, as the Swiss scholar Fritz Meier has shown, it was in the small town of Wakhsh north of the Oxus that Baha'uddin Walad, Jalaluddin's father, lived and worked as a jurist and preacher with mystical inclinations. Franklin Lewis, Rumi – Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teachings, and Poetry of Jalâl al-Din Rumi, 2000, pp. 47–49.


Professor Lewis has devoted two pages of his book to the topic of Wakhsh, which he states has been identified with the medieval town of Lêwkand (or Lâvakand) or Sangtude, which is about 65 kilometers southeast of Dushanbe, the capital of present-day Tajikistan. He says it is on the east bank of the Vakhshâb river, a major tributary that joins the Amu Daryâ river (also called Jayhun, and named the Oxus by the Greeks). He further states: "Bahâ al-Din may have been born in Balkh, but at least between June 1204 and 1210 (Shavvâl 600 and 607), during which time Rumi was born, Bahâ al-Din resided in a house in Vaksh (Bah 2:143 [= Bahâ' uddîn Walad's] book, "Ma`ârif."). Vakhsh, rather than Balkh, was the permanent base of Bahâ al-Din and his family until Rumi was around five years old (mei 16-35) [= from a book in German by the scholar Fritz Meier--note inserted here]. At that time, in about the year 1212 (A.H. 608–609), the Valads moved to Samarqand (Fih 333; Mei 29–30, 36) [= reference to Rumi's "Discourses" and to Fritz Meier's book--note inserted here], leaving behind Baâ al-Din's mother, who must have been at least seventy-five years old."
^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2000.


How is it that a Persian boy born almost eight hundred years ago in Khorasan, the northeastern province of greater Iran, in a region that we identify today as Central Asia, but was considered in those days as part of the greater Persian cultural sphere, wound up in Central Anatolia on the receding edge of the Byzantine cultural sphere, in which is now Turkey, some 1500 miles to the west? (p. 9)



^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2000.


How is it that a Persian boy born almost eight hundred years ago in Khorāsān, the northeastern province of greater Iran, in a region that we identify today as Central Asia, but was considered in those days as part of the greater Persian cultural sphere, wound up in Central Anatolia on the receding edge of the Byzantine cultural sphere, in which is now Turkey, some 1500 miles to the west?



^ Annemarie Schimmel, The Triumphal Sun: A Study of the Works of Jalaloddin Rumi, SUNY Press, 1993, p. 193: "Rumi's mother tongue was Persian, but he had learned during his stay in Konya, enough Turkish and Greek to use it, now and then, in his verse"
^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2000. Chap1
^ Encyclopedia Iranica, "Baha Al-Din Mohammad Walad" [1], H. Algar.
^ C.E. Bosworth, "Turkish Expansion towards the west" in UNESCO HISTORY OF HUMANITY, Volume IV, titled "From the Seventh to the Sixteenth Century", UNESCO Publishing / Routledge, p. 391: "While the Arabic language retained its primacy in such spheres as law, theology and science, the culture of the Seljuk court and secular literature within the sultanate became largely Persianized; this is seen in the early adoption of Persian epic names by the Seljuq Rulers (Qubad, Kay Khusraw and so on) and in the use of Persian as a literary language (Turkish must have been essentially a vehicle for every days speech at this time). The process of Persianization accelerated in the thirteenth century with the presence in Konya of two of the most distinguished refugees fleeing before the Mongols, Baha al-din Walad and his son Mawlana Jalal al-din Rumi, whose Mathnawi, composed in Konya, constitutes one of the crowning glories of classical Persian literature."
^ Barks, Coleman, Rumi: The Book of Love: Poems of Ecstasy and Longing, HarperCollins, 2005, p. xxv, ISBN 0-06-075050-2
^ Note: Rumi's shrine is now known as the Mevlana Museum in Turkey
^ Lazard, Gilbert "The Rise of the New Persian Language", in Frye, R. N., The Cambridge History of Iran, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995, Vol. 4, pp. 595–632. (Lapidus, Ira, 2002, A Brief History of Islamic Societies, "Under Arab rule, Arabic became the principal language for administration and religion. The substitution of Arabic for Middle Persian was facilitated by the translation of Persian classics into Arabic. Arabic became the main vehicle of Persian high culture, and remained such will into the eleventh century. Parsi declined and was kept alive mainly by the Zoroastrian priesthood in western Iran. The Arab conquests however, helped make Persian rather than Arabic the most common spoken language in Khurasan and the lands beyond the Oxus River. Paradoxically, Arab and Islamic domination created a Persian cultural region in areas never before unified by Persian speech. A new Persian evolved out of this complex linguistic situation. In the ninth century the Tahirid governors of Khurasan began to have the old Persian language written in Arabic script rather than in pahlavi characters. At the same time, eastern lords in the small principalities began to patronize a local court poetry in an elevated form of Persian. The new poetry was inspired by Arabic verse forms, so that Iranian patrons who did not understand Arabic could comprehend and enjoy the presentation of an elevated and dignified poetry in the manner of Baghdad. This new poetry flourished in regions where the influence of Abbasid Arabic culture was attenuated and where it had no competition from the surviving tradition of Middle Persian literary classics cultivated for religious purposes as in Western Iran." "In the western regions, including Iraq, Syria and Egypt, and the lands of the far Islamic west including North Africa and Spain, Arabic became the predominant language of both high literary culture and spoken discourse." pp. 125–132, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.)
^ Charles Haviland (2007-09-30). "The roar of Rumi - 800 years on". BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/south_asia/7016090.stm. Retrieved on 2007-09-30. 
^ Ahmed, Nazeer, Islam in Global History: From the Death of Prophet Muhammed to the First World War, p.58, Xlibris Corporation (2000), ISBN 0-7388-5962-1
^ The Essential Rumi. Translations by Coleman Barks, p. xx.
^ Helminski, Camille. "Introduction to Rumi: Daylight". http://www.sufism.org/books/dayex.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-06. 
^ Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (1987). Islamic Art and Spirituality. SUNY Press. pp. 120. ISBN 0887061745. http://books.google.com/books?id=EBu6gWcT0DsC&pg=PA120&ots=r7WC3HRDUt&sig=dK7cXLr2Wj7pxYqSLnMZGS0XgII. 
^ Mevlana Jalal al-din Rumi
^ Naini, Majid. The Mysteries of the Universe and Rumi's Discoveries on the Majestic Path of Love. 
^ Abdul Rahman Jami notes:


من چه گویم وصف آن عالی‌جناب — نیست پیغمبر ولی دارد کتاب
مثنوی معنوی مولوی — هست قرآن در زبان پهلوی




What can I say in praise of that great one?
He is not a Prophet but has come with a book;
The Spiritual Masnavi of Mowlavi
Is the Qur'an in the language of Pahlavi (Persian).


(Khawaja Abdul Hamid Irfani, "The Sayings of Rumi and Iqbal", Bazm-e-Rumi, 1976.)

^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West – The Life, Teachings, and Poetry of Jalal al-Din Rumi, Oneworld Publications, 2000, Chapter 7.
^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West – The Life, Teachings, and Poetry of Jalal al-Din Rumi, Oneworld Publications, 2000.
^ M.M. Sharif, A History of Muslim Philosophy, Vol II, p. 827.
^ M.M. Sharif, A History of Muslim Philosophy, Vol II, p. 828.
^ Various Scholars such as Khalifah Abdul Hakim (Jalal al-Din Rumi), Afzal Iqbal (The Life and Thought of Rumi), and others have expressed this opinion; for a direct secondary source, see citation below.
^ a b c Khalifah Abdul Hakim, "Jalal al-Din Rumi" in M.M. Sharif, ed., A History of Muslim Philosophy, Vol II.
^ Rumi Yoga
^ Life of Rumi
^ "Rumi". BBC World Service. http://www.bbc.co.uk/worldservice/learningenglish/movingwords/quotefeature/rumi.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-05-18. 
^ fUSION Anomaly. Whirling Dervish
^ Said, Farida. "REVIEWS: The Rumi craze". http://www.dawn.com/weekly/books/archive/050508/books18.htm. Retrieved on 2007-05-19. 
^ The Diploma of Honorary Doctorate of the University of Tehran in the field of Persian Language and Literature will be granted to Professor Coleman Barks
^ Curiel,J onathan, San Francisco Chronicle Staff Writer, Islamic verses: The influence of Muslim literature in the United States has grown stronger since the Sept. 11 attacks (February 6, 2005), Available online (Retrieved Aug 2006)
^ Sufism
^ ISCA - The Islamic Supreme Council of America
^ "Mevlana Celaleddin Rumi". http://www.mevlana.net/celebi.htm. Retrieved on 2007-05-19. 
^ a b About the Mevlevi Order of America
^ Hanut, Eryk (2000). Rumi: The Card and Book Pack : Meditation, Inspiration, Self-discovery. The Rumi Card Book. Tuttle Publishing. xiii. ISBN 1885203950. http://www.google.ca/books?id=Q42DV0Fk96MC&pg=PR13&ots=gR49x6YysU&dq=rumi+come+come+whoever+you+are&sig=R9ohIyuY431C_8p-22yDshe9STk. 
^ Web Page Under Construction
^ Mango, Andrew, Atatürk: The Biography of the Founder of Modern Turkey, (2002), ISBN 1585670111.
^ Kloosterman Genealogy, Jalal al-Din Muhammad Rumi
^ Edward G. Browne, A Literary History of Persia from the Earliest Times Until Firdawsh, 543 pp., Adamant Media Corporation, 2002, ISBN 1402160453, 9781402160455 (see p.437)
^ Annemarie Schimmel, Deciphering the Signs of God, 302 pp., SUNY Press, 1994, ISBN 0791419827, 9780791419823 (see p.210)
^ Quatrain No. 1173, translated by Ibrahim Gamard and Ravan Farhadi in "The Quatrains of Rumi", an unpublished manuscript
^ Seyyed Hossein Nasr, "Rumi and the Sufi Tradition," in Chelkowski (ed.), The Scholar and the Saint, p. 183
^ Quoted in Ibrahim Gamard, Rumi and Islam: Selections from His Stories, Poems, and Discourses — Annotated and Explained, p. 171.
^ Ibid., p. 177.
^ Today'S Zaman
^ 800th Anniversary of the Birth of Mawlana Jalal-ud-Din Balkhi-Rumi
^ UNESCO. Executive Board; 175th; UNESCO Medal in honour of Mawlana Jalal-ud-Din Balkhi-Rumi; 2006
^ http://www.iran-daily.com/1385/2690/pdf/i12.pdf
^ Ministry of Foreign Affairs Afghanistan - Rumi's 800 Anniversary
^ همشهری آنلاین
^ Int'l congress on Molana opens in Tehran
^ Iran Daily - Arts & Culture - 10/03/06
^ CHN | News
^ Podcast Interview with Coleman Barks on Rumi
^ tehrantimes.com, 300 dervishes whirl for Rumi in Turkey
^ "MA-AARIF-E-MATHNAVI A commentary of the Mathnavi of Maulana Jalaluddin Rumi (R.A.)", by Hazrat Maulana Hakim Muhammad Akhtar Saheb". http://yunuspatel.co.za/books-Ma-aarif-E-Mathnavi.php. 



[edit] External links

Find more about Jalal al-Din Muhammad Rumi on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity




Sufism portal




Rumi Under the Weather
Speaking of Faith: The Ecstatic Faith of Rumi, with Krista Tippet, American Public Media, December 13, 2007:
— Pragram's Main Page
— Program Particulars
— Listen Now (RealAudio, 53 min)
— Download (mp3, 53 min)
— Video Performance: The Musicality of Rumi
A mystic chant from Rumi's Masnavi sung by Shusha Guppy in the 1970s: Masnavi.
BBC News.


[edit] On-line texts and translations of Rumi

"MA-AARIF-E-MATHNAVI A commentary of the Mathnavi of Maulana Jalaluddin Rumi (R.A.)", by Hazrat Maulana Hakim Muhammad Akhtar Saheb (D.B.), 1997.
Four new translations of Rumi poems by Coleman Barks
Rumi poetry set to beautiful Persian Music on Mp3 and CD
The Masnavi I Ma'navi, by Maulana Jalalu-'d-din Muhammad Rumi, Abridged and Translated by E.H. Whinfield on sacred-texts.com
Dar al Masnavi, several English versions of selections by different translators.
(Rumi.net) Rumi's little-known biography and poems (Quatrains and Odes) in English by Shahram Shiva
[3]
[4]
Quatrains at Iranian.com


[edit] On Rumi

The Rubaiyat of Rumi Lecture of Khosro Naghed.
Rumi, Poet of Love and Justice, CHN News
Jalaluddin Rumi
About Rumi, English translations and personal/rare biography
Several Rumi Poems (Quatrains and Odes) in English
Iranian studies site
The Threshold Society and Mevlevi Order
The Mevlevi Order of America. [This organization and the one above are unaffiliated with each other]
Official website of the Family of Jalal al-Din Muhammad Rumi
Mevlana
Mawlana Jalal al-Din Rumi- Mevlevi webpage
RumiOnFire.com - A Tribute to Rumi
Rumi, Jalal al-Din, a biography by Professor Iraj Bashiri, University of Minnesota.
What goes round... - The Guardian, November 5, 2000
Rumi Lectures at Harvard University
Rumi and the Tradition of Sufi Poetry
Rumi and Islamic Spirituality
Rumi and Self Discovery
Mewlana Jelal Ad-Din Rumi
Treasures of Persian Literature, by Professor Behrouz Homayoun Far
Sadeq Dehqan. UNESCO designates 2007 "Year of Molana", Iran Daily, April 8, 2006.
Ashkhabad to host Molana conference
Guernica Magazine (guernicamag.com) on the 800th anniversary of Rumi's birth
Can Rumi Save Us Now?


[edit] Criticism

Is Rumi what we think he is?, by Massoume Price








v • d • e

Scholars of Khorasan (Sogdiana, Bactria, and Khwarezmia)






Avicenna  · Biruni  · Farabi  · Rumi  · Ghazali













v • d • e

Persian literature










 
Old






Behistun Inscription · Old Persian inscriptions














 
Middle






Ayadgar-i Zariran · Dēnkard · Book of Jamasp · Book of Arda Viraf · Karnamak-i Artaxshir-i Papakan · Cube of Zoroaster · Shapuregan of Mani · Bundahishn · Greater Bundahishn · Menog-i Khrad · Jamasp Namag  · Pazand  · Counsels of Adarbad Mahraspandan · Dadestan-i Denig  · Zadspram  · Zand-i Vohuman Yasht  · Drakht-i Asurig














 
Classical










900s–1000s


Rūdakī · Daqīqī · Ferdowsī (Šahnāma) · Abu Shakur Balkhi · Bal'ami · Rabia Balkhi · Abusaeid Abolkheir (967–1049) · Avicenna (980–1037) · Unsuri · Asjadi · Kisai Marvazi · Ayyuqi







1000s–1100s


Bābā Tāher · Nasir Khusraw (1004–1088) · Al-Ghazali (1058–1111) · Khwaja Abdullah Ansari (1006–1088) · Asadi Tusi · Qatran Tabrizi (1009–1072) · Nizam al-Mulk (1018–1092) · Masud Sa'd Salman (1046–1121) · Moezi Neyshapuri · Omar Khayyām (1048–1131) · Fakhruddin As'ad Gurgani · Hujwiri · Manuchehri · Ayn-al-Quzat Hamadani (1098–1131) · Uthman Mukhtari · Abu-al-Faraj Runi · Sanai · Mu'izzi · Mahsati Ganjavi







1100s–1200s


Hakim Iranshah · Suzani Samarqandi · Ashraf Ghaznavi · Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi (1155–1191) · Adib Sabir · Am'aq · Attār (1142–c.1220) · Khaghani (1120–1190) · Anvari (1126–1189) · Faramarz-e Khodadad · Nizāmī Ganjavi (1141–1209) · Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (1149–1209) · Shams Tabrizi (d.1248)







1200s–1300s


Abu Tahir Tartusi · Najm al-din Razi · Awhadi Maraghai · Shams al-Din Qays Razi · Baha al-din Walad · Nasīr al-Dīn al-Tūsī · Baba Afdal al-Din Kashani · Fakhr al-din Araqi · Mahmud Shabistari (1288–1320s) · Abu'l Majd Tabrizi · Amīr Khosrow (1253–1325) · Sa'adī (Būstān / Golestān) · Bahram-e-Pazhdo · Zartosht Bahram e Pazhdo · Rumi · Homam Tabrizi (1238–1314) · Khwaju Kermani · Sultan Walad







1300s–1400s


Ibn Yamin · Shah Ni'matullah Wali · Hāfez (Dīvān) · Abu Ali Qalandar · Fazlallah Astarabadi · Nasimi · Emad al-Din Faqih Kemani







1400s–1500s


Ubayd Zakani · Salman Sawaji · Jāmī · Kamal Khujandi · Ahli Shirzi (1454–1535) · Fuzûlî (1483–1556) · Baba Faghani Shirzani







1500s–1600s


Vahshi Bafqi (1523–1583) · Urfi Shirazi







1600s–1700s


Sa'eb Tabrizi (1607–1670) · Hazin Lāhiji (1692–1766) · Saba Kashani · Bidel Dehlavi (1642–1720)







1700s–1800s


Neshat Esfahani · Forughi Bistami (1798–1857) · Mahmud Saba Kashani (1813–1893)

















 
Contemporary






Ahmad Kasravi · Mohammad–Taqī Bahār · Sādeq Hedāyat · Forough Farrokhzad · Šāmlū · Khalilollāh Khalilī · Sohrāb Sepehri · Shahriar · Loiq Sherali · Muhammad Iqbal · Parvin E'tesami · Mehdi Akhavan-Sales · Emad Khorasani · Aref Qazvini · Ebrahim Poordavood · Mirzadeh Eshghi · Allameh Tabatabaei · Adib Pishevari · Ashraf Gilani · Javad Nurbakhsh · Golchin Gilani · Gholām–Hossein Sā'edi









Contemporary Persian and Classical Persian are the same language, but writers since 1900 are classified as contemporary. The above lists include poets mostly of Persian background but also some of Indic, Turkic and Slavic backgrounds. At one time, Persian was a common cultural language of much of the non-Arabic Islamic world.












v • d • e

Tasawwuf (Sufism)





Ideas:

Ihsan · Noor · Maqaam · Haal · Manzil · Yaqeen · Fanaa · Baqaa · Haqiqah · Marifah · Nafs · Dhawq · Sulook · Cosmology · Kashf · Metaphysics · Psychology · Tajalli






Practices:

Dhikr · Hadhra · Muraqaba · Qawwali · Sema · Whirling






Sufi orders:

Chishti · Mevlevi · Murīdiyya · Naqshbandi · Qadri · Rifa'i · Shadhili · Suhrawardi · Tijaniyyah · Qadiri Boutchichi · Ni'matullāhī List of tariqas






Early Notable Sufis:

Uwais al-Qarni · Hasan Basri · Rabia Basri · Bayazid Bastami · Junayd Baghdadi · Dhu n-Nun · Hallaj · Abolkheir · Ghazali · Kharaqani · Gilani · Moinuddin Chishti · Suhrawardi · Rifa'i · Bakhtiar Kaki · Baba Farid · Ibn Arabi · Shams Tabrizi · Rumi · Saadi · Attar · Shabistari · Nizamuddin Auliya · Ganj Bakhsh · Baha-ud-Din Naqshband · Amir Khusro · Safi  · Nimatullah  · Kubra · Jami · Jazouli · Sabir Pak · Shah Waliullah · Ata Allah · Waris Pak · Zarruq · Yesevi · Emre · Semnani · Sirhindi · Bhittai · Haddad






Notable Modern Sufis:

Tahir ul-Qadri · Tahir Allauddin · Abdal Hakim Murad · Shaykh Nazim · Hisham Kabbani · Nuh Keller  · Muhammad al-Maliki · Abdalqadir as-Sufi · Qalander Ba Ba Auliya · Shamsuddin Azeemi · Reshad Feild · Ahmad al-Alawi · Ozak · Bawa Muhaiyaddeen · Galib · Omar Shah · Haeri · Gohar Shahi






Sufi studies:

Shah · Lings · Chittick · Ernst · Sells · Corbin · Frager · Schimmel · Hixon · Aguéli · Guénon · Nasr · Burckhardt · Almqvist · Lindbom · Schuon ·






Topics in Sufism:

Art · Fiction  · History · Music · Poetry · Shrines  · Texts








Persondata


NAME
alal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Rumi; Mevlânâ Celâleddin Mehmed Rum; Mawlānā Jalāl ad-Dīn Muhammad Balkhī; Mawlana; Mawlana Rumi Rumi


SHORT DESCRIPTION
13th century Persian poet, jurist, theologian and teacher of Sufism.


DATE OF BIRTH
1207 CE


PLACE OF BIRTH
Balkh, Afghanistan


DATE OF DEATH
1273 CE


PLACE OF DEATH
Konya. Turkey






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rumi"
Categories: 1207 births | 1273 deaths | Persian literature | Iranian Sufis | Persian philosophers | 13th-century philosophers | Persian spiritual writers | Sufi poets | Persian poets | Persian writers | Mevlevi order | 13th-century writers | Medieval poets | Mystic poetsHidden categories: Articles containing Persian language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


አማርኛ
العربية
Azərbaycan
Bosanski
Български
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Frysk
한국어
हिन्दी
Italiano
עברית
Қазақша
Kurdî / كوردی
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Українська
اردو
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 17:30.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
