













John Cassavetes - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "John_Cassavetes";
		var wgTitle = "John Cassavetes";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "273777";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282392320;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); John Cassavetes

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2007)




John Cassavetes



Cassavetes appearing as Johnny Staccato in the critically acclaimed TV series of the same name


Born
John Nicholas Cassavetes
December 9, 1929(1929-12-09)
New York, New York


Died
February 3, 1989 (aged 59)
Los Angeles, California


Other name(s)
Nick Colasanto


Occupation
Actor, Director, Screenwriter, Producer, Editor


Years active
1951 - 1985


Spouse(s)
Gena Rowlands (1954-1989, his death)


John Nicholas Cassavetes (9 December 1929 – 3 February 1989) was an American actor, screenwriter and filmmaker. He appeared in many Hollywood films, and is considered a pioneer of independent film.




Contents


1 Early life
2 Early films and acting
3 1970s
4 Later career, death and family legacy
5 Improvisation
6 Film Methodology
7 Tributes
8 Filmography

8.1 As Director
8.2 As Actor


9 See also
10 References
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early life
Cassavetes was born in New York City, the son of Katherine Cassavetes (who was to feature in some of his films) and Nicholas John Cassavetes, Greek immigrants to the U.S. His early years were spent with his family in Greece; when he returned, at the age of seven, he spoke no English.[1] He grew up in Long Island, New York and attended high school at Blair Academy in New Jersey before moving to the American Academy of Dramatic Arts. On graduation in 1950, he continued acting in the theater, took small parts in films, and began working on television in anthology series such as Alcoa Theatre.

[edit] Early films and acting
During this time he met and married actress Gena Rowlands. By 1956, Cassavetes had begun teaching method acting in workshops in New York City. An improvisation exercise in one workshop inspired the idea for his writing and directorial debut, Shadows (1959; first version 1957). Cassavetes raised the funds for production from friends and family, as well as listeners to Jean Shepherd's late-night radio talk show Night People.
Cassavetes was unable to gain American distribution of Shadows, but it won the Critics Award at the Venice Film Festival. European distributors later released the movie in the United States as an import. Although the box office of Shadows in the United States was slight, it did gain attention from the Hollywood studios. Cassavetes directed two movies for Hollywood in the early 1960s — Too Late Blues and A Child Is Waiting.
He also played Johnny Staccato in a late 50s television series about a jazz pianist who also worked as a detective. It was broadcast on NBC between September 1959 and March 1960, when it was acquired by ABC. Although critically acclaimed, the series was cancelled in September 1960. Cassavetes also appeared on the NBC interview program Here's Hollywood.
In the 1962-1963 season, Cassavetes guest starred on the CBS anthology series, The Lloyd Bridges Show, and directed two episodes, including "A Pair of Boots" in which his friend Seymour Cassel guest starred. In the 1963-1964 season, Cassavetes appeared in Jason Evers's ABC drama about college life, Channing. That same season, he appeared in the ABC medical drama about psychiatry, Breaking Point. In 1965, he appeared on ABC's western series, The Legend of Jesse James.
Cassavetes acted in films such as Devil's Angels (1967), the second of American International Pictures motorcycle gang movics, The Dirty Dozen (1967), for which he was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor as an impudent, insubordinate condemned soldier, and in Roman Polanski's Rosemary's Baby (1968) as a two-faced actor. Other notable appearances include the role of the victim in Don Siegel's The Killers, and as a vicious government nemesis to Kirk Douglas in The Fury (1978).
His next film as a director (and his second independent film) was Faces (1968), starring his wife Rowlands as well as John Marley, Seymour Cassel and Val Avery. It depicts a contemporary marriage in slow disintegration. Faces was nominated for three Academy Awards (Best Original Screenplay, Best Supporting Actor and Best Supporting Actress). Around this time, Cassavetes formed "Faces International" as a distribution company to handle all of his films.
Husbands (1970) stars Cassavetes himself with Peter Falk and Ben Gazzara. They play a trio of married men on a spree in New York and London after the funeral of one of their best friends. Minnie and Moskowitz (1971), about two unlikely lovers, has Rowlands with Seymour Cassel. He played opposite Peter Falk again in 1972, in the film Columbo: Etude in Black, playing the symphony conductor and murderer Alex Benedict.

[edit] 1970s
His three films of the 1970s as director were produced independently. A Woman Under the Influence (1974) stars Rowlands as an increasingly troubled housewife named Mabel. Mabel serves a purpose in highlighting how Cassavetes treats an offbeat protagonist in a completely different manner than in Hollywood productions. In A Woman Under the Influence, Mabel is not 'sane' by societal standards, but her real problem is that she lives to please everybody else and not herself, hence the name of the film, and Nick, her husband, is not overly demonised even though he lashes out and hits Mabel when she is acting too hospitably towards his company in the spaghetti dinner scene. Nick loves his wife; evident by the way he is so consumed with guilt after sending Mabel to the institution that he lashes out at a co-worker for making light of the situation, or shown further through his excitement and fancy dress to welcome Mabel home. Rowlands captured the character of Mabel so well that she received an Academy Award nomination for Best Actress, while Cassavetes was nominated for Best Director.
In The Killing of a Chinese Bookie (1976), Ben Gazzara plays Cosmo Vitelli, a small-time strip-club owner with an out-of-control gambling habit, pressured by mobsters to commit a murder to pay off his debt. Opening Night (1977) has Gena Rowlands as lead actress with Cassavetes, Ben Gazzara, and Joan Blondell. Rowlands portrays an aging film star named Myrtle Gordon working in the theater and suffering a personal crisis. Alone and unloved by her colleagues, in fear of age and always at a remove from others on account of her stardom, she succumbs to alcohol and hallucinations after witnessing the accidental death of a young fan. Ultimately, she fights through this, delivering the performance of her life in a play.

[edit] Later career, death and family legacy
Cassavetes directed the film Gloria (1980) featuring Rowlands as a Mob moll who tries to protect an orphan boy whom the Mob wants to kill. She earned another best-actress nomination for it. Love Streams (1984) featured Cassavetes as an aging swain who suffers the overbearing affection of his recently divorced sister. His last film, Big Trouble (1986), was taken over during filming from Andrew Bergman, who wrote the original screenplay.
An alcoholic,[2] Cassavetes died from cirrhosis of the liver in 1989 at the age of 59. He was survived by Rowlands and three children (Nick, Alexandra and Zoe).
His son, Nick Cassavetes, followed in his father's footsteps as an actor (Face/Off, Life) and director, and made the 1997 film She's So Lovely from a screenplay written by his father. He also directed 2002's John Q and 2004's The Notebook, which also starred Rowlands. Alexandra Cassavetes directed the documentary, Z Channel: A Magnificent Obsession in 2004 and served as 2nd Unit Director on her brother's film Alpha Dog in 2006. Lastly, his younger daughter, Zoe Cassavetes both wrote and directed the 2007 film, Broken English featuring Rowlands and Parker Posey.
Many of John Cassavetes' films are now owned by Faces Distribution, a company overseen by Gena Rowlands and Julian Schlossberg, with Castle Hill Productions distributing.

[edit] Improvisation
The role of improvisation in Cassavetes' films is frequently misunderstood. His films were — with the exception of the original version of Shadows — heavily scripted. Confusion arises in part because Cassavetes allowed actors to bring their own interpretations of characters to their performances. Performances were scripted, but delivery was not.

[edit] Film Methodology





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2008)







This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details. (October 2008)


Cassavetes offered a formula that differed greatly from that of the Hollywood studio system, both in method and final product.His films were not easy to watch; filled with awkward and gut wrenching moments and complex characters that were unpredictable, uncontrollable, and for the most part unreadable, they usually did not even offer the audience a concrete narrative story line to follow. For Cassavetes, it was more about the characters themselves, the moments of expressional truth sealed within an interaction, a look, or an awkward pause, than how the story necessarily played out.
Aside from presenting difficult characters whose inner desires were not easily understood, he paid little attention to the “impressionistic cinematography, linear editing, and star-centred scene making ” [3] that are fashionable in both Hollywood and art films. Instead, he chose to shoot mostly hand held with general lighting, or documentary style, to accommodate the spontaneity of his actors. Further, Cassavetes’ methodology was completely unconventional by Hollywood standards from the way he created a communal atmosphere on set with no class structure, to shooting in continuity, everything he did defied standard filmmaking practice and he came to embody an American counter-culture independent film movement that would come to prominence in the sixties and seventies on the heels of his groundbreaking first film, Shadows. Cassavetes unorthodox characters represented the filmmaker’s vision of breaking down our learned societal forms of expression, for which Hollywood is one of many teachers, in an effort to depict true human emotion on screen while his methodology in both production and shooting represented, like his films, a shift away from the normal monetary driven productions of Hollywood. Thus, while Hollywood reinforces conformity and the American dream along with all of the commonly held social values that come with it, Cassavetes aimed to present humanity in its truest form, depicting and championing those characters who did not conform to social standards of self expression, just as he himself refused to conform to cinematic standards, both in content and methodology. The performances that Cassavetes elicited from his subjects were entirely different from the Hollywood standard whereby a character conveys his or her feelings and inner desires through clearly spoken, well-articulated lines, or a director gives the audience insight through more complex mise en scene.
Cassavetes's characters were neither simple nor readable because human beings are complex and his films are an attempt to reflect our true nature. In addition, Cassavetes was never interested in working with actors or actresses who were more concerned with their own personal images than with that of the characters whom they were portraying, which is why he rarely, if ever, had actors or actresses of note (other than Gena Rowlands who was his wife) in his films. As Cassavetes himself said, he strove “to put [actors] in a position where they may make asses of themselves without feeling they’re revealing things that will eventually be used against them.”[4]
Cassavetes's unorthodox characters aimed to portray our inner desires of self-expression, thus moving away from learned social practices that Hollywood movies both reflected and still perpetuate. Hollywood has always been concerned with portraying simple, universal emotions in accordance with a narrative story line; Cassavetes was concerned with individual emotional expression above all.
Cassavetes's unorthodox characters also reflected his similarly unconventional methodology in the making of his films. He employed mostly his friends as actors and on-set personnel, generally for little or no money guarantee and a share in the profits, if any, of the film. Both Shadows and Faces, two of his earlier films, were shot over a four-year period on week-ends and whenever funds became available. Because the set was in essence a collective, there was no formal class structure, meaning that Cassavetes liked working in this environment because he felt that for his intensely personal and emotionally powerful films to work, he needed everybody on his set to feel that the film was theirs. “The hardest thing for a film-maker, or a person like me,” he once said, “is to find people…who really want to do something…They’ve got to work on a project that’s theirs.”[5] This on-set methodology differs greatly from the 'director run' sets of big-budget Hollywood productions
Marshall Fine writes in his book, Accidental Genius, that “Cassavetes, who provided the impetus of what would become the independent film movement in America…spent the majority of his career making his films ‘off the grid’ so to speak…unfettered by the commercial concerns of Hollywood.” [6] To make the kind of films he wanted to make, it was essential to work in this ‘communal,’ ‘off the grid’ atmosphere because Hollywood’s “basis is economic rather than political or philosophical,”[7] and no Hollywood executives were interested in Cassavete’s in-depth study of human behaviour. Indeed, he mortgaged his house to acquire the funds to shoot A Woman Under the Influence. instead of seeking money from an investor who might try to change the script so as to make the film more marketable.
Cassavetes's films were no doubt original, and his avoidance of the studio system in his production methodology allowed him to further explore those realms of human nature that films over concerned with turning a profit could never do. So, while Hollywood reinforced the American dream so as to keep people in their state of metaphorical sleep, Cassavetes, in his attempts to wake them up, struggled valiantly to show them that our social codes of expression are learned, and thus fabrications.

[edit] Tributes
In September 2004, The Criterion Collection produced a Region 1 DVD box set of his five independent films: Shadows, Faces, A Woman Under The Influence, The Killing of a Chinese Bookie and Opening Night. Also featured in the set is a documentary about the life and works of Cassavetes called A Constant Forge along with a booklet featuring critical assessments of the director's work, along with tributes by old friends. In 2005, a box set of the same five films was released in Region 2 by Optimum Releasing. The Optimum DVD of Shadows has a voice-over commentary by Seymour Cassel that has numerous mistakes about the first and second versions of the film, which are documented on Ray Carney's web site.[8]
Cassavetes is also the subject of several books about the actor/filmmakers life. Cassavetes on Cassavetes is a collection of interviews collected or conducted by Boston University film scholar Ray Carney, in which the late filmmaker recalls his experiences, influences and outlook in the film industry. In the Oscar 2005 edition of Vanity Fair magazine, one of the articles features a tribute to Cassavetes with three members of his stock company: Rowlands, and actors Ben Gazzara and Peter Falk.
In the Robert Crais books The Monkey's Raincoat and Stalking the Angel the main character Elvis Cole is noted to look like John Cassavetes '20 years ago'. He also uses the name Johhny Staccato when giving his details to an apartment guard.
Washington D.C. band Fugazi recorded a tribute on 1993 record 'In on the Killtaker' called "Cassavetes".
Jem Cohen's film about the band, 'Instrument' is dedicated to Cassavetes, as well as D. Boon of the 1980s punk rock band the Minutemen.
New York City band Le Tigre released 'What's Yr Take On Cassavetes?', on their self-titled album, featuring a debate between two widely-opinionated individuals on the actor. This is exemplified by the song featuring two vocalists, each of them being used to assert these differing opinions.
On the album The Gap (2000) by Chicago band Joan of Arc, there is a song titled "John Cassavetes, Assata Shakur, and Guy Debord Walk Into a Bar.."
The season finale of Moral Orel entitled "Nature, Part 2" on July 15, 2007 was dedicated to John Cassavetes.
Elaine May's Mikey and Nicky (1976), featuring Falk and Cassavetes, was an overt homage to Cassavetes in cultural / thematic scope, cinematography, and the improvisational nature of the acting.
In the 1993 Denis Leary song "Asshole" Leary states he is going to get "The Duke" (John Wayne), John Cassavetes, Lee Marvin, Sam Peckinpah and a case of whiskey then drive down to Texas before being cutoff by a bandmate and getting called an asshole.
The Hold Steady's 2008 album Stay Positive makes various allusions to Cassavetes's Opening Night, the closing song "Slapped Actress" being the most explicit.

[edit] Filmography

[edit] As Director

Shadows (1959)
Too Late Blues (1961)
A Child Is Waiting (1963)
Faces (1968)
Husbands (1970)
Minnie and Moskowitz (1971)
A Woman Under the Influence (1974)
The Killing of a Chinese Bookie (1976)
Opening Night (1977)
Gloria (1980)
Love Streams (1984)
Big Trouble (1986)


[edit] As Actor

Taxi (1953)
I'll Cry Tomorrow (1955)
The Night Holds Terror (1955)
Crime in the Streets (1956)
Alfred Hitchcock Presents (1956) Episode: "You Got to Have Luck"
Edge of the City (1957)
Affair in Havana ((1957)
Virgin Island (1958)
Saddle the Wind (1958)
Shadows (1959)
The Webster Boy (1962)
Too Late Blues (1962)
The Killers (1964)
The Dirty Dozen (1967)
Rome Like Chicago (1967)
Bandits in Rome (1967)
Devil's Angels (1967)
Rosemary's Baby (1968)
Machine Gun McCain (1969)
If It's Tuesday, This Must Be Belgium (1969)
Husbands (1970)
Minnie and Moskowitz (1971)
Capone (1975)
Two-Minute Warning (1976)
Mikey and Nicky (1976)
Opening Night (1977)
Brass Target (1978)
The Fury (1978)
Flesh and Blood (TV) (1979)
Whose Life Is It Anyway? (1981)
The Incubus (1981)
Tempest (1982)
The Haircut (1982)
Marvin and Tige (1983)
Love Streams (1984)


[edit] See also

List of directors


[edit] References


^ Cf. Cassavetes Directs, by Michael Ventura, 2007; ISBN 10: 1-84243-228-1; p. 176.
^ Filmcritic.com
^ Bendedetto, Lucio. “Forging an Original Response: A Review of Cassavetes Criticism in English.” Post Script. V. 11 n. 2. (Winter 1992): 101.
^ Gelmis, Joseph. “John Cassavetes.” The Film Director as Superstar. London: Seckler & Warburg, 1971, Pg. 80.
^ Gelmis, Joseph. “John Cassavetes.” The Film Director as Superstar. London: Seckler & Warburg, 1971. Pg 79.
^ Fine, Marshall. “Accidental Genius: How John Cassavetes Invented American Independent Film.” Miramax Books: New York, 2005. Pg 99.
^ Powdermaker, Hortense. “Hollywood: The Dream Factory.” Little, Brown and Company: Boston, 1950. Pg 327.
^ A Chronology of Cassavetes–Related Events, 1979-2007 (Page 4)



[edit] External links

John Cassavetes at the Internet Movie Database






This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links.



Ray Carney: John Cassavetes
kamera.co.uk: John Cassavetes
Bright Lights Film Journal: John Cassavetes
Interview (07/1971)
JohnCassavetes.net








v • d • e

Films directed by John Cassavetes








Shadows • Too Late Blues • A Child Is Waiting • Faces • Husbands • Minnie and Moskowitz • A Woman Under the Influence • The Killing of a Chinese Bookie • Opening Night • Gloria • Love Streams • Big Trouble











Persondata


NAME
Cassavetes, John


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Cassavetes, John Nicholas


SHORT DESCRIPTION
Actor, Director, Screenwriter, Producer, Editor


DATE OF BIRTH
1929-12-9


PLACE OF BIRTH
New York, New York


DATE OF DEATH
1989-2-3


PLACE OF DEATH
Los Angeles, California






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Cassavetes"
Categories: 1929 births | 1989 deaths | American experimental filmmakers | American film actors | American film directors | American screenwriters | Burials at Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery | Deaths from cirrhosis | Greek-Americans | People from Long IslandHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2007 | Articles needing additional references from October 2008 | Articles that may contain original research since October 2008 | All articles that may contain original research | Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Български
Català
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Euskara
Français
Galego
Italiano
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 18:36.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
