













America's Army - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "America\'s_Army";
		var wgTitle = "America\'s Army";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "177953";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = "277691941";
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [""];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [""];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); America's Army

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For the actual U.S. Army, see United States Army.



America's Army




North American boxart, PC version


Developer(s)
U.S. Army (PC & Consoles), Secret Level (Consoles)


Publisher(s)
U.S. Army (PC), Ubisoft (Consoles)


Distributor(s)
U.S. Army


License
Proprietary license


Engine
v1.0-2.3 (Unreal Engine 2.0)
v2.4-2.x (Unreal Engine 2.5) v3.0- (Unreal Engine 3.0) Rise of a Soldier (Xbox): Unreal Engine 2.0 True Soldiers (Xbox 360): YETI engine



Version
2.8.4


Platform(s)
Windows (current version 2.8.4), Linux (discontinued as of 2.5), Mac OS X (discontinued as of 2.5)


Release date(s)
PC: July 4, 2002 (v1.0)


Genre(s)
Tactical first-person shooter


Mode(s)
Training and Online multiplayer


Rating(s)
ESRB: T (Teen)


Media
Online download, DVD (2.7 and up), CD (2.6 and earlier)


System requirements
Current PC version: Windows 2000, XP or Vista; Internet access or LAN; 2.4 GHz+ CPU or equivalent; 512 MB+ RAM; DirectX 9.0+; 128 MB+ 3D graphics card supporting transform and lighting; 3.5 GB+ of free hard drive space


Input methods
Keyboard, mouse


America's Army (also known as AA or Army Game Project) is a video game developed by the United States Army and released as a global public relations initiative to help with recruitment. The Army Game Project was conceived by Colonel Casey Wardynski and is managed by the U.S. Army's Office of Economic and Manpower Analysis (OEMA) at the United States Military Academy, West Point, New York.[1] Wardynski envisioned "using computer game technology to provide the public a virtual Soldier experience that was engaging, informative and entertaining."[2]
The PC version 1.0, subtitled Recon, was first released on July 4, 2002. Since then, there have been over 25 versions released, the most recent being America's Army: Special Forces (Overmatch) v2.8.4. All versions have been developed on the Unreal Engine and use Evenbalance's PunkBuster technology to try to prevent cheating. The game is financed by the U.S. Government and distributed at no cost. The free Windows version can be downloaded on the Internet. Game discs are also distributed at U.S. Army recruiting centers and events.
The Army Game Project originally partnered with the MOVES Institute at the Naval Postgraduate School to develop the game. Professor Michael Zyda, the director and founder of the MOVES Institute, acknowledged Counter-Strike as the model for the game.
America's Army has ranked among the top ten online PC action games with almost 9.5 million registered players who have completed over 380 million missions from basic training to operations in the War on Terrorism. A Gamespot.com editor asserts "nothing beats going in and seeing what the Army really does...without actually having to do it"[1]
In recent years, America's Army has expanded to console versions for Xbox and Xbox 360, arcade and mobile applications published through licensing arrangements.[3][4]
The Game Project has "grown in ways its originators couldn't have imagined".[2] Dozens of government training and simulation applications have been developed to train and educate U.S. Army Soldiers using the America's Army platform.[5] The Game has also been used to deliver interactive, virtual Soldiering experiences to participants at events, such as air shows, amusement parks, sporting events around the country.




Contents


1 History

1.1 Background
1.2 Initial Release
1.3 Later development


2 Game play
3 Recent game versions

3.1 America's Army 2.8 Special Forces Editor
3.2 America's Army 3.0


4 Game editions

4.1 Licensed products

4.1.1 America's Army: Rise of a Soldier
4.1.2 Mobile game
4.1.3 Arcade game
4.1.4 America's Army: True Soldiers
4.1.5 Real Heroes program


4.2 Government applications

4.2.1 Virtual Army Experience
4.2.2 Army Experience Center
4.2.3 Technology Education Program




5 Reception

5.1 Press coverage
5.2 Awards
5.3 Academic references
5.4 In popular culture


6 Controversy
7 See also
8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History

[edit] Background
Col. Wardynski, who holds a PhD in Policy Analysis, recognized that the appetite of young Americans for electronic entertainment was growing faster than their interest in television and other forms of traditional media. According to Nielsen, three out of four residences with males under 34 have a game system.[6]
Furthermore, first-person, military-themed games featuring land forces, had become one of the most popular game genres among young adult males. The objective for America's Army was to harness multiplayer game technology and the Internet to place a vivid, virtual Soldier sampling experience in the immediate environment of young adults and thereby overcome obstacles that were confronting the Army's strategic communication efforts. Due to the economies to scale and measurement opportunities afforded by web-based games, this effort would also drive down the costs of communicating with young Americans and increase Army capacity to assess marketing effectiveness.
The Project employs commercial game and web technologies to create and deliver virtual experiences that elicit active youth engagement in team-based experiences motivated by player adherence to Army Values and the Warrior Ethos. Thus, rather than pushing Army messaging into popular culture, the Project creates content that almost 9.5 million users have downloaded and in which they have virtually explored Soldiering in over 230 million hours of online play. Col. Wardynski hopes that by providing more information to prospective Soldiers, the game will help reduce the number of recruits who wash out during the nine weeks of basic training.[1] He calls this a "symmetrical information environment" that "gives them [kids] what they need to make informed decisions" about the Army. Career Innovation Case Study as part of the "Digital Generation Initiative".[7] A teenager at E3 was quoted saying the game "provides great information. This would probably spark an interest. I don't know how I would have found out so much some other way."[8]
With several thousand players online at any one time between 2002 and 2008, it ranked in the top 10 FPS (First Person Shooter) games played online during the period, as tracked by GameSpy. It was similar in popularity to Wolfenstein: Enemy Territory or Medal of Honor, also in the top ten, for much of that time period.[9]
The Army Game Project licensed the Unreal game engine as the foundation for its America's Army game. The Project then employed industry experts to build AA on this engine as a virtual "test-drive" of Soldiering. The Project leveraged its access to real Army equipment, units and Soldiers to create a realistic game about the Army as a platform for strategic communication with young Americans.[1] AA is intended to give a positive impression of the U.S. Army. In the official Frequently Asked Questions page the developers, too, confirm that in a statement giving the reason why people outside the United States can play the game: "We want the whole world to know how great the U.S. Army is."
America's Army was the first computer video game to make recruitment an explicit goal and the first well-known overt use of computer gaming for political aims. It has been pointed out that its recruiting aspect bears resemblance to games in both the movie The Last Starfighter and to the novel Ender's Game, a popular science fiction story of the 80s.[10][11] Chris Chambers, the former deputy director of development for America's Army, admits it is a recruitment tool, and "the Army readily admits [America's Army] is a propaganda device, " wrote Chris Morris, a CNN/Money columnist and director of content development.[12][13] America's Army, considered by the U.S. Army to be a "cost-effective recruitment tool," aims to become part of youth culture's "consideration set," as Army Deputy Chief of Personnel, Timothy Maude, testified before the Senate Armed Services Committee.[14]
The Army Game and its official webpage, which must be visited to be able to play the game, contain links to the army recruitment website, another recruiting tool that, according to the Army Subcommittee Testimony from February 2000, has a higher chance of recruiting than "any other method of contact."[14] Leading American players to the website is a major goal of the game, and it was confirmed that twenty-eight percent of all visitors of America's Army's webpage click through to this recruitment site.
The Army soon realized that America's Army could become an enterprise solution for Army outreach, training, and education. According to Col. Wardynski, the game generated interest from other U.S. government agencies, including the Secret Service, resulting in the development of a training version that was similar to the public version but for internal government use only.[15] The Army incorporated government applications of AA into missile systems, visualization tools, command and control systems, training devices and education programs used by Soldiers within the Army. This evolution created a situation in which the Army could marry Army hardware with America's Army software to create opportunities for immersive experiential marketing.

[edit] Initial Release
In May 2000, the MOVES Institute at the Naval Postgraduate School was contracted by the U.S. Army to create the game. Zyda said later in an interview with Gary Webb that, "We thought we'd have a lot more problems. But the country is in this mood where anything the military does is great. ... 9/11 sort of assured the success of this game. I'm not sure what kind of reception it would have received otherwise."[16]
In May 2002 the game was announced and presented to the public at the E3 combined with an interactive display provided by the U.S. Army that included Soldiers and an M6 Bradley Linebacker armored air defense vehicle.[17] Initial reaction among gamers was really positive. The Army's display booth at the event was packed and Army officials said they had received more than 150,000 advance orders for the game.[1]
On July 4, 2002, the United States' Independence Day, Col. Wardynski and OEMA released the first version of America's Army, named Recon, after three years of development and production costs between $6 million and $8 million.[18] The game was easily available, the gameplay was similar to Counter-Strike, and it had the Unreal Engine as well as free servers sponsored by the U.S. Army. For two days after its Fourth of July release, Web sites serving up the free, state-of-the-art videogame received 750,000 hits--per second. In the first two months, 2.5 million people downloaded it (a 14-hour endeavor on a standard phone line), while 120,000 people signed up to receive the CD version by mail. One online insomniac played 3,600 10-minute missions.[19] CNN Money credited the Army with "keen awareness of its target market."[13] In the book "Watch This, Listen Up, Click Here", America's Army was cited as being "a gold standard of advergames for its effectiveness and realism".[6]
The game is rated "T" for teen by the ESRB. In the Frequently Asked Questions section of the game's official website, its developers argue its suitability for teenagers. It reads, "In elementary school kids learn about the actions of the Continental Army that won our freedoms under George Washington and the Army's role in ending Hitler's oppression. Today they need to know that the Army is engaged around the world to defeat terrorist forces bent on the destruction of America and our freedoms."[20]
At the United States Military Academy, 19 percent of 2003's freshman class stated they had played the game. Enlistment quotas were met in the two years directly following the game's release, as it had two years prior to its release. By 2008, that percent had risen to 33 percent. M. Paul Boyce, an Army public affairs officer at The Pentagon, was quoted as saying it would never be possible to find out what difference the game has made to recruitment numbers, but that he hoped no one has been recruited because of the game alone on the grounds that America's Army makes no attempt to help answer "hard questions" about the Army, such as "Is it right for me, is it right for my family, and is it right for my country?".[21]
Also shown at E3 was America's Army: Soldiers; a role-playing game in the development stage that was to elucidate career paths in the U.S. Army. It "died a sad and whimpering death before ever seeing the light of day," a former developer concludes.[citation needed] Also in 2002, the ArmyOps Tracker website was created by a German computer engineer with the purpose of tracking gameplay statistics such as a player's number of kills or hours played.[citation needed]

[edit] Later development
On November 6, 2003, version 2.0 of AA was published, with the full title of America's Army: Special Forces. In a booklet produced by the MOVES Institute, an article by Wagner James Au explains that "the Department of Defense want[ed] to double the number of Special Forces soldiers, so essential [had they proven] in Afghanistan and northern Iraq; consequently, orders [had] trickled down the chain of command and found application in the current release of America's Army."[22]
As the game became more widely distributed, it generated additional media interest. In December 2003, a Boston Globe columnist said "... America's Army isn't just a time-wasting shoot-'em-up. It's full of accurate information about military training and tactics, intended to prepare a new generation of potential recruits. Amidst all the shouting drill sergeants and whistling bullets, some real education is going on. America's Army is a 'serious game,' part of a new wave of computer simulations that provide entertaining lessons about real world activities."[23]
After the game proved successful, the lack of the Army's acknowledgment for the contribution by the US Navy annoyed the Navy and led to tension and political fights over the project.[24] Eventually the project was withdrawn from the Naval Postgraduate School due to allegations of mismanagement in March 2004 and the development team was moved to two new locations.[16][25]
One month after taking over production, the Army declared it has signed an exclusive long-term contract with Ubisoft to reach a wider and younger audience. America's Army: Rise of a Soldier, a different version of the game for Xbox was produced by Ubisoft in collaboration with the U.S. Army.[16] Despite a 10-year publishing deal, the control over all communication and advertising remains with the Army.[26] The Xbox version was released in November, 2005. It was also to be released on the PlayStation 2 but was later canceled.[27] A version of the game was also made for the mobile phone by Gameloft.

[edit] Game play
America's Army is a round- and team-based tactical shooter game similar to Counter-Strike with the player depicted as a soldier in the U.S. Army. An editor at Gamespot.com admires the game's authenticity: It's pretty realistic -- you take one or two shots and you go limp, you take one more and you're done.[1] Another game review concurs describing America's Army as "the most realistic portrayal of weapons and combat of any game".[28]
Just like real soldiers, players must perform training and demonstrate competence to earn the chance to engage in the most exciting parts of being a soldier.[7] Before being allowed to play online, a player must first go through four training maps and have his or her progress saved online in a player account.
Accomplishing the other thirteen training levels enables the player to become a combat lifesaver, Special Forces operator, advanced marksman, HMMWV driver, CROWS gunner, and Javelin missile operator.[29]
A key feature within America's Army is the inclusion of medical training designed to convey life-saving information to players. This content creates a positive externality for players who learn the critical skills necessary to perform first responder duties should a real world emergency arise. In order to assume the role of combat medic in the game, players must pass a virtual medical training course based on actual training that Soldiers receive with regard to evaluating and prioritizing casualties, controlling bleeding, recognizing and treating shock, and administering aid when victims are not breathing. Two AA players have reported using the training they received in-game to save lives in emergency situations.[30]
The game has been cited for its realism in first aid training. In November 2007, avid America's Army player Paxton Galvanek came across such a scenario when he found himself as the first person on the scene of a horrific, multi-victim car accident. According to Yahoo Games, 28-year-old Galvanek rescued two victims from an overturned SUV on the shoulder of a North Carolina highway. He was able to safely remove both individuals involved in the crash, and he properly assessed and treated their wounds, which included bruises, scrapes, head trauma, and the loss of two fingers. Quote: "So obviously, this guy must be a doctor or at least a medical student, correct? Well, in a manner of speaking... He learned it playing as a medic in the game, America's Army."[31]. According to Galvanek, "I have received no prior medical training and can honestly say that because of the training and presentations within America's Army, I was able to help and possibly save the injured men."[30] When Galvanek's story went public in January 2008, it garnered multiple print, broadcast and internet media interest nationwide. Media coverage included Fox & Friends, San Antonio News Express, dozens of radio interviews, and the top story on Yahoo's homepage. Mr. Galvanek's actions marked the second time the game has been credited with saving a life.
The main section of the game is the multiplayer part, in which players fight either as the U.S. Army or, on "Special Forces" maps, as indigenous forces against an opposing enemy team. The game is a medium-paced tactical shooter, similar to the Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six and Ghost Recon series. Pacing is fast in the sense that players can be killed very quickly, but the players' movements are a lot slower and the gameplay contains fewer firefights than most other online first-person shooters, especially on larger maps. Unlike many other games, players are encouraged to aim using their weapon's sights to shoot more accurately, though a crosshair is still displayed for non-sniper weapons even if the player is not using the sights. One of AA's unusual features is the design of the player's opponents. The players' characters are divided into two teams: usually an "Assault" group and a "Defense" one. The Assault team loses the round if the time limit runs out. Players always see themselves and their team as U.S. soldiers or friendly indigenous forces. The other side is always seen as the enemy (or OPFOR in the case of training maps).
The players on either team appear as U.S. soldiers carrying U.S. weapons such as the M16A2. Their opponents usually appear as non-uniformed people carrying Warsaw Pact weapons such as the AK-47 on multiplayer maps. The AI enemy on co-op maps appears to be wearing the typical indigenous forces' uniform in Special Forces maps and carry MP5SDs.
However, when a player is killed, from the perspective of his enemies, he drops his Warsaw Pact counterpart weapon, while his teammates still view the dropped weapon as a NATO weapon even when picked up by the enemy. This does not apply on co-op maps in which some of the AI characters carry MP5SDs but drop AKS-74Us.
Each round starts with the two teams spawning simultaneously and each player always starting with the equipment of his soldier class. This equipment normally consists of one or two firearms and several hand grenades (M67 fragmentation grenades, M84 stun grenades, and M83 white smoke grenades).[32] The regular rifleman carries an assault rifle (M16A2 or M4A1), but there are specialists like the automatic rifleman (M249 SAW), grenadier (M16A2 with M203 grenade launcher), advanced marksman (M24 SWS, M82A1 SAMR, or SPR, plus an M9 pistol as a sidearm), or team leader (assault rifle and binoculars). For balance, the defending team will usually have fewer grenades and often no night-vision goggles.
The round usually ends with only one team winning. In certain circumstances, such as when both teams are eliminated or both sides have not completed their objectives and time runs out, there will be a tie. A team wins when its objectives are completed or when all members of the enemy team are eliminated. For example, the objective on the SF Hospital map, one of the most played maps, is to kill the rebels' "VIP," while the other team's mission is to keep him alive and escort him to the extraction point. Popular maps such as SF Hospital have an SE version of it released in updates, in the hope that it will be as popular.
From its earliest version, America's Army: Recon (v1.0.0), players were bound by the Rules of Engagement (ROE), teamwork and adherence to the seven Army core values. Two dozen releases later, success in the game is still built upon team play, and still guided by the Army's values of loyalty, duty, respect, selfless service, honor, integrity and personal courage.[33]
The game features a kind of honor system making use of operant conditioning, which means that gamers who obey to the ROE are rewarded with experience points or else punished with a decrease of them. Examples of rewarded actions are the completion of specific mission objectives, killing enemies and healing injured teammates – however, one receives more points for completing an objective or healing a teammate than for killing enemies. Game reviews indicate that the U.S. Army's ROE are enforced to the letter. "Shoot your teammates or kill innocent civilians and you'll land your soldier in prison."[34] The highest honor level on AA is 100 which will take many players around three years of playing to achieve. Players will need to create new accounts, thus resetting their experience points, in America's Army 3. ROE violations are punished for friendly fire and eliminating objectives which are assigned for protection. Players can be kicked from the server if their ROE reaches a limit set by the server admin and their characters can be sent to the Fort Leavenworth military prison. However, this option can be disabled by the server admin. A higher honor level gives the player priority over other teammates in selecting specialist roles such as automatic rifleman, grenadier, advanced marksman, or team leader. Teamwork is a strategy and a value Col. Wardynski wants to impart.[22]




Screenshot from the Snakeplain SF map


Any player character killed before the round is over becomes a spectator; their chat or text messages cannot be seen or heard by the players still alive, but they can watch the rest of the round. Spectators can communicate with those still playing through third-party programs, which have become a common type of cheating, widely referred to as ghosting. As is common in multiplayer online games, cheating, such as through the use of wallhacks or aimbots, is common in America's Army, though the game uses PunkBuster to reduce it. In the more recent versions, cheating activity not related to ghosting appears to have been significantly reduced.[citation needed] Various anti-cheat organizations also work on reducing cheating. Most anti-cheat organizations run a master ban list that prevents blacklisted players from playing on servers using the ban list.
Depending on server configuration, spectators can watch the rest of the round in up to three ways. One, which is always available, allows the spectating player to choose a member of his own team (or even an enemy's on some servers) and view in first-person; another allows spectating individuals in third-person. There are also certain fixed viewpoints that allow the spectating player to observe a specific area of the map.
America's Army is relatively authentic in terms of visual and acoustic representation of combat, especially pertaining to its depictions of firearm usage and mechanics, but its critics have alleged that it fails to convey wartime conditions as accurately as it claims.[16] "Kids aren't stupid," says Wardynski. "They know if they come into the army there is a reason that we have rifles and tanks and all that stuff." The players insist they understand the meaning of "game over." "If you are going to join the Army, you know the risk," says one gamer, Bart Koscinski. "In this game you might die like eight times in like 15 minutes. In real life people know what they are getting themselves into."[35]

[edit] Recent game versions

[edit] America's Army 2.8 Special Forces Editor
Since version 2.8, America's Army has included a tool called AA Editor (also referred to as the America's Army Mission Editor, or AAME) based on the same Unreal editing tool used to create the official maps currently in AA. Mission Editor allows players to make and submit their own custom maps. The submitted maps are judged at AA Mission Depot and may be included in the full package with the normal maps. There are official tutorials available in the game manual, which is written using the Wiki system.
Created by Pragmatic Solutions in cooperation with the U.S. Army, Mission Depot was developed to support the use of AAME. Since its inception, more than 344 maps have been submitted for review. Of those submitted, Army Subject Matter Experts have approved two as "fully mission capable," Operation Shrouded Eagle and Oil Rig making them eligible for play on Official Servers. Interviews with the developers of these player created maps can be found at: [1] and [2].
Students from The Guildhall (GH) at Southern Methodist University (SMU) used the Mission Editor to create maps for America's Army: Special Forces (Coalition). The SMU GH Map Pack provided four new missions created by students at Guildhall under a collaborative partnership with the U.S. Army. Dr. Peter Raad, executive director of the Guildhall, says the school wants to not only continue building new offerings for the Army, but also to understand why video games are so effective in learning, and how to use that knowledge in other areas such as teaching science, technology, engineering, math and reading.[36] Other organizations, including the Emergent Media Center (EMC) at Champlain College, are working to create new maps using AAME.
America's Army developers began implementing specialized hardware into the subsequent 2.8 versions of the game. As of version 2.8.1, AA has limited support of NaturalPoint Inc's TrackIR motion tracking headset to use in lieu of a mouse.
Version 2.8.2 included improved support for the headset, as well as native support for the Logitech G15 gaming keyboard. The LCD screen attached to the keyboard shows game statistics and player information once the game is loaded.
Version 2.8.4 includes a Deploy client distribution system that uses both peer-to-peer as well as traditional (client-server) download systems, allowing users to contribute to the community by permitting content that has already been downloaded to be sent to other peers connected to the download system. This system will provide direct access to support, information on the Army or other dynamically delivered content.

[edit] America's Army 3.0
America's Army 3 (AA3) is scheduled for beta-testing in winter 2008.[37] Based on the Unreal Engine 3, this version is said to put emphasis on graphical performance and on graphical flexibility to cover a greater range of PCs, as well as decreased size for the full version download.[38][39] The rifles used by OPFOR will no longer be real Soviet weapons, e.g. the AK-47 and the AKS-74u Spetsnaz, but a fictional weapon system called the Obran and its derivatives, e.g. the Obran NP - an assualt rifle version - and the Obran LMK - a light machine gun variant. The Obran weapon system is based on the IMI Galil.[40] The player's "jump" function will be radically changed.[41] Several pictures of various guns have been released as well as screen shots from the game released on AA official forums.








Pipeline Looking out of Assault Spawn









Pipeline Assault Spawn









Pipeline Break Room









The Obran NP (Nastak Pusbrata - Assault Rifle)





The Army officially announced AA3 on January 20. The game’s executive producer is quoted in a story on IGN [42] saying: "In AA3 we've taken all of the best features in AA2, incorporated feedback from the AA community and added the latest technology to develop a high-tech game that can be customized by the player to create a much more detailed interactive experience," said Michael Bode, executive producer of the America's Army game. "One of our key design philosophies is to make the game easily accessible to a new player, while at the same time keeping a deeper layer of complexity for the more advanced players to discover and take advantage of."
A story on GameDaily [43] quotes Col. Casey Wardynski, originator and Director of the America's Army game project as saying: "With AA3, we're taking military gaming to an all new level where every detail counts. We want our America's Army 3 players to have a greater understanding of the Army and its values. Our Soldiers are aspirational figures and our players are able to virtually experience many aspects of a Soldier's life from their training, to their missions, to the way the Army has influenced their lives."
GameDailyNews includes more info on the game [44] :As with the previous America's Army games, AA3's authenticity is second-to-none. Our Army development team worked closely with Subject Matter Experts from across the Army to make sure that everything about the game is as realistic as possible. AA3 has more authentic military elements including training, technology, weapons, and audio than any other military game. Built on Unreal Engine 3, AA3 delivers stunningly realistic environments, lighting effects, animations, and team-based experiences so that America's Army players can experience how the Army has strength like no other within its game that is like no other.
When the game was announced a reviewer from CNET talks [45] about his experiences playing the game in the past. He says “What originally got me excited about this game was that you could actually make use of your surroundings in unique ways. You can take cover behind a bombed-out car--and have that move actually be effective--or use a vent or underground passage to reach an objective, rather than come through the front door. Hmm, just thinking about it makes me miss it. Hopefully, AA3 has the same cool level design as its predecessors.”
The Army’s full press release on the game describes many of the game’s upcoming features including gameplay features, authenticity, new technologies and career paths.
The Wargamer.com[46] website posted several newly released screenshots.

[edit] Game editions

[edit] Licensed products

[edit] America's Army: Rise of a Soldier
America's Army: Rise of a Soldier (AA:RoS) was released for Xbox systems in November 2005 as the only official U.S. Army game on the console. AA:RoS offers an intense multiplayer experience with up to 16 players playing on Xbox Live. According to the press release, the game features "all the action-packed realism that players have come to expect from the America's Army game brand" and "offers the most true-to-life Army experience, allowing players to create a soldier and lead him through the excitement of an Army career". Col. Wardynski said, "America's Army: Rise of a Soldier emulates the real Army, allowing players to choose their own career paths. Players can focus on individual Army roles, like Sniper or Grenadier, or experience different roles in their goal to achieve Green Beret status."[47] The AA:RoS trailer can be viewed here.

[edit] Mobile game
In February 2007, Gameloft and the U.S. Army released the first mobile game of the Army – America's Army: Special Operations. The game is available from all major cell phone carriers and features three types of gameplay. Players can pilot a combat helicopter, man an armored vehicle and serve as a Soldier on the battlefield. According to Mobicritic.com, "Gameloft does a great job with this game and the only fault one could find is that the game is too short. It isn't, really: you just won't realize how fast the hours of play have passed, as this game really gives the term 'action packed' a new meaning."[48] Col. Wardynski discusses the game's authenticity: "In keeping with our PC and console titles, America's Army: Special Operations embodies the high levels of attention to detail and realism that have made America's Army the definitive title for games about the U.S. Army." [49]

[edit] Arcade game
Launched in July 2007, the coin-operated America's Army game is a "realistic and engaging game centered on exciting training exercises and includes a significant amount of authentic Army videos". The arcade game is based on the AA computer game and is developed and produced through a partnership between GlobalVR and the U.S. Army.[50] The game can be found at cinemas, arcades and restaurants around the country.

[edit] America's Army: True Soldiers
America's Army: True Soldiers (AA:TS) was released for the Xbox 360 in November 2007. The game is rated "T" for Teen and features eight maps developed by Red Storm Entertainment. In addition to single-player missions, the game provides extensive multiplayer features for play on Xbox LIVE. AA:TS demonstrates the core values that guide Soldiers in the U.S. Army, by incorporating game play based on mission accomplishment, teamwork, leadership, and rules of engagement.
The game portrays the breadth of the Army in terms of non-combat skills and features Army equipment, including a blue Force Tracker that improves recognition of targets while increasing information to the player. Other technologies in game are Raven unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), robots, advanced command and control systems and body armor. Using video, text and pictures, True Soldiers incorporates extensive coverage of Army educational and quality of life benefits, units, technologies, occupations and insignia. These videos, text and pictures focus on non-combat occupations and encompass topics ranging from Army recreation facilities to health care and One-Plus-One barracks living. [51][52]

[edit] Real Heroes program
The AA Real Heroes program, launched in September 2006, offers a glimpse into the accomplishments of Soldiers who have distinguished themselves in combat and earned some of the nation's highest awards for valor and bravery. Described in an article from U.S. News and World Report, the idea of the Real Heroes program "is to tout ordinary people who, when thrust into danger, showed extraordinary courage... Today, there is a public recognition of a certain kind of heroism. The press regularly memorializes those soldiers who have been killed in Iraq and Afghanistan. What's missing are the tales of the soldiers who embody the Army's warrior ethos--men and women who have fought and killed the enemy."[53]
The AA Real Heroes program tells Soldiers' heroic stories through inspirational videos, photo albums and blogs on the Real Heroes website. Soldiers' likenesses and biographies are incorporated in the America's Army game and used to create action figures sold at retail and distributed at Army events. Additionally, the Real Heroes make media appearances at AA events across the country such as the VAE, AA gaming competitions and Technology Education programs. On January 23, 2007, Real Hero SGT Tommy Rieman was recognized by the President during his State of the Union address. The President affirmed "... and like so many other Americans who have volunteered to defend us, he has earned the respect and the gratitude of our country."[54] Currently, there are eight Real Heroes in the program with other Soldiers being considered for 2009.

America's Army Real Heroes

Name
Award
Tour
Selection Date


CPT Jason Amerine
Bronze Star w V Device
OEF-A
2006


SGT Tommy Rieman
Silver Star
OIF
2006


SFC Gerald Wolford
Silver Star
OIF
2006


SGT Mathew Zedwick
Silver Star
OIF
2006


SPC Jason Mike
Silver Star
OIF
2007


SSG Timothy Nein
Distinguished Service Cross
OIF
2007


SFC Robert David Groff
Bronze Star w V Device
OIF
2008


SSG John Adams
Bronze Star w V Device
OIF
2008


SPC Monica Brown
Silver Star
OEF
2009



Ranks are accurate as of the time of award.


[edit] Government applications
In 2005, the Army Game Project partnered with the Software Engineering Directorate (SED) and the Army's Aviation and Missile Research Development Engineering Center (AMRDEC) in Huntsville, Alabama to manage the commercial game development process and use the AA game platform to create government training and simulations. "America's Army has pushed to reuse the same elements for many purposes," said Colonel Wardynski, originator of the Game, "We can build one soldier avatar and use it again and again. When we build something in America's Army, the U.S. government owns it completely ... and [it] can therefore be used for any application or use of the game. So costs keep going down. " After AA went live, requests started coming in to use the game for purposes other than recruiting, such as training.[55]
The partnership with SED, an Army software lifecycle management center, allowed the Game Project to repurpose the commercial software to meet the needs of Soldiers preparing for deployment. SED engineers developed customized applications used by many different Army and government organizations including the JFK Special Forces School and the Army's Chemical School. By creating training simulations linked to tactical hardware, Soldiers are able to learn to use sophisticated, and often scarce, equipment such as PackBot robots, Common Remotely Operated Weapons Stations (CROWS), and Nuclear Biological Chemical Reconnaissance Vehicles (NBC-RV) in a safe, vivid, simulation. "Trainers and simulators allow for modified versions of the game to be used almost anywhere, especially if a financial resource is limited," said Col. Wardynski. "This allows for all sorts of variables to be included at virtually no extra cost."[56]
These trainers were so well received by Soldiers, the Project team began researching opportunities to use America's Army simulations for outreach at Army events. Because repurposed code can be applied to almost any project, firms external to the AA game project have approached SED for custom applications such as convoy training, personnel recovery, combat readiness command and safety training, thus saving valuable time and money.[56] At the Army's Aviation Research, Development and Engineering Center, one of the new places of the developers, the game is used to test new weapons.

[edit] Virtual Army Experience
Launched in February 2007, the Virtual Army Experience (VAE) is a mobile U.S. Army simulator that allows participants to virtually "test drive" of Soldiering. http://vae.americasarmy.com/ The VAE provides a "high-tech, team-based experience designed to immerse visitors in the operational roles of Soldiers in the U.S. Army". http://www.goarmy.com/events/vae/index.jsp The core of the 19,500 square foot VAE is the America's Army computer game, rendered with state-of-the-art Army training simulation technology to create a life-size, networked virtual world. The VAE is deployed in its full scale rendition, or may be broken down into two smaller versions enabling it to appear at two separate events simultaneously. Since its' launch, the VAE has hosted over 130,000 participants at more than 100 events from air shows to amusement parks to state fairs and festivals.
Inside the VAE are realistic Up-Armored HMMWVs and Blackhawk Helicopter simulator stations. The simulators feature special effects such as the HMMWV pitching and shaking as it moves over the virtual terrain, and simulated explosions caused by enemy fire and IEDs (Improvised Explosive Devices). Subject Matter Experts (most of whom have served in the Army) guide participants through the experience by providing a short briefing on how to use the equipment and pointing out IEDs, terrorists, civilians, and allies. The entire experience lasts approximately 20 minutes and requires that participants register with the VAE if they wish to use the simulator.
The VAE launch was greeted with enthusiasm by the experiential marketing community for its innovative design, use of advanced data capture technology, and ability to effectively engage visitors through an immersive, entertaining and educational experience. The Army's use of storytelling, virtual-reality techniques and tracking technology is a potent combination that commercial marketers could learn from, say experts, especially those marketers who target young adults.[57]
Overall the VAE:



Attended over 100 events including air shows, music festivals, amusement parks, Spring Break, NASCAR and NHRA races, and urban expos thru September 2008
Attracted more than 140,000 participants across the country thru September2008
Received Event Design magazine Bronze Award for Best Outdoor Consumer Experience
Was featured in the cover story in AdWeek magazine, November 2007




[edit] Army Experience Center
On August 29, 2008, the U.S. Army opened the Army Experience Center (AEC), an educational facility where visitors can virtually experience many aspects of Army life. Located inside the Franklin Mills Mall in Philadelphia, the 14,500-square-foot facility features a number of interactive simulations and online learning programs to inform visitors about Army careers, training and educational opportunities. America's Army gaming and simulation technologies are featured throughout the AEC.[58]
Pete Geren, Secretary of the Army, says "Potential recruits are afforded a unique opportunity through the Army Experience Center to learn what it means to be the best-led, best-trained and best-equipped Army in the world by allowing them to virtually experience multiple aspects of the Army."[59]
The AEC highlights how Soldiers accomplish complex missions by putting visitors in the roles of Soldiers and providing them hands-on interaction with mission simulations, interactive displays and educational technologies. The experience allows participants to see how technology, training and teamwork combine to make the Army successful.
The AEC houses a Command and Control Center where high-tech briefings are conducted; an interactive career center for exploring Army career opportunities; realistic AA simulators that include an Apache helicopter, a Black Hawk helicopter, and an Armored HMMWV. There also are gaming areas featuring Xbox 360 pods and networked personal computers for playing America's Army.
The head of Army Recruiting Command, Major General Thomas Bostick, calls the AEC "a learning laboratory" — but not just for those who are thinking of joining. "It's incumbent upon the American public to know about their Army," Bostick said.[60]

[edit] Technology Education Program
Launched in 2007, the AA Technology Education Program provides real world applications of classroom learning that augment the curriculum in academic areas including math, physical science, physics, chemistry, technology, computer science, art, animation, graphic design, social studies, anatomy, physiology and psychology. Army experts and Soldiers work with students to teach them about robotics; optics; missiles; video gaming; and intellectual, emotional and physical development. "The U.S. Army is committed to educating today's youth," said Col. Wardynski, director of the AA game project. He said, "America's Army combines the power of gaming and simulations with real-life equipment to create a compelling academic program."[61]
The Game Project teams at West Point and AMRDEC have developed educational modules for non-profit educational organizations. Project Lead the Way (PLTW), a national organization that provides standards-based, pre-engineering and technology curriculum to over 3,000 high school and middle school students nationwide, is participating in the AA Technology Education Program. They partnered with AA to develop interactive simulations to teach scientific and mathematic principles in a fun and engaging way. The first modules were released in September 2008 and will be used by PLTW teachers in the state of Ohio for the 2008-2009 academic years before being rolled out nationwide. Educators have visited Army labs to meet with engineers and scientists and preview technologies from missiles to robotics to flight simulators and nuclear biological and chemical detection systems. "When we were approached by the U.S. Army late last year, we realized the great opportunity this project represented for engaging students in a learning environment that excites them," said Ohio Superintendent of Public Instruction Susan Tave Zelman. "This will move the STEM [science, technology, engineering and math] initiative forward in vast ways and refocus teaching strategies in the classroom. This marks a real shift in the education paradigm to utilizing a technology platform that students are familiar with and enjoy."[61]
Business First Columbus ran a column entitled "Do your homework! Wait, no, Let me" which stated: "Imagine kids playing video games in which they drive jeeps and aim cannons - and it's sponsored by the Ohio Department of Education. That will be the case as the state becomes the pilot site for incorporating a free online game from the U.S. Army into science and math curriculum developed by a national nonprofit. Clifton, N.Y. based Project Lead the Way will place modules from the AA game in its principles of engineering course. Students will use geometry and physics to estimate and carry out virtual ballistics projects and helicopter drops. The group hopes to take it nationwide next year."[62]
In April 2008, Discovery Education featured America's Army in a live webinar in which over 1000 students and educators participated with AA game developers and software engineers. A group of students and teachers toured the AA lab at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama and the game development studio in California to learn about the Army's latest technologies.
AA and the Army Center for Enhanced Performance (ACEP) are developing educational programs for coaches and athletes from the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) to teach mental and leadership skills that enhance performance. AA provides on-line, interactive applications to supplement classroom instruction in skills such as life saving, financial management, focus, concentration, and study skills. AA Real Heroes tell their stories at schools and events around the country. They also showcase equipment such as robots and provide life-saving and performance enhancement training.

[edit] Reception

[edit] Press coverage
America's Army has been featured in more than 6,400 stories around the globe including newspapers such as the NY Times, LA Times, Wall Street Journal, USA Today and multiple times on wire services such as the Associated Press, UPI, and Reuters. In addition reporters have highlighted the program through articles in Newsweek, Popular Mechanics, Time Magazine, Stuff, Soldiers and FHM. Online sites such as CNN.com, Wired News, Business Week Online, MTV, ABC News and MSNBC.com have also covered the program. AA spokespeople including Soldiers from the Real Heroes program have also been guests or featured on TV with appearances on CNN, Fox and Friends, MTV, FOX News and CBS Evening News.
During November and December 2007, the Discovery Channel aired a five part series entitled "Rise of the Video Game". Episode three featured America's Army and an interview with project director Col. Wardynski.[63]

[edit] Awards
Since its inception, the Army Game Project has earned the following nominations, accolades and awards:
2002


Presenting Body
Award


Computer Gaming World Magazine
Editor's Choice award (4.5 out of 5 stars)


Computer Games Magazine
Best Use of Tax Dollars


PC Gamer Magazine
Best Value


PC Gamer Magazine
The Best Gaming moments of 2002


IGN ActionVault
Debut Game of the Year


IGN ActionVault
Biggest Surprise of the Year


IGN ActionVault
Multiplayer Game of the Year (Honorable Mention)


Gamespot.com
Biggest Surprise on a PC


Gamespot.com
Best Multiplayer Game (Runner Up)


Gamespot.com
Nominated for Best Sound in a Game


GameSpy.com
Best Action Game of E3 (Runner Up)


Wargamer.com
Best First Person / Tactical Shooter


Computer Gaming World
Multiplayer Game of the Year (Nominated)


Clan World Network
Most Realistic Game of the Year


2003


Presenting Body
Award


Well-Rounded Entertainment.com
Best Game of E3 2003


DoubleClick's Insight Awards
Honorable Mention for Best Multi-Channel Marketing


Academy for Interactive Arts & Sciences
Finalist for 2003's First Person Action Game


GameSpot
Runner up for Best Multiplayer Game of the Year 2003


CBS Online
One of the Best Games of 2003


GameSpy
Best of 2003 – Best Value


PC Gamer
Runner Up for Best Value


2004


Presenting Body
Award


Computer Games Magazine
Best Free Game


Tom's Hardware
The Best of E3America's Army: Special Forces - Most Dedicated Developers


2005


Presenting Body
Award


Digital Entertainment & Media Excellence Award(DEMX)
Best Advergame of 2005


2006


Presenting Body
Award


Innovations in American Government Award
Finalist


M16 Copywriting and Text
Gold Prize for demonstrating compelling and creative copy


2007


Presenting Body
Award


Event Design Magazine Awards
Bronze Medal for Best Outdoor Consumer Environment (VAE)


2008


Presenting Body
Award


Guinness World Records
Largest Traveling Game Simulator (VAE)


Guinness World Records
Largest Virtual Army


Guinness World Records
Most Downloaded War Game



[edit] Academic references
AA has gained the interest of numerous professionals in the fields of business, economics, and social science. A partial list of published analyses includes:

"Changing the Game: How Video games are Transforming the Future of Business October, 2008." David Edery, Microsoft Xbox executive and research affiliate of the MIT Comparative Media Studies Program, and Ethan Mollick, researcher at the MIT Sloan School of Management, investigate the future of video games. They cite the combat medic training received by Paxton Galvanek to save a life as "tangible evidence of the power of games to educate". (p. 97) Furthermore, the book praises America's Army by saying "Far-sighted companies are using games to recruit, train, motivate, and make employees more productive" (p.97) and includes research that supports this point: "30% of all Americans age 16 to 24 had a more positive impression of the Army because of the game and, even more amazingly, the game had more impact on recruits than all other forms of Army advertising combined." (p. 141)
"Watch This, Listen Up, Click Here: Inside the 300 Billion Dollar Business Behind the Media You Constantly Consume April, 2007." David Verklin, CEO of Carat, and Bernice Kanner, marketing expert, test the stability of old, traditional media and find they're collapsing under pressure from online services. Highlights the U.S. Army video game as the 21st century's recruitment poster. "America's Army has proven to be such powerful weaponry that an official game store does brisk business selling collectible action figures, clothes, coffee mugs, and other doodads emblazoned with the logo." (p. 90)
"Experience the Message: How Experiential Marketing Is Changing the Brand World by Max Lendermann, creative director of GMR Marketing, December, 2005." Cites AA advergaming success and rollout to an experiential marketing campaign. "The America's Army experience is an advergaming juggernaut, an empire that is looked to enviably by the rest of the advergaming nations." (p. 218) "Not only do players get a fun and exciting experience, they also get as close to the real thing of being in the army as possible, without actually getting a buzz cut and general-issue fatigues." (p. 222)
"Authenticity: What Consumers Really Want by James H. Gilmore and B. Joseph Pine II, co-founders of Strategic Horizons LLP, September 2007." http://authenticitybook.com/ Published by Harvard Business School Press, this book cites America's Army as one of the most innovative and successful examples of virtual placemaking and Col. Wardynski's efforts in establishing new and better metric analyses. "According to the director of the program, Colonel Casey Wardynski, 20 percent of those matriculating at West Point in 2005 had played America's Army, along with 20 to 40 percent of enlisted soldiers recruited that year." (p. 168) "America's Army director Colonel Wardynski uses the metric 'cost per person hour', estimating in 2005 that the $2.5 million the Army puts into the program each year results in 'a cost per person hour of 10 cents, versus $5 to $8 for TV'." (p. 173)
"Career Innovation Case Study of the U.S. Army as part of the "Digital Generation Initiative"" Case study analyzed the Army Game Project efforts and concluded the following: First, to reach the Digital Generation, content must be engaging and authentic. Employers will have to adopt a much more open and transparent approach to communicating information and allowing contact with employees than is currently the norm. Second, the Digital Generation will expect to be able to virtually explore and even "test drive" jobs and organizations. The Army's experience shows the potential and importance of virtual tools and capabilities in shaping the brand image of employers. Third, games and simulations can play a role in preparing new hires for the job. And finally, employers should treat investments in games and simulations as a platform to support a wide range of recruiting, learning and performance development activities and goals. Virtual simulators are cheaper than real ones in many instances.
"The Potential of America's Army as Civilian-Military Public Sphere" extensive February 2004 thesis (149 pages) by graduate student Zhan Li for the Massachusetts Institute of Technology - includes ethnographic analysis of Soldiers who play the game during the invasion of Iraq, and interviews with West Point directors of the America's Army project.
"Social Realism in Gaming academic analysis of AA in terms of "Social realism" by Alexander R. Galloway" a book author and Assistant Professor at New York University. Alexander R. Galloway, an associate professor at New York University notes that, "What is interesting about America's Army, is not the debate over whether it is thinly-veiled propaganda or a legitimate recruitment tool, for it is unabashedly and decisively both, but rather that the central conceit of the game is one of mimetic realism." In his analysis, Galloway concludes that AA, despite being a fairly realistic game, with real-life settings, does not make even the least attempt to achieve narrative realism—that is, accurately representing what serving a tour in the Army would actually be like. Instead, it simply expresses a nationalistic sentiment under the guise of realism, being little more than a "naïve and unmediated or reflective conception of aesthetic construction."
"Video Games, Manipulation and the U.S. Military: A Comparative Analysis of America's Army and SOCOM II: US Navy SEALs" academic analysis of America's Army and SOCOM II: U.S. Navy SEALs in terms of "Visual Discourse" by Caroline S. Brooks, a PhD candidate at East Carolina University.
"America's Army PC Game - Vision and Realization," published by the MOVES Institute and the US Army, February 2004, 40 pages.
Michael Zyda, Alex Mayberry, Jesse McCree, and Margaret Davis “From Viz-Sim to VR to Games: How We Built a Hit Game-Based Simulation,” in W.B. Rouse and K.R. Boff (Eds.) Organizational Simulation: From Modeling & Simulation to Games & Entertainment, New York: Wiley Press, 2005,pp., ISBN 0471681636.
Margaret Davis, Russell Shilling, Alex Mayberry, Jesse McCree, Phillip Bossant, Scott Dossett, Christian Buhl, Christopher Chang, Evan Champlin, Travis Wiglesworth and Michael Zyda "Researching America’s Army," in Design Research: Methods and Perspectives, edited by Brenda Laurel, MIT Press, 1 October 2003, ISBN 0262122634, 268-275.
Russ Shilling, Michael Zyda and E. Casey Wardynski, "Introducing Emotion into Military Simulation and Videogame Design: America's Army Operations and VIRTE," in the Proceedings of the GameOn Conference, London, 30 November 2002, pp. 151-154.


This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it.

[edit] In popular culture

In NBC's My Name is Earl "Early Release" episode on December 6, 2007, the warden was playing AA while Earl was attempting his escape.[64]


In Comedy Central's Reno 911! "The Prefect of Wanganui" episode on July 19, 2005, Wiegel and Junior are at job fair recruiting for the Reno Police department and an America's Army mobile game exhibit is featured. [65]


An America's Army rap song was developed by the clan site Baghdad Bounty Hunters.[66]


Author Max Brooks, in New York Times Bestseller World War Z mentions the game in his fictional chronology as one of many failed attempts to increase recruitment in the days before the Zombie War.


Propagandhi's "Die Jugend Marschiert" (meaning, The Youth Marches in German), from their album Potemkin City Limits, is an intense criticism of the game and parents who allow their children to play it.


[edit] Controversy
Apart from the common controversy that surrounds games rewarding the virtual killing of other human beings, America's Army caused additional debate and disagreement that has made it the subject of journalistic and academic research.
One of the major aspects of the game is the relatively realistic depiction of used equipment. However, critics of the project state that it excludes some notable facets of Army life from its portrayal, such as the emotional trauma that soldiers may experience when they are confronted with combat.
One commonly brought up example is gore, which is much more tame than it is in real life. One reason for this is that too much gore would raise the ESRB's rating of the game above Teen, while the target audience is teenagers just below recruiting age (17). Another reason is that high gore would not attract potential recruits to join the military. Another possibility is that a high gore depiction may direct even more intense criticism towards the Army for the perceived glorification of violence that other developers have been the target of.
There has also been some criticism about how the game portrays the reaction of the human body when hit by a bullet. For example, an injury to the knee won't result in the player dropping to the ground, and subsequently facing difficulty in movement or not being able to move at all. At most, the result would be the player going from the "Green" status (healthy or lightly wounded) to the "Yellow" status (wounded) usually by bleeding, causing just a slight reduction in movement speed and weapon accuracy. Note that the player would still be able to jump, even in the "Red" status (severely wounded). Likewise, an injury to an area usually not protected by body armor like hands won't result in the player dropping his weapon nor subsequently not being able to fire at all.
The game has also been described as an extension of the military entertainment complex or so-called "militainment", further blurring the line between entertainment and war,[12] with criticism that it contributes to a militarization of society.[67] Gary Webb argued that the game's other purpose was aptitude testing of potential recruits and that this had never been noticed by the public. He concluded that this could be the only reason for spending taxes to track players and collect statistics.[16]
Because America's Army focuses on the technological aspect of war rather than the moral, it has been referred to as How We Fight, alluding to the U.S. government's series of films named Why We Fight, which supported the war effort for World War II.[68]

[edit] See also




Video games portal




AirForce Delta Storm, video game used by US Air Force[69]
Close Combat: First to Fight, video game developed with input from US Marines
Close Combat: Marines, training game available only to US Marines
Fleet Command, video game used by US Navy
Full Spectrum Warrior, commercial version of military training aid
Microsoft Flight Simulator, used by US Navy[70]
Militainment
Operation Flashpoint: Cold War Crisis
Recruitment tool
SOCOM: U.S. Navy SEALs
Soldier of Fortune, video game used by USMC Infantry Cognitive Skills Lab[71]
VBS1, a leading military simulator


[edit] References


^ a b c d e f Kennedy, Brian (2002-07-11). "Uncle Sam Wants You (To Play This Game)". New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9B0DE2DE1330F932A25754C0A9649C8B63&sec=&spon=&&scp=1&sq=wardynski&st=cse. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ a b McLeroy, Carrie (2008-09). "History of Military Gaming" (pdf). Soldiers Magazine: 4-6. http://lists.army.mil/soldiersmagazine/pdfs/sep08full.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Bramwell, Tom (2007-03-17). "America's Army launches mobile offensive.". gamesindustry.biz. http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/americas-army-launches-mobile-offensive. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Brinkley, C. Mark (2007-03-19). "Expand and conquer". Army Times. http://www.armytimes.com/entertainment/video_games/online_life_americasarmy070226/. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Jean, Grace (2006-02). "Game Branches Out Into Real Combat Training". National Defense Magazine. http://www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/archive/2006/February/Pages/games_brance3042.aspx. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ a b Verklin, David; Kanner, Bernice (2007-08-07). "Games People Play". MediaPost Publications. http://www.mediapost.com/publications/index.cfm?fuseaction=Articles.showArticleHomePage&art_aid=63264. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ a b "Playing the Recruiting Game". Career Innovation. 2008-06-12. http://www.careerinnovation.com/page.asp?PageID=160. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Goodale, Gloria (2002-05-31). "Video game offers young recruits a peek at military life". The Christian Science Monitor. http://www.csmonitor.com/2002/0531/p18s01-algn.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "Gimme The Stats!". GameSpy.com. http://archive.gamespy.com/stats/. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Christensen, Bill (2005). "America's Army And The Last Starfighter: Science Fiction in the News". Technovelgy.com. http://www.technovelgy.com/ct/Science-Fiction-News.asp?NewsNum=334. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "America's Army". Everything2.com. 2002-05-30. http://everything2.com/index.pl?node_id=1310813. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ a b Turse, Nick (2003-10-16). "Zap, zap, you're dead...". TomDispatch.com. http://www.tomdispatch.com/index.mhtml?pid=1012. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ a b Morris, Chris (2002-06-03). "Your tax dollars at play". CNN Money. http://money.cnn.com/2002/05/31/commentary/game_over/column_gaming/. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ a b Hodes, Jacob; Ruby-Sachs, Emma (2002-08-23). "'America's Army' Targets Youth". The Nation. http://www.thenation.com/doc/20020902/hodes20020823. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Feldman, Curt (2005-05-19). "E3 Update: America's Army polishes up its act". GameSpot. http://www.gamespot.com/news/2005/05/19/news_6124594.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ a b c d e Webb, Gary (2004-10-14). "The killing game". Sacramento News and Review. http://www.newsreview.com/sacramento/Content?oid=31755. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Breznican, Anthony (2002-05-23). "Army Recruiting Through Video Games". Associated Press. http://www.cndyorks.gn.apc.org/news/articles/videogames.htm. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Turse, Nick (2003-12-16). "The Pentagon Invades Your Xbox". ZNet. http://www.zmag.org/content/showarticle.cfm?SectionID=51&ItemID=4688%20. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "Full Metal Joystick, Entrepreneurs: The U.S. Army's New Recruiting Videogame Is An Online Phenomenon". NewsWeek. 2002-10-14. http://www.newsweek.com/id/65951/output/print. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "America's Army Website FAQ". US Army. http://www.americasarmy.com/support/faqs.php?t=9. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Bushman, Brad (2004-05-09). "Army video game breeds violence with tax money.". The Detroit News. http://www.topplebush.com/oped376.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ a b Wagner, James Au (2002-10-04). "Weapons of mass distraction, A new breed of computer games is teaching today's teenagers how to wage, and win, the war against terror.". Salon.com. http://dir.salon.com/story/tech/feature/2002/10/04/why_we_fight/print.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Bray, Hiawatha (2003-12-09). "New Take On The Game of Life". Boston Globe. http://search.boston.com/local/Search.do?s.sm.query=%22new+take+on+the+game+of+life%22&s.author=&s.si%28simplesearchinput%29.sortBy=-articleprintpublicationdate&docType=&s.collections=bostonGlobe%3A&date=&s.dateRange=&s.startDate=&s.endDate=. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "America's Army -- Behind the Scenes". March 2005. Archived from the original on March 16, 2005. http://web.archive.org/web/20050316051635/http://dukenukem.typepad.com/game_matters/2005/03/americas_army_b.html. 
^ Granetto, Paul J (2005-08-24). "Development and Management of the Army Game Project". written at Arlington, Virginia. Department of Defense: Office of the Inspector General. http://www.dodig.mil/Audit/reports/FY05/05103sum.htm. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Burns, Enid (2005-08-29). "U.S. Army Invades Video Game consoles". The ClickZ Network. http://www.clickz.com/showPage.html?page=3530631. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "GameSpy: America's Army: Rise of a Soldier". GameSpy. http://xbox.gamespy.com/xbox/americas-army/. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "America's Army Preview". GamesFirst!. http://www.gamesfirst.com/index.php?id=933. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "Advanced Marksmanship Training  : AAManual". US Army. http://manual.americasarmy.com/index.php/Advanced_Marksmanship_Training. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ a b "Man Imitates America's Army, Saves Lives". Wired Online. 2008-01. http://blog.wired.com/games/2008/01/americas-army-t.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "America's Army Game Saves Lives". PSXExtreme. http://www.psxextreme.com/ps3-news/2460.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "U.S. Army Weapons - AAManual". US Army. http://manual.americasarmy.com/index.php/U.S._Army_Weapons. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "Magazine Focuses on Army Gaming". Military.com. http://www.military.com/entertainment/games/game-news/magazine-focuses-on-army-gaming. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "America's Army Preview (PC)". GamesFirst!. 2002-06-08. http://www.gamesfirst.com/index.php?id=933. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Acosta, Jim (2004-03-30). "Army Recruits Video Gamers: Latest Recruiting Tool Winning Over Hearts, Minds Of Teens". CBS News. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2004/03/30/eveningnews/main609489.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Bounds, Jeff (2007-04-09). "Game On! When the army came calling for an assist with its popular video game, A local university answered the call". Dallas Business Journal. http://dallas.bizjournals.com/dallas/stories/2007/04/09/focus1.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "News on Beta timeframe and first look at AA3". America's Army Forums. 2008-09-05. http://forum.americasarmy.com/viewtopic.php?t=283775&highlight=AA3. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "Recent News From [DevAceKilla"]. America's Army 3.0. 2007-07-19. http://www.aao30.com/?p=7. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "An Update From The Development Team". America's Army 3.0. 2007-12-07. http://www.aao30.com/?p=34. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "[DevSnoopDoug on OpFor Weapons"]. America's Army 3.0. 2007-07-19. http://www.aao30.com/?p=8. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "Jump in AA3". America's Army 3.0. 2007-10-02. http://www.aao30.com/?p=29. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "America's Army 3 Announced". IGN. 2009-20-01. http://pc.ign.com/articles/946/946300p1.html. 
^ "America's Army 3 Deploying in 2009". Game Daily. 2009-20-01. http://www.gamedaily.com/articles/news/americas-army-3-deploying-in-2009/?biz=1. 
^ "America's Army 3 Announced". Game Daily News. 2009-20-01. http://www.gamersdailynews.co.uk/story-7897-Americas-Army-3-Announced.html. 
^ "'America's Army' to upgrade this year". CNET. 2009-20-01. http://news.cnet.com/8301-17938_105-10148526-1.html. 
^ "'Screenshots Feature: America's Army 3 Details". WarGamer. 2009-20-01. http://www.wargamer.com/article/2639/america's-army-3-details. 
^ "AA: RoS in Stores NOW!". RiseofaSoldier.com. 2005-11-16. http://www.riseofasoldier.com/us/newsItem.php?id=14007. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "America's Army Gameloft". Mobilecritic.com. 2007-04-06. http://mobicritic.com/2007/04/06/americas-army-gameloft/. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "America's Army Mobile Phone Game". ArmyOps Tracker. 2007-01-31. http://aaotracker.com/thread.php?threadid=163814/. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "Global VR to Deploy America's Army at AAMA Gala". Arcade Renaissance. 2007-07-20. http://www.arcade-renaissance.com/2007/07/global-vr-to-deploy-americas-army-at.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "Free Favorites - America's Army". About.com. http://internetgames.about.com/library/weekly/aaarmyopsa.htm. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "America's Army: True Soldiers Reader Review by TheZeeMan". IGN.com. 2007-12-18. http://rr.xbox360.ign.com/rrview/xbox360/americas_army_true_soldiers/926363/78260/. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Barnes, Julian E. (2005-11-13). "The New Action Heroes: In a time of war, the Army finds innovative ways to promote its warriors". U.S. News. http://www.usnews.com/usnews/news/articles/051121/21heroes.htm. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "State of the Union". Whitehouse Website. 2007. http://www.whitehouse.gov/stateoftheunion/2007/photoessay/04.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Testa, Bridget Mintz (2008-05-26). "'America's Army' provides an enterprise platform for Army training". Defense Systems. http://defensesystems.com/articles/2008/05/much-more-than-a-game.aspx. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ a b "America's Army' game transformed". UPI.com. 2006-02-16. http://www.upi.com/Science_News/2006/02/16/Americas_Army_game_transformed/UPI-67241140094380/. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Voight, Joan (2007-11-26). "Army Recruiters On a New Mission". AdWeek. http://www.adweek.com/aw/esearch/article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1003676881. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ McLeroy, Carrie (2008-09-02). "Army Experience Center opens in Philadelphia". U.S. Army News. http://www.army.mil/-news/2008/09/02/12072-army-experience-center-opens-in-philadelphia/. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "U.S. Army Opens 'Army Experience Center' in Philadelphia: High-Tech Facility Allows Visitors to Experience Many Aspects of Army". MarketWatch.com. 2008-08-29. http://www.marketwatch.com/news/story/us-army-opens-army-experience/story.aspx?guid=%7B8650D27D-4056-4C42-961F-BB180FB2E1A0%7D&dist=hppr. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Matheson, Kathy (2008-08-30). "Army Experience Center offers simulations at mall". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/news/military/2008-08-30-army-experience-center_N.htm?csp=34. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ a b "'America's Army' finds place in classroom". Fort Leavenworth Lamp Online. 2008-09-25. http://www.ftleavenworthlamp.com/articles/2008/09/25/dod_news/dod6.txt. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "Do your homework! Wait, no, let me". Business First. 2008-09-22. http://www.bizjournals.com/columbus/stories/2008/09/22/tidbits1.html?b=1222056000%5E1703169&brthrs=1. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "Rise of the Video Game". Discovery Channel. http://dsc.discovery.com/tv/video-game/episode/episode-tab-03.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "My Name is Earl". NBC. http://www.nbc.com/My_Name_Is_Earl/video/clips/early-release-1206/192841/. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "The Prefect of Wanganui". IMDB.com. http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0685207/. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "Baghdad Bounty Hunters". http://www.baghdadbountyhunters.clanservers.com/audio/aamusic.mp3. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Li, Zhan (2003). "The Potential of America's Army the Video Game as Civilian-Military Public Sphere" (pdf). http://www.gamasutra.com/education/theses/20040725/ZLITHESIS.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ Huntemann, Nina (2003). "Militarism & Video Games". Media Education Foundation. Archived from the original on October 2, 2003. http://web.archive.org/web/20031002152720/http://www.mediaed.org/news/articles/militarism. 
^ "Air Force Delta Storm". Department of Defense Game Developers'. http://www.dodgamecommunity.com/modules.php?op=modload&name=News&file=article&sid=34&mode=thread&order=1&thold=0. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "Microsoft Flight Simulator". Department of Defense Game Developers' Community. http://www.dodgamecommunity.com/modules.php?op=modload&name=News&file=article&sid=46&mode=thread&order=1&thold=0. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "Soldier of Fortune". Department of Defense Game Developers' Community. http://www.dodgamecommunity.com/modules.php?op=modload&name=News&file=article&sid=33&mode=thread&order=1&thold=0. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 



[edit] External links

Official website
The MOVES Institute (former developers)
"War games in a time of war", MSNBC article (July 18, 2004)
"The Army Game Project" article for the Army Magazine by Chris Chambers (deputy director of AA), Thomas Sherlock (teacher of political science) and Paul Kucik (economic analyst in the Office of Economic and Manpower Analysis), 2002
Enjoy the video game? Then join the army. by the Christian Science Monitor
Official PunkBuster site
America's Army at GameSpot




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/America%27s_Army"
Categories: 2002 video games | Advergames | Cancelled PlayStation 2 games | First-person shooters | Multiplayer online games | Propaganda video games | Tactical shooter video games | Windows games | Xbox games | Unreal Engine gamesHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008 | Incomplete lists 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search



 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Français
Italiano
עברית
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Simple English
Slovenščina
Suomi
Svenska
中文









 This page was last modified on 16 March 2009, at 18:28.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
