













Westminster Abbey - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Westminster_Abbey";
		var wgTitle = "Westminster Abbey";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "43245";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281994740;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 


wgOggPlayer.msg = {"ogg-play": "Play", "ogg-pause": "Pause", "ogg-stop": "Stop", "ogg-no-player": "Sorry, your system does not appear to have any supported player software.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload a player\x3c/a\x3e.", "ogg-player-videoElement": "Native browser support", "ogg-player-oggPlugin": "Browser plugin", "ogg-player-cortado": "Cortado (Java)", "ogg-player-vlc-mozilla": "VLC", "ogg-player-vlc-activex": "VLC (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-quicktime-mozilla": "QuickTime", "ogg-player-quicktime-activex": "QuickTime (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-totem": "Totem", "ogg-player-kaffeine": "Kaffeine", "ogg-player-kmplayer": "KMPlayer", "ogg-player-mplayerplug-in": "mplayerplug-in", "ogg-player-thumbnail": "Still image only", "ogg-player-selected": "(selected)", "ogg-use-player": "Use player:", "ogg-more": "More…", "ogg-download": "Download file", "ogg-desc-link": "About this file", "ogg-dismiss": "Close", "ogg-player-soundthumb": "No player", "ogg-no-xiphqt": "You do not appear to have the XiphQT component for QuickTime.\nQuickTime cannot play Ogg files without this component.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload XiphQT\x3c/a\x3e or choose another player."};
wgOggPlayer.cortadoUrl = "http://upload.wikimedia.org/jars/cortado.jar";
wgOggPlayer.extPathUrl = "/w/extensions/OggHandler";


.ogg-player-options {
	border: solid 1px #ccc;
	padding: 2pt;
	text-align: left;
	font-size: 10pt;
}
 <!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Westminster Abbey

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For the Benedictine monastery, see Westminster Abbey (British Columbia). For the former constituency, see Westminster Abbey (UK Parliament constituency).


Westminster Palace, Westminster Abbey and Saint Margaret's Church*


UNESCO World Heritage Site







State Party
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland


Type
Cultural


Criteria
I, II, IV


Reference
426


Region**
Europe and North America


Inscription history


Inscription
1987  (11th Session)


* Name as inscribed on World Heritage List.
** Region as classified by UNESCO.


The Collegiate Church of St Peter at Westminster, which is almost always referred to popularly and informally as Westminster Abbey, is a large, mainly Gothic church, in Westminster, London, just to the west of the Palace of Westminster. It is the traditional place of coronation and burial site for English, later British and later still (and currently) monarchs of the Commonwealth Realms. It briefly held the status of a cathedral from 1546–1556, and is currently a Royal Peculiar.




Contents


1 History
2 Coronations
3 Burials and memorials

3.1 Buried

3.1.1 Monarchs and their consorts
3.1.2 Other monarchs and consorts
3.1.3 Nave
3.1.4 North Transept
3.1.5 South Transept
3.1.6 Cloisters
3.1.7 North Choir Aisle
3.1.8 South Choir Aisle
3.1.9 Ambulatory Chapels
3.1.10 Henry VII's Lady Chapel


3.2 Commemorated
3.3 Removed


4 Schools
5 Organ

5.1 Organists
5.2 Sub organists
5.3 Assistant organists


6 Bells
7 Transport
8 Chapter
9 Museum

9.1 Exhibits


10 Gallery
11 See also
12 Notes
13 References
14 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
According to tradition the Abbey was first founded in 616 on the present site, then known as Thorn Ey (Thorn Island); based on a late 'tradition' that a fisherman called ' Aldrich ' on the River Thames saw a vision of Saint Peter near the site. This seems to be quoted to justify the presents of salmon from the Thames fishermen that the Abbey received in later years. The proven origins are that in the 960s or early 970s, Saint Dunstan, assisted by King Edgar, planted a community of Benedictine monks here. A stone Abbey was built around 1045–1050 by King Edward the Confessor as part of his palace there: it was consecrated on December 28, 1065,[1] only a week before the Confessor's death and subsequent funeral and burial. It was the site of the last coronation prior to the Norman Invasion, that of his successor King Harold. It was later rebuilt by Henry III from 1245, who had selected the site for his burial.




A layout plan dated 1894.


The only extant depiction of the original Abbey, in the Romanesque style that is called Norman in England, together with the adjacent Palace of Westminster, is in the Bayeux Tapestry. Increased endowments supported a community increased from a dozen monks in Dunstan's original foundation, to about eighty monks.[2]
The Abbot and learned monks, in close proximity to the Royal Palace of Westminster, the seat of government from the later twelfth century, became a powerful force in the centuries after the Norman Conquest: the Abbot was often employed on royal service and in due course took his place in the House of Lords as of right. Released from the burdens of spiritual leadership, which passed to the reformed Cluniac movement after the mid-tenth century, and occupied with the administration of great landed properties, some of which lay far from Westminster, "the Benedictines achieved a remarkable degree of identification with the secular life of their times, and particularly with upper-class life", Barbara Harvey concluded, to the extent that her depiction of daily life[3] provides a wider view of the concerns of the English gentry in the High and Late Middle Ages. The proximity of the Palace of Westminster did not extend to providing monks or abbots with high royal connections; in social origin the Benedictines of Westminster were as modest as most of the order. The abbot remained Lord of the Manor of Westminster as a town of two to three thousand persons grew around it: as a consumer and employer on a grand scale the monastery helped fuel the town economy, and relations with the town remained unusually cordial, but no enfranchising charter was issued during the Middle Ages.[4] The abbey built shops and dwellings on the west side, encroaching upon the sanctuary.
The Abbey became the coronation site of Norman kings, but none were buried there until Henry III, intensely devoted to the cult of the Confessor, rebuilt the Abbey in Anglo-French Gothic style as a shrine to honour St Edward the Confessor and as a suitably regal setting for Henry's own tomb, under the highest Gothic nave in England. The Confessor's shrine subsequently played a great part in his canonisation. The work continued between 1245-1517 and was largely finished by the architect Henry Yevele in the reign of King Richard II. Henry VII added a Perpendicular style chapel dedicated to the Blessed Virgin Mary in 1503 (known as the Henry VII Chapel). Much of the stone came from Caen, in France (Caen stone), the Isle of Portland (Portland stone) and the Loire Valley region of France (tuffeau limestone).




Flag of Westminster Abbey, featuring the Tudor Arms between Tudor Roses above the supposed arms of St Edward the Confessor


In 1535, the Abbey's annual income of £2400-2800[citation needed] during the assessment attendant on the Dissolution of the Monasteries rendered it second in wealth only to Glastonbury Abbey. Henry VIII had assumed direct royal control in 1539 and granted the Abbey cathedral status by charter in 1540, simultaneously issuing letters patent establishing the Diocese of Westminster. By granting the Abbey cathedral status Henry VIII gained an excuse to spare it from the destruction or dissolution which he inflicted on most English abbeys during this period. Westminster was a cathedral only until 1550. The expression "robbing Peter to pay Paul" may arise from this period when money meant for the Abbey, which was dedicated to St Peter, was diverted to the treasury of St Paul's Cathedral.
The Abbey was restored to the Benedictines under the Catholic Queen Mary, but they were again ejected under Queen Elizabeth I in 1559. In 1579, Elizabeth re-established Westminster as a "Royal Peculiar"—a church responsible directly to the sovereign, rather than to a diocesan bishop—and made it the Collegiate Church of St Peter, (that is a church with an attached chapter of canons, headed by a dean). The last Abbot was made the first Dean. It suffered damage during the turbulent 1640s, when it was attacked by Puritan iconoclasts, but was again protected by its close ties to the state during the Commonwealth period. Oliver Cromwell was given an elaborate funeral there in 1658, only to be disinterred in January 1661 and posthumously hanged from a nearby gibbet.




Westminster Abbey with a procession of Knights of the Bath, by Canaletto, 1749.






Layout of Westminster Abbey, 2008.


The abbey's two western towers were built between 1722 and 1745 by Nicholas Hawksmoor, constructed from Portland stone to an early example of a Gothic Revival design. Further rebuilding and restoration occurred in the 19th century under Sir George Gilbert Scott. A narthex for the west front was designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens in the mid C20 but was not executed.
Until the 19th century, Westminster was the third seat of learning in England, after Oxford and Cambridge. It was here that the first third of the King James Bible Old Testament and the last half of the New Testament were translated. The New English Bible was also put together here in the 20th century. Westminster suffered minor damage during the Blitz on November 15, 1940.


[edit] Coronations




King Edward's Chair


Since the coronations in 1066 of both King Harold and William the Conqueror, all English and British monarchs (except Edward V and Edward VIII, who did not have coronations) have been crowned in the Abbey.[1] Henry III was unable to be crowned in London when he first came to the throne because Prince Louis of France had taken control of the city, and so was crowned in Gloucester Cathedral, but this coronation was deemed by the Pope to be improper, and a further coronation was held in the Abbey on 17 May 1220.[5] Lady Jane Grey, whose reign lasted just nine days and was of doubtful legality, was also never crowned. The Archbishop of Canterbury is the traditional cleric in the coronation ceremony. King Edward's Chair (or St Edward's Chair), the throne on which British sovereigns are seated at the moment of coronation, is housed within the Abbey and has been used at every coronation since 1308; from 1301 to 1996 the chair also housed the Stone of Scone upon which the kings of Scotland are crowned, but pending another coronation the Stone is now kept in Scotland.

[edit] Burials and memorials




The cloister.


Henry III rebuilt the Abbey in honour of the Royal Saint Edward the Confessor whose relics were placed in a shrine in the sanctuary and now lie in a burial vault beneath the 1268 Cosmati mosaic pavement, in front of the High Altar. Henry III was interred nearby in a superb chest tomb with effigial monument, as were many of the Plantagenet kings of England, their wives and other relatives. Subsequently, most Kings and Queens of England were buried here, although Henry VIII and Charles I are buried in St George's Chapel at Windsor Castle, as are all monarchs and royals after George II.
Aristocrats were buried inside chapels and monks and people associated with the Abbey were buried in the Cloisters and other areas. One of these was Geoffrey Chaucer, who was buried here as he had apartments in the Abbey where he was employed as master of the Kings Works. Other poets were buried or memorialized around Chaucer in what became known as Poets' Corner. These include; William Blake, Robert Burns, Lord Byron, John Dryden, George Eliot, T. S. Eliot, Thomas Gray, Gerard Manley Hopkins, John Masefield, John Keats, John Milton, Laurence Olivier, Alexander Pope, Nicholas Rowe, Percy Bysshe Shelley, Rudyard Kipling, Thomas Shadwell, William Shakespeare and William Wordsworth.
Abbey musicians such as Henry Purcell were also buried in their place of work. Subsequently it became an honour to be buried or memorialised here. The practice spread from aristocrats and poets to generals, admirals, politicians, scientists, doctors, etc..

[edit] Buried

See also: Category:Burials at Westminster Abbey


[edit] Monarchs and their consorts
The following English and British Monarchs and their consorts are buried in the Abbey:




St Edward the Confessor and wife Edith of Wessex
Henry III of England
Edward I of England and wife Eleanor of Castile
Edward III of England and wife Philippa of Hainault
Richard II of England and wife Anne of Bohemia
Henry V of England and wife Catherine of Valois
Edward V of England
Henry VII of England and wife Elizabeth of York
Edward VI of England




Anne of Cleves 4th wife of King Henry VIII
Mary I of England
Elizabeth I of England
James I of England and wife Anne of Denmark
Charles II of England
Mary II of England
William III of England
Anne of Great Britain and husband Prince George of Denmark
George II of Great Britain and wife Caroline of Ansbach





[edit] Other monarchs and consorts

Anne Neville
Anne of Cleves
Mary Queen of Scots
Elizabeth of Bohemia


[edit] Nave
The following are buried in the Nave




Edmund Allenby, 1st Viscount Allenby
John André
Francis Atterbury
Clement Attlee, 1st Earl Attlee
Sir Charles Barry
Ernest Bevin
Andrew Bonar Law
Angela Georgina Burdett-Coutts
Thomas Cochrane, 10th Earl of Dundonald
Charles Darwin




King St Edward the Confessor
Freeman Freeman-Thomas, 1st Marquess of Willingdon
George Graham
Ben Jonson (buried upright)
David Livingstone
Charles Lyell
James Clerk Maxwell
Sir Isaac Newton
Ernest Rutherford, 1st Baron Rutherford




Sir George Gilbert Scott
Robert Stephenson
Ludovic Stewart, 2nd Duke of Lennox
George Edmund Street
J. J. Thomson
William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin
Thomas Tompion
The Unknown Warrior
Beatrice Webb
Sidney James Webb, 1st Baron Passfield





[edit] North Transept
The following are buried in the North Transept




William Ewart Gladstone
William Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham




William Pitt the Younger
William Wilberforce




Sir John Malcolm





[edit] South Transept
The following are buried in the South Transept which is known as Poets' Corner




Maj. John André
Robert Adam
Robert Browning
William Camden
Thomas Campbell
Geoffrey Chaucer
William Congreve
Abraham Cowley
William Davenant




John Denham
Charles Dickens
John Dryden
Adam Fox
David Garrick
John Gay
George Frederick Handel
Thomas Hardy
Sir Henry Irving




Dr Samuel Johnson
Rudyard Kipling
Thomas Macaulay
John Masefield
Laurence Olivier, Baron Olivier
Thomas Parr
Richard Brinsley Sheridan
Edmund Spenser
Alfred Tennyson, 1st Baron Tennyson





[edit] Cloisters
The following are buried in the Cloisters




Aphra Behn
Gen. John Burgoyne




Muzio Clementi
Percy Dearmer
Lord Fraser of Lonsdale




Johann Peter Salomon
William Shield
William Turner





[edit] North Choir Aisle
The following are buried in the North Choir Aisle




Joseph R. Bray




Henry Purcell




Ralph Vaughan Williams





[edit] South Choir Aisle
The following are buried in the South Choir Aisle

Dame Sybil Thorndike


[edit] Ambulatory Chapels




Robert Ayton
Eleanor de Bohun
Anne of Cleves
Lionel Cranfield, 1st Earl of Middlesex
John of Eltham, Earl of Cornwall




Sir Rowland Hill
Simon Langham
Edward Talbot, 8th Earl of Shrewsbury
William de Valence, 1st Earl of Pembroke




Catherine of Valois
George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham
Katherine Villiers, Duchess of Buckingham





[edit] Henry VII's Lady Chapel

Joseph Addison, buried in a vault in the north aisle. There is also a white marble statue of him in Poet's Corner.
Hugh Dowding, 1st Baron Dowding
George Monck, 1st Duke of Albemarle (also memorial Henry VII Chapel, south aisle)
Viscount Trenchard
Maj. Gen. Charles Worsley, though no memorial remains.


[edit] Commemorated

Christopher Anstey, buried at Bath, Somerset
Dame Peggy Ashcroft, cremated at Golders Green Crematorium, London
Jane Austen, buried in Winchester Cathedral
Robert, Lord Baden-Powell, buried in Nyeri, Kenya and Lady Baden-Powell, ashes in Nyeri, Kenya
Stanley Baldwin, cremated at Golders Green Crematorium and ashes buried in Worcester Cathedral
William Booth, buried at Stoke Newington
Charlotte Brontë, Emily Jane Brontë, Anne Brontë; Charlotte and Emily are buried at Haworth, while Anne is buried at Scarborough
Lord Byron, buried at Hucknall, Nottinghamshire
Sir Winston Churchill, buried at Bladon, Oxfordshire
John Clare, buried in St Botolph's churchyard, Helpston, Cambridgeshire
Richard Dimbleby, buried in St Peter's churchyard, Lynchmere, West Sussex
Paul Dirac, buried in Florida
Benjamin Disraeli, 1st Earl of Beaconsfield, buried at Hughenden Manor, Buckinghamshire
Sir Francis Drake, buried at sea off Portobelo, Panama
Sir Edward Elgar, buried in St Wulftan's RC Church in Little Malvern, Worcestershire
Sir John Franklin, presumably buried at sea near King William Island, Canada
Adam Lindsay Gordon, buried in Australia
John Harrison, buried in St John's Church in Hampstead
Rev Evelyn Levett Sutton, prebendary of Westminster and chaplain to the House of Commons who collapsed after reading the ninth commandment during Sunday services and died the next day (in a monument)
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, buried at Cambridge, Massachusetts
James Ramsay Macdonald, buried at Spynie, near Lossiemouth, Grampian
William Shakespeare, buried at Stratford-upon-Avon
Dylan Thomas (in a plaque unveiled in 1982), buried at Laugharne
Charles Wesley, buried at Old Marylebone, London
John Wesley, buried at City Road Chapel, London
Oscar Wilde (in a stained glass window unveiled in 1995), buried in Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris
Gen. James Wolfe, buried in Greenwich


Sixteen Great War poets are commemorated on a slate stone unveiled November 11th, 1985, in the South Transept (Poet's Corner)[6]:

Richard Aldington, buried in France
Laurence Binyon, author of For the Fallen, buried in Reading, Berkshire
Edmund Blunden, buried in Long Melford, Suffolk
Rupert Brooke, author of The Soldier, buried in Skyros, Greece
Wilfrid Gibson
Robert Graves, author of I, Claudius and the only poet of the sixteen still living at the time of the commemoration, buried in Deià, Majorca, Spain
Julian Grenfell, buried in Boulogne-sur-Mer, France
Ivor Gurney, buried in Twigworth, Gloucestershire
David Jones, buried in Crofton Park, Lewisham
Robert Nichols
Wilfred Owen, author of Dulce et Decorum Est and Anthem for Doomed Youth, buried in Ors, France
Herbert Read, buried in Stonegrave, North Yorkshire
Isaac Rosenberg, buried in Pas de Calais, France
Siegfried Sassoon, buried in Mells, Somerset
Charles Sorley
Edward Thomas buried in Agny Military Cemetery, France




Above the Great West Door, ten 20th century Christian martyrs from across the world are depicted in statues; from left to right:

St Maximilian Kolbe
Manche Masemola
Janani Luwum
Grand Duchess St Elizabeth of Russia
Martin Luther King, Jr
Óscar Romero
Dietrich Bonhoeffer
Esther John
Lucian Tapiedi
Wang Zhiming




[edit] Removed
The following were buried in the Abbey but later removed on the orders of Charles II:

Oliver Cromwell, Lord Protector
Adm. Robert Blake
John Pym

In November 1869, at the request of the Dean of Westminster and with the approval of Queen Victoria, the philanthropist George Peabody was given a temporary burial in the Abbey, but later moved and buried in Salem, Massachusetts.

[edit] Schools
Westminster School and Westminster Abbey Choir School are also in the precincts of the Abbey. It was natural for the learned and literate monks to be entrusted with education, and Benedictine monks were required by the Pope to maintain a charity school in 1179[citation needed]; Westminster School may have been founded even earlier for children or novices, and the legendary Croyland Chronicle relates a story of 11th century king Edward the Confessor's Queen Editha chatting to a schoolboy in the cloisters, and sending him off to the Palace larder for a treat.[citation needed]

[edit] Organ
The organ was built by Harrison & Harrison in 1937, then with four manuals and 84 speaking stops, and was used for the first time at the coronation of King George VI. Some pipework from the previous Hill organ of 1848 was revoiced and incorporated in the new scheme. The two organ cases, designed in the late nineteenth century by John Loughborough Pearson, were re-instated and coloured in 1959. In 1982 and 1987, Harrison and Harrison enlarged the organ under the direction of the then Abbey Organist Simon Preston to include an additional Lower Choir Organ and a Bombarde Organ: the current instrument now has five manuals and 109 speaking stops. In 2006, the console of the organ was refurbished by Harrison and Harrison, and space was prepared for two additional 16ft stops on the Lower Choir Organ and the Bombarde Organ.
Link to details of the organ on the National Pipe Organ Register.

[edit] Organists




1549 John Howe
1560 Master Whitt
1562 John Taylor
1570 Robert White
1575 Henry Leeve
1585 Nathaniel Giles and John Mundy (joint organists)
1606 Edmund Hooper
1621 John Parsons
1623 Orlando Gibbons
1625 Thomas Day
1633 Richard Portman




1660 Christopher Gibbons
1666 Albertus Bryne
1668 John Blow
1679 Henry Purcell
1696 John Blow (re-appointed)
1708 William Croft
1727 John Robinson
1762 Benjamin Cooke
1793 Samuel Arnold
1802 Robert Cooke
1814 George Ebenezer Williams




1819 Thomas Greatorex
1831 James Turle
1882 Frederick Bridge
1919 Sydney Nicholson, MVO
1928 Ernest Bullock, CVO
1941 Sir William Neil McKie
1963 Douglas Guest, CVO
1981 Simon Preston
1988 Martin Neary
1998 Martin Baker (Acting)
2000 James O'Donnell





[edit] Sub organists

Charles Sherwood Jekyll 1860 - 1875[7]
Frederick Bridge 1875 - 1882 (afterwards Organist)
Henry Davan Wetton ???? - 1896[8]
Walter Galpin Alcock 1896 - 1916
Stanley Roper 1917 - 1919


Osborne Harold Peasgood 1921 - 1941, 1946 - 1962 (acting organist 1941 - 1946)
Simon Preston 1962 - 1967
Tim W. R. Farrell 1967 - 1974 (afterwards organist of the Chapel Royal)
Stephen Cleobury 1974 - 1978
Christopher Herrick 1979 - 1984
lain Simcock
Harry Bicket
Andrew Lumsden 1988 - 1992
Martin Baker 1992 - 1998 (acting organist 1998 - 1999)
Andrew Reid
Robert Quinney 2004 - current

This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it.

[edit] Assistant organists

Hugh Marchant 1947 - 1950
Hugo Limer 1950 - 1959
Rilford Trafalgar 1959 - 1984
Yarborough Lamard 1984 - 1996
George Stanton 1996 - 2007
Vilmar Natrice 2007 - present

This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it.
See also the List of Organ Scholars at Westminster Abbey.

[edit] Bells
The bells at the Abbey were overhauled in 1971. The ring is now made up of ten bells, hung for change ringing, cast in 1971, by the Whitechapel Bell Foundry, tuned to the notes: F#, E, D, C#, B, A, G, F#, E and D. The Tenor bell in D (588.5 Hz) has a weight of 30 cwt, 1 qtr, 15 lb (3403 lb or 1544 kg). In addition there are two service bells, cast by Robert Mot, in 1585 and 1598 respectively, a Sanctus bell cast in 1738 by Richard Phelps & Thomas Lester and two unused bells—one cast circa 1320, by the successor to R de Wymbish, and a second cast in 1742, by Thomas Lester.[9] The two service bells and the 1320 bell, along with a fourth small silver "dish bell", kept in the refectory, have been noted as being of historical importance by the Church Buildings Council of the Church of England.[10]

[edit] Transport

Nearest London Underground stations:

St. James's Park (District, Circle lines)
Westminster (Jubilee, District, Circle lines)




[edit] Chapter
The Abbey is a Collegiate church organised into the College of St Peter, which comprises the Dean and four residentiary Canons (one of whom is also Rector of St Margaret's Church, Westminster, and Speaker's Chaplain), and seventeen other persons who are members ex officio, as well as twelve lay vicars and ten choristers. The seventeen are the Receiver-General and Chapter Clerk, the Registrar, the Auditor, the Legal Secretary and the Clerk of the Works (the administrative officers). Those more directly concerned with liturgical and ceremonial operations include the Precentor, the Chaplain and Sacrist, the Organist, and the (honorary) High Steward and High Bailiff. The Abbey and its property is in the care of the Librarian, the Keeper of the Muniments, and the Surveyor of the Fabric. Lastly, the educational role of the Abbey is reflected in the presence of the Headmaster of the Choir School, the Headmaster and Under Master of Westminster School, and the Master of The Queen's Scholars.
The Abbey is governed by the Dean and Chapter established under the Elizabethan statute of 1560. This consists of the Dean and the four residentiary Canons.

[edit] Museum
The Westminster abbey museum is located in the 11th century vaulted undercroft of St Peter beneath the former monks' dormitory in Westminster Abbey. This is one of the oldest areas of the Abbey, dating back almost to the foundation of the Norman church by King Edward the Confessor in 1065.

[edit] Exhibits
The exhibits include a unique collection of royal and other funeral effigies (funeral saddle, helm and shield of Henry V), together with other treasures, including some panels of medieval glass, 12th century sculpture fragments, Mary II's coronation chair and replicas of the Coronation regalia, effigies of Edward III, Henry VII and his queen, Elizabeth I, Charles II, William III, Mary II and Queen Anne.
Later wax effigies include a striking likeness of Horatio, Viscount Nelson wearing some of his own clothes and another of the famous Prime Minister William Pitt, Earl of Chatham, modelled by an American lady called Patience Wright. During recent conservation of Elizabeth I's effigy a unique corset dating from 1603 was found on the figure and is now displayed separately.
A recent addition to the display is the late 13th century Westminster Retable, England's oldest altarpiece. It was most probably designed for the High Altar of the Abbey, although it has been damaged in past centuries. The panel has been expertly cleaned and conserved. One section shows the figure of St Peter, the patron saint of the Abbey.

[edit] Gallery








The Great West Door and towers, as seen from Tothill Street









A view of from the nearby London Eye to the North East









At night, from Dean's Yard to the South; artificial light highlights the flying buttresses









The North entrance











Four of the ten Christian martyrs depicted in statues above the Great West Door









Handel Commemoration in 1784









The Quire in 1848.









The tomb of King Henry III of England in the Abbey.






[edit] See also

List of Abbots of Westminster
List of Deans of Westminster
List of churches and cathedrals of London
List of other famous burial sites
The Unknown Warrior
The Abbey, a 1995 BBC TV documentary film


[edit] Notes


^ a b "A Brief History—Introduction to Westminster Abbey". Dean and Chapter of Westminster Abbey. http://www.westminster-abbey.org/history-research/a-brief-history/. Retrieved on 2008-04-19. 
^ Harvey (1993); p. 2
^ Harvey (1993)
^ Harvey (1993); p. 6f
^ "Henry III, Archonotology.org". http://www.archontology.org/nations/england/king_england/henry3.php. Retrieved on 2008-04-21. 
^ http://net.lib.byu.edu/english/wwi/poets/poets.html
^ British Musical Biography By James D. Brown
^ The Musical Times and Singing-class Circular
^ Westminster—Collegiate Church of S Peter (Westminster Abbey), Dove's Guide for Church Bell Ringers, 25 October 2006. Retrieved on 16 October 2008.
^ "Database of Historically Significant Bells and Bell Frames". Churchcare website. Church of England. 2008-04-01. http://www.churchcare.co.uk/bells.php. Retrieved on 2008-10-16.  "search on "Westminster Abbey" for bell details" 



[edit] References


Bradley, S. and Pevsner, N. (2003) The Buildings of England - London 6: Westminster, Yale University Press 2003. ISBN 0-300-09595-3, pp. 105–207
Harvey, B. (1993) Living and Dying in England 1100-1540: The Monastic Experience, Ford Lecture series, Oxford : Clarendon Press, ISBN 0-19-820161-3
Morton, H.V. [1951] (1988) In Search of London, London : Methuen, ISBN 0-413-18470-6



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Westminster Abbey



Listen to this article (info/dl)











This audio file was created from a revision dated 2005-04-21, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles



Official site
Keith Short - Sculptor Images of stone carving for Westminster Abbey

Mystery Worshipper Report at the Ship of Fools website


Carved Crests for the Knights of the Bath
A history of the choristers and choir school of Westminster Abbey
Adrian Fletcher’s Paradoxplace Westminster Abbey Pages — Photos
A panorama of Westminster Abbey in daytime - JPEG and 3D Quicktime versions





Anglicanism portal










v • d • e

History of London





Evolution

Londinium · Lundenwic · City of London · City of Westminster · Middlesex · County of London · Greater London






Local government

Metropolitan Board of Works · London County Council · Greater London Council · Greater London Authority · London Assembly · Mayor of London






Events

Peasants' Revolt · Black Death · Great Plague · Great Fire · 1854 cholera outbreak · Great Stink · Great Exhibition · 1908 Franco-British Exhibition · The Battle of Cable Street · The Blitz · Swinging London · London Plan · 7/7 bombings · Olympic Games (1908 · 1948 · 2012) · Paralympic Games (2012)






Structures

St Paul's Cathedral · Tower of London · Palace of Whitehall · Westminster Hall · London Bridge · Tower Bridge · Westminster Abbey · Big Ben · The Monument · Fortifications · Shard London Bridge






City of London

City of London Corporation · Lord Mayor of the City of London · Guildhall · Livery Companies · Lord Mayor's Show · Bank of England






Services

Bow Street Runners · Metropolitan Police Service · London Ambulance Service · London Fire Brigade · London sewerage system · London Underground






History of London category












v • d • e

World Heritage Sites in the United Kingdom





England


Frontiers of the Roman Empire (Hadrian's Wall) · Blenheim Palace · Canterbury Cathedral – St. Augustine's Abbey – St. Martin's Church · Bath · Cornwall and West Devon Mining Landscape · Derwent Valley Mills · Durham Castle and Cathedral · Ironbridge Gorge · Jurassic Coast · Kew Gardens · Liverpool · Maritime Greenwich · Westminster Palace – Westminster Abbey – St. Margaret's Church · Saltaire · Stonehenge, Avebury and Associated Sites · Studley Royal Park and Fountains Abbey · Tower of London










Scotland


Frontiers of the Roman Empire (Antonine Wall) · Edinburgh Old Town and New Town · Heart of Neolithic Orkney (Maeshowe • Ring of Brodgar • Skara Brae • Standing Stones of Stenness) · New Lanark · St. Kilda







Wales



Castles and Town Walls of King Edward I in Gwynedd (Beaumaris Castle • Caernarfon Castle • Conwy Castle • Harlech Castle) · Blaenavon Industrial Landscape








Northern Ireland

Giant's Causeway






Overseas territories



Henderson Island · Gough Island and Inaccessible Island · St. George's Town and Castle Islands Fortifications








Coordinates: 51°29′58″N 0°07′39″W﻿ / ﻿51.49944°N 0.1275°W﻿ / 51.49944; -0.1275



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Westminster_Abbey"
Categories: Spoken articles | 1210s architecture | 1517 architecture | 1745 architecture | Anglican churches in London | Buildings and structures in Westminster | Christian congregations and communities established in the 10th century | Collegiate churches in England | English Gothic architecture | Former cathedrals in the United Kingdom | Grade I listed churches in London | Nicholas Hawksmoor buildings | Monasteries in London | Religion in Westminster | Royal Peculiars | Westminster Abbey | World Heritage Sites in LondonHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2008 | Incomplete lists 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Alemannisch
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Sámegiella
Simple English
Slovenčina
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 00:05 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
