













Communist Party of China - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Communist_Party_of_China";
		var wgTitle = "Communist Party of China";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "7175";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281583715;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Communist Party of China

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)







The neutrality of this article is disputed. Please see the discussion on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until the dispute is resolved. (March 2009)







Communist Party of China
中国共产党















General Secretary
Hu Jintao





Standing Committee
Wu Bangguo, Wen Jiabao
Jia Qinglin, Li Changchun
Xi Jinping, Li Keqiang
He Guoqiang, Zhou Yongkang





Founded
July 1, 1921 (official)
July 23, 1921 (de facto)


Headquarters
Zhongnanhai, Beijing





Political ideology
Communism,
Marxism-Leninism-Stalinism-Mao Thought,
Deng Xiaoping Theory with Socialism with Chinese characteristics,
Three Represents,
Scientific Development Concept





No. of members
73,360,000 (2007)





Website
News on CPC




Communist Party of China




Traditional Chinese:
中國共產黨


Simplified Chinese:
中国共产党





Transliterations


Mandarin


- Hanyu Pinyin:
Zhōngguó Gòngchǎndǎng





The Communist Party of China (CPC), also known as the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), is the founding and the ruling political party of the People's Republic of China and the world's largest political party. While not a governing body recognized by P. R. China's constitution,[1] the Party's position as the supreme political authority and power in P. R. China is realized through its control of all state apparatuses and of the legislative process.[2] The Communist Party of China was founded in 1921, and came to rule all of mainland China after defeating its rival the Kuomintang (KMT) in the Chinese Civil War. The party's 70 million members[3] constitute 5.5% of the total population of mainland China.




Contents


1 Organization
2 Internal or external groupings
3 Membership
4 History
5 Viewpoints: criticism and support
6 Current leadership
7 List of leaders of the Communist Party of China
8 See also
9 Notes
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Organization
The party's organizational structure was destroyed during the Cultural Revolution and rebuilt afterwards by Deng Xiaoping, who subsequently initiated "Socialism with Chinese characteristics" and brought all state apparatuses back under the control of the CPC.
Theoretically, the party's highest body is the National Congress of the Communist Party of China, which meets at least once every five years. The primary organization of power in the Communist Party which is detailed in the party constitution include:

Central Committee, which includes:

The Politburo Standing Committee, which currently consists of nine members; see current members of the Politburo Standing Committee for a complete list.
The Politburo, consisting of 24 full members (including the members of the Politburo Standing Committee) and one alternate; see current members of the Politburo for a complete list.
The Secretariat, the principal administrative mechanism of the CPC, headed by the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China;
The Central Military Commission (a parallel organization of the government institution of the same name);


The Central Discipline Inspection Commission, which is directly under the National Congress and on the same level with the Central Committee, charged with rooting out corruption and malfeasance among party cadres.

Other central organizations include:

General Office;
Central Organization Department;
Propaganda Department
International Liaison Department; and
United Front Department

In addition, there are numerous commissions and leading groups, the most important of which are:

Central Political and Legislative Affairs Committee
Work Committee for Organs under the Central Committee
Work Committee for Central Government Organs
Central Financial and Economic Leading Group
Central Leading Group for Rural Work
Central Leading Group for Party Building
Central Foreign Affairs Leading Group
Central Taiwan Affairs Leading Group
Commission for Protection of Party Secrets
Leading Group for State Security
Party History Research Centre
Party Research Center
Central Party School

Every five years, the Communist Party of China holds a National Congress. The latest happened on October 15, 2007. Formally, the Congress serves two functions: to approve changes to the Party constitution regarding policy and to elect a Central Committee, about 300 strong. The Central Committee in turn elects the Politburo. In practice, positions within the Central Committee and Politburo are determined before a Party Congress, and the main purpose of the Congress is to announce the party policies and vision for the direction of China in the following few years.
The party's central focus of power is the Politburo Standing Committee. The process for selecting Standing Committee members, as well as Politburo members, occurs behind the scenes in a process parallel to the National Congress. The new power structure is announced obliquely through the positioning of portraits in the People's Daily, the official newspaper of the Party. The number of Standing Committee members varies and has tended to increase over time. The Committee was expanded to nine at the 16th Party National Congress in 2002.
There are two other key organs of political power in the People's Republic of China: the formal government and the People's Liberation Army.
There are, in addition to decision-making roles, advisory committees, including the People's Political Consultative Conference. During the 1980s and 1990s there was a Central Advisory Commission established by Deng Xiaoping which consisted of senior retired leaders, but with their passing this has been abolished.

[edit] Internal or external groupings
Political scientists have identified two groupings within the Communist Party[4] leading to a structure which has been called "one party, two factions".[5] The first is the "elitist coalition" or Shanghai clique which contains mainly officials who have risen from the more prosperous provinces. The second is the "populist coalition" or "Youth League faction" which consists mainly of officials who have risen from the rural interior, through the Communist Youth League. The interaction between these two factions is largely complementary with each faction possessing a particular expertise and both committed to the continued rule of the Communist Party and not allowing intra-party factional politics threaten party unity. It has been noted that party and government positions have been assigned to create a very careful balance between these two groupings.
Within his "one party, two factions" model, Li Chen has noted that one should avoid labeling these two groupings with simplistic ideological labels, and that these two groupings do not act in a zero-sum, winner take all fashion. Neither group has the ability or will to dominate the other completely.[6]

[edit] Membership
The party was small at first, but grew intermittently through the 1920s. Twelve voting delegates were seated at the 1st National Party Congress in 1921, as well as at the 2nd (in 1922), when they represented 195 party members. By 1923, the 420 members were represented by 30 delegates. The 1925 4th Congress had 20 delegates representing 994 members; then real growth kicked in. The 5th Congress (held in April-May 1927 as the KMT was slaughtering communists) comprised 80 voting delegates representing 57,968 members.
It was at the 1928 6th Congress that the now-familiar ‘full’ and ‘alternate’ structure originated, with 84 and 34 delegates, respectively. Membership was estimated at 40,000. In 1945, the 7th Congress had 547 full and 208 alternate delegates representing 1.21 million members, a ratio of one representative per 1,600 members as compared to 1:725 in 1927.
After the Party defeated the Nationalists, participation at National Party Congresses became much less representative. Each of the 1026 full and 107 alternate members represented 9,470 party members (10.73 million in total) at the 1956 8th Congress. Subsequent congresses held the number of participants down despite membership growing to more than 60 million by 2000.[7]

[edit] History
Main article: History of the Communist Party of China

[edit] Viewpoints: criticism and support





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2008)







The neutrality of this section is disputed. Please see the discussion on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until the dispute is resolved. (November 2008)


There are a variety of opinions about the Communist Party of China, and these opinions often create unexpected political alliances and divisions. Trotskyists argue that the party was doomed to its present character, that of petty-bourgeois nationalism in the 1920s, because of the near-annihilation of the workers' movement in the KMT betrayal of 1927, which was made possible by Stalin's order that the Communists disarm and surrender.[citation needed] This slaughter forced the tiny surviving Party to switch from a workers' union- to a peasant, guerrilla-based organization, and to seek the aid of the most heterodox sources: from "patriotic capitalists" to the dreaded KMT itself, with which it openly sought to participate in a coalition government, even into early 1949.[citation needed] Chinese Trotskyists from Chen Duxiu onward have called for a political revolution against what they see as an opportunist, capitalist leadership of the CPC. Opinions about the CPC also create very strong divisions among groups normally ideologically united such as conservatives in the United States.
Many of the unexpected opinions about the CPC result from its rare combination of attributes as a party formally based on Marxism which has eventually overseen a dynamic market economy, yet maintains an authoritarian political system.
Supporters of the International Tibet Independence Movement, the Republic of China (Taiwan), Falun Gong, a spiritual group, Taiwan independence, East Turkestan Independence Movement, neoconservatives in the United States and Japan, international human rights groups, proponents of civil liberties and freedom of expression, advocates of democracy, anarchists, along with many democratic and anti-authoritarian left-wing forces in those same countries, are among the groups which have opposed the CPC government because it is said to be a repressive single-party state regime.
Some of the opponents of the Party within the Chinese democracy movement have tended not to argue that a strong Chinese state is inherently bad, but rather that the Communist leadership is corrupt. The Chinese New Left, meanwhile, is a current within China that seeks to "revert China to the socialist road" – i.e., to return China to the socialist system that existed before Deng Xiaoping's reforms.
Another school of thought argues that the worst of the abuses took place decades ago, and that the current leaders were not only unconnected with them, but were actually victims of that era. They have also argued that, while the modern Communist Party may be flawed, it is comparatively better than previous regimes, with respect to improving the general standard of living, than any other government that has governed China in the past century and can be seen in a more favorable light compared with most governments of the developing nations. As a result, the CPC has recently taken sweeping measures to regain support from the countryside, with limited success.
In addition, some scholars contend that China has never operated under a decentralized democratic regime in its several thousand years of history, and therefore it can be argued that the present structure, albeit not up to western moral standards, is the best possible option when compared to its alternatives. A sudden transition to democracy, they contend, would result in the economic and political upheaval that occurred in the Soviet Union in the 1990s, and that by focusing on economic growth, China is setting the stage for a more gradual but sustainable transition to a more liberal system. This group sees Mainland China as being similar to Spain in the 1960s, and South Korea and Taiwan during the 1970s.
This school of thought also brings together some unlikely political allies. Not only do most intellectuals within the Chinese government follow this school of thinking, but it is also the common belief held amongst pro-free trade liberals in the West.
Many observers from both within and outside of China have argued that the CCP has taken gradual steps towards democracy and transparency, hence arguing that it is best to give it time and room to evolve into a better government rather than forcing an abrupt change.[8] However, other observers (like Minxin Pei) question whether these steps are genuine efforts towards democratic reform or disingenuous measures by the CCP to retain power.[9]
Many current party officials are the sons and daughters of prominent Party officials. These young, powerful individuals are referred to as the "Crown Prince Party", or "Princelings", and their rise to power has been criticized as a form of nepotism or cronyism.

[edit] Current leadership
The Members of the Politburo Standing Committee of the Communist Party of China are:

Hu Jintao: President of the People's Republic of China, General Secretary of the CPC, Chairman of the Central Military Commission.
Wu Bangguo: Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress
Wen Jiabao: Premier of the State Council of the People's Republic of China
Jia Qinglin: Chairman of the People's Political Consultative Conference
Li Changchun: "Propaganda Chief"
Xi Jinping: Vice President of the People's Republic of China, top-ranked member of CPC Secretariat
Li Keqiang: Executive Vice Premier
He Guoqiang: Head of Central Commission for Discipline Inspection
Zhou Yongkang: Head of Political and Legislative Affairs Committee

Members of the Politburo of the CPC Central committee:
Wang Lequan, Wang Zhaoguo, Hui Liangyu, Liu Qi, Liu Yunshan, Li Changchun, Wu Yi, Wu Bangguo, Wu Guanzheng, Zhang Lichang, Zhang Dejiang, Luo Gan, Zhou Yongkang, Hu Jintao, Yu Zhengsheng, He Guoqiang, Jia Qinglin, Guo Boxiong, Cao Gangchuan, Zeng Qinghong, Zeng Peiyan, Wen Jiabao.
Alternate member of the Politburo of the CPC Central Committee: Wang Gang
Members of Secretariat of the CPC Central Committee: Zeng Qinghong, Liu Yunshan, Zhou Yongkang, He Guoqiang, Wang Gang, Xu Caihou, He Yong.

[edit] List of leaders of the Communist Party of China
Main article: List of leaders of the Communist Party of China
Between 1921 and 1943 the Communist Party of China was headed by the General Secretary:

Chen Duxiu, General Secretary 1921–1922 and 1925–1927
Qu Qiubai, General Secretary 1927–1928
Xiang Zhongfa, General Secretary 1928–1931
Li Lisan, acting General Secretary 1929–1930
Wang Ming, acting General Secretary 1931
Bo Gu, a.k.a. Qin Bangxian, acting General Secretary 1932–1935
Zhang Wentian a.k.a. Luo Fu, acting General Secretary 1935–1943

In 1943 the position of Chairman of the Communist Party of China was created.

Mao Zedong, Chairman 1943–1976
Hua Guofeng, Chairman 1976–1981
Hu Yaobang, Chairman 1981–1982, also General Secretary

In 1982, the post of Chairman was abolished, and the General Secretary, at this time held by the same man as the post of Chairman, once again became the supreme office of the Party.

Hu Yaobang, General Secretary 1980–1987
Zhao Ziyang, General Secretary 1987–1989
Jiang Zemin, General Secretary 1989–2002
Hu Jintao, General Secretary since 2002


[edit] See also


Communist Parties







Africa
 Lesotho
 Madagascar
 Senegal
 South Africa






Americas
 Argentina (PCA · PCRA)
 Bolivia
 Brazil (PCdoB · PCB)
 Canada
 Chile
 Colombia
 Cuba
 Ecuador
 Mexico (PC · PPS · PPSM)
 Panama (PPP · PC(ml)P)
 Paraguay
 Peru (PCP · PCdelP-PR)
 Uruguay
 United States
 Venezuela






Asia
 Bangladesh
 Burma
 China
 India (CPI · CPI (M))
 Iran
 Japan
 Kazakhstan
 Kyrgyzstan
 Korea
 Laos
 Nepal
 Pakistan
 Philippines
 Sri Lanka
 Tajikistan
 Vietnam






Europe
 Albania
 Armenia
 Austria
 Azerbaijan
 Belarus (KPB)
 Belgium (Flanders · Wallonia)
 Belgium (PvdA/PTB)
 Bosnia and Herzegovina
 Britain (CPB · NCP)
 Bulgaria
 Cyprus
 Czech Republic
 Denmark (DKP · KPiD)
 Estonia
 Finland
 France
 Georgia
 Germany
 Greece
 Hungary
 Ireland (CPI · WPI)
 Italy (PdCI · PRC)
 Luxembourg
 Malta
 Moldova
 Netherlands
 Norway
 Portugal
 Russian Federation
 San Marino
 Scotland
 Serbia
 Slovakia
 Spain
 Spain (Catalonia)
 Sweden
 Switzerland
 Turkey
 Ukraine






Middle East
 Algeria
 Iraq
 Israel
 Jordan
 Lebanon
 Sudan
 Syria






Related topics
 Communism (history)
 Marxism-Leninism
 Democratic centralism





v • d • e




Government of the People's Republic of China
Chinese Anarchism
List of Communist Parties
Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
Chinese Socialist Democracy


[edit] Notes


^ Constitution of the People's Republic of China
^ Ralph H. Folsom, John H. Minan, Lee Ann Otto, Law and Politics in the People's Republic of China, West Publishing Co. (St. Paul 1992), pp. 76-77.
^ CPC holds grand rally to celebrate 85th founding anniversary, Xinhua News Agency, June 30, 2006
^ http://chicagosociety.uchicago.edu/china/coverage/PoliticsPanel.pdf
^ http://chinavitae.com/reference/conferencepapers/Li_Cheng.pdf
^ The Jamestown Foundation
^ Press center of the 17th CPC National Congress
^ Yang, Dali. Communist are cheap no good fags. Remaking the Chinese Leviathan. Stanford University Press, 2004.
^ An, Alex and An, David, "Media control and the Erosion of an Accountable Party-State in China." China Brief, October 7, 2008. [1]



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Communist Party of China



Official News of the Communist Party of China
Official newspaper
The Communist Party of China — Council on Foreign Relations
"A Struggle Within the Chinese Communist Party" — Monthly Review article, May 2002.







 
Links to related articles














v • d • e

Warlord era in early Republic of China (1916–1930)









Main events (1916–1920)
Main events (1920–1930)
Northern Factions
Southern Factions







Empire of China (1915–1916)
National Protection War (1915-1916)
Death of Yuan Shikai (1916)
Manchu Restoration (1917)
Constitutional Protection Movement (1917-1922)
Paris Peace Conference (1919)
May Fourth Movement (1919)
Occupation of Mongolia (1919-1921)




Zhili-Anhui War (1920)
Guangdong-Guangxi War (1920–1921)
First Zhili-Fengtian War (1922)
Second Zhili-Fengtian War (1924)
Beijing coup (1924)
Yunnan-Guangxi War (1925)
May 30 Movement (1925)
Anti-Fengtian War (1925-1926)
Northern Expedition (1926–1928)
Huánggūtun Incident (1928)
Flag Replacement of the Northeast
Central Plains War (1930)




Beiyang Army:
Yuan Shikai
Anhui clique
Zhili clique
Regional:
Fengtian clique
Shanxi clique
Guominjun
Ma clique
Xinjiang clique




Yunnan clique
Old Guangxi Clique New Guangxi Clique Guandong clique Kuomintang (KMT) Sichuan clique














v • d • e
Chinese Civil War


Main events pre-1945
Main events post-1945
Specific articles




First United Front (1924)
Shanghai massacre of 1927




Nanchang Uprising
Autumn Harvest Uprising
Guangzhou Uprising




Encirclement Campaigns (1930–1934)
Chinese Soviet Republic (1931–1934)
Long March (1934–1936)
Xi'an Incident (1936)
Second United Front (1937–1946)



Part of the Cold War


Full-scale Civil War (1946–1949)
First Taiwan Strait Crisis (1955)
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis (1958)
Third Taiwan Strait Crisis (1996)
Pan-Blue visits to mainland China (2005-)




Political status of Taiwan
Legal status of Taiwan
Chinese reunification
Taiwan independence
Cross-Strait relations

Primary participants

 Kuomintang of China
 Communist Party of China











v • d • e

Cold War






Participants   NATO · Non-Aligned Movement · People's Republic of China · Warsaw Pact





1940s

Yalta Conference · Operation Unthinkable · Potsdam Conference · Gouzenko Affair · Iran crisis of 1946 · Chinese Civil War · Greek Civil War · Restatement of Policy on Germany · Truman Doctrine · Marshall Plan · Czechoslovak coup d'état of 1948 · Tito–Stalin split · Berlin Blockade · Western betrayal · Iron Curtain · Eastern Bloc






1950s

Korean War · First Indochina War · 1953 Iranian coup d'état · Uprising of 1953 in East Germany · 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état · First Taiwan Strait Crisis · Geneva Summit (1955) · Poznań 1956 protests · Hungarian Revolution of 1956 · Suez Crisis · Sputnik crisis · Second Taiwan Strait Crisis · Cuban Revolution · Kitchen Debate · Asian-African Conference · Bricker Amendment · McCarthyism · Operation Gladio · Hallstein Doctrine






1960s

Congo Crisis · Sino-Soviet split · 1960 U-2 incident · Bay of Pigs Invasion · Cuban Missile Crisis · Berlin Wall · Vietnam War · 1964 Brazilian coup d'état · U.S. invasion of the Dominican Republic · South African Border War · Transition to the New Order · Domino theory · Bangkok Declaration · Laotian Civil War · Greek military junta of 1967–1974 · Cultural Revolution · 1962 Sino-Indian War · Prague Spring · Goulash Communism · Sino-Soviet border conflict






1970s

Détente · Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty · Black September in Jordan · Cambodian Civil War · Ping Pong Diplomacy · Four Power Agreement on Berlin · 1972 Nixon visit to China · 1973 Chilean coup d'état · Yom Kippur War · Strategic Arms Limitation Talks · Angolan Civil War · Mozambican Civil War · Ogaden War · Cambodian-Vietnamese War · Sino-Vietnamese War · Iranian Revolution · Operation Condor · Bangladesh Liberation War  · Korean Air Lines Flight 902






1980s

Soviet war in Afghanistan · Olympic boycotts · History of Solidarity · Contras · Central American Crisis · RYAN · Korean Air Lines Flight 007 · Able Archer 83 · Strategic Defense Initiative · Invasion of Grenada · Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 · Singing Revolution · Invasion of Panama · Fall of the Berlin Wall · Revolutions of 1989 · Glasnost · Perestroika






1990s

Breakup of Yugoslavia · Dissolution of the USSR · Dissolution of Czechoslovakia






See also

Soviet and Russian espionage in U.S. · Soviet Union–United States relations · NATO-Russia relations






Establishments

ASEAN · Central Intelligence Agency · Comecon · European Community · KGB · Stasi






Races

Arms race · Nuclear arms race · Space Race






Ideologies

Capitalism · Liberal democracy · Communism · Stalinism · Trotskyism · Maoism






Propaganda

Pravda · Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty · Red Scare · Voice of America · Voice of Russia






Foreign policy

Truman Doctrine · Marshall Plan · Containment · Eisenhower Doctrine · Domino theory · Kennedy Doctrine · Peaceful coexistence · Ostpolitik · Johnson Doctrine · Brezhnev Doctrine · Nixon Doctrine · Ulbricht Doctrine · Carter Doctrine · Reagan Doctrine · Rollback






Timeline of events · Portal · Category












v • d • e

Politics of the People's Republic of China





Constitution of the People's Republic of China





State organs

National People's Congress (President · Vice President · Premier) · State Council · People's Liberation Army (PLA)






Parties

Parties · Communist Party (Politburo)






Politics of
province-level
divisions





Provinces


Anhui · Fujian · Gansu · Guangdong · Guizhou · Hainan · Hebei · Heilongjiang · Henan · Hubei · Hunan · Jiangsu · Jiangxi · Jilin · Liaoning · Qinghai · Shaanxi · Shandong · Shanxi · Sichuan · Yunnan · Zhejiang







Autonomous
regions


Guangxi · Inner Mongolia · Ningxia · Xinjiang · Tibet







Municipalities


Beijing · Chongqing · Shanghai · Tianjin







SARs


Hong Kong · Macau









Elections












v • d • e

Political parties in the People's Republic of China 





Major party

Communist Party of China






Minor registered parties

Revolutionary Committee of the Kuomintang - China Democratic League - China Democratic National Construction Association - China Association for Promoting Democracy - Chinese Peasants' and Workers' Democratic Party - China Zhi Gong Party - September 3 Society - Taiwan Democratic Self-Government League






Portal:Politics - List of political parties - Politics of the People's Republic of China















Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communist_Party_of_China"
Categories: Communist Party of China | Ruling Communist parties | Parties of single-party systems | Political parties established in 1921 | Chinese Civil WarHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2009 | NPOV disputes from March 2009 | All NPOV disputes | Articles containing non-English language text | Articles needing additional references from August 2008 | NPOV disputes from November 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Bân-lâm-gú
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
贛語
Galego
한국어
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Кыргызча
Lietuvių
Magyar
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 22:09.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
