













Imogen Heap - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Imogen_Heap";
		var wgTitle = "Imogen Heap";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "2127621";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281376807;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Imogen Heap

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2007)







This article may require copy-editing for style.. You can assist by editing it now. A how-to guide is available. (October 2008)




Imogen Heap



At Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in 2006
Photo: Noelle Smith



Background information


Birth name
Imogen Jennifer Jane Heap


Born
9 December 1977 (1977-12-09) (age 31)


Origin
London, England


Genre(s)
Electronica, Alternative, Indie, Pop, Rock, Ambient


Occupation(s)
Musician, Singer-Songwriter, visual artist


Instrument(s)
Piano, keyboards, array mbira, cello, clarinet, guitar, drums, keytar, hang


Years active
1997–present


Label(s)
Almo Sounds (1998–2001)
Megaphonic (2005–present)
Sony BMG (2006–present)


Associated acts
Frou Frou


Website
ImogenHeap.com


Imogen Heap (pronounced /ˈɪmoʊdʒən ˈhiːp/[1]) (born 9 December 1977 at Essex, England)[2] is a Grammy nominated English singer-songwriter from Romford, London, most famous for her work as part of Frou Frou and for her 2005 solo record Speak for Yourself, which she wrote, produced and mixed herself. In 2006, she was nominated for two Grammy Awards.




Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Early life
1.2 1998–2000: i Megaphone
1.3 2001 - interim work
1.4 2002–2003: Frou Frou
1.5 2004–2005: The O.C. and Speak for Yourself
1.6 2006–2007: The year of the 'White Rabbit'
1.7 2008–present: Third studio album


2 Tracks written for television and film
3 Usage of Heap's songs
4 Tracks for other artists
5 Charity
6 Discography

6.1 Solo albums
6.2 Solo singles
6.3 Frou Frou
6.4 Guest appearances
6.5 Compilation appearances


7 References
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography

[edit] Early life
Heap has played music from an early age, and is classically trained in many instruments, including the piano (her first instrument), cello and clarinet. She later taught herself to play the guitar, drums, and the array mbira.[3]
Heap had begun to write songs by the time of her thirteenth birthday. Her mother (an art therapist) and her father (a construction rock retailer) separated when Heap was twelve. The boarding school she was sent to lacked students wishing to pursue music and Heap clashed with the music teacher. His idea of punishment was to leave Heap alone to learn by herself; as a result she principally taught herself sequencing, music engineering, sampling and production on Atari computers.
Following this, Heap went on to study at the BRIT School of Performing Arts & Technology in Croydon, Surrey. She also teamed up with manager, Mark Wood. After being introduced to Nik Kershaw by his manager Mickey Modern, Imogen recorded four demos with Nik which Mark and Mickey took to Rondor Music. Consequently, a few months later she signed her first record contract at the age of 18 to independent record label Almo Sounds. Mark Wood and Mickey Modern formed Modernwood Management and they managed Imogen over the next ten years. (In 2006, Modernwood Management was dissolved, although Mark Wood continued to manage Heap via his new company, Radius Music.)
During 1996, Heap began working with an experimental pop band called Acacia, which was fronted by the epicene Nigerian emigre Alexander Nilere and which also contained keyboard/sampler player Guy Sigsworth (who'd also played with Bjork and Seal). While never a full member of the band, Heap played an important role as guest vocalist (as a counterpart to Nilere) and would end up contributing to various Acacia single and album tracks (One Acacia song - "Maddening Shroud" - would later resurface in the repertoire of Heap's Frou Frou project).
Dennis Arnold - a friend of Mickey Modern - was an early Imogen Heap fan and recommended she should play at the 1996 Prince's Trust Concert in Hyde Park, London organized by Harvey Goldsmith. Having enjoyed a prestigious live debut, performing four songs backed by a band consisting of several of her closest friends (including Acacia members) between sets by The Who and Eric Clapton, Heap's debut album enjoyed some critical high points all over the UK.

[edit] 1998–2000: i Megaphone
Heap's debut album, i Megaphone (an anagram of "Imogen Heap") was released in 1998 internationally via Almo Sounds, and garnered critical acclaim. The album was a mixture of self-penned and self-produced tracks, alongside tracks co-written with, and produced by established producers such as David Kahne, Dave Stewart and Guy Sigsworth. Heap's angst-filled songs were compared favourably to work by artists such as PJ Harvey, Kate Bush and Annie Lennox.
Promotion for the record included a tour of America, where the album was becoming popular through word-of-mouth, and performances all around Europe. Three singles were commercially released in limited quantities in the UK; "Getting Scared", "Shine" and "Come Here Boy". "Oh Me, Oh My" was also sent to US radio stations in place of "Shine".
Heap's early success was soon replaced by problems. Almo Sounds cut funding for the UK promotional and gave Heap a deadline to deliver songs for her second album. Upon delivery of the songs, she was told that they lacked "hit potential". Her career was left in limbo for over a year, a situation which was worsened when it was announced that the record label had been sold to Universal and would be shut down and disbanded, with its repertoire of artists moving or leaving the label. Heap was one of the artists who was dropped from the label, leaving her without a record contract.
i Megaphone had, however, been licensed from Almo Sounds to Aozora Records in Japan, who eventually re-released and re-promoted the album in January 2002, featuring "Blanket", and a Frou Frou remix of one of her B-sides, "Aeroplane" (for which a video was released exclusively to Japanese media). The album featured new packaging, all-new artwork, and a previously unavailable hidden track, entitled "Kidding", recorded live during her 1999 tour.
Copies of the original Almo Sounds release remain rare. A Brazilian label, Trama Records, currently claims to hold the license to the record and have started re-printing copies of the album in limited quantities. The album was released digitally on the U.S. iTunes Music Store in early 2006. After receiving more commercial success with her work with Guy Sigsworth as the duo Frou Frou and her second solo album, Speak for Yourself, Heap was able to secure the re-release of i Megaphone. It was re-released on November 14, 2006 to coincide with her Fall 2006 North American tour.

[edit] 2001 - interim work
During her time in limbo with the Almo Sound situation, Heap appeared on two further UK singles. These were "Meantime" (a track written by her former Acacia colleagues Guy Sigsworth and Alexander Nilere for the soundtrack to the independent British film, G:MT – Greenwich Mean Time) and "Blanket" (a collaboration with Urban Species, which was commercially released on 2 CDs, as well as being available on the Urban Species album of the same name).
In the gap between the end of promotion for i Megaphone internationally, and the re-promotion, Heap had also begun to think about her second solo album, and had started writing songs, both solo, as well as working with Guy Sigsworth; however, as she was left without a record deal, the songs were shelved.
In 2000, Heap also sang on the album You Had It Coming by Jeff Beck.

[edit] 2002–2003: Frou Frou
Heap had kept in contact with Guy Sigsworth, who had co-written and produced "Getting Scared" from i Megaphone, and this led to the pair of them establishing the collaborative project Frou Frou.
The initial idea was that Sigsworth would put together an album, featuring tracks written and produced by him alongside a singer, songwriter, poet or rapper, to be released under the name Frou Frou. Heap explains that Sigsworth invited her over to his studio, to write lyrics to a four-bar motif he had, with one condition – that she include the word "love" somewhere. The first line she came up with was "lung of love, leaves me breathless", and the Details album track, "Flicks" was born. A week later, Sigsworth phoned her up again, and together they wrote and recorded "Breathe In" and it happened again and again, until nearly half the album was completed. In December 2001, they made the conscious decision to form a duo together.
Their first official release as Frou Frou was a remix of "Airplane" (renamed "Aeroplane") – a track they had written together at the time of "Getting Scared", which was used as a B-side on the "Shine" single and on the Japanese re-release of i Megaphone.
In August 2002, they released the Details album and singles "Breathe In", "It's Good To Be In Love", and "Must Be Dreaming" (although the latter two were not commercially available). The album – a full collaboration between the duo, with Heap giving vocals to tracks they had written and produced together – was critically acclaimed, but did not enjoy the commercial success that had been hoping for.
In late 2003, after an extensive promotional tour of the UK, Europe and the U.S., the duo were told that their record label, Island Records would not be picking up the option for a second album. They were, however, open to signing Heap as a solo artist; she declined, unwilling to entrust them with her career after their mistreatment of Details. She says, "If you had taken a shirt into a dry cleaners and they burned it, would you then go, 'Thanks very much. I'll bring in my other dry cleaning tomorrow'? You wouldn't. So I didn't take the deal."
Heap and Sigsworth remain firm friends, and have worked together since the project, including their temporary re-formation in late 2003, when they covered the Bonnie Tyler classic, "Holding Out for a Hero", which was featured during the credits of the movie Shrek 2 after Jennifer Saunders' version in the film. Frou Frou saw a resurgence in popularity in 2004, when their album track "Let Go" was featured in the film Garden State. Heap's "Just For Now" appeared as a song in the film The Holiday that appeared in cinemas in 2006.

[edit] 2004–2005: The O.C. and Speak for Yourself




Imogen at Coachella


In December 2003, Heap announced on her web site that she was going to write and produce her second solo album, using her site as an online blog to update fans on progress, and even seeking them to be her A&R team for the lyrics to "Daylight Robbery" (which started out as a sample recorded for a television advert).
Heap set herself a deadline of one year to make the album, booking a session to master the album exactly one year ahead in December 2004. She re-mortgaged her flat to fund production costs, including renting a studio (previously inhabited by UK grime artist, Dizzee Rascal), and purchasing instruments (as a birthday present to herself). The agent who came to finalize the amount she was to receive turned out to be a Frou Frou fan. During the year, demo versions of tracks were played on U.S. radio station, KCRW, who had also supported the Frou Frou record.
At the end of 2004, with the album completed, Heap premiered two album tracks online, enabling fans to purchase them prior to the album's release – "Just for Now" (which was up for a limited time as a Christmas gift), and "Goodnight and Go", which had been featured on the second season of hit US TV drama The O.C. early in the month. Heap announced at a December 2006 concert in Lawrence, KS that the track "Just for Now" was also originally written for The O.C. as a combination Christmas and Hanukkah song titled "Chrismukkah" but was deemed by the producers to be "too dark."
In April 2005, The O.C. featured another track, the sparse vocodered-vocal track, "Hide and Seek" in the closing scenes of the season two finale. The track was released immediately to digital download services, such as iTunes, in the U.S., where it became a fixture in the chart. The track was released to iTunes UK on 5 July 2005 — the same day as the UK airing of the season finale — and peaked at #1 on the iTunes download chart, as well as entering the official UK download chart.
The third season of The O.C. featured Heap's song "Speeding Cars" and closed with her haunting rendition of Leonard Cohen's "Hallelujah". The show's season one finale ended with a recording of the same song by artist Jeff Buckley.
Due to bad experiences with record labels in the past, Heap made a decision to put out the album on her own in the UK, starting her own record company, titled Megaphonic Records. The album, titled Speak for Yourself – as Heap had produced, written and done 'everything in between' on the record, including designing the artwork – was described by Heap as "more Madonna than Guns N' Roses, more Donnie Darko than Dirty Dancing... left of center, electronically sprinkled magic dust over orchestral strings, harps and things, with great lyrics". Following Heap's guest appearance on his You Had It Coming album, Jeff Beck returned the favour by playing on the album track "Goodnight And Go".
The album was released in the UK on 18 July 2005 on CD and iTunes UK, where it entered the top 10 chart. The initial 10,000 physical copies pressed also sold out quickly, distributed through large and independent record stores, and Heap's own online shop.
"Hide and Seek", thanks to exposure from The O.C., received radio attention from the popular UK radio station BBC Radio One, with DJ Scott Mills featuring it as his record of the week, and provoking strong reactions ("love it or hate it") from other DJs at the station. Due to popular demand, the track was commercially released on a special limited edition (1500 copies) 7" vinyl in the UK in September, featuring an exclusive instrumental, "Cumulus", to accompany the vocal-only A-side. The track has also been featured on downtempo compilation CDs, including The Chillout Session 2006. Other singles from the album include "Goodnight and Go" and "Headlock".
In August 2005, Heap announced that she had licensed Speak for Yourself to Sony BMG imprint RCA Victor for the album release in the United States, Canada and Mexico. The album was released in November 2005, and debuted at #144 in the Billboard Top 200 album chart, with Heap appearing on the Hotel Cafe Tour as well as a mini-tour of her own to promote the record. In concert, Heap performed as a one-woman band, controlling the sound through her Apple PowerBook laptop, as well as singing and playing the piano and array mbira. She also performed the album's second single, "Goodnight and Go" on The Late Show with David Letterman on 11 January 2006 (having been scheduled for the day before, and cancelled moments before going onstage, due to time constraints) as well as The Tonight Show with Jay Leno. She played both "Hide and Seek" and "Goodnight and Go" on Last Call With Carson Daly.
When she returned from the U.S., having sold over 120,000 copies, she announced tour dates for the UK, which saw her playing to a crowd of 2000 at the Shepherds Bush Empire in March 2006 and going on to perform for 3300 people at the reopened The Roundhouse venue in October 2006 which also marked the first public concert to ever take place at the newly refurbished London venue.

[edit] 2006–2007: The year of the 'White Rabbit'
Heap also announced, on her return to the UK, that she had signed a deal for the album to be released internationally, as well as re-promoted in the UK, with a new imprint of Sony BMG, White Rabbit, run by former Sony BMG UK A&R vice president Nick Raphael. The deal meant that the album could have the promotional backing provided by a respected major label, whilst Heap retained sole control and the team she established for Megaphonic Records.
Speak for Yourself was re-released on the label on 24 April 2006, ahead of a full promotional push on May 15, a week after the second single, "Goodnight and Go", was commercially released in the UK on CD (featuring artwork by Ryan Obermeyer and a special lenticular cover), and special limited edition 7" vinyl. The track was remixed by Heap for radio to include elements from her live performances of the track and labelled as 'Immi's Radio Mix', which is accompanied on the release by a brand new track entitled "Speeding Cars", which she performed at tour dates in the UK in February and March. The video, which is also featured on the CD release, hit MTV and VH1 UK in early April, before being added to other television channels later in the month, and the single charted at #56 in the official UK top 75 singles chart. A special edit of the video for the US market was released in late April, and both "Speeding Cars" and Immi's Radio Mix of "Goodnight and Go" were made available via iTunes a few days later, to coincide with her appearance at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival and on The Tonight Show With Jay Leno.
In August 2006, Heap performed a set at the V Festival, and it was announced that "Headlock" would be the third single to be lifted from the album, to be released on 16 October 2006 in the UK, on CD (in a special digipak with partially frosted plastic outer sleeve) and special limited edition 7" vinyl, once again remixed for radio as 'Immi's Radio mix' and accompanied by a new all-vocal B-side, entitled "Mic Check". The "Headlock" video premiered on Manchester-centric TV station, Channel M, in early September, before being sent to other music television channels for rotation, and promo CDs of the single were sent out featuring a drum and bass remix of the track by High Contrast.
In late September and early October, Heap embarked on a tour of the UK, holding a competition on MySpace for different support acts for each venue, before touring throughout Canada and the USA in November and December. This was her first tour of North America that included a band, incorporating upright bass, percussion, and support acts Kid Beyond and Levi Weaver on beatbox and guitar, respectively. In December 2006, Heap was featured on the front page of The Green Room magazine.
On 7 December 2006, Heap received two Grammy nominations for the 49th Annual Grammy Awards, one for Best New Artist and the other for Best Song Written For Motion Picture, Television Or Other Visual Media for "Can't Take It In". In early 2007, a Verizon commercial featured the instrumental of her song "Headlock". Apple Inc. also used her track "Goodnight and Go" for feature previews for pre-release videos of Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard. Heap announced in May 2007 that she will not be making appearances for most of the year in order to complete the scoring for the Disney documentary and to work on her forthcoming third solo album that is expected out in 2009.

[edit] 2008–present: Third studio album
Although she had full intentions on working on the Disney documentary, later on in the summer of 2007, Heap announced on her MySpace blog that she had dropped out of the project in order to focus more time on her upcoming album. Heap had said in a video blog that she expected her third album to be strategically released in May 2008, indicating that releasing it later over the competitive holiday release window would put her in competitions with the likes of "Britney Spears and Madonna."
Currently, one of Heap's latest Video Blogs revealed that, at the rate of recording a song every two weeks (with twelve songs in total), the latest record would be finished in December 2008, a day before her birthday. Heap has also named at least sixteen of her new songs in multiple YouTube VBlogs and in her online Blog, including "Not Now But Soon", "Black Sheets", "Seat Covers", "Bad Body Double", "Little Bird", "Tidal", "Wedding Song", "Somewhere on the Central Line", "Canvas", "Polyfilla", "A-ha!", "Wait it Out", "Swoon", "First Train Home", "Earth", "Half Life", and "But...". "Not Now, But Soon" was the first of these songs to officially be recorded and then heard when Heap added it to her MySpace. The song was also used on the official soundtrack for the NBC show, Heroes. Heap has stated on her online blog however, that she isn't sure if the song will even end up on the album.
As of now, there is neither a title nor a confirmed official release date for Heap's third release. As of YouTube VBlog #24, Heap had strategically planned to publish all twelve tracks of her new album by the end of September 2008, but she failed to meet the date. On VBlog #28, she planned to finish the album by December 8, the day before her birthday, and begin mastering it the day after. Now, as of VBlog #33, Heap has stated that she failed to make the recording date again with everything else that she had lined up.
She stated that this time around, she had many more commitments besides recording, and other projects that she wanted to do. One of these was being asked to perform at the annual event, PopTech on October 23. At this event, she included one of her new songs, "Wait it Out" in the set, as well as performing one of her original songs, "Speeding Cars." Even though she has struggled meeting the recording goals she has set up, Heap stated that she is about a month away from finishing the album.
But, in one of Imogen's iBlogs, she stated the album was most likely being pushed back to an April-May release, due to the fact she wanted much promotion done, more so than with Speak For Yourself, also, a DVD was being produced to being sold with the album.
On March 12, Directcurrentmusic.com [1] reported that the new album has an internal RCA release schedule date of July 14 with the song, "Canvas" being readied as the album's first official single and video.

[edit] Tracks written for television and film
In addition to albums, Heap has also been approached to record songs for films, including a cover of the Classics IV hit, "Spooky", for the soundtrack to the Reese Witherspoon film, Just Like Heaven. Also Heap's song "Hide and Seek" was featured in The Last Kiss, featuring Zach Braff. It was also used in a 2007 episode of Saturday Night Live, hosted by Shia LaBeouf.
In 2004, while recording her second solo album, she was also commissioned to record a cover of a short nursery rhyme for the HBO television series, Six Feet Under, entitled "I'm A Lonely Little Petunia (In An Onion Patch)" (three versions were recorded and are available from Heap's official web site).
In March 2006, she announced she had completed a track about locusts, entitled "Glittering Cloud", for a CD of music about the plagues of Egypt entitled Plague Songs, accompanying The Margate Exodus project, having been approached by musical director, Brian Eno.
In late 2005, Heap was asked to write a track for the soundtrack of The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe entitled "Can't Take It In", when the track that fellow Brit singer Dido submitted was deemed as unfitting. Heap's track is played at the end of the film in a special orchestral version produced by Heap and Harry Gregson Williams who scored the movie.
Heap has recorded an a cappella version of the Leonard Cohen track, "Hallelujah", for the season three finale of The O.C.. Heap has recently announced that she will no longer be scoring the latest Disney motion picture about flamingos. She said on her official website that "It just didn't work out I'm afraid. I said yes to one too many things this time...it just became impossible to do." However, Heap also mentioned that she is hungry for a score after her next album is finished. In addition, Heap composed a track for the soon to be released The Chronicles of Narnia: Prince Caspian, but it was deemed to be too dark in tone for the film. Instead, it will be included as a track on Heap's new record. Heap's latest track, "Not Now But Soon," has been included on the original soundtrack for the hit NBC show, Heroes.
In 2006 Heap recorded a cover of the Leonard Cohen song "Hallelujah" for The OC marking her second season finale appearance. The shows after music listing featured music from the upcoming soundtrack "The OC Mix 6: Covering Our Tracks". However when the track listing for this all cover album was released on the internet Heap was missing from the soundtrack and the soundtrack did not feature her on it after its release. For unknown reasons Heap's cover had been dropped from the album. The cover was a homage to the role reversals of the characters Ryan and Marissa in which the end of season 1 and 3 each character was leaving Newport. In season 1 when Ryan left Jeff Buckley's cover of "Hallelujah" was featured in the episode.

[edit] Usage of Heap's songs
Frou Frou's song "Let Go" was featured in the soundtrack to Zach Braff's movie Garden State, and was also featured on the DC snowboarding movie Mtn.Lab, in the 2006 movie, The Holiday (which also featured the song "Just for Now") and in the second season of the reality television show So You Think You Can Dance, and was also on the Series Premiere of CBS's show Cane. "Hide and Seek" is used for season two of So You Think You Can Dance for the top 6 contemporary group dance choreographed by Mia Michaels and was featured in Zach Braff's film The Last Kiss. "Hide and Seek" was also used in an SNL Digital Short entitled "Dear Sister" that parodied the episode entitled The Dearly Beloved of the American television show The O.C.. "Just for Now" was also featured in The Holiday.
In February 2007, the music from her song "Headlock" was featured in a Verizon Wireless commercial. "Can't Take It In" was featured during the closing credits of The Chronicles of Narnia.
In June 2007, Apple started using an instrumental version of "Goodnight and Go" in its online demonstration videos to promote its upcoming Mac OS X v10.5 "Leopard" operating system. "Loose Ends" was used in an episode of MTV's The Hills.
In 2007, Heap's "Speeding Cars" was used in the third installment of the ABC miniseries Fallen and also in the 2007 movie Suburban Girl starring Alec Baldwin and Sarah Michelle Gellar. Heap's "Goodnight and Go" was used on MTV's Newport Harbor: The Real Orange County. The song "The Moment I Said It" is used in the third season of So You Think You Can Dance for the top 10 contemporary group dance also choreographed by Mia Michaels, in the closing scenes of an episode of the show Criminal Minds and the show Ghost Whisperer, as well as in CSI. "Goodnight and Go" was also used on an episode of the sixth season of Celebrity Fit Club.
Her song "Mic Check" was used in the fourth season of So You Think You Can Dance as part of the choreography again by Mia Michaels for Contemporary during Vegas week. In August 2008, the song "Just for Now" was used in the 2008 Fall Campaign of the Polish TV Station TVN (Poland). "Headlock" and others were used in the soundtrack for The WB'S Summerland. Also, YouTube's DJ Pyro remixed her song, Speeding Cars under the same name and Lil' Ray is going to make a song based upon DJ Pyro's instrumental for his album Lil' Ray III.

[edit] Tracks for other artists




Playing at O2 Academy Birmingham, in 2006


In addition to producing her own records, Heap has also produced tracks for various other artists through her career.
In 2001 she wrote the Way Out West single "Mindcircus" for their album intensify, the track became a great hit across Europe's dancefloors and has been played by some of the world's top deejays such as Tiësto and Nick Warren. [4]She has also created songs for Nik Kershaw as well as supplied backing vocals on three tracks of his 2006 album You've Got To Laugh – she has also collaborated either as a guest vocalist, co-writer, or remixer for artists as diverse as IAMX, Jeff Beck, Temposhark, LHB, J.Peter Schwalm, Way Out West, Jon Bon Jovi, Mich Gerber, Sean Lennon, Urban Species, Blue October, Matt Willis, Jon Hopkins, and Acacia.
Heap has also written and produced for Fame Academy winner Alex Parks, but their collaboration was not released on her album, Honesty. She also worked on a track for Britney Spears' fourth release, In the Zone; this track is called "Over To You Now", co-writing and providing backing vocals on the track, which was produced by Guy Sigsworth, and written originally by Sigsworth and Swedish artist Robyn for her third album. Although the track was not included on In the Zone, it was released in late 2005 on the UK and Japan DVD release of Spears' Britney and Kevin: Chaotic TV show. Her songs (both specially composed and album tracks) comprise the principal score for Mark Ravenhill's pool (no water) play, performed by Frantic Assembly and toured around the UK. Also in 2006, Heap collaborated with Josh Groban on his third album Awake, co-writing and producing the song "Now Or Never", on which she played all the instruments.
Heap sings on the Temposhark duet "Not That Big" which is out now as a remix on iTunes and the original version is coming out on the soon-to-be-released Temposhark album The Invisible Line. Heap features on ex-Busted singer Matt Willis' album Don't Let It Go to Waste on a song called "Who You Gonna Run To" and helped with b-side "Not Over" with an Imogen Heap vibe through-out the song. "Hide and Seek" is also featured as a remixed version on Tiesto's In Search of Sunrise 6.

[edit] Charity
In 2008 she participated in a music album called Songs for Tibet: The Art of Peace, which is an initiative to support Tibet, Dalai Lama Tenzin Gyatso and to underline the human rights situation in Tibet. The album was issued on August 5 via iTunes and on August 19 in music stores around the world.[5] On 12 October 2008, Heap also Participated in "Run 10k: Cancer Research UK," placing fifth of the women in the actual run and raising over £1000 for the cause with the help of her fans.

[edit] Discography

[edit] Solo albums

i Megaphone (1998/2002/2006) • (Almo Sounds/Aozora Records)
Speak for Yourself (2005) (US #144 • Megaphonic Records/RCA Victor/White Rabbit)
Live Session (iTunes Exclusive EP) (2005)
Untitled Third Studio Album (2009) (Megaphonic Records/RCA Victor/White Rabbit)


[edit] Solo singles

"Getting Scared" (1998 • Almo Sounds)
"Shine" (1998 • Almo SoundsVictor)
"Come Here Boy" (1998)
"Speeding Cars" (2005)
"Hide and Seek" (2005)
"Goodnight and Go" (2006) (UK: #56)
"Headlock" (2006) (UK: #74)
"Not Now, But Soon" (2008)
"Canvas" (2009)


[edit] Frou Frou

Details (2002 • Island Records/MCA/Universal) (UK: #128)
"Breathe In" (single) (2002 • Island Records/Universal) (UK: #44)


[edit] Guest appearances

Hate EP by Acacia (1996 • Radar Records)
Sway EP by Acacia (1996 • Radar Records)
Maddening Shroud EP by Acacia (1997 • WEA)
Cradle by Acacia - all tracks except "Wire" (1997 • WEA)
Blanket by Urban Species – "Blanket' and 'Predictably Unpredictable" (1998)
Amor Fati by Mich Gerber – "Embers of Love" (2000)
¡Viva Nueva! by Rustic Overtones – "Valentine's Day Massacre" (2001 • Tommy Boy Records)
You Had It Coming by Jeff Beck – "Dirty Mind" and "Rollin' and Tumblin'" (2001 • Sony Music)
Tell 'Em Who We Are by LHB – "Coming Up For Air" (2003 • Telstar TV)
Contact Note by Jon Hopkins – "Second Sense" (2004 • Just Music)
It's Better To Have Loved EP by Temposhark – "Not That Big (Metronomy Remix)" (2005 • Paper & Glue)
Foiled by Blue October – "Congratulations" (2006 • Universal Records)
Musikain by J.P. Schwalm – "P.I.N." (2006 • Musikain Records)
The Invisible Line by Temposhark – "Not That Big" (2007 • Paper & Glue)
Kingdom of Welcome Addiction by IAMX – "My Secret Friend" (2009 • Metropolis Records)


[edit] Compilation appearances

I Still Know What You Did Last Summer soundtrack – "Getting Scared" – (1998 • Warner Music Group)
Virtual Sexuality soundtrack – "Come Here Boy" – (1998 • EMI)
G:MT – Greenwich Mean Time soundtrack – "Mean Time" (with GMT) – (1999 • Island Records/Universal)
Women Talking Dirty soundtrack – "Getting Scared" – (2001 • Polygram International)
American Psycho 2: All American Girl soundtrack – "Angry Angel" – (2002 • Rondor Music (London) Ltd)
Garden State – "Let Go" – (2004 • Epic Records/Sony BMG)
Music from the OC: Mix 4 – "Goodnight and Go" – (2005 • Warner Music Group)
Six Feet Under, Vol. 2: Everything Ends – "I'm A Lonely Little Petunia (In An Onion Patch)" – (2005 • Astralwerks/EMI)
Just Like Heaven Soundtrack – "Spooky" – (2005 • Sony BMG)
Music from the OC: Mix 5 – "Hide and Seek" – (2005 • Warner Music Group)
The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe – "Can't Take It In" – (2005 • Disney Records/EMI)
The Last Kiss soundtrack – "Hide and Seek" – (2005 • Lakeshore Pictures)
Plague Songs – "Glittering Clouds (Locusts)" – (2006 • 4AD)
So You Think You Can Dance (US) – "Hide and Seek" – (2006)
So You Think You Can Dance (US) – "Let Go" – (2006)
The Black Donnellys - "The Moment I Said It" - (2007)
In Search of Sunrise 6 – "Hide and Seek" (Tiëstos' In Search Of Sunrise Remix) – (2007)
The Holiday – "Separate Vacations", "It's Complicated", "The 'Cowch'" and "Three Musketeers" – (2006)
So You Think You Can Dance – "The Moment I Said It" – (2007)
Heroes Original Soundtrack – "Not Now, But Soon" – (2008 • NBC Records)
Criminal Minds – "The Moment I Said It" – (2008)
Songs For Tibet – The Art of Peace' – "Hide & Seek 2" - (2008)


[edit] References


^ "pronunciation of Imogen Heap". inogolo. http://inogolo.com/pronunciation/d1222/Imogen_Heap. Retrieved on 2008-04-30. 
^ Rigby, Tony (10 February 2006). "Imogen Heap, Scala, London". The Independent. http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/music/reviews/imogen-heap-scala-london--none-onestar-twostar-threestar-fivestar-525700.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-17. 
^ Williams, Andrew (2006-10-23). "60 SECONDS: Imogen Heap". Metro. http://www.metro.co.uk/fame/interviews/article.html?in_article_id=22257&in_page_id=11. Retrieved on 2008-04-30. 
^ Mindcircus
^ E-Online (22 July 2008) Sting, Matthews, Mayer Gamer for Tibet Than Beijing



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Imogen Heap



Official website
Brief Webcam Updates at 12seconds
Twitter Feed
Last.fm profile
Auralgasms Interview From January 2006
beat Lawrence: Imogen Heap Video Interview
Imogen Heap video interview on TiFFcast, November 2006
Portrait of Imogen Heap on 365portraits.com
[http://www.thearraymbira.com Imogen Heap plays the Array mbira on numerous recordings and in concert








v • d • e

Imogen Heap





Studio albums

iMegaphone · Speak for Yourself · Untitled






Other releases

Live Session EP






Singles

"Getting Scared" · "Shine" · "Come Here Boy" · "Hide and Seek" · "Goodnight and Go" · "Headlock" · "Not Now But Soon" · "Canvas"






Related articles

Songs






Frou Frou












v • d • e

Frou Frou





Imogen Heap · Guy Sigsworth





Studio albums

Details






Singles

"Breathe In" · "Must Be Dreaming" · "It's Good To Be In Love" · "Let Go"









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imogen_Heap"
Categories: 1977 births | Living people | English female singers | Female rock singers | People from Essex | English singer-songwriters | Former students of the BRIT School | Ableton Live usersHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2007 | Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from October 2008 | All articles needing copy edit 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Česky
Deutsch
Français
Italiano
Magyar
Nederlands
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Suomi
Svenska









 This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 21:55.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
