













Central Intelligence Agency - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Central_Intelligence_Agency";
		var wgTitle = "Central Intelligence Agency";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "5183633";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281241473;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Central Intelligence Agency

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"CIA" redirects here. For other uses, see CIA (disambiguation).


Central Intelligence Agency



Seal of the Central Intelligence Agency


Agency overview


Formed
July 26, 1947


Preceding agency
Central Intelligence Group


Headquarters
Langley, Virginia, United States 38°57′06″N 77°08′48″W﻿ / ﻿38.951796°N 77.146586°W﻿ / 38.951796; -77.146586


Employees
Classified[1][2]
20,000 estimated[3]



Annual budget
Classified[4][5]
$10 Billion estimated [6]


Agency executives
Leon Panetta, Director
 
Stephen Kappes, Deputy Director
 
Scott White, Associate Deputy Director


Website


www.cia.gov






The entrance of the CIA Headquarters


The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) is a civilian intelligence agency of the United States government. It is the successor of the Office of Strategic Services (OSS) formed during World War II to coordinate espionage activities between the branches of the US military services.
Its primary function is collecting and analyzing information about foreign governments, corporations, and persons in order to advise public policymakers. Prior to December 2004, the CIA was literally the central intelligence organization for the US government. The Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 created the office of the Director of National Intelligence (DNI), who took over some of the government and intelligence community (IC)-wide functions that had previously been the CIA's. The DNI manages the United States Intelligence Community and in so doing it manages the intelligence cycle. Among the functions that moved to the DNI were the preparation of estimates reflecting the consolidated opinion of the 16 IC agencies, and preparation of briefings for the president. On July 30, 2008, President Bush issued Executive Order 13470[7] amending Executive Order 12333 to strengthen the role of the DNI.[8]
When discussing the CIA, it is critical to distinguish whether one is speaking of the agency as it was during the period that it bore IC-wide responsibilities, or as it is today, given its present set of responsibilities. The IC still has internal politics,[9] although an increasing number of interagency "centers", as well as the Intellipedia information sharing mechanism, are hoped to be improvements.
The current CIA still has a number of functions in common with other countries' intelligence agencies; see relationships with foreign intelligence agencies. The CIA's headquarters is in Langley in the McLean CDP of Fairfax County, Virginia, a few miles west of Washington, D.C. along the Potomac River.
Sometimes, the CIA is referred to euphemistically in government and military parlance as Other Government Agencies (OGA), particularly when its operations in a particular area are an open secret.[10][11] Other terms include The Company[12] [13] [14] [15] and The Agency.[citation needed]




Contents


1 Organization

1.1 Budget
1.2 Executive Office
1.3 Executive Staff

1.3.1 General Publications
1.3.2 General counsel and inspection
1.3.3 Public Affairs


1.4 Directorate of Intelligence

1.4.1 Regional groups
1.4.2 Transnational groups
1.4.3 Support and general units


1.5 National Clandestine Service
1.6 Directorate of Science and Technology
1.7 Directorate of Support

1.7.1 Training




2 Relationship with other sources of intelligence

2.1 Other U.S. intelligence agencies
2.2 Open Source Intelligence
2.3 Outsourcing
2.4 Foreign intelligence services


3 Organizational history

3.1 Immediate predecessors, 1946–1947
3.2 Early CIA, 1947–1952
3.3 The structure stabilizes, 1952
3.4 Early Cold War, 1953–1966
3.5 Indochina and the Vietnam War (1954–1975)
3.6 Abuses of CIA authority, 1970s–1990s
3.7 2004, DCI takes over CIA top-level functions


4 Mission-related issues and controversies

4.1 Security and counterintelligence failures

4.1.1 Security failures
4.1.2 Counterintelligence failures


4.2 Failures in intelligence analysis
4.3 Questionable/controversial tactics
4.4 Internal/presidential studies, external investigations and document releases
4.5 Influencing public opinion and law enforcement
4.6 Linkages with former Nazi and Japanese War Criminals
4.7 Al-Qaeda and the "War on Terror"
4.8 The 2003 War in Iraq
4.9 Drug trafficking


5 See also

5.1 Further reading
5.2 Official websites and documents
5.3 Other links


6 References
7 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Organization
Main article: Organizational structure of the Central Intelligence Agency
In its present form, the CIA has an executive office and several agency-wide functions, and four major directorates:



The Directorate of Intelligence, responsible for all-source intelligence research and analysis
The National Clandestine Service, formerly the Directorate of Operations, which does clandestine intelligence collection and covert action
The Directorate of Support
The Directorate of Science and Technology




[edit] Budget
The overall U.S. intelligence budget has been considered classified until recently. There have been numerous attempts to get general information[16] and there have also been accidental disclosures. [17] For instance, Mary Margaret Graham, a former CIA official and deputy director of national intelligence for collection in 2005, said the annual intelligence budget was $44 billion.

[edit] Executive Office
The Director of the CIA reports directly to the Director of National Intelligence (DNI); in practice, he deals with the DNI, Congress, and the White House, while the Deputy Director is the internal executive. The CIA has varying amounts of Congressional oversight, although that is principally a guidance role.
The CIA Executive Office also facilitates CIA’s support of the military by providing the military with information it gathers, receiving information from military intelligence organizations, and cooperating on field activities. Two senior executives have responsibility, one CIA-wide and one for the National Clandestine Service. The Associate Director for Military Support, a senior military officer, manages the relationship between CIA and the Unified Combatant Commands, who produce regional/operational intelligence and consume national intelligence; he is assisted by the Office of Military Affairs in providing support to all branches of the military[18]
In the National Clandestine Services, an Associate Deputy Director for Operations for Military Affairs[19] deals with specific clandestine human-source intelligence and covert action in support of military operations.
The CIA also makes national-level intelligence available to tactical organizations, usually to their all-source intelligence group. [20]

[edit] Executive Staff
There are an assortment of staff offices that report to the executive offices. In brief, these offices are responsible for:

[edit] General Publications
The CIA's Center for the Study of Intelligence maintains the Agency's historical materials and promotes the study of intelligence as a legitimate discipline.[21]
In 2002, CIA's Sherman Kent School for Intelligence Analysis began publishing the unclassified Kent Center Occasional Papers, aiming to offer "an opportunity for intelligence professionals and interested colleagues—in an unofficial and unfettered vehicle—to debate and advance the theory and practice of intelligence analysis."[22]

[edit] General counsel and inspection
Two offices advise the Director on legality and proper operations. The Office of the General Counsel advises the Director of the CIA on all legal matters relating to his role as CIA director and is the principal source of legal counsel for the CIA.
The Office of Inspector General promotes efficiency, effectiveness, and accountability in the administration of Agency activities, and seeks to prevent and detect fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement. The Inspector General, whose activities are independent of those of any other component in the Agency, reports directly to the Director of the CIA. [23][24]

[edit] Public Affairs
The Office of Public Affairs advises the Director of the CIA on all media, public policy, and employee communications issues relating to his role. See CIA influence on public opinion for developments in the means by which the Agency, among other functions, works with the entertainment industry.

[edit] Directorate of Intelligence
The Directorate of Intelligence produces all-source intelligence analysis on key foreign issues.[25]. It has four regional analytic groups, six groups for transnational issues, and two support units.[26]

[edit] Regional groups
There is an Office dedicated to Iraq, and regional analytical Offices covering:



The Office of Near Eastern and South Asian Analysis (NESA). See details of work in this area in CIA activities in the Near East, North Africa, South and Southwest Asia
The Office of Russian and European Analysis (OREA). See details of work in this area in CIA activities in Russia and Europe
The Office of East Asian, Pacific, Latin American and African Analysis (APLAA). See details of work in these areas in CIA activities in Asia and the Pacific, CIA activities in Africa and CIA activities in the Americas




[edit] Transnational groups
The Office of Terrorism Analysis[27] supports the National Counterterrorism Center in the Office of the Director of National Intelligence. See CIA transnational anti-terrorism activities.
The Office of Transnational Issues[28] assesses existing and emerging threats to US national security and provides the most senior policymakers, military planners, and law enforcement with analysis, warning, and crisis support.
The CIA Crime and Narcotics Center[29] researches information on international crime for policymakers and the law enforcement community. As the CIA has no domestic police authority, it sends its analyses to the FBI and other law enforcement organizations, such as the Drug Enforcement Administration of the United States Department of Justice.
The Weapons Intelligence, Nonproliferation, and Arms Control Center[30] provides intelligence support related to national and non-national threats, as well as supporting threat reduction and arms control. It receives the output of national technical means of verification.
The Counterintelligence Center Analysis Group[31] identifies, monitors, and analyzes the efforts of foreign intelligence entities, both national and non-national, against US interests. It works with FBI personnel in the National Counterintelligence Executive of the Director of National Intelligence.
The Information Operations Center Analysis Group.[32] deals with threats to U.S. computer systems. This unit supports DNI activities.

[edit] Support and general units
The Office of Collection Strategies and Analysis provides comprehensive intelligence collection expertise to the Directorate of Intelligence, to senior Agency and Intelligence Community officials, and to key national policymakers.
The Office of Policy Support customizes Directorate of Intelligence analysis and presents it to a wide variety of policy, law enforcement, military, and foreign liaison recipients.

[edit] National Clandestine Service
In 2004, the CIA was given charge of all US human intelligence, which many consider the core of the agency. As such, the National Clandestine Service (NCS; formerly the Directorate of Operations) is responsible for collecting foreign intelligence, mainly from clandestine HUMINT sources, and covert action. The new name reflects its having absorbed some Department of Defense HUMINT assets. The NCS was created in an attempt to end years of rivalry over influence, philosophy and budget between the United States Department of Defense and the CIA. The Department of Defense had organized the Defense HUMINT Service,[33] which, with the Presidential decision, became part of the NCS.
The precise present organisation of the NCS is classified.[34].

[edit] Directorate of Science and Technology
The Directorate of Science & Technology was established to research, create, and manage technical collection disciplines and equipment. Many of its innovations were transferred to other intelligence organizations, or, as they became more overt, to the military services.
For example, the development of the U-2 high-altitude reconnaissance aircraft was done in cooperation with the United States Air Force. The U-2's original mission was clandestine imagery intelligence over denied areas such as the Soviet Union. It was subsequently provided with signals intelligence and measurement and signature intelligence capabilities, and is now operated by the Air Force.
Imagery intelligence collected by the U-2 and reconnaissance satellites was analyzed by a DS&T organization called the National Photointerpretation Center (NPIC), which had analysts from both the CIA and the military services. Subsequently, NPIC was transferred to the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA).
The CIA has always shown a strong interest in how to use advances in technology to enhance its effectiveness This interest has historically had two primary goals:



harnessing techniques for its own use
countering any new intelligence technologies the Soviets might develop..[35]



In 1999, the CIA created the venture capital firm In-Q-Tel to help fund and develop technologies of interest to the agency.[36] It has long been the IC practice to contract for major development, such as reconnaissance aircraft and satellites.

[edit] Directorate of Support
The Directorate of Support has many traditional organizational administrative functions, such as personnel, security, communications, and financial operations, but in a manner consistent with the needs of highly sensitive operations. Significant units include



The Office of Security
The Office of Communications
The Office of Information Technology




[edit] Training
The Office of Training begins with the Junior Officer Training program for new employees, but it also conducts courses in a wide range of specialized professional disciplines. So that the initial course might be taken by employees who had not received final security clearance and thus were not permitted unescorted access to the Headquarters building, a good deal of basic training has been given at office buildings in the urban areas of Arlington, Virginia.
For a later stage of training of student operations officers, there is at least one classified training area at Camp Peary, Virginia, near Williamsburg. Students are selected, and their progress evaluated, in ways derived from the OSS, published as the book Assessment of Men, Selection of Personnel for the office of Strategic Services. [37]

[edit] Relationship with other sources of intelligence
The CIA acts as the primary American HUMINT, HUMan INTelligence, and general analytic agency, under the Director of National Intelligence, who directs or coordinates the 16 member organizations of the United States Intelligence Community. In addition, it obtains information from other U.S. government intelligence agencies, commercial information sources, and foreign intelligence services.

[edit] Other U.S. intelligence agencies
A number of intelligence organizations are fully or partially under the budgetary control of the United States Secretary of Defense or other cabinet officers such as the Attorney General of the United States.
As do other analytic members of the U.S. intelligence community, such as the Department of State's Bureau of Intelligence and Research and the analytic division of the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), CIA's raw input includes imagery intelligence IMINT collected by the air and space systems of the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), processed by the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA), signals intelligence SIGINT of the National Security Agency (NSA), and measurement and signature intelligence (MASINT) from the DIA MASINT center.

[edit] Open Source Intelligence
Until the 2004 reorganization of the intelligence community, one of the "services of common concern" that CIA provided was OSINT from the Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS).[38] FBIS, which had absorbed the Joint Publication Research Service, a military organization that translated documents,[39] which moved into the National Open Source Enterprise under the Director of National Intelligence.
CIA still provides a variety of unclassified maps and reference documents both to the intelligence community and the public.[40]
As part of its mandate to gather intelligence, CIA is looking increasingly online for information, and has become a major consumer of social media. "We're looking at YouTube, which carries some unique and honest-to-goodness intelligence," said Doug Naquin, director of the DNI Open Source Center (OSC) at CIA. "We're looking at chat rooms and things that didn't exist five years ago, and trying to stay ahead."[41]

[edit] Outsourcing
In a trend some find disturbing[42][43][44], many of the duties and functions of Intelligence Community activities, not the CIA alone, are being outsourced and privatized. Mike McConnell, Director of National Intelligence, was about to publicize an investigation report of outsourcing by U.S. intelligence agencies, as required by Congress.[45] However, this report was then classified.[46][47] Hillhouse speculates that this report includes requirements for the CIA to report:[46][48]



different standards for government employees and contractors;
contractors providing similar services to government workers;
analysis of costs of contractors vs. employees;
an assessment of the appropriateness of outsourced activities;
an estimate of the number of contracts and contractors;
comparison of compensation for contractors and government employees,
attrition analysis of government employees;
descriptions of positions to be converted back to the employee model;
an evaluation of accountability mechanisms;
an evaluation of procedures for "conducting oversight of contractors to ensure identification and prosecution of criminal violations, financial waste, fraud, or other abuses committed by contractors or contract personnel"; and
an "identification of best practices of accountability mechanisms within service contracts."



According to investigative journalist Tim Shorrock; "...what we have today with the intelligence business is something far more systemic: senior officials leaving their national security and counterterrorism jobs for positions where they are basically doing the same jobs they once held at the CIA, the NSA and other agencies - but for double or triple the salary, and for profit. It's a privatization of the highest order, in which our collective memory and experience in intelligence - our crown jewels of spying, so to speak - are owned by corporate America. Yet, there is essentially no government oversight of this private sector at the heart of our intelligence empire. And the lines between public and private have become so blurred as to be nonexistent."[43][44]
Congress has required an outsourcing report by March 30, 2008.[48]

"The Director of National Intelligence has been granted the authority to increase the number of positions (FTEs) on elements in the Intelligence Community by up to 10% should there be a determination that activities performed by a contractor should be done by a US government employee."."[48]

Part of the contracting problem comes from Congressional restrictions on the number of employees in the IC. According to Hillhouse, this resulted in 70% of the de facto workforce of the CIA's National Clandestine Service being made up of contractors. "After years of contributing to the increasing reliance upon contractors, Congress is now providing a framework for the conversion of contractors into federal government employees--more or less."[48]
As with most government agencies, building equipment often is contracted. The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), responsible for the development and operation of airborne and spaceborne sensors, long was a joint operation of the CIA and the United States Department of Defense. NRO had been significantly involved in the design of such sensors, but the NRO, then under DCI authority, contracted more of the design that had been their tradition, and to a contractor without extensive reconnaissance experience, Boeing. The next-generation satellite Future Imagery Architecture project, which missed objectives after $4 billion in cost overruns, was the result of this contract.[49][50]
Some of the cost problems associated with intelligence come from one agency, or even a group within an agency, not accepting the compartmented security practices for individual projects, requiring expensive duplication.[51]

[edit] Foreign intelligence services
Many intelligence services cooperate. There may even be a deniable communications channel with ostensibly hostile nations.
The role and functions of the CIA are roughly equivalent to those of the United Kingdom's Secret Intelligence Service (MI6), the Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS), the Australian Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS), the Russian Foreign Intelligence Service (Sluzhba Vneshney Razvedki) (SVR), the French foreign intelligence service Direction Générale de la Sécurité Extérieure (DGSE) and Israel's Mossad. While the preceding agencies both collect and analyze information, some like the US State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research are purely analytical agencies. See List of intelligence agencies.
The closest links of the US IC to other foreign intelligence agencies are to those of other mainly White Anglo-Saxon Protestant states: Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. There is a special communications marking that signals that intelligence-related messages can be shared with these four countries.[52] An indication of the United States' close operational cooperation is the creation of a new message distribution label within the main US military communications network. Previously, the marking of NOFORN (i.e., No Foreign Nationals) required the originator to specify which, if any, non-US countries could receive the information. A new handling caveat, USA/AUS/CAN/GBR/NZL Eyes Only, used primarily on intelligence messages, gives an easier way to indicate that the material can be shared with Australia, Canada, Great Britain, and New Zealand.

[edit] Organizational history
The Central Intelligence Agency was created by Congress with the passage of the National Security Act of 1947, signed into law by President Harry S. Truman. It is the descendant of the Office of Strategic Services (OSS) of World War II, which was dissolved in October 1945 and its functions transferred to the State and War Departments. Eleven months earlier, in 1944, William J. Donovan, the OSS's creator, proposed to President Franklin D. Roosevelt to create a new organization directly supervised by the President: "which will procure intelligence both by overt and covert methods and will at the same time provide intelligence guidance, determine national intelligence objectives, and correlate the intelligence material collected by all government agencies."[53] Under his plan, a powerful, centralized civilian agency would have coordinated all the intelligence services. He also proposed that this agency have authority to conduct "subversive operations abroad," but "no police or law enforcement functions, either at home or abroad."[54][dead link]




The lives of 83 fallen CIA officers are represented by 83 stars on the CIA Memorial Wall in the Original Headquarters building.


CIA personnel have died on duty, some in accidents and some by deliberate hostile action. On the memorial wall at CIA headquarters, some of the stars have no name attached, because it would reveal the identity of a clandestine officer.[55] Both the OSS and its British counterparts, as do other agencies worldwide, struggle with finding the right organizational balance among clandestine intelligence collection, counterintelligence, and covert action. See Clandestine HUMINT and Covert Action for a historical perspective on this problem. These issues also bear on the reasons that, in the history below, some "eras" overlap. Also see the Wikipedia article Director of Central Intelligence, which contains an expanded history of CIA by director; the priorities and personalities of individual directors have had a strong influence on Agency operations.

[edit] Immediate predecessors, 1946–1947
The Office of Strategic Services, which was the first independent US intelligence agency, created for the Second World War, was broken up shortly after the end of the war, by President Harry S. Truman, on September 20, 1945 when he signed an Executive Order which made the breakup 'official' as of October 1, 1945. The rapid reorganizations that followed reflected the routine sort of bureaucratic competition for resources, but also trying to deal with the proper relationships of clandestine intelligence collection and covert action (i.e., paramilitary and psychological operations). See Clandestine HUMINT and Covert Action for a more detailed history of this problem, which was not unique to the US during and after World War II. In October 1945, the functions of the OSS were split between the Departments of State and War:


New Unit
Oversight
OSS Functions Absorbed


Strategic Services Unit (SSU)
War Department
Secret Intelligence (SI) (i.e., clandestine intelligence collection) and Counter-espionage (X-2)


Interim Research and Intelligence Service (IRIS)
State Department
Research and Analysis Branch (i.e., intelligence analysis)


Psychological Warfare Division (PWD) (not uniquely for former OSS)
War Department, Army General Staff
Staff officers from Operational Groups, Operation Jedburgh, Morale Operations (black propaganda)


This division lasted only a few months. Despite opposition from the military establishment, the United States Department of State and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),[53] President Truman established the Central Intelligence Group (CIG) in January 1946 which was the direct predecessor to the CIA.[56][dead link] The CIG was an interim authority established under Presidential authority. The assets of the SSU, which now constituted a streamlined "nucleus" of clandestine intelligence was transferred to the CIG in mid-1946 and reconstituted as the Office of Special Operations (OSO).

[edit] Early CIA, 1947–1952
In September 1947, the National Security Act of 1947 established both the National Security Council and the Central Intelligence Agency.[57] Rear Admiral Roscoe H. Hillenkoetter was appointed as the first Director of Central Intelligence.




The 16-foot (5 m) diameter CIA seal in the lobby of the Original Headquarters Building.


The National Security Council Directive on Office of Special Projects, June 18, 1948 (NSC 10/2) further gave the CIA the authority to carry out covert operations "against hostile foreign states or groups or in support of friendly foreign states or groups but which are so planned and conducted that any US Government responsibility for them is not evident to unauthorized persons."[58]
In 1949, the Central Intelligence Agency Act (Public Law 81-110) authorized the agency to use confidential fiscal and administrative procedures, and exempting it from most of the usual limitations on the use of Federal funds. It also exempted the CIA from having to disclose its "organization, functions, officials, titles, salaries, or numbers of personnel employed." It also created the program "PL-110", to handle defectors and other "essential aliens" who fall outside normal immigration procedures, as well as giving those persons cover stories and economic support.[59]

[edit] The structure stabilizes, 1952
Then-DCI Walter Bedell Smith, who enjoyed a special degree of Presidential trust, having been Dwight D. Eisenhower's primary Chief of Staff during World War II, insisted that the CIA – or at least only one department – had to direct the OPC and OSO. Those organization, as well as some minor functions, formed the euphemistically named Directorate of Plans in 1952.
Also in 1952, United States Army Special Forces were created, with some missions overlapping those of the Department of Plans. In general, the pattern emerged that the CIA could borrow resources from Special Forces, although it had its own special operators.

[edit] Early Cold War, 1953–1966




Lockheed U-2 "Dragon Lady", the first generation of near-space reconnaissance aircraft.


Allen Dulles, who had been a key OSS operations officer in Switzerland during the Second World War, took over from Smith, at a time where US policy was dominated by intense anticommunism. Various sources existed, the most visible being the investigations and abuses of Senator Joseph McCarthy, and the more quiet but systematic containment doctrine developed by George Kennan, the Berlin Blockade and the Korean War. Dulles enjoyed a high degree of flexibility, as his brother, John Foster Dulles, was simultaneously Secretary of State. Concern regarding the Soviet Union and the difficulty of getting information from its closed society, which few agents could penetrate, led to solutions based on advanced technology. Among the first success was with the Lockheed U-2 aircraft, which could take pictures and collect electronic signals from an altitude above Soviet air defenses' reach. After Gary Powers was shot down by an SA-2 surface to air missile in 1960, causing an international incident, the SR-71 was developed to take over this role.




The USAF's SR-71 Blackbird was developed from the CIA's A-12 OXCART.


During this period, there were numerous covert actions against resource nationalism and socialism. The CIA overthrew a democratically-elected government for the first time during Operation Ajax, after Iran moved to take control of its petroleum reserves. Some of the largest operations were aimed at Cuba after the overthrow of the Batista dictatorship, including assassination attempts against Fidel Castro and the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion. There have been suggestions that the Soviet attempt to put missiles into Cuba came, indirectly, when they realized how badly they had been compromised by a US-UK defector in place, Oleg Penkovsky.[60]
The CIA, working with the military, formed the joint National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) to operate reconnaissance aircraft such as the SR-71 and later satellites. "The fact of" the United States operating reconnaissance satellites, like "the fact of" the existence of NRO, was highly classified for many years.




Early CORONA/KH-4B imagery IMINT satellite.



[edit] Indochina and the Vietnam War (1954–1975)

See also: Vietnam War and Phoenix Program

The OSS Patti mission arrived in Vietnam near the end of the Second World War, and had significant interaction with the leaders of many Vietnamese factions, including Ho Chi Minh.[61] While the Patti mission forwarded Ho's proposals for phased independence, with the French or even the United States as the transition partner, the US policy of containment opposed forming any government that it believed was communist in nature, even if it was democratically-elected.
The first CIA mission to Indochina, under the code name Saigon Military Mission arrived in 1954, under Edward Lansdale. US-based analysts were simultaneously trying to project the evolution of political power, both if the scheduled referendum chose merger of the North and South, or if the South, the US client, stayed independent. Initially, the US focus in Southeast Asia was on Laos, not Vietnam.
During the period of US combat involvement in the Vietnam War, there was considerable arguments about progress among the Department of Defense under Robert S. McNamara, the CIA, and, to some extent, the intelligence staff of Military Assistance Command Vietnam.[62] In general, the military was consistently more optimistic than the CIA. Sam Adams, a junior CIA analyst with responsibilities for estimating the actual damage to the enemy, eventually resigned from the CIA, after expressing concern to Director of Central Intelligence Richard Helms with estimates that were changed for interagency and White House political reasons. Adams afterward wrote the book War of Numbers.

[edit] Abuses of CIA authority, 1970s–1990s
Things came to a head in the mid-1970s, around the time of the Watergate political burglary affair. A dominant feature of political life during that period were the attempts of Congress to assert oversight of US Presidency, the executive branch of the U.S. Government. Revelations about past CIA activities, such as assassinations and attempted assassinations of foreign leaders (most notably Fidel Castro) and illegal domestic spying on US citizens (the CIA has no authority to conduct any domestic activities whatsoever), provided the opportunities to execute Congressional oversight of US intelligence operations.[63]
Hastening the Central Intelligence Agency's fall from grace were the burglary of the Watergate headquarters of the Democratic Party by ex-CIA agents, and President Richard Nixon's subsequent use of the CIA to impede the FBI's investigation of the burglary. In the famous "smoking gun" recording that led to President Nixon's resignation, Nixon ordered his chief of staff, H.R. Haldeman, to tell the CIA that further investigation of Watergate would "open the whole can of worms" about the Bay of Pigs Invasion of Cuba.[64] In this way Nixon and Haldemann ensured that the CIA's #1 and #2 ranking officials, Richard Helms and Vernon Walters, communicated to FBI Director L. Patrick Gray that the FBI should not to follow the money trail from the burglars to the Committee to Re-Elect the President, as it would uncover CIA informants in Mexico. The FBI initially agreed to this due to a long standing agreement between the FBI and CIA not to uncover each other's sources of information. Though within a couple of weeks the FBI demanded this request in writing, and when no such formal request came, the FBI resumed its investigation into the money trail. Nonetheless, when this the smoking gun tapes were made public, damage to the public's perception of CIA's top officials, and thus to the CIA as a whole, could not be avoided.[65]
In 1973, then-DCI James R. Schlesinger commissioned reports – known as the "Family Jewels" – on illegal activities by the Agency. In December 1974, Investigative journalist Seymour Hersh broke the news of the "Family Jewels" in a front-page article in The New York Times, revealing that the CIA had assassinated foreign leaders, and had illegally conducted surveillance on some 7,000 US citizens involved in the anitwar movement (Operation CHAOS).[63] The CIA had also experimented on people, who unknowingly took LSD (among other things).[63]
Congress responded to the disturbing charges in 1975, investigating the CIA in the Senate via the Church Committee, chaired by Senator Frank Church (D-Idaho), and in the House of Representatives via the Pike Committee, chaired by Congressman Otis Pike (D-NY).[63] In addition, President Gerald Ford created the Rockefeller Commission,[63] and issued an executive order prohibiting the assassination of foreign leaders. As the CIA fell out of favor with the public, Ford assured Americans that his administration was not involved: "There are no people presently employed in the White House who have a relationship with the CIA of which I am personally unaware."[63]
Repercussions from the Iran-Contra Affair arms smuggling scandal included the creation of the Intelligence Authorization Act in 1991. It defined covert operations as secret missions in geopolitical areas where the US is neither openly nor apparently engaged. This also required an authorizing chain of command, including an official, presidential finding report and the informing of the House and Senate Intelligence Committees, which, in emergencies, requires only "timely notification".

[edit] 2004, DCI takes over CIA top-level functions
Previously, the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI) oversaw the Intelligence Community, serving as the president's principal intelligence advisor, additionally serving as head of the Central Intelligence Agency. The DCI's title now is "Director of the Central Intelligence Agency" (DCIA), serving as head of the CIA.
Currently, the Central Intelligence Agency reports to the Director of National Intelligence. Prior to the establishment of the DNI, the CIA reported to the President, with informational briefings to congressional committees. The National Security Advisor is a permanent member of the National Security Council, responsible for briefing the President with pertinent information collected by all U.S. intelligence agencies, including the National Security Agency, the Drug Enforcement Administration, etc. All 16 Intelligence Community agencies are under the authority of the Director of National Intelligence.

[edit] Mission-related issues and controversies
The history of CIA deals with several things, certainly including covert action, but also clandestine and overt intelligence collection, intelligence analysis and reporting, and logistical and technical support of its activities. Prior to the December 2004 reorganization of the intelligence community (IC), it also was responsible for coordinations of IC-wide intelligence estimates.
These articles are organized in two different ways: By geographical region (for state actors or non-state actors limited to a country or region) and by transnational topic (for non-state actors).
CIA operations by region, country and date are discussed in detail in the following articles:

CIA activities in Africa
CIA activities in Asia and the Pacific
CIA activities in Russia and Europe
CIA activities in the Americas
CIA activities in the Near East, North Africa, South and Southwest Asia

CIA analyses of issues such as the effect of emerging infectious diseases, and the detection of WMDs, are inherently transnational, and are discussed in the following articles. CIA operations and, where appropriate, authorizations for covert operations (for example, NSDD 138 authorizing direct action against opponents) by transnational topic are discussed in the following Wikipedia articles:

CIA transnational activities in counterproliferation
CIA transnational anti-crime and anti-drug activities
CIA transnational anti-terrorism activities
CIA transnational health and economic activities
CIA transnational human rights actions

In addition, a view of covert US activity specifically oriented towards regime change actions is given in the following Wikipedia article:

CIA sponsored regime change

Major sources for this section include the Council on Foreign Relations of the United States series, the National Security Archive and George Washington University, the Freedom of Information Act Reading Room at the CIA, U.S. Congressional hearings, Blum's book[66] and Weiner's book[42] Note that the CIA has posted a rebuttal to Weiner's book,[67] and that Jeffrey Richelson of the National Security Archive has also been sharply critical of it.[68]
Areas of controversy about inappropriate, often illegal actions include experiments, without consent, on human beings to explore chemical means of eliciting information or disabling people. Another area involved torture and clandestine imprisonment. There have been attempted assassinations under CIA orders and support for assassinations of foreign leaders by citizens of the leader's country, and, in a somewhat different legal category that may fall under the customary laws of war, assassinations of militant leaders.

[edit] Security and counterintelligence failures
While the names change periodically, there are two basic security functions to protect the CIA and its operations. There is an Office of Security in the Directorate for Support, which is responsible for physical security of the CIA buildings, secure storage of information, and personnel security clearances. These are directed inwardly to the agency itself.
In what is now the National Clandestine Service, there is a counter-intelligence function, called the Counterintelligence Staff under its most controversial chief, James Jesus Angleton. This function has roles including looking for staff members that are providing information to foreign intelligence services (FIS) as moles. Another role is to check proposals for recruiting foreign HUMINT assets, to see if these people have any known ties to FIS and thus may be attempts to penetrate CIA to learn its personnel and practices, or as a provocateur, or other form of double agent.
This agency component may also launch offensive counterespionage, where it attempts to interfere with FIS operations. CIA officers in the field often have assignments in offensive counterespionage as well as clandestine intelligence collection.

[edit] Security failures
In 1993, the headquarters of the CIA was attacked by Mir Aimal Kansi, a Pakistani national. Two CIA employees were killed, Frank Darling and Lansing Bennett, M.D.
The "Family Jewels" and other documents reveal that the Office of Security violated the prohibition of CIA involvement in domestic law enforcement, sometimes with the intention of assisting police organizations local to CIA buildings.

[edit] Counterintelligence failures
Perhaps the most disruptive period involving counterintelligence was James Jesus Angleton's search for a mole,[69] based on the statements of a Soviet defector, Anatoliy Golitsyn. A second defector, Yuri Nosenko, challenged Golitsyn's claims, with the two calling one another Soviet double agents.[70] Many CIA officers fell under career-ending suspicion; the details of the relative truths and untruths from Nosenko and Golitsyn may never be released, or, in fact, may not be fully understood. The accusations also crossed the Atlantic to the British intelligence services, who also were damaged by molehunts.[71]
On February 24, 1994, the agency was rocked by the arrest of 31-year veteran case officer Aldrich Ames on charges of spying for the Soviet Union since 1985.[72]
Other defectors have included Edward Lee Howard, a field operations officer, and William Kampiles, a low-level worker in the CIA 24-hour Operations Center. Kampiles sold the Soviets the detailed operational manual for the KH-11 reconnaissance satellite.[73]

[edit] Failures in intelligence analysis
The agency has also been criticized for ineffectiveness as an intelligence gathering agency. Former DCI Richard Helms commented, after the end of the Cold War, "The only remaining superpower doesn't have enough interest in what's going on in the world to organize and run an espionage service."[74] The CIA has come under particular criticism for failing to predict the collapse of the Soviet Union.
See the information technology section of the intelligence analysis management for discussion of possible failures to provide adequate automation support to analysts, and US intelligence community A-Space for a IC-wide program to collect some of them. Cognitive traps for intelligence analysis also goes into areas where CIA has examined why analysis can fail.
Agency veterans have lamented CIA's inability to produce the kind of long-range strategic intelligence that it once did in order to guide policymakers. John McLaughlin, who was deputy director and acting director of central intelligence from October 2000 to September 2004, said that CIA is drowned by demands from the White House and Pentagon for instant information, "intelligence analysts end up being the Wikipedia of Washington."[75] In the intelligence analysis article, orienting oneself to the consumers deals with some of ways in which intelligence can become more responsive to the needs of policymakers.
For the media, the failures are most newsworthy. A number of declassified National Intelligence Estimates do predict the behavior of various countries, but not in a manner attractive to news, or, most significantly, not public at the time of the event. In its operational role, some successes for the CIA include the U-2 and SR-71 programs, and anti-Soviet operations in Afghanistan in the mid-1980s.
Among the first analytic failures, before the CIA had its own collection capabilities, it assured President Harry S Truman on October 13, 1950 that the Chinese would not send troops to Korea. Six days later, over one million Chinese troops arrived.[76] See an analysis of the failure; also see surrounding text for the two Koreas and China, and the time period before the Korean War. Earlier, the intelligence community failed to detect the North Korean invasion, in part because resources were not allocated to SIGINT coverage of the Korean peninsula.
The history of US intelligence, with respect to French Indochina and then the two Vietnams, is long and complex. The Pentagon Papers often contain pessimistic CIA analyses that conflicted with White House positions. It does appear that some estimates were changed to reflect Pentagon and White House views..[62] See CIA activities in Asia and the Pacific for detailed discussions of intelligence and covert operations from 1945 (i.e., before the CIA) onwards.
Another criticism is the failure to predict India's nuclear tests in 1974. A review of the various analyses of India's nuclear program did predict some aspects of the test, such as a 1965 report saying, correctly, that if India did develop a bomb, it would be explained as "for peaceful purposes".
A major criticism is failure to forestall the September 11, 2001 attacks. The 9/11 Commission Report identifies failures in the IC as a whole. One problem, for example, was the FBI failing to "connect the dots" by sharing information among its decentralized field offices. The report, however, criticizes both CIA analysis, and impeding their investigation.
The executive summary of a report which was released by the office of CIA Inspector General John Helgerson on August 21, 2007 concluded that former DCI George Tenet failed to adequately prepare the agency to deal with the danger posed by Al Qaeda prior to the attacks of September 11, 2001. The report had been completed in June, 2005 and was partially released to the public in an agreement with Congress, over the objections of current DCI General Michael V. Hayden. Hayden said its publication would "consume time and attention revisiting ground that is already well plowed.”[77] Tenet disagreed with the report's conclusions, citing his planning efforts vis-a-vis al-Qaeda, particularly from 1999.[78]

[edit] Questionable/controversial tactics
Main article: CIA transnational human rights actions

see also: MKULTRA, Extraordinary rendition by the United States, Church Committee, and Covert U.S. regime change actions

The CIA has been called into question on several occasions for some of the tactics it employs to carry out its missions. At times these tactics have included torture, training of groups and organizations that would later participate in killing of civilians and other non-combatants, human experimentation, and targeted killings and assassinations.
In understanding the CIA's role in human rights, there are challenging problems of ethics. John Stockwell, a CIA officer who left the Agency and became a public critic, said of the CIA field officers: "They don't meet the death squads on the streets where they're actually chopping up people or laying them down on the street and running trucks over their heads. The CIA people in San Salvador meet the police chiefs, and the people who run the death squads, and they do liaise with them, they meet them beside the swimming pool of the villas. And it's a sophisticated, civilized kind of relationship. And they talk about their children, who are going to school at UCLA or Harvard and other schools, and they don't talk about the horrors of what's being done. They pretend like it isn't true."[79].

[edit] Internal/presidential studies, external investigations and document releases
Main article: Official reports by the US Government on the CIA
At various times since the creation of the CIA, the US Government has produced comprehensive reports on CIA actions that marked historical watersheds in how CIA went about trying to fulfill its vague charter purposes from 1947. These reports were the result of internal/presidential studies, external investigations by Congressional committees or other arms of the US Government, or even the simple releases and declassification of large quantities of documents by the CIA.
Several investigations (e.g., the Church Committee, Rockefeller Commission, Pike Committee, etc.), as well as released declassified documents, reveal that the CIA, at times, operated outside its charter. In some cases, such as during Watergate, this may have been due to inappropriate requests by White House staff. In other cases, there was a violation of Congressional intent, such as the Iran-Contra affair. In many cases, these reports provide the only official discussion of these actions available to the public.

[edit] Influencing public opinion and law enforcement
See also: CIA influence on public opinion, CIA and the media, CIA in fiction and the movies, Robertson Panel, and Operation Mockingbird
This is an area with many shades of gray. There is little argument, for example, that the CIA acted inappropriately in providing technical support to White House operatives conducting both political and security investigations, with no legal authority to do so. Things become much more ambiguous when law enforcement may expose a clandestine operation, a problem not unique to intelligence but also seen among different law enforcement organizations, where one wants to prosecute and another to continue investigations, perhaps reaching higher levels in a conspiracy.[80]

[edit] Linkages with former Nazi and Japanese War Criminals
Main article: U.S. Intelligence involvement with German and Japanese War Criminals after World War II
While the United States was involved in the prosecution of war criminals, US military and intelligence agencies protected some war criminals in the interest of obtaining technical or intelligence information from them, or taking part in ongoing intelligence or engineering (e.g., Operation Paperclip). Multiple US intelligence organizations were involved, and many of these relationships were formed before the creation of the CIA in 1947, but the CIA, in some cases, took over the relationships and concealed them for nearly 60 years.

[edit] Al-Qaeda and the "War on Terror"
Further information: CIA transnational anti-terrorism activities and CIA transnational human rights actions
The CIA had long been dealing with terrorism originating from abroad, and in 1986 had set up a Counterterrorist Center to deal specifically with the problem. At first confronted with secular terrorism, the Agency found Islamist terrorism looming increasingly large on its scope.
The network that became known as al-Qaeda ("The Base") grew out of Arab volunteers who fought the Soviets and their puppet regimes in Afghanistan in the 1980s. In 1984 Abdullah Azzam and Osama bin Laden set up an organization known as the Office of Services in Peshawar, Pakistan, to coordinate and finance the "Afghan Arabs", as the volunteers became known.
The CIA also channeled US aid to Afghan resistance fighters via Pakistan in a covert operation known as Operation Cyclone. It denied dealing with non-Afghan fighters, or having direct contact with bin Laden.[81] However, various authorities relate that the Agency brought both Afghans and Arabs to the United States for military training.[82][83][84] Azzam and Bin Laden set up recruitment offices in the US, under the name "Al-Khifah", the hub of which was the Farouq Mosque in Brooklyn's Atlantic Avenue. This was "a place of pivotal importance for Operation Cyclone".[85]
Among notable figures at the Brooklyn center was the Egyptian "double agent" Ali Mohamed, who worked for the CIA, the Green Berets, Egyptian Islamic Jihad and al-Qaeda at various times in the 1980s and 1990s. FBI special agent Jack Cloonan called him "bin Laden's first trainer".[86] Another was "Blind Sheikh" Abdel Rahman, a leading recruiter of mujaheddin, who obtained US entry visas with the help of the CIA in 1987 and 1990.
Around 1988, Bin Laden set up al-Qaeda from the more extreme elements of the Services Office. But it was not a large organization. When Jamal al-Fadl (who had been recruited through the Brooklyn center in the mid 1980s) joined in 1989, he was described as Qaeda's "third member".[87]
In January 1996 the CIA created an experimental "virtual station", the Bin Laden Issue Station, under the Counterterrorist Center, to track Bin Laden's developing activities. Al-Fadl, who defected to the CIA in spring 1996, began to provide the Station with a new image of the Qaeda leader: he was not only a terrorist financier, but a terrorist organizer too. FBI special agent Dan Coleman (who together with his partner Jack Cloonan had been "seconded" to the Bin Laden Station) called him Qaeda's "Rosetta Stone".[88]
In 1999 CIA chief George Tenet launched a grand "Plan" to deal with al-Qaeda. The Counterterrorist Center, its new chief Cofer Black and the center's Bin Laden unit were the Plan's developers and executors. Once it was prepared Tenet assigned CIA intelligence chief Charles E. Allen to set up a "Qaeda cell" to oversee its tactical execution.[89] In 2000 the CIA and USAF jointly ran a series of flights over Afghanistan with a small remote-controlled reconnaissance drone, the Predator; they obtained probable photos of Bin Laden. Cofer Black and others became advocates of arming the Predator with missiles to try to assassinate Bin Laden and other Qaeda leaders. After the Cabinet-level Principals Committee meeting on terrorism of September 4, 2001, the CIA resumed reconnaissance flights, the drones now being weapons-capable.
The CIA set up a Strategic Assessments Branch in 2001 to remedy the deficit of "big-picture" analysis of al-Qaeda, and apparently to develop targeting strategies. The branch was formally set up in July 2001, but it struggled to find personnel. The branch's head took up his job on September 10, 2001.[90][91][92]
After 9/11, the CIA came under criticism for not having done enough to prevent the attacks. Tenet rejected the criticism, citing the Agency's planning efforts especially over the preceding two years. He also considered that the CIA's efforts had put the Agency in a position to respond rapidly and effectively to the attacks, both in the "Afghan sanctuary" and in "ninety-two countries around the world".[93] The new strategy was called the "Worldwide Attack Matrix".

[edit] The 2003 War in Iraq
Main article: CIA activities in Iraq
Further information: Plame affair and CIA activities in the Near East, North Africa, South and Southwest Asia
Whether or not the intelligence available, or presented by the Bush Administration justified the 2003 War in Iraq or allowed proper planning, especially for the occupation, is quite controversial. However, there were more than one CIA employees that asserted the sense that Bush administration officials placed undue pressure on CIA analysts to reach certain conclusions that would support their stated policy positions with regard to Iraq. For more on this specific issue, see the appropriate section in the main article

[edit] Drug trafficking
Main articles: CIA transnational anti-crime and anti-drug activities and CIA drug trafficking
Two offices of CIA Directorate of Intelligence have analytical responsibilities in this area. The Office of Transnational Issues[94] applies unique functional expertise to assess existing and emerging threats to US national security and provides the most senior US policymakers, military planners, and law enforcement with analysis, warning, and crisis support.
CIA Crime and Narcotics Center[95] researches information on international narcotics trafficking and organized crime for policymakers and the law enforcement community. Since CIA has no domestic police authority, it sends its analytic information to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and other law enforcement organizations, such as the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) and the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United States Department of the Treasury (OFAC).
Another part of CIA, the National Clandestine Service, collects human intelligence (HUMINT) in these areas.
Research by Alfred W. McCoy PhD, Gary Webb, and others has pointed to CIA involvement in narcotics trafficking across the globe, although the CIA officially denies such allegations. During the Cold War, when numerous soldiers participated in transport of SE Asian heroin to the United States by the airline Air America, the CIA's role in such traffic was reportedly rationalized as "recapture" of related profits to prevent possible enemy control of such assets. Researchers point to similar operations during Reagan's Contra War in Nicaragua, US involvement in Afghanistan during the Cold War, and current CIA involvement with Pakistan's ISI intelligence agency, which allegedly has links to the refining of Afghan heroin in Pakistan.

[edit] See also



Indices of CIA-related pages and some unindexed pages

Category:Central Intelligence Agency
Category:Analysts of the Central Intelligence Agency
Category:Directors of the Central Intelligence Agency
Category:Historians of the Central Intelligence Agency
Category:People of the Central Intelligence Agency






Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Central Intelligence Agency





Wikinews has related news:
CIA







[edit] Further reading

Marchetti, Victor; John D. Marks (1974). The CIA and the Cult of Intelligence. Knopf. ISBN 0394482395. 
Johnson, Loch K. (1991). America's Secret Power: The CIA in a Democratic Society. Oxford University Press. 
Andrew, Christopher (1996). For the President's Eyes Only. HarperCollins. ISBN 0-00-638071-9. 
Baer, Robert (2003). Sleeping With the Devil: How Washington Sold Our Soul for Saudi Crude. Crown. ISBN 1-4000-5021-9. 
McCoy, Alfred W. (1972). The Politics of Heroin in Southeast Asia. Harper Colophon. ISBN 06-090328-7. 
Smith, Jr., W. Thomas (2003). Encyclopedia of the Central Intelligence Agency. Facts on File. ISBN 0-8160-4667-0. 
Bearden, Milton; James Risen (2003). The Main Enemy: The Inside Story of the CIA's Final Showdown With the KGB. Random House. ISBN 0-679-46309-7. 
Mahle, Melissa Boyle (2004). Denial and Deception: An Insider's View of the CIA from Iran-Contra to 9/11. Nation Books. ISBN 1-56025-649-4. 
Weiner, Tim (2007). Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA. Doubleday. ISBN 0-38551-445-X. 
Wallace, Robert; Melton, H. Keith; Schlesinger, Henry R. (2008). Spycraft: The Secret History of the CIA's Spytechs, from Communism to al-Qaeda. Dutton. ISBN 0525949801


[edit] Official websites and documents

CIA official site
CIA official Freedom of Information Act (foia) site
George Washington University National Security Archive


[edit] Other links

CIA: The World Factbook
Managing and Teaching New Analysts by Martin Petersen
Central Intelligence Agency Meeting Notices and Rule Changes from The Federal Register RSS Feed
Inside the Company: CIA Diary. Third World Traveler: Excerpt from a book by Philip Agee.
William Blum website on CIA and US policy
Interview of a former CIA operative
Former CIA Inspector General Frederick P. Hitz discusses his book Why Spy? Espionage in an age of uncertainty, January 2009, ISRIA


[edit] References


^ "CIA Frequently Asked Questions". cia.gov. 2006-07-28. https://www.cia.gov/about-cia/faqs/index.html#employeenumbers. Retrieved on 2008-07-04. 
^ "Public affairs FAQ". cia.gov. July 28, 2006. https://www.cia.gov/about-cia/faqs/index.html#employeenumbers. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.  However, it was made public for several years in the late 1990s. In 1997 it was of $26.6 billion and in 1998 it was $26.7 billion
^ Crile, George (2003). Charlie Wilson's War. Grove Press. 
^ Kopel, Dave (1997-07-28). "CIA Budget: An Unnecessary Secret". http://www.cato.org/dailys/7-28-97.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-15. 
^ "Cloak Over the CIA Budget". 1999-11-29. http://www.fas.org/sgp/news/1999/11/wp112999.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-04. 
^ [1]
^ Executive Order 13470
^ "Bush Orders Intelligence Overhaul", by Associated Press, July 31, 2008
^ Theoharis, Athan (2007). The Quest for Absolute Security; The Failed Relations Among U.S. Intelligence Agencies'. Ivan R. Dee. ISBN 1-56663-697-3. 
^ Rosen, Nir. "Unsavory allies stack CIA's deck". post-gazette.com. http://www.post-gazette.com/pg/03236/214533.stm. Retrieved on 2008-07-04. 
^ Smith, R. Jeffrey (2004-06-09). "Soldier Described White House Interest". Yurica Report. http://www.yuricareport.com/PrisonerTortureDirectory/JordanLinksAbuGhraibToWhiteHouse.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-04. 
^ Aven, Daniel (2007-08-08). "O'Donnell Tackles CIA On "The Company": Actor Discusses Playing Agent On New TNT Miniseries". CBS News. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2007/08/08/earlyshow/main3146547.shtml. Retrieved on 2009-03-29. 
^ Agee, Philip (January 1, 1984). Inside the Company: CIA Diary. Bantam. ISBN 055326012X. 
^ Littell, Robert (April 11, 2002). The Company: A Novel of the CIA. Overlook. ISBN 1585671975. 
^ Chris O'Donnell, Alfred Molina. (2007). The Company [DVD]. Sony Pictures. ( Traces CIA activities over a 40-year period)
^ Declaration of Steven Aftergood, 5 May 2003, Case No. 02-1146 (RMU), http://www.fas.org/sgp/foia/2002/aftergood.html 
^ Shane, Scott (8 November 2005), "Official Reveals Budget for U.S. Intelligence", New York Times, http://www.nytimes.com/2005/11/08/politics/08budget.html?pagewanted=print 
^ "CIA Support to the US Military During the Persian Gulf War". Central Intelligence Agency. 1997-06-16. https://www.cia.gov/library/reports/general-reports-1/gulfwar/061997/support.htm. 
^ CIA Abbreviations and Acronyms
^ Reiss Jr, Robert J. Jr. (2006 Summer Edition), "The C2 puzzle: Space Authority and the Operational Level of War", Army Space Journal, http://www.smdc-armyforces.army.mil/Pic_Archive/ASJ_PDFs/ASJ_VOL_5_NO_2_Article_1.pdf 
^ "Center for the Study of Intelligence". cia.gov. 2006-07-16. https://www.cia.gov/csi/index.html. 
^ Kent Center Occasional Papers, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications//Kent_Papers/index.html 
^ "CIA Sets Changes To IG's Oversight, Adds Ombudsman", Washington Post: A03, February 2, 2008, http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/02/01/AR2008020103150_pf.html 
^ Mazetti, Mark (February 2, 2008), "C.I.A. Tells of Changes for Its Internal Inquiries", New York Times, http://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/02/washington/02intel.html 
^ "Fifty Years of Service to the Nation". cia.gov. 2006-07-16. https://www.cia.gov/offices-of-cia/intelligence-analysis/index.html. 
^ Central Intelligence Agency. "Intelligence & Analysis". https://www.cia.gov/offices-of-cia/intelligence-analysis/organization-1/index.html. 
^ Office of Terrorism Analysis, https://www.cia.gov/offices-of-cia/intelligence-analysis/organization-1/ota.html 
^ Office of Transnational Issues, https://www.cia.gov/offices-of-cia/intelligence-analysis/organization-1/oti.html 
^ CIA Crime and Narcotics Center, https://www.cia.gov/offices-of-cia/intelligence-analysis/organization-1/the-cia-crime-and-narcotics-center.html 
^ Weapons Intelligence, Nonproliferation, and Arms Control Center, https://www.cia.gov/offices-of-cia/intelligence-analysis/organization-1/winpac.html 
^ Counterintelligence Center Analysis Group, https://www.cia.gov/offices-of-cia/intelligence-analysis/organization-1/cic-ag.html 
^ Information Operations Center Analysis Group, https://www.cia.gov/offices-of-cia/intelligence-analysis/organization-1/ioc-ag.html 
^ Richelson, Jeffrey, ed. (May 23, 2001), The Pentagon's Spies, http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB46/ 
^ Martin, Thomas S.; Evans, Michael L. (July 17, 2000), "Defense HUMINT Service Organizational Chart", The "Death Squad Protection" Act: Senate Measure Would Restrict Public Access to Crucial Human Rights Information Under the Freedom of Information Act, http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB34/13-01.htm 
^ "Science, Technology and the CIA". National Security Archive, The George Washington University. 2001-09-10. http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB54/. 
^ Rick E. Yannuzzi. "In-Q-Tel: A New Partnership Between the CIA and the Private Sector". Central Intelligence Agency, with permission from the Defense Intelligence Journal. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/additional-publications/in-q-tel/index.html. 
^ The OSS Assessment Staff (1948), Assessment of Men, Selection of Personnel for the Office of Strategic Services, Rinehart and Company, Inc. 
^ Mercado, Stephen (2007-04-15). "Reexamining the Distinction Between Open Information and Secrets". Central Intelligence Agency Center for the Study of Intelligence. https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/csi-studies/studies/Vol49no2/reexamining_the_distinction_3.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-04. 
^ Joint Publications Research Service (JPRS), http://hcl.harvard.edu/research/guides/jprs/ 
^ CIA Maps & Publications, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/cia-maps-publications/index.html 
^ Thomas Claburn (2008-02-06). "CIA Monitors YouTube For Intelligence". InformationWeek. http://www.informationweek.com/story/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=206105311. Retrieved on 2008-02-11. 
^ a b Weiner, Tim (2007). Legacy of Ashes. Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-51445-3. 
^ a b Shorrock, Tim (2008-05-29). "Former high-ranking Bush officials enjoy war profits". Salon.com. http://www.salon.com/news/excerpt/2008/05/29/spies_for_hire/print.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-16. 
^ a b Hurt III, Harry (2008-06-15). "The Business of Intelligence Gathering". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/06/15/business/15shelf.html?ref=business&pagewanted=print. Retrieved on 2008-06-18. 
^ Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008, Conference Committee Report, December 6, 2007, http://www.fas.org/irp/congress/2007_rpt/hrpt110-478.pdf 
^ a b Hillhouse, R.J. (July 8, 2007), Who Runs the CIA? Outsiders for Hire., http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/07/06/AR2007070601993_pf.html, retrieved on 2008-07-04 
^ Keefe, Patrick Radden (June 25, 2007), Don't Privatize Our Spies, http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9E06E6D91731F936A15755C0A9619C8B63, retrieved on 2008-07-04 
^ a b c d Hillhouse, R.J. (December 18, 2007), CIA Contractors: Double or Nothin', http://www.thespywhobilledme.com/ 
^ Butler, Amy (March 20, 2005), "SBIRS High in the Red Again", Aviation Week, http://www.aviationweek.com/aw/generic/story_generic.jsp?channel=awst&id=news/03215p02.xml 
^ Taubman, Philip (November 11, 2007), "Failure to Launch: In Death of Spy Satellite Program, Lofty Plans and Unrealistic Bids", New York Times, http://www.nytimes.com/2007/11/11/washington/11satellite.html?ei=5088&en=af17736747d92e0b&ex=1352437200&partner=rssn&pagewanted=all#step1 
^ Rich, Ben R. (1996). Skunk Works: A Personal Memoir of My Years of Lockheed. Back Bay Books. 
^ US Defense Information Services Agency (March 19, 1999), DMS (Defense Messaging Service) Genser (General Service) Message Security Classifications, Categories, and Marking Phrase Requirements Version 1.2, http://www.fas.org/sgp/othergov/dod/genser.pdf 
^ a b Factbook on Intelligence. Central Intelligence Agency. December 1992. pp. 4–5. 
^ Troy, Thomas F. (1993-09-22). "Truman on CIA". cia.gov. p.6. https://www.cia.gov/csi/kent_csi/docs/v20i1a02p_0006.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-15. 
^ Special Forces Roll of Honour: Central Intelligence Agency, http://www.specialforcesroh.com/browse.php?mode=viewc&catid=53 
^ Warner, Michael. "The Creation of the Central Intelligence Group". cia.gov. https://www.cia.gov/csi/studies/96unclass/salvage.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-15. 
^ Zegart, Amy B. (2007-09-23). "The CIA's license to fail". The Los Angeles Times. http://www.latimes.com/news/opinion/sunday/commentary/la-op-zegart23sep23,0,7737105.story?coll=la-sunday-commentary. 
^ "U.S. Department of State: Foreign Relations of the United States, 1945–1950, Emergence of the Intelligence Establishment". state.gov. Document 292, Section 5. http://www.state.gov/www/about_state/history/intel/290_300.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-04. 
^ "George Tenet v. John Doe" (PDF). Federation of American Scientists. 2006-07-16. http://www.fas.org/sgp/jud/tenetvdoe-petresp.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-07-04. 
^ Schecter, Jerrold L.; Deriabin, Peter S. (1992), The Spy Who Saved the World: How a Soviet Colonel Changed the Course of the Cold War, Scribner, ISBN 0684190680 
^ Patti, Archimedes L. A (1980). Why Viet Nam?: Prelude to America's albatross. University of California Press. 
^ a b Adams, Sam (1994). War of Numbers: an Intelligence Memoir. Steerforth Press. ISBN 188364223X. 
^ a b c d e f Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. pp. 49–51. ISBN 0465041957. 
^ "Transcript of a recording of a meeting between President Richard Nixon and H. R. Haldeman in the oval office". hpol.org. 1972-06-23. http://www.hpol.org/transcript.php?id=92. Retrieved on 2008-07-04. 
^ Gray III, L. Patrick; Ed Gray (2008). [www.lpatrickgrayiii.com In Nixon's Web:A Year in the Crosshairs of Watergate]. Times Books/Henry Holt. ISBN 0805082565. www.lpatrickgrayiii.com. 
^ Blum, William (1986). The CIA: A Forgotten History. Zed Books. ISBN 0-86232-480-7. 
^ "Review of 'Legacy of Ashes: The History of CIA'" by Nicholas Dujmovic, CIA Center for the Study of Intelligence, November 26, 2007
^ Richelson, Jeffrey (2007-09-11). "Sins of Omission and Commission". http://www.washingtondecoded.com/site/2007/09/sins-of-omissio.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-04. 
^ Wise, David (1992), Molehunt: The Secret Search for Traitors That Shattered the CIA, Random House 
^ Baer, Robert (2003), See No Evil: The True Story of a Ground Soldier in the CIA's War on Terrorism, Three Rivers Press, ISBN 140004684X 
^ Wright, Peter; Greengrass, Paul (1987), Spycatcher, William Heinemann 
^ "FBI History: Famous Cases - Aldrich Hazen Ames". Federal Bureau of Investigation. http://www.fbi.gov/libref/historic/famcases/ames/ames.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-04. 
^ McKinley, Cynthia A. S., When the Enemy Has Our Eyes, http://www.fas.org/spp/eprint/mckinley.htm 
^ The CIA: On top of everything else, not very good at its job, Review of Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA by Tim Weiner in The Economist, August 16, 2007
^ Weiner, Tim (2006-05-14). "Langley, We Have a Problem". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/05/14/weekinreview/14weiner.html?pagewanted=print. Retrieved on 2008-07-04. 
^ Kerber, Linda K. (2006-05-15). "Protecting the Nation's Memory". American Historical Association. http://www.historians.org/Perspectives/NewsBriefs/2006/0605/KerberArticle.cfm. Retrieved on 2008-07-04. 
^ Stout, David; Mazzetti, Mark (2007-08-21). "Tenet’s C.I.A. Unprepared for Qaeda Threat, Report Says". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/08/21/washington/21cnd-cia.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-04. 
^ "CIA criticises ex-chief over 9/11", BBC News online, August 22, 2007, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/americas/6957839.stm 
^ Stockwell, John (October 1987), "The Secret Wars of the CIA, a lecture", Information Clearing House, http://www.informationclearinghouse.info/article4068.htm 
^ Saunders, Frances Stonor (1999). The Cultural Cold War: The CIA and the World of Arts and Letters. New Press. ISBN 1-56584-664-8. 
^ Steve Coll, Ghost Wars (Penguin, 2005 edn), p.87.
^ Giles Foden, "Blowback Chronicles", Guardian, Sept. 15, 2001; referring to John Cooley, Unholy Wars: Afghanistan, America and International Terrorism (Pluto Press, no date given)
^ Cooperative Research transcript of Fox TV interview with J. Michael Springmann (head of the non-immigrant visa section at the US consulate in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, in 1987-88) July 18, 2002.
^ transcript of Springmann interview with CBC, July 3, 2002, 9/11 Review.
^ Andrew Marshall, "Terror 'blowback' burns CIA: America's spies paid and trained their nation's worst enemies", Independent On Sunday (copy), Nov. 1, 1998.
^ Cloonan Frontline interview, PBS, July 13, 2005.
^ Peter L Bergen, Holy War, Inc: Inside the Secret World of Osama bin Laden (Weidenfield & Nicholson, 2001), p.65.
^ Jane Mayer, "Junior: The clandestine life of America's top Al Qaeda source", New Yorker, Sept. 11, 2006.
^ Tenet, At The Center of the Storm, pp.119, 120.
^ 9/11 Commission Report, chapter 11, p.342 (HTML version)
^ Joint Inquiry Final Report, part three, p.387.
^ Tenet statement to the 9/11 Commission, March 24, 2004, p.8.
^ George Tenet, At The Center Of The Storm (Harper Press, 2007), pp.121-2; cf. p.178.
^ Office of Transnational Issues, https://www.cia.gov/offices-of-cia/intelligence-analysis/organization-1/oti.html 
^ CIA Crime and Narcotics Center, https://www.cia.gov/offices-of-cia/intelligence-analysis/organization-1/the-cia-crime-and-narcotics-center.html 



[edit] External links






 
Links to related articles














v • d • e

Central Intelligence Agency (USA)






Geographic CIA activities: the Americas · Africa · Asia/Pacific · Near East, North Africa, South and Southwest Asia · Russia and Europe ·
Transnational CIA activities: Terrorism · Arms control, WMD, and proliferation · Crime and illicit drug trade · Health and economy · Human rights · CIA influence on public opinion
Divisions: Directorate of Science & Technology
Other: Official reports by the US Government on the CIA













v • d • e

Intelligence agencies and organizations of USA





Intelligence Community

Central Intelligence Agency · Air Force Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Agency · United States Army Military Intelligence · Defense Intelligence Agency · Marine Corps Intelligence Activity · National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency · National Reconnaissance Office · National Security Agency · Office of Naval Intelligence · Coast Guard Intelligence · Federal Bureau of Investigation  · Drug Enforcement Administration · Bureau of Intelligence and Research · Office of Intelligence and Analysis · Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence · Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence






Other

Director of National Intelligence · Strategic Support Branch · National Clandestine Service · National Counterproliferation Center · National Counterterrorism Center · President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board






Defunct

Office of Strategic Services · Office of Special Plans · Counterintelligence Field Activity













v • d • e

United States topics





History





Timeline


Pre-Columbian · Colonial era (Thirteen Colonies) · Declaration of Independence · American Revolution · Territorial changes · American Civil War · Reconstruction era · African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954) · World War I · Great Depression · World War II (Home front) · Cold War · Korean War · African-American Civil Rights Movement (1955–1968) · Feminist Movement · Vietnam War  · Post-Cold War (1991-present) · War on Terrorism (War in Afghanistan · Iraq War)







By topic


Demographic · Economic · Military · Postal · Technological and industrial · Inventions and discoveries









Federal
government








   


Law
U.S. Constitution
Bill of Rights
Civil liberties
Federalism
Separation of powers
Law Enforcement
Department of Justice (DOJ)
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)




Legislature - Congress
House of Representatives
Senate
Vice President
Executive - President
Executive Office of the President
Cabinet/Executive departments
Independent agencies
Policies




Judiciary - Supreme Court
Federal courts
Courts of appeal
District courts
Intelligence
U.S. Intelligence Community
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA)
National Security Agency (NSA)




Military
Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard














Politics

State governments  · Local governments  · Elections (Electoral College) · Political divisions · Political ideologies · Political parties (Democratic Party · Republican Party · Third parties) · Political scandals · Political status of Puerto Rico · Red states and blue states · Uncle Sam






Geography

Cities, towns and villages · Counties · Extreme points · Islands · Mountains (Appalachian · Rocky) · National Park System · Regions (New England · Mid-Atlantic · Southern · Midwestern · Great Plains · Northwestern · Southwestern) · Rivers (Mississippi · Missouri · Colorado) · States · Territory · Water supply and sanitation






Economy

Banking · Communications · Companies · Federal Reserve System · Insurance · Standard of living (Personal income · Household income · Homeownership · Income inequality) · Tourism · Transportation (Airports · Highways · Interstate Highway System · Passenger vehicles · Railroads · Trucking industry) · U.S. dollar · Wall Street  · Total debt






Society

Adolescent sexuality · Crime · Demographics · Education · Health care · Health insurance · Incarceration · Languages (American English · Spanish) · Media · People · Public holidays · Religion · Social class (Affluence · American Dream · American middle class · Educational attainment · Poverty · Professional and working class conflict) · Sports






Culture

American literature (Beat Generation · Folklore · Harlem Renaissance · Poetry · Transcendentalism) · Architecture · Cuisine · Dance · Fashion · Flag · Music (American classical music · American folk music · American popular music · Country music · Blues · Jazz · Rock and roll) · Radio · Television / Cinema (Hollywood) · Visual arts (Abstract expressionism)






Issues

Abortion · Affirmative action · American exceptionalism · Anti-Americanism · Capital punishment · Drug policy / Prohibition · Energy policy · Environmental movement · Gun politics · Health care reform · Human rights · Immigration (United States–Mexico barrier · Third Border Initiative) · Obesity · Racism · Same-sex marriage






Portal












v • d • e

External national intelligence agencies









   



 ASIS
 DGFI
 ABIN
 CSIS
 MSS
 HIS
 DI






 FE
 GIS
 DGSE
 EYP
 BND
 RAW






 BIN
 VEVAK
 GSD
 Mossad
 AISE
 PSIA






 CISEN
 AIVD
 EAB
 NIA
 ISI
 NICA






 AW
 SIS
 SIE
 SVR
 BIA
 SID






 SASS
 NIS
 CNI
 SND
 NSB
 MIT






 SIS
 CIA
 DBK



















v • d • e

Cold War






Participants   NATO · Non-Aligned Movement · People's Republic of China · Warsaw Pact





1940s

Yalta Conference · Operation Unthinkable · Potsdam Conference · Gouzenko Affair · Iran crisis of 1946 · Chinese Civil War · Greek Civil War · Restatement of Policy on Germany · Truman Doctrine · Marshall Plan · Czechoslovak coup d'état of 1948 · Tito–Stalin split · Berlin Blockade · Western betrayal · Iron Curtain · Eastern Bloc






1950s

Korean War · First Indochina War · 1953 Iranian coup d'état · Uprising of 1953 in East Germany · 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état · First Taiwan Strait Crisis · Geneva Summit (1955) · Poznań 1956 protests · Hungarian Revolution of 1956 · Suez Crisis · Sputnik crisis · Second Taiwan Strait Crisis · Cuban Revolution · Kitchen Debate · Asian-African Conference · Bricker Amendment · McCarthyism · Operation Gladio · Hallstein Doctrine






1960s

Congo Crisis · Sino-Soviet split · 1960 U-2 incident · Bay of Pigs Invasion · Cuban Missile Crisis · Berlin Wall · Vietnam War · 1964 Brazilian coup d'état · U.S. invasion of the Dominican Republic · South African Border War · Transition to the New Order · Domino theory · Bangkok Declaration · Laotian Civil War · Greek military junta of 1967–1974 · Cultural Revolution · 1962 Sino-Indian War · Prague Spring · Goulash Communism · Sino-Soviet border conflict






1970s

Détente · Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty · Black September in Jordan · Cambodian Civil War · Ping Pong Diplomacy · Four Power Agreement on Berlin · 1972 Nixon visit to China · 1973 Chilean coup d'état · Yom Kippur War · Strategic Arms Limitation Talks · Angolan Civil War · Mozambican Civil War · Ogaden War · Cambodian-Vietnamese War · Sino-Vietnamese War · Iranian Revolution · Operation Condor · Bangladesh Liberation War  · Korean Air Lines Flight 902






1980s

Soviet war in Afghanistan · Olympic boycotts · History of Solidarity · Contras · Central American Crisis · RYAN · Korean Air Lines Flight 007 · Able Archer 83 · Strategic Defense Initiative · Invasion of Grenada · Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 · Singing Revolution · Invasion of Panama · Fall of the Berlin Wall · Revolutions of 1989 · Glasnost · Perestroika






1990s

Breakup of Yugoslavia · Dissolution of the USSR · Dissolution of Czechoslovakia






See also

Soviet and Russian espionage in U.S. · Soviet Union–United States relations · NATO-Russia relations






Establishments

ASEAN · Central Intelligence Agency · Comecon · European Community · KGB · Stasi






Races

Arms race · Nuclear arms race · Space Race






Ideologies

Capitalism · Liberal democracy · Communism · Stalinism · Trotskyism · Maoism






Propaganda

Pravda · Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty · Red Scare · Voice of America · Voice of Russia






Foreign policy

Truman Doctrine · Marshall Plan · Containment · Eisenhower Doctrine · Domino theory · Kennedy Doctrine · Peaceful coexistence · Ostpolitik · Johnson Doctrine · Brezhnev Doctrine · Nixon Doctrine · Ulbricht Doctrine · Carter Doctrine · Reagan Doctrine · Rollback






Timeline of events · Portal · Category












v • d • e

War on Terrorism





Timeline · Casualties · Theaters · Criticism · ISAF





Participants





Operational


ISAF · Operation Enduring Freedom participants · Multinational force in Iraq · Afghanistan · Northern Alliance · Iraq (Iraqi Army) · NATO · Pakistan · United Kingdom · United States · Philippines · Ethiopia







Targets


al-Qaeda · Osama bin Laden · Abu Sayyaf · Iraqi insurgency · Hamas · Islamic Courts Union · Jemaah Islamiyah · Taliban · Pattani Separatists · Jaish-e-Mohammed · Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami · Hizbul Mujahideen · Kurdistan Workers' Party · Hezbollah · Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan · Lashkar-e-Taiba









Conflicts





Operation
Enduring Freedom


War in Afghanistan · OEF - Philippines · Georgia Train and Equip Program · Georgia Sustainment and Stability · OEF - Horn of Africa · OEF - Trans Sahara · Missile strikes in Pakistan







Other


Insurgency in the Maghreb · Iraq insurgency and operations · Insurgency in Saudi Arabia · War in North-West Pakistan · South Thailand insurgency · Lebanon War · War in Somalia · Lebanon-Fatah al-Islam conflict









Islamist
attacks





2001–2002


September 11 attacks · 2001 Indian Parliament attack · Shoe bomb plot · Terrorism in Pakistan · Ghriba synagogue bombing · 1st Bali bombing







2003–2004


Riyadh compound bombings · Casablanca bombings · 2003 Mumbai bombings · Jakarta Marriott Hotel bombing · Istanbul bombings · SuperFerry 14 bombing · Madrid train bombings · Beslan school hostage crisis · Jakarta Australian embassy bombing







2005–2006


1st London bombings · 2nd London bombings · Sharm el-Sheikh attacks · 2nd Bali bombing · 1st Delhi bombings · Amman bombings · 2006 Varanasi bombings · 2006 Mumbai train bombings · Transatlantic aircraft plot · Toronto terrorism plot







2007–2008


1st Algiers bombings · Fort Dix attack plot · Ankara bombing · London car bomb plot · Glasgow Airport attack · Hyderabad bombings · Qahtaniya bombings · Karachi bombing · Baghlan bombing · Philippine Congress bombing · 2nd Algiers bombings · Assassination of Benazir Bhutto · Jaipur bombings · Danish embassy · Indian embassy · United States consulate · Istanbul bombings · Bangalore bombings-Ahmedabad · 2nd Delhi bombings · American embassy · Islamabad bombing · 3rd Delhi bombing · 2008 Assam bombings · 2008 Mumbai attacks







2009–current


Attack on Sri Lankan cricket team · Yemeni tourist attack









See also

Abu Ghraib prison · Axis of evil · Bush Doctrine · CIA run Black sites · Combatant Status Review Tribunal · Enhanced interrogation techniques · Extrajudicial prisoners of the US · Extraordinary rendition · Guantanamo Bay detention camp · Military Commissions Act · NSA electronic surveillance program · Protect America Act of 2007 · Unitary executive theory · Unlawful combatant · USA PATRIOT Act






Terrorism · War















Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_Intelligence_Agency"
Categories: Government agencies established in 1947 | Central Intelligence Agency | United States intelligence agencies | McLean, VirginiaHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead external links since July 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Asturianu
Bân-lâm-gú
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Gaeilge
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Kurdî / كوردی
Lietuvių
Magyar
മലയാളം
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
ייִדיש
中文









 This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 06:33.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
