













List of Microsoft Windows components - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "List_of_Microsoft_Windows_components";
		var wgTitle = "List of Microsoft Windows components";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "2055550";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 284506180;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); List of Microsoft Windows components

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
The following is a list of Microsoft Windows components.




Contents


1 Configuration and maintenance
2 User interface
3 Applications and utilities
4 Windows Server components
5 File systems
6 Core components
7 Services
8 Games
9 DirectX
10 Networking
11 Scripting and command-line
12 Kernel
13 .NET Framework
14 Security
15 Deprecated components and programs
16 APIs
17 Miscellaneous (to be categorized)
18 See also
19 Notes and references





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Configuration and maintenance


Component
Description
Introduced


Control Panel


Control Panel
Allows users to view and manipulate basic system settings and controls, such as adding hardware, adding and removing software, controlling user accounts, changing accessibility options, and so on.
Windows 1.0


Device Manager
Allows the user to display and control the hardware attached to the computer, and control what device drivers are used.
Windows 95


Windows Mobility Center
Centralizes the most relevant information related to mobile computing.
Windows Vista


Windows Security Center
Centralizes and reports on the status of anti-virus, Automatic Updates, Windows Firewall, and other security-related components of the operating system.
Windows XP SP2


Administrative Tools


Microsoft Management Console
Provides system administrators and advanced users with a flexible interface through which they may configure and monitor the system.
Windows NT 4.0 Option Pack


Windows System Assessment Tool
A built-in benchmarking tool that analyzes the different subsystems (graphics, memory, etc), and uses the results to allow for comparison to other Windows Vista systems, and for software optimizations. It rates the computer's performance using the Windows Experience Index.
Windows Vista


System Restore
Allows for the rolling back of system files, registry keys, installed programs, etc., to a previous state in the event of a system failure.
Windows Me


Windows Recovery Environment
Helps diagnose and recover from serious errors which may be preventing Windows from booting successfully, or restore the computer to a previous state using System Restore or a backup image.
Windows Vista


Windows Disk Defragmenter
Rearranges files stored on a hard disk to occupy contiguous storage locations in order to optimize computer performance.
Windows 95, Windows 2000


Event Viewer
Lets administrators and users view the event logs on a local or remote machine.
Windows NT 3.1


Reliability and Performance Monitor
Lets administrators view current system reliability and performance trends over time.
Windows Vista


Logical Disk Manager
A logical volume manager developed by Microsoft in conjunction with Veritas Software.
Windows NT 4.0 (as a separate Tool) 2000 (integrated in the Management Console)


Registry Editor
Edits the Windows registry.
Windows 3.1


Task Scheduler
Allows users to script tasks for running during scheduled intervals
Microsoft Plus! for Windows 95


Software installation and deployment


Windows Update
An online service which provides critical updates, service packs, device drivers, and other updates. A variation called Microsoft Update also provides software updates for several Microsoft products.
Windows 98


Windows Installer
A packaging format and engine for the installation, maintenance, and removal of software. Includes a GUI framework, automatic generation of the uninstallation sequence and deployment capabilities for corporate networks.
Windows 2000


ClickOnce
Technology for deploying .NET Framework-based software via web pages, with automatic update capabilities. Intended for per-user only applications.
.NET Framework 2.0



[edit] User interface


Component
Description
Introduced


Aero.msstyles
The file that contains the Windows Aero theme for Windows Vista and Windows 7.
Windows Vista


Windows Shell
The most visible and recognizable aspect of Microsoft Windows. The shell is the container inside of which the entire graphical user interface is presented, including the taskbar, the desktop, Windows Explorer, as well as many of the dialog boxes and interface controls. In Windows Vista, a new compositing glass-like user interface called Windows Aero has been shown.
Windows 1.0


Windows Explorer
Provides an interface for accessing the file systems, launching applications, and performing common tasks such as viewing and printing pictures.
Windows 95


Windows Search
Starting with Windows Vista, search is a tightly shell-integrated component of Windows. A downloadable Windows Desktop Search software is available for Windows XP and older versions.
Windows Vista, downloadable for older versions


Special Folders
Folders which are presented to the user through an interface as an abstract concept, instead of an absolute path. This makes it possible for an application to locate where certain kinds of files can be found, regardless of what version or language of operating system is being used. See also, Windows Shell namespace.
Windows 95


Start menu
Serves as the central launching point for applications. It provides a customizable, nested list of programs for the user to launch, as well as a list of most recently opened documents, a way to find files and get help, and access to the system settings.
By default, the Start Button is visible at all times in the lower left-hand corner of the screen.

Windows 95


Taskbar
The application desktop bar which is used to launch and monitor applications.
Windows 95


Windows Sidebar
A new panel on the side of the screen to place gadgets.
Windows Vista


File associations
Used to open a file with the correct program. File associations can be uniquely assigned to specific actions, known as verbs.
Windows 3.0



[edit] Applications and utilities


Component
Description
Introduced
Screenshot


Accessories


Windows Easy Transfer
File transferring.
Windows Vista



Windows Calendar
Calendaring and task tracking application.
Windows Vista



Windows Contacts
Keeps a single list of contacts that can be shared by multiple programs.
Windows Vista



Calculator
A calculation application.
Windows 1.0



Character Map
Utility to view and search characters in a font, copy them to the clipboard and view their Windows Alt keycodes and Unicode names
Windows 3.1



Paint
A simple graphics painting program.
Windows 1.0



Notepad
A simple text editor.
Windows 1.0



Narrator
A screen reader utility that reads dialog boxes and window controls in a number of the more basic applications for Windows.
Windows 2000



Sound Recorder
A simple audio recording program that can record from a microphone or headset, and save the results in WAVE format and Windows Media Audio format in some Windows versions.
Windows 3.1



Command Prompt
A text-based shell (command line interpreter) that provides a command line interface to the operating system.
MS-DOS 1.0



WordPad
A simple word processor that is more advanced than Notepad. It has facilities to format and print text, but lacks intermediate features such as a spell checker and thesaurus.
Windows 95



Private Character Editor
Utility to create private use characters as defined under Unicode and various East Asian encoding schemes.
Windows 3.1+ East Asian editions



Remote Desktop Connection
A client implementation of the Remote Desktop Protocol; allows a user to securely connect to a computer running Terminal Services (Remote Desktop on Windows XP and Server 2003) and interact with a full desktop environment on that machine, including support for remoting of printers, audio, and drives.
Windows XP, downloadable for previous Windows versions



Windows Remote Assistance
Allows a user to temporarily take over a remote computer over a network or the internet to offer help with and resolve issues.
Windows XP



Internet Explorer
A graphical web browser and FTP client.
See also: IE1, IE2, IE3, IE4,IE5, IE6, IE7, IE8, Features, History, Removal, Browser Helper Objects

Microsoft Plus! for Windows 95



Windows Mail
An e-mail and news client.
Windows Vista, Outlook Express was introduced in Windows 98



Windows Fax and Scan
An integrated faxing and image scanning application.
Windows Vista, older faxing and scanning applications were present in previous Windows versions



Windows Media Player
A digital media player and media library application that is used for playing audio, playing video and viewing images. In addition to being a media player, Windows Media Player includes the ability to rip music from, and copy music to compact discs, synchronize content with a digital audio player (MP3 player) or other mobile devices, and let users purchase or rent music from a number of online music stores.
Windows 95



Windows Photo Gallery
A photo management application. Lets users organize their digital photo collection in its Gallery view, by adding titles, rating, captions, and custom metadata tags to photos. Photos can be edited for exposure, color correction, resizing, cropping, red-eye reduction, etc. and also allows printing photos via the Photo Printing Wizard.
Windows Vista



Windows Movie Maker
A video editing software that is intended for use in editing home movies. Source footage can be split into clips, and the final movie created by combining multiple clips along with effects such as transitions, titles/credits, separate audio track, timeline narration etc.
Windows Me



Windows DVD Maker
A DVD movie encoding and authoring software.
Windows Vista



Windows Journal
A notetaking application that allows for the creation of handwritten notes.
Windows XP Tablet PC Edition, Vista



Windows Media Center
Designed to serve as a home-entertainment hub, to be viewed from a distance up to 3 meters (~10 feet) and controlled by specially designed remote controls. Lets users browse and view pictures, videos, and music from local hard drives, optical drives, and network locations, along with viewing, recording and deferred-playing live TV. Features an interactive TV guide with scheduled recording capabilities. Can also be used for visualization of other information (like sports scores) within the interface.
Windows XP Media Center Edition



Windows Meeting Space
A peer-to-peer collaboration program which lets multiple users start collaboration sessions. Supports desktop sharing , distribution and collaborative editing of documents, and passing notes to other participants.
Windows Vista



Windows Task Manager
Provides information about computer performance and displays details about running applications, processes, network activity, logged-in users, and system services.
Windows 3.0



Disk Cleanup
A utility for compacting rarely used files and removing files that are no longer required.
Windows 98



Shadow Copy
A graphical front end for the Shadow Copy service that lets users choose from multiple versions of a file. The shadow copy service creates multiple copies of a file as they are changed over time, so that users can revert to previous versions.
Windows Vista. Windows Server 2003 included Previous Versions support only for client computers.



Snipping Tool
A screen-capture tool that allows for taking screen shots (called snips).
Experience Pack for Windows XP Tablet PC Edition 2005




[edit] Windows Server components


Component
Acronym
Description
Supported by


Windows Server domain

A logical group of computers that share a central directory and user database.
All Windows NT-based versions


Active Directory
AD
A set of technologies introduced with Windows 2000 that allows administrators to assign enterprise-wide policies, deploy programs to many computers, and apply critical updates to an entire organization. Active Directory stores information and settings relating to an organization in a central, organized, accessible database. Networks can vary from a small installation with a few objects, to global-scale directories with millions of objects.
   Related topics: Active Directory Service Interfaces, Flexible single master operation, IntelliMirror, Active Directory Application Mode
Windows 2000, Windows Server 2003


Domain controller
DC, PDC, BDC
A server that responds to security authentication requests (logging in, checking permissions, etc.) within a Windows Server domain. Prior to Windows 2000, a domain controller was either a Primary Domain Controller (PDC), of which there could only be one with this role; or a Backup Domain Controller (BDC). In Windows 2000 and later the concept of primary and secondary domain controllers were eliminated, partially to emphasize the multi-master replication technology available in Windows.
All Windows NT-based versions


Group Policy
GP, GPO
Provides centralized management of user and computer settings in an Active Directory environment. Group policy can control a target object's registry, NTFS security, audit and security policy, software installation, logon/logoff scripts, folder redirection, and Internet Explorer settings. Policy settings are stored in Group Policy Objects (GPOs), and may be linked to one or more sites, domains or organizational units.
   Related topics: Administrative Templates
Windows 2000 and later


Internet Information Services
IIS
Web server
Windows NT family



[edit] File systems


Component
Acronym
Description
Supported by


File Allocation Table
FAT, FAT12, FAT16
The original file systems used with MS-DOS. The standard file systems used with Windows 1.0 through Windows 95.
All versions


FAT32
FAT32
Extensions to FAT supporting larger disk sizes. The standard file system for Windows 98 and Me.
Windows 95 OSR2, Windows 98, Windows 2000, Windows XP, Windows Server 2003, Windows Vista


NTFS
NTFS
Standard file system of Windows NT; supports security via access control lists, as well as file system journaling and file-system metadata. Windows 2000 added support for reparse points (making NTFS junction points and Single instance storage possible), Hard links, file compression, and Sparse files. Encryption of data is provided by Encrypting File System. Symbolic links and transactioning of file operations via Transactional NTFS are features new to Windows Vista. Windows 95 also supports reading NTFS partitions, over a network.
Windows NT, Windows 2000, Windows XP,Windows Server 2003, Windows Vista


ISO 9660
ISO 9660 ("CDFS")
The predominant file system for CD-ROM and DVD-ROM media. Windows includes support for Joliet extensions and the ISO 9660:1999 standard. ISO 9660:1999 is supported since Windows XP.
MS-DOS and Windows 9x via extensions, such as MSCDEX.EXE (Microsoft CDROM Extension), natively in Windows NT


Universal Disk Format
UDF
A file system for storing files on optical media. It is an implementation of the ISO/IEC 13346 standard (also known as ECMA-167). It is considered to be a replacement of ISO 9660. Successive versions of Windows have supported newer versions of UDF.
Windows 98, Windows 2000, Windows XP, Windows Server 2003, Windows Vista


HPFS
HPFS
High-Performance File system, used on OS/2 computers. Read and write capability in Windows 95 (where it also listed network computer NTFS-formatted drives as "HPFS", even though it had no direct NTFS capabilities). HPFS write support was dropped in Windows NT 4.0 and Windows 98, and dropped altogether shortly before the release of Windows 2000.
Windows 95 (Read/write), Windows 98, Windows NT (read), 3.1/3.51 (read/write/boot)



[edit] Core components


Component
Acronym
Description


Windows kernel (Windows NT)
Main article: Architecture of the Windows NT operating system line



Ntoskrnl.exe

The Windows kernel image. Provides the kernel and executive layers of the kernel architecture, and is responsible for services such as hardware virtualization, process and memory management, etc.


hal.dll
HAL
Provides and handles the interaction between software and hardware via the Hardware Abstraction Layer.


Core processes (Windows NT)


System idle process
SIP
A counter which measures how much idle capacity the CPU has at any given time. The process runs in the background and monitors processing bandwidth, occupied memory and the Windows virtual paging file.


Session Manager Subsystem
SMSS
Performs several critical boot-time operations, such as the creation of environment variables, starting CSRSS, and performing file-copy operations that were queued up from before the system was booted (pending file rename operations). During system operation, it handles Windows File Protection and the creation of logon sessions via Winlogon.


Client/Server Runtime Subsystem
CSRSS
User-mode side of the Win32 subsystem. Provides the capability for applications to use the Windows API.


Local Security Authority Subsystem Service
LSASS
Responsible for enforcing the security policy on the system. Verifies users logging on to the computer and creates security tokens.


Winlogon

Responsible for handling the secure attention key, loading the user profile on logon, and optionally locking the computer when a screensaver is running. On Windows NT systems prior to Windows Vista, Winlogon is also responsible for loading GINA libraries which are responsible collecting logon credentials from the user.


Svchost.exe

A generic host process name for services that run from dynamic-link libraries (DLLs). Several Svchost processes are typically present on a Windows machine, each running in a different security context, depending on what privileges the contained services require.


Windows on Windows and WOW64
WoW
An abstraction layer that allows legacy code to operate on more modern versions of Windows; typically this means running 16-bit Windows applications on 32-bit Windows, and 32-bit applications on 64-bit Windows.


Virtual DOS machine
NTVDM
Allows MS-DOS programs to run on Intel 80386 or higher computers when there is already another operating system running and controlling the hardware. Introduced in Windows 2.1; not available in any 64-bit edition of Windows.


System startup (Windows NT)
Main articles: Windows NT Startup Process and Windows Vista Startup Process



NTLDR, IA64ldr, Winload

The boot loader; performs basic system initialization options such as loading the hardware abstraction layer and boot-time device drivers, prior to passing control to the Windows kernel. In versions prior to Vista, NTLDR and IA64ldr also display menus to the user if multiple operating systems are defined in boot.ini, or if F8 is pressed.


Recovery Console

Provides the means for administrators to perform a limited range of tasks using a command line interface, primarily to aid in recovering from situations where Windows does not boot successfully.


ntdetect.com

Used during the boot process to detect basic hardware components that may be required during the boot process.


Windows Boot Manager

In Windows Vista and later operating systems, displays boot menus to the user if multiple operating systems are configured in the system's Boot Configuration Data.


Graphical subsystem


Graphics Device Interface
GDI/GDI+
The kernel graphics component for representing graphical objects and transmitting them to output devices such as monitors and printers.


Desktop Window Manager
DWM
The compositing manager introduced in Windows Vista that handles compositing and manages special effects on screen objects in a graphical user interface.



[edit] Services
This list is not all-inclusive (see also: Windows Services).


Display name
Service name
Description
Introduced


Alerter service
Alerter
Sends administrative alerts over the network to client computers, administrators and users.
Windows NT


Application Layer Gateway service
ALG
Provides support for plugins that allow network protocols to pass through Windows Firewall and work behind Internet Connection Sharing.
Windows 2000


Application Management
AppMgmt
Processes requests to enumerate, install, and remove applications that are installed on the computer or deployed through an organization’s network.
Windows 2000


Background Intelligent Transfer Service
BITS
Transfers files between machines using idle network bandwidth. Used by Windows Update, Windows Server Update Services, and Systems Management Server to deliver software updates to clients, as well as by Windows Messenger.
Windows XP


Computer Browser
Browser
Crawls neighboring computers on the network and locates shared resources. One of the computers acts as the Master Browser and supplies this information to other computers designated as browsers. [1]
Windows for Workgroups


Distributed Link Tracking
TrkWks, TrkSrv
Used to track links to files on NTFS volumes. Windows uses these services to find linked files if they are renamed or moved (locally or to another machine).[2]
Windows 2000


Distributed Transaction Coordinator
MSDTC
Allows transactional components to be configured through COM+ by coordinating transactions that are distributed across multiple computers and/or resource managers, such as databases, message queues, file systems, and other transaction–based resource managers.[3]
Windows 2000 and later NT-based


Event Log
EventLog
Stores and retrieves events that can be viewed in the event viewer. Part of services.exe.[4]
Windows NT


Indexing Service
CISVC
Indexes contents and properties of files on local and remote computers; provides rapid access to files through flexible querying language.[5]
Windows 2000 and later NT-based


Network Location Awareness
NLA
Manages network configurations and information, and notifies applications of changes.
Windows XP


NT LM Security Support Provider
NTLMSSP
Uses the NTLM MS-CHAP protocol to encapsulate and negotiate options in order to provide signed and sealed communication. Deprecated now in favor of Kerberos authentication.
Windows NT


Print Spooler
Spooler
Manages printer devices and moves files into memory for printing.
Windows 95, Windows NT


Secondary Logon (Run As...)
seclogon
Allows users to run programs with a different account than the one they logged in with. Allows non-administrative accounts to perform administrative tasks.[6]


Security Account Manager
SamSs
Manages user account security information.
Windows NT family


System Event Notification
SENS
Monitors system events, such as network, power, logon, logoff, terminal services session connection and disconnection, and delivers these to applications and other system components.[7]
Windows 2000


Task Scheduler
Schedule
Lets users setup and schedule automated tasks.
Microsoft Plus! for Windows 95


TCP/IP NetBIOS Helper
LmHosts
Enables support for NetBIOS over TCP/IP (NetBT) service and NetBIOS name resolution.
Windows NT family


Windows Audio
AudioSrv
Manages audio devices for Windows-based programs. Controls all audio functions.
Windows XP


Windows Image Acquisition (WIA)
STISvc
Handles scanner and camera inputs.
Windows Me


Windows Time
W32Time
Synchronizes the system time with external time servers. From Windows Server 2003 forward, full and compliant NTP support is provided.[8]
Windows 2000


Windows Update
WUAUServ
Provides updates for the operating system and its installed components.
Windows XP


Wireless Zero Configuration
WZCSvc
Configures and manages 802.11 wireless adapters.
Windows XP, Server 2003 only


Messenger service
Messenger
Allows users to send pop-up messages to other computers over the network.
Windows NT family


MSRPC
RpcSs
Provides Remote Procedure Call (RPC) technique via remotely accessible Named Pipes.
Windows NT family


Volume Shadow Copy Service
VSS
Create multiple versions of files that change. Gained ability to store persistent snapshots in Windows Server 2003.[9]
Windows XP


Windows Firewall/Internet Connection Sharing
SharedAccess
Internet Connection Sharing (Firewall)
Windows 2000



[edit] Games


Component
Description
Introduced
Screenshot


Chess Titans
A version of Chess.
Windows Vista



FreeCell
A version of FreeCell.
Win32s



Hearts
A version of Hearts using Black Lady scoring.
Windows for Workgroups 3.11



Hold 'Em
A version of Texas hold 'em.
Windows Ultimate Extras



InkBall
A game employing the use of a stylus or mouse (in Windows Vista) to draw lines to direct balls into holes of corresponding colors.
Windows XP Tablet PC Edition 2005



Mahjong Titans
A version of Mahjong solitaire.
Windows Vista



Microsoft Tinker
A puzzle game in which the player controls a robot through various mazes and obstacle courses.
Windows Ultimate Extras



Minesweeper
A version of Minesweeper.
Windows 3.1



Purble Place
An educational game for children, teaching pattern recognition, shapes, and colors.
Windows Vista



Solitaire
A version of Klondike Solitaire.
Windows 3.0



Spider Solitaire
A version of Spider Solitaire.
Microsoft Plus! 98




[edit] DirectX

Direct3D
DirectDraw
DirectInput
DirectMusic
DirectPlay
DirectShow
DirectSound
DirectX
DirectX Media Objects
DirectX plugin
DirectX Video Acceleration


[edit] Networking

Administrative share
Distributed File System
My Network Places (formerly Network Neighborhood)
Network Access Protection
Remote Installation Services
Server Message Block
Windows Rights Management Services


[edit] Scripting and command-line

Batch file
CHKDSK
Cmd.exe
ComSpec
Ipconfig
Net
Net Send
Netdom.exe: Windows Domain Manager
Netsh
Netstat
QBasic
Regsvr32
Robocopy
Win32 console
Windows Script Host
Windows PowerShell
XCOPY


[edit] Kernel

Commit charge
Kernel Transaction Manager
Win32 Thread Information Block


[edit] .NET Framework

.NET assembly
.NET Languages
.NET metadata
.NET Remoting
ADO.NET
ASP.NET
Base Class Library
Common Intermediate Language
Common Language Infrastructure
Common Language Runtime
Common Type System
Virtual Execution System
Windows CardSpace
Windows Communication Foundation
Windows Forms
Windows Presentation Foundation
Windows Workflow Foundation


[edit] Security

BitLocker Drive Encryption
Data Execution Prevention
Encrypting File System
Security Account Manager
SYSKEY
User Account Control
Windows Defender


[edit] Deprecated components and programs

3D Pinball
ActiveMovie
Cardfile
DriveSpace
File Manager
Hover!
Internet Mail and News
Media Control Interface
Media Player
Microsoft Calendar
Microsoft Diagnostics
Microsoft WinHelp
NTBackup
Object Packager
Outlook Express
Program Manager
Recorder (Macro Recorder)
Reversi
Video for Windows
Windows Address Book
Windows Calendar
Windows Mail
Windows Messaging
Windows Messenger
Windows Movie Maker
Windows NetMeeting
Windows Photo Gallery
Windows Picture and Fax Viewer
Windows Write


[edit] APIs

ClearType
Media Foundation
Windows Driver Foundation
Windows Imaging Component
Windows Management Instrumentation


[edit] Miscellaneous (to be categorized)

ActiveSync
I/O technologies
Microsoft Agent
Prefetcher
ReadyBoost
Sync Center
Text Services Framework
Universal Audio Architecture
Windows Color System
Windows Mobile Device Center
Windows Rally
Windows Registry
Windows Speech Recognition
XML Paper Specification


[edit] See also

Blue Screen of Death
List of Microsoft topics


[edit] Notes and references


^ Description of the Microsoft Computer Browser Service
^ "Distributed Link Tracking on Windows-based domain controllers". Microsoft. http://support.microsoft.com/kb/312403. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "Distributed Transaction Coordinator (MSDTC)". Microsoft. http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa940166.aspx. Retrieved on 2008-06-27. 
^ "Event Log". Microsoft. http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa939451.aspx. Retrieved on 2008-06-27. 
^ "What is Indexing Service?". Microsoft. http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms689718.aspx. Retrieved on 2008-06-27. 
^ "Secondary Logon (Run As): Starting Programs and Tools in Local Administrative Context". Microsoft Corporation. http://support.microsoft.com/kb/225035. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "System Event Notifcation Service". The Elder Geek. http://www.theeldergeek.com/system_event_notification.htm. Retrieved on 2008-06-27. 
^ "How Windows Time Service Works: Windows Time Service". Microsoft Corporation. http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc773013.aspx. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 
^ "What Is Volume Shadow Copy Service?: Data Recovery". Microsoft Corporation. http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc757854.aspx. Retrieved on 2008-10-28. 









v • d • e

Windows components





Core

Aero · AutoRun · ClearType · Desktop Window Manager · DirectX · Explorer · Taskbar · Start menu · Shell (namespace · Special Folders · File associations) · Search (Saved search · iFilters) · Graphics Device Interface · Imaging Format · .NET Framework · Server Message Block  · XML Paper Specification · Active Scripting (WSH · VBScript · JScript) · COM (OLE · OLE Automation · DCOM · ActiveX · ActiveX Document · Structured storage · Transaction Server) · Previous Versions · Win32 console






Management
tools

Backup and Restore Center · command.com · cmd.exe · Control Panel (Applets) · Device Manager · Disk Cleanup · Disk Defragmenter · Driver Verifier · Event Viewer · Management Console · Netsh · Problem Reports and Solutions · Sysprep · System Policy Editor · System Configuration · Task Manager · System File Checker · System Restore · Windows Installer · PowerShell · Windows Update · WAIK · WinSAT · Windows Easy Transfer






Applications

Calculator · Calendar · Character Map · Contacts · DVD Maker · Fax and Scan · Internet Explorer · Journal · Mail · Magnifier · Media Center · Media Player · Meeting Space · Mobile Device Center · Mobility Center · Movie Maker · Narrator · Notepad · Paint · Photo Gallery · Private Character Editor · Remote Assistance · Sidebar · Snipping Tool · Sound Recorder · Speech Recognition · WordPad






Games

Chess Titans · FreeCell · Hearts · Hold 'Em · InkBall · Mahjong Titans · Minesweeper · Purble Place · Solitaire · Spider Solitaire  · Tinker






Kernel

Ntoskrnl.exe · hal.dll · System Idle Process · Svchost.exe · Registry · Windows service · Service Control Manager · DLL · EXE · NTLDR / Boot Manager · Winlogon · Recovery Console · I/O · WinRE · WinPE · Kernel Patch Protection






Services

BITS · Task Scheduler · Wireless Zero Configuration · Shadow Copy · Error Reporting · Multimedia Class Scheduler · CLFS






File systems

NTFS (Hard link · Junction point · Mount Point · Reparse point · Symbolic link · TxF · EFS) · FAT32·FAT16·FAT12 · exFAT · CDFS · UDF · DFS · IFS






Server

Domains · Active Directory · DNS · Group Policy · Roaming user profiles · Folder redirection · Distributed Transaction Coordinator · MSMQ · Windows Media Services · Rights Management Services · IIS · Terminal Services · WSUS · Windows SharePoint Services · Network Access Protection · DFS Replication · Remote Differential Compression · Print Services for UNIX · Remote Installation Services · Windows Deployment Services · System Resource Manager · Hyper-V






Architecture

NT series architecture · Object Manager · Startup process (Vista) · I/O request packets · Kernel Transaction Manager · Logical Disk Manager · Security Accounts Manager · Windows Resource Protection · LSASS · CSRSS · SMSS · MinWin






Security

UAC · BitLocker · Defender · DEP · Protected Media Path · Mandatory Integrity Control · UIPI · Windows Firewall · Security Center






Compatibility

Unix subsystem (Microsoft POSIX  · Interix) · Virtual DOS machine · Windows on Windows · WOW64









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Microsoft_Windows_components"
Categories: Microsoft lists | Windows components 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Français
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu









 This page was last modified on 17 April 2009, at 21:58 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
