













Hermann Hesse - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Hermann_Hesse";
		var wgTitle = "Hermann Hesse";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "13578";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281512486;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Hermann Hesse

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Hermann Hesse



Hermann Hesse in 1927


Born
2 July 1877(1877-07-02)
Calw, Württemberg, Germany


Died
9 August 1962 (aged 85)
Montagnola, Switzerland


Occupation
Novelist, short story author, essayist, poet


Nationality
German, Swiss


Writing period
1904–1953


Genres
Fiction


Notable work(s)
The Glass Bead Game, Demian, Steppenwolf, Siddhartha


Notable award(s)
Nobel Prize in Literature
1946







Influences






Plato, Spinoza, Goethe, Schopenhauer, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Burckhardt, Indian philosophy, Chinese philosophy, Carl Jung[1]










Hermann Hesse (pronounced [ˈhɛʀman ˈhɛsə]) (2 July 1877 – 9 August 1962) was a German-Swiss poet, novelist, and painter. In 1946, he received the Nobel Prize in Literature. His best-known works include Steppenwolf, Siddhartha, and The Glass Bead Game (also known as Magister Ludi) which explore an individual's search for authenticity, self-knowledge and spirituality.




Contents


1 Life

1.1 Youth
1.2 Becoming a writer
1.3 Between Lake Constance and India
1.4 The First World War
1.5 Casa Camuzzi
1.6 The Glass Bead Game
1.7 Later life
1.8 Popularity outside the German speaking countries


2 Selected works
3 Awards
4 Hermann Hesse in popular culture
5 References
6 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Life

[edit] Youth
Hesse was born in the Black Forest town of Calw in Württemberg, Germany to a Christian missionary family. Both of his parents served with a Basel Mission to India, where Hesse's mother Marie Gundert was born in 1842. Hesse's father, Johannes Hesse, was born in 1847 in Estonia, the son of a doctor. The Hesse family had lived in Calw since 1873, where they operated a missionary publishing house under the direction of Hesse's grandfather, Hermann Gundert.
Hesse spent his first years of life surrounded by the spirit of Swabian piety. In 1881, when Hesse was four, the family moved to Basel, Switzerland, for six years, then returned to Calw. After successful attendance at the Latin School in Göppingen, Hesse began to attend the Evangelical Theological Seminary in Maulbronn in 1891. Here in March 1892, Hesse showed his rebellious character and in one instance he fled from the Seminary and was found in a field a day later.
Hesse began a journey through various institutions and schools and experienced intense conflicts with his parents. In May, after an attempt at suicide, he spent time at an institution in Bad Boll under the care of theologian and minister Christoph Friedrich Blumhardt. Later he was placed in a mental institution in Stetten im Remstal, and then a boys' institution in Basel.




Hesse's birthplace in Calw, 1977






Hesse's birthplace, 2007


At the end of 1892, he attended the Gymnasium in Cannstatt. In 1893 he passed the One Year Examination which concluded his schooling.
After this, Hesse began a bookshop apprenticeship in Esslingen am Neckar, but after three days he left. Then in the early summer of 1894 he began a 14-month mechanic apprenticeship at a clock tower factory in Calw. The monotony of soldering and filing work made him resolve to turn himself toward more spiritual activities. In October 1895 he was ready to begin wholeheartedly a new apprenticeship with a bookseller in Tübingen. This experience from his youth he returns to later in his novel Beneath the Wheel.

[edit] Becoming a writer
On 17 October 1895 Hesse began working in the bookshop Heckenhauer in Tübingen which had a specialized collection in theology, philology, and law. Hesse's assignment there consisted of organizing, packing, and archiving the books. After the end of each twelve hour workday Hesse pursued his own work further and he spent his long, idle Sundays with books rather than friends. Hesse studied theological writings and later Goethe, Lessing, Schiller, and several texts on Greek mythology. In 1896 his poem 'Madonna' appeared in a Viennese periodical.
By 1898 Hesse had a respectable income that enabled financial independence from his parents. During this time he concentrated on the works of the German Romantics, including much of the work from Clemens Brentano, Joseph Freiherr von Eichendorff, Friedrich Holderlin and Novalis. In letters to his parents he expressed a belief that "the morality of artists is replaced by aesthetics."
In the autumn Hesse released his first small volume of poetry Romantic Songs and in the summer of 1899, a collection of prose entitled One Hour After Midnight . Both works were a business failure. In two years only 54 of the 600 printed copies of Romantic Songs were sold, and One Hour After Midnight received only one printing and sold sluggishly. Nevertheless, the Leipzig publisher Eugen Diederichs was convinced of the literary quality of the work and from the beginning regarded the publications more as encouragement of a young author than as profitable business.
From the autumn of 1899 Hesse worked in a distinguished antique book shop in Basel. Through family contacts he stayed with the intellectual families of Basel. In this environment with rich stimuli for his pursuits, he further developed spiritually and artistically. At the same time Basel offered the solitary Hesse many opportunities for withdrawal into a private life of artistic self-exploration, journeys and wanderings. In 1900, Hesse was exempted from compulsory military service due to an eye condition. This, along with nerve disorders and persistent headaches, affected him his entire life.




"Modern Book Printing" from the Walk of Ideas in Berlin, Germany - built in 2006 to commemorate Johannes Gutenberg's invention, c. 1445, of movable printing type.


In 1901 Hesse undertook to fulfill a long-held dream and travelled for the first time to Italy. In the same year Hesse changed jobs and began working at the antiquarium Wattenwyl in Basel. Hesse had more opportunities to release poems and small literary texts to journals. These publications now provided honorariums. Shortly the publisher Samuel Fischer became interested in Hesse, and with the novel Peter Camenzind, which appeared first as a pre-publication in 1903 and then as a regular printing by Fischer in 1904, came a breakthrough: From now on, Hesse could live as a free author.

[edit] Between Lake Constance and India
With the literary fame Hesse married Maria Bernoulli (of the famous family of mathematicians[2]) in 1904, settled down with her in Gaienhofen on Lake Constance, and began a family, eventually having three sons. In Gaienhofen he wrote his second novel Beneath the Wheel, which was published in 1906. In the following time he composed primarily short stories and poems. His next novel, Gertrude, published in 1910, revealed a production crisis—he had to struggle through writing it, and he later would describe it as "a miscarriage."




Hesse's writing desk, pictured at the Museum Gaienhofen


Gaienhofen was also the place where Hesse's interest in Buddhism was resparked. Following a letter to Kapff in 1895 entitled Nirvana, Hesse ceased alluding to Buddhist references his work. In 1904, however, Arthur Schopenhauer and his philosophical ideas started receiving attention again, and Hesse discovered theosophy. Schopenhauer and theosophy renewed Hesse's interest in India. Although it was many years before the publication of Hesse's Siddhartha (1922), this masterpiece was to be derived from these new influences.
During this time there also was increased dissonance between him and Maria, and in 1911 Hesse left alone for a long trip to Sri Lanka and Indonesia. Any spiritual or religious inspiration that he was looking for eluded him, but the journey made a strong impression on his literary work. Following Hesse's return the family moved to Bern (1912), but the change of environment could not solve the marriage problems, as he himself confessed in his novel Rosshalde from 1914.

[edit] The First World War
At the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 Hesse registered himself as a volunteer with the Imperial army, saying that he could not sit inactively by a warm fireplace while other young authors were dying on the front. He was found unfit for combat duty, but was assigned to service involving the care of war prisoners. [3]
On 3 November 1914, in the Neue Zürcher Zeitung, Hesse's essay "O Friends, Not These Tones" ("O Freunde, nicht diese Töne")[4] appeared, in which he appealed to German intellectuals not to fall for patriotism. What followed from this, Hesse later indicated, was a great turning point in his life: For the first time he found himself in the middle of a serious political conflict, attacked by the German press, the recipient of hate mail, and distanced from old friends. He did receive continued support from his friend Theodor Heuss, and the French writer Romain Rolland, whom Hesse visited in August 1915.
This public controversy was not yet resolved, when a deeper life crisis befell Hesse with the death of his father on 8 March 1916, the difficult sickness of his son Martin, and his wife's schizophrenia. He was forced to leave his military service and begin receiving psychotherapy. This began for Hesse a long preoccupation with psychoanalysis, through which he came to know Carl Jung personally, and was challenged to new creative heights. During a three-week period during September and October 1917, Hesse penned his novel Demian, which would be published following the armistice in 1919 under the pseudonym Emil Sinclair. (Emil Sinclair was a friend of the German Romantic poet Novalis, who was an influence on Hesse).

[edit] Casa Camuzzi




Hermann Hesse in 1925


By the time Hesse returned to civilian life in 1919 his marriage had shattered. His wife had a severe episode of psychosis, but even after her recovery, Hesse saw no possible future with her. Their home in Bern was divided and Hesse resettled alone in the middle of April in Ticino. He occupied a small farm house near Minusio (close to Locarno), living from 25 April to 11 May in Sorengo. On 11 May he moved to the town Montagnola and rented four small rooms in a castle-like building, the 'Casa Camuzzi'.
Here he explored his writing projects further; he began to paint, an activity which is reflected in his next major story Klingsor's Last Summer, published in 1920. In 1922 Hesse's novel Siddhartha appeared, which showed the love for Indian culture and Buddhist philosophy, which had already developed in his earlier life. In 1924 Hesse married the singer Ruth Wenger, the daughter of the Swiss writer Lisa Wenger and aunt of Meret Oppenheim. This marriage never attained any stability, however.
In 1923 Hesse received Swiss citizenship. His next major works, Kurgast (1925) and The Nuremberg Trip (1927), were autobiographical narratives with ironic undertones, and foreshadowed Hesse's following novel, Steppenwolf, which was published in 1927. In the year of his 50th birthday, the first biography of Hesse appeared, written by his friend Hugo Ball. Shortly after his new successful novel, he turned away from the solitude of Steppenwolf and married art historian Ninon Dolbin, née Ausländer. This change to companionship was reflected in the novel Narcissus and Goldmund, appearing in 1930.
In 1931 Hesse left the Casa Camuzzi and moved with Ninon to a large house (Casa Hesse) near Montagnola, which was built according to his wishes.

[edit] The Glass Bead Game
Main article: The Glass Bead Game
In 1931 Hesse began planning what would become his last major work, The Glass Bead Game (aka Magister Ludi). In 1932, as a preliminary study, he released the novella, Journey to the East. The Glass Bead Game was printed in 1943 in Switzerland. For this work he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1946.

[edit] Later life
Hesse observed the rise to power of Nazism in Germany with concern. In 1933 Bertolt Brecht and Thomas Mann made their travels into exile and in both cases were aided by Hesse. In this way Hesse attempted to work against Hitler's suppression of art and literature that protested Nazi ideology.
Hesse, who had long published pieces in German journals and newspapers, spoke publicly in support of Jewish artists and others pursued by the Nazis.[citation needed] However, when he wrote for the Frankfurter Zeitung, he was accused of supporting the Nazis, whom Hesse did not publicly condemn.
From the end of the 1930s German journals stopped publishing Hesse's work, and it was eventually banned by the Nazis.
The Glass Bead Game was Hesse's last novel. During the last twenty years of his life Hesse wrote many short stories (chiefly recollections of his childhood) and poems (frequently with nature as their theme). Hesse wrote ironic essays about his alienation from writing (for instance, the mock autobiographies: Life Story Briefly Told and Aus den Briefwechseln eines Dichters) and spent much time pursuing his interest in watercolors.
Hesse also occupied himself with the steady stream of letters he received as a result of the prize and as a new generation of German readers explored his work. In one essay Hesse reflected wryly on his lifelong failure to acquire a talent for idleness and speculated that his average daily correspondence was in excess of 150 pages. He died on 9 August 1962 and was buried in the cemetery at San Abbondio in Montagnola, where Hugo Ball is also buried.

[edit] Popularity outside the German speaking countries
A few years after Hesse's death in 1962 his novels enjoyed a revival of popularity due to their association with some of the themes of the 1960s counterculture (or "hippie") movement. In particular, the quest-for-enlightenment theme of Siddhartha, Journey to the East, and Narcissus and Goldmund resonated with counter-cultural ideals. Also, the "magic theater" sequences in Steppenwolf were interpreted by some as drug-induced psychedelia. These and other Hesse novels were republished in paperback editions and were widely read by university students and young people in the United States and elsewhere.
Hesse's 'Siddartha' is one of the most popular Western Novels set in India. The work has been translated into most Indian languages.[citation needed] An authorized translation of Siddartha came in Malayalam language in 1990; the language which surrounded Hesse's grandfather, Hermann Gundert, for most of his life. Hermann Hesse Society of India has also been formed in India. It aims to bring out authentic translations of 'Siddartha' in all Indian languages including Sanskrit.
One enduring monument to Hesse's lasting popularity in the United States is the Magic Theatre in San Francisco. Referring to "The Magic Theatre for Madmen Only" in 'Steppenwolf' (a kind of spiritual and somewhat nightmarish cabaret attended by some of the characters, including Harry Haller), the Magic Theatre was founded in 1967 to perform works by new playwrights. Founded by the late John Lion, the Magic Theatre has fulfilled that mission for many years, including the world premieres of many plays by Sam Shepard.
Hesse's 'Demian' was translated into Esperanto in 2007 by Detlef Karthaus and published in New York by Mondial.

[edit] Selected works
For a more complete list, see Hermann Hesse (German Wikipedia) and Sämtliche Werke (Complete works, ed. 2001-2007).

1904 – Peter Camenzind
1906 – Beneath the Wheel (also published under the title The Prodigy)
1910 – Gertrude
1914 – Rosshalde
1915 – Knulp
1919 – Demian (published under the pen name Emil Sinclair)
1919 – Klein and Wagner
1920 – Klingsor's Last Summer
1922 – Siddhartha
1927 – Steppenwolf
1930 – Narcissus and Goldmund
1932 – Journey to the East
1943 – The Glass Bead Game (also published under the title Magister Ludi)


[edit] Awards




Statue in Calw



1906 - Bauernfeld-Preis
1928 - Mejstrik-Preis der Wiener Schiller-Stiftung
1936 - Gottfried-Keller-Preis
1946 - Goethepreis der Stadt Frankfurt
1946 - Nobel Prize in Literature
1947 - Honorary Doctorate from the University of Bern
1950 - Wilhelm-Raabe-Preis
1954 - Orden Pour le mérite für Wissenschaft und Künste
1955 - Peace Prize of the German Book Trade

Hesse received honorary citizenship from his home city of Calw, and additionally, throughout Germany many schools are named after him. In 1964 the Calwer Hermann-Hesse-Preis was founded, which is awarded every two years, alternately to a German-language literary journal or to the translator of Hesse's work to a foreign language. There is also a Hermann-Hesse-Preis that is associated with the city of Karlsruhe.

[edit] Hermann Hesse in popular culture

In the summer of 1948, the composer Richard Strauss set three short poems by Hesse to music to become all but one of his valedictory Four Last Songs, his final works before his death in 1949.
In 1967, the rock band Steppenwolf named themselves after Hesse's novel, partly due to lead singer John Kay having been born and raised in Germany. Along with other bands also inspired by Hesse, like Anyone's Daughter with their 40 minute version of "Piktors Verwandlungen", Steppenwolf played in 2002 on Calw's market square as part of the International Hermann-Hesse-Festival 2002.
The Volvos singer Heynes Arms wrote a song entitled "I Think I'm Herman Hesse". Like Hesse, Arms had German parentage and was born on 2 July.
The British progressive rock band Yes was influenced by Hesse, especially on their 1972 album, Close to the Edge.
The American band Kansas had a song entitled 'Journey to Mariabronn' on their self-titled first album Kansas (1974) which was based on Hesse's Narcissus and Goldmund.
World Champion Slam Poet Buddy Wakefield titled the first track of his 2006 album Run On Anything "Healing Hermann Hesse."
Electronic duo Thievery Corporation has a song on their album Sounds from the Thievery Hi-Fi (1997) titled "The Glass Bead Game".
A song by English rock band Blur, "Strange News from Another Star," from their self-titled album, takes its name from the title of a Hesse anthology of the same name.
American performance artist Laurie Anderson mentions Hesse and his grave in her spoken piece "Maria Teresa Teresa Maria" on the live album The Ugly One with the Jewels. In it she mentions the disparity between his gravestone and that of his wife, Nina, apparently misunderstanding the citation "Ausländer", which in fact was Nina's maiden name.
River Phoenix was named for the river of life in the Hermann Hesse novel Siddhartha.[5]
The German composer Bertold Hummel wrote two song cycles after poems by Hermann Hesse [1]. The cycle Headless [2] was his final work before his death in 2002. His Poem for Violoncello and strings [3] based on the famous poem Stages by Hermann Hesse.
The Magic Theatre in San Francisco, which has been continuously performing works by new playwrights since 1967, has a name taken from Hesse's "Magic Theatre for Madmen Only" in 'Steppenwolf.' For more information, see the section entitled "Popularity outside German speaking countries," above.


[edit] References


^ "Hermann Hesse autobiography". Nobelprize.org. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/1946/hesse-autobio.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-16. 
^ Gustav Emil Müller, Philosophy of Literature, Ayer Publishing, 1976.
^ "Hermann Hesse Schriftsteller" (in German). Deutsches Historisches Museum. http://www.dhm.de/lemo/html/biografien/HesseHermann/. Retrieved on 15 January 2008. 
^ See Text of the fourth movement of Beethoven's Symphony No. 9.
^ http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9F0CE7DF173DF930A25752C1A965958260



[edit] External links

Find more about Hermann Hesse on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Hermann Hesse



Complete bibliography at Nobelprize.org
Poems in Dedication to Hermann Hesse, with some of his own incorporated throughout - in English and German, webmastered by S. Wolf Britain, Human and Civil Rights Advocate
Works by Hermann Hesse at Project Gutenberg
Hermann Hesse Page - in German and English, maintained by Professor Gunther Gottschalk
Hermann Hesse in the German National Library catalogue (German)
Hermann Hesse Portal
Community of the Journeyer to the East - in German and English
Concise Biography - originally published by the Germanic American Institute, by Paul A. Schons
Article at 'Books and Writers'
The painter Hermann Hesse Galerie Ludorff, Duesseldorf, Germany
Book Review of Steppenwolf
Audio recording in English of Siddhartha from Librivox.org.








v • d • e

Works by Hermann Hesse





Poems

Romantic Songs · One Hour After Midnight · Poems






Novels

Peter Camenzind · Beneath the Wheel · Gertrude · Rosshalde · Knulp · Demian · Klein and Wagner · Klingsor's Last Summer · Siddhartha · Kurgast · Die Nürnberger Reise · Steppenwolf · Narcissus and Goldmund · Journey to the East · Autobiographical Writings · The Glass Bead Game






Essay collections

If the War Goes On ... · My Belief: Essays on Life and Art






Short Stories

The Complete Fairy Tales of Hermann Hesse · Stories of Five Decades · Strange News from Another Star













v • d • e

Nobel Laureates in Literature








Grazia Deledda (1926) · Henri Bergson (1927) · Sigrid Undset (1928) · Thomas Mann (1929) · Sinclair Lewis (1930) · Erik Axel Karlfeldt (1931) · John Galsworthy (1932) · Ivan Bunin (1933) · Luigi Pirandello (1934) · Eugene O'Neill (1936) · Roger Martin du Gard (1937) · Pearl S. Buck (1938) · Frans Eemil Sillanpää (1939) · Johannes Vilhelm Jensen (1944) · Gabriela Mistral (1945) · Hermann Hesse (1946) · André Gide (1947) · T. S. Eliot (1948) · William Faulkner (1949) · Bertrand Russell (1950)








Complete roster · 1901–1925 · 1926–1950 · 1951–1975 · 1976–2000 · 2001–present








Persondata


NAME
Hesse, Hermann


ALTERNATIVE NAMES



SHORT DESCRIPTION
German novelist, short story writer,, essayist and poet


DATE OF BIRTH
2 July 1877(1877-07-02)


PLACE OF BIRTH
Calw, Württemberg, Germany


DATE OF DEATH
9 August 1962


PLACE OF DEATH
Montagnola, Switzerland


 



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hermann_Hesse"
Categories: 1877 births | 1962 deaths | People from the District of Calw | German Nobel laureates | German novelists | German painters | German poets | Nobel laureates in Literature | People from the Kingdom of Württemberg | People with bipolar disorder | Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class) | Swiss German people | Swiss novelists | Swiss painters | Swiss poets | Western mysticsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Alemannisch
العربية
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kiswahili
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Occitan
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
Volapük
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 15:13.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
