













Santorini - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Santorini";
		var wgTitle = "Santorini";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "28377";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282144096;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Santorini

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Santorini (disambiguation).
"Thera" redirects here.  For the moth genus, see Thera (moth). For the wrinkle ridge on the Moon, see Dorsum Thera.


Santorini
Σαντορίνη



View across collapsed caldera


Geography





Coordinates:
36°25.2′N 25°25.9′E﻿ / ﻿36.42°N 25.4317°E﻿ / 36.42; 25.4317


Island Chain:
Cyclades


Area:[1]
73 km² (28 sq.mi.)


Government


 Greece


Periphery:
South Aegean


Prefecture:
Cyclades


Capital:
Fira


Statistics


Population:
13,402 (as of 2001)


Density:
184 /km² (475 /sq.mi.)


Postal Code:
847 00, 847 02


Area Code:
22860


License Code:
EM


Website


www.thira.gr






Thera Municipality seal






Satellite image of Santorini. Clockwise from center: Nea Kameni; Palea Kameni; Aspronisi; Therasia; Thera






The "saffron-gatherers"






Landscape of spring time - Fresco from the Bronze Age, Akrotiri






Thira at night






Oia at night






Houses built on the edge of the caldera






The city of Fira.






The town of Oia






Mansions and hotels on the steep cliffs


Santorini (Greek: Σαντορίνη, pronounced [ˌsa(n)do̞ˈrini]) is a small, circular archipelago of volcanic islands located in the southern Aegean Sea, about 200 km southeast from Greece's mainland. It is also known as Thera (or Thira, Greek Θήρα [ˈθira]), forming the southernmost member of the Cyclades group of islands, with an area of approximately 73 km² (28 mi²) and a 2001 census population of 13,670. It is composed of the Municipality of Thíra (pop. 12,440) and the Community of Oía (Οία, pop. 1,230, which includes 268 inhabitants resident on the offshore island of Therasia, lying to the west). These have a total land area of 90.623 km², which also includes the uninhabited islands of Nea Kameni, Palaia Kameni, Aspronisi, and Christiana (all part of the Municipality of Thira).
Santorini is essentially what remains of an enormous volcanic explosion, destroying the earliest settlements on what was formerly a single island, and leading to the creation of the current geological caldera. Its spectacular physical beauty, along with a dynamic nightlife, have made the island one of Europe's tourist hotspots.
A giant central lagoon, more or less rectangular, and measuring about 12 km by 7 km (8 mi by 4 mi), is surrounded by 300 m (984 ft) high steep cliffs on three sides. The island slopes downward from the cliffs to the surrounding Aegean Sea. On the fourth side, the lagoon is separated from the sea by another much smaller island called Therasia; the lagoon merges with the sea in two places, in the northwest and southwest. The water in the centre of the lagoon is nearly 400 m (1300 ft) deep, thus making it a safe harbour for all kinds of shipping. The island's harbours all lie in the lagoon and there are no ports on the outer perimeter of the island; the capital, Fira, clings to the top of the cliff looking down on the lagoon. The volcanic rocks present from the prior eruptions feature olivine and have a notably small presence of hornblende.[2]
It is the most active volcanic centre in the South Aegean Volcanic Arc, though what remains today is chiefly a water-filled caldera. The name Santorini was given to it by the Latin empire in the thirteenth century, and is a reference to Saint Irene. Before then it was known as Kallistē (Καλλίστη, "the most beautiful one"), Strongylē (Στρογγύλη, "the circular one"), or Thera.
The island is the site of one of the largest volcanic eruptions the planet has ever seen: the Minoan eruption (sometimes called the Thera eruption), which occurred some 3,600 years ago at the height of the Minoan civilization. The eruption left a large caldera surrounded by volcanic ash deposits hundreds of feet deep and may have led indirectly to the collapse of the Minoan civilization on the island of Crete, 110 km (70 miles) to the south, through the creation of a gigantic tsunami. Another popular theory holds that the Thera eruption is the source of the legend of Atlantis.




Contents


1 History

1.1 Minoan Akrotiri

1.1.1 Dating


1.2 Ancient and Medieval Santorini
1.3 Modern Santorini


2 Volcanic eruption

2.1 The physical eruption
2.2 Speculation on an Exodus connection
2.3 Speculation on an Atlantis connection


3 Sea Diamond sinking
4 Gallery
5 See also
6 Notes
7 References
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History

[edit] Minoan Akrotiri
Excavations starting in 1967 at the site called Akrotiri under the late Professor Spyridon Marinatos have made Thera the best-known "Minoan" site outside of Crete, the homeland of the culture. The island was not known as Thera at this time. Only the southern tip of a large town has been uncovered, yet it has revealed complexes of multi-level buildings, streets, and squares with remains of walls standing as high as eight meters, all entombed in the solidified ash of the famous eruption of Thera. The site was not a palace-complex such as are found in Crete, but its excellent masonry and fine wall-paintings show that this was certainly no conglomeration of merchants' warehousing either. A loom-workshop suggests organized textile weaving for export. This Bronze Age civilization throve between 3000 to 2000 BC, and reached its peak in the period 2000 to 1580 BC.[3]
Some of the houses in Akrotiri are major structures, some amongst them three stories high. Its streets, squares, and walls were preserved in the layers of ejecta, sometimes as tall as eight meters, and indicating this was a major town. In many houses stone staircases are still intact, and they contain huge ceramic storage jars (pithoi), mills, and pottery. Noted archaeological remains found in Akrotiri are wall paintings or frescoes, which have kept their original colour well, as they were preserved under many meters of volcanic ash. The town also had a highly developed drainage system and, judging from the fine artwork, its citizens were clearly sophisticated and relatively wealthy people.
Pipes with running water and water closets found at Akrotiri are the oldest such utilities discovered. The pipes run in twin systems, indicating that the Therans used both hot and cold water supplies; the origin of the hot water probably was geothermic, given the volcano's proximity. The dual pipe system suggesting hot and cold running water, the advanced architecture, and the apparent layout of the Akrotiri find resemble Plato's description of the legendary lost city of Atlantis, further indicating the Minoans as the culture which primarily inspired the Atlantis legend.[citation needed]
Fragmentary wall-paintings at Akrotiri lack the insistent religious or mythological content familiar in Classical Greek decor. Instead, the Minoan frescoes depict "Saffron-Gatherers", who offer their crocus-stamens to a seated lady, perhaps a goddess; in another house are two antelopes, painted with a kind of confident, flowing, decorative, calligraphic line, the famous fresco of a fisherman with his double strings of fish strung by their gills, and the flotilla of pleasure boats, accompanied by leaping dolphins, where ladies take their ease in the shade of light canopies, among other frescoes.
The well preserved ruins of the ancient town often are compared to the spectacular ruins at Pompeii in Italy. The canopy covering the ruins collapsed in an accident in September 2005, tragically killing one tourist and injuring seven more. The site remains closed while a new canopy is built.
The oldest signs of human settlement are Late Neolithic (4th millennium BC or earlier), but ca. 2000–1650 BC Akrotiri developed into one of the Aegean's major Bronze Age ports, with recovered objects that had come, not just from Crete, but also from Anatolia, Cyprus, Syria, and Egypt as well as from the Dodecanese and the Greek mainland.

[edit] Dating
The Minoan eruption provides a fixed point for the chronology of the second millennium BC in the Aegean, because evidence of the eruption occurs throughout the region and the site itself contains material culture from outside. The eruption occurred during the "Late Minoan IA" period at Crete and the "Late Cycladic I" period in the surrounding islands.
The exact date of the eruption, however, is unknown. Radiocarbon dating indicates that the eruption occurred about 1645—1600 BC.[4] These dates, however, conflict with the usual date range from archaeological evidence, which is between about 1550 and 1500 BC.[5] For more discussion, see the article on the Minoan eruption.

[edit] Ancient and Medieval Santorini
Santorini remained unoccupied throughout the rest of the Bronze Age, during which time the Greeks took over Crete. At Knossos, in a LMIIIA context (14th century BC), seven Linear B texts while calling upon "all the gods" make sure to grant primacy to an elsewhere-unattested entity called qe-ra-si-ja and, once, qe-ra-si-jo. If the endings -ia[s] and -ios represent an ethnikonic suffix, then this means "The One From Qeras[os]". If aspirated, *Qhera- would have become "Thera-" in later Greek. "Therasia" and its ethnikon "Therasios" are both attested in later Greek; and, since -sos was itself a genitive suffix in the Aegean Sprachbund, *Qeras[os] could also shrink to *Qera. (An alternate view takes qe-ra-si-ja and qe-ra-si-jo as proof of androgyny, and applies this name by similar arguments to the legendary seer, Tiresias, but these views are not mutually exclusive of one another.) If qe-ra-si-ja was an ethnikon first, then in following him/her/it the Cretans also feared whence it came.[6]
Over the centuries after the general catastrophes of 1200 BC,[vague] Phoenicians founded a site on Thera. Herodotus reports that the Phoenicians called the island Callista and lived on it for eight generations.[7] Then, in the 9th century BC, Dorians founded the main Hellenic city - on Mesa Vouno, 396 m above sea level. This group later claimed that they had named the city and the island after their leader, Theras. Today, that city is referred to as Ancient Thera.
Apollonius Rhodius' Argonautica, written in Hellenistic Egypt in the 3rd century BC, includes an origin and sovereignty myth of Thera being given by Triton in Libya to the Greek Argonaut Euphemus, son of Poseidon, in the form of a clod of dirt. After carrying the dirt next to his heart for several days, Euphemus dreamt that he nursed the dirt with milk from his breast, and that the dirt turned into a beautiful woman with whom he had sex. The woman then told him that she was a daughter of Triton named Kalliste, and that when he threw the dirt into the sea it would grow into an island for his descendants to live on. The poem goes on to claim that the island was named Thera after Euphemus' descendant Theras, son of Autesion, the leader of a group of refugee settlers from Lemnos.
The Dorians have left a number of inscriptions incised in stone, in the vicinity of the temple of Apollo, attesting to pederastic relations between the authors and their eromenoi. These inscriptions, found by Friedrich Hiller von Gaertringen, have been thought by some archaeologists to be of a ritual, celebratory nature, due to their large size, careful construction and - in some cases - execution by craftsmen other than the authors. Other historians, such as Dover and Henri-Irénée Marrou, have considered them to be pornographic in nature.[8]
According to Herodotus (4.149-165), following a drought of seven years, Thera sent out colonists who founded a number of cities in northern Africa, including Cyrene.
In the 5th century BC, Dorian Thera did not join the Delian League with Athens; and during the Peloponnesian War, Thera sided with Dorian Sparta, against Athens. The Athenians took the island during the war, but lost it again after the Battle of Aegospotami.
As with other Greek territories, Thera then was ruled by the Romans; it passed to the eastern side of the Empire when it divided - which now is known as the Byzantine Empire.
During the Crusades, the Franks settled it, while in the 13th century AD, the Venetians annexed the isle to the Duchy of Naxos and renamed it "Santorini", that is "Saint Irene". Santorini came under Ottoman rule in 1579.

[edit] Modern Santorini
Santorini was united with Greece in 1912. Its major settlements include Fira (Phira), Oia, Emporio, Kamari, Perissa, Imerovigli, Pyrgos, and Therasia. Akrotiri is a major archaeological site, with ruins from the Minoan era. Santorini's primary industry is tourism, particularly in the summer months. The island's pumice quarries have been closed since 1986, in order to preserve the caldera.
Santorini has no rivers, and water is scarce. Until the early 1990s locals filled water cisterns from the rain that fell on roofs and courts, from small springs, and with imported assistance from other areas of Greece. In recent years a desalination plant has provided running, yet non-potable, water to most houses.
The island remains the home of a small, but flourishing, wine industry, based on the indigenous grape variety, Assyrtiko. Vines of the Assyrtiko variety are extremely old and prove resistant to phylloxera, attributed by local winemakers to the well-drained volcanic soil and its chemistry, and the soil needed no replacement during the great phylloxera epidemic of the early 20th century. In their adaptation to their habitat, such vines are planted far apart, as their principal source of moisture is dew, and they often are trained in the shape of low-spiralling baskets, with the grapes hanging inside to protect them from the winds. Also unique to the island is the red, sweet, and extremely strong Vinsanto. White wines from the island are extremely dry with a strong, citrus scent, and the ashy volcanic soil gives the white wines a slightly sulfurous flavour much like Vinsanto. It is not easy to be a winegrower in Santorini; the hot and dry conditions give the soil a low productivity. The yield per acre is only 10 to 20% of the yields that are common in France and California.
In 1707 an undersea volcano breached the sea surface, forming the current centre of activity at Nea Kameni in the centre of the lagoon, and eruptions centred on it continue — the twentieth century saw three such, the last in 1950. At some time in the future, it will almost certainly erupt violently again. Santorini was also struck by a devastating earthquake in 1956. Although the volcano is quiescent at the present time, at the current active crater (there are several former craters on Nea Kameni), steam and sulphur dioxide are given off.

[edit] Volcanic eruption
Main article: Minoan eruption

[edit] The physical eruption
The devastating volcanic eruption of Thera has become the most famous single event in the Aegean before the fall of Troy. This may have been one of the biggest volcanic eruptions on Earth in the last few thousand years.
The violent eruption was centered on a small island just north of the existing island of Nea Kameni in the centre of the caldera; the caldera itself was formed several hundred thousand years ago by the collapse of the centre of a circular island, caused by the emptying of the magma chamber during an eruption. It has been filled several times by ignimbrite since then, and the process repeated itself, most recently 21,000 years ago. The northern part of the caldera was refilled by the volcano, then collapsing once more during the Minoan eruption. Before the Minoan eruption, the caldera formed a nearly continuous ring with the only entrance between the tiny island of Aspronisi and Thera; the eruption destroyed the sections of the ring between Aspronisi and Therasia, and between Therasia and Thera, creating two new channels.
On Santorini, a deposit of white tephra thrown from the eruption is to be found, lying up to 60 metres thick overlying the soil marking the ground level before the eruption, and forming a layer divided into three fairly distinct bands indicating different phases of the eruption. New archaeological discoveries by a team of international scientists, in 2006, have revealed that the Santorini event was much more massive than previously thought; it expelled 61 km³ of magma and rock into Earth's atmosphere, compared to previous estimates of only 39 cubic kilometres in 1991,[9][10] producing an estimated 100 cubic kilometres of tephra. Only the Mount Tambora volcanic eruption of 1815, the 181 AD eruption of Lake Taupo, and possibly Baekdu Mountain's 969 AD eruption released more material into the atmosphere during the past 5,000 years.




Recent ISS aerial image of the volcano crater



[edit] Speculation on an Exodus connection
A 2006 documentary created by filmmaker Simcha Jacobovici called The Exodus Decoded [11] suggests that the eruption of the Santorini Island volcano (c. 1623 BC, +/-25) caused all the biblical plagues described against Egypt, re-dating the eruption to c. 1500 BC. The film claims the Hyksos were the Israelites and that some of them may have originally been from Mycenae. The film also claims that these original Mycenaean Israelites fled Egypt (which they had in fact ruled for some time) after the eruption, back to Mycenae. The pharaoh with whom they identify the Pharaoh of the Exodus is Ahmose I. Rather than crossing the Red Sea, Jacobovici argued a marshy area in northern Egypt known as the "Reed Sea" would have been alternately drained and flooded by tsunamis caused by the caldera collapse, and could have been crossed during the Exodus.

[edit] Speculation on an Atlantis connection
It is easy to see why this location was added to the list of possible locations for the fabled city of Atlantis. As with most myths, connections to real places are usually dubious and many scientists often are skeptical. However some archaeological, seismological, and vulcanological evidence [12] [13] [14] (popularized on The History Channel programme Lost Worlds episode "Atlantis" [15]) regarding Crete, Santorini, and the description of Atlantis from Plato, has been presented linking the Atlantis myth to Santorini. For more discussion, see the article on Location hypotheses of Atlantis.

[edit] Sea Diamond sinking
On April 6, 2007, the 469-foot cruise ship MS Sea Diamond struck a volcanic reef within the crater and sank the following day, resulting in the loss of two passengers. The Sea Diamond was operated by Louis Cruise Lines, part of a Cyprus-based tourism group. The Merchant Marine Ministry said 1,195 passengers and 391 crew members were on board. The ship settled to the bottom near the port of Athenios. The wreck contains 200 tons of fuel oil and poses a serious threat to the waters of the caldera. Plans are currently being made to salvage the ship, which is resting precariously on an undersea ledge.

[edit] Gallery





Panoramic view of the Santorini caldera, taken from Imerovigli









Panoramic view of Santorini's principal city, Fira












Santorini's famous Red Beach.









Thira, taken from a ship in the harbor









The Lighthouse, Akrotiri









Prehistoric Site of Akrotiri











Linear A script etched on a vase found in Akrotiri









Volcanic craters at Santorini today









Stairway in Imerovigli, Santorini









The Santorini windmills






[edit] See also

Akrotiri
Ancient Thera
Santorini (Thira) National Airport
List of volcanoes in Greece


[edit] Notes

Forsyth, Phyllis Y.: Thera in the Bronze Age, Peter Lang Pub Inc, New York 1997. ISBN 0-8204-4889-3
Thera (Santorin) - Catholic Encyclopedia article
Global Volcanism Program: Santorini
History Channel's "Lost Worlds: Atlantis" archeology series. Features scientists Dr. J. Alexander MacGillivray (archeologist), Dr. Colin F. MacDonald (archaeologist), Professor Floyd McCoy (vulcanologist), professor Clairy Palyvou (architect), and Dr. Gerassimos Papadopoulos (seismologist)


[edit] References


^ "Basic Characteristics". Ministry of the Interior. www.ypes.gr. http://www.ypes.gr/topiki.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-07. 
^ Michaēl Phytikas, The South Aegean Active Volcanic Arc: Present Knowledge and Future Perspectives
^ C. Michael Hogan, Akrotiri, The Modern Antiquarian (2007)
^ Manning, Sturt W; Ramsey, CB, Kutschera, W, Higham, T, Kromer, B, Steier, P, and Wild, EM (2006). "[http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/abstract/sci;312/5773/565 Chronology for the Aegean Late Bronze Age 1700-1400 B.C.]". Science (American Association for the Advancement of Science) 312 (5773): 565–569. doi:10.1126/science.1125682. PMID 16645092. http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/abstract/sci;312/5773/565. Retrieved on 2007-03-10. 
^ Warren PM (2006). Czerny E., Hein I., Hunger H., Melman D., Schwab A. (editors). ed. Timelines: Studies in Honour of Manfred Bietak (Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 149). Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium: Peeters. pp. 2: 305–321. ISBN 90-429-1730-X. 
^ Minoan Qe-Ra-Si-Ja. The Religious Impact of the Thera Volcano on Minoan Crete
^ Herodotus iv. 147
^ Theran graffiti in translation
^ URI Department of Communications and Marketing
^ "Atlantis" Eruption Twice as Big as Previously Believed, Study Suggests
^ The Exodus Decoded Office Website
^ "Santorini Eruption (~1630 BC) and the legend of Atlantis". http://www.geology.sdsu.edu/how_volcanoes_work/santorini.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-09. 
^ Vergano, Dan (2006-08-27). "Ye gods! Ancient volcano could have blasted Atlantis myth". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/tech/science/columnist/vergano/2006-08-27-ancient-volcano_x.htm. Retrieved on 2008-03-09. 
^ Lilley, Harvey (20 April 2007). "The wave that destroyed Atlantis". BBC Timewatch. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/6568053.stm. Retrieved on 2008-03-09. 
^ "Lost Worlds: CGI: Atlantis". History.com. http://www.history.com/media.do?id=lostworlds_atlantis_broadband&action=clip. Retrieved on 2008-03-09. 



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Santorini 



Find more about Santorini on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Santorini travel guide from Wikitravel
The Eruption of Thera: Date and Implications
Was the Bronze Age Volcanic Eruption of Thira (Santorini) a Megacatastrophe? A Geological/Archeological Detective Story, Grant Heiken, Independent consultant, author, geologist (retired) Los Alamos National Laboratory; lecture presented at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, sponsored by Center for Global Studies and Center for Advanced Study
Hellenic Ministry of Culture: Akrotiri of Thera: fully illustrated capsule of the finds
Santorini Eruption much larger than previously thought
Professor Doumas of U of Athens Discusses the Archaeological Significance of Thera - Video Interview








v • d • e

Islands of the Cyclades








Antiparos · Agios Efstathios · Agios Nikolaos Donoussas · Amorgos · Anafi · Andros · Ano Antikeros · Antimilos · Anydros Amorgou · Askania · Delos · Despotiko · Donoussa · Eschati · Fidoussa · Folegandros · Glaroni · Gramvoussa · Gyaros · Hristiana · Htapodia Mykonou · Ios · Iraklia · Kalogiros · Kammeni · Kapititas · Kardiotissa · Kato Antikeros · Kato Kouphonissi · Kea · Keros · Kimolos · Kitriani · Kouphonissi · Kramvonissi · Kythnos · Liadi Island · Makronisos · Megalo · Milos · Mykonos · Nata · Naxos · Nikouria · Pahia Anaphis · Pandros · Paros · Polyaigos · Rhineia · Santorini · Schoinoussa · Serifopoula · Serifos · Sifnos · Sikinos · Stroggyli Parou · Syros · Thirasia · Tinos · Vous















v • d • e

Municipalities and communities of the Cyclades Prefecture





Municipalities

Amorgos • Andros • Ano Syros • Drymalia • Ermoupoli • Exomvourgo • Ios • Kea • Korthio • Kythnos • Milos • Mykonos • Naxos • Paros • Poseidonia • Santorini • Serifos • Sifnos • Tinos • Ydrousa






Communities

Anafi • Antiparos • Donousa • Folegandros • Irakleia • Kimolos • Koufonisi • Oia • Panormos • Schoinoussa • Sikinos













v • d • e

Articles on the Aegean Sea






General







Countries

 Greece •  Turkey






Other

Aegean civilization • Aegean Islands • Aegean dispute







Aegean islands






Cyclades

Amorgos • Anafi • Andros • Antimilos • Antiparos • Delos • Despotiko • Donoussa • Folegandros • Gyaros • Ios • Irakleia • Kardiotissa • Kea • Keros • Kimolos • Koufonisi • Kythnos • Milos • Mykonos • Nata • Naxos • Paros • Polyaigos • Rhineia • Santorini • Schoinoussa • Serifopoula • Serifos • Sifnos • Sikinos • Syros • Therasia • Tinos • Vous






Dodecanese

Agathonisi • Arkoi • Armathia • Alimia • Astakida • Astypalaia • Çatalada • Chamili • Gaidaros • Gyali • Halki • Iç Ada (Antalya) • Imia/Kardak • Kalolimnos • Kalymnos • Kandelioussa • Kara Ada • Karpathos • Kasos • Kastelorizo • Kekova • Kos • Küçük Tavşan Adası • Leros • Lipsi • Nisyros • Patmos • Pacheia • Pharmakonisi • Platy • Pserimos • Rho • Rhodes • Saria • Salih Ada • Strongili • Symi • Syrna • Telendos • Tilos • Zafora






North Aegean

Agios Eustratius • Ammouliani • Ayvalık Islands • Büyük Ada • Chios • Chryse • Cunda • Fener Ada • Fournoi Korseon • Icaria • Imbros • Incir Ada • Koukonesi • Lemnos • Lesbos • Metalik Ada • Nissiopi • Oinousses • Psara • Samiopoula • Samos • Samothrace • Tenedos • Thasos • Thymaina






Saronic

Aegina • Agios Georgios • Angistri • Dokos • Hydra • Poros • Psyttaleia • Salamis • Spetses






Sporades

Adelfoi Islets • Agios Georgios Skopelou • Alonissos • Argos Skiathou • Dasia • Erinia • Gioura • Grammeza • Kyra Panagia • Lekhoussa • Peristera • Piperi • Psathoura • Repio • Rineia Skyrou • Sarakino • Skandili • Skantzoura • Skiathos • Skopelos • Skyropoula • Skyros • Tsougria • Valaxa






Other

Crete • Dia • Euboea • Gavdos • Makronisos









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Santorini"
Categories: Santorini | Wine regions of GreeceHidden categories: Articles containing Greek language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Français
Furlan
Galego
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latina
Lëtzebuergesch
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Türkçe
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 17:05.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
