













Republic of China - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Republic_of_China";
		var wgTitle = "Republic of China";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "25734";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283647409;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Republic of China

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
The Republic of China was commonly known as "China" or "Nationalist China" until the 1970s when it has since been commonly known as "Taiwan".[1]
Not to be confused with People's Republic of China.





It has been suggested that Taiwan be merged into this article or section. (Discuss)




Republic of China
中華民國
Zhōnghuá Mínguó










Flag
National Emblem





Anthem: National Anthem of the Republic of China










Capital
(and largest city)
Taipei (de facto)[2]
25°02′N 121°38′E﻿ / ﻿25.033°N 121.633°E﻿ / 25.033; 121.633


Official languages
Standard Mandarin


Demonym
Taiwanese or Chinese


Government
Semi-presidential system


 - 
President
Ma Ying-jeou


 - 
Vice President
Vincent Siew


 - 
Premier
Liu Chao-shiuan


Legislature
Legislative Yuan


Establishment
Xinhai Revolution 


 - 
Start of Xinhai Revolution
October 10, 1911 


 - 
Republic established
January 1, 1912 


Area


 - 
Total
36,190 km2 (136th)
13,973 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
10.34


Population


 - 
2008 estimate
23,037,031[3] (47tha)


 - 
Density
636.57/km2 (14tha)
1,648.71/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2008 estimate


 - 
Total
$695.388 billion (19th)


 - 
Per capita
$31,892 (26th)


GDP (nominal)
2008 estimate


 - 
Total
$383,347 billion (24th)


 - 
Per capita
$18,306 (41th)


HDI (2005)
▲ 0.932 [4] (high) 


Currency
New Taiwan dollar (NT$) (TWD)


Time zone
CST (UTC+8)


Date formats
yyyy-mm-dd
yyyy年m月d日
(CE; CE+2697) or 民國yyyy年m月d日


Drives on the
right


Internet TLD
.tw


Calling code
886


a Rank based on 2006 figures. China21




Republic of China




Traditional Chinese:
中華民國


Simplified Chinese:
中华民国





Transliterations


Mandarin


- Hanyu Pinyin:
Zhōnghuá Mín'guó


- Wade-Giles:
Chung-hua Min-kuo


Min


- Hokkien POJ:
Tiong-hôa Bîn-kok












This article contains Chinese text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Chinese characters.




 


This article is part of the
Politics series


Forms of
government


 


List of forms of
government





Anarchy
Aristocracy
Authoritarianism
Autocracy
Communist state
Confederation
Corporatocracy
Consociational state
Demarchy
Democracy
Direct
Representative
Consensus

Despotism
Dictatorship
Military

Epistemocracy
Ethnocracy
Exilarchy
Federation
Feudalism
Gerontocracy
Military junta
Kleptocracy
Kratocracy
Kritocracy
Kritarchy
Logocracy
Meritocracy
Geniocracy

Minarchism/Night Watchman
Monarchy
Absolute
Constitutional
Diarchy/Co-Kingship

Noocracy
Ochlocracy/Mobocracy
Oligarchy
Panarchism
Plutocracy
Puppet state
Republic
Crowned
Capitalist
Constitutional
Federal
Parliamentary
Federal


Socialist state
Sociocracy
Technocracy
Cyberocracy
Netocracy

Theocracy
Theodemocracy
Timocracy
Totalitarianism
Tribal
Chiefdom

Class-Communism
Socialism





Politics portal



v • d • e



The Republic of China (ROC) is a state in East Asia that has evolved from a single-party state with full global recognition into a multi-party democratic state with limited international recognition, although it enjoys de facto relations with many other countries. It was a founding member of the United Nations.[5]
Established in 1912, the Republic of China encompassed much of mainland China and Outer Mongolia. In 1945 at the end of World War II the Republic of China added the island groups of Taiwan and the Penghu islands to its authority. These island groups, together with Kinmen and Matsu, became the full extent of the Republic of China's authority after 1949 when the Kuomintang (KMT) lost the Chinese Civil War. The KMT lost the war to the Chinese Communist Party which then founded the People's Republic of China (PRC) in mainland China. Under ROC law, these areas currently under ROC jurisdiction are known as the "Free Area of the Republic of China." The capital city is Taipei.[2]
Although the jurisdiction of Republic of China only covers Taiwan and outlying islands since 1949, during the early Cold War the ROC was recognized by most Western nations and the United Nations as the sole legitimate government of China. During the 1970s, the ROC began to lose these recognitions in favor of the People's Republic of China. The Republic of China has not relinquished its claim as the legitimate government of all China.[6] Both former Presidents Lee Teng-hui and Chen Shui-bian have held the view that it is a sovereign and independent country separate from mainland China and there is no need for a formal declaration of independence.[7] President Ma Ying-jeou has expressed the view that the ROC is a sovereign and independent country that includes both Taiwan and mainland China, a view that corresponds with the ROC constitution and the 1992 Consensus.[8]
From the 1910s to 1940s, the Republic of China was commonly referred as "China". During the 1950s and 1960s, it was common to refer it as Nationalist China or Free China. Over subsequent decades, the Republic of China has been commonly referred to as "Taiwan". Since the late 1970s the name "China" is commonly used to refer to the People's Republic of China.





Contents


1 Establishment
2 Political status

2.1 Potential military conflict

2.1.1 United States involvement and current standpoint


2.2 Opinions within the ROC
2.3 The PRC's One-China policy

2.3.1 ROC international relations
2.3.2 ROC participation in international events and organizations




3 History

3.1 1911–27
3.2 1927–45
3.3 1945 to present


4 Government

4.1 Republican China
4.2 Present

4.2.1 Head of state
4.2.2 Legislature
4.2.3 Judiciary
4.2.4 Executive Yuan
4.2.5 Ruling party




5 Administrative regions

5.1 Counties
5.2 Municipalities and cities


6 Politics

6.1 1911–49
6.2 1949–2005
6.3 Present

6.3.1 Major camps
6.3.2 Current political issues




7 Foreign relations

7.1 1911–49
7.2 1949–present


8 Military

8.1 1911–49
8.2 Present


9 Economy

9.1 1912–49
9.2 Taiwan Miracle
9.3 Present


10 Education
11 Demographics

11.1 Largest cities


12 Public health
13 Calendar
14 International rankings
15 See also
16 Notes and references

16.1 Other references


17 Further reading
18 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Establishment
The Republic of China was established in 1911, replacing the Qing Dynasty and ending over two thousand years of imperial rule in China. It is the oldest surviving republic in East Asia. The Republic of China on mainland China went through periods of warlordism, Japanese invasion, civil war between the Kuomintang (KMT) and the Communists. The Republic of China on Taiwan has experienced rapid economic growth and industrialization, and democratization.
Starting in 1928, the Republic of China was ruled by the Kuomintang as an authoritarian one-party state.[9] In the 1950s and 1960s, the KMT went through wide restructuring and decreased corruption and implemented land reform. There followed a period of great economic growth, the Republic of China became one of the Four Asian Tigers, despite the constant threat of war and civil unrest. In the 1980s and 1990s the government peacefully transitioned to a democratic system, with the first direct presidential election in 1996 and the 2000 election of Chen Shui-bian, the first non-KMT after 1949 to become President of the Republic of China. The KMT regained presidency and increased its majority in the legislature in the 2008 presidential and legislative elections.[10]

[edit] Political status
Main article: Political status of Taiwan
The political status of the Republic of China is a contentious issue. The People's Republic of China (PRC) claims that the ROC government is illegitimate, referring to it as the "Taiwan Authority", while the ROC views itself as an independent sovereign state.[11] The ROC claimed to be the sole legitimate government of all China since its relocation to Taiwan in 1949 until the lift of martial law in 1987. Although the administration of pro-independence President Chen Shui-bian (2000-2008) did not actively claim sovereignty over all of China, the national boundaries of the ROC have not been redrawn and its outstanding territorial claims from the late 1940s have not been revised. Thus, the claimed area of the ROC continue to include Mainland China, several off-shore islands, Taiwan, Outer Mongolia, Northern Burma, and Tuva (now Russian territory). The current President Ma Ying-jeou reasserted the ROC's claim to be the sole legitimate government of China and the claim that mainland China is part of ROC's territory.[6]

[edit] Potential military conflict
The political environment is complicated by the potential for military conflict should overt actions toward independence or reunification be taken. It is the official PRC policy to use force to ensure reunification if peaceful reunification is no longer possible, as stated in its anti-secession law, and for this reason there are substantial military installations on the Fujian coast.[12]

[edit] United States involvement and current standpoint
As a result of Cold War politics, the United States has provided military training and sold arms to the ROC armed forces.[13] However, the current status quo, as defined by the U.S., is supported on a quid pro quo basis between both Chinese states. The PRC is expected to "use no force or threat[en] to use force against Taiwan" and the ROC is to "exercise prudence in managing all aspects of Cross-Strait relations." Both are to refrain from performing actions or espousing statements "that would unilaterally alter Taiwan's status."[14]
For its part, the People's Republic of China appears to find the retention of the name "Republic of China" far more acceptable than the declaration of a de jure independent Taiwan. However, with the rise of the Taiwanese independence movement, the name "Taiwan" has been employed increasingly more often on the island itself.

[edit] Opinions within the ROC
See also: 1992 Consensus, One-China policy, and Special non-state-to-state relations
Within the ROC, opinions are polarized between those supporting unification, represented by the Pan-Blue Coalition of parties, and those supporting independence, represented by the Pan-Green Coalition. The Kuomintang, the largest Pan-Blue party, supports the status quo for the indefinite future with a stated ultimate goal of unification. However, it does not support unification in the short term with the PRC as such a prospect would be unacceptable to most of its members and the public. Ma Ying-jeou, former chairman of the KMT and the current ROC President, has set out democracy, economic development to a level near that of the ROC, and equitable wealth distribution as the conditions that the PRC must fulfill for reunification to occur. The DPP, the largest Pan-Green party, also supports the status quo because the risk of provoking the PRC is unacceptable to its members.
Former President Chen Shui-bian of the Democratic Progressive Party stated during his years of administration that no matter what, any decision should be decided through a public referendum of the people of the ROC. Both parties' current foreign policy positions support actively advocating ROC participation in international organizations, but while the KMT accepts the "One-China" principle, the DPP encourages the ROC's participation as an independent state.
On 2 September 2008 the ROC President Ma Jing-jeou was interviewed by the Mexico based newspaper Sol de Mexico and he was asked about his views on the subject of 'two Chinas' and if there is a solution for the sovereignty issues between the two. The ROC President replied that the relations are neither between two Chinas nor two states. It is a special relationship. Further, he stated that the sovereignty issues between the two cannot be resolved at present, but he quoted the '1992 Consensus', currently accepted by both sides, as a temporary measure until a solution becomes available.[8]

[edit] The PRC's One-China policy

[edit] ROC international relations
Under its One-China policy, the PRC requires other countries to give no official recognition to the ROC as a condition of maintaining diplomatic relations. As a result, there are only 23 states that have official diplomatic relations with the Republic of China. However, most countries have unofficial representative offices in the ROC.
The United States maintains unofficial relations with the ROC through the instrumentality of the American Institute in Taiwan.[15] The ROC maintains similar de facto embassies and consulates in most countries, called "Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Offices" (TECRO), with branch offices called "Taipei Economic and Cultural Offices" (TECO). Both TECRO and TECO are "unofficial commercial entities" of the ROC in charge of maintaining diplomatic relations, providing consular services (i.e. Visa applications), and serving the national interests of the ROC in other countries in basically the same way as an embassy or consulate.[16]

[edit] ROC participation in international events and organizations
Also due to its One China policy, the PRC only participates in international organizations where the ROC is not recognized as a sovereign country. In 1945, the ROC, as representative of all the territory of China, was one of the founding nations and Security Council member of the United Nations; however, in 1971, with the passage of United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758, it was replaced by the PRC. Each year since 1992, the ROC has petitioned the UN for entry but has been unsuccessful. Most member states, including the United States, do not wish to discuss the issue of the ROC's political status for fear of souring diplomatic ties with the PRC. However, both the U.S. and Japan publicly support the ROC's bid for membership in the World Health Organization as an observer.[17] However, though the ROC has applied for WHO membership every year since 1997 under various denominations, their efforts have consistently been blocked by PRC.
The ROC currently uses the politically neutral name "Chinese Taipei" in international events such as the Olympic Games where the PRC is also a party. The ROC is typically barred from using its national anthem and national flag in international events due to PRC pressure; ROC spectators attending events such as the Olympics are often barred from bringing ROC flags into venues.[18] The ROC is able to participate as "China" in organizations that the PRC does not participate in, such as the World Organization of the Scout Movement.
The relationship with the PRC and the related issues of Taiwanese independence and Chinese reunification continue to dominate ROC politics.[19] For any particular resolution public favor shifts greatly with small changes in wording, illustrating the complexity of public opinion on the topic.[20]

[edit] History
Main articles: History of the Republic of China and Timeline of Republic of China history

[edit] 1911–27




Map of Republic of China printed by Rand McNally & Co. in the year 1914.






Yuan Shikai (left) and Sun Yat-sen (right) with two different flags representing the early Republic.


In 1911, after over two thousand years of imperial rule, a republic was established in China and the monarchy overthrown. The Qing government, having just experienced a century of instability, suffered from both internal rebellion and foreign imperialism. The Neo-Confucian principles that had, to that time, sustained the dynastic system were now called into question and a loss of cultural self-confidence was blamed for a total of 40 million Chinese consumers of opium by 1900 (roughly 10% of the population).[21] By the time of its embarrassing defeat by an expeditionary force led by the world's major powers in 1900 during the suppression of the Boxer Rebellion, the Qing government was already in its final throes, with only the lack of an alternative regime in sight prolonging its existence until 1912.[22]
The establishment of Republican China developed out of the Wuchang Uprising against the Qing on October 10, 1911. That date is now celebrated annually as the ROC's national day, also known as the 'Double Ten Day'. The Republic of China was established on January 1, 1912, with Dr. Sun Yat-sen as the provisional president. As part of the agreement to have the last emperor Puyi abdicate, Yuan Shikai was officially elected president in 1913. However, Yuan dissolved the ruling Kuomintang party (KMT), ignored the provisional Constitution by asserting presidential power, and ultimately declared himself Emperor of China in 1915.




Sun Yat-sen (middle) and Chiang Kai-shek (on stage in uniform) at the founding of the Whampoa Military Academy in 1924.


Yuan's supporters deserted him, and many provinces declared independence and became warlord states. Yuan Shikai died of natural causes in 1916. This thrust China into a decade of warlordism. Sun Yat-sen, forced into exile, returned to Guangdong province with the help of southern warlords in 1917 and 1920, and set up successive rival governments. Sun re-established the KMT in October, 1919.
The Beiyang government in Beijing struggled to hold on to power. An open and wide-ranging debate evolved regarding how China should confront the West. After the Treaty of Versailles, on May 4, a student protest led to a nationwide uprising and gave the movement its name.
Chinese anarchism, specifically anarchist communism, had been one of the most prominent forms of revolutionary socialism even before the Wuchang Uprising. Following the Russian Revolution, the influence of Marxism spread and became more popular. Li Dazhao and Chen Duxiu led the Marxist-Leninist movement in the beginning. The Communist Party of China was founded in July, 1921.[citation needed]

[edit] 1927–45




Chiang Kai-shek , who assumed the leadership of the Kuomintang (KMT) after the death of Sun Yat-sen in 1925


After Sun's death in March 1925, Chiang Kai-shek became the leader of the KMT. Chiang had led the successful Northern Expedition which, with the help of the Soviet Union, defeated the warlords and nominally united China under the KMT. Soviet advisors had provided training, propaganda, popular agitation, and arms. However, Chiang soon dismissed his Soviet advisors, and purged communists and leftists from the KMT, leading to the Chinese Civil War. The Communists were pushed into the interior as Chiang Kai-shek sought to destroy them. Chiang consolidated his rule, establishing a Nationalist Government in Nanjing in 1927. Efforts were made to establish a modern civil society, by creating the Academia Sinica, the Bank of China, and other agencies.
1932 saw the first participation in the Olympic Games by a team, representing a nominally united China under the flag of the Republic of China.[citation needed]
Stability was interrupted by the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931, with hostilities continuing through the Second Sino-Japanese War, part of World War II, from 1937 to 1945. The government of the Republic of China retreated from Nanjing to Chongqing. In 1945, Japan surrendered and the Republic of China became one of the founding members of the United Nations. The government returned to Nanjing.

[edit] 1945 to present




The National Chiang Kai-shek Memorial Hall in Taipei, built by the ROC government to honor Chiang.


After the defeat of Japan during World War II, Taiwan was surrendered to the Allies, with ROC troops accepting the surrender of the Japanese garrison. Taiwan was pronounced "retroceded" to the Chinese Republic, the effective successors of the Chinese Qing Dynasty on October 25, 1945, although proponents of Taiwan independence dispute the validity of the proclamation, arguing that the proclamation was made without a peace treaty formally transferring sovereignty. The military administration of the ROC extended over Taiwan, which led to widespread unrest and increasing tensions between Taiwanese and mainlanders.[23] The arrest of a cigarette vendor and the shooting of a bystander on February 28, 1947 triggered island-wide unrest, which was then suppressed with military force in what is now called the 228 Incident. Mainstream estimates of casualties range from 10,000 to 30,000, mainly Taiwanese elites. The administration declared martial law in 1948.[24]
The Chinese civil war between the Communists and the Nationalists resumed and intensified. By the 1950s, the Republic of China lost effective control over mainland China and Hainan. Chiang Kai-shek evacuated the government from Nanjing (then romanised as 'Nanking') and made Taipei the provisional capital of China. Accompanying his retreat were some two million refugees from mainland China, adding to the earlier population of approximately six million.[25]
Initially, the United States abandoned the KMT and expected that Taiwan would fall to the Communists. However, in 1950 the conflict between North Korea and South Korea, which had been ongoing since the Japanese withdrawal in 1945, escalated into full-blown war, and in the context of the Cold War, U.S. President Harry S. Truman intervened again and dispatched the 7th Fleet into the Taiwan Straits to prevent hostilities between Taiwan and mainland China.[26] In the Treaty of San Francisco, which came into force on April 28, 1952, and the Treaty of Taipei, which came into force on August 5, 1952, Japan formally renounced all right, claim and title to Taiwan and Penghu, and renounced all treaties signed with China before 1942. Both treaties remained silent about who would take control of the island, in part to avoid taking sides in the Chinese Civil War. Advocates of Taiwan independence have used this omission to call into question the PRC and ROC claims on Taiwan, arguing that the future of Taiwan should be decided by self-determination. Continuing conflict of the Chinese Civil War through the 1950s, and intervention by the United States notably resulted in legislations such as the Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty and the Formosa Resolution of 1955.
During the 1960s and 1970s, the ROC began to develop into a prosperous, technology-oriented industrialized developed country, while maintaining an authoritarian, single-party government. Because of the Cold War, most Western nations and the United Nations regarded the ROC as the sole legitimate government of China until the 1970s and especially after the termination of the Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty; after that, most nations switched diplomatic recognition to the PRC.

[edit] Government
Main article: Government of the Republic of China

[edit] Republican China
The first national government of the Chinese Republic was established on January 1, 1912, in Nanjing, with Sun Yat-sen as the provisional president. Provincial delegates were sent to confirm the authority of the national government, and they later also formed the first parliament. The power of this national government was both limited and short-lived, with generals controlling both central and northern provinces of China. The limited acts passed by this government included the formal abdication of the Qing dynasty and some economic initiatives.
Shortly after the rise of Yuan Shikai, the parliament's authority became nominal; violations of the Constitution by Yuan were met with half-hearted motions of censure, and Kuomintang members of the parliament that gave up their membership in the KMT were offered £1,000 British pounds. Yuan maintained power locally by sending military generals to be provincial governors or by obtaining the allegiance of those already in power. Foreign powers came to recognize Yuan's power as well: when Japan came to China with 21 demands, it was Yuan who submitted to them, on May 25, 1915.
When Yuan died, the parliament of 1913 was reconvened to give legitimacy to a new government. However, the real power of the time passed to military leaders, forming the warlord period. The impotent government still had its use; when World War I began, several Western powers and Japan wanted China to declare war on Germany, in order to liquidate German holdings.

[edit] Present




The Presidential Building in Taipei has housed the Office of the President of the Republic of China since 1950.






Ma Ying-jeou, President of the Republic of China.



[edit] Head of state
The head of state is the President, who is elected by popular vote for a four-year term on the same ticket as the Vice-President. The President has authority over the five administrative branches (Yuan): the Control Yuan, Examination Yuan, Executive Yuan, Judicial Yuan and Legislative Yuan. The President appoints the members of the Executive Yuan as his cabinet, including a Premier, who is officially the President of the Executive Yuan; members are responsible for policy and administration.

[edit] Legislature
The main legislative body is the unicameral Legislative Yuan with 113 seats. 73 are elected by popular vote from single-member constituencies; 34 are elected based on the proportion of nationwide votes received by participating political parties in a separate party list ballot; and six are elected from two three-member aboriginal constituencies. Members serve three-year terms. Originally the unicameral National Assembly, as a standing constitutional convention and electoral college, held some parliamentary functions, but the National Assembly was abolished in 2005 with the power of constitutional amendments handed over to the Legislative Yuan and all eligible voters of the Republic via referendums.

[edit] Judiciary
The Judicial Yuan is ROC's highest judiciary. It interprets the constitution and other laws and decrees, judges administrative suits, and disciplines public functionaries. The President and Vice-President of the Judicial Yuan and fifteen Justices form the Council of Grand Justices. They are nominated and appointed by the President of the Republic, with the consent of the Legislative Yuan. The highest court, the Supreme Court, consists of a number of civil and criminal divisions, each of which is formed by a presiding Judge and four Associate Judges, all appointed for life. In 1993, a separate constitutional court was established to resolve constitutional disputes, regulate the activities of political parties and accelerate the democratization process. There is no trial by jury but the right to a fair public trial is protected by law and respected in practice; many cases are presided over by multiple judges.

[edit] Executive Yuan
The ROC's political system does not fit traditional models. The Premier is selected by the President without the need for approval from the Legislature, but the Legislature can pass laws without regard for the President, as neither he nor the Premier wields veto power. Thus, there is little incentive for the President and the Legislature to negotiate on legislation if they are of opposing parties. After the election of the pan-Green's Chen Shui-bian as President in 2000, legislation repeatedly stalled because of deadlock with the Legislative Yuan, which was controlled by a pan-Blue majority. There is another curiosity of the ROC system; because the ROC was previously dominated by strongman single party politics, real power in the system shifted from one position to another, depending on what position was currently occupied by the leader of the state. This legacy has resulted in executive powers currently being concentrated in the office of the President rather than the Premier.

[edit] Ruling party





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2009)


The term ruling party was previously applied to the Kuomintang, as it was the authoritarian party that controlled all aspects of government (ruling party may also be applied to the majority party in a parliamentary system). The Soviets, who had trained Chiang and the KMT and the Communists, left a lasting mark on the practices of the KMT, and under a Leninist-style single-party state, there was little difference between the ROC government, the KMT, and the army. Today, however, the term "ruling party" has a specific, peculiar use in Taiwan and is used to describe the party holding the Presidency. This is not entirely accurate since Taiwan does not have a parliamentary system, where the executive branch is occupied by the same party or coalition that holds a majority in the legislature. This term is currently used because the Premier is appointed by the President, thus executive powers tend to be dominated by the party holding the Presidency.[citation needed]
See also: Constitution of the Republic of China

[edit] Administrative regions
Main article: Administrative divisions of the Republic of China
According to the 1947 Constitution, written before the ROC government retreated to Taiwan, the highest level administrative division is the province, which includes special administrative regions, regions, and centrally-administered municipalities. However, in 1998 the only provincial government to remain fully functional under ROC jurisdiction, Taiwan Province, was streamlined, with most responsibility assumed by the central government and the county-level governments (the other existing provincial government, Fuchien, was streamlined much earlier). The ROC currently administers two provinces and two provincial level cities.

[edit] Counties



Political divisions of the ROC


Provinces








Taiwan Province
Fujian Province


Counties
Municipalities
Counties




Chiayi County
Changhua County
Hsinchu County
Hualien County
Kaohsiung County
Miaoli County




Nantou County
Penghu County
Pingtung County
Taichung County
Tainan County
Taipei County




Taitung County
Taoyuan County
Yilan County
Yunlin County




Chiayi
Hsinchu
Keelung
Taichung
Tainan




Kinmen County
Lienchiang County




Municipalities
Claimed political divisions




Taipei
Kaohsiung




Provinces and territories no longer under the control of the Republic of China




The Republic of China also controls the Pratas Islands (Dong-Sha) and Taiping Island, which are part of the disputed South China Sea Islands. They were placed under Kaohsiung City after the retreat to Taiwan.[27]
Taichung is currently under consideration for elevation to central municipality status. Also, Taipei County and Kaohsiung County are considering mergers with their respective cities.




Constitutional administrative division of the Republic of China.






Constitutional claims in a global context.


The ROC has not constitutionally renounced sovereignty over Mainland China and Outer Mongolia, but President Lee Teng-hui announced in 1991 that his government does not dispute the fact that the Communist Party rules Mainland China. In practice, although ROC law still formally recognizes residents of mainland China as citizens of the ROC, it makes a distinction between persons who have household residency in the Free Area of the Republic of China and those that do not, meaning that persons outside the area administered by the ROC must apply for special travel documents and cannot vote in ROC elections. The DPP government under Chen Shui-bian has established a representative office in Mongolia's capital, Ulan Bator. Offices established to create the appearance of domestic governance of those regions, such as the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission,[28] lie dormant.[29]

[edit] Municipalities and cities
ROC official boundaries continue to show thirty-five provinces, fourteen municipalities, one special administrative region and two regions, instead of the twenty-three provinces, four municipalities, two special administrative regions and five autonomous regions shown on PRC maps. The former DPP government of Chen Shui-bian had dropped regulations which had required ROC map makers to depict the constitutional boundaries.

[edit] Politics
Main article: Politics of the Republic of China

[edit] 1911–49
The original founding of the Republic centered on the Three Principles of the People (san min zhuyi): Nationalism, Democracy, and People's Livelihood (also translated "Socialism"). "Nationalism" meant standing up to Japanese and European interference, "democracy" represented elected rule modeled after the Diet of Japan, and the "people's livelihood" meant government regulation of the means of production. Another subordinate principle was the "republic of Five Races" (五族共和), which emphasized the harmony of the five major ethnic groups in China (Han, Manchus, Mongols, Tibetans, and Uyghurs), represented by the colored stripes of the original Five-Colored Flag of the Republic. The Five Races Under One Union principle and the five-colored flag were abandoned in 1927.
The Three Principles were not realized. Republican China was riven by warlordism, foreign invasion, and civil war. There were elected legislators, but Republican China was largely a one-party dictatorship,[30] with some minor parties, such as the Chinese Youth Party,[31] the National Socialist Party, and the Rural Reconstruction Party.[32] Within the KMT, there was suppression of dissent by the Communists. The central government was weak and unable to implement land reform or wealth redistribution. Politics of this era consisted primarily of political and military struggle between the KMT and the CPC between periods of military resistance against Japanese invasion.

[edit] 1949–2005
The constitution of the Republic of China was drafted before the fall of Mainland China to the Communists. It was created for the purpose of forming a coalition government between the Nationalists and the Communists for ruling all of China, including Taiwan. However, the CPC boycotted the National Assembly, and the Taiwanese representatives were not elected. The constitution went into effect December 25, 1947.
Taiwan remained under martial law from 1948 until 1987 and much of the constitution was not in effect. Political reforms beginning in the late 1970s and continuing through the early 1990s liberalized the ROC from an authoritarian one-party state into a multiparty democracy. Since the lifting of martial law, the Republic of China has democratized and reformed, removing legacy components that were originally meant for the governing of mainland China. Many legacy components that remain are nonfunctional. This process of amendment continues. In 2000, the KMT's monopoly on power ended after the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) won the ROC presidency. In May 2005, a new National Assembly was elected to reduce the number of parliamentary seats and implement several constitutional reforms. These reforms have been passed; the National Assembly has essentially voted to abolish itself and transfer the power of constitutional reform to the popular ballot.[33]

[edit] Present

[edit] Major camps
The political scene in the ROC is divided into two camps, with the pro-unification and center-right Kuomintang (KMT), People First Party (PFP), and New Party forming the Pan-Blue Coalition, and the pro-independence and center-left Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) and centrist Taiwan Solidarity Union (TSU) forming the Pan-Green Coalition.
Separate identity resolution
On September 30, 2007, the ruling Democratic Progressive Party approved a resolution asserting separate identity from China and called for the enactment of a new constitution for a "normal country". It called also for general use of "Taiwan" as the island's name, without abolishing its formal name, the Republic of China.[34]
The Pan-Green camp tends to favor emphasizing the Republic of China as being a distinct country from the People's Republic of China. Many Pan-Green supporters seek formally declaring Taiwan independence and to drop the title of the Republic of China. Many members of the coalition, such as former President Chen Shui-bian, have moderated their views and explain that it is unnecessary to proclaim independence because "Taiwan is already an independent, sovereign country" and the Republic of China is the same as Taiwan. A small minority claim that the ROC is nonexistent and call for the establishment of an independent Republic of Taiwan. Supporters of this idea have issued self-made "passports" for their Republic of Taiwan. Attempts to use these "passports" however have been currently stopped by officials at the Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport.[citation needed]
Some Pan-Blue members, especially former leaders from the older generation, support the concept of the Republic of China, which remains an important symbol of their links with China. During his visit to mainland China in April 2005, former KMT Party Chairman Lien Chan reiterated his party's belief in the "One China" policy, which states that there is only one China controlled by two governments and that Taiwan is a part of China. PFP Party Chair James Soong expressed the same sentiments during his visit in May. The more mainstream Pan-Blue position is to lift investment restrictions and pursue negotiations with the PRC to immediately open direct transportation links. Regarding independence, the mainstream Pan-Blue position is to maintain the status quo, while being open to negotiations for unification.

[edit] Current political issues
The dominant political issue in the ROC is its relationship with the PRC. Some people in the ROC desire the opening of direct transportation links between Taiwan and mainland China, including direct flights. This would aid many ROC businesses that have opened factories or branches in mainland China. The former DPP administration feared that such links will lead to tighter economic and political integration with the PRC, and in the 2006 Lunar New Year Speech, President Chen Shui-bian called for managed opening of links. Direct weekend charter flights commenced between Taiwan and mainland China began in July 2008 under the current KMT government. Talks with the PRC are being scheduled for direct daily charter flights in late October and early November 2008.
Other major political issues include the passage of an arms procurement bill that the United States authorized in 2001, and the establishment of a National Communications Commission to take over from the Government Information Office, whose advertising budget exercised great control over ROC media. The arms procurement bill was sent to the US congress for approval in October 2008.
The politicians and their parties have themselves become major political issues. Corruption among some DPP administration officials has been exposed. The KMT was once the richest political party in the world[35] and KMT assets continue to be an issue. In early 2006, President Chen Shui-bian was linked to possible corruption. The political effect on President Chen Shui-bian was great, causing a divide in the DPP leadership and supporters alike. It eventually led to the creation of a Pan-Red camp led by Ex-DPP leader Shih Ming-teh which believe the President should resign than stay in disgrace; forming a 3 side standoff. Nearing the end of 2006, KMT's chairman Ma Ying-jeou was also hit by corruption controversies, although he has since then been cleared of any wrong-doings by the courts.[36] Since completing his second term as President, Chen Shui-bian has been charged with corruption and money laundry.[37]
The merger of the KMT and PFP was thought to be certain, but a string of defections from the PFP to the KMT have increased tensions within the Pan-Blue camp. There has been talk from both camps of amending the constitution to finally resolve whether the Republic of China should have a presidential system or a parliamentary system.

[edit] Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of the Republic of China

[edit] 1911–49




Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, Franklin D. Roosevelt, and Winston Churchill met at the Cairo Conference in 1943 during World War II.


The foreign policy of Republican China was complicated by a lack of internal unity; competing centers of power all claimed legitimacy. There was also foreign interference and invasion. Japan, the United Kingdom, France, Italy, Germany, Russia, and other major powers all made claims to various parts of China during this time. During the early years of the Republic, almost all foreign powers recognized the "warlord" government controlled by Yuan Shi-kai in Beijing as the legitimate government of China. In return for recognition, the Republic had to give up control of Outer Mongolia and Tibet. China would remain suzerain, but Russia would be allowed to influence Mongolia while the British would be allowed in Tibet. It was also this government that sent representatives to sign the Treaty of Versailles over protests by students in the May Fourth Movement.
After the defeat of the Beiyang Government in Beijing by the Kuomintang (Nationalists) and the purging of Communists from the party, the 1928 Nanjing Nationalist Government received widespread diplomatic recognition. This recognition lasted throughout the Chinese Civil War and World War II (though Japan established a rival puppet government during the invasion that received some recognition from the Axis Powers). Having fought on the side of the Allied Powers during World War II, the Republic of China became one of the founding members of the UN and held one of the five permanent seats on the UN Security Council.
Despite Chiang's failures as an administrator and military strategist, he is today recognized for several diplomatic successes. In the 1930s, he was able to moderate Japanese advances by negotiating aid from Nazi Germany. Immediately prior to World War II, he was able to secure aid from his former patrons, the Soviets. During World War II and immediately afterwards, he was able to obtain large amounts of support from the US, including lend-lease supplies. Huge infusions of military assistance, equipment, advice, and cash continued even after he evacuated the KMT to Taiwan.[26][38]

[edit] 1949–present
After the KMT retreat to Taiwan, most countries, notably the countries in the Western Bloc, continued to maintain relations with the ROC. Due to diplomatic pressure, recognition gradually eroded and many countries switched recognition to the PRC in the 1970s. There are now only 23 states that maintain official diplomatic relations with the ROC.
The PRC refuses to have diplomatic relations with any nation that recognizes the ROC, and requires all nations with which it has diplomatic relations to make a statement recognizing its claims to Taiwan. In practice most major nations maintain unofficial relations with the ROC and the statement required by the PRC is ambiguously worded. The ROC maintains unofficial relations via Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Offices or "Taipei Representative Offices" that take on most of the functions of an official embassy, such as issuing visas. Similarly, most nations maintain corresponding trade and economic offices in the ROC, such as the American Institute in Taiwan, which is the de facto embassy of the United States in the ROC.
The ROC was a founding member of the United Nations and held China's seat on the Security Council until 1971, when it was expelled by General Assembly Resolution 2758 and replaced in all UN organs with the PRC. Multiple attempts by the ROC to rejoin the UN have not made it past committee. (See China and the United Nations.)
Besides the dispute with the PRC over mainland China, the ROC also has a controversial relationship with Mongolia. Until 1945, the ROC claimed sovereignty over Greater Mongolia, but under Soviet pressure, it recognized Mongolian independence. Shortly thereafter in 1953, it revoked this recognition and continued to claim sovereignty over Mongolia. Since the late 1990s, the relationship with Mongolia has become a controversial topic. Any move to renounce sovereignty over Mongolia is controversial because the PRC claims that it is a prelude to Taiwan independence.
The ROC is required to use the name Chinese Taipei to participate in international events due to People's Republic of China's interpretation of the One-China policy which many international organizations choose to follow. Among organizations that have this requirement are international sports federations, including the International Olympic Committee.

[edit] Military
Main article: Military of the Republic of China

[edit] 1911–49
Several armies were associated with this era, including those of the various warlords, the KMT, and the CPC. There were two armies regarded as the "National army": the Beiyang Army of the Warlord government and later the National Revolutionary Army of the Nationalist Government.
The founding of the Republic was made possible by mutiny within the Qing New Army. When Yuan Shikai took over as president, he was already commander of the Beiyang Army, which controlled North China. However, with Yuan's death in 1916, numerous factions within the Beiyang Army broke loose, and the leading generals of the Beiyang Army became warlords, ruling huge fiefdoms in the following decade. Regulars in these warlord armies often did not wear uniforms and the distinction between bandit and soldier was blurred.
With the help of the Comintern, Sun Yat-sen established the National Revolutionary Army in 1925 in Guangdong with a goal of reunifying China under the Kuomintang. To this end, it initially fought against the warlords who had fractured China, successfully unifying China, and later against the Communist Red Army. A minor Sino-Soviet conflict in 1929 was fought over the administration of the Manchurian Chinese Eastern Railway. The National Revolutionary Army also fought against Japanese invasion during the Second Sino-Japanese War (1931 and 1937–45), which became a part of the larger World War II. Leadership of the military during this time empowered political leadership. Following the principles of Leninism the distinctions among party, state, and army were blurred.
When the People's Liberation Army won the Chinese Civil War, much of the National Revolutionary Army retreated to Taiwan along with the government. It was later reformed into the Republic of China Army. Units which surrendered and remained in Mainland China were either disbanded or incorporated into the PLA.

[edit] Present
Main articles: Republic of China Army, Republic of China Air Force, and Republic of China Navy




ROC Military Police special forces disembarking from a UH-1H helicopter from the ROC Army 602nd Air Cavalry Brigade during a counter-terrorism exercise (ROC Ministry of National Defense).


Today, the Republic of China maintains a large and technologically advanced military, mainly as defense against the constant threat of invasion by the PRC under the Anti-Secession Law of the People's Republic of China.[12] From 1949 to the 1970s the military's primary mission was to "retake the mainland." As this mission has shifted to defense, the ROC military has begun to shift emphasis from the traditionally dominant army to the air force and navy. Control of the armed forces has also passed into the hands of the civilian government. As the ROC military shares historical roots with the KMT, the older generation of high ranking officers tends to have Pan-Blue sympathies.[39] However, many have retired and there are many more non-Mainlanders enlisting in the armed forces in the younger generations, so the political leanings of the military have moved closer to the public norm in Taiwan.




Republic of China Air Force Indigenous Defense Fighter.


The ROC's armed forces number approximately 300,000, with nominal reserves totaling 3,870,000. The ROC began a force reduction program to scale down its military from a level of 430,000 in the 1990s which drew to a close in 2005. Conscription remains universal for qualified males reaching age eighteen, but as a part of the reduction effort many are given the opportunity to fulfill their draft requirement through alternative service and are redirected to government agencies or defense related industries. Current plans call for a transition to a predominantly professional army over the next decade. Conscription periods will decrease by two months each year, with a final result of three months.




Republic of China Navy Kang Ding class frigate.


The armed forces' primary concern at this time is the possibility of an attack by the PRC, consisting of a naval blockade, airborne assault and/or missile bombardment. Four upgraded Kidd class destroyers were recently purchased from the United States, significantly upgrading Taiwan's air defense and submarine hunting abilities.[40] The Ministry of National Defense planned to purchase diesel-powered submarines and Patriot anti-missile batteries from the United States, but its budget has been stalled repeatedly by the opposition-Pan-Blue Coalition controlled legislature. The defense package was stalled from 2001-2007 where it was finally passed through the legislature and the US responded on October 3, 2008 with a $6.5 Billion arms package including PAC III Anti-Air defence systems, AH-64D Apache Attack helicopters and other arms and parts. .[41] A significant amount of military hardware has been bought from the United States, and continues to be legally guaranteed today by the Taiwan Relations Act.[13] In the past, the ROC has also purchased military weapons and hardware from France and the Netherlands.
The first line of defense against invasion by the PRC is the ROC's own armed forces. Current ROC military doctrine is to hold out against an invasion or blockade until the U.S. military responds. A defense pact between the U.S. and Japan signed in 2005 implies that Japan would be involved in any response.[39] Other U.S. allies, such as Australia, could theoretically be involved but this is unlikely in practice.[42] It is also worth noting that there is no guarantee in the Taiwan Relations Act or any other treaty that the United States will attack the PRC, even in the event of invasion.[43]

[edit] Economy

[edit] 1912–49




Bonds that Sun Yat-sen used to raise money for revolutionary cause. (The Republic of China was also once known as the Chunghwa Republic.)


During the first half of the twentieth century the economy of the Republic of China was essentially capitalist, with much foreign interference. Progress was impeded by constant war and internal and external strife.
The weak national government made some attempts to promote economic activity, such as by establishing the Industrial Bank of China. There was little government control of the economy however, other than causing runaway inflation by overprinting money to finance wars against the Japanese and the Communists. Foreign debts also made the national government susceptible to foreign influence. The Nationalists, like Yuan Shi-kai before them, were propped up through massive economic loans by the United States.
China at the time was largely agrarian, with most of the land, and thus the wealth, concentrated in a wide pyramid structure. Much of the land was owned by a few very wealthy landowners; the general population were tenant farmers who did not own land. The founders of both the Republic of China and the Communist Party had aimed to overturn this inequality. The Henan famine (1943–44) aided the collapse of the Republican government. Labor unions had been crushed in the purge of the Communists from the Kuomintang, leading to more inequality. Many of the wealthiest landowners and business leaders were also ministers and officials of the state and were often corrupt, preventing effective measures from being implemented.

[edit] Taiwan Miracle
Main article: Taiwan Miracle




Taipei 101 is a symbol of the success of the Taiwanese economy.


Taiwan's quick industrialization and rapid growth during the latter half of the twentieth century, has been called the "Taiwan Miracle" (台灣奇蹟) or "Taiwan Economic Miracle". As it has developed alongside Singapore, South Korea and Hong Kong, the ROC is one of the industrialized developed countries known as the "Four Asian Tigers".
Japanese rule prior to and during World War II brought forth changes in the public and private sectors of the economy, most notably in the area of public works, which enabled rapid communications and facilitated transport throughout much of the island. The Japanese also improved public education and made the system compulsory for all ROC citizens during this time.
When the KMT government fled to Taiwan it brought the entire gold reserve and the foreign currency reserve of mainland China to the island which stabilized prices and reduced hyperinflation. More importantly, as part of its retreat to Taiwan, KMT brought with them the intellectual and business elites from mainland China.[44] This unprecedented influx of monetary and human capital laid the foundation for Taiwan's later dramatic economic development. The KMT government instituted many laws and land reforms that it had never effectively enacted on mainland China. The government also implemented a policy of import-substitution, attempting to produce imported goods domestically. Much of this was made possible through US economic aid, subsidizing the higher cost of domestic production. Native Taiwanese were largely excluded from the mainlander-dominated government.
In 1962, Taiwan had a per capita gross national product (GNP) of $170, placing the island's economy squarely between Zaire and Congo. By 2008 Taiwan's per capita GNP, adjusted for purchasing power parity (PPP), had soared to $33,000 (2008 est.), contributing to a Human Development Index equivalent to that of other developed countries.
According to economist Paul Krugman, the rapid growth was made possible by increases in capital and labor, but not an increase in efficiency. In other words, the savings rate increased, and work hours were both lengthened and many more people, such as women, entered the work force.[45]
Dwight Perkins and others cite certain methodological flaws in Krugman's (and Alwyn Young's) research, and suggest that much of Taiwan's growth can be attributed to increases in productivity. These productivity boosts were achieved through land reform, structural change (urbanization and industrialization), and an economic policy of export promotion rather than import substitution.

[edit] Present
Main article: Economy of Taiwan




Taipei, capital of the Republic of China.


Today the Republic of China has a dynamic capitalist, export-driven economy with gradually decreasing state involvement in investment and foreign trade. In keeping with this trend, some large government-owned banks and industrial firms are being privatized. Real growth in GDP has averaged about eight percent during the past three decades. Exports have provided the primary impetus for industrialization. The trade surplus is substantial, and foreign reserves are the world's third largest. [2] The Republic of China's current GDP (PPP) per capita is equal to the average of EU Countries.
The Republic of China has its own currency, the New Taiwan dollar.
Agriculture constitutes only two percent of the GDP, down from 35 percent in 1952. Traditional labor-intensive industries are steadily being moved offshore and with more capital and technology-intensive industries replacing them. The ROC has become a major foreign investor in the PRC, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, and Vietnam. It is estimated that some 50,000 Taiwanese businesses and 1,000,000 businesspeople and their dependents are established in the PRC.[46]
Because of its conservative financial approach and its entrepreneurial strengths, the ROC suffered little compared with many of its neighbors from the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis. Unlike its neighbors South Korea and Japan, the Taiwanese economy is dominated by small and medium sized businesses, rather than the large business groups. The global economic downturn, however, combined with poor policy coordination by the new administration and increasing bad debts in the banking system, pushed Taiwan into recession in 2001, the first whole year of negative growth since 1947. Due to the relocation of many manufacturing and labor intensive industries to the PRC, unemployment also reached a level not seen since the 1970s oil crisis. This became a major issue in the 2004 presidential election. Growth averaged more than 4% in the 2002-2006 period and the unemployment rate fell below 4%.
The ROC often joins international organizations under a politically neutral name. The ROC is a member of governmental trade organizations such as the World Trade Organization under the name Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu since 2002.

[edit] Education
Main article: Education in Taiwan
The Republic of China has a twenty-two year comprehensive educational system influenced by the Japanese educational system. The system includes six years of elementary school, three years of middle school, three years of high school, and four years of college.[dubious – discuss] The system has been successful in that pupils in the ROC boast some of the highest test scores in the world, especially in mathematics and science;[47] However, it has also been criticized for placing excessive pressure on students and eschewing creativity in favor of rote memorization.[citation needed] Many Taiwanese students attend bushiban to improve mathematics, science and other topics. The teachers in cram schools will ask students to do questions repeatedly so that knowledge will be deeply ingrained in students' minds.[citation needed]
The literacy rate is 96.1%.[48]

[edit] Demographics
Main articles: Demographics of Taiwan and Religion in Taiwan
The population of areas under control of the Republic of China was estimated in July 2006 at 23,036,087[49] spread across a total land area of 35,980 square kilometres (13,890 sq mi) making it the twelfth most densely populated country in the world with a population density of 640/km² (1,658/sq mi). 98% of Taiwan's population is made up of Han Chinese while 2% are Austronesian aborigines.


Taiwan religiosity


religion


percent



Buddhism

  

35.1%


Taoism

  

33%


Atheism

  

14%


Christianity

  

3.9%


I-Kuan Tao

  

3.5%





There are approximately over 18,718,600 religious followers in Taiwan as of 2005 (81.3% of total population) and over 14-18% are non-religious. According to the 2005 census, of the 26 religions recognized by the ROC government, the five largest are: Buddhism (8,086,000 or 35.1%), Taoism (7,600,000 or 33%), I-Kuan Tao (810,000 or 3.5%), Protestantism (605,000 or 2.6%), and Roman Catholicism (298,000 or 1.3%). But according to the CIA World Factbook and other latest sources from U.S. Department of States or the Religious Affairs Section of the MOI, over 80% to 93% of the population are nominal or cultural adherents of a Chinese traditional combination of Mahayana Buddhism, Confucianism (Ancestor worship) and Taoism .[50][51][52][53]
Taiwan is undergoing a decline in birth rates with a population growth of just 0.61% for the year 2006. The official national language is Mandarin Chinese though the majority also speak Taiwanese (variant of the Min Nan speech of Fujian province) and Hakka.[54][55] Aboriginal languages are becoming extinct as the aborigines have become sinicized and the ROC government has not preserved the Formosan languages.

[edit] Largest cities
See also: List of cities of the Republic of China
The figures below are the 2009 estimates for the twenty largest urban populations within administrative city limits; a different ranking exists when considering the total municipal populations (which includes suburban and rural populations).


Largest cities of the Republic of China

Taipei

Tainan
Rank
Core City
Division
Pop.

view • talk • edit

Kaohsiung


Taichung


1
Taipei
Taipei City
2,620,273



2
Kaohsiung
Kaohsiung City
1,526,128



3
Taichung
Taichung City
1,067,366



4
Tainan
Tainan City
768,891



5
Banciao
Taipei County
551,122



6
Zhonghe
Taipei County
412,785



7
Hsinchu
Hsinchu City
406,471



8
Xinzhuang
Taipei County
398,860



9
Taoyuan
Taoyuan County
397,529



10
Keelung
Keelung City
388,787



11
Sanchong
Taipei County
385,450



12
Zhongli
Taoyuan County
362,499



13
Fongshan
Kaohsiung County
339,353



14
Xindian
Taipei County
292,826



15
Tucheng
Taipei County
238,417



16
Yonghe
Taipei County
236,888



17
Yongkang
Tainan County
212,844



18
Pingjhen
Taoyuan County
205,468



19
Dali
Taichung County
194,960



20
Xizhi
Taipei County
183,866



2009 Census



[edit] Public health
Health care in the ROC is managed by the Bureau of National Health Insurance (BNHI).[56]
The current program was implemented in 1995 and is considered social insurance. The government health insurance program maintains compulsory insurance for employed, impoverished, un-employed citizens and persons of natural disasters with fees that correlate to the individual and/or family income; it also maintains protection for non-citizens working in Taiwan. The 2001 premium for the district population was US$18.88 per person per month.[57] A standardized method of calculation applies to all persons and can optionally be paid by an employer or by individual contributions.
BNHI insurance coverage requires co-payment at the time of service for most services unless it is a preventative health service, for low-income families, veterans, children under three years old, or in the case of catastrophic diseases. Low income households maintain 100% premium coverage by the BNHI and co-pays are reduced for disabled or certain elderly peoples.
According to a recently published survey, out of 3,360 patients surveyed at a randomly chosen hospital, 75.1% of the patients said they are "very satisfied" with the hospital service; 20.5% said they are "okay" with the service. Only 4.4% of the patients said they are either "not satisfied" or "very not satisfied" with the service or care provided.[58]
Taiwan has its own Center for Disease Control, and during the SARS outbreak occurring in March 2003 confirmed 347 cases. During the outbreak the CDC and local governments set up monitored stations throughout public transportation, recreational sites and other public areas. With full containment in July 2003, there has not been a case of SARS since.[59]
BNHI Facility Contract Distribution facilities total 17,259, including:[60]


Number
Subject


16,174
outpatient-only facilities


5,701
dental clinics


2,422
Chinese medicine clinics


1,085
inpatient/outpatient facilities


437
local community hospitals


35
Chinese medicine hospitals


23
academic medical centers


Basic coverage areas of the insurance include:




In-patient care
Ambulatory care
Laboratory tests
Prescription and over-the-counter drugs
Dental services





Mental Illness
Traditional Chinese medicine
Home care
Preventative services*










* child check-ups, prenatal care, pap smears, adult check-ups
In 2004 the infant mortality rate was 5.3 with 15 physicians and 63 hospital beds per 10,000 people. The life expectancy for males was 73.5 years and 79.7 years for females according the World Health Report. Since the inception of the BNHI in 1995 the aggregate life expectancy increase is 1.6 years for males and 2 years for females, possibly a key indicator for success in the BNHI program considering the relatively stable life expectancy rate prior to the initiative.[61]
Other health related programs in Taiwan are the Center for Disease Control and the Department of Health.

[edit] Calendar
Main article: Minguo calendar





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2007)






A calendar that commemorates the first year of the Republic as well as the election of Sun Yat-sen as the provisional President.


Following the imperial tradition of using the sovereign's era name and year of reign, official ROC documents use the Republic (Chinese: 民國; pinyin: míngúo; literally "The Country of the People") system of numbering years in which the first year (民國元年) was 1912, the year of the founding of the Republic of China. For example, 2007 is the "96th year of the Republic" (民國九十六年, 民國96年, or simply 96). As Chinese era names are traditionally two characters long, 民國 (Republic) is employed as an abbreviation of 中華民國 (Republic of China).
Months and days are numbered according to the Gregorian calendar. Based on Chinese National Standard CNS 7648: Data Elements and Interchange Formats — Information Interchange — Representation of Dates and Times, (similar to ISO 8601), year numbering may use the A.D. system as well as the ROC era. For example, May 3, 2004 may be written 2004-05-03 or R.O.C.93-05-03.
The ROC era numbering happens to be the same as the numbering used by North Korea because its founder, Kim Il-sung, was born in 1912. The years in Japan's Taishō period (July 30, 1912 to December 25, 1926) are also coincident with the ROC era.
The use of the ROC era system extends beyond official documents. When used to mark expiration dates on products for export, they can be misunderstood as having an expiration date 11 years earlier than intended. Misinterpretation is more likely in the cases when the prefix (R.O.C. or 民國) is omitted.
Traditional Chinese holidays such as the Chinese New Year, the Lantern Festival, and the Dragon Boat Festival are celebrated regularly.
See also: Chinese calendar, Holidays in Taiwan, and Public holidays in the Republic of China

[edit] International rankings


Context
Organization
Rank
Year
Source


GDP (PPP)
International Monetary Fund / CIA
19/179 (IMF)
18/227 (CIA)
2007
IMF
CIA


GDP (PPP) per capita
International Monetary Fund / CIA
28/179 (IMF)
40/227 (CIA)
2007
IMF
CIA


Human Development Index
Government of the Republic of China
23/177
if ranked
2005
[3]


Worldwide press freedom index
Reporters Without Borders
32/169
2007
[4]


Freedom of the Press
Freedom House
32/195
2008
[5]


Index of Economic Freedom
The Wall Street Journal and the Heritage Foundation
25/157
2008
[6]


Economic Freedom of the World
Fraser Institute
24/130
2004
[7]


Ease of Doing Business Index
World Bank
50/178
2008
[8]


Global Competitiveness Report
World Economic Forum
13/125
2006–2007
[9]


Business Competitiveness Index
World Economic Forum
21/121
2006
[10]


Worldwide quality-of-life index
The Economist
21/111
2005
[11]


Global e-Government Study
Brown University
2/198
2006
[12]


Richard Lynn and Tatu
Vanhanen IQ and Global Inequality
Dr. Richard Lynn, Professor Emeritus
of Psychology at the University of Ulster
5/185
2006
[13]


World Competitiveness Yearbook
International Institute for Management Development
13/55
2008
[14]


Network Readiness Index
World Economic Forum
17/127
2007–2008
[15]


Corruption Perceptions Index
Transparency International
34/180
2007
[16]


Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index
World Economic Forum
52/130
2008
[17]


IT industry competitiveness index
Economist Intelligence Unit
2/66
2008
[18]


Business Environment Rankings
Economist Intelligence Unit
18/82
2008
[19]


E-readiness rankings
Economist Intelligence Unit
19/70
2008
[20]


Environmental Performance Index
Yale University
40/149
2008
[21]


Bertelsmann Transformation Index (Status)
Bertelsmann Foundation
4/125
2008
[22]


Bertelsmann Transformation Index (Managem.)
Bertelsmann Foundation
7/125
2008
[23]



[edit] See also




Republic of China portal







Taiwan portal




Administrative divisions of the Republic of China
Chiang Kai-shek
Kuomintang
Battle of Kuningtou
Chinese Civil War
Communications in Taiwan
Communist Party of China
Constitution of the Republic of China
Cross-Strait relations
Elections in the Republic of China
Foreign relations of the Republic of China
History of the Republic of China
Human rights in the Republic of China
List of assets owned by the Kuomintang
List of political parties of the Republic of China
Mikhail Borodin
Military of the Republic of China
National Anthem of the Republic of China
National Assembly of the Republic of China
National Revolutionary Army
Pan-Blue Coalition
Pan-Green Coalition
Penghu
Political status of Taiwan
Politics of the Republic of China
President of the Republic of China
Republic of China Army
Republic of China Military Academy
Republic of Taiwan
Revolutionary Committee of the Kuomintang
Second Sino-Japanese War
Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty
Socialism with Chinese characteristics
Song Jiaoren
Sun Yat-sen
Taipei
Taiwan after World War II
Taiwan independence
Taiwan Relations Act
Taiwanization
Tangwai movement
Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion
Three Principles of the People
Treaty of Shimonoseki
Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization
Whampoa Military Academy


[edit] Notes and references


^ Government Information Office, Republic of China (Taiwan)
^ a b Before relocating to Taiwan, the capital of the ROC was Nanjing (then romanized as "Nanking") The History of the ROC Before 1949. After the relocation of the government to Taiwan, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek declared Taipei would be the provisional capital. Nanjing then appeared in official maps and publications as the capital while Taipei was labeled as the provisional capital. Yearbook 2003. Government Information Office of the Republic of China. 2003. http://209.85.173.132/search?q=cache:8UX6aYRl3-kJ:www.gio.gov.twfp.asp%3FxItem%3D18818%26ctNode%3D2584%26mp%3D807+taipei+is+the+capital+of+the+ROC+site:gio.gov.tw&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=7&gl=us.  "Taipei is the Capital of the ROC" 
^ Republic of China Interior Affair-Department of Statistics - Area and Number of Villages, Neighborhoods, Households and Resident Population
^ Due to its political status, the UN has not calculated an HDI for the ROC. The ROC government calculated its HDI for 2005 to be 0.932 National Statistics General Publication
^ Taiwan Journal Text of Lee's message to recall signing of UN Charter
^ a b "Ma refers to China as ROC territory in magazine interview". Taipei Times. 2008-10-08. http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/archives/2008/10/08/2003425320. 
^ China: The Fragile Superpower: Susan L. Shirk
^ a b "Taiwan and China in 'special relations': Ma". China Post. 2008-09-04. http://www.chinapost.com.tw/taiwan/china-taiwan%20relations/2008/09/04/173082/Taiwan-and.htm. 
^ Roy, Denny (2003). Taiwan: A Political History. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. pp. 55, 56. ISBN 0-8014-8805-2. 
^ Decisive election win puts KMT back in power, GlobalSecurity.org
^ "The One-China Principle and the Taiwan Issue". PRC Taiwan Affairs Office and the Information Office of the State Council. 2005. http://www.gwytb.gov.cn:8088/detail.asp?table=WhitePaper&title=White%20Papers%20On%20Taiwan%20Issue&m_id=4. Retrieved on 2006-03-06.  Section 1: "Since the KMT ruling clique retreated to Taiwan, although its regime has continued to use the designations "Republic of China" and "government of the Republic of China," it has long since completely forfeited its right to exercise state sovereignty on behalf of mainland China and, in reality, has always remained only a separate state on the island of Taiwan."
^ a b "2004 National Defense Report" (PDF). ROC Ministry of National Defense. 2004. http://report.mnd.gov.tw/eng/pdf/all-1-360.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-03-05.  pages 89-90: "The PRC refusal to renounce using military power against Taiwan, its current emphasis on 'enhancing preparation for military struggle', its obvious intention of preparing a war against Taiwan reflected in operational deployment, readiness efforts, and annual military exercises in the Southeast China coastal region, and its progress in aerospace operations, information warfare, paralyzing warfare, and non-conventional warfare, all of these factors work together so that the ROC Armed Forces face an increasingly complicated and difficult situation in terms of self-defense and counterattack. These multiple daunting challenges are testing our defense security."
^ a b "Executive Summary of Report to Congress on implementation of the Taiwan Relations Act". Report to Congress Pursuant to Public Law 106-113. U.S. Department of Defense. 2000. http://www.defenselink.mil/pubs/twstrait_12182000.html. Retrieved on 2005-03-05. 
^ U.S. Department of State (2004-04-21). Overview of U.S. Policy Towards Taiwan. Press release. http://www.state.gov/p/eap/rls/rm/2004/31649.htm. 
^ "The World Factbook". CIA. 2006-05-03. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/tw.html. 
^ "TECRO Profile & Mission". TECRO in the United States. 2006-05-03. http://www.tecro.org/dev/contents/?ID=2&T=About%20TECRO. 
^ "WHO application: a question of health or politics?". The Taipei Times. 2004-05-19. http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/archives/2004/05/19/2003156094. 
^ "Taiwan flags in S.L. ruffle a few feelings". The Deseret News. 2002-02-10. http://deseretnews.com/oly/view/0,3949,70000298,00.html. 
^ Mainland Affairs Council, ROC Executive Yuan (2005-03-29). The Official Position of the Republic of China on China’s Passing of the Anti-secession (Anti-Separation) Law. Press release. http://www.mac.gov.tw/english/english/anti/mofa940329e.htm.  Section II-2: "'The Republic of China is an independent and sovereign state. Taiwan's sovereignty belongs to the 23 million people of Taiwan. Only the 23 million citizens of Taiwan may decide on the future of Taiwan.' This statement represents the greatest consensus within Taiwan's society today concerning the issues of national sovereignty and the future of Taiwan. It is also a common position shared by both the ruling and opposition parties in Taiwan. A recent opinion poll shows that more than 90% of the people of Taiwan agree with this position."
^ Swaine, Michael; James C. Mulvenon (2001) [2001]. "3" (PDF). Taiwan's Foreign and Defense Policies: Features and Determinants. RAND Corporation. pp. 30. ISBN 0-8330-3094-9. http://www.rand.org/pubs/monograph_reports/MR1383/MR1383.ch3.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-03-05.  ""Efforts to accurately measure and assess public and group views and interests on these and other issues are fraught with problems, however, such as political bias and the use of unscientific methodologies. A significant number of opinion polls are conducted each year by Taiwan’s political parties, newspapers, and various politically-oriented private groups or foundations on a wide range of subjects. Many such polls arguably produce inaccurate results, either as a result of sampling errors, biased questions, or a subject’s awareness of the highly partisan nature of the polling agency."" 
^ Encyclopedia Britannica
^ P. 235. Fairbank and Goldman. China.
^ "This Is the Shame". Time Magazine. 1946-06-10. http://www.time.com/time/archive/preview/0,10987,792979,00.html.  (subscription required)
^ "Snow Red & Moon Angel". Time Magazine. 1947-04-07. http://www.time.com/time/archive/preview/0,10987,804090,00.html.  (subscription required) Full version at [1]
^ "Taiwan's Ethnic Composition". Private website. http://members.tripod.com/kelly_yunya/pages/people.htm. Retrieved on 2006-03-08. 
^ a b U.S. Department of Defense (1950). Classified Teletype Conference, dated June 27, 1950, between the Pentagon and General Douglas MacArthur regarding authorization to use naval and air forces in support of South Korea. Papers of Harry S. Truman: Naval Aide Files. Truman Presidential Library and Museum. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/whistlestop/study_collections/korea/large/week1/kw_22_1.htm.  Page 1: "In addition 7th Fleet will take station so as to prevent invasion of Formosa and to insure that Formosa not be used as base of operations against Chinese mainland." Page 4: "Seventh Fleet is hereby assigned to operational control CINCFE for employment in following task hereby assigned CINCFE: By naval and air action prevent any attack on Formosa, or any air or sea offensive from Formosa against mainland of China."
^ "World: Asia-Pacific Analysis: Flashpoint Spratly". BBC. 1999-02-14. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/279170.stm. 
^ 蒙藏委員會•Introduction to MTAC
^ "Taiwan-Mongolia ties move on". The Taipei Times. 2002-09-10. http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/archives/2002/09/10/167505. 
^ "Greet the New High Tide of the Chinese Revolution". Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung. Marxists.org. 2005. http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/mao/selected-works/volume-4/mswv4_17.htm#bm7. Retrieved on 2006-03-08. 
^ Chang, Y.F. Bradford. The Flood of Political Ideas in China During the 1920s. City University of Hong Kong. http://www.cuhk.edu.hk/ics/journal/summaries/number7/Chang%20Yu-fa.htm. 
^ "The Formal Establishment of an Anti-Japanese National United Front". PLA Daily. 2005-08-01. http://english.chinamil.com.cn/site2/special-reports/2005-08/01/content_263104.htm. 
^ "Taiwan assembly passes changes". BBC. 2005-06-07. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/4616043.stm. 
^ AP, Taiwan Party Asserts Separate Identity
^ Bristow, Michael (2001-10-26), Wealth probe for 'world's richest' party, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/1621048.stm, retrieved on 2007-11-12 
^ Court clears Ma of graft charges Retrieved on May 6, 2008
^ Chen Shui-bian lied about Lien Chan-endorsed check Retrieved on October 9, 2008
^ Fairbank and Goldman, 330–37.
^ a b Swaine, Michael; James C. Mulvenon (2001) [2001] (PDF). Taiwan's Foreign and Defense Policies: Features and Determinants. RAND Corporation. ISBN 0-8330-3094-9. http://www.rand.org/pubs/monograph_reports/MR1383/MR1383.ch3.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-03-05. 
^ "Kidd-class warships set sail for Taiwan". The Taipei Times. 2005-10-31. http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/archives/2005/10/31/2003278135. 
^ "Taiwanese leader hails weapons deal with U.S.". The Washington Post. 2008-10-05. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/10/04/AR2008100400477.html. 
^ Tow, William (2005). "ANZUS: Regional versus Global Security in Asia?". International Relations in the Asia-Pacific 5 (2): 197. doi:10.1093/irap/lci113. 
^ "China Threat to Attack Taiwan Alarms Asia". Associated Press. 2005-03-14. http://sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/n/a/2005/03/14/international/i003051S91.DTL. 
^ Roy, Denny (2003). Taiwan: A Political History. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. pp. 76, 77. ISBN 0-8014-8805-2. 
^ "Paul Krugman". The Myth of Asia's Miracle: A Cautionary Fable. 2006. http://web.mit.edu/krugman/www/myth.html. Retrieved on 2006-04-02. 
^ Morris, Peter (February 4, 2004). "Taiwan business in China supports opposition". Asia Times Online. http://www.atimes.com/atimes/China/FB04Ad04.html. 
^ Gary Phillips (November 17, 2007) (PDF). Chance Favors the Prepared Mind: Mathematics and Science Indicators for Comparing States and Nations. American Institutes for Research. http://www.air.org/publications/documents/phillips.chance.favors.the.prepared.mind.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-11-21. 
^ "Taiwan". CIA - The World Factbook. December 10, 2006. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/tw.html. 
^ "Taiwan". CIA - The World Factbook. November 14, 2006. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/tw.html. 
^ CIAFactbook - Taiwan
^ "China (includes Taiwan only): International Religious Freedom Report 2005". U.S. Department of State: Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor. 2005-11-08. http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2005/51508.htm. Retrieved on 2008-01-24. 
^ "China (includes Taiwan only): International Religious Freedom Report 2006". U.S. Department of State: Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor. 2006-09-15. http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2006/71337.htm. Retrieved on 2008-02-24. 
^ "China (includes Taiwan only): International Religious Freedom Report 2007". U.S. Department of State: Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor. 2006-09-15. http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2007/90134.htm. Retrieved on 2008-02-24. 
^ http://www.gio.gov.tw/taiwan-website/5-gp/yearbook/2002/chpt03-2.htm
^ http://www.gio.gov.tw/ct.asp?xItem=35570&ctNode=4101
^ "Bureau of National Health Insurance". Taiwan BNHI. 2006-07-18. http://www.nhi.gov.tw. 
^ "Bureau of National Health Insurance faq". Taiwan BNHI. 2006-07-18. http://www.nhi.gov.tw/english/e_06faq_813.asp. 
^ "Taiwanese Hospital Public Satisfaction Poll". Taiwan Department of Health. October 2004. http://www.hcquality.helthe.net/reports/showreports.php?id=2_1. 
^ "Center for Disease Control". Taiwan CDC. 2006-07-18. http://www.cdc.gov.tw. 
^ "Bureau of National Health Insurance Full Summary" (PDF). Taiwan BNHI. July 18, 2006. http://www.nhi.gov.tw/english/file/s92.pdf. 
^ "Taiwan Department of Health Full Summary" (PDF). Taiwan Department of Health. 2006-07-18. http://www.nhi.gov.tw/english/file/s92.pdf. 



[edit] Other references

Find more about Republic of China on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Wikimedia Atlas of Republic of China




Wikibooks Cookbook has a recipe/module on
Republic of China






[edit] Further reading

Bush, R. & O'Hanlon, M. (2007). A War Like No Other: The Truth About China's Challenge to America. Wiley. ISBN 0471986771
Bush, R. (2006). Untying the Knot: Making Peace in the Taiwan Strait. Brookings Institution Press. ISBN 0815712901
Carpenter, T. (2006). America's Coming War with China: A Collision Course over Taiwan. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 1403968411
Cole, B. (2006). Taiwan's Security: History and Prospects. Routledge. ISBN 0415365813
Copper, J. (2006). Playing with Fire: The Looming War with China over Taiwan. Praeger Security International General Interest. ISBN 0275988880
Federation of American Scientists et al. (2006). Chinese Nuclear Forces and U.S. Nuclear War Planning
Feuerwerker, Albert. 1968. The Chinese Economy, 1912–1949. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Gill, B. (2007). Rising Star: China's New Security Diplomacy. Brookings Institution Press. ISBN 0815731469
Shirk, S. (2007). China: Fragile Superpower: How China's Internal Politics Could Derail Its Peaceful Rise. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195306090
Tsang, S. (2006). If China Attacks Taiwan: Military Strategy, Politics and Economics. Routledge. ISBN 0415407850
Tucker, N.B. (2005). Dangerous Strait: the U.S.-Taiwan-China Crisis. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0231135645


[edit] External links





General

Office of the President
Control Yuan
Examination Yuan
Executive Yuan
Government Information Office
Judicial Yuan
Legislative Yuan
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
National Assembly
Taipei Economic & Cultural Representative Office in the U.S.
History, Cuisine, Culture and General Information
















v • d • e

 Republic of China topics





Society

Demographics · Education · Ethnic groups · History (timeline) · Human rights · International rankings · Languages · Religion






Administration

Administrative divisions · Conscription · Constitution · Elections · Foreign relations · Government · Law · Law enforcement · Military · National anthem · National emblem · Nationality Law · Politics






Culture

Aborigines · Cinema · Communications · Cuisine · Holidays · Literature · Media · Music · Night markets · Sports · Tea · Tourism






Economy

Banks (Central bank) · Companies · Currency · Transportation






Geography

Cities · Hot springs · Islands · Mountains · National parks · Rivers












 
Geographic national














v • d • e

Administrative divisions of the Republic of China





Provinces and
counties





Taiwan Province


Changhua · Chiayi · Hsinchu · Hualien · Kaohsiung · Miaoli · Nantou · Penghu (Pescadores) · Pingtung · Taichung · Tainan · Taipei · Taitung · Taoyuan · Yilan · Yunlin







Fujian Province


Kinmen · Lienchiang (Matsu Islands)









Provincial cities

Chiayi · Hsinchu · Keelung · Taichung · Tainan






Central municipalities

Taipei City · Kaohsiung City






Taiwan Area












v • d • e

Cities and towns of the Republic of China (Taiwan)








Alian · Alishan · Anding · Bade · Baihe · Baisha · Bali · Banciao · Baojhong · Baoshan · Beidou · Beigan · Beigang · Beimen · Beinan · Beipu · Budai · Caotun · Changbin · Changhua · Changjhih · Chaojhou · Caoya · Checheng · Chenggong · Chiayi · Chihshang · Chunrih · Ciaotou · Cigu · Cihtong · Cimei · Cingshuei · Cishan · Cyonglin · Daan · Dacheng · Dacun · Dadu · Dahu · Dajia · Dali · Daliao · Dalin · Danei · Danshuei · Dapi · Dapu · Daren · Dashe · Dashu · Dasi · Datong · Dawu · Daya · Dayuan · Donghe · Dongshan · Dongshan · Dongshih · Dongshih · Dongshih · Dongyin · Douliou · Dounan · Emei · Erlin · Erlun · Ershuei · Fangliao · Fangshan · Fangyuan · Fanlu · Fenyuan · Fongbin · Fonglin · Fongshan · Fongyuan · Fuli · Fusing · Fusing · Gangshan · Gaoshu · Gongguan · Gongliao · Guangfu · Guantian · Guanshan · Guansi · Guanyin · Gueiren · Gueishan · Gukeng · Guosing · Haiduan · Hemei · Hengchun · Hengshan · Heping · Houbi · Houli · Houlong · Hsinchu · Hualien · Huatan · Hukou · Hunei · Huwei · Husi · Jiading · Jiali · Jiangjyun · Jiaosi · Jiasian · Jincheng · Jinfong · Jinhu · Jinning · Jinsha · Jinshan · Jhonghe · Jhongli · Jhongliao · Jhongpu · Jhuangwei · Jhubei · Jhuci · Jhudong · Jhunan · Jhuolan · Jhuosi · Jhushan · Jhutang · Jhutian · Jiadong · Ji-an · Jianshih · Jiji · Jiouru · Jyuguang · Kanding · Kaohsiung · Keelung · Kouhu · Laiyi · Lanyu · Lieyu · Ligang · Linbian · Linkou · Linluo · Linnei · Linyuan · Liouciou · Liouguei · Lioujia · Lioujiao · Liouying · Longjing · Longtan · Lucao · Lugang · Lugu · Lujhu · Lujhu · Lujhou · Lunbei · Luodong · Luye · Lyodao · Madou · Mailiao · Majia · Magong · Manjhou · Maolin · Meinong · Meishan · Miaoli · Mingjian · Minsyong · Mituo · Mudan · Nanao · Nangan · Nanhua · Nanjhou · Nanjhuang · Nantou · Neimen · Neipu · Niaosong · Pingjhen · Pinglin · Pingsi · Pingtung · Pitou · Puli · Pusin · Puyan · Puzih · Renai · Rende · Renwu · Rueifang · Rueisuei · Sanchong · Sandimen · Sanjhih · Sanmin · Sansia · Sansing · Sanwan · Sanyi · Shalu · Shanhua · Shanlin · Shanshang · Shengang · Shengang · Shenkeng · Shetou · Shihding · Shihgang · Shihmen · Shihtan · Shihzih · Shoufong · Shuangsi · Shueilin · Shueishang · Shueili · Shulin · Siansi · Siaying · Sigang · Sihhu · Sihu · Sihu · Sijhih · Sijhou · Sikou · Siluo · Sincheng · Sindian · Sinfong · Singang · Sinhua · Sinjhuang · Sinpi · Sinpu · Sinshe · Sinshih · Sinwu · Sinyi · Sinying · Sinyuan · Sioulin · Sioushuei · Siyu · Suao · Syuejia · Taian · Taibao · Taichung · Taimali · Tainan · Taipei · Taiping · Taisi · Taishan · Taitung · Taiwu · Tanzih · Taoyuan · Taoyuan · Tianjhong · Tianliao · Tianwei · Tongluo · Tongsiao · Toucheng · Toufen · Touwu · Tucheng · Tuku · Tungkang · Waipu · Wandan · Wangan · Wanli · Wanluan · Wanrong · Wuci · Wuciou · Wugu · Wufong · Wufong · Wujie · Wulai · Wurih · Wutai · Yanchao · Yangmei · Yanping · Yanpu · Yanshuei · Yijhu · Yilan · Yingge · Yongan · Yonghe · Yongjing · Yongkang · Yuanchang · Yuanli · Yuanlin · Yuanshan · Yuchih · Yujing · Yuli · Zaociao · Zihguan · Zuojhen






















 
Geographic international














v • d • e

Countries of Asia








Afghanistan · Armenia · Azerbaijan1 · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Bhutan · Brunei · Burma · Cambodia · People's Republic of China · Republic of China (Taiwan)2 · Cyprus · Egypt3 · Georgia1 · India · Indonesia4 · Iran · Iraq · Israel · Japan · Jordan · Kazakhstan1 · North Korea · South Korea · Kuwait · Kyrgyzstan · Laos · Lebanon · Malaysia · Maldives · Mongolia · Nepal · Oman · Pakistan · Philippines · Qatar · Russia1 · Saudi Arabia · Singapore · Sri Lanka · Syria · Tajikistan · Thailand · East Timor (Timor-Leste)4 · Turkey1 · Turkmenistan · United Arab Emirates · Uzbekistan · Vietnam · Yemen3

For dependent and other territories, see Dependent territory.

1 Partly or significantly in Europe.  2 The Republic of China (Taiwan) is not officially recognized by the United Nations; see Political status of Taiwan.
3 Partly or significantly in Africa.  4 Partly or wholly reckoned in Oceania.















v • d • e

Countries and territories of East Asia






People's Republic of China (S.A.R: Hong Kong · Macau) · Republic of China1 · South Korea · Japan · Mongolia · North Korea
Sometimes included:  Singapore · Vietnam · Russian Far East
1 Commonly known as "Taiwan"; see Political status of Taiwan.




















 
International membership














v • d • e

Members of the World Trade Organization (WTO)








Albania · Angola · Antigua and Barbuda · Argentina · Armenia · Australia · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Barbados · Belize · Benin · Bolivia · Botswana · Brazil · Brunei · Burkina Faso · Burma · Burundi · Cambodia · Cameroon · Canada · Cape Verde · Central African Republic · Chad · Chile · PR China · Colombia · Democratic Republic of the Congo · Republic of the Congo · Costa Rica · Côte d'Ivoire · Croatia · Cuba · Djibouti · Dominica · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · Egypt · El Salvador · European Union¹ · Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) · Fiji · Gabon · The Gambia · Georgia · Ghana · Grenada · Guatemala · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Guyana · Haiti · Honduras · Hong Kong² · Iceland · India · Indonesia · Israel · Jamaica · Japan · Jordan · Kenya · South Korea · Kuwait · Kyrgyzstan · Lesotho · Liechtenstein · Macau² · Madagascar · Malawi · Malaysia · Maldives · Mali · Mauritania · Mauritius · Mexico · Moldova · Mongolia · Morocco · Mozambique · Namibia · Nepal · New Zealand · Nicaragua · Niger · Nigeria · Norway · Oman · Pakistan · Panama · Papua New Guinea · Paraguay · Peru · Philippines · Qatar · Rwanda · St. Kitts and Nevis · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · Saudi Arabia · Senegal · Sierra Leone · Singapore · Solomon Islands · South Africa · Sri Lanka · Suriname · Swaziland · Switzerland · Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, and Matsu³ · Tanzania · Thailand · Togo · Tonga · Trinidad and Tobago · Tunisia · Turkey · Uganda · Ukraine · United Arab Emirates · United States · Uruguay · Venezuela · Vietnam · Zambia · Zimbabwe


All twenty-seven member states of the European Union are also members of the WTO in their own right: Austria • Belgium • Bulgaria • Cyprus • Czech Republic • Denmark • Estonia • Finland • France • Germany • Greece • Hungary • Ireland • Italy • Latvia • Lithuania • Luxembourg • Malta • Netherlands and Netherlands Antilles • Poland • Portugal • Romania • Slovakia • Slovenia • Spain • Sweden • United Kingdom.
Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China.
Designated name for the Republic of China (Commonly Known as Taiwan)















v • d • e

Member economies of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)








Australia · Brunei Darussalam · Canada · Chile · People's Republic of China · Hong Kong, China · Indonesia · Japan · Republic of Korea · Malaysia · Mexico · New Zealand · Papua New Guinea · Peru · Philippines · Russian Federation · Singapore · Chinese Taipei * · Thailand · United States · Vietnam
*Designation of the Republic of China















v • d • e

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)








Australia · Austria · Belgium · Canada · Czech Republic · Denmark · Finland · France · Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Japan · South Korea · Luxembourg · Mexico · Netherlands · New Zealand · Norway · Poland · Portugal · Slovakia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey · United Kingdom · United States















v • d • e

Member states of the Four Asian Tigers






 Hong Kong  ·    South Korea  ·    Singapore  ·    Taiwan



















 
Languages














v • d • e

Sino-Tibetan-speaking nations and regions









   


 People's Republic of China




 Hong Kong




 Macau




 Singapore




 Republic of China (Taiwan)











Names in italics indicate non-sovereign territories.












v • d • e

Austronesian-speaking countries and territories





Formosan

Taiwan






Malayo-Polynesian

American Samoa · Brunei · Burma (Myanmar) · Cambodia · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands · Cook Islands · Easter Island · East Timor · Fiji · French Polynesia · Guam · Hainan · Hawaii · Indonesia · Kiribati · Madagascar · Malaysia · Marshall Islands · FS Micronesia · Nauru · New Caledonia · New Zealand · Niue · Northern Mariana Islands · Orchid Island · Palau · Papua New Guinea · Patani · Philippines · Samoa · Singapore · Solomon Islands · Sri Lanka · Suriname · Tokelau · Tonga · Tuvalu · United States · Vanuatu · Vietnam · Wallis and Futuna













Coordinates: 22°57′N 120°12′E﻿ / ﻿22.95°N 120.2°E﻿ / 22.95; 120.2




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Republic_of_China"
Categories: Politics series sidebar templates | Forms of government | Republic of China | First republics in Asia | Island countries | Chinese-speaking countries and territoriesHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | Articles to be merged since April 2009 | All articles to be merged | Articles containing non-English language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2007 | Articles needing additional references from February 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with disputed statements from February 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 | Articles needing additional references from December 2007 | Articles containing Chinese language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Български
Eesti
Euskara
Français
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Македонски
Русский
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
العربية
Aragonés
Arpetan
Asturianu
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Boarisch
Bosanski
Български
Català
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Français
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kapampangan
ქართული
कश्मीरी - (كشميري)
Қазақша
Kiswahili
Kurdî / كوردی
Ladino
Latina
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Limburgs
Magyar
Македонски
Māori
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Myanmasa
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Occitan
Oshiwambo
پښتو
Piemontèis
Tok Pisin
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
संस्कृत
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Удмурт
Українська
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
Volapük
文言
吴语
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 13 April 2009, at 21:18 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
