













Zapatista Army of National Liberation - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Zapatista_Army_of_National_Liberation";
		var wgTitle = "Zapatista Army of National Liberation";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "87066";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 284198655;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Zapatista Army of National Liberation

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







This article or section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss these issues on the talk page.

It needs additional references or sources for verification. Tagged since April 2008.
It may require general cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Tagged since April 2008.







Zapatista Army of National Liberation


Participant in Zapatista Insurgency



The flag of the EZLN.


Active
January 1, 1994 to Present


Ideology
Libertarian socialism
Socialism
Anarchism
Anarcho-communism


Leaders
Subcomandante Elisa
Subcomandante Marcos
Comandante Ramona


Area of
operations
Chiapas, Mexico


Strength
about 3000 insurgents and militia and tens of thousands civilian supporters (bases de apoyo)


Opponents
Mexican Government


The Zapatista Army of National Liberation (Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional, EZLN) is an armed revolutionary group (VNSA) based in Chiapas, one of the poorest states of Mexico. Since 1994, they have been in a declared war "against the Mexican state." Their social base is mostly indigenous but they have some supporters in urban areas as well as an international web of support. Their main spokesperson is Subcomandante Marcos (currently a.k.a. Delegate Zero in relation to the "Other Campaign"). Unlike other Zapatista comandantes, Marcos is not an indigenous Mayan.
The group takes its name from Emiliano Zapata, the agrarian reformer[1] and commander of the Liberation Army of the South during the Mexican Revolution and sees itself as his ideological heir. In reference to inspirational figures, in nearly all EZLN villages exist murals accompanying images of Emiliano Zapata, Che Guevara, and Subcomandante Marcos.[2]
Their ideology combines libertarian socialism, libertarian municipalism, libertarian Marxism, and indigenous Mayan political thought. They align themselves with the wider anti-globalization, anti-neoliberal social movement and seek indigenous control over their local resources, especially land. The New York Times called the Zapatista movement the first "post-modern" revolution: an armed revolutionary group that has abstained from using their weapons since their 1994 uprising was countered by the overpowering military might of the Mexican Army. The Zapatistas quickly adopted a new strategy by trying to garner the support of Mexican and international socialist-anarchist societies. They try to achieve this by using the Internet to disseminate their statements and to enlist the support of NGOs and solidarity groups. Awareness of the Zapatista Movement has also been raised due to support by the bands Rage Against the Machine, Leftöver Crack and Brujeria. The Zapatistas are featured prominently in Rage Against the Machine's songs, in particular "People of the Sun" and "War Within a Breath".




Contents


1 History
2 Ideology

2.1 Women's Revolutionary Law


3 Political initiatives
4 Communications
5 Recent and current activities
6 List of known members
7 New media technologies and the Zapatista idea
8 See also
9 References
10 Notes
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Main article: History of the Zapatista Army of National Liberation


History of Mexico



This article is part of a series



Pre-Columbian Mexico


Spanish conquest


Colonial period


War of Independence


First Empire


First Republic


War with Texas


Pastry War


Mexican–American War


The Reform


Reform War


French intervention


Second Empire


Restored Republic


Porfiriato


Revolution


La decena trágica


Plan of Guadalupe


Tampico Affair


Occupation of Veracruz


Maximato


Petroleum Nationalization


Mexican miracle


Mexico 68


La Década Perdida


1982 economic crisis


Zapatista Insurgency


1994 economic crisis


The end of PRI's hegemony




Mexico Portal
 v • d • e 


The Zapatistas went public on January 1, 1994, the day when the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) came into effect. On January 8, 1994, they issued their First Declaration from the Lacandon Jungle and their Revolutionary Laws. The declaration amounted to a declaration of war on the Mexican government, which they considered so out of touch with the will of the people as to make it completely illegitimate.
Their initial goal was to instigate a revolution in all of Mexico, but as this did not happen, they used their uprising as a platform to call the world's attention to their movement to protest the signing of NAFTA, which the EZLN believed would increase the gap between rich and poor people in Chiapas. The EZLN also called for greater democratization of the Mexican government which had been controlled by the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) for 65 years and for land reform mandated by the 1917 Constitution of Mexico but largely ignored by the PRI.[3] The EZLN did not demand independence from Mexico, but rather autonomy, and (among other things) that the natural resources that are extracted from Chiapas benefit more directly the people of Chiapas.
Short armed clashes in Chiapas ended on January 12, 1994, with a ceasefire brokered by the Catholic diocese in San Cristóbal de las Casas under Bishop Samuel Ruiz, a well known liberation theologist. Some of the land taken over by the Zapatistas in 1994 was retained, but the territory they held militarily for a little more than a year was overrun by the Mexican army in a surprise raid in February 1995.
Although army camps were set up along all major thoroughfares, the army failed to capture the guerilla movement's commanders. Instead, the Mexican government pursued a policy of negotiation, while the Zapatistas developed a mobilization and media campaign through numerous newspaper comunicados and over time a set of Sixth Declaration of the Lacandon Jungle with no further military actions on their part. After the First Declaration from the Lacandon Jungle, subsequent declarations have focused on non-violent solutions, both through political channels and through the assumption of many of the functions of government in the Chiapas state of southeastern Mexico. Other groups within Chiapas, such as the pacifist Las Abejas, support many of the goals of the Zapatista Revolution without condoning the use of violence to achieve those goals. A strong international Internet presence prompted numerous left-wing international groups to adhere to the movement. Government talks with the EZLN culminated in the signing of the San Andrés Accords (1996) that granted autonomy and special rights to the indigenous population.
The Intercontinental Encounter for Humanity and against Neoliberalism held in Chiapas in 1996 resulted in various pro-Zapatista support groups emerging outside Mexico, particularly in USA, Argentina, Spain, Italy, Germany, Austria, Switzerland, France and Britain.[4]
With the new government of President Vicente Fox (the first non-PRI president of Mexico in over 80 years) in 2001, the Zapatistas marched on Mexico City to present their case to the Mexican Congress. Although Fox had stated earlier that he could end the conflict "in fifteen minutes,"[5] the EZLN rejected watered-down agreements and created 32 "autonomous municipalities" in Chiapas, thus partially implementing their demands without government support but with some funding from international organizations.
On June 28, 2005, the Zapatistas presented the so-called Sixth Declaration of the Lacandon Jungle,[6] declaring their principles and vision for Mexico and the world. This declaration reiterates the support for the indigenous peoples, who compose roughly one third of the population of the state of Chiapas, and extends the cause to include "all the exploited and dispossessed of Mexico". It also expresses the movement's sympathy to the international alter-globalization movement, and offers to provide material aid to those in Cuba, Bolivia, Ecuador and elsewhere, with whom they make common cause. The declaration ends with an exhortation for all who have more respect for humanity than for money to join with the Zapatistas in the struggle for social justice both in Mexico and abroad. The declaration called for an alternative national campaign (the "Other Campaign") in opposition to the current presidential campaign. In preparation for this alternative campaign, the Zapatistas invited to their territory over 600 national leftist organizations, indigenous groups and non-governmental organizations in order to listen to their claims for human rights in a series of biweekly meetings that culminated in a plenary meeting in September 16, the day Mexico celebrates its independence from Spain. In this meeting, Subcomandante Marcos requested official adherence of the organizations to the Sixth Declaration, and detailed a six-month tour of the Zapatistas through all 31 Mexican states that took place concurrently with the electoral campaign starting January 2006.

[edit] Ideology




This sign reads, in Spanish: Top sign: "You are in Zapatista rebel territory. Here the people give the orders and the government obeys." Bottom sign: "North Zone. Council of Good Government. Trafficking in weapons, planting of drugs, drug use, alcoholic beverages, and illegal sales of wood are strictly prohibited. No to the destruction of nature." Federal Highway 307, Chiapas.


The ideology of the Zapatista movement, Zapatismo, combines traditional Mayan practices with elements of anarchism, libertarian socialism, and Marxism. There is a long history of anarchism in Mexico, of which Zapatismo is a descendent. A Zapatista slogan is in harmony with the concept of mutual aid: "Everything for everyone, nothing for ourselves" (Para todos todo, para nosotros nada).
The EZLN opposes neo-liberal globalization, arguing that it severely and negatively affects the peasant way of life of its indigenous support base and oppressed people worldwide. An example of neo-liberal policy that the EZLN opposes is the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Apart from opening the Mexican market to cheap mass-produced US agricultural products, NAFTA spells an end to Mexican crop subsidies, and drastically reduces income and living standards of many southern Mexican farmers who cannot compete with the subsidized, artificially fertilized, mechanically harvested and genetically modified imports from the United States. The signing of NAFTA also resulted in the removal of Article 27 Section VII in the Mexican Constitution which previously had guaranteed land reparations to indigenous groups throughout Mexico.
Another key element of the Zapatista ideology is their aspiration to do politics in a new, participatory way, from the "bottom-up" instead of "top-down." The Zapatistas consider the contemporary political system of Mexico inherently flawed due to what they consider its purely representative nature and obvious disconnection from the people and their needs. Instead, the EZLN claims to reinforce the idea of participatory democracy or radical democracy by limiting public servants' terms to only two weeks, not using visible organization leaders, and constantly referring to the people they are governing for major decisions, strategies and conceptual visions. As Marcos has reiterated, "my real commander is the people". In accordance with this principle, the Zapatistas are not a political party: they do not seek office throughout the state, because that would perpetuate the political system by attempting to gain power within its ranks. Instead, they wish to reconceptualize the entire system.
In an unusual move for any revolutionary organization, documents released by the EZLN[7] (in Spanish) before the initial uprising in 1994 explicitly defined a right of the people to resist any unjust actions of the EZLN. They also defined a right of the people to

"demand that the revolutionary armed forces not intervene in matters of civil order or the disposition of capital relating to agriculture, commerce, finances, and industry, as these are the exclusive domain of the civil authorities, elected freely and democratically."

It added that the people should "acquire and possess arms to defend their persons, families and property, according to the laws of disposition of capital of farms, commerce, finance and industry, against the armed attacks committed by the revolutionary forces or those of the government."

[edit] Women's Revolutionary Law
From the First Declaration from the Lacandon Jungle, the Zapatistas presented to the people of Mexico, the government, and the world their Revolutionary Laws on January 8, 1994. One of the laws was the Women's Revolutionary Law, which stated:

Women, regardless of their race, creed, color or political affiliation, have the right to participate in the revolutionary struggle in any way that their desire and capacity determine.
Women have the right to work and receive a just salary.
Women have the right to decide the number of children they have and care for.
Women have the right to participate in the matters of the community and have charge if they are free and democratically elected.
Women and their children have the right to Primary Attention in their health and nutrition.
Women have the right to education.
Women have the right to choose their partner and are not obliged to enter into marriage.
Women have the right to be free of violence from both relatives and strangers.


[edit] Political initiatives
Since December 1994, the Zapatistas had been gradually forming several autonomous municipalities, more or less independent of the Mexican government. See the List of Zapatista Autonomous Municipalities.

[edit] Communications
From the beginning, the EZLN has made communication with the rest of Mexico and the world a high priority. The EZLN has used technology, including cellular phones and the Internet, to generate international solidarity with sympathetic people and organizations. Rap-rock band Rage Against the Machine is well known for its support of the EZLN, using the red star symbol as a backdrop to their live shows and have also often informed concert crowds of the ongoing situation. As a result, on trips abroad the president of Mexico is routinely confronted by small activist groups about "the Chiapas situation". The Zapatistas are featured prominently in Rage Against the Machine's songs, in particular "People of the Sun", "Wind Below", "Zapata's Blood" and "War Within a Breath".
Prior to 2001, Marcos' writings were frequently published in some Mexican and a few international newspapers. Then Marcos fell silent, and his relationship with the media declined. When he resumed writing in 2002, he assumed a more aggressive tone, and his attacks on former allies angered some of the EZLN's supporters. Except for these letters and occasional critical "communicados" concerning the political climate, the EZLN was largely silent until August 2004, and COCOPA head Luis H. Álvarez stated in mid-2004 that Marcos had not been seen in Chiapas for some time. The EZLN received little press coverage during this time, although it continued to develop the local governments it had created earlier.
In August, Marcos sent eight brief communiques to the Mexican press, published from August 20 to August 28. The set was entitled "Reading a video" (possibly mocking political video scandals that occurred earlier that year). The set began and ended as a kind of written description of an imaginary low-budget Zapatista video, with the rest being Marcos' comments on political events of the year and the EZLN current stance and development.
In 2005, Marcos made headlines again by comparing the then presidential candidate Andrés Manuel López Obrador to Carlos Salinas de Gortari (as part of a broad criticism of the three main political parties in Mexico - the PAN, PRI, and PRD), and at the same time contradicting himself (because Obrador was from the PRD, his former supporter), and publicly declaring the EZLN in "Red Alert". Shortly thereafter, communiques announced that the EZLN had undergone a restructuring that enabled them to withstand the loss of their public leadership (Marcos and the CCRI). After consulting with their support base, the Zapatistas' issued the Sixth Declaration of the Lacandon Jungle.
Since the first uprising, the newspaper La Jornada has continuously covered the Zapatistas. Most communicados and many of Marcos' letters are delivered to and only published by La Jornada, and the online edition of the newspaper has a section dedicated to the Other Campaign.
The independent media organization Indymedia also covers and prints Zapatista developments and communications.

[edit] Recent and current activities
On June 28, 2005 the EZLN released an installment of what it called the Sixth Declaration of the Lacandon Jungle. According to the communique, the EZLN has reflected on its history and decided that it must make changes in order to continue its struggle. Accordingly, the EZLN has decided to unite with the "workers, farmers, students, teachers, and employees... the workers of the city and the countryside." They propose to do so through a non-electoral front to talk and collectively write a new constitution to establish a new political culture.
On January 1, 2006 the EZLN began a massive tour - "The Other Campaign" - encompassing all 31 Mexican states in the build up to the year's presidential election, which the EZLN made clear they would not participate in directly.
On May 3-4, 2006, a series of demonstrations protested the forcible removal of irregular flower vendors from a lot in Texcoco for the construction of a Walmart branch. The protests turned violent when state police and the Federal Preventive Police bussed in some 5,000 agents to San Salvador Atenco and the surrounding communities. A local organization called the People's Front in Defense of the Land (FPDT), which adheres to the Sixth Declaration, called in support from other regional and national adherent organizations. "Delegate Zero" and his "Other Campaign" were at the time in nearby Mexico City, having just organized May Day events there, and quickly arrived at the scene. The following days were marked by violence, with some 216 arrests, over 30 rape and sexual abuse accusations against the police, five deportations, and one casualty, a 14-year-old boy named Javier Cortes shot by a policeman. A 20-year-old UNAM economics student, Alexis Benhumea, died the morning of June 7, 2006, after being in a coma caused by a blow to the head from a police-launched tear-gas grenade. Most of the resistance organizing was done by the EZLN and Sixth Declaration adherents, and Delegate Zero has stated that the "Other Campaign" tour will be temporarily halted until all prisoners are released.
In late 2006 and early 2007, the Zapatistas (through Subcomandante Marcos), along with other indigenous peoples of the Americas, announced the Intercontinental Indigenous Encounter. They invited indigenous people from all over the Americas and the rest of the world, to gather on October 11-14, 2007 near Guaymas, Sonora. In the declaration for the Indigenous Intercontinental Conference, it designated this date because of "515 years since the invasion of ancient Indigenous territories and the onslaught of the war of conquest, spoils and capitalist exploitation". Comandante David said in an interview; "The object of this meeting is to meet one another and to come to know one another’s pains and sufferings. It is to share our experiences, because each tribe is different."[8]
The Third Encuentro of the Zapatistas People with the People of the World was held from December 28, 2007 - January 1, 2008[9]
In mid January 2009, Marcos made a speech on behalf of the Zapatistas in which he supported the resistance of the Palestinians as "the Israeli government's heavily trained and armed military continues its march of death and destruction." He described the actions of the Israeli government as a "classic military war of conquest". He said: "The Palestinian people will also resist and survive and continue struggling and will continue to have sympathy from below for their cause." [1]

[edit] List of known members
The following is a list of known current or former members of the EZLN.

Comandante David
Comandante Ester
Comandante Ramona
Subcomandante Elisa
Subcomandante Marcos
Comandante Cabrales
Comandante Tacho


[edit] New media technologies and the Zapatista idea
The Zapatista idea is the use of tactical media to draw public attention to a political cause. Used as a form of political activism, the Zapatista idea is the notion that “the important thing is the spectacle that you make out of an event in the media, as opposed to the event itself".[10] The concept derives from the Zapatistas' ability through new media to communicate and generate universal solidarity in Mexico and worldwide.
The “communications revolution has generally shifted the ‘balance of power’ from the media to the audience”.[11] This has allowed the Zapatista idea to flourish, opening up new channels and providing a powerful forum for political participation by citizens (see edemocracy) on a scale like never before. “Digital, networked media allow for faster, diverse, two-way communications between users who have both more control and more choice”[12] as they become simultaneously users, producers and agents of social change.
For example, on the night of June 25, 2008, activists used the Internet to organise “A flash mob for Burma”, a spontaneous gathering of people using high-impact videos and posters at Waterloo Station, London, in order to urge commuters to remember victims of the Burma cyclone and decades of human rights abuses’.[13] “Emphasising the spectacle, the mediation of the event, as much as the event itself”,[14] flash mob members used the technologies to stage a demonstration that would have impact and raise media awareness.

[edit] See also

Chiapas conflict
A Place Called Chiapas, a documentary on the Zapatistas and Subcomandante Marcos.
Himno Zapatista - anthem of the Zapatistas.
Indigenous Movements in the Americas
Castellanos, L. (2007). México armado: 1943-1981. Epilogue and chronology by Alejandro Jiménez Martín del Campo. México: Biblioteca ERA. 383 pp. ISBN-10: 968.411.695.0 ISBN-13: 978.968.411.695.5
San Andres Accords


[edit] References

O'Neil, Patrick H.; Fields, Karl; Share, Don (2006), Cases in Comparative Politics (2nd ed.), New York: Norton, ISBN 0-393-92943-4 
http://flag.blackened.net/revolt/mexico/ezln/womlaw.html.


[edit] Notes


^ http://libcom.org/history/zapata-emiliano-1879-1919
^ Baspineiro, Alex Contreras. "The Mysterious Silence of the Mexican Zapatistas." Narco News (May 7, 2004).
^ O'Neil, et al: 377.
^ http://bermudaradical.blogspot.com/2008/03/ejrcito-zapatista-de-liberacin-nacional.html
^ O'Neil, et al: 378.
^ http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Sixth_Declaration_of_the_Lacandon_Jungle
^ Editorial
^ Norrell, Brenda. "Zapatistas Select Yaqui to Host Intercontinental Summit in Mexico." Narco News (May 7, 2007).
^ http://zeztainternazional.ezln.org.mx/ 2008.
^ Meikle, G: “Networks of Influence: Internet Activism in Australia and Beyond” in Gerard Goggin (ed.) Virtual nation: the Internet in Australia, University of New South Wales Press, page 83, 2004.
^ McQuail, D: McQail’s Mass Communication Theory (fourth edition), page 28, Sage, London, 2000.
^ Croteau, D and Hoynes, W: Media Society: Industries, Images and Audiences, page 313, Pine Forge Press, Thousand Oaks, 2003.
^ Sugden, J (June 25, 2008) “Flash mob for Burma hits London”, Times Online, http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/uk/article4214433.ece.
^ Meikle, G: “Networks of Influence: Internet Activism in Australia and Beyond” in Gerard Goggin (ed.) Virtual nation: the Internet in Australia, University of New South Wales Press, page 84, 2004.



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Zapatista Army of National Liberation




Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Zapatista Army of National Liberation



Unmasking the Zapatistas (A critical Analysis)
EZLN official site of the EZLN
Enlace Zapatista
Movie of Zapatista Caravan from Indigenous Communities to Mexico City
Zapatista.info
Site that focuses on Zapatista Women Also features info on alternative economy and solidarity.
Radio Insurgente
Communiques
Communiques in English 1994 - 2004
Chiapas Indymedia
Narco News Bulletin. Features frequent reporting on the EZLN and the Other Campaign.
ZNet Chiapas Watch/Zapatista Crisis page with English translations of EZLN documents
Online archive of EZLN articles and communiques
A Commune in Chiapas - Libertarian Marxist Analysis of the Zapatista Uprising
What is it that is different about the Zapatistas? - Anarchist analysis of the Zapatista method of organisation
[2] - EZLN - Women's Revolutionary Law
Chiapas Indymedia More EZLN communiques can be found here. In Spanish, with English sections.
"A two wheeled rocinante from the jungle" Report on the first stop of the national Zapatista tour, January 2, 2006
Student Project on Cyberactivism and the EZLN
Zapatistas Discussion Group
"UNMASKING MILITARISM - U.S.- Supported Low-Intensity War in Chiapas" Article chronicling Tom Hayden's visit to the Chiapas.
Smygo News & Views for Anarchists & Activists.
Explanations of Amado Avendaño Figueroa, Ex-Governor of Zapatists Rebellion in Chiapas, December 31st 1994
Website of a militant African shack dwellers' movement that, like the Zapatistas, rejects party politics in favour of autonomous popular local governance
"The Struggle for the Lacandon Selva: Mexican State Plays Ethnic Divide-and-Rule in the Chiapas Rainforest," World War 4 Report
In the Village of the Zapatistas The New York Times, December 9 2008
Article on Zapatista Army of National Liberation by the International Museum of Women.




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zapatista_Army_of_National_Liberation"
Categories: Zapatista Army of National LiberationHidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from April 2008 | Cleanup from April 2008 | All pages needing cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Asturianu
Беларуская
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Français
Gaeilge
한국어
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Lietuvių
Nederlands
日本語
Nnapulitano
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Türkçe
中文









 This page was last modified on 16 April 2009, at 12:32 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
