













Arrow of time - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Arrow_of_time";
		var wgTitle = "Arrow of time";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "296639";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280563890;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Arrow of time

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"Time's arrow" redirects here. For other uses, see Time's Arrow.

This article is an overview of the subject. For a more technical discussion and for information related to current research, see Entropy (arrow of time).

In the natural sciences, arrow of time, or time’s arrow, is a term coined in 1927 by British astronomer Arthur Eddington used to distinguish a direction of time on a four-dimensional relativistic map of the world, which, according to Eddington, can be determined by a study of organizations of atoms, molecules, and bodies.
Physical processes at the microscopic level are believed to be either entirely or mostly time symmetric, meaning that the theoretical statements that describe them remain true if the direction of time is reversed; yet when we describe things at the macroscopic level it often appears that this is not the case: there is an obvious direction (or flow) of time. An arrow of time is anything that exhibits such time-asymmetry.




Contents


1 History of term
2 Overview
3 Arrows

3.1 The thermodynamic arrow of time
3.2 The cosmological arrow of time
3.3 The radiative arrow of time
3.4 The causal arrow of time
3.5 The particle physics (weak) arrow of time
3.6 The quantum arrow of time
3.7 The psychological/perceptual arrow of time


4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History of term
From the 1928 book The Nature of the Physical World, which helped to popularize the term, Eddington states:


“
Let us draw an arrow arbitrarily. If as we follow the arrow we find more and more of the random element in the state of the world, then the arrow is pointing towards the future; if the random element decreases the arrow points towards the past. That is the only distinction known to physics. This follows at once if our fundamental contention is admitted that the introduction of randomness is the only thing which cannot be undone. I shall use the phrase ‘time’s arrow’ to express this one-way property of time which has no analogue in space.
”


Eddington then gives three points to note about this arrow:

It is vividly recognized by consciousness.
It is equally insisted on by our reasoning faculty, which tells us that a reversal of the arrow would render the external world nonsensical.
It makes no appearance in physical science except in the study of organization of a number of individuals.

Here, according to Eddington, the arrow indicates the direction of progressive increase of the random element. Following a lengthy argument into the nature of thermodynamics, Eddington concludes that in so far as physics is concerned time's arrow is a property of entropy alone.

[edit] Overview
The symmetry of time (T-symmetry) can be understood by a simple analogy: if time were perfectly symmetric then it would be possible to watch a movie taken of real events and everything that happens in the movie would seem realistic whether it was played forwards or backwards.[1]
An obvious objection to this assertion is gravity: after all, things fall down not up. Consider first some bodies interacting in space. Perhaps one asteroid approaches another, loops part-way around it, and slingshots off in another direction. In this case the forward-recording and the backward-recording look equally realistic.
One could film a tossed ball as it moves up, slows gradually to a stop, and then falls back down. This is another case where the forward- and backward- recordings clearly look equally realistic. One might expect it to take the same amount of time for the ball to go up in reverse as it did for it to go up going forward, but as it turns out the film would show it taking slightly longer going forward than going backward. This is not because gravity is asymmetric but because when the ball is going forward in time it loses energy to air molecules it bumps into but when the ball is going backwards in time the air molecules are bumping into it, giving it energy. Note that this inequality doesn't contradict the definition of time reversal because forward-up is a different leg of the trip from backward-up. So the system is strictly T-symmetrical, but we recognize that while going "forward," useful kinetic energy is dissipated into the environment: entropy is increasing. Entropy, which is a purely statistical observation, may be one of the only processes in physics that is not time-reversible.
This kind of thinking turns out to be critical to understanding the final case of this example. What if you record somebody simply dropping a ball? It falls for a meter and stops. Certainly someone watching this recording in reverse would notice an unrealistic discrepancy: a ball falling upward! But imagine the forward-recording carefully. When the ball lands, its kinetic energy is dispersed into sound, shaking the ground, and some heat. That is what allows the ball to be moving one moment and still the next. Now think of the recording in reverse. Those sound waves, those ground vibrations, and that heat, are all rushing back into the ball, imparting just enough energy to propel it upward into the person's hand. With this understanding, the backward recording appears perfectly realisitic. The only way that someone can tell the video is in reverse is by making the statistical prediction that it's unlikely that these forces could incidentally interact to propel the ball upward into your waiting hand.
This is an overview: see the main article for more on entropy, including another example.

[edit] Arrows

[edit] The thermodynamic arrow of time
Main article: Entropy (arrow of time)
The thermodynamic arrow of time is provided by the Second Law of Thermodynamics, which says that in an isolated system, entropy tends to increase with time. Entropy can be thought of as a measure of microscopic disorder; thus the Second Law implies that time is asymmetrical with respect to the amount of order in an isolated system: as time increases, a system will statistically become more disordered. This asymmetry can be used empirically to distinguish between future and past though measuring entropy does not accurately measure time. There is also the complication that, locally, entropy can decrease with time: living systems decrease their entropy by expenditure of energy at the expense of environmental entropy increase.
Since the Second Law is statistical, it does not hold with strict universality: any system can fluctuate to a state of lower entropy (see the Poincaré recurrence theorem). However, the Second Law seems to accurately describe the overall trend in real systems toward higher entropy.
This arrow of time seems to be related to all other arrows of time and arguably underlies some of them, with the exception of the weak arrow of time.

[edit] The cosmological arrow of time
See also: Entropy and Entropy (arrow of time)
The cosmological arrow of time points in the direction of the universe's expansion. It may be linked to the thermodynamic arrow, with the universe heading towards a heat death (Big Chill) as the amount of usable energy becomes negligible. Alternatively, it may be an artifact of our place in the universe's evolution (see the Anthropic bias), with this arrow reversing as gravity pulls everything back into a Big Crunch.
If this arrow of time is related to the other arrows of time, then the future is by definition the direction towards which the universe becomes bigger. Thus, the universe expands - rather than shrinks - by definition.
The thermodynamic arrow of time and the Second law of thermodynamics are thought to be a consequence of the initial conditions in the early universe. Therefore they ultimately result from the cosmological set-up.

[edit] The radiative arrow of time
Waves, from radio waves to sound waves to those on a pond from throwing a stone, expand outward from their source, even though the wave equations allow for solutions of convergent waves as well as radiative ones. This arrow has been reversed in carefully worked experiments which have created convergent waves, so this arrow probably follows from the thermodynamic arrow in that meeting the conditions to produce a convergent wave requires more order than the conditions for a radiative wave. Put differently, the probability for initial conditions that produce a convergent wave is much lower than the probability for initial conditions that produce a radiative wave. In fact, normally a radiative wave increases entropy, while a convergent wave decreases it, making the latter contradictory to the Second Law of Thermodynamics in usual circumstances.

[edit] The causal arrow of time
A cause precedes its effect: the causal event occurs before the event it effects. Birth, for example, follows a successful conception and not vice versa. Thus causality is intimately bound up with time's arrow.
A problem with using causality as an arrow of time is that, as David Hume pointed out, the causal relation per se cannot be perceived; one only perceives sequences of events. Furthermore it is surprisingly difficult to provide a clear explanation of what the terms "cause" and "effect" really mean. It does seem evident, however, that dropping the plate is the cause while the plate shattering is the effect.
Physically speaking, this is another manifestation of the thermodynamic arrow of time, and is a consequence of the Second law of thermodynamics[2]. Controlling the future, or causing something to happen, creates correlations between the doer and the effect[3]. and these can only be created as we move forwards in time, not backwards.

[edit] The particle physics (weak) arrow of time
Certain subatomic interactions involving the weak nuclear force violate the conservation of both parity and charge conjugation, but only very rarely. An example is the kaon decay [1]. According to the CPT Theorem, this means they should also be time irreversible, and so establish an arrow of time. Such processes should be responsible for matter creation in the early universe.
This arrow is not linked to any other arrow by any proposed mechanism, and if it would have pointed to the opposite time direction, the only difference would have been that our universe would be made of anti-matter rather than from matter. More accurately, the definitions of matter and anti-matter would just be reversed.
That the combination of parity and charge conjugation is broken so rarely means that this arrow only "barely" points in one direction, setting it apart from the other arrows whose direction is much more obvious.

[edit] The quantum arrow of time
According to the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics, quantum evolution is governed by the Schrödinger equation, which is time-symmetric, and by wave function collapse, which is time irreversible. As the mechanism of wave function collapse is philosophically obscure, it is not completely clear how this arrow links to the others. While at the microscopic level, collapse seems to show no favor to increasing or decreasing entropy, some believe there is a bias which shows up on macroscopic scales as the thermodynamic arrow. According to the modern physical view of wave function collapse, the theory of quantum decoherence, the quantum arrow of time is a consequence of the thermodynamic arrow of time.

[edit] The psychological/perceptual arrow of time
Psychological time is, in part, the cataloguing of ever increasing items of memory from continuous changes in perception. In other words, things we remember make up the past, while the future consists of those events that cannot be remembered. The ancient method of comparing unique events to generalized repeating events such as the apparent movement of the sun, moon, and stars provided a convenient grid work to accomplish this. The consistent increase in memory volume creates one mental arrow of time. Another arises because one has the sense that one's perception is a continuous movement from the known (Past) to the unknown (Future). Anticipating the unknown forms the psychological future which always seems to be something one is moving towards, but, like a projection in a mirror, it makes what is actually already a part of memory, such as desires, dreams, and hopes, seem ahead of the observer.
The association of (behind = past) and (ahead = future) is itself culturally determined. For example, the Chinese and the Aymara people both associate (ahead = past) and (behind = future).[4] In Chinese, for instance, the term "the day after tomorrow" literally means "behind day" while "the day before yesterday" is referred to as "front day".[citation needed]
The other side of the psychological passage of time is in the realm of volition and action. We plan and often execute actions intended to affect the course of events in the future. Hardly anyone tries to change past events. Indeed, in the Rubaiyat it is written (sic):
The Moving Finger writes; and, having writ,
  Moves on: nor all thy Piety nor Wit
Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line,
  Nor all thy Tears wash out a Word of it.
- Omar Khayyám (Fitzgerald translation)
The psychological arrow of time is thought to be reducible to the thermodynamic arrow: it has deep connections with Maxwell's demon and the physics of information; In fact, it is easy to understand its link to the Second Law of Thermodynamics if we view memory as correlation between brain cells (or computer bits) and the outer world. Since the Second Law of Thermodynamics is equivalent to the growth with time of such correlations, then it states that memory will be created as we move towards the future (rather than towards the past).

[edit] See also

Anthropic bias
Loschmidt's paradox
Maxwell's demon
T-symmetry
Royal Institution Christmas Lectures 1999
Philosophy of space and time


[edit] References


^ David Albert on Time and Chance
^ Physical Origins of Time Asymmetry, chapter 6
^ Physical Origins of Time Asymmetry, pp. 109-111.
^ For Andes tribe, it's back to the future — accessed 2006-09-26



[edit] Further reading

Halliwell, J.J. et.al. (1994). Physical Origins of Time Asymmetry. Cambridge. ISBN 0-521-56837-4.  (technical).
Boltzmann, Ludwig (1964). Lectures On Gas Theory. University Of California Press.  Translated from the original German by Stephen G. Brush. Originally published 1896/1898.
Peierls, R (1979). Surprises in Theoretical Physics. Princeton.  Section 3.8.
Feynman, Richard (1965). The Character of Physical Law. BBC Publications.  Chapter 5.
Penrose, Roger (1989). The Emperor's New Mind. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-851973-7.  Chapter 7.
Penrose, Roger (2004). The Road to Reality. Jonathan Cape. ISBN 0-224-04447-8.  Chapter 27.
Price, Huw (1996). Time's Arrow and Archimedes' Point. ISBN 0-19-510095-6.  Website
Zeh, H. D (2001). The Physical Basis of The Direction of Time. ISBN 3-540-42081-9.  Official website for the book


[edit] External links

The Ritz-Einstein Agreement to Disagree, a review of historical perspectives of the subject, prior to the evolvement of quantum field theory.
The Thermodynamic Arrow: Puzzles and Pseudo-Puzzles Huw Price on Time's Arrow
The Arrow of Time








v • d • e

Time





Major concepts

Time · Eternity · Arguments for eternity · Immortality
Deep time · History · Past · Present · Future · Futurology


Time Portal





Measurement and Standards

Chronometry · UTC · UT · TAI · Second · Minute · Hour · Sidereal time · Solar time · Time zone
Clock · Horology · History of timekeeping devices · Astrarium · Marine chronometer · Sundial · Water clock
Calendar · Day · Week · Month · Year · Tropical year · Julian · Gregorian · Islamic
  Intercalation · Leap second · Leap year






Chronology

Astronomical chronology · Geologic Time · Geological history · Geochronology · Archaeological dating
Calendar era · Regnal year · Chronicle · Timeline · Periodization






Religion and Mythology

Time and fate deities · Wheel of time · Kāla · Kalachakra · Prophecy · Dreamtime






Philosophy

Causality · Eternalism · Eternal return · Event · The Unreality of Time · A-series and B-series · B-Theory of time
Endurantism · Four dimensionalism · Perdurantism · Presentism · Temporal finitism · Temporal parts






Physical Sciences

Time in physics · Spacetime · Absolute time and space · T-symmetry
Arrow of time · Chronon · Fourth dimension · Planck epoch · Planck time · Time domain
Theory of relativity · Time dilation · Gravitational time dilation · Coordinate time · Proper time






Biology

Chronobiology · Circadian rhythms






Psychology

Consciousness and spacetime · Mental chronometry · Reaction time · Sense of time · Specious present






Sociology and Anthropology

Futures studies · Long Now Foundation · Time discipline · Time use research






Economics

Newtonian time in economics · Time value of money · Time Banking · Time-based currency






Related topics

Space · Duration · Time capsule · Time travel · Time signature · System time · Metric time · Hexadecimal time · Carpe diem · Tempus fugit









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arrow_of_time"
Categories: Time | Philosophy of thermal and statistical physics | Non-equilibrium thermodynamicsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Deutsch
Español
Euskara
Français
עברית
日本語
Polski
Русский
Suomi
中文









 This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 03:03.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
