













The Hero with a Thousand Faces - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "The_Hero_with_a_Thousand_Faces";
		var wgTitle = "The Hero with a Thousand Faces";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "624990";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 284134738;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); The Hero with a Thousand Faces

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


The Hero with a Thousand Faces  



Third Edition, 2008


Author
Joseph Campbell


Country
United States


Language
English


Genre(s)
Non-Fiction


Publisher
New World Library


Publication date
First published in 1949; 2nd ed., 1968; 3rd ed., 2008


Media type
print (hardback)


ISBN
978-1577315933


The Hero with a Thousand Faces (first published in 1949) is a non-fiction book, and seminal work of comparative mythology by Joseph Campbell. In this publication, Campbell discusses his theory of the journey of the archetypal hero found in world mythologies.
Since publication of The Hero with a Thousand Faces, Campbell's theory has been consciously applied by a wide variety of modern writers and artists. The best known is perhaps George Lucas, who has acknowledged a debt to Campbell regarding the stories of the Star Wars films.[1]
The Joseph Campbell Foundation and New World Library issued a new edition of The Hero with a Thousand Faces in July, 2008 as part of the Collected Works of Joseph Campbell series of books, audio and video recordings.




Contents


1 Summary
2 Contents

2.1 Prologue: The Monomyth
2.2 PART ONE: The Adventure of the Hero

2.2.1 Chapter I: Departure
2.2.2 Chapter II: Initiation
2.2.3 Chapter III: Return
2.2.4 Chapter IV: The Keys


2.3 PART TWO: The Cosmogonic Cycle

2.3.1 Chapter I: Emanations
2.3.2 Chapter II: The Virgin Birth
2.3.3 Chapter III: Transformations of the Hero
2.3.4 Chapter IV: Dissolutions


2.4 Epilogue: Myth and Society


3 Background

3.1 Publishing History
3.2 Quotations


4 The Hero Journey and Women
5 Artists influenced by work
6 Footnotes
7 References
8 See also
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Summary
Campbell explores the theory that important myths from around the world which have survived for thousands of years all share a fundamental structure, which Campbell called the monomyth. In a well-known quote from the introduction to The Hero with a Thousand Faces, Campbell summarized the monomyth:


“
A hero ventures forth from the world of common day into a region of supernatural wonder: fabulous forces are there encountered and a decisive victory is won: the hero comes back from this mysterious adventure with the power to bestow boons on his fellow man.[2]
”


In laying out the monomyth, Campbell describes a number of stages or steps along this journey. The hero starts in the ordinary world, and receives a call to enter an unusual world of strange powers and events (a call to adventure). If the hero accepts the call to enter this strange world, the hero must face tasks and trials (a road of trials), and may have to face these trials alone, or may have assistance. At its most intense, the hero must survive a severe challenge, often with help earned along the journey. If the hero survives, the hero may achieve a great gift (the goal or "boon"), which often results in important self-knowledge. The hero must then decide whether to return with this boon (the return to the ordinary world), often facing challenges on the return journey. If the hero is successful in returning, the boon or gift may be used to improve the world (the application of the boon).
Very few myths contain all of these stages - some myths contain many of the stages, while others contain only a few; some myths may have as a focus only one of the stages, while other myths may deal with the stages in a somewhat different order. These stages may be organized in a number of ways, including division into three sections: Departure (sometimes called Separation), Initiation and Return. "Departure" deals with the hero venturing forth on the quest, "Initiation" deals with the hero's various adventures along the way, and "Return" deals with the hero's return home with knowledge and powers acquired on the journey.
The classic examples of the monomyth relied upon by Campbell and other scholars include the stories of Osiris, Prometheus, the Buddha, Moses, and Christ, although Campbell cites many other classic myths from many cultures which rely upon this basic structure.
While Campbell offers a discussion of the hero's journey by using the Freudian concepts popular in the 1940s and 1950s, the monomythic structure is not tied to these concepts. Similarly, Campbell uses a mixture of Jungian archetypes, unconscious forces, and Arnold van Gennep's structuring of rites of passage rituals to provide some illumination.[3] However, this pattern of the hero's journey influences artists and intellectuals worldwide, suggesting a basic usefulness for Campbell's insights not tied to academic categories and mid-20th century forms of analysis.

[edit] Contents

[edit] Prologue: The Monomyth

1. Myth and Dream
2. Tragedy and Comedy
3. The Hero and the God
4. The World Navel


[edit] PART ONE: The Adventure of the Hero

[edit] Chapter I: Departure

1. The Call to Adventure


The adventure begins with the hero receiving a call to action, such as a threat to the peace of the community, or the hero simply falls into or blunders into it. The call is often announced to the hero by another character who acts as a "herald". The herald, often represented as dark or terrifying and judged evil by the world, may call the character to adventure simply by the crisis of his appearance.


2. Refusal of the Call


In some stories, the hero initially refuses the call to adventure. When this happens, the hero may suffer somehow, and may eventually choose to answer, or may continue to decline the call.


3. Supernatural Aid


After the hero has accepted the call, he encounters a protective figure (often elderly) who provides special tools and advice for the adventure ahead, such as an amulet or a weapon.


4. The Crossing of the First Threshold


The hero must cross the threshold between the world he is familiar with and that which he is not. Often this involves facing a "threshold guardian", an entity that works to keep all within the protective confines of the world but must be encountered in order to enter the new zone of experience.


5. The Belly of the Whale


The hero, rather than passing a threshold, passes into the new zone by means of rebirth. Appearing to have died by being swallowed or having their flesh scattered, the hero is transformed and becomes ready for the adventure ahead.


[edit] Chapter II: Initiation

1. The Road of Trials


Once past the threshold, the hero encounters a dream landscape of ambiguous and fluid forms. The hero is challenged to survive a succession of obstacles and, in so doing, amplifies his consciousness. The hero is helped covertly by the supernatural helper or may discover a benign power supporting him in his passage.


2. The Meeting with the Goddess


The ultimate trial is often represented as a marriage between the hero and a queenlike, or mother-like figure. This represents the hero's mastery of life (represented by the feminine) as well as the totality of what can be known. When the hero is female, this becomes a male figure.


3. Woman as the Temptress


His awareness expanded, the hero may fixate on the disunity between truth and his subjective outlook, inherently tainted by the flesh. This is often represented with revulsion or rejection of a female figure.


4. Atonement with the Father


The hero reconciles the tyrant and merciful aspects of the father-like authority figure to understand himself as well as this figure.


5. Apotheosis


The hero's ego is disintegrated in a breakthrough expansion of consciousness. Quite frequently the hero's idea of reality is changed; the hero may find an ability to do new things or to see a larger point of view, allowing the hero to sacrifice himself.


6. The Ultimate Boon


The hero is now ready to obtain that which he has set out, an item or new awareness that, once he returns, will benefit the society that he has left.



[edit] Chapter III: Return

1. Refusal of the Return


Having found bliss and enlightenment in the other world, the hero may not want to return to the ordinary world to bestow the boon onto his fellow man.


2. The Magic Flight


When the boon's acquisition (or the hero's return to the world) comes against opposition, a chase or pursuit may ensue before the hero returns.


3. Rescue from Without


The hero may need to be rescued by forces from the ordinary world. This may be because the hero has refused to return or because he is successfully blocked from returning with the boon. The hero loses his ego.


4. The Crossing of the Return Threshold


The hero returns to the world of common day and must accept it as real.


5. Master of the Two Worlds


Because of the boon or due to his experience, the hero may now perceive both the divine and human worlds.


6. Freedom to Live


The hero bestows the boon to his fellow man.


[edit] Chapter IV: The Keys

[edit] PART TWO: The Cosmogonic Cycle

[edit] Chapter I: Emanations

1. From Psychology to Metaphysics
2. The Universal Round
3. Out of the Void -Space
4. Within Space -Life
5. The Breaking of the One into the Manifold
6. Folk Stories of Creation


[edit] Chapter II: The Virgin Birth

1. Mother Universe
2. Matrix of Destiny
3. Womb of Redemption
4. Folk Stories of Virgin Motherhood


[edit] Chapter III: Transformations of the Hero

1. The Primordial Hero and the Human
2. Childhood of the Human Hero
3. The Hero as Warrior
4. The Hero as Lover
5. The Hero as Emperor and as Tyrant
6. The Hero as World Redeemer
7. The Hero as Saint
8. Departure of the Hero


[edit] Chapter IV: Dissolutions

1. End of the Microcosm
2. End of the Macrocosm


[edit] Epilogue: Myth and Society

1. The Shapeshifter
2. The Function of Myth, Cult, and Meditation
3. The Hero Today


[edit] Background
Campbell used the work of early 20th century theorists to develop his model of the hero (see also structuralism), including Freud (particularly the Oedipus complex), Carl Jung (archetypal figures and the collective unconscious), and Arnold Van Gennep (the three stages of The Rites of Passage, translated by Campbell into Departure, Separation, and Return). Campbell also looked to the work of ethnographers James Frazer and Franz Boas and psychologist Otto Rank.
Campbell called this journey of the hero the monomyth.[4] Campbell was a noted scholar of James Joyce (in 1944 he co-authored A Skeleton Key to Finnegans Wake with Henry Morton Robinson), and Campbell borrowed the term monomyth from Joyce's Finnegans Wake. In addition, Joyce's Ulysses was also highly influential in the structuring of The Hero with a Thousand Faces.

[edit] Publishing History
The book was originally published by the Bollingen Foundation through Pantheon Press. The Bollingen Series was taken over by Princeton University Press, who published Book through 2006. Originally issued in 1949 and revised by Campbell in 1968, The Hero with a Thousand Faces has been reprinted a number of times. Reprints issued after the release of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope in 1977 used the image of Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker on the cover.[1]. Princeton University Press issued a commemorative printing of the second edition in 2004 on the occasion of the joint centennial of Campbell's birth and the Press's founding.
A third edition, compiled by the Joseph Campbell Foundation and published by New World Library, was released in July, 2008.
The Hero with a Thousand Faces has been translated into over twenty languages, including Spanish, Portuguese, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Chinese (simplified and traditional), Turkish, Dutch, Greek, Danish, Persian, Polish, Czech, Croatian, Serbian, Slovenian and Russian and has sold well over a million copies worldwide.[5]

[edit] Quotations
Preface:

"There are of course differences between the numerous mythologies and religions of mankind, but this is a book about similarities; and once they are understood the differences will be found to be much less great than is popularly (and politically) supposed. My hope is that a comparative elucidation may contribute to the perhaps not-quite disparate causes of those forces that are working in the present world for unification, not in the name of some ecclesiastical or political empire, but in the sense of human mutual understanding" (Third edition, page VIII).
"As we are told in the Vedas: 'Truth is one, the sages speak of it by many names,' " (Third edition, page VII).


"We have not even to face the adventure alone, for the heroes of all time, have gone before us: the labyrinth is thoroughly known; we have only to follow the thread of the hero path. And where we had thought to find an abomination, we shall find a god, and where we had thought to slay another, we shall slay ourselves. Where we had thought to travel outward, we shall come to the center of our own existence, and where we had thought to be alone, we shall be with all the World." (Chapter one, ending.)


[edit] The Hero Journey and Women
One of the questions that has been raised about the way that Campbell laid out the monomyth of the Hero's Journey in Hero with a Thousand Faces was that it focused on the masculine journey. Although this was not altogether true—the princess of the Grimms' "Frog Prince" tale and the saga of the hero-goddess Inanna's descent into the underworld feature prominently in Campbell's schema—it was, nonetheless, a question that has been raised about the book since its publication.
Late in his life, Campbell had this to say:


“
All of the great mythologies and much of the mythic story-telling of the world are from the male point of view. When I was writing The Hero with a Thousand Faces and wanted to bring female heroes in, I had to go to the fairy tales. These were told by women to children, you know, and you get a different perspective. It was the men who got involved in spinning most of the great myths. The women were too busy; they had too damn much to do to sit around thinking about stories. [...]
In The Odyssey, you'll see three journeys. One is that of Telemachus, the son, going in quest of his father. The second is that of the father, Odysseus, becoming reconciled and related to the female principle in the sense of male-female relationship, rather than the male mastery of the female that was at the center of The Iliad. And the third is of Penelope herself, whose journey is [...] endurance. Out in Nantucket, you see all those cottages with the widow's walk up on the roof: when my husband comes back from the sea. Two journeys through space and one through time.[6]

”



[edit] Artists influenced by work
Main article: Monomyth
In Pathways to Bliss: Mythology and Personal Transformation, a book drawn from Campbell's late lectures and workshops, he says about artists and the monomyth:


“
Artists are magical helpers. Evoking symbols and motifs that connect us to our deeper selves, they can help us along the heroic journey of our own lives. [...]
The artist is meant to put the objects of this world together in such a way that through them you will experience that light, that radiance which is the light of our consciousness and which all things both hide and, when properly looked upon, reveal. The hero journey is one of the universal patterns through which that radiance shows brightly. What I think is that a good life is one hero journey after another. Over and over again, you are called to the realm of adventure, you are called to new horizons. Each time, there is the same problem: do I dare? And then if you do dare, the dangers are there, and the help also, and the fulﬁllment or the ﬁasco. There's always the possibility of a ﬁasco. But there's also the possibility of bliss.[7]

”


The Hero with a Thousand Faces has influenced a number of artists, musicians, poets, and filmmakers, including Bob Dylan, Jim Morrison and George Lucas. Mickey Hart, Bob Weir and Jerry Garcia of the Grateful Dead had long noted Campbell's influence and agreed to participate in a seminar with him in 1986 entitled From Ritual to Rapture.[8]
Stanley Kubrick introduced Arthur C. Clarke to the book during the writing of 2001: A Space Odyssey. [9]
George Lucas' deliberate use of Campbell's theory of the monomyth in the making of the Star Wars movies is well-documented. On the DVD release of the famous colloquy between Campbell and Bill Moyers, filmed at Lucas's Skywalker Ranch and broadcast in 1988 on PBS as The Power of Myth, Campbell and Moyers discussed Lucas's use of The Hero with a Thousand Faces in making his films.[10] Lucas himself discussed how Campbell's work affected his approach to storytelling and film-making.[11]
Christopher Vogler, a Hollywood film producer and writer, wrote a memo for Disney Studios on the use of The Hero with a Thousand Faces as a guide for scriptwriters; this memo influenced the creation of such films as Aladdin, The Lion King, and Beauty and the Beast. Vogler later expanded the memo and published it as the book The Writer's Journey: Mythic Structure For Writers, which became the inspiration for a number of successful Hollywood films and is believed to have been used in the development of the Matrix series.
Author Neil Gaiman, whose work is frequently seen as exemplifying the monomyth structure,[12] says that he started The Hero with a Thousand Faces but refused to finish it: "I think I got about half way through The Hero with a Thousand Faces and found myself thinking if this is true — I don’t want to know. I really would rather not know this stuff. I’d rather do it because it’s true and because I accidentally wind up creating something that falls into this pattern than be told what the pattern is."[13]

[edit] Footnotes

^ Joseph Campbell, The Hero's Journey: Joseph Campbell on His Life and Work, 3rd edition, Phil Cousineau, editor. Novato, California: New World Library, 2003, pp. 186-187.
^ Joseph Campbell. The Hero with a Thousand Faces. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1968, p. 30 / Novato, California: New World Library, 2008, p. 23.
^ Since the late 1960s, with the introduction of post-structuralism, theories such as the monomyth (to the extent they are based in structuralism) have lost ground in the academic world. Nonetheless, the resonance of this theory and of Campbell's schema remains; every year, The Hero with a Thousand Faces is used as a text-book in thousands of university courses worldwide. Source: Joseph Campbell Foundation website.
^ Source of term monomyth.
^ The Complete Works of Joseph Campbell data base on the Joseph Campbell Foundation website
^ --Joseph Campbell, Pathways to Bliss: Mythology and Personal Transformation, Edited by David Kudler. Novato, California: New World Library, 2004, pp. 145, 159.
^ --Joseph Campbell, Pathways to Bliss: Mythology and Personal Transformation, Edited by David Kudler. Novato, California: New World Library, 2004, pp. 132, 133.
^ Joseph Campbell Timeline on the Pacifica Graduate Institute website
^ [http://www.visual-memory.co.uk/amk/doc/0073.html "Clark's 2001 Diary," extracted from Arthur C. Clark, Lost Worlds of 2001. New American Library (New York), 1972.]
^ [http://www.tv.com/joseph-campbell-and-the-power-of-myth/the-heros-adventure/episode/432756/summary.html Joseph Campbell and the Power of Myth: The Hero's Adventure - TV.com
^ Joseph Campbell, The Hero's Journey, loc. cit.
^ See Stephen Rauch, Neil Gaiman's The Sandman and Joseph Campbell: In Search of the Modern Myth, Wildside Press, 2003
^ The Wild River Review, "Interview with the Dream King"


[edit] References

Campbell, Joseph. The Hero's Journey: Joseph Campbell on His Life and Work. Edited and with an Introduction by Phil Cousineau. Forward by Stuart L. Brown, Executive Editor. New York: Harper and Row, 1990.
Campbell, Joseph and Henry Morton Robinson. A Skeleton Key to Finnegans Wake, 1944.
Campbell, Joseph. The Hero with a Thousand Faces. 1st edition, Bollingen Foundation, 1949. 2nd edition, Princeton University Press. 3rd edition, New World Library, 2008.
Campbell, Joseph. Pathways to Bliss: Mythology and Personal Transformation. Edited by David Kudler. Novato, California: New World Library, 2004.
Ford, Clyde W. The Hero with an African Face. New York: Bantam, 2000.
Henderson, Mary. Star Wars: The Magic of Myth. Companion volume to the exhibition at the National Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution. New York: Bantam, 1997.
Larsen, Stephen and Robin Larsen. Joseph Campbell: A Fire in the Mind. Rochester, Vermont: Inner Traditions, 2002.
Manganaro, Marc. Myth, Rhetoric, and the Voice of Authority: A Critique of Frazer, Eliot, Frye, and Campbell. New Haven: Yale, 1992.
Moyers, Bill and Joseph Campbell. The Power of Myth. Anchor: Reissue edition, 1991. ISBN 0-385-41886-8
Pearson, Carol and Katherine Pope. The Female Hero in American and British Literature. New York: R.R. Bowker, 1981.
Vogler, Christopher. The Writer's Journey: Mythic Structure For Writers. Studio City, CA: Michael Wiese Productions, 1998.


[edit] See also

The Golden Bough
Bildungsroman
Otto Rank


[edit] External links

Information on the 2008 third edition from the Joseph Campbell Foundation
Monomyth from UC Berkeley
The Archetype of the Hero's Journey from Web English Teacher
A Practical Guide to THE HERO WITH A THOUSAND FACES
Joseph Campbell's Hero Journey at MonoMyth.org
The Hero Cycle as seen in the Star Wars saga
Star Wars Origins - Joseph Campbell








v • d • e

Joseph Campbell





Books

Where the Two Came to Their Father: A Navaho War Ceremonial (1943). with Jeff King and Maud Oakes • A Skeleton Key to Finnegans Wake (1944). with Henry Morton Robinson • The Hero with a Thousand Faces (1949). •



The Masks of God
(1959–1968)


Volume 1, Primitive Mythology (1959) • Volume 2, Oriental Mythology (1962) • Volume 3, Occidental Mythology (1964) • Volume 4, Creative Mythology (1968)) •




The Flight of the Wild Gander:Explorations in the Mythological Dimension (1968) • Myths to Live By (1972) • Erotic irony and mythic forms in the art of Thomas Mann (1973) • The Mythic Image (1974) • The Inner Reaches of Outer Space: Metaphor As Myth and As Religion (1986) •




Historical Atlas
of World Mythology


Volume I: The Way of Animal Powers (1983) (reprint in two parts: Part 1: Mythologies of the Primitive Hunters and Gatherers (1988);
Part 2: Mythologies of the Great Hunt (1988)) • Volume II: The Way of the Seeded Earth (Part 1: The Sacrifice (1988); Part 2: Mythologies of the Primitive Planters: The North Americas (1989);
Part 3: Mythologies of the Primitive Planters: The Middle and Southern Americas (1989)) •



Transformations of Myth Through Time (1990) • A Joseph Campbell Companion: Reflections on the Art of Living (1991). editor Diane K. Osbon • Mythic Worlds, Modern Words: On the Art of James Joyce (1993). editor Edmund L. Epstein • The Mythic Dimension: Selected Essays (1959–1987) (1993). editor Anthony Van Couvering • Baksheesh & Brahman: Indian Journals (1954–1955) (1995). editors Robin/Stephen Larsen & Anthony Van Couvering • Thou Art That: Transforming Religious Metaphor (2001). editor Eugene Kennedy • Sake & Satori: Asian Journals - Japan (2002). editor David Kudler • Myths of Light: Eastern Metaphors of the Eternal (2003). editor David Kudler • Pathways to Bliss: Mythology and Personal Transformation (2004). editor David Kudler






Books based
upon interviews

The Power of Myth (1988). with Bill Moyers and editor Betty Sue Flowers • An Open Life: Joseph Campbell in Conversation with Michael Toms (1989). editors John Maher and Dennie Briggs, forward by Jean Erdman Campbell • This business of the gods: Interview with Fraser Boa (1989) • The Hero's Journey: Joseph Campbell on His Life and Work (1990). editor Phil Cousineau






Audio tapes

The Power of Myth (With Bill Moyers) (1987) • Transformation of Myth through Time Volume 1-3 (1989) • The Hero with a Thousand Faces: The Cosmogonic Cycle (Read by Ralph Blum) (1990) • The Way of Art (1990—unlicensed) • The Lost Teachings of Joseph Campbell Volume 1-9 (With Michael Toms) (1993) • On the Wings of Art: Joseph Campbell; Joseph Campbell on the Art of James Joyce (1995) • The Wisdom of Joseph Campbell (With Michael Toms) (1997) •



The Collected Lectures
of Joseph Campbell


Volume 1: Mythology and the Individual (1997) • Volume 2: The Inward Journey (1997) • Volume 3: The Eastern Way (1997) • Volume 4: Man and Myth (1997) • Volume 5: The Myths and Masks of God (1997) • Volume 6: The Western Quest (1997)



Myth and Metaphor in Society (With Jamake Highwater) (abridged)(2002)






Video/DVDs

Psyche & Symbol (13 part KQED/PBS video series: Executive Producer: Aaron Miller; Director: Diane Dowling) (1976) • Transformations of Myth Through Time (1989) • Mythos (1987/1998) • Joseph Campbell and the Power of Myth (1988) • The Hero's Journey: The World of Joseph Campbell (1987) (Phil Cousineau) • Myth and Metaphor in Society (With Jamake Highwater) (1993) • Sukhavati (2005)






Books edited

Gupta, Mahendranath. The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna (1942) (translation from Bengali by Swami Nikhilananda; Joseph Campbell and Margaret Woodrow Wilson, translation assistants -
see preface; foreword by Aldous Huxley) • Myths and Symbols in Indian Art and Civilization. Heinrich Zimmer (1946) • The King and the Corpse: Tales of the Soul's Conquest of Evil. Heinrich Zimmer (1948) • Philosophies of India. Heinrich Zimmer (1951) • The Portable Arabian Nights (1951) • The Art of Indian Asia. Heinrich Zimmer (1955) • Man and Time: Papers from the Eranos Yearbooks. Various authors (1954–1969) • Man and Transformation: Papers from the Eranos Yearbooks. Various authors (1954–1969) • The Mysteries: Papers from the Eranos Yearbooks. Various authors (1954–1969) • The Mystic Vision: Papers from the Eranos Yearbooks. Various authors (1954–1969) • Spirit and Nature: Papers from the Eranos Yearbooks. Various authors (1954–1969) • Spiritual Disciplines: Papers from the Eranos Yearbooks. Various authors (1954–1969) • Myths, Dreams, Religion. Various authors (1970) • The Portable Jung. Carl Jung (1971)






See also

Monomyth · Mythos · Joseph Campbell Foundation









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Hero_with_a_Thousand_Faces"
Categories: Comparative mythology | 1949 books | Mythology books | Religious studies books | Philosophy books | Sociology books | Books by Joseph Campbell 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Español
Русский









 This page was last modified on 16 April 2009, at 03:14 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
