













Elizabeth Barrett Browning - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Elizabeth_Barrett_Browning";
		var wgTitle = "Elizabeth Barrett Browning";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "9627";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281098060;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Elizabeth Barrett Browning

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Elizabeth Barrett Browning



An 1871 engraving of an 1859 photograph of Elizabeth Barrett Browning


Born
March 6, 1806(1806-03-06)
Durham, England


Died
June 29, 1861 (aged 55)
Florence, Italy


Occupation
Poet







Influenced






Emily Dickinson, Edgar Allan Poe, Dante and Christina Rossetti, Algernon Charles Swinburne










Elizabeth Barrett Browning (March 6, 1806 – June 29, 1861) was one of the most respected poets of the Victorian era.




Contents


1 Early life
2 Publication
3 Wimpole Street
4 Robert Browning
5 Death
6 Spritual influence
7 Influence
8 Works, First Publication

8.1 Other Information


9 References
10 Bibliography
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early life
Elizabeth Barrett Moulton-Barrett was born March 6, 1806, in Coxhoe Hall, Durham, England. In 1809, From Edward Barrett and Mary Graham-Clarke, she was the eldest of their 12 children, eight boys and 4 girls. All the children survived but one girl who died at the age of four, while Elizabeth was eight. All the children in her family had nicknames: Elizabeth's was `Ba`. For centuries, the Barrett family, who were part Creole, had lived in Jamaica, where they owned sugar plantations and relied on slave labor. Elizabeth's father, Edward Barrett Moulton Barrett, chose to raise his family in England, while his fortune grew in Jamaica. Educated at home, Elizabeth apparently had read passages from Paradise Lost and a number of Shakespearean plays, among other great works, before the age of ten. Her mother’s family was equally as wealthy as Edward's. He bought "Hope End", a 500-acre (2.0 km2) estate near the Malvern Hills in Ledbury, Herefordshire, England., after his third child, Henrietta was born. Elizabeth had a"large room to herself, with stained glass in the window, and she loved the garden where she tended white roses in a special arbour by the south wall"[1] Later on in life Elizabeth would write Aurora Leigh which was inspired by her time at Hope End. In this same year Elizabeth was baptized at Kelloe Parish Church, though she had already been baptized by a family friend in the first week after she was born. Elizabeth was educated at home, attending lessons with her brother's tutor and was consequently well educated for a girl of that time. At the time, during the "Hope End period Elizabeth was a shy, intensely studious, precocious child, yet cheerful, affectionate and lovable"[2] Elizabeth, a very intellectual child, had been reading a number of Shakespearean plays, parts of Pope's Homeric translations, passages from Paradise Lost, and the histories of England, Greece, and Rome before the age of ten. Her intellectual fascination with the classics and metaphysics was balanced by a religious obsession which she later described as "not the deep persuasion of the mild Christian but the wild visions of an enthusiast."[3][1] Her family attended services at the nearest Dissenting chapel, and Mr. Barrett was active in Bible and Missionary societies. Elizabeth was very close to her siblings while playing the maternal role. Elizabeth had extreme respect for her father: she claimed that life was no fun without her father and her mother thought the same thing, probably because they did not fully understand what the business really was that kept him when his trips got longer and longer. Her first poem on record is from the age of six or eight. The manuscript is currently in the Berg Collection of the New York Public Library, but the exact date is controversial because the "2" in the date 1812 is written over something else that is scratched out.By the age of twelve, she had written an "epic" poem consisting of four books of rhyming couplets. A long Homeric poem titled The Battle of Marathon was published when she was fourteen, her father paying for its publication. Barrett later referred to her first literary attempt as, "Pope's Homer done over again, or rather undone." During her teen years, she read the principal Greek and Latin authors and Dante's Inferno in their original languages. Her appetite for knowledge led her to learn Hebrew and read the Old Testament from beginning to end. After this followed Essay’s of the mind (1826), this was also privately printed at her father’s expense. When Elizabeth was at the age of 20 she began the battle with a life long illness. Though the doctor didn’t know what was wrong with her, she began to take morphine for the pain. She began a drug addiction to deal with her pain; this illness also caused her to we be frail and weak[4]

[edit] Publication




Elizabeth Browning as a woman


On June 30, 1824 ``one of the leading newspapers in London, the Globe and Traveler, printed her "Stanzas on the Death of Lord Byron,"[5] In the same year a law suit Elizabeth father’s cousin had filed against him about property estate in Jamaica had won in favor of their cousin, causing them the start of their financial loss. In 1826, she published her first collection of poems, An Essay on Mind and Other Poems. This is a didactic poem with Homer; Latin and Greek are manifested within these poems. Its publication drew the attention of a blind scholar of the Greek language, Hugh Stuart Boyd, and that of another Greek scholar, Uvedale Price. She maintained a scholarly correspondence with both men her death. Uvedale Price, though a good friend, passed away only after a few years of their knowing each other. Among other neighbors, pleasant but of no intellectual interest, was Mrs. James Martin from Colwall with whom she kept up a correspondence, which gives account of her life. At Boyd's suggestion, she translated Aeschylus' Prometheus Bound (published in 1833; retranslated in 1850). During their friendship Barrett absorbed an astonishing amount of Greek literature — Homer, Pindar, Aristophanes, and others —. From 1822 on Elizabeth Barrett's interests tended more and more to the scholarly and literary. In 1825 she published The Rose and Zephyr," her first published work. In 1828 Elizabeth’s mother Mrs. Barrett died from an illness she had been fighting for a year or two, she was buried at the Parish Church of St Michael and All Angels in Ledbury next to her daughter Mary. The death of her mother hit her hard, which for a time took away from her the power of thinking, Boyd saysin their letters. The abolition of slavery in the early 1830s, a cause which she supported (she was a very political writer known for her political works that she published later in her life(see her work The Runaway Slave at Pilgrim's Point (1849)), reduced Mr. Barrett's finances. His financial losses in the early 1830s forced him to sell Hope End, and although never poor, the place was seized and put up for sale to please creditors. The investment that had given them revenue in Jamaica was also stopped with the abolition of slavery. In 1831 the news that her grandmother Mouton, who had been like a second mother to Elizabeth and the other children, had died, made Elizabeth became ill for weeks, which left her inside where she wrote to Boyd, Her father was jealous of Boyd because of the closeness of the connection he and Elizabeth shared. The family moved three times between 1832 and 1837, first to Sidmouth, Devonshire for three years to a white Georgian building and afterwards to London where they stayed at Gloucester Place; while living there she wrote for several magazines. In 1825 her first published work, "The Rose and Zephyr," was published in Literary Gazette. She finally settled at 50 Wimpole Street, where she used to visit as a child. She met a distance cousin of hers, John Kenyon, who introduced her to celebrities of the literary world, from William Wordsworth to Mary Russell Mitford, He also took her to dine with these famous writers, which also included Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Alfred Lord Tennyson and Thomas Carlyle with whom she herself became friends, and found herself being accepted as one of them. After the move to London, Elizabeth continued to write, contributing to various periodicals The Romaunt of Margaret, The Romaunt of the Page, The Poet's Vow, and other pieces, and corresponded with literary figures of the time, including Mary Russell Mitford. She and Mary became close friends, and Mary was the person to help her become a famous poetess: in 1838 The Seraphim and Other Poems appeared as the first volume of Elizabeth's mature poetry to appear under her own name. In that same year her physician's insistence had permitted her to move from London to Torquay on the Devonshire coast. Her favorite brother, Edward, went along with her. She enjoyed his tales of young people who danced, dined, sailed, and swam: all the things she was too sick and weak to do. Her father, Mr. Barrett, disapproved of Edward going to Torquay but did hinder his visit. The subsequent death of her brother Edward, who drowned in a sailing accident at Torquay in 1840, had a serious effect on her already fragile health; when they found his body a couple days later, she had no strength for tears or words. She was really hurt by his death; after she recovered she banned his name. Miss Mitford has a slight sketch of Elizabeth's life in which Elizabeth protested and wrote Miss Mitford in genuine agony. When she returned to Wimpole Street, she became an invalid and a recluse, spending most of the next five years in her bedroom, seeing only one or two people other than her immediate family. She felt responsible for his death because it was she who wanted him to be there with her. For the rest of her life she avoided all but her very closest friends and relatives. During her recovery she wrote poetry, including "The Cry of the Children", published in 1842, which was a condemnation of child labour. It helped bring about child labour reforms. About the same time she wrote "The Cry of the Children," she contributed some critical papers in prose to Richard Henry Horne's A New Spirit of the Age she also came up with The First Day’s Exile from Eden which she desired first place in the book. In 1844 she published two volumes of Poems, which included A Drama of Exile, A Vision of Poets, and Lady Geraldine's Courtship.

[edit] Wimpole Street
Throughout Elizabeth Barrett’s time spent at her house in London, located on Wimpole street, she suffered greatly from depression and feelings of guilt. She kept herself hidden in a room on the third story of the house, it had sealed up windows and the door was two layers thick. Although Elizabeth had blocked herself off from the world and everyone in society, she had expanded her learning greatly by reading many works; especially pursuing her reading of Latin, Italian, Hebrew, German, and mainly, Greek. In low spirits and poor health, despising the London pollution, noise and weather; Elizabeth became even more depressed. Throughout her battles, she found one of the only reliefs available for her pain; an addiction to opium. While trapped up in her room, she barely ate anything and she depended greatly on her father to comfort her and to pray with her each evening. One of the only things that brought her joy within her period of depression was her dog, named “Flush.” This golden-haired cocker spaniel had been given to Elizabeth as a gift from her close friend, “Mitford;” without the presence of this dog she may have completely given up her will to live. Elizabeth experienced a very different life from her sisters, even though all of them had been homeschooled, Elizabeth excelled ahead of her siblings in her level of knowledge:
“But since she was not burdened with any domestic duties expected of her sisters, Elizabeth could now devote herself entirely to the life of the mind, cultivating an enormous correspondence, reading widely, and admitting only a select few from the busy London world of letters into her presence.”[6] During Elizabeth's confinement at Wimpole Street, one of the only people besides her immediate family whom she saw was John Kenyon, a wealthy and convivial friend of the arts. Her 1844 Poems made her one of the most popular writers in the land and inspired Robert Browning to write to her, telling her how much he loved her poems. Kenyon arranged for Browning to meet Elizabeth in May 1845, and so began one of the most famous courtships in literature. 	Elizabeth Barrett had produced a large amount of works and had been writing long before Robert Browning had even published a word. However, although Elizabeth had made some publications before her courtship with Robert, he had a great influence on her writing, as did she on his. It is observable that Elizabeth’s poetry matured after her speaking with and coming to know Robert Browning as an individual. Two of Barrett’s most famous pieces were produced after she met Browning: Sonnets from the Portuguese and Aurora Leigh.: "Until her relationship with Robert Browning began in 1845, Barrett’s willingness to engage in public discourse about social issues and about aesthetic issues in poetry, which had been so strong in her youth, gradually diminished, as did her physical health. As an intellectual presence and a physical being, she was becoming a shadow of herself".[7]
Among Barrett Browning's best known lyrics is Sonnets from the Portuguese (1850) - the 'Portuguese' being her husband's pet name for her – to disguise the work as "translations" as a means to "depersonalise" the work. The title also refers to the series of sonnets of the 16th-century Portuguese poet Luis de Camões; in all these poems she used rhyme schemes typical of the Portuguese sonnets. The verse-novel Aurora Leigh, her most ambitious and perhaps the most popular of her longer poems, appeared in 1856. It is the story of a woman writer making her way in life, balancing work and love. The writings depicted in this novel are all based on similar, personal experiences that Elizabeth suffered through herself. Elizabeth has had many successful works published, which have greatly influenced her level of prestige. Her poem Aurora Leigh, published in 1857, represented her position as a literary leader in England and her positive display of feminism. The North American Review praised Elizabeth’s poem: “ Mrs. Browning’s poems are, in all respects, the utterance of a woman – of a woman of great learning, rich experience, and powerful genius, uniting to her woman’s nature the strength which is sometimes thought peculiar to a man.”[8] Although she had received her educated at home, Elizabeth Barrett had a high level of intelligence and was a gifted, influential writer.


[edit] Robert Browning




Elizabeth Barrett Browning with her son Pen, 1860


Robert Browning was born into a wealthy home outside of London in 1812, unlike Elizabeth, he had many financial opportunities and was able to experience and observe nature. Browning’s father had a large amount of books in their personal family library; this is where Robert spent much of his time reading to himself and expanding his knowledge. Everything that Robert learned was from what he read, his father’s tutoring lessons as well as lessons from a few other scholarly people. Robert Browning enjoyed the arts, but he had a strong preference for words, developing his strong dialogue at a young age: “Browning’s interests in art and music were lifelong and pronounced, but his imagination and narrative desire were from the beginning expressed primarily in words.”[9] The courtship and marriage between Robert Browning and Elizabeth Barrett, owing to her delicate health and the extraordinary objections made by Mr. Barrett to the marriage of any of his children, were carried out secretly. Six years his elder and an invalid, she could not believe that the vigorous and worldly Browning really loved her as much as he professed to, and her doubts are expressed in the Sonnets from the Portuguese, which she wrote over the next two years. Love conquered all, however, and, after a private marriage at St. Marylebone Parish Church, Browning imitated his hero Shelley by spiriting his beloved off to Italy in August 1846, which became her home almost continuously until her death. Elizabeth's loyal nurse, Wilson, who witnessed the marriage at the church, accompanied the couple to Italy and became at service to them. Mr. Barrett disinherited Elizabeth, as he did for each of his children who married: “The Mrs. Browning of popular imagination was a sweet, innocent young woman who suffered endless cruelties at the hands of a tyrannical papa but who nonetheless had the good fortune to fall in love with a dashing and handsome poet named Robert Browning. She finally escaped the dungeon of Wimpole Street, eloped to Italy, and lived happily ever after.”[10] As Elizabeth had inherited some money of her own, the Brownings were reasonably comfortable in Italy, and their relationship together was content. Elizabeth grew stronger, and, in 1849, at the age of 43, she gave birth to a son, Robert Wiedemann Barrett Browning, who they called Pen. Their son later married but had no children, so there are no direct descendants of the two famous poets. Due to Barrett’s exceeding amount of experience she possessed over Browning, she had a large influence on him and on his writing. Browning had always enjoyed dialect and had dreamed his whole life about pursuing a relationship in which his direct dialogue with his wife would aid him in his writing: “Several Browning critics have suggested that the poet decided that he was an “objective poet” and then sought out a “subjective poet” in the hope that dialogue with her would enable him to be more successful.”[11] After meeting Elizabeth and commencing their friendship, Robert had an inspiration to use more dialogue throughout his life and within his poetry. At Browning's insistence, the second edition of Barrett’s Poems included her love sonnets; these increased her popularity and high critical regard so that she cemented her position as favourite Victorian poetess. Upon William Wordsworth's death in 1850, she was a serious contender to become Poet Laureate, but the position went to Tennyson. Overall, Elizabeth Barrett and Robert Browning are extremely gifted writers who have had a large influence on each other’s productions.


[edit] Death




Elizabeth Barrett Browning's tomb from Harper's Magazine, 1896


In 1860 she issued a small volume of political poems titled Poems before Congress. These were her political poem for the Italians “most of which were written to express her sympathy with the Italian case after the outbreak of fighting in 1859”[12] she dedicated the book of poems to her husband. After a few weeks of it being published Robert had received a significant amount of money which they invested mostly in Tuscan bonds. In the time close to her death she lost a old friend G.B. Hunter; which shocked her and left her reminiscing on her time spent at Sidmouth. This blow would be nothing compared to the death of her father on April 17. As her health faded due to the difference in air in Florence which gave her the worse attach on her chest. She was moved from Florence to Siena where she was to weak to walk she had to be carried to her bed. Her doctor stayed in the hotel to be close to his patient, he was the one who decided the place for their summer home in Villa Alberti, a place in the low hills where the air would be cool and appropriate for her health. She had sent her last last piece of work to a new editor Cornhil, A Musical Instrument it was finally published in July of 1862, She also reprinted Last Poem which became one of her best works. In 1860 they returned to rome to find out Elizabeth’s sister Henrietta had died which made Elizabeth weaker and depressed. Her health underwent a change for the worse; she became gradually weaker and died on June 29, 1861. She was buried in the English Cemetery of Florence. Elizabeth Barrett Browning was a woman of nobility and charm. Mary Russell Mitford described the young Elizabeth as: "A slight, delicate figure, with a shower of dark curls falling on each side of a most expressive face; large, tender eyes, richly fringed by dark eyelashes, and a smile like a sunbeam." Anne Thackeray Ritchie described her as: "Very small and brown" with big, exotic eyes and an overgenerous mouth.[12] “on Monday July 1 the shops in the section of the city around Casa Guidi were closed, while Elizabeth was mourned with unusual demonstrations.”[13] The Brownings were well respected in Italy they would be asked for autographs or stopped by people because of the celebrity. The nature of her illnesses is still unclear [13], although medical and literary scholars have speculated that longstanding pulmonary problems, combined with palliative opiates, contributed to her decline.


[edit] Spritual influence
A lot of Elizabeth’s work has religion themes recurring thought her literature. From an early she has been interested in religion; she read and study famous literary work like Paradise lost and Dante's Inferno. She wanted her poetry to be sanctified, to be made holy. Gerald Smith studied Elizabeth and for a quote that she talks about the meaning of religion in her work: 	"As it touched other dead things; we want the sense of the saturation of Christ's 	blood upon the souls of our poets, that it may cry through them in answer to the 	ceaseless wail of the Sphinx of our humanity, expounding agony into renovation. Something of this has been perceived in art when its glory was at the fullest. 	Something of a yearning after this may be seen among the Greek Christian poets, something which would have been much with a stronger faculty"[2] She also believed that "Christ's religion is essentially poetry—poetry glorified.” We see that she uses the religious aspect in many of her poems especially in her early work such as the Sonnets from the Portuguese and Aurora Leigh, but also her large body of political works and her important early poems—The Seraphim and A Drama of Exile and the reading she read growing up. She would have theological debates in which she participated, her quarrel with the theology of Paradise Lost, and her scandalous involvement in mesmerism and Swedenborgianism.[14] She was very interested in religion she learned Hebrew and read the Hebrew bible, she was very educated in religion her and others. In Aurora Leigh, Elizabeth Barrett Browning litters her poem with religious imagery and allusions. Of particular interest is one specific category of religious references: images of the apocalypse. Appropriately enough, there is a cluster of references to the apocalypse at the end of Aurora Leigh.


[edit] Influence



This section requires expansion.


American poet Edgar Allan Poe was inspired by Barrett Browning's poem "Lady Geraldine's Courtship" and, specifically, borrowed the poem's meter for his poem "The Raven".[15] Poe had reviewed Barrett's work in the January 1845 issue of the Broadway Journal and said that "her poetic inspiration is the highest - we can conceive of nothing more august. Her sense of Art is pure in itself."[16] In return, she praised "The Raven" and Poe dedicated his 1845 collection The Raven and Other Poems to her, referring to her as "the noblest of her sex".[17] Her poetry greatly influenced Emily Dickinson who admired her as woman of achievement. Her popularity in the United States and Britain was further advanced by her stands against social injustice, including opposition to slavery in the United States, championing of the Italian national cause, protest against child labor.

[edit] Works, First Publication
1820 The Battle of Marathon:A Poem(Privately prited)
1826 A Essay On Mind, with Other Poems(London: James Duncan)
1833 Prometheus Bound, Translated from the Greek of Aeschlus,and Miscellaneous Poems(London: A.J. Valpy)
1838 The Seraphim, and Other Poems(London: Saunders and Otley)
1844 Poems(2 vols.)(London: Edward Moxon)[called A Drama of Exile, and other Poems in the United States(New York: Henry G. Langley)]
1850 Poems("New Edition," 2 vols.)(London: Chapman & Hall) [revision of 1844 edition, adding Sonnets from the Portuguese and others]
1851 Casa Guidi Window(London: Chapman & Hall)
1853 Poems(3d ed.)(London: Chapman & Hall)
1854 Two Poems["A Plea for the Ragged Schools of London" by Barrett Browning and "The Twins" by Browning] (London: Bradbury & Evans)
1856 Poems(4th ed.)(London: Chapman & Hall)Aurora Leigh(London: Chapman & Hall)[1857 printed on title page]
1860 Poems Beofore Congress(London: Chapman & Hall)
1862 Last Poems (London: Chapman & Hall)
1863 The Greek Christian: Poets and the English Poets (London: Chapman & Hall)
1877 The Earlier Poems of Elizabeth Barrett Browning, 1826-1833, ed Richard Herne Shepheard (London: Bartholomew Robson)
1877 Letters of Elizabeth Barrett Browning Addressed to Richard Hengist Horne, with comments on comtemoraries, 2 vols., ed. S.R. Townshend Mayer ( London: Richard Bentley & Son)
1897 Letters of Elizabeth Barrett Browning, 2 vols., ed. Frederic G. Kenyon (London:Smith, Elder,& Co.)
1899 Letters of Robert Browing and Elizabeth Barrett Barrett 1845-1846, 2 vol., ed Robert W. Barrett Browning (London: Smith, Elder & Co.)
1914 New Poems by Robert Browning and Elizabeth Barrett Browning, ed. Frederic G Kenyon (London:Smith, Elder & Co.)
1929 Elizabeth Barrett Browning: Letters to Her Sister, 1846-1859, ed. Leonard Huxley (London: John Murry)
1935 Twenty-Two Unpublished Letters of Elizabeth Barrett Browning and Robert Browning to Henrietta and Arabella Moulton Barrett (New York: United Feature Syndicate)
1939 Letters from Elizabeth Barrett to B.R. Haydon, ed. Martha Hale Shackford (New York: Oxford University Press)
1954 Elizabeth Barrett to Miss Mitford, ed. Betty Miller (London: John Murry)
1955 Unpublished Letters of Elizabeth Barrett Browning to Hugh Stuart Boyd, ed. Barbara P. McCarthy (New Heaven, conn.: Yale University Press)
1958 Letters of the Brownings to George Barrett, ed. Paul Landis with Ronald E. Freeman (Urbana: University of Illinois Press)
1974 Elizabeth Barrett Browning's Letters to Mrs. David Ogilvy, 1849-1861, ed. Peter N Heydon and Philip Kelley (New York: Quadrangle, The New York Times Book Co., and The Browning Institute)
1984 The Brownings' Correspondence, ed. Phillip Kelley, Ronald Hudson, and Scott Lewis (Winfield, Kans.: Wedgestone press)

[edit] Other Information
The University of Worcester has acknowledged Browning's local connection by naming a new building after her.

[edit] References


^ Mander,Rosalie.Mrs Browning: The Story of Elizabeth Barrett.London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson,1980
^ Taplin, Gardner B. The Life of Elizabeth BrowningNew Haven: Yale University Press, 1957
^ Everett, Glenn,Life of Elizabeth Browning(2002)
^ Mander,Rosalie.Mrs Browning: The Story of Elizabeth Barrett.London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson,1980
^ Taplin, Gardner B. The Life of Elizabeth Browning New Haven: Yale University Press, 1957
^ Pollock, Mary Sanders. Elizabeth Barrett and Robert Browning: A Creative Partnership. England: Ashgate Publishing Company, 2003.
^ Pollock, Mary Sanders. Elizabeth Barrett and Robert Browning: A Creative Partnership. England: Ashgate Publishing Company, 2003.
^ Kaplan, Cora. Aurora Leigh And Other Poems. London: The Women’s Press Lmited, 1978
^ Pollock, Mary Sanders. Elizabeth Barrett and Robert Browning: A Creative Partnership. England: Ashgate Publishing Company, 2003.
^ Peterson, William S. Sonnets From The Portuguese. Massachusetts: Barre Publishing, 1977.
^ Pollock, Mary Sanders. Elizabeth Barrett and Robert Browning: A Creative Partnership. England: Ashgate Publishing Company, 2003.
^ Taplin, Gardner B. The Life of Elizabeth BrowningNew Haven: Yale University Press, 1957
^ Taplin, Gardner B. The Life of Elizabeth BrowningNew Haven: Yale University Press, 1957
^ Lewis,Linda.Elizabeth Barrett Browning's Spiritual Progress. Missouri: Missouri University Press. 1997
^ Sova, Dawn B. Edgar Allan Poe: A to Z. New York City: Checkmark Books, 2001: 208. ISBN 081604161X
^ Meyers, Jeffrey. Edgar Allan Poe: His Life and Legacy. New York City: Cooper Square Press, 1992: 160. ISBN 0815410387
^ Thomas, Dwight and David K. Jackson. The Poe Log: A Documentary Life of Edgar Allan Poe, 1809-1849. New York: G. K. Hall & Co., 1987: 591. ISBN 0783814011



[edit] Bibliography

Everett, Glenn,Life of Elizabeth Browning(2002)


Julia Markus, Dared and Done: Marriage of Elizabeth Barrett and Robert Browning, Ohio University Press, 1995 ISBN 0 8214 1246 9.


Kaplan, Cora. Aurora Leigh And Other Poems. London: The Women’s Press Lmited, 1978.


Lewis,Linda.Elizabeth Barrett Browning's Spiritual Progress. Missouri: Missouri University Press. 1997


Mander,Rosalie.Mrs Browning: The Story of Elizabeth Barrett.London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson,1980


Meyers, Jeffrey. Edgar Allan Poe: His Life and Legacy. New York City: Cooper Square Press, 1992: 160. ISBN 0815410387


Peterson, William S. Sonnets From The Portuguese. Massachusetts: Barre Publishing, 1977


Pollock, Mary Sanders. Elizabeth Barrett and Robert Browning: A Creative Partnership. England: Ashgate Publishing Company, 2003


Sova, Dawn B. Edgar Allan Poe: A to Z. New York City: Checkmark Books, 2001: 208. ISBN 081604161X


Taplin, Gardner B. The Life of Elizabeth BrowningNew Haven: Yale University Press, 1957


Thomas, Dwight and David K. Jackson. The Poe Log: A Documentary Life of Edgar Allan Poe, 1809-1849. New York: G. K. Hall & Co., 1987: 591. ISBN 0783814011


[edit] External links

[3] The Life of Elizabeth Barrett Browning by Glenn Everett




Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Elizabeth Barrett Browning





Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Elizabeth Barrett Browning




Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Elizabeth Barrett Browning




Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Browning, Elizabeth Barrett.


Poems by Elizabeth Barrett Browning at PoetryFoundation.org
The Brownings: A Research Guide (Baylor University)
The Barretts of Wimpole Street at the Internet Movie Database
Project Gutenberg e-text of Sonnets from the Portuguese
Works by Elizabeth Barrett Browning at Project Gutenberg
Poems by Elizabeth Barrett Browning An extensive collection of Browning's poetry.
Elizabeth Barrett Browning Website, includes readings of Lady Geraldine's Courtship, Sonnets from the Portuguese, Runaway Slave at Pilgrim's Point, "Hiram Powers' Greek Slave", Casa Guidi Windows, and Aurora Leigh
Reely's Poetry Pages Hear Sonnets 43 and 33
Archival material relating to Elizabeth Barrett Browning listed at the UK National Register of Archives
Elizabeth Barrett Browning at Find A Grave




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elizabeth_Barrett_Browning"
Categories: 1806 births | 1861 deaths | English poets | People from County Durham | Women of the Victorian era | Sonneteers | English women writers | Victorian poetry | Women poets | Greek-English translatorsHidden categories: Articles to be expanded since March 2009 | All articles to be expanded 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Bosanski
Cymraeg
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Français
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
Polski
Português
Русский
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Suomi
Svenska
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 16:04.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
