













Maghreb - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Maghreb";
		var wgTitle = "Maghreb";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "346014";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282458817;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Maghreb

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the region.  For the Muslim prayer, see Maghrib.




The Maghreb


The Maghreb (المغرب العربي al-Maġrib al-ʿArabī), also rendered Maghrib (or rarely Moghreb), meaning "place of sunset" or "western" in Arabic, is a region in North Africa. The term is generally applied to all of Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia, but in older Arabic usage pertained only to the area of the three countries between the high ranges of the Atlas Mountains and the Mediterranean Sea. Historically, some writers also included Spain, Portugal, Sicily and Malta in the definition, especially during the periods of Arab and Muslim domination. Malta, in particular, speaks a language descended from the extinct Siculo-Arabic variety, modern Maltese. Partially isolated from the rest of the continent by the Atlas Mountains and the Sahara, the Maghreb has long been closely tied in terms of climate, landforms, population, economy, and history to the Mediterranean basin. Because sea transportation dominated people's lives for so long, peoples joined by waters shared more than those joined by land.
The region was united as a single political entity only during the first years of Arab rule (early 8th century), and again for several decades under the Almohads (1159–1229). The Arab states of North Africa established the Arab Maghreb Union in 1989 to promote cooperation and economic integration. Its members are Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya and Mauritania. Envisioned initially by Muammar al-Gaddafi as an Arab superstate, organization members expect eventually to function as a North African Common Market. Economic and political unrest, especially in Algeria, have hindered progress on the union’s joint goals.[1]




Contents


1 The Maghrebis
2 Religion
3 History
4 Maghrebi traders in Jewish history
5 Ecoregions of the Maghreb

5.1 Mediterranean Maghreb
5.2 Saharan Maghreb


6 Maghreb culture
7 Famous people of Maghrebin origin
8 Modern territories of the Maghreb
9 Medieval regions of the Maghreb
10 See also
11 References and notes
12 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] The Maghrebis




Algiers






Berber woman from Tunisia






Casablanca, Morocco


Maghrebis people are inhabitants of the Maghreb; it includes Algerians, Moroccans, Tunisians and Lybians. Maghrebis people are largely of Berber descent with Arab, Phoenician, European etc elements. A majority of the current population in the Maghreb consider themselves generally Arab in identity, regardless of mixed ethnic or linguistic heritage. However, there are significant non-Arab or non-Arab-identifying populations in the region.
Most important of the non-Arab populations found throughout the Maghreb, particularly in Morocco and Algeria, are the Berbers. They represented the majority of the pre-Islamic population. After the arrival of Islamic Arabs, Berbers assimilated in large numbers to Arab or mixed Arab-Berber ethnic identities.
Various other influences are also prominent throughout the Maghreb. In particular in northern coastal towns, several waves of European immigrants have influenced the population. Most notable were the moriscos and muladies, that is, indigenous Spaniards who had earlier converted to the Muslim faith and were fleeing, together with ethnic Arab and Berber Muslims, from the Catholic Reconquista. Other European contributions included French, Italians, and others captured by the corsairs.
Historically the Maghreb was home to significant Jewish communities, including the Berber Jews, who predated the 7th century introduction and conversion of the majority of Berbers to Islam. Later Spanish Sephardic Jews fleeing the Spanish Catholic Reconquista, established a presence in North Africa, chiefly in the urban trading centers. They have contributed to the wider population through conversion and assimilation. Many Sephardic Jews emigrated to North America in the early 20th century or to France and Israel later in the 20th century.
Among West Asians are Turks who came over with the expansion of the Ottoman Empire. A large Turkish descended population exists, particularly in Tunisia and Algeria.
Sub-Saharan Africans joined the population mix during centuries of trans-Saharan trade. Traders and slaves went to the Maghreb from the Sahel region. On the Saharan southern edge of the Maghreb are small communities of black populations, sometimes called Haratine, who are apparently descended from black populations who inhabited the Sahara during its last wet period and then migrated north.
In Algeria especially, a large European minority, the "pied noirs", immigrated and settled under French colonial rule. The overwhelming majority of these, however, left Algeria during and following the war for independence. France maintains a close relationship with the Maghreb countries.[2]

[edit] Religion
Historic records of religion in the Maghreb region show its gradual inclusion in the Classical World, with coastal colonies established first by Phoenicians, some Greeks, and later extensive conquest and colonization by the Romans. By the second century common era, the area had become a center of Latin-speaking Christianity. Both Roman settlers and Romanized populations converted to Christianity. The region produced figures such as Christian Church writer Tertullian (c. 155 – c. 202); and Christian Church martyrs or leading figures such as St Cyprian of Carthage (+ 258); St. Monica; her son the philosopher St. Augustine, Bishop of Hippo I (+ 430) (1); and St Julia of Carthage (5th century).
The domination of Christianity ended when Arab invasions brought Islam in 647. Carthage fell in 698 and the remainder of the region followed in subsequent decades. Gradual Islamization proceeded, although surviving letters showed correspondence from regional Christians to Rome up until the ninth century. Christianity was still a living faith. Christian bishoprics and dioceses continued to be active, with relations continuing with Rome. As late as Pope Benedict VII (974-983) reign, a new Archbishop of Carthage was consecrated. Evidence of Christianity in the region then faded through the tenth century.[citation needed]

During the 7th century, the region's peoples began their nearly total conversion to Islam. There is a small but thriving Jewish community, as well as a small Christian community. Most Muslims follow the Sunni Maliki school. Small Ibadi communities remain in some areas. A strong tradition of venerating marabouts and saints' tombs is found throughout regions inhabited by Berbers. Any map of the region demonstrates the tradition by the proliferation of "Sidi"s, showing places named after the marabouts. Like some other religious traditions, this has substantially decreased over the twentieth century. A network of zaouias traditionally helped proliferate basic literacy and knowledge of Islam in rural regions.

[edit] History
After the end of the Ice Age about ten thousand years ago, when the Sahara dried up, contact between the Maghreb and sub-Saharan Africa was extremely limited. Arab expansion and the spread of Islam pushed the development of trans-Saharan trade. While restricted due to the cost and dangers, the trade was important and highly profitable. Peoples traded in such goods as salt, gold, ivory, and slaves available from the Sahel regions.
Many ports along the Maghreb coast were occupied by Phoenicians, particularly Carthaginians. With the defeat of Carthage, Rome took over many of these ports, and ultimately it took control of the entire Maghreb north of the Atlas Mountains. Remaining outside its control were only some of the most mountainous regions like the Moroccan Rif.
The Arabs reached the Maghreb in early Umayyad times. Their control over it was quite weak. Various Islamic "heresies", such as the Ibadis and the Shia, adopted by some Berbers, quickly threw off Caliphal control in the name of their interpretations of Islam.
The Arabic language became widespread only later, as a result of the invasion of the Banu Hilal, unleashed by the Fatimids in punishment for their Zirid clients' defection in the 1100s. Throughout this period, the Maghreb most often was divided into three states roughly corresponding to modern Morocco, western Algeria, and eastern Algeria and Tunisia. The region was occasionally briefly unified, as under the Almohads, and briefly under the Hafsids).
After the Middle Ages, the Ottoman Empire loosely controlled the area east of Morocco. After the 19th century, areas of the Maghreb were colonized by France, Spain and later Italy.
Today more than two and a half million Maghrebin immigrants live in France, especially from Algeria. In addition, there are 3 million French of Maghrebin origin (in 1999) (with at least one grand-parent from Algeria, Morocco or Tunisia)[3].

[edit] Maghrebi traders in Jewish history
In the tenth century, as the social and political environment in Baghdad became increasingly hostile to Jews, many Jewish traders emigrated to the Maghreb, especially Tunisia. Over the following two or three centuries, such Jewish traders became known as the Maghribis, a distinctive social group who traveled throughout the Mediterranean World. They passed this identification on from father to son.[4]

[edit] Ecoregions of the Maghreb
The Maghreb is divided into a Mediterranean climate region in the north, and the arid Sahara to the south. The Magreb's variations in elevation, rainfall, temperature, and soils give rise to distinct communities of plants and animals. The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) identifies several distinct ecoregions in the Maghreb.

[edit] Mediterranean Maghreb
The portions of the Maghreb between the Atlas Mountains and the Mediterranean Sea, along with coastal Tripolitania and Cyrenaica in Libya, are home to Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub. These ecoregions share many species of plants and animals with other portions of Mediterranean Basin. The southern extent of the Mediterranean Maghreb corresponds with the 100 mm isohyet, or the southern range of the European Olive (Olea europea)[5] and Esparto Grass (Stipa tenacissima).[6]

Mediterranean acacia-argania dry woodlands and succulent thickets (Morocco, Canary Islands (Spain), Western Sahara)
Mediterranean dry woodlands and steppe (Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia)
Mediterranean woodlands and forests (Algeria, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia)
Mediterranean conifer and mixed forests (Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, Spain)
Mediterranean High Atlas juniper steppe (Morocco)


[edit] Saharan Maghreb
The Sahara extends across northern Africa from the Atlantic Ocean to the Red Sea. Its center is hyper-arid and supports little plant or animal life, but the northern portion of the desert receives occasional winter rains, while the strip along the Atlantic coast receives moisture from marine fog, which nourish a greater variety of plants and animals. The northern edge of the Sahara corresponds to the 100 mm isohyet, which is also the northern range of the Date Palm (Phoenix dactylifera).[6]

North Saharan steppe and woodlands: This ecoregion lies along the northern edge of the Sahara, next to the Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub ecoregions of the Mediterranean Maghreb and Cyrenaica. Winter rains sustain shrublands and dry woodlands that form a transition between the Mediterranean climate regions to the north and the hyper-arid Sahara proper to the south. It covers 1,675,300 square kilometers (646,800 square miles) in Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Tunisia, and Western Sahara. [7]
Atlantic coastal desert: The Atlantic coastal desert occupies a narrow strip along the Atlantic coast, where fog generated offshore by the cool Canary Current provides sufficient moisture to sustain a variety of lichens, succulents, and shrubs. It covers 39,900 square kilometers (15,400 square miles) in Western Sahara and Mauritania.[8]
Sahara desert: This ecoregion covers the hyper-arid central portion of the Sahara where rainfall is minimal and sporadic. Vegetation is rare, and this ecoregion consists mostly of sand dunes (erg), stone plateaus (hamada), gravel plains (reg), dry valleys (wadi), and salt flats. It covers 4,639,900 square kilometers (1,791,500 square miles) of Algeria, Chad, Egypt, Libya, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, and Sudan.[9]
Saharan halophytics: Seasonally-flooded saline depressions in the Maghreb are home to halophytic, or salt-adapted, plant communities. The Saharan halophytics cover 54,000 square kilometers (20,800 square miles), including Tunisian salt lakes of central Tunisia, Chott Melghir in Algeria, and other areas of Egypt, Algeria, Mauritania, and Western Sahara.[10]


[edit] Maghreb culture
Main articles: Arabic music, Berber music, Berber cuisine, and Arab cuisine
The Maghreb shares a common culinary tradition. Habib Bourguiba defined it as the part of the Arab world where couscous is the staple food, as opposed to Eastern Arab countries where white rice is the staple food. In terms of food, similarities beyond the starches are found throughout the Arab world.

[edit] Famous people of Maghrebin origin
Main article: Maghreb people









Masinissa









Juba II









Apuleius









Septimius Severus











Caracalla









Macrinus









Pope Victor I









Pope Gelasius I











Augustine of Hippo









Monica









Tertullian









Tariq ibn Ziyad











Abd ar-Rahman I









Ibn Battuta









Ibn Khaldoun









Abd al-Qadir











Abd el-Krim









Zinedine Zidane







[edit] Modern territories of the Maghreb

Algeria
Ceuta (a Spanish exclave)
Libya
Mauritania
Melilla (a Spanish exclave)
Morocco
Tunisia
Western Sahara (claimed by Morocco)


[edit] Medieval regions of the Maghreb

Ifriqiya
Djerid
Sous
Zab
Draa Valley
Hodna
Rif
Maghreb al-Awsat (Central Maghreb)
Morocco (Maghreb al-Aqsa)
Tamesna
Tripolitania


[edit] See also

Amazigh Moroccan Democratic Party
Arab Maghreb Union
Barbary Coast
Berber
Jews and Judaism in North Africa
Moors
Maghreb people
Maghrebi script
History of Morocco
History of Algeria
History of Tunisia
Maghreb toponymy
North Africa
Northwest Africa
Middle East
Tamazgha
Mashriq


[edit] References and notes


^ "Maghreb" (html). The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. 2001-05.. http://www.bartelby.com/65/ma/Maghreb.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-11. 
^ "France and Maghreb - An enhanced partnership with the Maghreb (March 20, 2007)". French ministry of Foreign and European Affairs. http://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/en/country-files_156/north-africa_5493/france-and-maghreb_5495/an-enhanced-partnership-with-the-maghreb-20.03.07_8821.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-11. 
^ An Estimation of the Foreign-Origin Populations of France, Michèle Tribalat
^ Avner Greif (June 1993). Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The Maghribi Traders' Coalition. American Economic Association in its journal American Economic Review. http://ideas.repec.org/a/aea/aecrev/v83y1993i3p525-48.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-11. . See also Greif's "Reputation and Coalitions in Medieval Trade: Evidence on the Maghribi Traders" in the Journal of Economic History Vol. XLIX, No. 4 (Dec. 1989) pp.857-882
^ Dallman, Peter R. (1998) Plant Life in the World's Mediterranean Climates. California Native Plant Society/University of California Press, Berkeley. ISBN 0-520-20809-9
^ a b Wickens, Gerald E. (1998) Ecophysiology of Economic Plants in Arid and Semi-Arid Lands. Springer, Berlin. ISBN 978-3-540-52171-6
^ "North Saharan steppe and woodlands" WWF Scientific Report [1]. Accessed December 31, 2007.
^ "Atlantic coastal desert" WWF Scientific Report [2]. Accessed December 31, 2007.
^ "Sahara desert" WWF Scientific Report [3]. Accessed December 31, 2007.
^ "Saharan halophytics" WWF Scientific Report [4]. Accessed December 31, 2007.



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Magreb 



Politics, economics, and human affairs analysis in the Maghhreb
News and Views of the Maghreb








v • d • e

Regions of the world










Africa
North (Maghreb) · 
Sub-Saharan (Central · Southern · West · East)
 



Americas
North (Northern • Middle • Central • Caribbean) · South (Southern Cone) · Anglo · Latin


Oceania
Australasia · Melanesia · Micronesia · Polynesia



Asia
East (Far East • Asia-Pacific)  · Southeast (Indochina • Malay Archipelago)  · South  · Southwest  · Central · North (Siberia)


Polar
Arctic · Antarctica



Europe
Western · Central · Eastern · Northern · Southern


Oceans
World · Arctic · Atlantic · Indian · Pacific · Southern









See also Continents of the world












v • d • e

Cultural Macro-Regions and their sub-entities





Western world

Western Europe · Central Europe · North America · Latin America · Australia






Eastern Slavic World

Russia · Ukraine · Belarus · Kazakhstan · Kyrgyzstan






Latin America

Central America · Caribbean · South America






Arab world

North Africa · Western Asia






Sinosphere

Mainland China · Taiwan · Japan · Korea · Vietnam · Mongolia · Singapore ·






Greater India

Indian Subcontinent · Indochina






Turkic peoples

Eastern Europe · Central Asia · Southern Europe · Turkey






Hellenistic world

Southern Europe · Eastern Europe · Anatolia · Southwest Asia · Middle East · Greece · Cyprus






Austronesia/
Malay world

Taiwan · Malay Archipelago · Melanesia · Micronesia · Polynesia · Madagascar · Hawaii






Aboriginal Australia

Australian Aborigines · Tasmanian Aborigines · Victorian Aborigines ·






Indigenous Culture of the Americas

Bolivia · Guatemala · Mexico · Paraguay · Peru · Canadian Aborigines · Native Americans · Native Alaskans · Inuit · Mapuche






Iranian World

Greater Iran · Iran · Central Asia · The Caucasus · Kurdistan · Afghanistan · Tajikistan · Republic of Azerbaijan · Uzbekistan · Zazas · Mishmahig






Bantu peoples

Southern Africa · Congo River · Equatorial Guinea · Kenya · Tanzania · Uganda · Rwanda · Burundi · Gabon · Cameroon · Nigeria






Unaffiliated

Israel






See also:

List of civilizations · Regions of the world · Clash of Civilizations · World history













v • d • e

French overseas empire





Former










v • d • e

Former French colonies in Africa and the Indian Ocean





Mahgreb

Algeria · Morocco (Arguin Island) · Tunisia






French West Africa

Côte d'Ivoire · Dahomey · French Sudan · Guinea · Mauritania · Niger · Senegal · Upper Volta






 

French Togoland · James Island






French Equatorial Africa

Chad · Gabon · Middle Congo · Oubangui-Chari






Comoros

Anjouan · Grande Comore · Mohéli






 

French Somaliland (Djibouti) · Madagascar · Ile de France · Seychelles















v • d • e

Former French colonies in the Americas






New France  (Acadia • Louisiana • Canada • Terre Neuve) 1655 – 1763







Inini · Berbice · Saint-Domingue (Haiti) · Tobago · Virgin Islands · France Antarctique · France Équinoxiale






French West India Company














v • d • e

Former French colonies in Asia and Oceania





French India

Chandernagor · Coromandel Coast · Madras · Malabar · Mahé · Pondichéry · Karaikal · Yanaon






French Indochina

Cambodia · Laos · Vietnam (Annam • Cochinchina • Tonkin)






Other Asian

Alaouites · Alexandretta-Hatay · Ceylon · Kwangchowan






Oceania

New Hebrides (Vanuatu)






French East India Company











Present






v • d • e

 Overseas departments and territories of France










 
Inhabited areas










Overseas departments1


French Guiana · Guadeloupe · Martinique · Réunion3, 5








Overseas collectivities


French Polynesia · Mayotte2, 3, 4 · Saint Barthélemy · Saint Martin · Saint Pierre and Miquelon · Wallis and Futuna







Special status


New Caledonia

















 
Uninhabited areas









Pacific Ocean

Clipperton Island






French Southern and
Antarctic Lands





Île Amsterdam · Île Saint-Paul · Crozet Islands · Kerguelen Islands · Adélie Land







Scattered islands in
the Indian Ocean


Bassas da India3 · Europa Island3 · Glorioso Islands2, 3, 4 · Juan de Nova Island3 · Tromelin Island5















1 Also known as overseas regions.  2 Claimed by Comoros.  3 Claimed by Madagascar.  4 Claimed by Seychelles.  5 Claimed by Mauritius.











Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maghreb"
Categories: Maghreb | North Africa | Regions of AfricaHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Arpetan
বাংলা
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Français
Frysk
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Қазақша
Kurdî / كوردی
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
Wolof
中文









 This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 00:40.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
