











RMS Titanic - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "RMS_Titanic";
		var wgTitle = "RMS Titanic";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "19285924";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 284244819;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 


wgOggPlayer.msg = {"ogg-play": "Play", "ogg-pause": "Pause", "ogg-stop": "Stop", "ogg-no-player": "Sorry, your system does not appear to have any supported player software.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload a player\x3c/a\x3e.", "ogg-player-videoElement": "Native browser support", "ogg-player-oggPlugin": "Browser plugin", "ogg-player-cortado": "Cortado (Java)", "ogg-player-vlc-mozilla": "VLC", "ogg-player-vlc-activex": "VLC (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-quicktime-mozilla": "QuickTime", "ogg-player-quicktime-activex": "QuickTime (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-totem": "Totem", "ogg-player-kaffeine": "Kaffeine", "ogg-player-kmplayer": "KMPlayer", "ogg-player-mplayerplug-in": "mplayerplug-in", "ogg-player-thumbnail": "Still image only", "ogg-player-selected": "(selected)", "ogg-use-player": "Use player:", "ogg-more": "More…", "ogg-download": "Download file", "ogg-desc-link": "About this file", "ogg-dismiss": "Close", "ogg-player-soundthumb": "No player", "ogg-no-xiphqt": "You do not appear to have the XiphQT component for QuickTime.\nQuickTime cannot play Ogg files without this component.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload XiphQT\x3c/a\x3e or choose another player."};
wgOggPlayer.cortadoUrl = "http://upload.wikimedia.org/jars/cortado.jar";
wgOggPlayer.extPathUrl = "/w/extensions/OggHandler";


.ogg-player-options {
	border: solid 1px #ccc;
	padding: 2pt;
	text-align: left;
	font-size: 10pt;
}
 <!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); RMS Titanic

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"Titanic" redirects here. For other uses, see Titanic (disambiguation).






RMS Titanic before departing Southampton, England. Photo taken Good Friday 5 April 1912


Career



Name:
RMS Titanic


Owner:
 White Star Line


Port of Registry:
Liverpool


Route:
Southampton to New York City


Builder:
Harland and Wolff yards in Belfast, UK


Yard number:
401


Laid down:
31 March 1909


Launched:
31 May 1911


Christened:
Not christened


Completed:
31 March 1912


Maiden voyage:
10 April 1912


Identification:
Radio Callsign "MGY"
UK Official Number: 131428


Fate:
Sank on 15 April 1912 after hitting an iceberg


General characteristics


Class and type:
Olympic-class ocean liner


Tonnage:
46,328 gross register tons (GRT)


Displacement:
52,310 tons


Length:
882 ft 9 in (269.1 m)[1]


Beam:
92 ft 0 in (28.0 m)[1]


Height:
175 ft (53.3 m) (Keel to top of funnels)


Draught:
34 ft 7 in (10.5 m)


Depth:
64 ft 6 in (19.7 m)[1]


Decks:
9 (Lettered A through G with boilers below)


Installed power:


24 double-ended (six furnace) and 5 single-ended (three furnace) Scotch marine boilers
Two four-cylinder reciprocating triple-expansion steam engines each producing 15,000 hp for the two outboard wing propellers at 75 revolutions per minute[2]
One low-pressure turbine producing 16,000 hp[2]
46,000 HP (design) - 59,000 HP (maximum)[3]




Propulsion:


Two bronze triple-blade wing propellers
One bronze quadruple-blade centre propeller.




Speed:


21 knots (39 km/h; 24 mph)
23 knots (43 km/h; 26 mph) (maximum)




Capacity:

Passengers and crew (fully loaded):

3547

Staterooms (840 total):

First Class: 416
Second Class: 162
Third Class: 262
plus 40 open berthing areas




The RMS Titanic was an Olympic-class passenger liner owned by the White Star Line and built at the Harland and Wolff shipyard in Belfast, United Kingdom. For her time, she was the largest passenger steamship in the world.
On the night of 14 April 1912, during her maiden voyage, Titanic hit an iceberg and sank two hours and forty minutes later, early on 15 April 1912. The sinking resulted in the deaths of 1,517 people, making it one of the most deadly peacetime maritime disasters in history. The high casualty rate was due in part to the fact that, although complying with the regulations of the time, the ship did not carry enough lifeboats for everyone aboard. The ship had a total lifeboat capacity of 1,178 people even though her maximum capacity was 3,547 people. A disproportionate number of men died also, due to the women-and-children-first protocol that was followed.
The Titanic used some of the most advanced technology available at the time and was, after the sinking, popularly believed to have been described as “unsinkable”.[4] It was a great shock to many that, despite the extensive safety features and experienced crew, the Titanic sank. The frenzy on the part of the media about Titanic's famous victims, the legends about the sinking, the resulting changes to maritime law, and the discovery of the wreck have contributed to the interest in and fame of the Titanic that continues to this day.




Contents


1 Construction

1.1 Features
1.2 Lifeboats
1.3 Comparisons with the Olympic


2 Ship history

2.1 Maiden (and only) voyage
2.2 Sinking
2.3 Lifeboats launched
2.4 Final minutes


3 Aftermath

3.1 Arrival of Carpathia in New York
3.2 Survivors, victims and statistics
3.3 Retrieval and burial of the dead
3.4 Memorials


4 Investigations into the RMS Titanic disaster

4.1 SS Californian inquiry


5 Rediscovery of the Titanic

5.1 Current condition of the wreck
5.2 Ownership and litigation


6 Possible factors in the sinking

6.1 Steel plates and iron rivets
6.2 Rudder and turning ability
6.3 Iceberg impact
6.4 Alternative theories


7 Legends and myths regarding the RMS Titanic

7.1 Unsinkable
7.2 David Sarnoff, wireless reports and the use of SOS
7.3 Titanic's band
7.4 The Titanic curse


8 See also
9 References

9.1 Explanatory notes
9.2 Notes
9.3 Bibliography


10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Construction




The first-class Grand Staircase aboard the Titanic.


The Titanic was a White Star Line ocean liner, built at the Harland and Wolff shipyard in Belfast, and designed to compete with the rival Cunard Line's Lusitania and Mauretania. The Titanic, along with her Olympic-class sisters, the Olympic and the soon to be built Britannic, were intended to be the largest, most luxurious ships ever to operate. The designers were William Pirrie,[5] a director of both Harland and Wolff and White Star, naval architect Thomas Andrews, Harland and Wolff's construction manager and head of their design department,[6] and Alexander Carlisle, the shipyard's chief draughtsman and general manager.[7] Carlisle's role in this project was the design of the superstructure of these ships, particularly the superstructures' streamlined joining to the hulls[citation needed] as well as the implementation of an efficient lifeboat davit design. Carlisle would leave the project in 1910, before the ships were launched, when he became a shareholder in Welin Davit & Engineering Company Ltd, the firm making the davits.[8]
Construction of RMS Titanic, funded by the American J.P. Morgan and his International Mercantile Marine Co., began on 31 March, 1909. Titanic's hull was launched on 31 May 1911, and her outfitting was completed by 31 March the following year. She was 882 feet 9 inches (269.1 m) long and 92 feet 0 inches (28.0 m) wide,[1] with a gross register tonnage of 46,328 long tons and a height from the water line to the boat deck of 59 feet (18 m). She was equipped with two reciprocating four-cylinder, triple-expansion, inverted steam engines and one low-pressure Parsons turbine, which powered three propellers. There were 29 boilers fired by 159 coal burning furnaces that made possible a top speed of 23 knots (43 km/h; 26 mph). Only three of the four 62 feet (19 m) funnels were functional: the fourth, which served only as a vent, was added to make the ship look more impressive. The ship could carry a total of 3,547 passengers and crew and, because she carried mail, her name was given the prefix RMS (Royal Mail Steamer) as well as SS (Steam Ship).

Features




Gymnasium aboard the Titanic.


In her time, Titanic surpassed all rivals in luxury and opulence. She offered an on-board swimming pool, a gymnasium, a Turkish bath, libraries in both the first and second-class, and a squash court.[9] First-class common rooms were adorned with ornate wood panelling, expensive furniture and other decorations.[10] In addition, the Café Parisien offered cuisine for the first-class passengers, with a sunlit veranda fitted with trellis decorations.[11]
The ship incorporated technologically advanced features for the period. She had an extensive electrical subsystem with steam-powered generators and ship-wide wiring feeding electric lights. She also boasted two Marconi radios, including a powerful 1,500-watt set manned by two operators working in shifts, allowing constant contact and the transmission of many passenger messages.[12] First class passengers paid a hefty fee for such amenities. The most expensive one-way trans-Atlantic passage was $4,350 (which is more than $80,000 in today's currency).[13]

Lifeboats
At the design stage Carlisle suggested that Titanic use a new, larger type of davit which could give the ship the potential to carry 48 lifeboats; these would have provided enough places for everyone on board, but not enough for the number of people the ship could carry. However, the White Star Line, while agreeing to the larger davits, decided that only 16 wooden lifeboats (16 being the minimum allowed by the board of trade, based on the Titanic's projected tonnage) would be carried (there were also four folding lifeboats, called collapsibles), which could accommodate only 52% of the people aboard. At the time, the Board of Trade's regulations stated that British vessels over 10,000 tons must carry 16 lifeboats with a capacity of 5,500 cubic feet (160 m3), plus enough capacity in rafts and floats for 75% (or 50% in case of a vessel with watertight bulkheads) of that in the lifeboats. Therefore, the White Star Line actually provided more lifeboat accommodation than was legally required.[14] The regulations made no extra provision for larger ships because they had not been changed since 1894, when the largest passenger ship under consideration was only 13,000 long tons (the Cunard Line's Lucania) and because of the expected difficulty in getting away a greater number than 16 boats in any emergency.[15] Carlisle told the official inquiry that he had discussed the matter with J. Bruce Ismay, White Star's Managing Director, but in his evidence Ismay denied that he had ever heard of this, nor did he recollect noticing such provision in the plans of the ship he had inspected.[8][16] However in spending the money for the expensive Welin davits, the White Star Line intended, at their discretion, to fit more lifeboats to Olympic & Titanic in future refits and annual overhauls.[citation needed] The company's main goal after constructing the ships were to get them into active service with lifeboat upgrades enacted according to the ships' performances.

Comparisons with the Olympic
The Titanic closely resembled her older sister Olympic. Although she enclosed more space and therefore had a larger gross register tonnage, the hull was almost the same length as the Olympic's. However, there were a few differences. Two of the most noticeable were that half of the Titanics's forward promenade A-Deck (below the boat deck) was enclosed against outside weather, and her B-Deck configuration was different from the Olympic's. As built the Olympic did not have an equivalent of the Titanic's Café Parisien: the feature was not added until 1913. Some of the flaws found on the Olympic, such as the creaking of the aft expansion joint, were corrected on the Titanic. The skid lights that provided natural illumination on A-deck were round, while on Olympic they were oval. The Titanic's wheelhouse was made narrower and longer than the Olympic's.[17] These, and other modifications, made the Titanic 1,004 gross register tons larger than the Olympic and thus the largest active ship in the world during her maiden voyage in April 1912.

Ship history

Maiden (and only) voyage




Titanic on her way after the near collision with the SS New York. On the left can be seen the Oceanic and the New York.


The vessel began her maiden voyage from Southampton, England, bound for New York City, New York, on Wednesday, 10 April 1912, with Captain Edward J. Smith in command. As the Titanic left her berth, her wake caused the liner City of New York, which was docked nearby, to break away from her moorings, whereupon she was drawn dangerously close (about four feet) to the Titanic before a tugboat towed the New York away.[18] The near accident delayed departure for one hour[citation needed]. After crossing the English Channel, the Titanic stopped at Cherbourg, France, to board additional passengers and stopped again the next day at Queenstown (known today as Cobh), Ireland. As harbour facilities at Queenstown were inadequate for a ship of her size, Titanic had to anchor off-shore, with small boats, known as tenders, ferrying the embarking passengers out to her. When she finally set out for New York, there were 2,240 people aboard.[19]
John Coffey, a 23-year-old crewmember, jumped ship by stowing away on a tender and hid amongst mailbags headed for Queenstown. Coffey stated that the reason for smuggling himself off the liner was that he held a superstition about sailing and specifically about travelling on the Titanic. However, he later signed on to join the crew of the Mauretania.[20]




Captain Edward J. Smith master of the Titanic.


On the maiden voyage of the Titanic some of the most prominent people of the day were travelling in first–class. Some of these included millionaire John Jacob Astor IV and his wife Madeleine Force Astor, industrialist Benjamin Guggenheim, Macy's owner Isidor Straus and his wife Ida, Denver millionairess Margaret "Molly" Brown, Sir Cosmo Duff Gordon and his wife couturière Lucy (Lady Duff-Gordon), George Elkins Widener and his wife Eleanor; cricketer and businessman John Borland Thayer with his wife Marian and their seventeen-year-old son Jack, journalist William Thomas Stead, the Countess of Rothes, United States presidential aide Archibald Butt, author and socialite Helen Churchill Candee, author Jacques Futrelle his wife May and their friends, Broadway producers Henry and Rene Harris and silent film actress Dorothy Gibson among others.[21] Also travelling in first–class were White Star Line's managing director J. Bruce Ismay and the ship's builder Thomas Andrews, who was on board to observe any problems and assess the general performance of the new ship.[21]

Sinking
Main article: Timeline of the sinking of the RMS Titanic




Route and location of the RMS Titanic.


On the night of Sunday, 14 April 1912, the temperature had dropped to near freezing and the ocean was calm. The moon was not visible and the sky was clear. Captain Smith, in response to iceberg warnings received via wireless over the preceding few days, altered the Titanic's course slightly to the south. That Sunday at 13:45,[a] a message from the steamer Amerika warned that large icebergs lay in the Titanic's path, but as Jack Phillips and Harold Bride, the Marconi wireless radio operators, were employed by Marconi [22] and paid to relay messages to and from the passengers,[23] they were not focused on relaying such "non-essential" ice messages to the bridge.[24] Later that evening, another report of numerous large icebergs, this time from the Mesaba, also failed to reach the bridge.
At 23:40, while sailing about 400 miles south of the Grand Banks of Newfoundland, lookouts Fredrick Fleet and Reginald Lee spotted a large iceberg directly ahead of the ship. Fleet sounded the ship's bell three times and telephoned the bridge exclaiming, "Iceberg, right ahead!". First Officer Murdoch gave the order "hard-a-starboard", using the traditional tiller order for an abrupt turn to port (left), and the engines to be put in full reverse (although a survivor from the engine room testified that, as he recalled, the indicator of the telegraph had moved to "stop", and only after the impact).[25][26] A collision was inevitable and the iceberg brushed the ship's starboard side (right side), buckling the hull in several places and popping out rivets below the waterline over a length of 299 feet (90 m). As seawater filled the forward compartments, the watertight doors shut. However, while the ship could stay afloat with four flooded compartments, five were filling with water. The five water-filled compartments weighed down the ship so that the tops of the forward watertight bulkheads fell below the ship's waterline, allowing water to pour into additional compartments. Captain Smith, alerted by the jolt of the impact, arrived on the bridge and ordered a full stop. Shortly after midnight on 15 April, following an inspection by the ship's officers and Thomas Andrews, the lifeboats were ordered to be readied and a distress call was sent out.




Photograph of an iceberg in the vicinity of the RMS Titanic's sinking taken on 15 April 1912 by the chief steward of the liner Prinz Adelbert who stated the berg had red anti-fouling paint of the kind found on the hull from below Titanic's waterline.


Wireless operators Jack Phillips and Harold Bride were busy sending out CQD, the international distress signal. Several ships responded, including Mount Temple, Frankfurt and Titanic's sister ship, Olympic, but none was close enough to make it in time.[27] The closest ship to respond was Cunard Line's Carpathia 58 miles (93 km) away, which could arrive in an estimated four hours—too late to rescue all of Titanic's passengers. The only land–based location that received the distress call from Titanic was a wireless station at Cape Race, Newfoundland.[27]
From the bridge, the lights of a nearby ship could be seen off the port side. As it was not responding to wireless, Fourth Officer Boxhall and Quartermaster Rowe attempted signalling the ship with a Morse lamp and later with distress rockets, but the ship never appeared to respond.[28] The Californian, which was nearby and stopped for the night because of ice, also saw lights in the distance. The Californian's wireless was turned off, and the wireless operator had gone to bed for the night. Just before he went to bed at around 23:00 the Californian's radio operator attempted to warn the Titanic that there was ice ahead, but he was cut off by an exhausted Jack Phillips, who snapped, "Shut up, shut up, I am busy; I am working Cape Race", referring to the Newfoundland wireless station. [29] When the Californian's officers first saw the ship, they tried signalling her with their Morse lamp, but also never appeared to receive a response. Later, they noticed the Titanic's distress signals over the lights and informed Captain Stanley Lord. Even though there was much discussion about the mysterious ship, which to the officers on duty appeared to be moving away, the Californian did not wake her wireless operator until morning.[28]

Lifeboats launched




Sinking of the Titanic by Henry Reuterdahl, drawn based on radio descriptions.


The first lifeboat launched was Lifeboat 7 on the starboard side with 28 people on board out of a capacity of 65. It was lowered at around 00:40 as believed by the British Inquiry.[30] Lifeboat 5 was launched two to three minutes later. The Titanic carried 20 lifeboats with a total capacity of 1,178 people. While not enough to hold all of the passengers and crew, the Titanic carried more boats than was required by the British Board of Trade Regulations. At the time, the number of lifeboats required was determined by a ship's gross register tonnage, rather than her human capacity.
The Titanic showed no outward signs of being in imminent danger, and passengers were reluctant to leave the apparent safety of the ship to board small lifeboats. As a result, most of the boats were launched partially empty; one boat meant to hold 40 people left the Titanic with only 12 people on board it. With "Women and children first" the imperative for loading lifeboats, Second Officer Lightoller, who was loading boats on the port side, allowed men to board only if oarsmen were needed, even if there was room. First Officer Murdoch, who was loading boats on the starboard side, let men on board if women were absent. As the ship's list increased people started to become nervous, and some lifeboats began leaving fully loaded. By 02:05, the entire bow was under water, and all the lifeboats, save for two, had been launched.

Final minutes




Survivors aboard a collapsible lifeboat, viewed from the Carpathia.


Around 02:10, the stern rose out of the water exposing the propellers, and by 02:17 the waterline had reached the boat deck. The last two lifeboats floated off the deck, one upside down, the other half-filled with water. Shortly afterwards, the forward funnel collapsed, crushing part of the bridge and people in the water. On deck, people were scrambling towards the stern or jumping overboard in hopes of reaching a lifeboat. The ship's stern slowly rose into the air, and everything unsecured crashed towards the water. While the stern rose, the electrical system finally failed and the lights went out. Shortly afterwards, the stress on the hull caused Titanic to break apart between the last two funnels, and the bow went completely under. The stern righted itself slightly and then rose vertically. After a few moments, at 02:20, this too sank into the ocean.
Only two of the 18 launched lifeboats rescued people after the ship sank. Lifeboat 4 was close by and picked up five people, two of whom later died. Close to an hour later, lifeboat 14 went back and rescued four people, one of whom died afterwards. Other people managed to climb onto the lifeboats that floated off the deck. There were some arguments in some of the other lifeboats about going back, but many survivors were afraid of being swamped by people trying to climb into the lifeboat or being pulled down by the suction from the sinking Titanic, though it turned out that there had been very little suction.
As the ship fell into the depths, the two sections behaved very differently. The streamlined bow planed off approximately 2,000 feet (609 m) below the surface and slowed somewhat, landing relatively gently. The stern plunged violently to the ocean floor, the hull being torn apart along the way from massive implosions caused by compression of the air still trapped inside. The stern smashed into the bottom at considerable speed, grinding the hull deep into the silt.
After steaming under a forced draft for just under four hours, the RMS Carpathia arrived in the area and at 04:10 began rescuing survivors. By 08:30 she picked up the last lifeboat with survivors and left the area at 08:50 bound for New York.[31]

Aftermath

Arrival of Carpathia in New York




Carpathia docked at Pier 54 in New York following the rescue.


On 18 April, the Carpathia docked at Pier 54 at Little West 12th Street in New York with the survivors. It arrived at night and was greeted by thousands of people. The Titanic had been headed for 20th Street. The Carpathia dropped off the empty Titanic lifeboats at Pier 59, as property of the White Star Line, before unloading the survivors at Pier 54. Both piers were part of the Chelsea Piers built to handle luxury liners of the day. As news of the disaster spread, many people were shocked that the Titanic could sink with such great loss of life despite all of her technological advances. Newspapers were filled with stories and descriptions of the disaster and were eager to get the latest information. Many charities were set up to help the victims and their families, many of whom lost their sole breadwinner, or, in the case of third-class survivors, lost everything they owned.[32] The people of Southampton were deeply affected by the sinking. According to the Hampshire Chronicle on 20 April 1912, almost 1,000 local families were directly affected. Almost every street in the Chapel district of the town lost more than one resident and over 500 households lost a member.[33]

Survivors, victims and statistics
See also: Maritime disasters, List of passengers on board RMS Titanic, and List of crew members on board RMS Titanic


Category
Number aboard
Number of survivors
Percentage survived
Number lost
Percentage lost


First class
329
199
60.5 %
130
39.5 %


Second class
285
119
41.7 %
166
58.3 %


Third class
710
174
24.5 %
536
75.5 %


Crew
899
214
23.8 %
685
76.2 %


Total
2,223
706
31.8 %
1,517
68.2 %






New York Herald front page about the Titanic disaster.


Of a total of 2,223 people aboard the Titanic only 706 survived the disaster and 1,517 perished.[34] The majority of deaths were caused by hypothermia in the 28 °F (−2 °C) water. Men and members of the lower classes were less likely to survive. 92 percent of the men perished in second class. Third class passengers fared very badly.
Six of the seven children in first class and all of the children in second class were saved, whereas only 34 percent were saved in third class. Nearly every first-class woman survived, compared with 86 percent of those in second class and less than half of those in third class. Over all, only 20 percent of the men survived, compared to nearly 75 percent of the women. First-class men were four times as likely to survive as second-class men, and twice as likely to survive as third-class men.[35]
Another disparity is that a greater percentage of British passengers died than American passengers, some sources claim this could be because many Britons of the time were too polite to force their way onto the lifeboats.[36]

In one case in the third class, a Swedish family lost the mother, Alma Pålsson, and her four children, all aged under 10. The father was waiting for them to arrive at the destination. "Paulson's grief was the most acute of any who visited the offices of the White Star, but his loss was the greatest. His whole family had been wiped out."[37]
The sailors aboard the ship CS Mackay-Bennett which recovered bodies from Titanic, who were very upset by the discovery of the unknown boy's body, paid for a monument and he was buried on 4 May 1912 with a copper pendant placed in his coffin by the sailors that read "Our Babe". The unknown child was later positively identified as Sidney Goodwin.
One survivor, stewardess Violet Jessop, who had been on board the RMS Olympic when she collided with HMS Hawke in 1911, went on to survive the sinking of HMHS Britannic in 1916.
Titanic survivors who have recently died include Lillian Asplund on 6 May 2006 and Barbara Dainton (née West) on 16 October 2007.
Millvina Dean, who was only two months old at the time of the sinking, is the only living survivor of the Titanic. Although she is 97 years old, she has remained active in Titanic-related events and lives in Southampton, England.
There are many stories relating to dogs on the Titanic. Apparently, a passenger released the dogs just before the ship went down; they were seen running up and down the decks. At least two dogs survived.[38]


Retrieval and burial of the dead




Marker of the unknown child who was later positively identified as Sidney Leslie Goodwin.


Once the massive loss of life became clear, White Star Line chartered the cable ship CS Mackay-Bennett from Halifax, Nova Scotia to retrieve bodies. Three other ships followed in the search, the cable ship Minia, the lighthouse supply ship Montmagny and the sealing vessel Algerine. Each ship left with embalming supplies, undertakers, and clergy. Of the 333 victims that were eventually recovered, 328 were retrieved by the Canadian ships and five more by passing North Atlantic steamships. For some unknown reason, numbers 324 and 325 were unused, and the six passengers buried at sea by the Carpathia also went unnumbered.[39] In mid-May 1912, over 200 miles (320 km) from the site of the sinking, the Oceanic recovered three bodies, numbers 331, 332 and 333, who were occupants of Collapsible A, which was swamped in the last moments of the sinking. Several people managed to reach this lifeboat, although some died during the night. When Fifth Officer Harold Lowe rescued the survivors of Collapsible A, he left the three dead bodies in the boat: Thomas Beattie, a first-class passenger, and two crew members, a fireman and a seaman. The bodies were buried at sea from Oceanic.[40]
The first body recovery ship to reach the site of the sinking, the cable ship CS Mackay-Bennett found so many bodies that the embalming supplies aboard were quickly exhausted. Health regulations only permitted that embalmed bodies could be returned to port.[41] Captain Larnder of the Mackay-Bennett and undertakers aboard decided to preserve all bodies of First Class passengers, justifying their decision by the need to visually identify wealthy men to resolve any disputes over large estates. As a result the burials at sea were Third Class passengers and crew. Larnder himself claimed that as a mariner, he would expect to be buried at sea.[42] However complaints about the burials at sea were made by families and undertakers. Later ships such as Minia found fewer bodies, requiring fewer embalming supplies, and were able to limit burials at sea to bodies which were too damaged to preserve.
Bodies recovered were preserved to be taken to Halifax, the closest city to the sinking with direct rail and steamship connections. The Halifax coroner, John Henry Barnstead, developed a detailed system to identify bodies and safeguard personal possessions. His identification system would later be used to identify victims of the Halifax Explosion in 1917. Relatives from across North America came to identify and claim bodies. A large temporary morgue was set up in a curling rink and undertakers were called in from all across Eastern Canada to assist.[40] Some bodies were shipped to be buried in their hometowns across North America and Europe. About two thirds of the bodies were identified. Unidentified victims were buried with simple numbers based on the order that the bodies were discovered. The majority of recovered victims, 150 bodies, were buried in three Halifax cemeteries, the largest being Fairview Lawn Cemetery followed by the nearby Mount Olivet and Baron de Hirsch cemeteries.[43] Much floating wreckage was also recovered with the bodies, many pieces of which can be seen today in the Maritime Museum of the Atlantic in Halifax.

Memorials




The Anna Bliss Titanic Victims Memorial in Woodlawn Cemetery






The memorial to the Titanic's engineers in Southampton


In many locations there are memorials to the dead of the Titanic. In Southampton, England a memorial to the engineers of the Titanic may be found in Andrews Park on Above Bar Street. Opposite the main memorial is a memorial to Wallace Hartley and the other musicians who played on the Titanic. A memorial to the liner is also located on the grounds of City Hall in Belfast, Northern Ireland.
In the United States there are memorials to the Titanic disaster as well. The Titanic Memorial in Washington, D.C. and a memorial to Ida Straus at Straus Park in Manhattan, New York are two examples.
On 15 April 2012, the 100th anniversary of the sinking of Titanic is planned to be commemorated around the world. By that date, the Titanic Quarter in Belfast is planned to have been completed. The area will be regenerated and a signature memorial project unveiled to celebrate Titanic and her links with Belfast, the city that had built the ship.[44]
The Balmoral, operated by Fred Olsen Cruise Lines has been chartered by Miles Morgan Travel to follow the original route of the Titanic, intending to stop over the point on the sea bed where she rests on 15 April 2012.[45]

Investigations into the RMS Titanic disaster
See also: Changes in safety practices following the RMS Titanic disaster and International Maritime Organization




Political cartoon from 1912 which shows the public demanding answers from the shipping companies about the Titanic disaster


Before the survivors even arrived in New York, investigations were being planned to discover what had happened, and what could be done to prevent a recurrence. The United States Senate initiated an inquiry into the disaster on 19 April, a day after Carpathia arrived in New York.
The chairman of the inquiry, Senator William Alden Smith, wanted to gather accounts from passengers and crew while the events were still fresh in their minds. Smith also needed to subpoena the British citizens while they were still on American soil. This prevented all surviving passengers and crew from returning to England before the American inquiry, which lasted until 25 May, was completed.
Lord Mersey was appointed to head the British Board of Trade's inquiry into the disaster. The British inquiry took place between 2 May and 3 July. Each inquiry took testimony from both passengers and crew of the Titanic, crew members of Leyland Line's Californian, Captain Arthur Rostron of the Carpathia and other experts.
The investigations found that many safety rules were simply out of date, and new laws were recommended. Numerous safety improvements for ocean-going vessels were implemented, including improved hull and bulkhead design, access throughout the ship for egress of passengers, lifeboat requirements, improved life-vest design, the holding of safety drills, better passenger notification, radio communications laws, etc. The investigators also learned that the Titanic had sufficient lifeboat space for all first-class passengers, but not for the lower classes. In fact, most third-class, or steerage, passengers had no idea where the lifeboats were, much less any way of getting up to the higher decks where the lifeboats were stowed.

SS Californian inquiry




The SS Californian.


Both inquiries into the disaster found that the SS Californian and its captain, Stanley Lord, failed to give proper assistance to the Titanic. Testimony before the inquiry revealed that at 22:10, the Californian observed the lights of a ship to the south; it was later agreed between Captain Lord and Third Officer C.V. Groves (who had relieved Lord of duty at 22:10) that this was a passenger liner. The Californian warned the ship by radio of the pack ice because of which the Californian had stopped for the night, but was violently rebuked by Titanic senior wireless operator, Jack Phillips. At 23:50, the officer had watched this ship's lights flash out, as if the ship had shut down or turned sharply, and that the port light was now observed. Morse light signals to the ship, upon Lord's order, occurred five times between 23:30 and 01:00, but were not acknowledged. (In testimony, it was stated that the Californian's Morse lamp had a range of about four miles (6 km), so could not have been seen from Titanic.)[28]
Captain Lord had retired at 23:30; however, Second Officer Herbert Stone, now on duty, notified Lord at 01:15 that the ship had fired a rocket, followed by four more. Lord wanted to know if they were company signals, that is, coloured flares used for identification. Stone said that he did not know that the rockets were all white. Captain Lord instructed the crew to continue to signal the other vessel with the Morse lamp, and went back to sleep. Three more rockets were observed at 01:50 and Stone noted that the ship looked strange in the water, as if she were listing. At 02:15, Lord was notified that the ship could no longer be seen. Lord asked again if the lights had had any colours in them, and he was informed that they were all white.
The Californian eventually responded. At 05:30, Chief Officer George Stewart awakened wireless operator Cyril Evans, informed him that rockets had been seen during the night, and asked that he try to communicate with any ships. The Frankfurt notified the operator of the Titanic's loss, Captain Lord was notified, and the ship set out for assistance.
The inquiries found that the Californian was much closer to the Titanic than the 19.5 miles (31.4 km) that Captain Lord had believed and that Lord should have awakened the wireless operator after the rockets were first reported to him, and thus could have acted to prevent loss of life.[28]
In 1990, following the discovery of the wreck, the Marine Accident Investigation Branch of the British Department of Transport re-opened the inquiry to review the evidence relating to the Californian. Its report of 1992 concluded that the Californian was farther from the Titanic than the earlier British inquiry had found, and that the distress rockets, but not the Titanic herself, would have been visible from the Californian.[46]

Rediscovery of the Titanic
See also: List of shipwrecks




Titanic's bow, with the forestay shackle fallen forwards, as seen from the Russian MIR I submersible.


The idea of finding the wreck of Titanic, and even raising the ship from the ocean floor, had been around since shortly after the ship sank. No attempts were successful until 1 September 1985, when a joint American-French expedition, led by Jean-Louis Michel (Ifremer) and Dr. Robert Ballard (WHOI), located the wreck using the side-scan sonar from the research vessel Knorr. It was found at a depth of 2.5 miles (4.02 km), slightly more than 370 miles (595.46 km) south-east of Mistaken Point, Newfoundland at 41°43′55″N 49°56′45″W﻿ / ﻿41.73194°N 49.94583°W﻿ / 41.73194; -49.94583Coordinates: 41°43′55″N 49°56′45″W﻿ / ﻿41.73194°N 49.94583°W﻿ / 41.73194; -49.94583, 13 miles (20.92 km) from fourth officer Joseph Boxhall's last position reading where Titanic was originally thought to rest. Ballard noted that his crew had paid out 12,500 feet (3,810 m) of the sonar's tow cable at the time of the discovery of the wreck,[47] giving an approximate depth of the seabed of 12,450 feet (3,795 m).[48] Ifremer, the French partner in the search, records a depth of 3,800 m (12,467 ft), an almost exact equivalent.[49] This approximates to 2.33 miles (3.75 km), often rounded upwards to 2.5 miles (4.02 km). In 1986, Ballard returned to the wreck site aboard the Atlantis II to conduct the first manned dives to the wreck in the submersible Alvin.
Ballard had in 1982 requested funding for the project from the US Navy, but this was provided only on the condition that the first priority was the search for the sunken US submarines Thresher and Scorpion. Only when these had been discovered and photographed did the search for Titanic begin.[50]
The most notable discovery the team made was that the ship had split apart, the stern section lying 1,970 feet (600 m) from the bow section and facing opposite directions. There had been conflicting witness accounts of whether the ship broke apart or not, and both the American and British inquiries found that the ship sank intact. Up until the discovery of the wreck, it was generally assumed that the ship did not break apart.
The bow section had struck the ocean floor at a position just under the forepeak, and embedded itself 60 feet (18 m) into the silt on the ocean floor. Although parts of the hull had buckled, the bow was mostly intact. The collision with the ocean floor forced water out of Titanic through the hull below the well deck. One of the steel covers (reportedly weighing approximately ten tonnes) was blown off the side of the hull. The bow is still under tension, in particular the heavily damaged and partially collapsed decks.[51]
The stern section was in much worse condition, and appeared to have been torn apart during its descent. Unlike the bow section, which was flooded with water before it sank, it is likely that the stern section sank with a significant volume of air trapped inside it. As it sank, the external water pressure increased but the pressure of the trapped air could not follow suit due to the many air pockets in relatively sealed sections. Therefore, some areas of the stern section's hull experienced a large pressure differential between outside and inside which possibly caused an implosion. Further damage was caused by the sudden impact of hitting the seabed; with little structural integrity left, the decks collapsed as the stern hit.[52]
Surrounding the wreck is a large debris field with pieces of the ship, furniture, dinnerware and personal items scattered over one square mile (2.6 km²). Softer materials, like wood, carpet and human remains were devoured by undersea organisms.
Dr. Ballard and his team did not bring up any artefacts from the site, considering this to be tantamount to grave robbing. Under international maritime law, however, the recovery of artefacts is necessary to establish salvage rights to a shipwreck. In the years after the find, Titanic has been the object of a number of court cases concerning ownership of artefacts and the wreck site itself. In 1994, RMS Titanic Inc. was awarded ownership and salvaging rights of the wreck, even though RMS Titanic Inc. and other salvaging expeditions have been criticised for taking items from the wreck. Among the items recovered by RMS Titanic Inc. was the ship's whistle, which was brought to the surface in 1992 and placed in the company's travelling exhibition. It has been operated only twice since, using compressed air rather than steam, because of its fragility.[53]
Approximately 6,000 artefacts have been removed from the wreck. Many of these were put on display at the National Maritime Museum in Greenwich, England, and later as part of a travelling museum exhibit.

Current condition of the wreck
Many scientists, including Robert Ballard, are concerned that visits by tourists in submersibles and the recovery of artefacts are hastening the decay of the wreck. Underwater microbes have been eating away at Titanic's iron since the ship sank, but because of the extra damage visitors have caused the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration estimates that "the hull and structure of the ship may collapse to the ocean floor within the next 50 years."[54][55]
Ballard's book Return to Titanic, published by the National Geographic Society, includes photographs depicting the deterioration of the promenade deck and damage caused by submersibles landing on the ship. The mast has almost completely deteriorated and has been stripped of its bell and brass light. Other damage includes a gash on the bow section where block letters once spelled Titanic, part of the brass telemotor which once held the ship's wooden wheel is now twisted and the crows nest has now completely deteriorated.[56]

Ownership and litigation
Titanic's rediscovery in 1985 launched a debate over ownership of the wreck and the valuable items inside. On 7 June 1994 RMS Titanic Inc., a subsidiary of Premier Exhibitions Inc., was awarded ownership and salvaging rights by the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia.[57] (See Admiralty law)[58] Since 1987, RMS Titanic Inc. and its predecessors have conducted seven expeditions and salvaged over 5,500 historic objects. The biggest single recovered object was a 17-ton section of the hull, recovered in 1998.[59] Many of these items are part of travelling museum exhibitions.
In 1993, a French administrator in the Office of Maritime Affairs of the Ministry of Equipment, Transportation, and Tourism awarded RMS Titanic Inc.'s predecessor title to the relics recovered in 1987.
In a motion filed on 12 February 2004, RMS Titanic Inc. requested that the district court enter an order awarding it "title to all the artifacts (including portions of the hull) which are the subject of this action pursuant to the Law of Finds" or, in the alternative, a salvage award in the amount of $225 million. RMS Titanic Inc. excluded from its motion any claim for an award of title to the objects recovered in 1987, but it did request that the district court declare that, based on the French administrative action, "the artifacts raised during the 1987 expedition are independently owned by RMST." Following a hearing, the district court entered an order dated 2 July 2004, in which it refused to grant comity and recognise the 1993 decision of the French administrator, and rejected RMS Titanic Inc.'s claim that it should be awarded title to the items recovered since 1993 under the Maritime Law of Finds.
RMS Titanic Inc. appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. In its decision of 31 January 2006[60] the court recognised "explicitly the appropriateness of applying maritime salvage law to historic wrecks such as that of Titanic" and denied the application of the Maritime Law of Finds. The court also ruled that the district court lacked jurisdiction over the "1987 artifacts", and therefore vacated that part of the court's 2 July 2004 order. In other words, according to this decision, RMS Titanic Inc. has ownership title to the objects awarded in the French decision (valued $16.5 million earlier) and continues to be salver-in-possession of the Titanic wreck. The Court of Appeals remanded the case to the District Court to determine the salvage award ($225 million requested by RMS Titanic Inc.).[61]
On 24 March 2009, it was revealed that the fate of 5,900 artefacts retrieved from the wreck will rest with a US District Judge's decision.[62] The ruling will decide whether the artefacts should be placed in a public exhibit or in the hands of private collectors. The judge will also rule on the RMS Titanic Inc.'s degree of ownership of the wreck as well as establishing a monitoring system to check future activity upon the wreck site.[63]

Possible factors in the sinking




The iceberg buckled Titanic's hull allowing water to flow into the ship


Originally, historians thought the iceberg had cut a gash into Titanic's hull. Since the part of the ship that the iceberg damaged is now buried, scientists used sonar to examine the area and discovered the iceberg had caused the hull to buckle, allowing water to enter Titanic between her steel plates.

Steel plates and iron rivets
A detailed analysis of small pieces of the steel plating from the Titanic's wreck hull found that it was of a metallurgy that loses its elasticity and becomes brittle in cold or icy water, leaving it vulnerable to dent-induced ruptures. The pieces of steel were found to have very high content of phosphorus and sulphur (4x and 2x respectively, compared to modern steel), with manganese-sulphur ratio of 6.8:1 (compare with over 200:1 ratio for modern steels). High content of phosphorus initiates fractures, sulphur forms grains of iron sulphide that facilitate propagation of cracks, and lack of manganese makes the steel less ductile. The recovered samples were found to be undergoing ductile-brittle transition in temperatures of 90 °F (32 °C) (for longitudinal samples) and 133 °F (56 °C) (for transversal samples—compare with transition temperature of -17 °F [-27 °C] common for modern steels—modern steel would become so brittle in between -76 and -94 °F [-60 and -70 °C]). The anisotropy was likely caused by hot rolling influencing the orientation of the sulphide stringer inclusions. The steel was probably produced in the acid-lined, open-hearth furnaces in Glasgow, which would explain the high content of phosphorus and sulphur, even for the time.[64][65]
Another factor was the rivets holding the hull together, which were much more fragile than once thought.[64][66] From 48 rivets recovered from the hull of the Titanic, scientists found many to be riddled with high concentrations of slag. A glassy residue of smelting, slag can make rivets brittle and prone to fracture. Records from the archive of the builder show that the ship's builder ordered No. 3 iron bar, known as “best” — not No. 4, known as “best-best,” for its rivets, although shipbuilders at that time typically used No. 4 iron for rivets. The company also had shortages of skilled riveters, particularly important for hand riveting, which took great skill: the iron had to be heated to a precise colour and shaped by the right combination of hammer blows. The company used steel rivets, which were stronger and could be installed by machine, on the central hull, where stresses were expected to be greatest, using iron rivets for the stern and bow.[64] Rivets of "best best" iron had a tensile strength approximately 80% of that of steel, "best" iron some 73%.[67]

Rudder and turning ability




View of the stern and rudder of one of the Olympic-class ships in dry-dock.


Although Titanic's rudder met the mandated dimensional requirements for a ship her size, the rudder's design was hardly state-of-the-art. According to research by BBC History: "Her stern, with its high graceful counter and long thin rudder, was an exact copy of an 18th-century sailing ship...a perfect example of the lack of technical development. Compared with the rudder design of the Cunarders, Titanic's was a fraction of the size. No account was made for advances in scale and little thought was given to how a ship, 852 feet in length, [sic] might turn in an emergency or avoid collision with an iceberg. This was Titanic's Achilles heel."[68] A more objective assessment of the rudder provision compares it with the legal requirement of the time: the area had to be within a range of 1.5% and 5% of the hull's underwater profile and, at 1.9%, the Titanic was at the low end of the range. However, the tall rudder design was more effective at the vessel's designed cruising speed; short, square rudders were more suitable for low-speed manoeuvring.[69]
Perhaps more fatal to the design of the Titanic was her triple screw engine configuration, which had reciprocating steam engines driving her wing propellers, and a steam turbine driving her centre propeller. The reciprocating engines were reversible, while the turbine was not. According to subsequent evidence from Fourth Officer Joseph Boxhall, who entered the bridge just after the collision, First Officer Murdoch had set the engine room telegraph to reverse the engines to avoid the iceberg,[25] thus handicapping the turning ability of the ship. Because the centre turbine could not reverse during the "full speed astern" manoeuvre, it was simply stopped. Since the centre propeller was positioned forward of the ship's rudder, the effectiveness of that rudder would have been greatly reduced: had Murdoch simply turned the ship while maintaining her forward speed, the Titanic might have missed the iceberg with metres to spare.[70] Another survivor, greaser Frederick Scott, gave contrary evidence: he recalled that at his station in the engine room all four sets of telegraphs had changed to "Stop", but not until after the collision.[26]

Iceberg impact
It has been speculated that the ship could have been saved if she had rammed the iceberg head on.[71][72] It is hypothesised that if Titanic had not altered her course at all and instead collided head first with the iceberg, the impact would have been taken by the naturally stronger bow of the hull and damage would only have affected the first or, at most, first two compartments. This would have disabled her severely, and possibly caused casualties among the passengers near the front of the ship, but would not likely have resulted in sinking since Titanic was designed to float with the first four compartments flooded. Instead, the glancing blow to the starboard side of the ship caused buckling in the hull plates along the first five compartments, more than the ship's designers had allowed for.

Alternative theories
Main article: Titanic alternative theories
A number of alternative theories diverging from the standard explanation for the Titanic's demise have been brought forth since shortly after the sinking. Some of these include a coal fire aboard ship,[73] or the Titanic hitting pack ice rather than an iceberg.[74][75] Also, the notion has been advanced that it was the White Star Lines' nearly identical ship, Olympic, and not Titanic that was sunk as part of an insurance scam.[76] In the realm of the supernatural, it has been proposed that the Titanic sank due to a mummy's curse.[77]

Legends and myths regarding the RMS Titanic

Unsinkable
Contrary to popular mythology, the Titanic was never described as "unsinkable", without qualification, until after she sank.[4][78] There are three trade publications (one of which was probably never published) that describe the Titanic as unsinkable, prior to its sinking, but they all qualify the claim, either with the word practically or with the phrase as far as possible. There is no evidence that the notion of the Titanic's unsinkability had entered public consciousness until after the sinking.[4]
The first unqualified assertion of the Titanic's unsinkability appears the day after the tragedy (on 16 April 1912) in The New York Times, which quotes Philip A. S. Franklin, vice president of the White Star Line as saying, when informed of the tragedy,

I thought her unsinkable and I based by  [sic] opinion on the best expert advice available. I do not understand it.[79]

This comment was seized upon by the press and the idea that the White Star Line had previously declared the Titanic to be unsinkable (without qualification) gained immediate and widespread currency. 
David Sarnoff, wireless reports and the use of SOS
An often-quoted story that has been blurred between fact and fiction states that the first person to receive news of the sinking was David Sarnoff, who would later lead media giant RCA. In modified versions of this legend, Sarnoff was not the first to hear the news (though Sarnoff willingly promoted this notion), but he and others did staff the Marconi wireless station (telegraph) atop the Wanamaker Department Store in New York City, and for three days, relayed news of the disaster and names of survivors to people waiting outside. However, even this version lacks support in contemporary accounts. No newspapers of the time, for example, mention Sarnoff. Given the absence of primary evidence, the story of Sarnoff should be properly regarded as a legend.[80][81][82][83][84]
Despite popular belief, the sinking of Titanic was not the first time the internationally recognised Morse code distress signal "SOS" was used. The SOS signal was first proposed at the International Conference on Wireless Communication at Sea in Berlin in 1906. It was ratified by the international community in 1908 and had been in widespread use since then. The SOS signal was, however, rarely used by British wireless operators, who preferred the older CQD code. First Wireless Operator Jack Phillips began transmitting CQD until Second Wireless Operator Harold Bride suggested half jokingly, "Send SOS; it's the new call, and this may be your last chance to send it." Phillips, who later died, then began to intersperse SOS with the traditional CQD call.

Titanic's band




Members of the Titanic's band.


One of the most famous stories of Titanic is of the band. On 15 April Titanic's eight-member band, led by Wallace Hartley, had assembled in the first-class lounge in an effort to keep passengers calm and upbeat. Later they moved on to the forward half of the boat deck. The band continued playing music even when it became apparent the ship was going to sink.
None of the band members survived the sinking, and there has been much speculation about what their last song was. A first-class Canadian passenger, Mrs. Vera Dick, alleged that the final song played was the hymn "Nearer, My God, to Thee." Hartley reportedly said to a friend if he was on a sinking ship "Nearer, My God, to Thee" would be one of the songs he would play. But Walter Lord's book A Night to Remember popularised wireless operator Harold Bride’s account that he heard the song "Autumn" before the ship sank. It is considered Bride either meant the hymn called "Autumn" or "Songe d'Automne," a popular song at the time. Bride is the only witness who was close enough to the band, at the moment the ship went down, to be considered reliable—Mrs. Dick had left by lifeboat an hour and 20 minutes earlier and could not possibly have heard the band's final moments. The notion that the band played "Nearer, My God, to Thee" as their swan song, is probably a myth originating from the wrecking of the SS Valencia, which had received wide press coverage in Canada in 1906 and so may have influenced Mrs. Dick's recollection.[4] It should also be noted that there are two different musical settings for "Nearer, My God, to Thee." One is popular in Britain, and the other is popular in the United States, and they are not similar. The film A Night to Remember, made in 1958, uses the British setting, while the 1953 film, Titanic, with Clifton Webb, uses the American setting.

The Titanic curse
When Titanic sank, claims were made that a curse existed on the ship. The press quickly linked the "Titanic curse" with the White Star Line practice of not christening their ships (notwithstanding the opening scene of the film A Night to Remember).[4]
One of the most widely spread legends linked directly into the sectarianism of the city of Belfast, where the ship was built. It was suggested that the ship was given the number 390904 which, when read backwards as reflected by the water's surface, was claimed to spell 'no pope', a sectarian slogan attacking Roman Catholics that was (and is) widely used provocatively by extreme Protestants in Northern Ireland, where the ship was built. In the extreme sectarianism of north-east Ireland (Northern Ireland itself did not exist until 1920), the ship's sinking, though mourned, was alleged to be on account of the sectarian anti-Catholicism of her manufacturers, the Harland and Wolff company, which had an almost exclusively Protestant workforce and an alleged record of hostility towards Catholics. (Harland and Wolff did have a record of hiring few Catholics; whether that was through policy or because the company's shipyard in Belfast's bay was located in almost exclusively Protestant East Belfast — through which few Catholics would dare to travel — or a mixture of both, is a matter of dispute.)[85]
The 'no pope' story is in fact an urban legend, with no basis in fact. RMS Olympic and Titanic were assigned the yard numbers 400 and 401[86] respectively. The source of the story may have been from reports by dockworkers in Queenstown of anti-Catholic graffiti that they found on Titanic's coalbunkers when they were loading coal.

See also

Listen to this article (info/dl)











This audio file was created from a revision dated 2005-12-10, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles



List of films about the RMS Titanic
MS Hans Hedtoft, a ship sunk by an iceberg on her maiden voyage in 1959.
Futility, or the Wreck of the Titan, a novella written by Morgan Robertson that outlined events similar to that of the Titanic, fourteen years prior to her sinking.
SS Nomadic, former tender to the Titanic and Olympic.


References

Explanatory notes

a. ^  Times given are in ship time, the local time for Titanic's position in the Atlantic. On the night of the sinking, this was approximately one and half hours ahead of EST and two hours behind GMT.
b. ^  The Library of Congress and Leo Marriot's Titanic identify this as Olympic, Dr Robert Ballard's Exploring the Titanic and Daniel Allen Butler's Unsinkable: The Full Story of the RMS Titanic identify this as Titanic.


Notes


^ a b c d Staff (27 May 1911). "The Olympic and Titanic". The Times (London) (39596): 4. 
^ a b Beveridge, Bruce; Hall, Steve (2004). "Ismay's Titans". Olympic & Titanic. West Conshohocken, PA: Infinity. p. 1. ISBN 0741419491. 
^ Chirnside, Mark (2004). The Olympic-Class Ships. Stroud, England: Tempus. p. 43. ISBN 0752428683. 
^ a b c d e Richard Howells The Myth of the Titanic, ISBN 0333725972
^ Moss, Michael S (2004). "William James Pirrie". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. 
^ Bullock, Shan F. (1912). Thomas Andrews, Shipbuilder. Dublin: Maunsel and Co. 
^ Jenkins, Stanley C. (1926-03-06). "Alexander Carlisle Obituary". The Times. http://www.encyclopedia-titanica.org/alexander-carlisle-obituary.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-08. 
^ a b "Testimony of Alexander Carlisle". British Wreck Commissioner's Inquiry. 1912-07-30. http://www.titanicinquiry.org/BOTInq/BOTInq20Carlisle01.php. Retrieved on 2008-11-08. 
^ "RMS Titanic facts". http://www.titanic-nautical.com/titanic-facts.html. 
^ "Titanic:A voyage of discovery". http://www.euronet.nl/users/keesree/palace.htm. 
^ "Titanic-construction". http://www.titanicinbelfast.com/template.aspx?pid=248&area=1&parent=247. 
^ "Wireless and the Titanic". http://jproc.ca/radiostor/titanic.html. 
^ LaRoe, L. M. n.d. Titanic. National Geographic Society Society.
^ Butler, p. 38
^ "Board of Trade's Administration". British Wreck Commissioner's Inquiry. 1912-07-30. http://www.titanicinquiry.org/BOTInq/BOTReport/BOTRepBOT.php. Retrieved on 2008-11-09. 
^ "Testimony of J. Bruce Ismay". British Wreck Commissioner's Inquiry. 1912-07-30. http://www.titanicinquiry.org/BOTInq/BOTInq16Ismay01.php. Retrieved on 2008-11-08. 
^ "Titanic's Blueprints [Roy Mengot] db-09". Titanic-model.com. http://titanic-model.com/db/db-01/db_09.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-06. 
^ Cableto THE NEW YORK TIMES., Special (1912-04-11). "TITANIC IN PERIL ON LEAVING PORT". New York Times (1857-Current file): p. 1. ISSN 03624331. http://proquest.umi.com/pqdweb?did=100529713&Fmt=7&clientId=48288&RQT=309&VName=HNP. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ "Titanic Passengers and Crew Listings". encyclopedia titanica. http://www.encyclopedia-titanica.org/manifest.php?q=1. Retrieved on 2008-11-24. 
^ "Deep Ocean Expeditions.com". http://www.deepoceanexpeditions.com/titanic3.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-24. 
^ a b "Titanic Passenger List First Class Passengers". Encyclopedia Titanica. http://www.encyclopedia-titanica.org/titanic-first-class-passengers/. Retrieved on 2008-11-24. 
^ "Titanic & Her Sisters Olympic & Britannic" by McCluskie/Sharpe/Marriott, p. 490, ISBN 1-57145-175-7
^ "Unsinkable - the Full Story" by Daniel Allen Butler, pp. 61-62, ISBN 0-8117-1814-X
^ "The Discovery of the Titanic" by Dr. Ballard, p. 20, ISBN 0-446-51385-7
^ a b "Testimony of Joseph G. Boxhall". British Wreck Commissioner's Inquiry. 1912-07-30. http://www.titanicinquiry.org/BOTInq/BOTInq13Boxhall01.php. Retrieved on 2008-07-10. 
^ a b "Testimony of Frederick Scott". British Wreck Commissioner's Inquiry. 1912-07-30. http://www.titanicinquiry.org/BOTInq/BOTInq06Scott01.php. Retrieved on 2008-07-10. 
^ a b "Pleas For Help - Distress Calls Heard". United States Senate Inquiry Report. http://www.titanicinquiry.org/USInq/USReport/AmInqRep06.php#a1. Retrieved on 2008-11-24. 
^ a b c d "STEAMSHIP LIGHT SEEN FROM STEAMSHIP TITANIC & STEAMSHIP CALIFORNIAN'S RESPONSIBILITY". United States Senate Inquiry Report. Titanic Inquiry Project. http://www.titanicinquiry.org/USInq/USReport/AmInqRep06.php#a5. Retrieved on 2008-11-24. 
^ United States Senate Inquiry - Day 8: Testimony of Cyril F. Evans
^ http://home.comcast.net/~bwormst/titanic/lifeboats/lifeboats.htm
^ ""RMS Carpathia"". http://www.sorbie.net/carpathia.htm. Retrieved on 2008-11-08. 
^ Holdaway, F. W. (19 April 1912). "Winchester "titanic relief fund"". The Hampshire Chronicle. http://archive.thisishampshire.net/2002/3/25/66345.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-08. 
^ "Gloom in southampton". The Hampshire Chronicle. 1912. http://archive.thisishampshire.net/2002/3/25/66393.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-08. 
^ U.S. Senate inquiry stats
^ Titanic Disaster: Official Casualty Figures and Commentary
^ Frey, Bruno S.; Savage, David A.; Torgler, Benno (January 2009), Surviving The Titanic Disaster: Economic, Natural And Social Determinants, Basel, Switzerland: Center for Research in Economics, Management and the Arts, http://www.crema-research.ch/papers/2009-03.pdf 
^ Pålsson family tragedy
^ Dogs on the Titanic
^ "RMS Titanic: List of Bodies and Disposition of Same". Nova Scotia Archives and Records Management. http://www.gov.ns.ca/nsarm/cap/titanic/. Retrieved on 2008-03-03. 
^ a b "TITANIC - A Voyage of Discovery"
^ Maritime Museum of the Atlantic Titanic Research Page - Victims
^ Mowbray, Jay Henry (1912). "CHAPTER XXI. THE FUNERAL SHIP AND ITS DEAD.". The sinking of the Titanic (1912). http://gaslight.mtroyal.ca/titnch21.htm. Retrieved on 24 November 2008. 
^ Ruffman, Alan Titanic Remembered: The Unsinkable ship and Halifax (1999) Halifax: Formac Publishing
^ "Titanic tourist project unveiled". BBC News. 2005-08-11. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/4141684.stm. 
^ "Cruise to mark Titanic centenary". BBC News. 2009-04-15. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/northern_ireland/7999110.stm. 
^ Marine Accident Investigation Branch. (1992). RMS "Titanic" Reappraisal of Evidence Relating to SS "Californian". London: H.M.S.O.. ISBN 0115511113. 
^ Ballard, Robert D. (1988). The Discovery of the Titanic. Toronto: Madison Press. ISBN 0-670-81917-4. 
^ Staff (2004-01-01). "1985 Discovery of Titanic". Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. http://www.whoi.edu/page.do?pid=7539. Retrieved on 2008-08-02. 
^ Ifremer (2004-11-23) (in French). Mise au point du Système Acoustique Remorqué (Deployment of the Towed Acoustic System). Press release. http://www.ifremer.fr/com/dossier-presse/23-11-04-unesco-20ans.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-02. 
^ Smith, Lewis (2008-05-24). "Titanic search was cover for secret Cold War subs mission". The Times. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/world/us_and_americas/article3994955.ece. Retrieved on 2008-05-26. 
^ Lynch, Marschall & Cameron 2003, p. 137.
^ Serway, Raymond A.; John W. Jewett (2005). Principles Of Physics. Thomson Brooks/Cole. ISBN 053449143X. 
^ "Titanic's whistles". Titanic-Titanic.com. http://www.titanic-titanic.com/titanic_whistles.shtml. Retrieved on 2009-01-26. 
^ Duncan Crosbie & Sheila Mortimer: Titanic The Ship of Dreams, last page (no page number specified). Tony Potter Publishing Ltd., 2008
^ http://titanic.marconigraph.com/mgy_05observations.html, Last paragraph (Conclusion)
^ [http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/ngm/0412/feature5/ National Geographic Magazine: Why is Titanic Vanishing?
^ Comprehensive resume of ownership questions
^ "Corporate Profile". RMS Titanic, Inc.. http://www.rmstitanic.net/index.php4?page=448. Retrieved on 1 February 2006. 
^ "Expeditions". RMS Titanic, Inc.. http://www.rmstitanic.net/index.php4?page=471. Retrieved on 1 February 2006. 
^ United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, R.M.S. TITANIC, INCORPORATED vs. THE WRECKED AND ABANDONED VESSEL - 31 January 2006PDF (127 KiB)
^ "Commented excerpts of the Court of Appeals decision". http://www.premier-exhibitions-investors.org/titanic_ownership.htm#excerpts. 
^ http://www.lehighvalleylive.com/entertainment-general/index.ssf/2009/03/battle_continues_on_fate_of_re.html
^ http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2009-03-24-titanic-artifacts_N.htm
^ a b c In Weak Rivets, a Possible Key to Titanic’s Doom, New York Times, 15 April 2008. A1-A21.
^ Felkins, Katherine; H.P. Leighly, Jr.; A. Jankovic (January 1998). "The Royal Mail Ship Titanic: Did a Metallurgical Failure Cause a Night to Remember?". JOM (Warrendale PA: The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society) 50 (1). doi:10.1007/s11837-998-0062-7. http://www.tms.org/pubs/journals/JOM/9801/Felkins-9801.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-05. 
^ McCarty, Jennifer et al. (2008). What Really Sank the Titanic. New York: Citadel Books.
^ Adams, Henry (1907). Cassel's Engineers' Handbook. London: Cassel and Company Ltd. 
^ Louden-Brown, Paul (2002-04-01). "Titanic: Sinking the Myths". British History. BBC. http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/britain_wwone/titanic_02.shtml. Retrieved on 2005-06-20.  The length quoted approximates to the vessel's waterline length.
^ Brown, David G. (2000). The Last Log of the Titanic. New York: McGraw-Hill Professional. ISBN 0071364471. 
^ Barczewski, Stephanie (2006). Titanic: A Night Remembered. London: Hambledon Continuum. ISBN 1852855002. 
^ Cassidy, Michael J. (2003). "The Sinking of the Titanic". in Hall, Randolph W.. Handbook of Transportation Science. Amsterdam Netherlands: Kluwer. ISBN 1402072465. 
^ "Testimony of Edward Wilding". British Wreck Commissioner's Inquiry. 1912-07-30. http://www.titanicinquiry.org/BOTInq/BOTInq19Wilding02.php. Retrieved on 2008-11-04. 
^ Coal Fire Theory
^ Efforts to solve Titanic mystery cut no ice
^ L. M. Collins, The Sinking of the Titanic: The Mystery Solved
^ Robin Gardiner, Titanic: the Ship That Never Sank?
^ John P. Eaton, Charles A. Haas, Titanic: Destination Disaster: the Legends and the Reality, p. 95
^ Staff (19 April 1912). "Lead Article". The Engineer.  "The phrase 'unsinkable ships' is certainly not one that has originated from the builders". 
^ Staff (16 April 1912). "Titanic sinks four hours after hitting iceberg". The New York Times. http://timesmachine.nytimes.com/browser/1912/04/16/100530234/article-view. Retrieved on 2008-12-19. 
^ "More About Sarnoff, Part One". PBS. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/technology/bigdream/masarnoff.html. 
^ Bruce M. Owen (1999). "The Evolution of Broadcast Radio". The Internet Challenge to Television. Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674003896. 
^ Albert Abramson (1995). "An Invitation from Westinghouse". Zworykin, Pioneer of Television. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0252021045. 
^ Harold Evans (2006). They Made America: From the Steam Engine to the Search Engine. Little Brown And Company. ISBN 0316277665. 
^ Huntington Williams (1989). Beyond Control: ABC and the Fate of the Networks. Atheneum. ISBN 068911818X. 
^ "Pope and Circumstance". www.snopes.com. 2005-12-15. http://www.snopes.com/history/titanic/nopope.asp. Retrieved on 2008-04-16. 
^ Mark Chirnside (2008-05-05). "The mystery of Titanic's central propeller". http://www.encyclopedia-titanica.org/mystery-titanic-central-propeller.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-08. 



Bibliography


Beesley, Lawrence, The Loss of the SS Titanic: Its Story and Its Lessons, by One of the Survivors (June, 1912)
Brander, Roy. The RMS Titanic and its Times: When Accountants Ruled the Waves. Elias P. Kline Memorial Lecture, October 1998 http://www.cuug.ab.ca/~branderr/risk_essay/Kline_lecture.html
Brown, David G. (2000). The Last Log of the Titanic. McGraw-Hill Professional. ISBN 0071364471. 
Butler, Daniel Allen. Unsinkable: The Full Story of RMS Titanic. Stackpole Books, 1998, 292 pages
Collins, L. M. The Sinking of the Titanic: The Mystery Solved Souvenir Press, 2003 ISBN 0-285-63711-8
Eaton, John P. and Haas, Charles A. Titanic: Triumph and Tragedy (2nd ed.). W.W. Norton & Company, 1995 ISBN 0-393-03697-9
Eaton, John P. and Haas, Charles A. Falling Star: The Misadventures of White Star Line Ships, c. 1990 W.W. Norton & Company, 1990 ISBN 0-3930-2873-7
Gardener, R & van der Vat, D The Riddle of the Titanic Orion 1995
HMSO. The Loss Of The Titanic: 1912 ISBN 0-11-702403-1 (Republished version of Lord Mersey's final report of the British inquiry, also including the report of 1992 inquiry)
Kentley, Eric. Discover the Titanic Ed. Claire Bampton and Sue Leonard. 1st ed. New York: DK, Inc., 1997. 22. ISBN 0-7894-2020-1
Lightoller, Charles Loss of the Titanic in Lightoller C H Titanic and Other Ships (1936)
Lord, Walter (1997). A Night to Remember Introduction by Nathaniel Philbrick. Bantam. ISBN 0-553-27827-4
Lynch, Donald and Marschall, Ken. Titanic: An Illustrated History Hyperion, 1995 ISBN 1-56282-918-1
Lynch, Donald and Marschall, Ken. Ghosts of the Abyss: A Journey into the Heart of The Titanic. A Hodder & Stoughton and Madison Press Books. 2003. ISBN 0-340-73416-7
McCarty, Jennifer Hooper and Tim Foecke. (2008). What Really Sank the Titanic: New Forensic Discoveries. New York: Citadel Press. 10-ISBN 0-806-52895-8; 13-ISBN 978-0-806-52895-3 (cloth)
O'Donnell, E. E. Father Browne's Titanic Album Wolfhound Press, 1997. ISBN 0-86327-758-6
Quinn, Paul J. Titanic at Two A.M.: An Illustrated Narrative with Survivor Accounts. Fantail, 1997 ISBN 0-9655209-3-5
Wade, Wyn Craig, The Titanic: End of a Dream Penguin Books, 1986 ISBN 0-14-016691-2
US Coast Guard. International Ice Patrol History. Page viewed May 2006. http://www.uscg.mil/LANTAREA/IIP/General/history.shtml
Layton, J. Kent. Atlantic Liners: A Trio of Trios
Ballard, Robert B. Lost Liners
Halpern, Samuel Somewhere About Twelve FeetPDF (170 KB)
Pellegrino, Charles R. Her Name, Titanic Avon, 1990 ISBN 0-380-70892-2



External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: RMS Titanic




Wikisource has original text related to this article:
RMS Titanic



BBC Archive: Titanic, Hear the survivors describe a night they could never forget.
Titanic Historical Society
Encyclopedia Titanica, an invaluable source of information concerning the sinking of the Titanic.
RMS Titanic, Inc Corporate information and the official Titanic archive.
Titanic Inquiry Project Complete transcripts of both the US Senate and British Board of Trade inquiries into the disaster, along with their final reports.
PBS Online - Lost Liners
RMS Titanic at the Open Directory Project
Personal Titanic Collection A personal collection of various pieces of RMS Titanic memorabilia.
The Titanic Radio Page Includes photos and radio distress traffic.



Records


Preceded by
Olympic
World's largest passenger ship
1911–1912
Succeeded by
Olympic









v • d • e

Officers on the RMS Titanic








Edward J. Smith, Captain · Henry T. Wilde, Chief Officer · William M. Murdoch, First Officer · Charles H. Lightoller, Second Officer · Herbert J. Pitman, Third Officer · Joseph G. Boxhall, Fourth Officer · Harold G. Lowe, Fifth Officer · James P. Moody, Sixth Officer















v • d • e

Olympic-class ocean liners






RMS Olympic · RMS Titanic · HMHS Britannic













v • d • e

RMS Titanic on film and TV






Saved from the Titanic (1912) · In Nacht und Eis (1912) · Atlantic (1929) · Titanic (1943) · Titanic (1953) · A Night to Remember (1958) · S.O.S. Titanic (1979) · Raise the Titanic! (1980) · Titanic (TV miniseries) (1996) · Titanic (1997) · Ghosts of the Abyss (2003)






      



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RMS_Titanic"
Categories: Spoken articles | 1912 in Canada | 1912 in the United Kingdom | 1912 in the United States | Belfast-built ships | Engineering failures | History of the Halifax Regional Municipality | Ocean liners | Ocean liners with four funnels | Passenger ships of the United Kingdom | RMS Titanic | Ships of Ireland | Ships of the United Kingdom | Shipwrecks in the Atlantic Ocean | Steamships | Ships of the White Star Line | Olympic class ocean liners | Deaths due to shipwreck | People who died at sea | Deaths by drowning | 1911 shipsHidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
বাংলা
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Corsu
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kiswahili
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
日本語
Нохчийн
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Sámegiella
Scots
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
ייִדיש
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 16 April 2009, at 17:38 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
