













Marcus Aurelius - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Marcus_Aurelius";
		var wgTitle = "Marcus Aurelius";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "20155";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282141913;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Marcus Aurelius

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Augustus


Emperor of the Roman Empire





Bust of Marcus Aurelius in the Glyptothek, Munich


Reign
March 8, 161–169
(with Lucius Verus);
169–177 (alone);
177–17 March 180
(with Commodus)


Full name
(Caesar) Marcus
Aurelius Antoninus Augustus


Born
26 April 121(121-04-26)


Birthplace
Rome[1]


Died
17 March 180 (aged 58)


Place of death
Vindobona or Sirmium[1]


Buried
Hadrian's Mausoleum


Predecessor
Antoninus Pius


Successor
Commodus (alone)


Consort to
Faustina the Younger


Dynasty
Antonine


Father
Marcus Annius Verus


Mother
Domitia Lucilla


Children
13, incl. Commodus, Marcus Annius Verus, Antoninus and Lucilla


Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Augustus (often referred to as "the wise"; April 26, 121[2] – March 17, 180) was Roman Emperor from 161 to his death in 180. He was the last of the "Five Good Emperors", and is also considered one of the most important Stoic philosophers. His tenure was marked by wars in Asia against a revitalized Parthian Empire, and with Germanic tribes along the Limes Germanicus into Gaul and across the Danube. A revolt in the East, led by Avidius Cassius who previously fought alongside Lucius Verus against the Parthians, failed.
Marcus Aurelius' work Meditations, written in Greek while on campaign between 170 and 180, is still revered as a literary monument to a government of service and duty and has been praised for its "exquisite accent and its infinite tenderness."[3]




Contents


1 Early life

1.1 Family
1.2 Heir to the Empire


2 Emperor

2.1 Joint emperorship
2.2 Challenges faced

2.2.1 War with Parthia
2.2.2 Germania and the Danube


2.3 Death and succession


3 Marriage and issue
4 Writings
5 Marcus Aurelius in later arts

5.1 Literature
5.2 Film


6 See also
7 Nerva-Antonine family tree
8 Notes
9 External links

9.1 Primary sources
9.2 Secondary material







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early life

[edit] Family
He was originally named Marcus Annius Catilius Severus. When he married he took the name Marcus Annius Verus,[4][5] and when he was named Emperor, he was given the name Marcus Aurelius Antoninus.
Marcus Aurelius was the only son to Marcus Annius Verus and Domitia Lucilla. Marcus Aurelius' father was of Romano-Spanish origin, and served as a praetor and died when Marcus was three years old. Marcus Aurelius credits him with teaching him "manliness without ostentation".[6] His mother was of Italian ancestry. His only natural sibling was his younger sister Annia Cornificia Faustina, who was about 2 years younger than he. Domitia Lucilla came from a wealthy family who were of consular rank.
His father's maternal aunt was Vibia Sabina, wife of Roman Emperor Hadrian. Rupilia Faustina (Marcus Aurelius' paternal grandmother) and Vibia Sabina were half-sisters and were daughters of Salonina Matidia (niece of the Roman Emperor Trajan). His father's sister was Faustina the Elder a Roman Empress who married the Roman Emperor Antoninus Pius.
After his father's death, Aurelius was adopted and raised by his mother and paternal grandfather Marcus Annius Verus. His paternal grandfather died in 138; he was almost ninety years old.

[edit] Heir to the Empire




Bust of Marcus Aurelius as a young boy, Capitoline Museum, Rome.


In 137, Hadrian had announced that his eventual successor would be Lucius Ceionius Commodus, renamed L. Aelius Caesar. Marcus had already attracted the attention of Hadrian (who had nicknamed him verissimus, which translates as "truest") and had been made a member of the equestrian order when he was six;[7] he was subsequently engaged to Ceionia Fabia, Commodus' daughter. The engagement, however, was annulled later after the death of Commodus, as Marcus was betrothed to Antoninus' daughter.
Therefore, on the death of Hadrian's first adopted son L. Aelius Verus, Hadrian made it a precondition of making Antoninus his successor that Antoninus would adopt Marcus (then called Marcus Aelius Aurelius Verus) and Lucius Ceionius Commodus (Lucius Aelius' son, ten years junior than Marcus, renamed Lucius Aurelius Verus), and arrange for them to be next in the line.
This Antoninus did, adopting and designating them as his successors on February 25, 138, when Marcus was only seventeen years of age. He would become emperor at 40. It has been suggested that Commodus and Antoninus Pius were designed by Hadrian only as "place warmers" for the young Marcus and Verus.
Marcus received an education from some of the greatest scholars of his day: Euphorion for literature, Geminus for drama, Andron for geometry, Caninius Celer and Herodes Atticus in Greek oratory, Alexander of Cotiaeum for Greek, and Marcus Cornelius Fronto for Latin. It is through Marcus' correspondence with Fronto that we have many of the details of his life during the reign of Antoninus. Through these letters Marcus appears as an intelligent, serious-minded and hardworking youth. They also show the growing importance of philosophy for the future emperor: showing impatience for the unending exercises with Greek and Latin declamations, he later became fond of the Diatribai ("Discourses") of Epictetus, an important moral philosopher of the Stoic school. Marcus also started to have an increasing public role at the side of Antoninus, holding the place of consul in 140, 145 and 161 and increasing collaboration in decisions. In 147 he received the proconsular imperium outside Rome and the tribunicia potestas, the main formal powers of emperorship. In 145, Marcus married Annia Galeria Faustina or Faustina the Younger, who was Antoninus' daughter and his paternal cousin.

[edit] Emperor

[edit] Joint emperorship




Equestrian Statue of Marcus Aurelius on Capitoline Hill.


When Antoninus Pius died (March 7, 161), Marcus accepted the throne on the condition that he and Verus were made joint emperors (Augusti). Though formally equal from the constitutional point of view, Verus, younger and probably less popular, looks to have been subordinate in practice.[8]
Marcus' insistence to have Verus elected with him was motivated by his loyalty towards the will of their adoptive father. The joint succession may have also been motivated by military experiences, since, during his reign, Marcus Aurelius was almost constantly at war with various peoples outside the empire. A highly authoritative figure was needed to command the troops, yet the emperor himself could not defend both the German and Parthian fronts at the same time. Neither could he simply appoint a general to lead the legions; earlier popular military leaders like Julius Caesar and Vespasian had used the military to overthrow the existing government and install themselves as supreme leaders. Marcus Aurelius solved the problem by sending Verus to command the legions in the east. Verus was authoritative enough to command the full loyalty of the troops, but already powerful enough that he had little incentive to overthrow Marcus. Verus remained loyal until his death in 169. This joint emperorship was reminiscent of the political system of the Roman Republic, which functioned according to the principle of collegiality and did not allow a single person to hold supreme power. Joint rule was revived by Diocletian's establishment of the Tetrarchy in the late 3rd century.
Immediately at the beginning of his reign, Marcus continued on the path of his predecessors by issuing numerous law reforms, mainly to clear away abuses and anomalies in the civil jurisprudence. In particular he promoted favourable measures towards categories like slaves, widows and minors; recognition to blood relationships in the field of succession was given. In the criminal law a distinction of class, with different punishments, was made between honestiores and humiliores ("The more distinguished" and "the more lowly", respectively).
Under Marcus' reign, the status of Christians remained the same since the time of Trajan. They were legally punishable, though in fact rarely persecuted. In 177 a group of Christians were executed at Lyon, for example, but the act is mainly attributable to the initiative of the local governor.

[edit] Challenges faced

[edit] War with Parthia




Marcus Aurelius Arch in Tripoli, built to commemorate the emperor.


In Asia, a revitalized Parthian Empire renewed its assault in 161, defeating two Roman armies and invading Armenia and Syria. Marcus Aurelius sent his joint emperor Verus to command the legions in the east to face this threat. The war ended successfully in 166, although the merit must be mostly ascribed to subordinate generals like Gaius Avidius Cassius. On the return from the campaign, Verus was awarded with a triumph; the parade was unusual because it included the two emperors, their sons and unmarried daughters as a big family celebration. Marcus Aurelius' two sons, Commodus five years old and Annius Verus of three, were elevated to the status of Caesar for the occasion.
The returning army carried with them a plague, afterwards known as the Antonine Plague, or the Plague of Galen, which spread through the Roman Empire between 165 and 180. The disease was a pandemic believed to be either of smallpox or measles, and would ultimately claim the lives of two Roman emperors—Lucius Verus, who died in 169, and Marcus Aurelius, whose family name, Antoninus, was given to the epidemic. The disease broke out again nine years later, according to the Roman historian Dio Cassius, and caused up to 2,000 deaths a day at Rome, one quarter of those infected. Total deaths have been estimated at five million. A possible contact with Han China occurred in 166 AD when a Roman traveller visited the Han court, claiming to be an ambassador representing a certain Andun (Chinese: 安敦), who can be identified either with Marc Aurel or his predecessor Antoninus Pius.[9]

[edit] Germania and the Danube
Main article: Marcomannic Wars





Bust of Marcus Aurelius, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.


Starting from the 160s, Germanic tribes and other nomadic people launched raids along the Northern border, particularly into Gaul and across the Danube. This new impetus westwards was probably due to attacks from tribes farther east. A first invasion of the Chatti in the province of Germania Superior was repulsed in 162. Far more dangerous was the invasion of 166, when the Marcomanni of Bohemia, clients of the Roman Empire since 19, crossed the Danube together with the Lombards and other German tribes. At the same time, the Iranian Sarmatians attacked between the Danube and the Theiss rivers.
Due to the situation in the East, only a punitive expedition could be launched in 167. Both Marcus and Verus led the troops. After the death of Verus (169), Marcus led personally the struggle against the Germans for the great part of his remaining life. The Romans suffered at least two serious defeats by the Quadi and Marcomanni, who could cross the Alps, ravage Opitergium (Oderzo) and besiege Aquileia, the Roman main city of north-east Italy. At the same time the Costoboci, coming from the Carpathian area, invaded Moesia, Macedonia and Greece. After a long struggle, Marcus Aurelius managed to push back the invaders. Numerous Germans settled in frontier regions like Dacia, Pannonia, Germany and Italy itself. This was not a new thing, but this time the numbers of settlers required the creation of two new frontier provinces on the left shore of the Danube, Sarmatia and Marcomannia, including today's Bohemia and Hungary.
The emperor's plans were, however, prevented by a revolt in East, led by Avidius Cassius, which was prompted by false news of the death of Marcus after an illness. Of the eastern provinces, only Cappadocia and Bithynia did not side with the rebels. When it became clear that Marcus Aurelius was still alive, Cassius' fortunes declined quickly and he was killed by his troops after only 100 days of power.
Together with his wife Faustina, Marcus Aurelius toured the eastern provinces until 173. He visited Athens, declaring himself a protector of philosophy. After a triumph in Rome, the following year he marched again to the Danubian frontier. After a decisive victory in 178, the plan to annex Bohemia seemed poised for success but was abandoned after Marcus Aurelius again fell ill in 180.

[edit] Death and succession
Marcus Aurelius died on March 17, 180, in the city of Vindobona (modern Vienna), his son and successor Commodus accompanying him. He was immediately deified and his ashes were returned to Rome, and rested in Hadrian's mausoleum (modern Castel Sant'Angelo) until the Visigoth sack of the city in 410. His campaigns against Germans and Sarmatians were also commemorated by a column and a temple in Rome.
Marcus Aurelius was able to secure the succession for Commodus, whom he had named Caesar in 166 and made co-emperor in 177, though the choice may have been unknowingly unfortunate. This decision, which put an end to the fortunate series of "adoptive emperors", was highly criticized by later historians since Commodus was a political and military outsider, as well as an extreme egotist with neurotic problems. For this reason, Marcus Aurelius' death is often held to have been the end of the Pax Romana. It is possible that he chose Commodus simply in the absence of other candidates, or as a result of the fear of succession issues and the possibility of civil war.
Historian Michael Grant, in The Climax of Rome (1968), states about Commodus, "The youth turned out to be very erratic or at least so anti-traditional that disaster was inevitable. But whether or not Marcus ought to have known this to be so, the rejections of his son's claims in favour of someone else would almost certainly involved one of the civil wars which were to proliferate so disastrous around future successions." Therefore, it would be logical to assume that Marcus Aurelius stoically chose Commodus to prevent civil war.

[edit] Marriage and issue




Bust of Faustina the Younger, Louvre, Paris.


Aurelius married Faustina the Younger in 145. During their 30-year marriage Faustina bore 13 children. Only one son and four daughters outlived their father:

Annia Aurelia Galeria Faustina (147-after 165)
Gemellus Lucillae (died around 150), twin brother of Lucilla
Annia Aurelia Galeria Lucilla (148/50-182), twin sister of Gemellus, married her father's co-ruler Lucius Verus
Titus Aelius Antoninus (born after 150, died before 7 March 161)
Titus Aelius Aurelius (born after 150, died before 7 March 161)
Hadrianus (152-157)
Domitia Faustina (born after 150, died before 7 March 161)
Fadilla (159-after 211)
Annia Cornificia Faustina Minor (160-after 211)
Titus Aurelius Fulvus Antoninus (161-165), twin brother of Commodus
Lucius Aurelius Commodus Antoninus(Commodus) (161-192), twin brother of Titus Aurelius Fulvus Antoninus, later emperor
Marcus Annius Verus Caesar (162-169)
Vibia Aurelia Sabina (170-died before 217)


[edit] Writings




Original bronze statue of Marcus Aurelius, now preserved in the Capitoline Museums, Rome.


While on campaign between 170 and 180, Aurelius wrote his Meditations in Greek as a source for his own guidance and self-improvement. He had been a priest at the sacrificial altars of Roman service and was an eager patriot. He had a logical mind and his notes were representative of Stoic philosophy and spirituality. Meditations is still revered as a literary monument to a government of service and duty. It has been praised for its "exquisite accent and its infinite tenderness"[citation needed] and "saintliness"[citation needed], and has also been called the "gospel of his life."[citation needed] John Stuart Mill, in his Utility of Religion, compared the Meditations to the Sermon on the Mount.
The book itself was first published in 1558 in Zurich, from a manuscript copy that is now lost. The only other surviving complete copy of the manuscript is in the Vatican library.




Marcus Aurelius wrote Meditations in Greek at his base in Sirmium in modern-day Serbia and also while positioned at Aquincum on campaign in Pannonia in modern-day Hungary.


The significance of death was very important in the philosophy of Marcus Aurelius. He didn't believe in the afterlife. He wrote: 'We live for an instant, only to be swallowed in "complete forgetfulness and the void of infinite time on this side of us." "Think how many ere now, after passing their life in implacable enmity, suspicion, hatred... are now dead and burnt to ashes." According to Marcus Aurelius everything will be turned in absolute oblivion, even legends. "Of the life of man the duration is but a point, its substance streaming away, its perception dim, the fabric of the entire body prone to decay, and the soul a vortex, and fortune incalculable, and fame uncertain. In a word all things of the body are as a river, and the things of the soul as a dream and a vapour; and life is a warfare and a pilgrim's sojourn, and fame after death is only forgetfulness." 'Everything existing "is already disintegrating and changing... everything is by nature made but to die." 'The length of one's life is irrelevant, "for look at the yawning gulf of time behind thee and before thee at another infinity to come. In this eternity the life of a baby of three days and the life of a Nestor of three centuries are as one." 'To desire is to be permanently disappointed and disturbed, since everything we desire in this world is "empty and corrupt and paltry." For Marcus Aurelius, death was desirable, because it would make an end to all desires.[10]
Despite these thoughts on life and death, Marcus Aurelius was an advocate of rational virtue. According to Jonathan Dollimore, Marcus Aurelius had a kind of indifference towards the brutalities in life. As an emperor, he persecuted Christians and went frequently on military campaigns. He justified his deeds by pointing at the insignificance of worldly affairs.[11]

[edit] Marcus Aurelius in later arts

[edit] Literature

Marcus Aurelius appears as a minor character and is mentioned extensively in Marius the Epicurean by Walter Pater.
John Steinbeck in East of Eden has the character Lee read often from Meditations as a sage-like character.
A Man in Full, a 1998 novel by Tom Wolfe. One of the characters reads Marcus Aurelius while in jail and is heavily influenced by his Stoicism. It helps him deal with his suffering and the injustice of his incarceration. However, Wolfe more strongly uses Epictetus.
Mémoires d'Hadrien (1951), a fictitious but plausible autobiography (in form of a series of letters directed to his adoptive grandson "Marcus") of one of his predecessors, Hadrian, by Marguerite Yourcenar. It is one of the best-selling European novels of the 20th century.
Household Gods, a 1999 novel by Judith Tarr and Harry Turtledove.
John Irving in "The World According to Garp" has the character Garp reflect on a quote of Marcus Aurelius from "Meditations".
Silence of the Lambs Hannibal Lecter referral whilst talking to Agent Clarice Starling: "First principles, Clarice. Simplicity. Read Marcus Aurelius. Of each particular thing ask: what is it in itself? What is its nature? What does he do, this man you seek?"
"The Most Dangerous Game" by Richard Connell features the wicked General Zaroff reading Marcus Aurelius after his unsuccessful hunting of Sanger Rainsford.
"Mr Biswas" in A House For Mr Biswas by V S Naipaul often refers to Marcus Aurelius to show that he (Mr Biswas) is wiser and better read than his brothers-in-law.
Upamanyu Chatterjee in "English, August" has the protagonist Agastya Sen often quote Marcus Aurelius while spending a year as a trainee civil services officer in the village of Madna.
A Marcus Aurelius book is burned in Fahrenheit 451.
In the Babylon 5 book To Dream in the City of Sorrows, Jeffrey Sinclair (who is also the spiritual leader Valen) frequently mentions the Meditations of Marcus Aurelius. Sinclair/Valen calls Meditations one of "the best books ever on leadership."


[edit] Film

The Fall of the Roman Empire (1964), played by Alec Guinness
Gladiator (2000), starring Russell Crowe


[edit] See also

Epictetus
Stoicism
Socrates
Zeno of Citium


[edit] Nerva-Antonine family tree

(1) = 1st spouse
(2) = 2nd spouse (not shown)
(3) = 3rd spouse
SMALL CAPS = posthumously deified (Augusti, Augustae, or other)
dotted lines indicate adoption or (in the case of Hadrian and Antinous) lovers




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 

Marcia

 

TRAJANUS PATER

 

NERVA (r. 96-98)

 

Ulpia Trajana



 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 

MARCIANA

 

TRAJAN, adoptive son (r. 98-117)

 

PLOTINA

 


 


 


 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Aelius Afer

 

Paulina Major



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 

Libo Rupilius Frugi (3)

 


 

MATIDIA

 


 


 


 

L. Vibius Sabinus (1)

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



Rupilia Annia

 

M. Annius Verus

 

Rupilia Faustina

 

SABINA

 

HADRIAN, adoptive son (r. 117-138)

 

ANTINOUS

 

Paulina Minor



 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



Domitia Lucilla

 

M. Annius Verus

 

M. Annius Libo

 

FAUSTINA

 

ANTONINUS PIUS, adoptive son (r. 138-161)

 

Aelius, adoptive son

 

Julia Paulina



 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



Cornificia

 

MARCUS AURELIUS, adoptive son (r. 161-180)

 

FAUSTINA Iunior

 

Aurelia Fadilla

 

two infant sons

 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Salinator



 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

VERUS, adoptive son (r. 161-169)



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



Fadilla

 

Cornificia

 

COMMODUS (r. 177-192)

 

nine other children

 

Lucilla

 


 




 




[edit] Notes


^ a b "Marcus Aurelius". Encyclopaedia Britannica. http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-9050818/Marcus-Aurelius. Retrieved on 2007-08-07. 
^ Augustan History, "Marcus Aurelius"
^ John Stuart Mill in his Utility of Religion, compared Meditations to the Sermon on the Mount.
^ Historia Augusta, Marcus Aurelius, 1
^ Cassius Dio, lxix, 21
^ 1964 Maxwell Staniforth translation.
^  "Marcus Aurelius Antoninus". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 1913. http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Catholic_Encyclopedia_(1913)/Marcus_Aurelius_Antoninus. 
^ Cassius Dio, Roman History, 71.1
^ Edwin G. Pulleyblank: "The Roman Empire as Known to Han China", Journal of the American Oriental Society, Vol. 119, No. 1 (1999), pp. 71-79
^ Jonathan Dollimore, Death, Desire and Loss in Western Culture (London 1998) 32–34.
^ Ibid., 34–35.



[edit] External links

Huge statue of Roman ruler found






Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Marcus Aurelius





Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Marcus Aurelius





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Marcus Aurelius



[edit] Primary sources

Cassius Dio, Roman History. See original text on LacusCurtius.
Marcus Aurelius, Meditations.
Scriptores Historiae Augustae, Augustan History. See original text on LacusCurtius.
Works by Emperor of Rome Marcus Aurelius at Project Gutenberg
English Translation by George Long (1862)
Latin Version by J. M. Schulz (1802)
Henry Dwight Sedgwick, Life of Marcus Aurelius, Yale University Press, 1922.
Partial statue of Marcus Aurelius recently unearthed in Turkey (25 AUG 08)
Greek Version


[edit] Secondary material

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry
Marcus Aurelius entry at De Imperatoribus Romanis
Marcuss Aurelius free access article at Encyclopaedia Britannica
Marcus Aurelius entry at livius.org
A Man in Full: The Teachings of Marcus Aurelius and Epictetus A discussion and comparison of Meditations and its influence on Tom Wolfe and modern culture.
Marcus Aurelius: The Philosopher-Emperor of Rome — Essay looking at Marcus Aurelius from the perspective of his leadership.
Filmed academic lectures on Marcus Aurelius





Marcus Aurelius
Antonine dynasty
Cadet branch of the Nervan-Antonian Dynasty
Born: 26 April 121 Died: 17 March 180


Regnal titles


Preceded by
Antoninus Pius
Roman Emperor
161–180
(with Lucius Verus 161–169)
Succeeded by
Commodus


Political offices


Preceded by
Antoninus Pius, Gaius Bruttius Praesens and Lucius Fulvius Rusticus
Consul of the Roman Empire with Antoninus Pius
140
Succeeded by
Titus Hoenius Severus and Marcus Peducaeus Stloga Priscinus


Preceded by
Lollianus and Titus Statilius Maximus
Consul of the Roman Empire with Antoninus Pius
145
Succeeded by
Sextus Erucius Clarus and Cnaeus Claudius Severus Arabianus


Preceded by
Appius Annius Atilius Bradua and Titus Clodius Vibius Varus
Consul of the Roman Empire with Lucius Verus
161
Succeeded by
Quintus Iunius Rusticus and Lucius Titius Plautius Aquilinus









v • d • e

Western and Eastern Roman Emperors





Principate
27 BC – 235



Augustus · Tiberius · Caligula · Claudius · Nero · Galba · Otho · Vitellius · Vespasian · Titus · Domitian · Nerva · Trajan · Hadrian · Antoninus Pius · Marcus Aurelius with Lucius Verus · Commodus · Pertinax · Didius Julianus · Septimius Severus · Caracalla · Geta · Macrinus with Diadumenian · Elagabalus · Alexander Severus








Crisis
235–284



Maximinus Thrax · Gordian I and Gordian II · Pupienus and Balbinus · Gordian III · Philip the Arab · Decius with Herennius Etruscus · Hostilian · Trebonianus Gallus with Volusianus · Aemilianus · Valerian · Gallienus · Claudius Gothicus · Quintillus · Aurelian · Tacitus · Florianus · Probus · Carus · Carinus · Numerian








Dominate
284–395



Diocletian · Maximian · Constantius Chlorus · Galerius · Severus · Maxentius · Maximinus Daia · Licinius with Valerius Valens and Martinianus · Constantine I · Constantine II · Constans I · Constantius II · Julian the Apostate · Jovian · Valentinian I · Valens · Gratian · Valentinian II · Theodosius I








Western Empire
395–480



Honorius · Constantius III · Joannes · Valentinian III · Petronius Maximus · Avitus · Majorian · Libius Severus · Anthemius · Olybrius · Glycerius · Julius Nepos · Romulus Augustulus








Eastern/
Byzantine Empire
395–1204



Arcadius · Theodosius II · Marcian · Leo I · Leo II · Zeno · Basiliscus · Anastasius I · Justin I · Justinian I · Justin II · Tiberius II Constantine · Maurice · Phocas · Heraclius · Constantine III · Heraklonas · Constans II · Constantine IV · Justinian II · Leontios · Tiberios III · Philippikos · Anastasios II · Theodosios III · Leo III the Isaurian · Constantine V Copronymus · Artabasdos · Leo IV the Khazar · Constantine VI · Irene · Nikephoros I · Staurakios · Michael I Rangabe · Leo V the Armenian · Michael II the Stammerer · Theophilos · Michael III the Drunkard · Basil I the Macedonian · Leo VI the Wise · Alexander · Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus · Romanos I Lekapenos · Romanos II · Nikephorus II Phokas · John I Tzimiskes · Basil II Bulgaroktonos · Constantine VIII · Zoe · Romanos III Argyros · Michael IV Paphlagon · Michael V Calaphates · Constantine IX Monomachos · Theodora the Macedonian · Michael VI the Aged · Isaac I Komnenos · Constantine X Doukas · Romanos IV Diogenes · Michael VII Parapinakes · Nikephoros III Botaniates · Alexios I Komnenos · John II Komnenos · Manuel I Komnenos · Alexios II Komnenos · Andronikos I Komnenos · Isaac II Angelos · Alexios III Angelos · Alexios IV Angelos · Nikolaos Kanabos · Alexios V Doukas








Empire of Nicaea
1204–1261



Constantine Laskaris · Theodore I Laskaris · John III Doukas Vatatzes · Theodore II Laskaris · John IV Laskaris








Eastern/
Byzantine Empire
1261–1453



Michael VIII Palaiologos · Andronikos II Palaiologos · Michael IX Palaiologos · Andronikos III Palaiologos · John V Palaiologos · John VI Kantakouzenos · Matthew Kantakouzenos · Andronikos IV Palaiologos · John VII Palaiologos · Andronikos V Palaiologos · Manuel II Palaiologos · John VIII Palaiologos · Constantine XI Palaiologos















v • d • e

Stoicism





Philosophers





Early Stoa


Zeno of Citium · Persaeus · Aristo · Sphaerus · Herillus · Cleanthes · Chrysippus · Zeno of Tarsus · Crates of Mallus · Diogenes of Babylon · Apollodorus · Antipater of Tarsus







Middle Stoa


Panaetius · Dardanus · Mnesarchus · Hecato · Posidonius · Diodotus · Geminus · Antipater of Tyre · Athenodoros Cananites







Late Stoa


Seneca · Cornutus · Musonius Rufus · Euphrates · Cleomedes · Epictetus · Hierocles · Sextus · Junius Rusticus · Marcus Aurelius









Philosophy

Stoicism · Stoic Categories · Stoic Passions · Neostoicism






Concepts

Adiaphora · Apatheia · Ataraxia · Diairesis · Eudaimonia · Katalepsis · Logos · Kathekon · Physis · Pneuma






Works

Dialogues (Seneca) · Discourses (Epictetus) · Enchiridion (Epictetus) · Epistles (Seneca) · Meditations (Marcus Aurelius) · Republic (Zeno)









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Aurelius"
Categories: 2nd-century philosophers | 2nd-century Romans | Nerva-Antonine Dynasty | Roman emperors | Imperial Roman consuls | Roman era philosophers | Stoic philosophers | Annii | Deified Roman emperors | People from Rome (city) | 121 births | 180 deaths | 2nd-century rulersHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
Azərbaycan
Bikol Central
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kiswahili
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
मराठी
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Occitan
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Sicilianu
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Tagalog
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 16:53.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
