













Pope John Paul I - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Pope_John_Paul_I";
		var wgTitle = "Pope John Paul I";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "24027";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 275907803;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Pope John Paul I

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


John Paul I





Papacy began
August 26, 1978


Papacy ended
September 28, 1978


Predecessor
Paul VI


Successor
John Paul II





Birth name
Albino Luciani


Born
17 October 1912(1912-10-17)
Canale d'Agordo, Italy


Died
28 September 1978 (aged 65)
Apostolic Palace, Vatican City


Other popes named John Paul


Pope John Paul I (Latin: Ioannes Paulus PP. I, Italian: Giovanni Paolo I), born Albino Luciani, (October 17, 1912 – September 28, 1978), reigned as Pope of the Roman Catholic Church and as Sovereign of Vatican City from 26 August 1978 until his death 33 days later. His reign is among the shortest in papal history, resulting in the most recent Year of Three Popes. John Paul I was the first Pope to have been born in the 20th century.




Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Early years


2 Vocation
3 Papacy

3.1 Long conclave predicted
3.2 The smiling pope
3.3 New Pope, new rules


4 Death
5 Legacy
6 John Paul II on his predecessor
7 Media
8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography

[edit] Early years
Albino Luciani was born on October 17, 1912 in Forno di Canale (now Canale d'Agordo) in Belluno, a province of the Veneto region in northern Italy. He was the son of Giovanni Luciani (1872? - 1952), a bricklayer, and Bortola Tancon (1879? - 1948). Albino was followed by two brothers, Federico (1915 - 1916) and Edoardo (1917 - 2008), and a sister, Antonia (b. 1920).




John Paul I pictured in a coin.



[edit] Vocation
Luciani entered the minor seminary of Feltre in 1923, where his teachers found him "too lively", and later went on to the major seminary of Belluno. During his stay at Belluno, he attempted to join the Jesuits but was denied by the seminary's rector, Bishop Giosuè Cattarossi. Ordained a priest on 7 July 1935, Luciani then served as a curate in his native Forno de Canale before becoming a professor and the vice-rector of the Belluno seminary in 1937. Among the different subjects, he taught dogmatic and moral theology, canon law, and sacred art.
In 1941, Luciani began to seek a doctorate in theology from the Pontifical Gregorian University, which required at least one year's attendance in Rome. However, the seminary's superiors wanted him to continue teaching during his doctoral studies; the situation was resolved by a special dispensation of Pope Pius XII himself, on 27 March 1941. His thesis (The origin of the human soul according to Antonio Rosmini) largely attacked Rosmini's theology, and earned him his doctorate magna cum laude.
In 1947, he was named vicar general to Bishop Girolamo Bortignon, OFM Cap, of Belluno. Two years later, in 1949, he was placed in charge of diocesan catechetics. On 15 December 1958, Luciani was appointed Bishop of Vittorio Veneto by Pope John XXIII. He received his episcopal consecration on the following 27 December from Pope John himself, with Bishops Bortignon and Gioacchino Muccin serving as co-consecrators. As a bishop, he participated in all the sessions of the Second Vatican Council (1962-1965). On 15 December 1969, he was appointed Patriarch of Venice by Pope Paul VI and took possession of the archdiocese on 3 February 1970. Pope Paul created Luciani Cardinal-Priest of S. Marco in the consistory of 5 March 1973. Catholics were struck by his humility, a prime example being his embarrassment when Paul VI once removed his papal stole and put it on Patriarch Luciani. He recalls the occasion in his first Angelus thus:[1]


“
Pope Paul VI made me blush to the roots of my hair in the presence of 20,000 people, because he removed his stole and placed it on my shoulders. Never have I blushed so much!
”



[edit] Papacy


Papal styles of
Pope John Paul I










Reference style
His Holiness


Spoken style
Your Holiness


Religious style
Holy Father


Posthumous style
Servant of God


Luciani was elected on the fourth ballot of the August 1978 papal conclave. He chose the regnal name of John Paul, the first double name in the history of the papacy, explaining in his famous Angelus that he took it as a thankful honour to his two immediate predecessors: John XXIII, who had named him a bishop, and Paul VI, who had named him Patriarch of Venice and a cardinal. He was also the first (and so far only) pope to use "the first" in his regnal name. In Italy he is remembered with the affectionate appellatives of "Il Papa del Sorriso" (The Smiling Pope) and "Il Sorriso di Dio" (God's Smile).
Observers have suggested that his selection was linked to the rumored divisions between rival camps within the College of Cardinals:

Conservatives and Curialists supporting Cardinal Giuseppe Siri, who favored a more conservative interpretation or even correction of Vatican II's reforms.
Those who favored a more liberal interpretation of Vatican II's reforms, and some Italian cardinals supporting Cardinal Giovanni Benelli, who was opposed because of his "autocratic" tendencies.
The dwindling band of supporters of Cardinal Sergio Pignedoli, who was allegedly so confident that he was papabile that he went on a crash diet to fit the right size of white cassock when elected.[citation needed]

Outside the Italians, now themselves a lessening influence within the increasingly internationalist College of Cardinals, were figures like Cardinal Karol Wojtyła. Over the days following the conclave, cardinals effectively declared that with general great joy they had elected "God's candidate". Argentine Cardinal Eduardo Francisco Pironio stated that, "We were witnesses of a moral miracle." And later, Mother Teresa commented: "He has been the greatest gift of God, a sunray of God's love shining in the darkness of the world."
Metropolitan Nikodim (Rotov) of Leningrad, who was present at his installation, collapsed and died during the ceremony, and the new Pope prayed over him in his final moments.

[edit] Long conclave predicted
Many, including the cardinals, expected a long conclave, deadlocked between the camps. Luciani was an easy compromise. He was a pastor more in the spirit of Vatican II than an austere intellectual, a man with few autocratic pretensions and so less unwelcome to some than Cardinal Giovanni Benelli. And for Italian cardinals, determined not to "lose" the papacy to a non-Italian for the first time in centuries and faced with other controversial Italian candidates, Luciani was an Italian with no baggage. He had no enemies created through a high profile career in the Curia, made no controversial or radical statements or sermons and was just a smiling gentleman, a pastor.
Even before the conclave began, journalists covering it for Vatican Radio noted increasing mention of his name, often from cardinals who barely knew him but wanted to find out more; not least, "What is the state of the man's health?" Had they known just how precarious his health was (his feet were so swollen he could not wear the shoes bought for him by his family for the conclave) they might have looked elsewhere for Paul VI's successor. Hence, to his own horror and disbelief, he was elected to the papacy. The surprise of his election is captured in his official portrait, his hair is clumsily brushed back, because unlike papabili cardinals who expect their election, he had not had his hair cut for the conclave. When he was asked if he accepted his election, he stated "May God forgive you for what you have done in my regard."[2] Moments later, hesitating, he said: "I accept".

[edit] The smiling pope
After his election, John Paul quickly made several decisions that would "humanize" the office of pope, admitting publicly he had turned scarlet when Paul VI had named him the patriarch of Venice. He was the first modern pope to speak in the singular form, using 'I' instead of the royal we, though the official records of his speeches were often rewritten in more formal style by traditionalist aides, who reinstated the royal we in press releases and in L'Osservatore Romano. He was the first to refuse the sedia gestatoria until Vatican pressure convinced him of its need, in order to allow the faithful to see him.
John Paul was the first pope to admit that the prospect of the papacy had daunted him to the point that other cardinals had to encourage him to accept it. He strongly suggested to his aides and staff that he believed he was unfit to be pope. Though Pope Paul VI's Apostolic Constitution Romano Pontifici Eligendo explicitly required that John Paul be crowned, he controversially refused to have the millennium-old traditional Papal Coronation and wear the Papal Tiara.[3] He instead chose to have a simplified Papal Inauguration Mass. John Paul I used as his motto Humilitas. In his notable Angelus of August 27,[1] delivered on the first day of his papacy, he impressed the world with his natural friendliness.

[edit] New Pope, new rules
As a theologian, he was expected to be an interim pastor who would make few if any major changes. However, he did meet with representatives of the United Nations to discuss the issue of overpopulation in the Third World, a controversial issue in light of the Church's opposition to artificial birth control.
John Paul I intended to prepare an encyclical in order to confirm the lines of the Second Vatican Council ("an extraordinary long-range historical event and of growth for the Church," he said) and to enforce the Church's discipline in the life of priests and the faithful. In discipline, he was a reformist, instead, and was the author of initiatives such as the devolution of one per cent of each church's entries for the poor churches in the Third World. The visit of Jorge Rafael Videla, president of the Argentine junta, to the Vatican caused considerable controversy, especially when the Pope reminded Videla about human rights violations taking place in Argentina during the so-called Dirty War.
John Paul impressed people with his personal warmth. There are reports that within the Vatican he was seen as an intellectual lightweight not up to the responsibilities of the papacy, although David Yallop ("In God's Name") says that this is the result of a whispering campaign by people in the Vatican who were opposed to Luciani's policies. In the words of John Cornwell, "they treated him with condescension"; one senior cleric discussing Luciani said "they have elected Peter Sellers."[4] Critics contrasted his sermons mentioning Pinocchio to the learned intellectual discourses of Pius XII or Paul VI. Visitors spoke of his isolation and loneliness, and the fact that he was the first pope in decades not to have had either a diplomatic (such as Pius XI and John XXIII) or Curial role in the Church (such as Pius XII and Paul VI).
Yallop (p. 267-269) writes repeatedly that Luciani was a highly capable person, fluent in six different languages, who was respected for his intelligence; if he chose simple words (such as the sermon that mentioned Pinocchio), he did this to communicate well to a wide audience. Yallop says that many in the Vatican were opposed to Luciani, and depicted him in their comments as being too simple. By contrast, he recounts two specific incidents from this short papacy:
"Foreign Minister Casaroli came to the Pope with seven questions concerning the Church's relationship with various Eastern European countries, Luciani promptly gave him answers on five of them and asked for a little time to consider the other two. ... Casaroli returned to his office and told a colleague what had occurred. The priest enquired: "Were they the correct solutions?" "In my view, totally. It would have taken me a year to get those responses from [Pope Paul VI]."
Yallop also writes about Cardinal Gabriel-Marie Garrone's discussion with Luciani about a document (Sapienta Christiana) that the curia had been preparing and revising for 16 years:
"[Luciani] told Garrone that he had spent most of the previous day studying the document. Then without referring to a copy of it he began to discuss it at length and in great detail. Garrone sat astonished at the Pope's grasp and understanding of such a highly complex document. ... Returning to his office [Garrone] remarked 'I have just met a great Pope.'"

[edit] Death
John Paul I was found dead sitting up in his bed shortly before dawn on September 29, 1978,[5] just 33 days into his papacy. The Vatican reported that the 65-year old Pope most likely died the previous night of a heart attack. However, a degree of uncertainty accompanies this diagnosis since an autopsy was not performed. This uncertainty, coupled with inconsistent statements made following the Pope's death, has led to a number of conspiracy theories concerning his death. These statements concern who found the Pope's body, at what time he was found, and what papers the Pope had in his hand.
Immediately following the Pope's death, rumours began. One rumour claimed that a visiting prelate, Nikodim, had recently died from drinking "poisoned tea" prepared for the pope. The visiting prelate actually had died some days earlier, but there was no evidence of any poison, but again, no autopsy was performed because Nikodim was embalmed almost immediately. Another unsubstantiated rumour described the Pope's plans to dismiss senior Vatican officials over allegations of corruption. The suddenness of his embalming raised suspicions that it had been done to prevent an autopsy. The Vatican insisted that a papal autopsy was prohibited under Vatican law. However, one source (the diary of Agostino Chigi) reports that an autopsy was carried out on the remains of Pope Pius VIII in 1830. Nevertheless, suspicions persist to this day, particularly given the sweeping changes to Vatican personnel this Pope had already penned, along with the Mafia-riddled Italy of the time, and the number of subsequent murders of officials investigating the Vatican Bank along with its associates.[6]
On November 11, 2006, the first part of his beatification process concluded at the Belluno cathedral.

[edit] Legacy
Pope John Paul I was not in office long enough to make any major practical changes within the Vatican or the Roman Catholic Church (except for his abandonment of the Papal Coronation). His impact was twofold: his image as a warm, gentle, kind man captivated the world. This image was immediately formed when he was presented to the crowd in St. Peter's Square following his election. The warmth of his presence made him a much-loved figure before he even spoke a word. The media in particular fell under his spell. He was a skilled orator. Whereas Pope Paul VI spoke as if delivering a doctoral thesis, John Paul I produced warmth, laughter, a 'feel good factor,' and plenty of media-friendly sound bites. Secondly, the manner of his death raised many questions about the conduct of senior Vatican figures. Even among those who dismiss conspiracy theories, there are some that admit that the Vatican mishandled the circumstances of his death. For others, the suspicion remains that the 'smiling pope,' who charmed the world, died in a manner that has yet to be explained adequately.
He was regarded as a skilled communicator and writer, and has left behind some writings. His book Illustrissimi, written while he was a Cardinal, is a series of letters to a wide collection of historical and fictional persons. Among those still available are his letters to Jesus Christ, the Biblical King David, Figaro the Barber, Marie Theresa of Austria and Pinocchio. Others 'written to' included Mark Twain, Charles Dickens and Christopher Marlowe. He is also remembered for being the first to refuse the traditional papal coronation. Instead, he chose an "investiture" to commence his brief papacy. One of his remarks, reported in the press, was that we should see God not only as Father, but also as Mother. This remark reinforced the image of a pastoral pope.
A number of campaigns have been started to canonize Pope John Paul I. Miracles have been attributed to him. On June 10, 2003 the Vatican's Congregation for the Causes of Saints gave its permission for the opening of the beatification process of Pope John Paul I, Servant of God. The "diocesan phase" of this process began in Belluno on November 23, 2003; a miracle has already been alleged, of an Italian man cured of cancer.

[edit] John Paul II on his predecessor
Karol Józef Cardinal Wojtyła was elected to succeed John Paul I as Supreme Pontiff on Monday, October 16, 1978. According to at least one news report, his choice of the name John Paul was no surprise, although his election was. The next day he celebrated Mass together with the College of Cardinals in the Sistine Chapel. After the Mass, he delivered his first Urbi et Orbi (a traditional blessing) message, broadcast worldwide via radio. In it he pledged fidelity to the Second Vatican Council and paid tribute to his predecessor:[7]


“
What can we say of John Paul I? It seems to us that only yesterday he emerged from this assembly of ours to put on the papal robes—not a light weight. But what warmth of charity, nay, what 'an abundant outpouring of love'—which came forth from him in the few days of his ministry and which in his last Sunday address before the Angelus he desired should come upon the world. This is also confirmed by his wise instructions to the faithful who were present at his public audiences on faith, hope and love.
”



[edit] Media

In 2006, the Italian Public Broadcasting Service, RAI, produced a television miniseries about the life of John Paul I, called Papa Luciani: Il sorriso di Dio (literally, "Pope Luciani: The Smile of God"). It stars Italian comedian Neri Marcorè in the titular role.
The Fall's song 'Hey! Luciani' is about Pope John Paul I.
Patti Smith's recitative song "Wave" is about Luciani, and her Wave album is dedicated to him.
The 1990 film The Godfather Part III included the assassination theory of Pope John Paul I, although the character's lay name differs from the actual Pope's.


[edit] References


^ a b "FIRST ANGELUS ADDRESS, Pope John Paul I". Libreria Editrice Vaticana. http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/john_paul_i/angelus/documents/hf_jp-i_ang_27081978_en.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-28. 
^ L'Osservatore Romano 27 August 1978.'
^ Romano Pontifici Eligendo (1975) Paul VI's Apostolic Constitution on the election on the pontiff, Section 92.
^ [1]
^ NBC Radio News announces Pope John Paul I Death (In RealAudio)
^ See the article and list of further events after his death at The Mysterious Death of Pope John Paul I (A Treatise). Some other books about his death include In God's Name (Andrew Yallop) and Murder in the Vatican (Lucien Gregoire) that make the case for murder; while "A Thief in the Night: Life and Death in the Vatican" (John Cornwell) argues that he died of disease, and showed clear symptoms in his last few days.
^ "FIRST RADIOMESSAGE "URBI ET ORBI", Pope John Paul II". Libreria Editrice Vaticana. http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/john_paul_ii/speeches/1978/documents/hf_jp-ii_spe_19781017_primo-radiomessaggio_en.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-28. 



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: John Paul I





Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Pope John Paul I



Spirit Daily
Crisis Magazine
L'Osservatore Romano, Weekly Edition in English, 26 October 1978, p.
Pope John Paul on Find-A-Grave
John Paul I in the Vatican's site
Albino Luciani
Papaluciani.com
Tomb of John Paul I - Vatican Grottoes
Italian documentary about the election of Pope John Paul I on YouTube - Elezione di Giovanni Paolo I
Italian documentary (subtitled) on YouTube - The last days of Johannes Paulus I (Albino Luciani), 1978
An interview with Dr John Magee, former private secretary to John Paul I, on the occasion of John Paul II's funeral is available here. About 3 min 20 sec into the interview he mentions the fact that John Paul I seemed to believe his pontificate wouldn't be a long one. From RTÉ Radio One's "News At One" on 8 April 2005. -Real player required.
Here you can watch the film



Roman Catholic Church titles


Preceded by
Giovanni Urbani
Patriarch of Venice
1970 – 1978
Succeeded by
Marco Cé


Preceded by
Paul VI
Pope
1978
Succeeded by
John Paul II









v • d • e

Popes of the Roman Catholic Church











Peter
Linus
Anacletus
Clement I
Evaristus
Alexander I
Sixtus I
Telesphorus
Hyginus
Pius I
Anicetus
Soter
Eleuterus
Victor I
Zephyrinus
Callixtus I
Urban I
Pontian
Anterus
Fabian
Cornelius
Lucius I
Stephen I
Sixtus II
Dionysius
Felix I
Eutychian
Caius
Marcellinus
Marcellus I
Eusebius
Miltiades
Sylvester I




Mark
Julius I
Liberius
Damasus I
Siricius
Anastasius I
Innocent I
Zosimus
Boniface I
Celestine I
Sixtus III
Leo I
Hilarius
Simplicius
Felix III
Gelasius I
Anastasius II
Symmachus
Hormisdas
John I
Felix IV
Boniface II
John II
Agapetus I
Silverius
Vigilius
Pelagius I
John III
Benedict I
Pelagius II
Gregory I
Sabinian
Boniface III




Boniface IV
Adeodatus I
Boniface V
Honorius I
Severinus
John IV
Theodore I
Martin I
Eugene I
Vitalian
Adeodatus II
Donus
Agatho
Leo II
Benedict II
John V
Conon
Sergius I
John VI
John VII
Sisinnius
Constantine
Gregory II
Gregory III
Zachary
Stephen II
Paul I
Stephen III
Adrian I
Leo III
Stephen IV
Paschal I
Eugene II




Valentine
Gregory IV
Sergius II
Leo IV
Benedict III
Nicholas I
Adrian II
John VIII
Marinus I
Adrian III
Stephen V
Formosus
Boniface VI
Stephen VI
Romanus
Theodore II
John IX
Benedict IV
Leo V
Sergius III
Anastasius III
Lando
John X
Leo VI
Stephen VII
John XI
Leo VII
Stephen VIII
Marinus II
Agapetus II
John XII
Benedict V
Leo VIII




John XIII
Benedict VI
Benedict VII
John XIV
John XV
Gregory V
Sylvester II
John XVII
John XVIII
Sergius IV
Benedict VIII
John XIX
Benedict IX
Sylvester III
Gregory VI
Clement II
Damasus II
Leo IX
Victor II
Stephen IX
Nicholas II
Alexander II
Gregory VII
Victor III
Urban II
Paschal II
Gelasius II
Callixtus II
Honorius II
Innocent II
Celestine II
Lucius II
Eugene III




Anastasius IV
Adrian IV
Alexander III
Lucius III
Urban III
Gregory VIII
Clement III
Celestine III
Innocent III
Honorius III
Gregory IX
Celestine IV
Innocent IV
Alexander IV
Urban IV
Clement IV
Gregory X
Innocent V
Adrian V
John XXI
Nicholas III
Martin IV
Honorius IV
Nicholas IV
Celestine V
Boniface VIII
Benedict XI
Clement V
John XXII
Benedict XII
Clement VI
Innocent VI
Urban V




Gregory XI
Urban VI
Boniface IX
Innocent VII
Gregory XII
Martin V
Eugene IV
Nicholas V
Callixtus III
Pius II
Paul II
Sixtus IV
Innocent VIII
Alexander VI
Pius III
Julius II
Leo X
Adrian VI
Clement VII
Paul III
Julius III
Marcellus II
Paul IV
Pius IV
Pius V
Gregory XIII
Sixtus V
Urban VII
Gregory XIV
Innocent IX
Clement VIII
Leo XI
Paul V




Gregory XV
Urban VIII
Innocent X
Alexander VII
Clement IX
Clement X
Innocent XI
Alexander VIII
Innocent XII
Clement XI
Innocent XIII
Benedict XIII
Clement XII
Benedict XIV
Clement XIII
Clement XIV
Pius VI
Pius VII
Leo XII
Pius VIII
Gregory XVI
Pius IX
Leo XIII
Pius X
Benedict XV
Pius XI
Pius XII
John XXIII
Paul VI
John Paul I
John Paul II











Current: Benedict XVI












v • d • e

Catholic Church





Organizations, Papacy, Teachings and Liturgical Traditions





History

Jesus · Twelve Apostles · Early Christianity · History of the Papacy · Councils · Crusades · Missions · Great Schism of East · Great Schism of West · Reformation · Counter-Reformation · Roman Catholicism by country







Hierarchy

Pope · Cardinals · Patriarchs · Major Archbishops · Primates · Metropolitans · Archbishops · Diocesan Bishops






Theology

Trinity · Original sin · One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church · Worship · Divine Grace · Salvation · Sermon on the Mount · The Ten Commandments · Dogma · Body and Soul






Sacraments

Baptism · Confirmation · Eucharist · Penance · Anointing of the Sick · Holy Orders · Matrimony






Mariology

Mariology · Veneration · History of Mariology · Mariology of the saints · Mariology of the popes · Marian Doctrines · Mother of God · Perpetual Virginity · Immaculate Conception  · Assumption






Doctors of
the Church

Albertus Magnus · Ambrose · Anselm of Canterbury · Anthony of Padua · Thomas Aquinas · Athanasius of Alexandria · Augustine of Hippo · Basil of Caesarea · Bede · Robert Bellarmine · Bernard of Clairvaux · Bonaventure · Petrus Canisius · Catherine of Siena · Peter Chrysologus · John Chrysostom · Cyril of Alexandria · Cyril of Jerusalem · Peter Damian · Ephrem the Syrian · Francis de Sales · Gregory the Great · Gregory of Nazianzus · Hilary of Poitiers · Isidore of Seville · Jerome · John of Damascus · John of the Cross · Lawrence of Brindisi · Leo the Great · Alphonsus Liguori · Thérèse de Lisieux · Teresa of Ávila






Pope Benedict XVI

Conclave · Theology · Works · Deus Caritas Est · Sacramentum Caritatis · Summorum Pontificum · Spe Salvi






Preceding Popes

Pope John Paul II · Pope Paul VI · Pope John XXIII · Pope Pius XII · Pope Pius XI · Pope Benedict XV · Pope Pius X · Pope Leo XIII · Pope Pius IX






Orders & Societies

Assumptionist · Augustinian Order · Benedictines · Capuchin Order · Carmelites · Carthusians · Congregations of Holy Cross · Dominican Order · Franciscan orders · Jesuits · Oratory of Saint Philip Neri






Vatican II

Definition of the Church · Gaudium et Spes · Lumen Gentium · Nostra Aetate






Particular Churches
sorted by
Liturgical Traditions

Alexandrian · Coptic · Ethiopic · Antiochian · Maronite · Syriac · Syro-Malankara · Armenian · Armenian · Byzantine · Albanian · Belarusian · Bulgarian · Croatian · Greek · Hungarian · Italo-Greek · Macedonian · Melkite · Romanian · Russian · Ruthenian · Slovak · Ukrainian · East Syrian · Chaldean · Syro-Malabar · Roman · Ambrosian · Sarum · Mozarabic · Anglican Use · Latin · Priestly Fraternity of St. Peter






 Pope Portal  Catholicism Portal












v • d • e

History of the Roman Catholic Church





General

History of the Roman Catholic Church · History of the Papacy · Ecumenical Councils · Timeline of the Roman Catholic Church · History of Christianity · Role of the Roman Catholic Church in civilization · Art in Roman Catholicism · Roman Catholic religious order · Christian monasticism · Papal States







Church beginnings

Jesus · Twelve Apostles · Saint Peter · Paul the Apostle · Council of Jerusalem · Saint Stephen · John the Apostle · Ignatius of Antioch · Irenaeus · Pope Victor I · Tertullian · Apostolic Fathers






Constantine to
Pope Gregory I

Constantine I and Christianity · Arianism · Basilica of St. John Lateran · First Council of Nicaea · Pope Sylvester I · First Council of Constantinople · Canon · Jerome · Vulgate · Council of Ephesus · Council of Chalcedon · Benedict of Nursia · Second Council of Constantinople · Pope Gregory I · Gregorian Chant






Early Middle Ages

Third Council of Constantinople · Saint Boniface · Iconclasm · Second Council of Nicaea · Charlemagne · Pope Leo III · Fourth Council of Constantinople · East-West Schism






High Middle Ages

Pope Urban II · Investiture Controversy · Crusades · First Council of the Lateran · Second Council of the Lateran · Third Council of the Lateran · Pope Innocent III · Latin Empire of Constantinople · Saint Francis of Assisi · Fourth Council of the Lateran · Inquisition · First Council of Lyon · Second Council of Lyon · Bernard of Clairvaux · Thomas Aquinas






Late Middle Ages

Pope Boniface VIII · Avignon Papacy · Pope Clement V · Council of Vienne · Knights Templar · Catherine of Siena · Pope Alexander VI






Protestant Reformation &
Counter-Reformation

Protestant Reformation · Counter-Reformation · Thomas More · Pope Leo X · Society of Jesus · Francis Xavier · Dissolution of the Monasteries · Council of Trent · Pope Pius V · Tridentine Mass · Robert Bellarmine






Baroque Period to
French Revolution

Pope Innocent XI · Pope Benedict XIV · Suppression of the Society of Jesus · Anti-clericalism · Pope Pius VI · Shimabara Rebellion · Edict of Nantes · Dechristianisation of France during the French Revolution






19th century

Pope Pius VII · Pope Pius IX · Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary · Our Lady of Lourdes · First Vatican Council · Papal infallibility · Pope Leo XIII · Rerum Novarum






20th century

Pope Pius X · Our Lady of Fátima · Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII · Pope Pius XII · Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary · Pope John XXIII · Second Vatican Council · Pope Paul VI · Pope John Paul I · Pope John Paul II






21st century

Pope Benedict XVI · World Youth Day 2008






 Pope Portal  Catholicism Portal












v • d • e

History of Roman Catholic theology





Theologians · Teachings · Heresies





General History

History of the Roman Catholic Church · Early Christianity · History of the Papacy · Ecumenical Councils · Timeline of the Roman Catholic Church · History of Christianity · History of Christian theology







Church beginnings

Epistles of Clement · Didache · Ignatius of Antioch · Epistle of Barnabas · Justin Martyr · Irenaeus · Tertullian · Origen · Antipope Novatian · Cyprian






Constantine to
Pope Gregory I

Arianism · Pelagianism · Nestorianism · Monophysitism · Monothelitism · Pope Leo I · Ambrose · Augustine of Hippo






Early Middle Ages

Iconoclasm · Transubstantiation Dispute · Predestination Disputes






High Middle Ages

Thomas Aquinas · Thomism · Anselm of Canterbury · Peter Abelard · Decretum Gratiani · Bernard of Clairvaux · Peter Lombard · Hildegard of Bingen · Saint Dominic · Saint Francis of Assisi · Bonaventure · Albertus Magnus






Mysticism & Reforms

Duns Scotus · Dante Alighieri · William of Ockham · Catherine of Siena · Brigit of Sweden · Johannes Tauler · Heinrich Seuse · Nicholas of Kues · Thomas à Kempis






Protestant Reformation and
Counter-Reformation

Thomas More · John Fisher · Thomas Cajetan · Johann Eck · Ignatius of Loyola · Francis Xavier · Teresa of Ávila · John of the Cross · Petrus Canisius · Robert Bellarmine · Francis de Sales






Baroque Period to
French Revolution

Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet · Francisco Suárez · François Fénelon · Jansenism · Blaise Pascal · Saint Alphonsus Liguori · Saint Louis de Montfort · Alfonso Muzzarelli · Louis Thomassin · Jean de La Fontaine






19th century

John Henry Newman · Gaetano Sanseverino · Giovanni Maria Cornoldi · Clemens Maria Hofbauer · Johann Michael Sailer · Johann Joseph von Görres · Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler · Giuseppe Pecci · Joseph Hergenröther · Tommaso Maria Zigliara






20th-21st century

Romano Guardini · Sebastiaan Tromp · Raimondo Spiazzi · Gabriel Roschini · Hugo Rahner · Henri de Lubac · Pope Pius XII · Pierre Teilhard de Chardin · Hans Urs von Balthasar · Yves Congar · Karl Rahner · Edward Schillebeeckx · Marie-Dominique Chenu · Louis Bouyer · Étienne Gilson · Hans Küng · Jean Daniélou · Pope John Paul II · Pope Benedict XVI






 Pope Portal  Catholicism Portal









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pope_John_Paul_I"
Categories: 1912 births | 1978 deaths | Cause of death disputed | Deaths from myocardial infarction | Alumni of the Pontifical Gregorian University | Italian popes | Participants in the Second Vatican Council | Patriarchs of Venice | Deaths from cardiovascular disease | People from the Province of Belluno | Servants of God | Sovereigns of Vatican City | PopesHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Anglo-Saxon
Azərbaycan
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Български
Català
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Gaeilge
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kapampangan
ქართული
Kiswahili
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Lingála
Magyar
Македонски
मराठी
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Українська
Vèneto
Winaray
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 8 March 2009, at 22:48.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
