













Lewis Carroll - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Lewis_Carroll";
		var wgTitle = "Lewis Carroll";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "5340";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281576025;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Lewis Carroll

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Charles Lutwidge Dodgson





Born
27 January 1832(1832-01-27)
Daresbury, Cheshire, England


Died
14 January 1898 (aged 65)
Guildford, Surrey, England


Pen name
Lewis Carroll


Occupation
Author, Mathematician, Anglican Clergyman, Photographer, Logician


Nationality
British


Genres
Children's literature, fantasy literature, poetry, literary nonsense


Notable work(s)
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, Through the Looking-Glass, "The Hunting of the Snark", "Jabberwocky"


Charles Lutwidge Dodgson (IPA: /ˈdɒdsən/) (27 January 1832 – 14 January 1898), better known by the pen name Lewis Carroll (/ˈkærəl/), was an English author, mathematician, logician, Anglican deacon and photographer.
His most famous writings are Alice's Adventures in Wonderland and its sequel Through the Looking-Glass as well as the poems "The Hunting of the Snark" and "Jabberwocky", all considered to be within the genre of literary nonsense.
His facility at word play, logic, and fantasy has delighted audiences ranging from children to the literary elite, and beyond this his work has become embedded deeply in modern culture, directly influencing many artists.
There are societies dedicated to the enjoyment and promotion of his works and the investigation of his life in many parts of the world including United States, Japan, the United Kingdom, and New Zealand.




Contents


1 Early life

1.1 Antecedents
1.2 Young Charles
1.3 Oxford


2 Character and appearance

2.1 Physical appearance
2.2 Stammer
2.3 Personality


3 Artistic activities

3.1 Literature

3.1.1 Alice
3.1.2 The Hunting of the Snark


3.2 Photography
3.3 Inventions


4 The later years
5 Controversies and mysteries

5.1 Priesthood
5.2 The missing diaries

5.2.1 The "Cut Pages in Diary" document


5.3 Migraine and epilepsy
5.4 Suggestions of paedophilia
5.5 "The Carroll Myth"


6 Works
7 See also
8 Alfred C. Berol Collection of Lewis Carroll
9 Notes
10 References
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early life

[edit] Antecedents
Dodgson's family was predominantly northern English, with Irish connections. Conservative and High Church Anglican, most of Dodgson's ancestors were army officers or Church of England clergymen. His great-grandfather, also Charles Dodgson, had risen through the ranks of the church to become a bishop. His grandfather, another Charles, had been an army captain, killed in action in 1803 when his two sons were hardly more than babies. His mother's name was Frances Jane Lutwidge.
The elder of these sons — yet another Charles — was Carroll's father. He reverted to the other family business and took holy orders. He went to Rugby School, and thence to Christ Church, Oxford. He was mathematically gifted and won a double first degree, which could have been the prelude to a brilliant academic career. Instead he married his first cousin in 1827 and became a country parson.[1]
Young Charles' father was an active and highly conservative clergyman of the Anglican church who involved himself, sometimes influentially, in the intense religious disputes that were dividing the Anglican church. He was High Church, inclining to Anglo-Catholicism, an admirer of Newman and the Tractarian movement, and he did his best to instill such views in his children. Young Charles, however, was to develop an ambiguous relationship with his father's values and with the Anglican church as a whole.[2]

[edit] Young Charles
Dodgson was born in the little parsonage of Daresbury in Cheshire, the oldest boy but already the third child of the four-and-a-half year old marriage. Eight more were to follow. When Charles was 11, his father was given the living of Croft-on-Tees in north Yorkshire, and the whole family moved to the spacious Rectory. This remained their home for the next twenty-five years.
During the earlier times in his life, young Dodgson was educated at home. His "reading lists" preserved in the family testify to a precocious intellect: at the age of seven the child was reading The Pilgrim's Progress. He also suffered from a stammer — a condition shared by his siblings — that often influenced his social life throughout his years. At twelve he was sent away to a small private school at nearby Richmond, where he appears to have been happy and settled. But in 1846, young Dodgson moved on to Rugby School, where he was evidently less happy, for as he wrote some years after leaving the place:
I cannot say ... that any earthly considerations would induce me to go through my three years again ... I can honestly say that if I could have been ... secure from annoyance at night, the hardships of the daily life would have been comparative trifles to bear.[3]
Scholastically, though, he excelled with apparent ease. "I have not had a more promising boy his age since I came to Rugby" observed R.B. Mayor, the Mathematics master.[3]

[edit] Oxford
He left Rugby at the end of 1849 and, after an interval that remains unexplained, went on in January 1851 to Oxford, attending his father's old college, Christ Church. He had only been at Oxford two days when he received a summons home. His mother had died of "inflammation of the brain" — perhaps meningitis or a stroke — at the age of forty-seven.[1]
His early academic career veered between high-octane promise and irresistible distraction. He may not always have worked hard, but he was exceptionally gifted and achievement came easily to him. In 1852 he received a First in Honour Moderations and was shortly thereafter nominated to a Studentship, by his father's old friend Canon Edward Pusey. However, a little later he failed an important scholarship through his self-confessed inability to apply himself to study. Even so, his talent as a mathematician won him the Christ Church Mathematical Lectureship, which he continued to hold for the next twenty-six years. The income was good, but the work bored him. Many of his pupils were older and richer than he was, and almost all of them were uninterested. However, despite early unhappiness, Dodgson was to remain at Christ Church, in various capacities, until his death.[4]

[edit] Character and appearance

[edit] Physical appearance
The young adult Charles Dodgson was about six feet tall, slender and deemed attractive, with curling brown hair and blue or grey eyes (depending on the account). He was described in later life as somewhat asymmetrical, and as carrying himself rather stiffly and awkwardly, though this may be on account of a knee injury sustained in middle age. As a very young child, he suffered a fever that left him deaf in one ear. At the age of seventeen, he suffered a severe attack of whooping cough, which was probably responsible for his chronically weak chest in later life. Another defect he carried into adulthood was what he referred to as his "hesitation", a stammer he acquired in early childhood and which plagued him throughout his life.[5]

[edit] Stammer
The stammer has always been a potent part of the conceptions of Dodgson; it is part of the belief that he stammered only in adult company and was free and fluent with children, but there is no evidence to support this idea.[6] Many children of his acquaintance remembered the stammer while many adults failed to notice it. Dodgson himself seems to have been far more acutely aware of it than most people he met; it is said he caricatured himself as the Dodo in Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, referring to his difficulty in pronouncing his last name, but this is one of the many "facts" often-repeated, for which no firsthand evidence remains. He did indeed refer to himself as the dodo, but that this was a reference to his stammer is simply speculation.[7]

[edit] Personality
Although Dodgson's stammer troubled him, it was never so debilitating that it prevented him from applying his other personal qualities to do well in society. At a time when people commonly devised their own amusements and when singing and recitation were required social skills, the young Dodgson was well-equipped to be an engaging entertainer. He could sing tolerably well and was not afraid to do so before an audience. He was adept at mimicry and storytelling, and was, reputedly, quite good at charades.[5]
Dodgson was also quite socially ambitious and anxious to make his mark on the world as a writer or an artist. In the interim between his early published writing and the success of the Alice books, he began to move in the Pre-Raphaelite social circle. His scholastic career may well have been intended as something of a stop-gap on the way to other more exciting achievements. He first met John Ruskin in 1857 and became friendly with him. He developed a close relationship with Dante Gabriel Rossetti and his family, and also knew William Holman Hunt, John Everett Millais, and Arthur Hughes among other artists. He also knew the fairy-tale author George MacDonald well — it was the enthusiastic reception of Alice by the young MacDonald children that convinced him to submit the work for publication.[5][8]

[edit] Artistic activities

[edit] Literature
From a young age, Dodgson wrote poetry and short stories, both contributing heavily to the family magazine Mischmasch and later sending them to various magazines, enjoying moderate success. Between 1854 and 1856, his work appeared in the national publications, The Comic Times and The Train, as well as smaller magazines like the Whitby Gazette and the Oxford Critic. Most of this output was humorous, sometimes satirical, but his standards and ambitions were exacting. "I do not think I have yet written anything worthy of real publication (in which I do not include the Whitby Gazette or the Oxonian Advertiser), but I do not despair of doing so some day", he wrote in July 1855.[5]
In 1856 he published his first piece of work under the name that would make him famous. A romantic poem called "Solitude" appeared in The Train under the authorship of "Lewis Carroll". This pseudonym was a play on his real name; Lewis was the anglicised form of Ludovicus, which was the Latin for Lutwidge, and Carroll being an anglicised version of Carolus, the Latin for Charles.[1]

[edit] Alice




"The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her flamingo"


In the same year, 1856, a new Dean, Henry Liddell, arrived at Christ Church, bringing with him his young family, all of whom would figure largely in Dodgson's life and, over the following years, greatly influence his writing career. Dodgson became close friends with Liddell's wife, Lorina, and their children, particularly the three sisters: Lorina, Edith and Alice Liddell. He was for many years widely assumed to have derived his own "Alice" from Alice Liddell. This was given some apparent substance by the fact the acrostic poem at the end of Through the Looking Glass spells out her name, and that there are many superficial references to her hidden in the text of both books. Dodgson himself, however, repeatedly denied in later life that his "little heroine" was based on any real child,[9][10] and frequently dedicated his works to girls of his acquaintance, adding their names in acrostic poems at the beginning of the text. Gertrude Chataway's name appears in this form at the beginning of The Hunting of the Snark, and no one has ever suggested this means any of the characters in the narrative are based on her.[10]
Though information is scarce (Dodgson's diaries for the years 1858–1862 are missing), it does seem clear that his friendship with the Liddell family was an important part of his life in the late 1850s, and he grew into the habit of taking the children (first the boy, Harry, and later the three girls) on rowing trips to nearby Nuneham Courtenay or Godstow.[11]
It was on one such expedition, on 4 July 1862, that Dodgson invented the outline of the story that eventually became his first and largest commercial success. Having told the story and been begged by Alice Liddell to write it down, Dodgson eventually (after much delay) presented her with a handwritten, illustrated manuscript entitled Alice's Adventures Under Ground in November 1864.[11]
Before this, the family of friend and mentor George MacDonald read Dodgson's incomplete manuscript, and the enthusiasm of the MacDonald children encouraged Dodgson to seek publication. In 1863, he had taken the unfinished manuscript to Macmillan the publisher, who liked it immediately. After the possible alternative titles Alice Among the Fairies and Alice's Golden Hour were rejected, the work was finally published as Alice's Adventures in Wonderland in 1865 under the Lewis Carroll pen name, which Dodgson had first used some nine years earlier.[8] The illustrations this time were by Sir John Tenniel; Dodgson evidently thought that a published book would need the skills of a professional artist.
The overwhelming commercial success of the first Alice book changed Dodgson's life in many ways. The fame of his alter ego "Lewis Carroll" soon spread around the world. He was inundated with fan mail and with sometimes unwanted attention. Indeed, according to one popular story that Dodgson denied decades later, Queen Victoria herself enjoyed Alice In Wonderland so much that she suggested he dedicate his next book to her, and was accordingly presented with his next work, a scholarly volume entitled An Elementary Treatise on Determinants.[12][13] He also began earning quite substantial sums of money. However, he didn't use this income as a means of abandoning his seemingly disliked post at Christ Church.[8]
In 1872, a sequel — Through the Looking-Glass And What Alice Found There — was published. Its somewhat darker mood possibly reflects the changes in Dodgson's life. His father had recently died (1868), plunging him into a depression that would last some years.[8]

[edit] The Hunting of the Snark
In 1876, Dodgson produced his last great work, The Hunting of the Snark, a fantastical "nonsense" poem, exploring the adventures of a bizarre crew of variously inadequate beings, and one beaver, who set off to find the eponymous creature. The painter Dante Gabriel Rossetti reputedly became convinced the poem was about him.[8]

[edit] Photography




Photo of Alice Liddell taken by Lewis Carroll (1858).






Xie Kitchin, photographed by Lewis Carroll, 1876


In 1856, Dodgson took up the new art form of photography, first under the influence of his uncle Skeffington Lutwidge, and later his Oxford friend Reginald Southey.
He soon excelled at the art and became a well-known gentleman-photographer, and he seems even to have toyed with the idea of making a living out of it in his very early years.[8]
A recent study by Roger Taylor and Edward Wakeling[14] exhaustively lists every surviving print, and Taylor calculates that just over fifty percent of his surviving work depicts young girls, though this may be a highly distorted figure as approximately 60% of his original photographic portfolio is now missing,[15] so any firm conclusions are difficult. Dodgson also made many studies of men, women, male children and landscapes; his subjects also include skeletons, dolls, dogs, statues and paintings, and trees. His 'controversial' studies of nude children were long presumed lost, but six have since surfaced, five of which have been published.




Photo of John Everett Millais and his wife Effie Gray with two of their children, signed by Effie (c. 1860)


He also found photography to be a useful entrée into higher social circles. During the most productive part of his career, he made portraits of notable sitters such as John Everett Millais, Ellen Terry, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Julia Margaret Cameron, Michael Faraday and Alfred, Lord Tennyson.[8]
Dodgson abruptly ceased photography in 1880. Over 24 years, he had completely mastered the medium, set up his own studio on the roof of Tom Quad, and created around 3,000 images. Fewer than 1,000 have survived time and deliberate destruction. His reasons for abandoning photography remain uncertain.
With the advent of Modernism tastes changed, and his photography was forgotten from around 1920 until the 1960s. He is now considered by many to be one of the very best Victorian photographers, and is certainly the one who has had the most influence on modern art photographers.[citation needed]

[edit] Inventions
To promote letter writing, Dodgson invented The Wonderland Postage-Stamp Case in 1889. This was a cloth-backed folder with twelve slots, two marked for inserting the then most commonly used 1d. stamp, and one each for the other current denominations to 1s. The folder was then put into a slip case decorated with a picture of Alice on the front and the Cheshire Cat on the back. All could be conveniently carried in a pocket or purse. When issued it also included a copy of Carroll's pamphletted lecture, Eight or Nine Wise Words About Letter-Writing.[16][17]
Another invention is a writing tablet called the Nyctograph for use at night that allowed for note-taking in the dark; thus eliminating the trouble of getting out of bed and striking a light when one wakes with an idea. The device consisted of a gridded card with sixteen squares and system of symbols representing an alphabet of Dodgson's design.
Among the games he devised outside of logic, croquet, billiards and those played on a chess board, there are a number of word games, including an early version of what today is known as Scrabble. He also appears to have invented, or at least certainly popularised, the Word Ladder (or "doublet" as it was known at first); a form of brain-teaser that is still popular today: the game of changing one word into another by altering one letter at a time, each successive change always resulting in a genuine word. For instance, CAT is transformed into DOG by the following steps: CAT, COT, DOT, DOG.[8]
Other items include a rule for finding the day of the week for any date; a means for justifying right margins on a typewriter; a steering device for a velociam (a type of tricycle); new systems of parliamentary representation;[18] more nearly fair elimination rules for tennis tournaments; a new sort of postal money order; rules for reckoning postage; rules for a win in betting; rules for dividing a number by various divisors; a cardboard scale for the college common room he worked in later in life, which, held next to a glass, insured the right amount of liqueur for the price paid; a double sided adhesive strip for things like the fastening of envelopes or mounting things in books; a device for helping a bedridden invalid to read from a book placed sideways; and at least two ciphers.[8]

[edit] The later years
Over the remaining twenty years of his life, throughout his growing wealth and fame, his existence remained little changed. He continued to teach at Christ Church until 1881, and remained in residence there until his death. His last novel, the two-volume Sylvie and Bruno, was published in 1889 and 1893 respectively. Its extraordinary convolutions and apparent confusion baffled most readers and it achieved little success. It does contain an extremely concise account of three-valued logic when Bruno counts "about a thousand and four" pigs because he is certain about the four but estimates the remainder. In three-valued logic, unknown plus four = unknown (see Null (SQL)).
The only occasion on which (as far as is known) he travelled abroad was a trip to Russia in 1867, which he recounts in his "Russian Journal" which was first commercially published in 1935.[19]
He died on 14 January 1898 at his sisters' home, "The Chestnuts" in Guildford, of pneumonia following influenza. He was 2 weeks away from turning 66 years old. He is buried in Guildford at the Mount Cemetery.[8]

[edit] Controversies and mysteries

[edit] Priesthood
Dodgson had been groomed for the ordained ministry in the Anglican Church from a very early age and was expected, as a condition of his residency at Christ Church, to take holy orders within four years of obtaining his master's degree. However, he evidently became reluctant to do this. He delayed the process for some time but eventually took deacon's orders on 22 December 1861. But when the time came a year later to progress to priestly orders, Dodgson appealed to the dean for permission not to proceed. This was against college rules, and initially Dean Liddell told him he would have to consult the college ruling body, which would almost undoubtedly have resulted in his being expelled. However, for unknown reasons, Dean Liddell changed his mind overnight and permitted Dodgson to remain at the college, in defiance of the rules.[20] Uniquely amongst Senior Students of his time Dodgson never became a priest.
There is currently no conclusive evidence about why Dodgson rejected the priesthood. Some have suggested his stammer made him reluctant to take the step, because he was afraid of having to preach.[21] Wilson[22] quotes letters by Dodgson describing difficulty in reading lessons and prayers rather than preaching in his own words. But Dodgson did indeed preach in later life, even though not in priests orders, so it seems unlikely his impediment was a major factor affecting his choice.[citation needed]. Wilson also points out that the then Bishop of Oxford, Samuel Wilberforce, who ordained Dodgson, had strong views against members of the clergy going to the theatre, one of Dodgson's great interests. Others have suggested that he was having serious doubts about the Anglican church.[citation needed] It is known that he was interested in minority forms of Christianity (he was an admirer of FD Maurice) and "alternative" religions (theosophy).[23] Dodgson became deeply troubled by an unexplained sense of sin and guilt at this time (the early 1860s), and frequently expressed the view in his diaries that he was a "vile and worthless" sinner, unworthy of the priesthood.[24], and this sense of sin and unworthiness may well have had an impact on his decision to abandon the priesthood.
There is currently no certain explanation of why he rejected the priesthood, or why he was, at this time in his life, assailed by a sense of guilt and sin.

[edit] The missing diaries
At least four complete volumes[25] and around seven pages[26] of text are missing from Dodgson's 13 diaries. The loss of the volumes remains unexplained; the pages have been deliberately removed by an unknown hand. Most scholars assume the diary material was removed by family members in the interests of preserving the family name, but this has not been proven.[27] All of the missing material, with the exception of a single page, is believed to date from the period between 1853 (when Dodgson was 22) and 1863 (when he was 32).[28]
Many theories have been put forward to explain the missing material. A popular explanation for one particular missing page (27 June 1863) is that it might have been torn out to conceal the belief that Dodgson had proposed marriage on that day to the 11-year old Alice Liddell. However, there has never been any evidence to suggest this was so, and a paper[29] that came to light in the Dodgson family archive in 1996 alleges some evidence to the contrary.

[edit] The "Cut Pages in Diary" document




The "cut pages in diary" document, in the Dodgson family archive in Woking, UK.


This paper, known as the "cut pages in diary document", was compiled by various members of Carroll's family after his death. Part of it may have been written at the time the pages were destroyed, though this is unclear. The document offers a brief summary of two diary pages that are now missing, including the one for 27 June 1863. The summary for this page states that Mrs. Liddell told Dodgson there was gossip circulating about him and the Liddell family's governess, as well as about his relationship with "Ina", presumably Alice's older sister, Lorina Liddell. The "break" with the Liddell family that occurred soon after was presumably in response to this gossip.[30][31] An alternate interpretation has been made regarding Carroll's rumored involvement with "Ina": Lorina was also the name of Alice Liddell's mother. What is deemed most crucial and surprising is that the document seems to imply Dodgson's break with the family was not connected with Alice at all. However, until a primary source is discovered, the events of 27 June 1863 remain inconclusive.

[edit] Migraine and epilepsy
In his diary for the year 1880 Dodgson recorded experiencing his first episode of migraine with aura, describing very accurately the process of 'moving fortifications' that are a manifestation of the aura stage of the syndrome.[32] Several people have suggested the odd experiences Alice undergoes in the stories may have been inspired by migraine-like symptoms.[citation needed] Indeed a condition, Alice in Wonderland Syndrome, has been named after it. Also known as micropsia and macropsia, it is a brain condition affecting the way objects are perceived by the mind. For example, an afflicted person may look at a larger object, like a basketball, and perceive it as if it were the size of a mouse.
Dodgson also suffered two attacks in which he lost consciousness. He was diagnosed by three different doctors; a Dr. Morshead, Dr. Brooks, and Dr. Stedman, believed the attack and a consequent attack to be an "epileptiform" seizure (initially thought to be fainting, but Brooks changed his mind). Some have concluded from this he was a lifetime sufferer from this condition, but there is no evidence of this in his diaries beyond the diagnosis of the two attacks already mentioned.[33] Some authors, in particular Sadi Ranson, have suggested Carroll may have suffered from temporal lobe epilepsy in which consciousness is not always completely lost, but altered, and in which the symptoms mimic many of the same experiences as Alice in Wonderland. Note that Carroll had at least one incidence in which he suffered full loss of consciousness and awoke with a bloody nose, which he recorded in his diary and noted that the episode left him not feeling himself for "quite sometime afterward". This attack was diagnosed as possibly "epileptiform" and Carroll himself later wrote of his "seizures" in the same diary. It's worth noting that epilepsy runs in families, and Carroll had at least one other family member with epilepsy (also recorded in his diaries), and that speech hesitations, facial asymmetry, as well as some deafness are not uncommon in certain epilepsies. It is also recorded that several of Dodgson's siblings suffered from a speech hesitation, suggesting again that any existing neurological condition was within the family as reported in Interviews & Recollections, editor Morton N. Cohen.

[edit] Suggestions of paedophilia
Dodgson's friendships with young girls, together with his perceived lack of interest in romantic attachments to adult women, and psychological readings of his work—especially his photographs of nude or semi-nude girls[34]—have all led to speculation that he was, in modern parlance, a paedophile. This possibility has underpinned numerous modern interpretations of his life and work, particularly Dennis Potter's play Alice and his screenplay for the motion picture, Dreamchild, and a number of recent biographies, including Michael Bakewell's Lewis Carroll: A Biography (1996), Donald Thomas's Lewis Carroll: A Portrait with Background (1996) and Morton N. Cohen's Lewis Carroll: A Biography (1995). All of these works more or less unequivocally assume that Dodgson was a paedophile, albeit a repressed and celibate one.
Cohen claims Dodgson's "sexual energies sought unconventional outlets", and further writes:


We cannot know to what extent sexual urges lay behind Charles's preference for drawing and photographing children in the nude. He contended the preference was entirely aesthetic. But given his emotional attachment to children as well as his aesthetic appreciation of their forms, his assertion that his interest was strictly artistic is naive. He probably felt more than he dared acknowledge, even to himself.[34]


Cohen notes that Dodgson "apparently convinced many of his friends that his attachment to the nude female child form was free of any eroticism", but adds that "later generations look beneath the surface" (p. 229).
Cohen and other biographers argue that Dodgson may have wanted to marry the 11-year old Alice Liddell and that this was the cause of the unexplained "break" with the family in June 1863.[35] But there has never been significant evidence to support the idea, and the 1996 discovery of the "cut pages in diary document" (see above) might imply that the 1863 "break" had less to do with Alice, but was perhaps connected with rumors involving her older sister Lorina, or possibly their governess.
Some writers, e.g., Derek Hudson and Roger Lancelyn Green, who have fallen short of accepting Dodgson as a paedophile, have tended to concur that he had a passion for small female children and next to no interest in the adult world.

[edit] "The Carroll Myth"
The accepted view of Dodgson's biography has been challenged recently by a group of scholars led by Hugues Lebailly and Karoline Leach and others who argue that Dodgson's diaries and letters reveal him to have been very different in many key aspects from the traditional image. Leach's book, In the Shadow of the Dreamchild, in particular has raised a considerable amount of controversy.
Lebailly has endeavoured to set Dodgson's child-photography within the "Victorian Child Cult", which perceived child-nudity as essentially an expression of innocence. Lebailly claims that studies of child nudes were mainstream and fashionable in Dodgson's time and that most photographers, including Oscar Gustave Rejlander and Julia Margaret Cameron, made them as a matter of course. Lebailly continues that child nudes even appeared on Victorian Christmas cards—implying a very different social and aesthetic assessment of such material. Lebailly concludes that it has been an error of Dodgson's biographers to view his child-photography with 20th or 21st century eyes, and to have presented it as some form of personal idiosyncrasy, when it was in fact a response to a prevalent aesthetic and philosophical movement of the time.
Leach posed a new analysis of Dodgson's sexuality. She argues that the allegations of paedophilia rose initially from a misunderstanding of Victorian morals, as well as the mistaken idea, fostered by Dodgson's various biographers, that he had no interest in adult women. She termed the traditional image of Dodgson "the Carroll Myth".[36] She asserts his diaries show he was also keenly interested in adult women, married and single, and enjoyed several scandalous (by the social standards of his time) relationships with them. In later life many of those he described as "child-friends" were girls in their late teens and even twenties.[37] She argues that suggestions of paedophilia evolved only many years after his death, when his well-meaning family had suppressed all evidence of his relationships with women in an effort to preserve his reputation, thus giving a false impression of a man interested only in little girls. Similarly, Leach traces the claim that many of Carroll's female friendships ended when the girls reached the age of 14 to a 1932 biography by Langford Reed,[38] who Leach claims intended to suggest from this that Dodgson was a "pure man" untainted by sexual desire.[39]
Sherry L. Ackerman argues that the Carroll Myth also extends to traditional, mainstream views of Carroll's spirituality.[40] Ackerman proposes that Carroll, rather than being a conservative Victorian Anglican, was actually a mystic. She links Carroll to the nineteenth century Neoplatonic Revival in Great Britain, as well as to accompanying trends of theosophy and spiritualism.
The concept of the Carroll Myth has been opposed by some leading Carroll scholars, in particular Morton Cohen and Martin Gardner.

[edit] Works


A Tangled Tale
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland
An Elementary Treatise on Determinants, With Their Application to Simultaneous Linear Equations and Algebraic Equations
Euclid and his Modern Rivals (1879)
Facts
He thought he saw an elephant
Rhyme? And Reason? (also published as Phantasmagoria)
Pillow Problems
Sylvie and Bruno
Sylvie and Bruno Concluded
Symbolic Logic Part I
Symbolic Logic Part II (published posthumously)
The Game of Logic
The Hunting of the Snark
Three Sunsets and Other Poems
Through the Looking-Glass, and What Alice Found There (includes Jabberwocky)
What the Tortoise Said to Achilles



[edit] See also

The Fales Library Guide to the Alfred C. Berol Collection of Lewis Carroll
Dodgson condensation
Lewis Carroll identity
Lewis Carroll Shelf Award
Lewis Carroll Society of North America
Barbershop paradox
Jack the Ripper, Light-Hearted Friend: deals with the unusual idea that Carroll may have been the Ripper.
Phantasmagoria: The Visions of Lewis Carroll: An upcoming horror film based on the visions of Lewis Carroll, inspired, directed, and played by Marilyn Manson.
"Father William" which is a parody of Robert Southey's poem, "The Old Man’s Comforts and How He Gained Them".
RGS Worcester and The Alice Ottley School - Miss Ottley, the first Headmistress of The Alice Ottley School, was a friend of Lewis Carroll, and as such, one of the school's houses was named after him.


[edit] Alfred C. Berol Collection of Lewis Carroll
The Alfred C. Berol Collection of Lewis Carroll is housed in the Fales Library at New York University. One of the foremost collections of Lewis Carroll materials in the United States, it contains Carroll's correspondence, drawings, manuscripts (firsts, autographed copies, presentation copies, and proofs),and photographs. It also includes drawings by his illustrators Harry Furniss and John Tenniel. Additionally, the collection contains a number of ephemeral materials related to Lewis Carroll. This ephemera illustrates Carroll's work's contemporary and enduring cultural impact, as well as Alfred C. Berol's correspondence and notes on the gathering of the materials in the collection[41]. The Fales Library guide to the Alfred C. Berol Collection of Lewis Carroll.

[edit] Notes


^ a b c Cohen, Morton N. (26 November 1996). Lewis Carroll: A Biography. Vintage Books. pp. 30-35. ISBN 978-0-679-74562-4. 
^ Cohen, Morton N. (26 November 1996). Lewis Carroll: A Biography. Vintage Books. pp. 200-2. ISBN 978-0-679-74562-4. 
^ a b Collingwood, Stuart Dodgson. The Life and Letters of Lewis Carroll, 18.
^ Leach, Karoline In the Shadow of the Dreamchild Ch. 2.
^ a b c d Leach, Karoline In the Shadow of the Dreamchild Ch. 2
^ Leach, p. 91
^ Leach, Karoline In the Shadow of the Dreamchild Ch. 2.
^ a b c d e f g h i j Cohen, Morton N. (26 November 1996). Lewis Carroll: A Biography. Vintage Books. pp. 100–4. ISBN 978-0-679-74562-4. [page number needed]
^ Cohen, Morton N. (ed), The Letters of Lewis Carroll, London: Macmillan, 1979.
^ a b Leach, Karoline In the Shadow of the Dreamchild Ch. 5 "The Unreal Alice"
^ a b Leach, Karoline In the Shadow of the Dream Child Ch. 4
^ Wilson, Robin (17 November 2008). Lewis Carroll in Numberland: His Fantastical Mathematical Logical Life. W.W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-06027-0. 
^ "Lewis Carroll - Logician, Nonsense Writer, Mathematician and Photographer". The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. BBC. 26 August 2005. http://www.bbc.co.uk/dna/h2g2/A4462670. Retrieved on 2009-02-12. 
^ Taylor, Roger; Wakeling, Edward (25 February 2002). Lewis Carroll, Photographer. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-07443-6. 
^ how much evidence is there?[dead link]
^ Flodden W. Heron, "Lewis Carroll, Inventor of Postage Stamp Case" in Stamps, vol. 26, no. 12, 25 March 1939
^ "Lewis Carroll Related Postage Stamps". The Lewis Carroll Society. 28 April 2005. http://lewiscarrollsociety.org.uk/pages/inspired/stamps.htm. Retrieved on 2009-02-12. 
^ Black, Duncan; McLean, Iain; McMillan, Alistair; Monroe, Burt L.; Dodgson, Charles Lutwidge. A Mathematical Approach to Proportional Representation. ISBN 978-0-7923-9620-8. http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=PN1dAAAACAAJ. 
^ Chronology of Works of Lewis Carroll
^ Dodgson's MS diaries, volume 8, 22-24 October 1862
^ Cohen, Morton N. (26 November 1996). Lewis Carroll: A Biography. Vintage Books. pp. 263. ISBN 978-0-679-74562-4. 
^ Wilson, Robin (17 November 2008). Lewis Carroll in Numberland: His Fantastical Mathematical Logical Life. W.W. Norton. pp. 103-104. ISBN 978-0-393-06027-0. 
^ Leach, In the Shadow of the Dreamchild (new edition), 2009, p. 134
^ Dodgson's MS diaries, volume 8, see prayers scattered throughout the text
^ Leach, p. 48
^ Leach, p. 51
^ Leach, pp. 48–51
^ Leach, p. 52
^ Dodgson Family Collection, Cat. No. F/17/1. "Cut Pages in Diary". (For an account of its discovery see The Times Literary Supplement, 3 May 1996.)
^ Leach, Karoline In the Shadow of the Dreamchild pp. 170–2.
^ "Text available on-line". Looking for Lewis Carroll. http://www.lewiscarroll.cc/cutpages.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-04. 
^ "The Diaries of Lewis Carroll", vol 9 p. 52
^ "The Diaries of Lewis Carroll", vol 9
^ a b Cohen, Morton N. (26 November 1996). Lewis Carroll: A Biography. Vintage Books. pp. 166–167, 254–255. ISBN 978-0-679-74562-4. 
^ Cohen, Morton N. (26 November 1996). Lewis Carroll: A Biography. Vintage Books. pp. 100–4. ISBN 978-0-679-74562-4. 
^ "The Carroll Myth". http://carrollmyth.com/. Retrieved on 2009-02-12. 
^ Leach, pp. 16–17
^ Leach, p. 33
^ Leach, p. 32
^ Ackerman, Sherry L. (2008). Behind the Looking Glass. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. ISBN 1-84718-486-3. [page number needed]
^ http://dlib.nyu.edu/findingaids/html/fales/berol.html



[edit] References


Bowman, Isa (1899), The Story of Lewis Carroll, Told by the Real Alice in Wonderland, London: Dent
Cohen, Morton N. (1995), Lewis Carroll: A Biography, London: Macmillan. (ISBN 0-333-62926-4)
Collingwood, Stuart Dodgson (1898), The Life and Letters of Lewis Carroll, London: T. Fisher Unwin
Graham-Smith, Darien (2005), Contextualising Carroll, University of Wales, Bangor: PhD Thesis ([1])
Huxley, Francis (1976), The Raven and the Writing Desk. (ISBN 0-06-012113-0).
Kelly, Richard, Lewis Carroll. Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1990.
Kelly, Richard, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland.
Leach, Karoline (1999), In the Shadow of the Dreamchild: A New Understanding of Lewis Carroll, London: Peter Owen Publishers
Lennon, Florence Becker (1947), Lewis Carroll, London: Cassell
Reed, Langford (1932), The Life of Lewis Carroll, London: W. and G. Foyle
Sunghyun Kim, 'Political Unconscious in Fantastic Narrative: Lewis Carroll's Alice's Adventures in Wonderland(Korean)', Yonsei University Graduate School, 2005
Taylor, Alexander L., Knight (1952), The White Knight, Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd
Taylor, Roger & Wakeling, Edward, Lewis Carroll, Photographer. Princeton University Press, 2002. (ISBN 0691074437). Catalogues nearly every Carroll photograph known to be still in existence.
Wilson, Robin (2008). Lewis Carroll in Numberland: His Fantastical Mathematical Logical Life. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 9780713997576. 
Wullschläger, Jackie, Inventing Wonderland, (ISBN 0-7432-2892-8) — also looks at Edward Lear (of the "nonsense" verses), J. M. Barrie (Peter Pan), Kenneth Grahame (The Wind in the Willows), and A. A. Milne (Winnie-the-Pooh).
n.n., Dreaming in Pictures: The Photography of Lewis Carroll. Yale University Press & SFMOMA, 2004. (Places Carroll firmly in the art photography tradition.)



[edit] External links

The Fales Library Guide to the Alfred C. Berol Collection of Lewis Carroll




Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Lewis Carroll





Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Lewis Carroll




Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Lewis Carroll



Works by or about Lewis Carroll in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
The Carroll Myth background on the current controversy.
Cohen's objections to "The Carroll Myth"
Lewis Carroll.CC
The Lewis Carroll Society
Lewis Carroll Society of North America
Lewis Carroll at victorianweb.org
Contrariwise; the Association for New Lewis Carroll Studies
Works by Lewis Carroll at Project Gutenberg
The Photography of Lewis Carroll (selected colourised plates from his child photography)
Lewis Carroll Collection at the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin
Lewis Carroll on Tant Mieux A collection of articles by S. Ranson-Polizzotti and note of forthcoming book, summer, 2008.
Selected Poems, at Poetry Index
Lewis Carroll - The First Monty Python?
Archival material relating to Lewis Carroll listed at the UK National Register of Archives
Index entry for Lewis Carroll at Poets' Corner
Lewis Carroll online exhibition at the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin.









v • d • e

Nineteenth-century British children's literature






Authors · Titles · Illustrators













v • d • e

Lewis Carroll's Alice





Books

Alice's Adventures in Wonderland · Through the Looking-Glass






Alice's Adventures in Wonderland
characters

Alice · The White Rabbit · The Mouse · The Dodo · The Duck · The Lory · Eaglet · Bill the Lizard · The Caterpillar · The Duchess · The Cheshire Cat · The Mad Hatter · The March Hare · The Dormouse · The Queen of Hearts · The King of Hearts · The Knave of Hearts · The Gryphon · The Mock Turtle






Through the
Looking-Glass characters

Alice · The Red Queen · The White Queen · The Red King · The White King · The White Knight · Tweedledum and Tweedledee · The Sheep · Humpty Dumpty · Hatta · Haigha · The Lion and the Unicorn






Film adaptations

1903 film · 1933 film · 1951 film · 1966 film · 1972 film · 1976 film · 1981 film · 1985 film · 1988 film · 1988 film II · 1995 film · 1999 film






Poems

"How Doth the Little Crocodile" · "The Mouse's Tale" · "Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Bat" · "You Are Old, Father William" · "'Tis the Voice of the Lobster" · "Jabberwocky" · "The Walrus and the Carpenter" · "Haddocks' Eyes" · "The Hunting of the Snark" · "They told me you had been to her..."






Related topics

Alice Liddell  · Alice's Shop  · John Tenniel  · The Annotated Alice  · The Nursery "Alice"  · Works based on Alice in Wonderland









Persondata


NAME
Carroll, Lewis


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Dodgson, Charles Lutwidge (real name)


SHORT DESCRIPTION
Author, mathematician, and clergyman


DATE OF BIRTH
January 27, 1832(1832-01-27)


PLACE OF BIRTH
Daresbury, Cheshire, England


DATE OF DEATH
January 14, 1898


PLACE OF DEATH
Guildford, England






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lewis_Carroll"
Categories: Lewis Carroll | 19th-century British children's literature | English children's writers | English fantasy writers | English photographers | English poets | Victorian poetry | Portrait photographers | British logicians | British mathematicians | Voting theorists | Fellows of Christ Church, Oxford | Alumni of Christ Church, Oxford | Anglican deacons | English Anglicans | Old Rugbeians | People from Daresbury | 1832 births | 1898 deaths | Deaths from pneumonia | Infectious disease deaths in England | 19th-century mathematiciansHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations | All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead external links since February 2009 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Kiswahili
Kreyòl ayisyen
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
मराठी
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Occitan
Piemontèis
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 21:23.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
