











Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Elizabeth_II_of_the_United_Kingdom";
		var wgTitle = "Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "12153654";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281575911;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"QEII" redirects here. For the ocean liner QE2, see RMS Queen Elizabeth 2.





Elizabeth II


Queen of the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia and the other Commonwealth realms





Elizabeth II in 2007


Reign
6 February 1952 – present


Coronation
2 June 1953


Predecessor
George VI


Heir apparent
Charles, Prince of Wales


Consort
Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh



Detail
Issue


Charles, Prince of Wales
Anne, Princess Royal
Prince Andrew, Duke of York
Prince Edward, Earl of Wessex


Full name


Elizabeth Alexandra Mary



Detail
Titles and styles


HM The Queen
HRH The Princess Elizabeth, Duchess of Edinburgh
HRH The Princess Elizabeth
HRH Princess Elizabeth of York


House
House of Windsor


Anthem
God Save the Queen


Father
George VI


Mother
Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon


Born
21 April 1926 (1926-04-21) (aged 82)
Mayfair, London


Baptised
29 May 1926
Buckingham Palace, London


Signature



Religion
Church of England, Church of Scotland


Queen Elizabeth II (Elizabeth Alexandra Mary; born 21 April 1926) is the queen regnant of sixteen independent states known as the Commonwealth realms: the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Jamaica, Barbados, the Bahamas, Grenada, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Belize, Antigua and Barbuda, and Saint Kitts and Nevis. All together, these countries have a combined population, including dependencies, of over 129 million. She holds each crown separately and equally in a shared monarchy, and carries out duties in and on behalf of all the states of which she is sovereign. She is also Head of the Commonwealth, Supreme Governor of the Church of England, Duke of Normandy, Lord of Mann, and Paramount Chief of Fiji. In theory her powers are vast; however, in practice, and in accordance with convention, she rarely intervenes in political matters.
Her long reign (57 years) has seen sweeping changes, including the dissolution of the British Empire (a process that began before her accession) and the consequent evolution of the modern Commonwealth of Nations. Elizabeth became Queen of the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Pakistan, and Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) upon the death of her father, George VI, on 6 February 1952. As other British colonies gained independence from the United Kingdom, she became queen of several newly independent countries. During her 57 years on the throne, she has been the sovereign of 32 individual nations, but half of them subsequently became republics.
Elizabeth married Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh in 1947. The couple have four children and eight grandchildren. She is one of the longest-reigning British monarchs, after Victoria (who reigned over the United Kingdom for 63 years), George III (who reigned over Great Britain for 59 years), and James VI (who reigned over Scotland for over 57 years).




Contents


1 Early life
2 Heiress presumptive

2.1 World War II
2.2 Marriage


3 Queen

3.1 Succession
3.2 Continuing evolution of the Commonwealth
3.3 Silver Jubilee, Golden Jubilee and beyond
3.4 Health and reduced duties


4 Public perception and character

4.1 Finances
4.2 Politics

4.2.1 British national unity
4.2.2 Canadian national unity


4.3 Religion


5 Role in government

5.1 United Kingdom
5.2 Canada
5.3 Relations with foreign leaders


6 Titles, styles, honours and arms

6.1 Honours and honorary military positions
6.2 Arms


7 Issue
8 Ancestry
9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Early life




Princess Elizabeth aged seven, in 1933.


Elizabeth was the first child of Prince Albert, Duke of York (later King George VI), and his wife, Elizabeth. She was born by Caesarian section at 17 Bruton Street, Mayfair, London,[1] and on 29 May 1926, was baptised by the then Archbishop of York, Cosmo Lang, in the private chapel of Buckingham Palace. Her godparents were her paternal grandparents King George V and Queen Mary; her aunts, Princess Mary and Lady Elphinstone; her great-great-uncle, Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn; and her maternal grandmother, Cecilia Bowes-Lyon, Countess of Strathmore and Kinghorne. The Princess – who was named after her mother, her great-grandmother (Queen Alexandra), and grandmother (Queen Mary),[2] and called "Lilibet" by close family[3] – had a close relationship with her grandfather, and was credited with aiding in his recovery from illness in 1929.[4][5] Her only sibling was Princess Margaret, born in 1930, and the two princesses were educated at home under the supervision of both their mother and their governess, Marion Crawford, who was casually known as "Crawfie".[6] To the dismay of the Royal Family, Crawford later published a biography of Elizabeth and Margaret's childhood years entitled The Little Princesses, which described Elizabeth's love of horses and dogs, her orderliness, and her attitude of responsibility.[7] These observations were echoed by others, such as Winston Churchill, who described Elizabeth when she was two as "a character. She has an air of authority and reflectiveness astonishing in an infant,"[8] and her cousin, Margaret Rhodes, described her as "a jolly little girl, but fundamentally sensible and well-behaved."[9]

Heiress presumptive
As a granddaughter of the monarch in the male line, Elizabeth held the title of a British princess, with the style Her Royal Highness, her full style being Her Royal Highness Princess Elizabeth of York. At birth, she was third in the line of succession to the throne, behind her uncle, Prince Edward, Prince of Wales, and her father. Although her birth did generate public interest, there was no reason to believe then that she would ever become queen, as it was widely assumed that the Prince of Wales would marry and have children of his own.[10] In 1936, when her grandfather, the King, died and her uncle Edward succeeded, she was second in line after her father. Later that year, Edward abdicated and her father became king. Elizabeth became heiress presumptive, and was thereafter known as Her Royal Highness The Princess Elizabeth.
Although the heir to the British throne is generally created Prince of Wales, Elizabeth was never bestowed the title possibly because there was a remote possibility that if Elizabeth's father had a son, her brother would supplant Elizabeth in the line of succession. Some feel that George VI missed the opportunity to make an innovation in royal practice by re-adopting Henry VIII's idea of proclaiming his daughter, Lady Mary as Princess of Wales in her own right, in 1525.[11]
Elizabeth studied constitutional history with Sir Henry Marten, Vice-Provost of Eton College,[12] and religion with the Archbishop of Canterbury.[13] She learned modern languages, and still speaks French fluently.[14] A Girl Guides company, the 1st Buckingham Palace Company, was formed specifically so Elizabeth could socialize with girls her own age. She gained the interpreter, swimmer, dancer, horsewoman, cook, child nurse, and needlewoman badges, and eventually became patrol leader of the Swallow Patrol. Later she was enrolled as a Sea Ranger and, in 1946, she became Chief Ranger of the British Empire Rangers, the Senior branch of Girl Guides.[15] The Queen is still involved in Scouting and Guiding and has served as the patron of The Scout Association since 1952.[16]
In 1939, the Canadian government wanted Elizabeth to accompany her parents on their upcoming tour of Canada. However, the King decided against this, stating that his daughter was too young to undertake such a strenuous tour, which ended up being over a month long.[17] Elizabeth had probably met her future husband, Prince Philip of Greece and Denmark in 1934 and 1937.[18] After another meeting at the Royal Naval College in Dartmouth in July 1939, Elizabeth, though only 13 years old, fell in love with Philip, and they began to exchange letters.[19]

World War II




Princess Elizabeth changing a vehicle wheel during World War II.


In September 1939, World War II broke out. Elizabeth and her younger sister, Margaret, stayed at Balmoral Castle, Scotland, from September to Christmas 1939, until they moved to Sandringham House, Norfolk. In May 1940, they moved to Windsor Castle, where they stayed for most of the next five years. There was some suggestion that the two princesses be evacuated to Canada, where they, along with their parents, would have lived at Hatley Castle in British Columbia. This plan never came to fruition; to the proposal, Elizabeth's mother made the famous reply: "The children won't go without me. I won't leave without the King. And the King will never leave."[20] The children remained at Windsor, where they staged pantomimes at Christmas, to which family and friends were invited, along with the children of Royal Household staff. It was from Windsor that Elizabeth, in 1940, made her first radio broadcast during the BBC's Children's Hour, addressing other children who had been evacuated from the cities. She stated:


We are trying to do all we can to help our gallant sailors, soldiers and airmen, and we are trying, too, to bear our share of the danger and sadness of war. We know, every one of us, that in the end all will be well.[17]


During Elizabeth's years at Windsor, plans were drawn up by the constitutional expert Edward Iwi to have a member of the Royal Family present in Wales, in order to quell the growing nationalist influence of Plaid Cymru.[21] In a report to the Home Secretary Herbert Morrison, Iwi proposed appointing Elizabeth as Constable of Caernarfon Castle (the post then held by David Lloyd George) and patron of Urdd Gobaith Cymru, and to tour Wales as such.[21] The ideas were rejected by the Home Secretary, on the grounds that it might cause conflict between north and south Wales; by the King, who refused to subject his young daughter to the pressures of conducting official tours;[21] and by the government, as two leading members of Urdd Gobaith Cymru were discovered to be conscientious objectors.[21]
In 1945, Elizabeth accompanied her parents on visits to Commonwealth service personnel, and began to carry out solo duties, such as reviewing a parade of Canadian airwomen.[17] She joined the Women's Auxiliary Territorial Service, as No. 230873 Second Subaltern Elizabeth Windsor. She trained as a driver and mechanic, drove a military truck, and rose to the rank of Junior Commander.[22]
At the end of the war in Europe, on VE Day, Elizabeth and her sister mingled anonymously with the celebratory crowds in the streets of London. She later said in a rare interview, "we asked my parents if we could go out and see for ourselves. I remember we were terrified of being recognised ... I remember lines of unknown people linking arms and walking down Whitehall, all of us just swept along on a tide of happiness and relief."[23] Two years later, the Princess made her first official overseas tour, when she accompanied her parents to Southern Africa. On her 21st birthday, in a broadcast to the British Commonwealth from South Africa, she pledged: "I declare before you all that my whole life, whether it be long or short, shall be devoted to your service and the service of our great imperial family to which we all belong."[24]

Marriage




The Duke and Duchess of Edinburgh on their wedding day.


Elizabeth married Philip on 20 November 1947. The couple are second cousins once removed through King Christian IX of Denmark and third cousins through Queen Victoria. Before the marriage, Philip renounced his Greek and Danish titles, and adopted the style Lieutenant Philip Mountbatten, the surname adopted by his mother's family. Just before the wedding, he was created Duke of Edinburgh and granted the style of His Royal Highness.
The marriage was not without controversy: Philip was Greek Orthodox, had no financial standing, and had sisters who had married German noblemen with Nazi links. Elizabeth's mother was reported, in later biographies, to have opposed the union, even dubbing Philip as The Hun.[25] Still, the Commonwealth had not yet completely rebounded from the devastation of the war; rationing still required that the Princess save up her rationing coupons to buy the material for her gown,[26] designed by Norman Hartnell.[27] The wedding was seen as the first glimmer of a hope of rebirth. Elizabeth and Philip received over 2,500 wedding gifts from around the world. At the ceremony, Elizabeth's bridesmaids were her sister; her cousin, Princess Alexandra of Kent; Lady Caroline Montagu-Douglas-Scott, a cadet relative through their mutual aunt; Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester; her second cousin, Lady Mary Cambridge; Lady Elizabeth Mary Lambart (now Longman), daughter of Frederick Lambart, Earl of Cavan; The Honourable Pamela Mountbatten (now Hicks), Philip's cousin; and two maternal cousins, The Honourable Margaret Elphinstone (now Rhodes) and The Honourable Diana Bowes-Lyon (now Somervell).[28] Her page boys were her young paternal first cousins, Prince William of Gloucester and Prince Michael of Kent.[28] In post-war Britain, it was not acceptable for any of the Duke of Edinburgh's German relations to be invited to the wedding, including Philip's three surviving sisters. Elizabeth's aunt, Princess Mary, Princess Royal, allegedly refused to attend because her brother, the Duke of Windsor (who abdicated in 1936), was not invited due to his marital situation; she gave ill health as the official reason for not attending.[29]
Elizabeth gave birth to her first child, Prince Charles, on 14 November 1948, several weeks after letters patent were issued by her father allowing her children to enjoy a royal and princely status to which they otherwise would not have been entitled.[30] Though the Royal House is named Windsor, it was decreed through a British Order-in-Council in 1960, that those male-line descendants of Elizabeth II and Prince Philip who were not princes and princesses of the United Kingdom should have the personal surname Mountbatten-Windsor.[31] In practice, however, all of their children have used Mountbatten-Windsor as their surname. A second child, Princess Anne was born in 1950.
Following their wedding, the couple leased their first home, Windlesham Moor, until 4 July 1949,[28] when they took up residence at Clarence House. However, at various times between 1949 and 1951, the Duke of Edinburgh was stationed in Malta (at that time a British Protectorate) as a serving Royal Navy officer. He and Elizabeth lived intermittently, for several months at a time, in the Maltese hamlet of Gwardamangia, at the Villa Gwardamangia, the rented home of Louis Mountbatten, Earl Mountbatten of Burma. During their Maltese visits, the children remained in Britain.[32]

Queen

Succession




The coronation of Queen Elizabeth II, 2 June 1953. Prince Philip swears his allegiance to his wife and newly crowned sovereign.


George VI's health declined during 1951, and Elizabeth was soon frequently standing in for him at public events. In October of that year, she toured Canada, and visited the President of the United States, Harry S. Truman, in Washington, D.C.; on that trip, the Princess carried with her a draft accession declaration for use if the King died while she was out of the United Kingdom.[17][33] In early 1952, Elizabeth and Philip set out for a tour of Australia and New Zealand via Kenya. At Sagana Lodge, about 100 miles north of Nairobi, word arrived of the death of Elizabeth's father on 6 February. Philip broke the news to the new queen.[34] Martin Charteris, then her Assistant Private Secretary, asked her what she intended to be called as monarch, to which she replied: "My own name, of course."[35] As the royal party hastily returned to the United Kingdom, in the various countries where she had acceded to the throne, Elizabeth was proclaimed queen.
In the midst of the coronation preparations, Princess Margaret informed her sister that she wished to marry Peter Townsend, a divorced commoner sixteen years older than Margaret, with two sons from his previous marriage. The Queen asked them to wait for a year; in the words of Martin Charteris, "the Queen was naturally sympathetic towards the Princess, but I think she thought – she hoped – given time, the affair would peter out." After opposition from the Commonwealth prime ministers, and a British minister's threat of resignation should Margret and Townsend marry, the Princess decided to abandon her plans.[36]
Despite the death of the Queen's grandmother Queen Mary on 24 March 1953, the Queen's coronation went ahead in Westminster Abbey on 2 June 1953, in accordance with Mary's wishes. The entire ceremony was, save for the anointing and communion, televised throughout the Commonwealth, and watched by an estimated twenty million people, with twelve million more listening on the radio.[37] Elizabeth wore a gown commissioned from Norman Hartnell, which consisted of embroidered floral emblems of the countries of the Commonwealth: the Tudor rose of England, the Scots thistle, the Welsh leek, shamrocks for Ireland, the wattle of Australia, the maple leaf of Canada, the New Zealand fern, South Africa's protea, two lotus flowers for India and Ceylon, and Pakistan's wheat, cotton, and jute.[38] The Queen and Duke of Edinburgh moved into Buckingham Palace. As with many of her predecessors, Elizabeth is reported to dislike the palace as a residence, and considers Windsor Castle to be her home.[39]

Continuing evolution of the Commonwealth
Further information: Commonwealth of Nations, Commonwealth realm > Historical development, and George VI > Empire to Commonwealth




Elizabeth II's personal standard, used in her role as Head of the Commonwealth, and for when she visits Commonwealth countries of which she is not head of state.


Elizabeth witnessed, over her life, the ongoing transformation of the old British empire into the new British Commonwealth, and its modern successor, the Commonwealth of Nations. By the time of Elizabeth's accession in 1952, her role as nominal head of multiple independent states was already established. Spanning 1953–1954, the Queen and her husband embarked on a six month, around the world tour, making Queen Elizabeth II the first Commonwealth realms monarch to circumnavigate the globe.[40] She became the first reigning monarch of Australia, New Zealand, and Fiji to visit those nations. During the tour, crowds were immense; three-quarters of the population of Australia were estimated to have seen the Queen.[41]
In 1956, French Prime Minister Guy Mollet and British Prime Minister Sir Anthony Eden discussed the possibility of France joining in a union with the United Kingdom; among the ideas put forward was one in which Elizabeth was to be the French head of state. Mollet "had not thought there need be difficulty over France accepting the headship of Her Majesty."[42] The proposal was never accepted, and the following year France signed the Treaty of Rome.[42] In November that year, Britain and France invaded Egypt in an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to capture the Suez canal. Earl Mountbatten of Burma claimed the Queen was opposed to the invasion, though the Prime Minister, Anthony Eden, denied it. Eden resigned two months later.[43]
In 1957, the Queen received her first real personal criticism from Lord Altrincham, who accused her of being "out of touch".[44] Altrincham was denounced by public figures and physically attacked by members of the public appalled at his comments.[45] She made a state visit to the United States, where she addressed the United Nations General Assembly.[46] On the same tour she opened the 23rd Canadian Parliament, becoming the first Canadian monarch to open a parliamentary session. Two years later, she revisited Canada and the United States. In February 1961, she visited Ankara with Cemal Gursel, and toured India, Iran, Pakistan, and Nepal for the first time.[citation needed] During a trip to Ghana, she refused to keep her distance from President Kwame Nkrumah, despite him being a target for assassins. Harold Macmillan wrote at the time: "the Queen has been absolutely determined all through. She is impatient of the attitude towards her to treat her as... a film star... She has indeed 'the heart and stomach of a man'... She loves her duty and means to be a queen."[47]
Throughout her reign Elizabeth has undertaken state visits to foreign countries, as well as tours of each Commonwealth country, including attending all Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings (CHOGM) since the practice was established by Canada in 1973; the Queen had wished to attend the inaugural CHOGM in Singapore in 1971, but was advised not to do so by British Prime Minister Edward Heath.[48] Elizabeth II is the most widely-travelled head of state in history.[49][50]




The Queen (left) walks with then-First Lady Pat Nixon upon the Nixons' visit to the United Kingdom, 1970.


Elizabeth's pregnancies with both Andrew and Edward, in 1959 and 1963, marked the only times Elizabeth did not perform the State Opening of the British Parliament during her reign. She delegated the task to the Lord Chancellor instead. Elizabeth inaugurated the first Canadian trans-Atlantic telephone cable (part of one devised to link all the Commonwealth countries) in 1961, by calling Canadian Prime Minister, John Diefenbaker, from Buckingham Palace with the words "are you there Mr. Prime Minister?",[51] In 1965, Rhodesian Prime Minister Ian Smith declared unilateral independence from Britain. Although the Queen dismissed Smith in a formal declaration and the international community applied sanctions against Rhodesia, Smith's regime survived for another eleven years.[52]
In 1969, Elizabeth sent one of 73 Apollo 11 Goodwill Messages to NASA for the historic first lunar landing; the message is etched on a tiny silicon disc that still rests on the moon's surface. She later met the crew during their world tour.[14] In 1976, she became the first monarch to e-mail.[53]




Queen Elizabeth II is greeted by Margaret Whitlam at Fairbairn RAAF base, with Gough Whitlam, Prime Minister of Australia, and Lady Hasluck, wife of Governor-General Sir Paul Hasluck, looking on.


At the height of the 1975 Australian constitutional crisis, Prime Minister Gough Whitlam was dismissed from his post by Governor-General Sir John Kerr after Parliament rejected Whitlam's budget proposals.[54] The Speaker of the Australian House of Representatives, Gordon Scholes, appealed to the Queen on behalf of the house to reverse Kerr's decision, on the basis that Whitlam's Labor Party still enjoyed the confidence of the house. Elizabeth declined, stating that it was not appropriate for her to intervene in affairs that are reserved for the Governor-General alone by the Constitution of Australia.[55] The crisis fuelled Australian republicanism.[54]

Silver Jubilee, Golden Jubilee and beyond
In 1977, Elizabeth marked the Silver Jubilee of her accession.[56] Events took place in many countries throughout the Queen's associated Commonwealth tour, and included a service of thanksgiving at St. Paul's Cathedral attended by dignitaries and other heads of state. Parties were held throughout the Commonwealth realms, culminating in several Jubilee Days in the United Kingdom, in June. In Britain, commemorative stamps were issued. The Jubilee Line of the London Underground (though opened in 1979) was named for the anniversary, as were several other public locations and spaces, including the Jubilee Gardens in London's South Bank. In Canada, the Queen Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Medal was issued and an equestrian statue of the Queen was unveiled on Parliament Hill. In 1978, she endured a state visit by the brutal communist dictator of Romania, Nicolae Ceauşescu, but the following year brought two blows: one was the unmasking of Anthony Blunt, Surveyor of the Queen's Pictures, as a communist spy; the other was the assassination of her relative and in-law Earl Mountbatten of Burma by the Provisional Irish Republican Army.[57]




The equestrian statue of Elizabeth II on Parliament Hill in Ottawa, erected in 1992 to mark her 40th Jubilee and Canada's 125th Anniversary.


Elizabeth's personal courage was shown in 1981 during the annual Trooping the Colour ceremony. Six shots were fired at her from close range as she rode down The Mall. She reacted only by ducking slightly and then continuing on. Commentators were universally shocked by the apparent attack on the Queen's life, even after it was revealed that the shots fired were blanks. The Canadian House of Commons was so impressed by her display of courage that a motion was passed praising her composure.[47] The following year, the Queen found herself in another precarious situation when she awoke in her bedroom at Buckingham Palace to find a strange man, Michael Fagan, in the room with her. Remaining calm throughout, for approximately ten minutes, and through two calls to the palace police switchboard, Elizabeth spoke to Fagan while he sat at the foot of her bed until assistance arrived.[58] From April to September that year, the Queen remained anxious about her son, Prince Andrew, who was serving with British forces during the Falklands War.[59] Though she hosted President Ronald Reagan at Windsor Castle in 1982, and visited his Californian ranch in 1983, she was angered when his administration ordered the invasion of Grenada, one of her Caribbean realms.[60]
In 1991, she became the first British monarch to address a joint session of the United States Congress. The following year, she attempted to save the failing marriage of her eldest son, Charles, by counselling him and his wife, Diana, Princess of Wales, to patch up their differences.[61] She was unsuccessful, and the couple formally separated.
The Queen called 1992 her "annus horribilis" in a speech on 24 November 1992. The year had seen her daughter divorced, one son separated and another whose marriage was rocky. Windsor Castle had suffered severe fire damage, and the monarchy had come under increased criticism and public scrutiny.[62] In an unusually personal speech, she said any institution must expect criticism but asked, "Couldn't it be done with a touch of humour, gentleness and understanding?"[63]
In the ensuing years, public revelations on the state of Charles and Diana's marriage continued.[64] Eventually, in consultation with the British Prime Minister John Major, Archbishop of Canterbury George Carey, her private secretary Robert Fellowes, and her husband, she wrote to both Charles and Diana saying that a divorce was now desirable.[65] A year after the divorce, Diana was killed in a car crash in Paris on 31 August 1997. At the time, the Queen was on holiday at Balmoral with her son and grandchildren. In their grief, Diana's two sons wanted to attend church, and so their grandparents took them that morning.[66] For five days, the Queen and the Duke shielded their grandsons from the ensuing press interest by keeping them at Balmoral where they could grieve in private.[66][67] The royal family's seclusion caused public dismay.[68] Pressured by her family, friends, the new British Prime Minister Tony Blair, and public reaction, the Queen agreed to broadcast live to the world on 5 September.[69] In it, she expressed admiration for Diana, and her feelings "as a grandmother" for Princes William and Harry.[70] The public mood was transformed by the broadcast from hostility to respect.[70]
In 2002, Elizabeth marked her Golden Jubilee as queen.[71] She again undertook an extensive tour of her realms, which began in Jamaica in February, where the Queen called the farewell banquet "memorable" after a power cut plunged the King's House, the official residence of the Governor-General, into darkness.[72] Though public celebrations in the UK were more muted than those that had taken place 25 years earlier, due, in part, to the death of both the Queen Mother and her sister earlier that year, there were street parties and commemorative events in many locales. As in 1977, monuments were named and gifts offered to honour the occasion, including, in Canada, the Golden Jubilee Journalism New Media Centre at Sheridan College, and the Queen Elizabeth II Wildlands Provincial Park.
In 2005, she was the first Canadian monarch to address the Legislative Assembly of Alberta; and, in 2007, the first British monarch to address the Virginia General Assembly. The Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh celebrated their 60th wedding anniversary in 2007, with a special service at Westminster Abbey and private dinner hosted by Prince Charles at Clarence House on 19 November, and, the following day (their actual anniversary) a dinner party with other members of the Royal Family, former and present Prime Ministers, and the surviving bridesmaids and pages from the original wedding party. On 21 November, Elizabeth and Philip travelled to Malta, where a Royal Navy ship that was docked in the vicinity arranged its crew members on deck in the form of the number 60.
On 20 March 2008, The Queen accompanied by the Duke of Edinburgh, broke with tradition by attending a Maundy Service outside of England and Wales; They attended the Maundy Thursday service in Northern Ireland, at the Church of Ireland St Patrick's Cathedral, Armagh, during a three day visit to coincide with Easter.[73]

Health and reduced duties
In late February 2003, the Queen's reign surpassed those of her four immediate predecessors combined (Edward VII, George V, Edward VIII, and George VI), after which she became the third longest reigning British or English monarch, the second-longest-serving current monarch of a sovereign state (after King Bhumibol of Thailand), and the oldest reigning British monarch.
To become the longest-living British head of state, Elizabeth would have to live to 29 January 2012 when she would overtake Richard Cromwell. If Elizabeth lives until 19 September 2013, and her son Charles, the Prince of Wales succeeds her, he would become the oldest ever to succeed to the throne, surpassing William IV, who was 64. To overtake Queen Victoria and become the longest reigning monarch in British history, Elizabeth would have to live to 10 September 2015, when she would be 89. To surpass the reign of King Louis XIV of France, and become the longest reigning monarch in European history, Elizabeth would have to live until 26 May 2024, when she would be 98.
Elizabeth has enjoyed good health throughout her reign. While she continues to have what is described as excellent health and is seldom ill, she had some health issues in 2005–06. In June 2005, the Queen cancelled several engagements after contracting what the Palace described as a bad cold. In October 2006, she suffered a burst blood vessel in her right eye, causing it to appear deep red in colour.[74] While Buckingham Palace did not comment, medical experts stated that the Queen would have suffered no pain, and would be back to normal within a week or two, without lasting damage. However, they also mentioned that burst blood vessels, though common in the elderly, could be a sign of high blood pressure. Later that month, the Queen had to cancel her appointment to officially open the new Emirates Stadium, because of a strained back muscle that had been troubling her since the end of her holiday at Balmoral Castle that summer.[75] Elizabeth's back began to cause more serious concerns; in November 2006, there were worries that the Queen would not be well enough to open the British parliament, and, though she was able to attend, plans were drawn up to cover her possible absence. In December, there were rumours that Elizabeth was in declining health when she was seen in public with a bandage on her right hand, the position of which suggested that she may have been fitted with an intravenous drip, possibly, and especially in light of her back troubles, due to osteoporosis.[76] It was later revealed, however, that the bandage was because one of her corgis bit her hand when she separated two that had been fighting.[77]
At the time of her 80th birthday, the Queen made it clear that she had no intention of abdicating.[39] For a number of years, both Prince Charles and Princess Anne had been standing in for their mother at events such as investitures, and acting as Counsellors of State. This led to some speculation in the British press that Prince Charles would start to perform many of the day-to-day duties of the monarch while Elizabeth effectively went into retirement.[78] However, Buckingham Palace announced that Elizabeth would continue with her duties, both public and private, well into the future.[79]

Public perception and character
Main article: Personality and image of Queen Elizabeth II




Elizabeth's hand writing and signature on a personal note paying homage to Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, May 2008.


Elizabeth is depicted in a 2006 semi-biographical film, The Queen, but little is known of Elizabeth's personal feelings. She has almost never given press interviews. She is believed to have a deep sense of religious and civic duty, and to take her coronation oath seriously.[80] Elizabeth is known for her conservative fashions, consisting mostly of solid-colour overcoats and decorative hats, which allow her to be seen easily in a crowd.[81] Out of the public eye, her main leisure interests include horse racing, photography, and dogs, especially her Pembroke Welsh Corgis.[14]
In the 1950s, as a young woman at the start of her reign, Elizabeth was depicted as a glamorous "fairytale Queen".[82] After the trauma of the war, it was a time of hope, a period of progress and achievement heralding a"new Elizabethan age".[83] Lord Altrincham's accusation in 1957 that she was a "priggish schoolgirl" was an extremely rare criticism.[84] In the late 1960s, attempts to portray a more modern image of monarchy were made in the television documentary Royal Family, and by televising Prince Charles's investiture as Prince of Wales.[85] At her silver jubilee, the crowds and celebrations were genuinely enthusiastic,[86] but in the 1980s public criticism of the royal family increased, as the personal and working lives of Elizabeth's children came under media scrutiny.[87] Elizabeth's popularity sunk to a low point in the 1990s; under pressure from public opinion she began to pay income tax for the first time, and Buckingham Palace was opened to the public.[67] Discontent with the monarchy reached its peak on the death of Diana, and only faded once the Queen had broadcasted to the world.[67] In November 1999, a referendum in Australia on the future of the monarchy favoured its retention.[88] As her Golden Jubilee year began, the media speculated whether it would be a success or a failure.[89] The year began sombrely with the death of Elizabeth's sister and mother, but a million people attended each day of the three-day main Jubilee celebration in London.[90] The enthusiasm shown by the public for Elizabeth was greater than many journalists had predicted.[91] Polls in 2006 revealed strong support for Elizabeth; the majority of respondents desired that she remain on the throne until her death, and many felt that she had become an institution in herself.[92][93]

Finances




Sandringham House, Elizabeth II's private residence in Sandringham, Norfolk.


Elizabeth's personal fortune has been the subject of speculation for many years. Forbes magazine estimated the amount at around US$600 million (GB£330 million),[94] but official Buckingham Palace statements called estimates of £100 million "grossly overstated".[95] Though the Royal Collection is worth an approximate £10 billion, it is held in trust for her successors and the British nation, as are Buckingham Palace, Windsor Castle, and the other occupied palaces within the United Kingdom.[96][97]
Sandringham House and Balmoral Castle are privately owned by the Queen, having inherited them from her father on his death, along with the Duchy of Lancaster, itself valued at £310 million and which transferred a private income to the monarch of £9.811 million in 2006. Income from the British Crown Estate—with holdings of £7 billion—is transferred to her British treasury in return for Civil List payments. Both the Crown Estate and the Crown Land of Canada—comprising 89% (or approximately 8,885,000 km²)[98] of the country's 9,984,670 km² area—are owned by Elizabeth in trust for the nation by virtue of her position as Sovereign, and cannot be sold or owned by her in a private capacity.

Politics
As a constitutional monarch, Elizabeth has not expressed her personal political opinions in a public forum, maintaining this discipline throughout her reign.

British national unity
During an event in Westminster Hall that marked her Silver Jubilee as Queen, Elizabeth said in her speech: "I cannot forget that I was crowned Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland."[99] This reference came at a time when the Labour government was attempting to introduce a controversial[who?] devolution policy in regards to Scotland and Wales, and was interpreted as a subtle expression of opposition to the scheme.[by whom?] Similarly, her statement of praise[citation needed] for the Northern Ireland Belfast Agreement raised some complaints among Unionists,[citation needed] who were traditionally strong monarchists. Ian Paisley, leader of the Democratic Unionist Party and founder of the Evangelical Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster, famously broke with Unionism's traditional deference to the British Crown by calling the Queen "a parrot" of Tony Blair, suggesting that Elizabeth's support for the agreement would weaken the monarchy's standing among Northern Irish Protestants, a substantial number of whom remained opposed to certain parts of the accord.[100] After referenda held in the 1990s came out in favour of devolution plans , the Queen sent her best wishes to the newly established Scottish parliament and National Assembly of Wales, the first sessions of which she opened in person.

Canadian national unity
When Elizabeth was invited to Canada in 1964, at the height of the Quebec separatist movement, there were concerns for her safety. It was reported that the terrorist organization Front de libération du Québec had made assassination threats against her, and cancellation of the tour was considered.[47][101] The Queen's private secretary said that the Queen would have been horrified to have been prevented from going because of "the activities of extremists."[47] While never speaking directly against separatism, Elizabeth did publicly praise Canada's unity and expressed her wish to see the continuation of a unified Canada, sometimes courting controversy over the matter. In a speech to the National Assembly of Quebec, she ignored the national controversy and the riots during her appearance in favour of praising Canada's two "complementary cultures". She spoke in both French and English about the strength of Canada's two founding peoples, stating: "I am pleased to think there exists in our Commonwealth a country where I can express myself officially in French," and, "whenever you sing [the French words of] "O Canada" you are reminded that you come of a proud race."[17][102] Later, after she proclaimed the Constitution Act in 1982, which was the first time in Canadian history that a major constitutional change had been made without the agreement of the government of Quebec,[citation needed] Elizabeth attempted to demonstrate her position as head of the whole Canadian nation, and her role as conciliator, by privately expressing to journalists at a reception at Rideau Hall her regret that Quebec had not been a part of the settlement.[17]
In 1995, during a Quebec separatist referendum campaign, the Queen was tricked into revealing her more personal opinions on Quebec secession when Pierre Brassard, a DJ for Radio CKOI-FM Montreal, telephoned Buckingham Palace pretending to be then Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chrétien, and kept a convinced Queen Elizabeth in a fourteen minute conversation that vacillated between French and English. When told that the separatists were showing a lead in the polls, Elizabeth revealed that she felt the "referendum may go the wrong way," adding, "if I can help in any way, I will be happy to do so." However, she pointedly refused to accept the advice, from the man whom she believed to be Chrétien, that she intervene in the referendum without first seeing a draft speech sent by the Prime Minister's Office. The Queen eventually began to have suspicions about the person to whom she was speaking and ended the conversation, though her tactful handling of the call won plaudits from Brassard.[103] Chrétien later, in his memoirs, recounted the Queen's tongue-in-cheek comments to him regarding this affair: "'I didn't think you sounded quite like yourself,' she told me, 'but I thought, given all the duress you were under, you might have been drunk.'"[104]

Religion
Aside from her official religious roles in the United Kingdom, Elizabeth personally worships with the Anglican church, regularly attending services at St George's Chapel at Windsor Castle, at St Mary Magdalene Church when staying at Sandringham House, or at Crathie Kirk when holidaying at Balmoral Castle. Frequently, the Queen will add a personal note about her faith to her annual Royal Christmas Message broadcast to the Commonwealth, such as in the 2000 edition, wherein she spoke about the theological significance of the millennium marking the 2000th anniversary of the birth of Jesus Christ:

"To many of us, our beliefs are of fundamental importance. For me, the teachings of Christ, and my own personal accountability before God provide a framework in which I try to lead my life. I, like so many of you, have drawn great comfort in difficult times from Christ's words and example."[105]

Elizabeth also demonstrated support for inter-faith relations, often meeting with leaders of other religions, and granting her personal patronage to the Council of Christians and Jews.[106] 
Role in government
Further information: Commonwealth realm: Monarch's role in the realms

United Kingdom
On three occasions during Elizabeth's reign, she has had to deal with constitutional problems relating the formation of her UK government. In 1957, the absence of a formal mechanism within the Conservative Party for choosing a leader meant that, following the sudden resignation of Sir Anthony Eden, it fell to the Queen to decide whom to commission to form a government. Eden recommended that Elizabeth consult Lord Salisbury (the Lord President of the Council). Lord Salisbury and Lord Kilmuir (the Lord Chancellor) consulted the Cabinet, Winston Churchill and the Chairman of the 1922 Committee, as a result of which the Queen appointed their recommended candidate: Harold Macmillan. Six years later, Macmillan himself resigned and advised the Queen to appoint the Earl of Home as Prime Minister, advice which she followed. In both 1957 and 1963, the Queen came under criticism for appointing the Prime Minister on the advice of a small number of ministers, or a single minister. In 1965, the Conservatives adopted a formal mechanism for choosing a leader, thus relieving her of the duty.[107] In February 1974, an inconclusive general election result meant that, in theory, the outgoing Prime Minister, Edward Heath, whose party had won the popular vote, could stay in office if he formed a coalition government with the Liberals. Rather than immediately resign as Prime Minister, Heath explored this option, and only resigned when discussions on forming a cooperative government foundered, after which the Queen asked the Leader of the Opposition, Labour's Harold Wilson, to form a government.
The Queen meets the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom on a regular basis, as well as other British ministers and the First Minister of Scotland. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said in her memoirs: "Anyone who imagines that they are a formality or confined to social niceties is quite wrong; they are quietly business-like and Her Majesty brings to bear a formidable grasp of current issues and breadth of experience."[108] During Thatcher's time as Prime Minister, it was rumoured that Elizabeth was worried that Thatcher's economic policies fostered social divisions, and was reportedly alarmed by high unemployment, a series of riots, and the violence of a miners' strike.[109] Thatcher told Brian Walden, "the Queen is the kind of woman who could vote SDP [Social Democratic Party]."[109] Reports of strained relations between Elizabeth and Thatcher throughout the period varied over the extent of this difference and to what degree it was due to concerns over policy, or a personality clash.[110] The Queen's feelings towards Thatcher were even described as "cordial dislike".[111] Despite such speculation, Thatcher later clearly conveyed her personal admiration for the Queen, and expressed her belief that the idea of animosity between the two of them had been played up because they were both women. In the BBC documentary Queen & Country, Thatcher described the Queen as "marvellous" and "a perfect lady" who "always knows just what to say", referring, in particular, to her final meeting as prime minister with Elizabeth.[112] Belying reports of acrimony between them, after Thatcher retired from politics, Elizabeth conferred on her two personal gifts of the sovereign: the Order of Merit and the Order of the Garter.[88] Both the Queen and Prince Philip attended Thatcher's 80th birthday party.
It was initially thought that Elizabeth had very good relations with Tony Blair, during his first five years as Prime Minister. However, evidence mounted that their relationship had hardened as the years passed,[113] until it was revealed in May 2007 that the Queen was "exasperated and frustrated" by Blair's actions, especially by what she saw as a detachment from rural issues, as well as a too-casual approach (he requested that the Queen call him "Tony") and a contempt for British heritage. Elizabeth was rumoured to have shown concern that the British Armed Forces were overstretched, particularly in Iraq and Afghanistan, as well as "surprise" over Blair's shifting of their weekly meetings from Tuesday to Wednesday afternoons. She was supposed to have raised these concerns with Blair repeatedly at these meetings, though she never revealed her opinions on the Iraq War itself.[114] Relations between the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh and Blair and his wife, Cherie, were reported to be distant, as the two couples shared few common interests. Elizabeth did, however, apparently admire Blair's efforts to achieve peace in Northern Ireland.[115]
In 1992, the Queen was shown on television playfully teasing former Prime Minister Sir Edward Heath about how he could travel to world trouble spots like Iraq because he was "expendable now".[116]

Canada
Elizabeth's relations with her Canadian prime ministers have varied. Pierre Trudeau seemed to have caused the Queen some concern; Tony Benn said that the Queen expressed to him that she found her Canadian Prime Minister to be "rather disappointing".[117][118] This was perhaps due to his documented antics around her, such as sliding down banisters at Buckingham Palace and his famous pirouette behind her back, captured on film in 1977,[118] as well as the removal of various royal symbols from Canada during his tenure as Prime Minister.[118] The Queen was reported, by Paul Martin, Sr., as worrying that the Crown "had little meaning for [Trudeau]."[118] Still, Trudeau advised Elizabeth to attend the 1973 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, held that year in Ottawa; the advice was accepted, and, by several accounts,[119] the meetings were much more productive than the 1971 Singapore conference. It was observed that the Queen performed an important leadership role; the heads of government were much better behaved when she was present.[119]
Martin—who, along with John Roberts and Mark MacGuigan, was sent to the UK in 1980 to discuss the patriation of the Canadian constitution—noted that the Queen took a deep interest in the constitutional debate, especially following the failure of Bill C-60, which affected her role as head of state. The entire party found the Queen "better informed on both the substance and the politics of Canada's constitutional case than any of the British politicians or bureaucrats."[120] However, a result of the constitutional patriation, orchestrated by Trudeau, was the entrenchment of the monarchy within Canada's governing system, after which Trudeau said in his memoirs:

"I always said it was thanks to three women that we were eventually able to reform our Constitution. The Queen, who was favourable, Margaret Thatcher, who undertook to do everything that our Parliament asked of her, and Jean Wadds, who represented the interests of Canada so well in London... The Queen favoured my attempt to reform the Constitution. I was always impressed not only by the grace she displayed in public at all times, but by the wisdom she showed in private conversation."[119]

Former Governor General Jules Léger said of the Queen: "I wonder whether any sovereign was ever so directly informed and consulted by a Canadian Prime Minister. In any event, during my term of office, each one of the Queen's visits and the several meetings of Commonwealth Prime Ministers... made possible a continuous personal exchange of information and views between Her Majesty, the Prime Minister, and the Governor General. These personal communications made consensus rather easy whenever a decision had to be taken on any matter of common interest. And it is this practice which, I believe allowed Her Majesty to play a real part in the government of Canada."[121]

Relations with foreign leaders
Elizabeth II established numerous friendships, described as warm and informal, with foreign leaders, such as Nelson Mandela, Mary Robinson, and George W. Bush. Mary McAleese, the President of Ireland, recounted her shock when, at the time she was Pro-Vice-Chancellor of Queen's University of Belfast, she was invited to lunch with Elizabeth and Prince Philip as a chance for the Queen to talk to her as a Northern Ireland nationalist and hear her views on Anglo-Irish relations. The two women struck up an instant rapport, after which McAleese, during the 1997 Irish presidential election, and in an Irish Independent interview, called Elizabeth "a dote", a Hiberno-English term meaning "really lovely person".[122] Mandela was heard on film in a BBC documentary referring to the Queen as "my friend, Elizabeth".

Titles, styles, honours and arms
Main article: List of titles and honours of Queen Elizabeth II
Elizabeth has held a number of titles throughout her life, as granddaughter of the monarch, as a daughter of the monarch, through her husband's titles, and eventually as sovereign of multiple states. In common practice, she is referred to most often as simply The Queen or Her Majesty; if a distinction is necessary, this may be modified to be Her Britannic Majesty, Her Australian Majesty, Her Canadian Majesty, etc., as is called for. When in conversation with the Queen, the practice is to initially address her as Your Majesty and thereafter as Ma'am.
Following tradition, she is additionally titled Duke of Lancaster and Duke of Normandy, and is also Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces of many of her realms, Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom, and is styled Defender of the Faith in various realms for differing reasons.

Honours and honorary military positions
In her position as sovereign of multiple states, Elizabeth automatically holds the position of Commander-in-Chief in some of her realms, such as Canada,[123] New Zealand, and the United Kingdom.[124] In the latter, she also serves as Commandant-in-Chief of the Royal Air Force and Lord High Admiral of the Royal Navy. Elizabeth has been installed as Colonel-in-Chief, Captain-General, Air-Commodore-in-Chief, Commissioner, Brigadier, Commandant-in-Chief, and Royal Colonel of at least 96 regiments throughout the Commonwealth, both before and after her accession.
As a long reigning and widely travelled monarch, Elizabeth has received a great many honours and awards from countries around the world.

Arms
Main article: Flags and coats of arms of Elizabeth II




The arms of The Princess Elizabeth, before her marriage.


From 21 April 1944 until her marriage to the Duke of Edinburgh,[125] Princess Elizabeth's arms consisted of a lozenge bearing the same charges as the shield of the Royal coat of arms, and a label of three points argent, the centre bearing a Tudor Rose and the first and third a cross of St George. Following her marriage, these arms were impaled with those of the Duke of Edinburgh; she held these until her accession as queen,[126] after which, as the sovereign of each of the Commonwealth realms, she acquired the arms of the monarch of each of those countries, in most cases formally known as the Arms of Her Majesty in Right of [Country] or the Royal Arms of [Country]. The governments of the realms use these arms as symbols of the authority of the Crown.
Similarly, Elizabeth bears a number of personal flags for use in some of her realms: two in the United Kingdom (one for Scotland and another for all other areas), and one each for Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Jamaica, and Barbados. These consist of the banners of the associated Royal Arms, all, save for those of the UK, defaced with Elizabeth's personal badge: a crowned letter E within a circle of roses on a blue disk. This same badge is also used as the Queen's personal flag for her role as Head of the Commonwealth, or for visiting Commonwealth countries where she is not head of state.

Issue


Name
Birth
Marriage
Issue
Divorce


Prince Charles, Prince of Wales
14 November 1948
29 July 1981
Lady Diana Spencer
Prince William of Wales
Prince Henry of Wales
28 August 1996


9 April 2005
Camilla Parker-Bowles




Princess Anne, Princess Royal
15 August 1950
14 November 1973
Mark Phillips
Peter Phillips
Zara Phillips
28 April 1992


12 December 1992
Timothy Laurence




Prince Andrew, Duke of York
19 February 1960
23 July 1986
Sarah Ferguson
Princess Beatrice of York
Princess Eugenie of York
30 May 1996


Prince Edward, Earl of Wessex
10 March 1964
19 June 1999
Sophie Rhys-Jones
Lady Louise Windsor
Viscount Severn



Ancestry
Main articles: Ancestry of Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom, Descent of Elizabeth II from William I, Descent of Elizabeth II from Cerdic, and Descent of Elizabeth II from the Franks



v • d • e
Ancestors of Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

16. Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

8. Edward VII of the United Kingdom

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

17. Victoria of the United Kingdom



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

4. George V of the United Kingdom

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

18. Christian IX of Denmark



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

9. Alexandra of Denmark

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

19. Louise of Hesse-Cassel



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

2. George VI of the United Kingdom

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

20. Duke Alexander of Württemberg



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

10. Francis, Duke of Teck

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

21. Claudine Rhédey von Kis-Rhéde



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

5. Mary of Teck

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

22. Prince Adolphus, Duke of Cambridge



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

11. Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

23. Princess Augusta of Hesse-Cassel



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

1. Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

24. Thomas Lyon-Bowes, Lord Glamis



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

12. Claude Bowes-Lyon, 13th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

25. Charlotte Grimstead



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

6. Claude Bowes-Lyon, 14th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

26. Oswald Smith



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

13. Frances Dora Smith

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

27. Henrietta Hodgson



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

3. Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

28. William Charles Augustus Cavendish-Bentinck



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

14. Charles William Frederick Cavendish-Bentinck

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

29. Anne Wellesley



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

7. Cecilia Cavendish-Bentinck

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

30. Edwyn Burnaby



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

15. Caroline Louisa Burnaby

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

31. Anne Caroline Salisbury



 




 


 


 


 


 










See also

List of state leaders
List of the wealthiest royals
Queen's Beasts


References


^ Brandreth, p.103 and Roberts, p.74
^ Brandreth, p.103
^ "Queen 'Lilibet' letters unveiled". BBC. 27 May 2006. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/5019736.stm. Retrieved on 2009-04-02. 
^ Pimlott, Ben (1997). The Queen: A Biography of Elizabeth II. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 047119431X. http://www.nytimes.com/books/first/p/pimlott-queen.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-12. 
^ Rose, Kenneth (1983). King George V. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. pp. p 389. ISBN 0-297-78245-2. 
^ "The Real Crawfie". Channel 4. http://www.channel4.com/history/microsites/R/real_lives/crawfie.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-18. 
^ Quoted in Brandreth, pp.108–110
^ Quoted in Brandreth, p.105
^ Quoted in Brandreth, pp.105–106
^ Bond, p.8
^ "Queen Mary I". englishhistory.net. http://englishhistory.net/tudor/monarchs/mary1.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-04. 
^ Brandreth, p.124
^ "Queen's decision no snub: royal aides". CBC News. http://www.cbc.ca/world/story/2005/02/23/charles-queen050223.html. Retrieved on 2005-02-23. 
^ a b c "80 Things You (Probably) Didn't Know About Queen Elizabeth". Time Europe. http://www.time.com/time/europe/html/060417/facts.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-26. 
^ "Buckingham Palace press releases-Diary of events in the life of Her Majesty the Queen leading up to her accession". Official Website of the British Monarchy. http://www.royal.gov.uk/output/page932.asp. Retrieved on 2008-07-25. 
^ "Royal Support for the Scouting and Guiding Movements". Official Website of the British Monarchy. http://www.royal.gov.uk/output/Page5951.asp. Retrieved on 2008-07-25. 
^ a b c d e f "Elizabeth II, Queen of Canada". Canadian Royal Heritage Trust. http://www.crht.ca/DiscoverMonarchyFiles/QueenElizabethII.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-06. 
^ Brandreth, pp.133–139
^ Bond, p.10 and Brandreth, pp.132–136, 166–169
^ "Biography of HM Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother: Activities as Queen". British Monarchy Official Website. http://www.royal.gov.uk/output/page1043.asp. Retrieved on 2007-09-04. 
^ a b c d "Royal plans to beat nationalism". BBC. 8 March 2005. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/wales/4329001.stm. Retrieved on 2007-10-31. 
^ "Her Majesty the Queen – Early Public Life". Official website of the British Monarchy. http://www.royal.gov.uk/HMTheQueen/Publiclife/EarlyPublicLife/Earlypubliclife.aspx. Retrieved on 2009-02-27. 
^ Bond, p.10
^ Princess Elizabeth (21 April 1947). "Historic speeches: 21st birthday speech". British Monarchy Official Website. http://www.royal.gov.uk/output/Page4098.asp. Retrieved on 2007-09-09. 
^ Davies, Caroline (2006-04-20). "Philip, the one constant through her life". The Daily Telegraph. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/main.jhtml?xml=/news/campaigns/queen80/uqphilip.xml. Retrieved on 2007-01-23. 
^ Royal Insight Magazine: Behind-the-Scenes at the Royal Wedding of 1947
^ Bond, p.19
^ a b c "BBC NEWS | UK | Sixty facts about a royal marriage". News.bbc.co.uk. Last Updated:. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/7100546.stm. Retrieved on 2008-10-12. 
^ Bradford, Sarah (1989). King George VI. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. pp. p.424. ISBN 0297796674. 
^ "Letters Patent, 22 October 1948". Heraldica. http://www.heraldica.org/topics/britain/TNA/LCO_6_3676.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-09. 
^ London Gazette: (Supplement) no. 41948, p. 1003, 5 February 1960. Retrieved on 2007-10-31.
^ Brandreth, pp.226–238
^ Brandreth, pp.240–241
^ Brandreth, pp.245–247 and Lacey, pp.150–151
^ Brandreth, p.247
^ Bond, p.22 and Brandreth, p.271
^ Robert, p.82
^ "By appointment: Norman Hartnell’s sample for the Coronation dress". Nga.gov.au. http://www.nga.gov.au/ByAppointment/. Retrieved on 2008-10-12. 
^ a b English, Rebecca (2006-04-20). "'The Queen will NEVER consider abdicating'". Daily Mail. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/pages/live/articles/news/news.html?in_article_id=383595&in_page_id=1770. Retrieved on 2006-10-15. 
^ "Queen Elizabeth II". biography.co.uk. http://www.thebiographychannel.co.uk/biography_story/495:694/2/Elizabeth_Alexandra_Mary_Windsor_-_Queen_Elizabeth_II.htm. 
^ Brandreth, p.278
^ a b "France and UK considered 1950s 'merger'". The Guardian. 2007-01-15. http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk_news/story/0,,1990795,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-15. 
^ Roberts, p.84
^ Lord Altrincham in National Review quoted by Brandreth, p.374 and Roberts, p.83
^ Brandreth, p.374
^ Full text of the speech
^ a b c d "Courage of the Queen". Canadian Royal Heritage Trust. http://www.crht.ca/LibraryShelf/CourageoftheQueen.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-24. 
^ Lacey, Robert (2002). Royal: Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. London: Little, Brown. pp. p. 256. ISBN 0748104097. 
^ Challands, Sarah (2006-04-25). "Queen Elizabeth II celebrates her 80th birthday". CTV News. http://www.ctv.ca/servlet/ArticleNews/story/CTVNews/20060418/queen_liz_birthday_060418. Retrieved on 2007-06-13. 
^ The Real Queen. 2002-01-01.
^ "Transatlantic phone cable officially opened". CBC. http://archives.cbc.ca/clip.asp?page=1&IDClip=5721&IDCat=349&IDCatPa=261&IDDossier=. Retrieved on 2008-10-19. 
^ Bond, p.66
^ "The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh visit the UK headquarters of Google". Royal Insight (Buckingham Palace) (October 2008). 16 October 2008. http://www.royal.gov.uk/output/Page6362.asp. Retrieved on 2008-10-19. 
^ a b Bond, p.96
^ "The Whitlam Dismissal: Letter from the Queen's Private Secretary". Whitlamdismissal.com. http://whitlamdismissal.com/documents/letter-from-queen.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-10-12. 
^ 1977 "Queen celebrates Silver Jubilee". BBC News: On This Day. http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/june/7/newsid_2562000/2562633.stm 1977. 
^ Roberts, pp.88–89
^ Davidson, Spencer. "God Save the Queen, Fast", Time (26 July 1982), page 33.
^ Bond, p.115
^ Bond, p.188
^ Brandreth, p.349
^ Brandreth, p.377 and Roberts, p.94
^ Brandreth, p.377
^ Brandreth, p.356 and Roberts, p.94
^ Brandreth, p.357
^ a b Brandreth, p.358
^ a b c Bond, p.134
^ Brandreth, p.358; Bond, p.134; and Roberts, p.98
^ Brandreth, pp.358–359
^ a b Bond, p.134 and Brandreth, p.359
^ "In Depth: The Golden Jubilee". BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/in_depth/uk/2002/the_golden_jubilee/. 
^ Brandreth, p.31
^ "BBC NEWS | Northern Ireland | Historic first for Maundy service". News.bbc.co.uk. Last Updated:. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/7305675.stm. Retrieved on 2008-10-12. 
^ Leyland, Joanne (2006-10-11). "The Queen Proves She's A Real Trooper". The Royalist. http://www.theroyalist.net/content/view/1306/2/. Retrieved on 2006-10-20. 
^ "Queen cancels visit due to injury". BBC News. 2006-10-26. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/6087724.stm. 
^ Greenhill, Sam and Hope, Jenny (2006-12-06). "Plaster on Queen's hand: minor cut or IV drip?". Daily Mail. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/pages/live/articles/news/news.html?in_article_id=420950&in_page_id=1770. 
^ Whittaker, Thomas (2006-12-14). "Corgi put the queen in plaster". The Sun. http://www.thesun.co.uk/article/0,,2-2006570726,00.html. 
^ "Key aides move to Windsor ahead of Queen's retirement| News | This is London". Thisislondon.co.uk. London. http://www.thisislondon.co.uk/news/article-23375011-details/Key+aides+move+to+Windsor+ahead+of+Queen's+retirement/article.do. Retrieved on 2008-10-12. 
^ http://www.royal.gov.uk/output/page3956.asp Royal.gov.uk – Corrections
^ "Queen 'will do her job for life'". BBC News. 2006-04-19. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/4921120.stm. Retrieved on 2007-02-04. 
^ Cartner-Morley, Jess (2007-05-10). "Elizabeth II, belated follower of fashion". The Guardian (Guardian Media Group): pp. p2, G2 section. ISSN 0261-3077. http://www.guardian.co.uk/g2/story/0,,2076067,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-10. 
^ Bond, p.22
^ Bond, p.35 and Roberts, p.82
^ Bond, p.35
^ Bond, pp.66–67, 84, 87–89 and Roberts, pp.84–86
^ Bond, p.97 and Roberts, p.87
^ Bond, p.117 and Roberts, p.91
^ a b Roberts, p.101
^ Bond, p.156
^ Bond, pp.166–167
^ Bond, p.157
^ Bansal, Shaveta. "Poll: Queen Elizabeth "Most Popular Royal"". All Headline News. http://www.allheadlinenews.com/articles/7003227578. Retrieved on 2006-10-20. 
^ Monarchy poll, Ipsos MORI, April 2006, http://www.ipsos-mori.com/content/monarchy-poll.ashx, retrieved on 2008-10-14 
^ "The World's Richest Royals - Forbes.com". Forbes.com. http://www.forbes.com/business/2007/08/30/worlds-richest-royals-biz-royals07-cx_lk_0830royalintro.html?boxes=relstories. Retrieved on 2008-10-12. 
^ The Queen's Personal Wealth, Official web site of the British monarchy, http://www.royal.gov.uk/output/Page4975.asp, retrieved on 2008-10-09 
^ "The Royal Collection - What is the Royal Collection?". Royalcollection.org.uk. http://www.royalcollection.org.uk/default.asp?action=article&ID=9. Retrieved on 2008-10-12. 
^ "The Royal Collection > About the Royal Collection". Royal.gov.uk. http://www.royal.gov.uk/output/page601.asp. Retrieved on 2008-10-12. 
^ V.P. NEIMANIS. "Crown Land". The Canadian Encyclopedia: Geography. Historica Foundation of Canada. http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.com/index.cfm?PgNm=TCE&Params=A1ARTA0002049. Retrieved on 2007-02-12. 
^ "Queen's Silver Jubilee address". BBC News. 2002-04-30. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/1959535.stm. Retrieved on 2009-01-06. 
^ "'The Queen is a parrot' - Paisley". BBC News. 1998-05-26. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/events/northern_ireland/latest_news/100761.stm. 
^ Speaight, Robert (1970). Vanier, Soldier, Diplomat and Governor General: A Biography. Collins. ISBN 0002622521. 
^ "1964 Quebec visit – speech". CBC. http://archives.cbc.ca/500f.asp?id=1-69-70-236. 
^ Bousfield, Arthur (April 1996). "A Queen Canada Should be Proud Of". Monarchy Canada. http://www.monarchist.ca/mc/queenpr.htm. 
^ Thompson, Elizabeth (2007-10-14). "Chretien's Revenge". The Gazette. http://www.canada.com/montrealgazette/news/story.html?id=70a78606-30c2-438e-b541-d6e4ce00087a&k=14039&p=3. Retrieved on 2007-10-15. 
^ Elizabeth II (2000-12-25). "Historic speeches: Christmas Broadcast 2000". British Monarchy Official Website. http://www.royal.gov.uk/output/Page4656.asp. Retrieved on 2007-09-09. 
^ "Presidents, Vice Presidents and Board". Council of Christians and Jews. http://www.ccj.org.uk/Presidents.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-09. 
^ Roberts, p.84
^ Thatcher, M. (1993). The Downing Street Years (p. 18) New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 0-06-0170565
^ a b Campbell, John (2003). Margaret Thatcher: The Iron Lady. Jonathan Cape. ISBN 0224061569. 
^ "Newspaper Says Queen Is Upset by Thatcher". The New York Times. 1986-07-20. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9A0DE4DA153DF933A15754C0A960948260. 
^ "Atticus". The Sunday Times. 2005-10-09. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/article576422.ece. 
^ Bridcut, John (Producer). (2002). Queen and Country [Documentary]. BBC. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
^ "Queen Elizabeth feels snubbed by Blair". Sify. 2004-06-23. http://sify.com/news/fullstory.php?id=13504116. 
^ Alderson, Andrew (2007-05-28). "Revealed: Queen's dismay at Blair legacy". The Daily Telegraph. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/main.jhtml;jsessionid=VUFMK0FTBH0ZPQFIQMFSFFWAVCBQ0IV0?xml=/news/2007/05/27/nqueen27.xml. Retrieved on 2007-05-31. 
^ Alderson, Andrew (2007-05-27). "Tony and Her Majesty: an uneasy relationship". The Daily Telegraph. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/main.jhtml?xml=/news/2007/05/27/nqueen127.xml. Retrieved on 2007-05-31. 
^ Brandreth, p.17
^ CBC. "The Greatest Canadian: Pierre Elliot Trudeau". CBC. http://www.cbc.ca/greatest/top_ten/nominee/trudeau-pierre-know.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-13. 
^ a b c d Heinricks, Geoff (2001). "Trudeau and the Monarchy". National Post. http://www.monarchist.ca/cmn/2001/opinion.htm. Retrieved on 2008-10-13. 
^ a b c Trudeau, Pierre Elliott (1993). Memoirs. McLelland & Stewart. ISBN 0771085885. http://books.google.com/books?id=ZtMUAAAAYAAJ&q=memoirs+trudeau&dq=memoirs+trudeau&pgis=1. Retrieved on 2008-10-12. 
^ Heinricks, Geoff (Winter/Spring, 2000-01). "Trudeau and the Monarchy". Canadian Monarchist News, reprinted from the National Post. http://www.monarchist.ca/cmn/2001/opinion.htm. 
^ Editor (Autumn 2002). "Canada's Elizabethan Jubilee Reflections on the Queen of Canada". Canadian Monarchist News (Toronto: Monarchist League of Canada) 7 (2). 
^ Independent.ie - We'll acknowledge her presence politely ... then promptly put in a bid to rezone Windsor Castle as a shopping mall
^ Constitution Act 1867; III.15, Queen's Printer for Canada, 1867, http://laws.justice.gc.ca/en/const/c1867_e.html 
^ "The Monarchy Today: Queen and State: The Queen and the Armed Forces". Buckingham Palace. http://www.royal.gov.uk/output/Page4698.asp. Retrieved on 2008-10-17. 
^ "Marks of cadency in the British royal family". Heraldica.org. http://www.heraldica.org/topics/britain/cadency.htm. Retrieved on 2008-10-12. 
^ "Her Majesty The Queen". Britishflags.net. http://www.britishflags.net/queen.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-12. 



Further reading

Allison, Ronald; The Queen: 50 Years - A Celebration; HarperCollins UK (October 1, 2001) (ISBN 0004140788)
Bond, Jennie (2006). Elizabeth: Eighty Glorious Years. London: Carlton Publishing Group. ISBN 10-1-8442-360-7; 13-978-1-8442-360-9
Bousfield, Arthur; Toffoli, Gary (2002). Fifty Years the Queen - A Tribute to Elizabeth II on Her Golden Jubilee. Hamilton: Dundurn Press. ISBN 9781550023602. 
Brandreth, Gyles (2004). Philip and Elizabeth: Portrait of a Marriage. London: Century. ISBN 0-7126-6103-4
Erickson, Carolly; Lillibet: An Intimate Portrait of Elizabeth II; St. Martin's Press; 1st edition (January 26, 2004) (ISBN 0312287348)
Lacey, Robert (2002). Royal: Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. London: Little, Brown. ISBN 0748104097. 
Lacey, Robert; Monarch: The Life and Reign of Elizabeth II; Free Press (May 6, 2003) (ISBN 0743236696)
Noakes, Michael & Noakes, Vivien; The Daily Life of the Queen: An Artist's Diary; Trafalgar Square (2001) (ISBN 009186982X)
Pimlott, Ben; The Queen: Elizabeth II and the Monarchy; Harper Collins;revised edition (2007) (ISBN 0-007-11436-2)
Roberts, Andrew (2000) The House of Windsor. (Edited by Antonia Fraser) London: Cassell & Co. ISBN 0304354066
Waller, Maureen; Sovereign Ladies: Sex, Sacrifice, and Power. The Six Reigning Queens of England; New York, St. Martin's Press (2006) (ISBN 0-312-33801-5)
Jubilee A Celebration of 50 Years of the Reign of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II; Cassell & Co (2002) (ASIN B000BMS0UE)


External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom 





Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom




Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom



Official website
Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom at Genealogics
Elizabeth II: Modern Monarch
The official YouTube channel
A short video of Elizabeth's coronation from Encarta encyclopedia.
BBC Coverage of The Queens Golden Jubilee (2002)
CBC Digital Archives - Canada's New Queen
CBC Digital Archives - Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II









v • d • e

Queen Elizabeth II





Crowns



Queen of Antigua and Barbuda · Queen of Australia · Queen of the Bahamas · Queen of Barbados · Queen of Belize · Queen of Canada · Queen of Grenada · Queen of Jamaica · Queen of New Zealand · Queen of Papua New Guinea · Queen of Saint Kitts and Nevis · Queen of Saint Lucia · Queen of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines · Queen of the Solomon Islands · Queen of Tuvalu · Queen of the United Kingdom · Prime Ministers









Titles and honours



List of titles and honours · Head of the Commonwealth · Her Majesty's Ship · Paramount Chief of Fiji








Overseas visits



State visits · Commonwealth visits








Public celebrations



Silver Jubilee · Golden Jubilee · Queen's Official Birthday · Victoria Day










Titles and Succession






Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom
House of Windsor
Cadet branch of the House of Wettin
Born: 21 April 1926


Regnal titles


Preceded by
George VI
Queen of the United Kingdom
1952 – present
Incumbent
Heir Apparent:
Charles


Preceded by
George VI
as King of the British
Dominions beyond the Seas
Queen of Canada
1952 – present


Queen of Australia
1952 – present


Queen of New Zealand
1952 – present


Queen of Pakistan
1952 – 1956
End of title


Queen of South Africa
1952 – 1961


Queen of Ceylon
1952 – 1972


Preceded by
Herself
as Queen of the United Kingdom
Queen of Ghana
1957 – 1960


Queen of Nigeria
1960 – 1963


Queen of Sierra Leone
1961 – 1971


Queen of Tanganyika
1961 – 1962


Queen of Jamaica
1962 – present
Incumbent
Heir Apparent:
Charles


Queen of Trinidad and Tobago
1962 – 1976
End of title


Queen of Uganda
1962 – 1963


Queen of Kenya
1963 – 1964


Queen of Malawi
1964 – 1966


Queen of Malta
1964 – 1974


Queen of The Gambia
1965 – 1970


Queen of Guyana
1966 – 1970


Queen of Barbados
1966 – present
Incumbent
Heir Apparent:
Charles


Queen of Mauritius
1968 – 1992
End of title


Queen of Fiji
1970 – 1987


Queen of the Bahamas
1973 – present
Incumbent
Heir Apparent:
Charles


Queen of Grenada
1974 – present


Preceded by
Herself
as Queen of Australia
Queen of Papua New Guinea
1975 – present


Preceded by
Herself
as Queen of the United Kingdom
Queen of the Solomon Islands
1978 – present


Queen of Tuvalu
1978 – present


Queen of Saint Lucia
1979 – present


Queen of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
1979 – present


Queen of Belize
1981 – present


Queen of Antigua and Barbuda
1981 – present


Queen of Saint Christopher and Nevis
1983 – present


Political offices


Preceded by
George VI
Head of the Commonwealth
1952 – present
Incumbent


British royalty


Preceded by
Prince Albert, Duke of York
later became King George VI
Heir to the Throne
as heiress presumptive
1936 – 1952
Succeeded by
Charles, Prince of Wales


Order of precedence in the United Kingdom


First
Gentlemen
as Sovereign
Succeeded by
The Duke of Edinburgh


Ladies
HM The Queen
Succeeded by
The Duchess of Cornwall


Order of precedence


First
Canadian order of precedence
Succeeded by
Michaëlle Jean


First
Australian order of precedence
Succeeded by
Michael Jeffery


First
Jamaican order of precedence
Succeeded by
Kenneth O. Hall












v • d • e

British Monarchs






Kingdom of
Great Britain





Anne · George I · George II · George III







United Kingdom





George III · George IV · William IV · Victoria · Edward VII · George V · Edward VIII · George VI · Elizabeth II













v • d • e

  Monarchs of Canada





Dominion of Canada (1867-1931)




Victoria  · Edward VII  · George V






Canada (1931-present)




George V  · Edward VIII  · George VI  · Elizabeth II













v • d • e

 Heads of state of the European Union member states






Fischer (AT) · Albert II (BE2) · Parvanov (BG) · Christofias1 (CY) · Klaus (CZ) · Margrethe II (DK2) · Ilves (EE) · Halonen (FI) · Sarkozy1 (FR) · Köhler (DE) · Papoulias (GR) · Sólyom (HU) · McAleese (IE) · Napolitano (IT) · Zatlers (LV) · Adamkus (LT) · Henri (LU2) · Fenech Adami (MT) · Beatrix (NL2) · Kaczyński (PL) · Cavaco Silva (PT) · Băsescu (RO) · Gašparovič (SK) · Türk (SI) · Juan Carlos I (ES2) · Carl XVI Gustaf (SE2) · Elizabeth II (UK2)






1 Also members of the European Council. 2 Monarchies.












v • d • e

Order of Precedence in England and Wales (Ladies)*








HM The Queen • HRH The Duchess of Cornwall • HRH The Countess of Wessex • HRH The Princess Royal • Autumn Phillips • HRH Princess Beatrice of York • HRH Princess Eugenie of York • Lady Louise Windsor • Zara Phillips MBE • Viscountess Linley • Lady Sarah Chatto • HRH The Duchess of Gloucester • HRH The Duchess of Kent • HRH Princess Michael of Kent • The Rt Hon The Countess of Harewood • HRH Princess Alexandra, The Hon Lady Ogilvy • The Rt Hon The Baroness Royall of Blaisdon PC • The Rt Hon The Baroness Hayman PC • The Rt Hon Harriet Harman QC MP








*not including short-term appointments, visiting dignitaries and most peers












v • d • e

Royal Standards of Queen Elizabeth II





Current

 Australia ·  Barbados ·  Canada ·  Jamaica ·  New Zealand ·  United Kingdom  United Kingdom (Scotland)






Former

 Malta (1967–1974) ·  Mauritius (1968–1992) · File:Royal Standard of Sierra Leone.png Sierra Leone (1961–1971) ·  Trinidad and Tobago (1966–1976)






Personal

 Personal Flag













v • d • e

Dukes of Normandy





Norman Dukes

Rollo · William I · Richard I · Richard II · Richard III · Robert I · William II · Robert II · Henry I · William III · Matilda · Stephen · Geoffrey · Henry II · Richard IV · John I










French Dukes


John II (Dukedom of mainland Normany annexed to France) · Charles I · Charles II (Title merged with French crown)







English Dukes


Henry III · Edward I · Edward II · Edward III · Richard V · Henry IV · Henry V · Henry VI · Edward IV · Edward V · Richard VI · Henry VII · Henry VIII · Edward VI · Jane · Mary I · Elizabeth I · James I · Charles III · Charles IV · James II · William IV and Mary II · William IV







British Dukes


Anne · George I · George II · George III · George IV · William V · Victoria · Edward VII · George V · Edward VIII · George VI · Elizabeth II













v • d • e

British princesses





The generations indicate descent from George I, who formalised the use of the titles prince and princess for members of the British Royal Family. Where a princess may have been or is descended from George I more than once, her most senior descent, by which she bore or bears her title, is used.





1st Generation



Sophia, Queen in Prussia








2nd Generation



Anne, Princess Royal and Princess of Orange · The Princess Amelia · The Princess Caroline · Mary, Landgravine of Hesse-Cassel · Louise, Queen of Denmark-Norway








3rd Generation



Augusta, Duchess of Brunswick · Princess Elizabeth · Princess Louisa · Caroline Matilda, Queen of Denmark-Norway








4th Generation



Charlotte, Queen of Württemberg · The Princess Augusta Sophia · Elizabeth, Landgravine of Hesse-Homburg · Sophia of Gloucester · Caroline of Gloucester · Mary, Duchess of Gloucester · The Princess Sophia · The Princess Amelia








5th Generation



Charlotte Augusta, Princess Leopold of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld · Frederica of Hanover · Charlotte of Clarence · Victoria · Elizabeth of Clarence · Augusta, Grand Duchess of Mecklenburg-Strelitz · Mary Adelaide, Duchess of Teck








6th Generation



Victoria, German Empress · Alice, Grand Duchess of Hesse · Helena, Princess Christian of Schleswig-Holstein · Frederica, Baroness Alfons von Pawel-Rammingen · Louise, Duchess of Argyll · Marie of Cumberland · Beatrice, Princess Henry of Battenberg








7th Generation



Louise, Princess Royal and Duchess of Fife · The Princess Victoria · Maud, Queen of Norway · Marie, Queen of Romania · Victoria Melita, Grand Duchess of Hesse · Alexandra, Princess of Hohenlohe-Langenburg · Marie Louise, Princess Maximilian of Baden · Margaret, Crown Princess of Sweden · Alexandra, Grand Duchess of Mecklenburg-Schwerin · Alice, Countess of Athlone · Beatrice, Duchess of Galliera · Olga of Hanover · Patricia of Connaught








8th Generation



Alexandra, Duchess of Fife · Maud, Countess of Southesk · Mary, Princess Royal and Countess of Harewood · Sibylla, Duchess of Västerbotten · Caroline Mathilde of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha · Frederica, Queen of Greece








9th Generation



Elizabeth II · Margaret, Countess of Snowdon · Alexandra, The Hon Lady Ogilvy








10th Generation



Anne, Princess Royal








11th Generation



Beatrice of York · Eugenie of York · Lady Louise Windsor















v • d • e

Time Persons of the Year








Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951) · Elizabeth II (1952) · Konrad Adenauer (1953) · John Foster Dulles (1954) · Harlow Curtice (1955) · Hungarian Freedom Fighter (1956) · Nikita Khrushchev (1957) · Charles de Gaulle (1958) · Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959) · U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960) · John F. Kennedy (1961) · Pope John XXIII (1962) · Martin Luther King, Jr. (1963) · Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) · William Westmoreland (1965) · The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966) · Lyndon B. Johnson (1967) · The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968) · The Middle Americans (1969) · Willy Brandt (1970) · Richard Nixon (1971) · Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972) · John Sirica (1973) · King Faisal (1974) · American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Carol Sutton / Susie Sharp / Addie L. Wyatt (1975)








Complete roster · 1927–1950 · 1951–1975 · 1976–2000 · 2001–present







Persondata


NAME
Elizabeth II


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Elizabeth Alexandra Mary


SHORT DESCRIPTION
Queen regnant


DATE OF BIRTH
21 April 1926


PLACE OF BIRTH
London, United Kingdom


DATE OF DEATH



PLACE OF DEATH







Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elizabeth_II_of_the_United_Kingdom"
Categories: Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom | Queens regnant of the United Kingdom | Reigning monarchs | Monarchs of Australia | Heads of state of Canada | Heads of state of New Zealand | Monarchs of South Africa | Monarchs of Ceylon | Heads of the Commonwealth | Auxiliary Territorial Service officers | British Anglicans | 20th-century Anglicans | 21st-century Anglicans | British philanthropists | British Presbyterians | Canadian military personnel | Canadian philanthropists | English and British princesses | Girlguiding UK | House of Windsor | People illustrated on sterling banknotes | Protestant monarchs | The Scout Association | Time magazine Persons of the Year | Women in World War II | 1926 births | Living peopleHidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since October 2008 | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
مصرى
Asturianu
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bislama
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
Māori
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Occitan
Piemontèis
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Sámegiella
संस्कृत
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
සිංහල
Simple English
SiSwati
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Tok Pisin
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Yorùbá
粵語
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 21:23.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
