













Norwegian language - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Norwegian_language";
		var wgTitle = "Norwegian language";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "21704";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282059697;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Norwegian language

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2009)




Norwegian
norsk 



Pronunciation:
/nɔrsk/


Spoken in:
Norway and by people in Norwegian settlements in the United States[1]






Total speakers:
4.7 million[2] 


Ranking:
111


Language family:
Indo-European
Germanic
North Germanic
   West Scandinavian[3]
    Norwegian 


Writing system:
Latin (Norwegian variant) 


Official status


Official language in:
Norway
Nordic Council


Regulated by:
Norwegian Language Council


Language codes


ISO 639-1:
no – Norwegian
nb – Bokmål
nn – Nynorsk


ISO 639-2:
nor – Norwegian
nob – Bokmål
nno – Nynorsk


ISO 639-3:
variously:
nor – Norwegian
nob – Bokmål
nno – Nynorsk


Note: This page may contain IPA phonetic symbols in Unicode.


Norwegian (norsk) is a North Germanic language spoken primarily in Norway, where it is an official language. Together with Swedish and Danish, Norwegian forms a continuum of more or less mutually intelligible local and regional variants (see Danish language#Classification).
These continental Scandinavian languages together with the insular languages Faroese and Icelandic, as well as some extinct languages, constitute the North Germanic languages (also called Scandinavian languages). Faroese and Icelandic are hardly mutually intelligible with Norwegian in their spoken form, because continental Scandinavian has diverged from them.
As established by law and governmental policy, there are two official forms of written Norwegian – Bokmål (literally "book language") and Nynorsk (literally "new Norwegian"). The Norwegian Language Council recommends the terms "Norwegian Bokmål" and "Norwegian Nynorsk" in English.
There is no officially sanctioned standard of spoken Norwegian, and most Norwegians speak their own dialect in all circumstances. The sociolect of the urban upper and middle class in East Norway, upon which Bokmål is primarily based, can be regarded as a de facto spoken standard for Bokmål.[4] This so-called standard østnorsk ("Standard Eastern Norwegian") is the form generally taught to foreign students.
From the 16th to the 19th centuries, Danish was the standard written language of Norway. As a result, the development of modern written Norwegian has been subject to strong controversy related to nationalism, rural versus urban discourse, and Norway's literary history. Historically, Bokmål is a Norwegianized variety of Danish, while Nynorsk is a language form based on Norwegian dialects and puristic opposition to Danish. The now abandoned official policy to merge Bokmål and Nynorsk into one common language called Samnorsk through a series of spelling reforms has created a wide spectrum of varieties of both Bokmål and Nynorsk. The unofficial form known as Riksmål is considered more conservative than Bokmål, and the unofficial Høgnorsk more conservative than Nynorsk.
Norwegians are educated in both Bokmål and Nynorsk. A 2005 poll indicates that 86.3% use primarily Bokmål as their daily written language, 5.5% use both Bokmål and Nynorsk, and 7.5% use primarily Nynorsk.[citation needed] Thus 13% are frequently writing Nynorsk, though the majority speak dialects that resemble Nynorsk more closely than Bokmål.[5] Broadly speaking, nynorsk writing is widespread in Western Norway, though not in major urban areas; it is little used elsewhere. The Norwegian broadcasting corporation (NRK) broadcasts in both Bokmål and Nynorsk, and all governmental agencies are required to support both written languages. Bokmål is used in 92% of all written publications, Nynorsk in 8% (2000).[citation needed]
Norwegian is one of the working languages of the Nordic Council. Under the Nordic Language Convention, citizens of the Nordic countries speaking Norwegian have the opportunity to use their native language when interacting with official bodies in other Nordic countries without being liable to any interpretation or translation costs.[6][7]




Contents


1 History

1.1 From Old Norse to distinct Scandinavian languages
1.2 Danish and Swedish rule
1.3 Danish to Norwegian


2 Phonology

2.1 Consonants
2.2 Vowels
2.3 Accent


3 Written language

3.1 Alphabet
3.2 Bokmål and Nynorsk
3.3 Riksmål
3.4 Høgnorsk
3.5 Current usage


4 Dialects
5 Examples
6 Morphology

6.1 Nouns
6.2 Adjectives
6.3 Verbs
6.4 Pronouns
6.5 Determiners
6.6 Particle classes
6.7 Compound words


7 Vocabulary
8 See also
9 References
10 Bibliography
11 External links
12 Translation services





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History

[edit] From Old Norse to distinct Scandinavian languages




This is the approximate extent of Old Norse and related languages in the early 10th century. The red area is the distribution of the dialect Old West Norse; the orange area is the spread of the dialect Old East Norse. The pink area is Old Gutnish and the green area is the extent of the other Germanic languages with which Old Norse still retained some mutual intelligibility


The languages now spoken in Scandinavia developed from the Old Norse language, which did not differ greatly between what are now Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish areas. In fact, Viking traders spread the language across Europe and into Russia, making Old Norse one of the most widespread languages for a time. According to tradition, King Harald Fairhair united Norway in 872. Around this time, a runic alphabet was used. According to writings found on stone tablets from this period of history, the language showed remarkably little deviation between different regions. Runes had been in limited use since at least the 3rd century. Around 1030, Christianity came to Norway, bringing with it the Latin alphabet. Norwegian manuscripts in the new alphabet began to appear about a century later. The Norwegian language began to deviate from its neighbors around this time as well.
Viking explorers had begun to settle Iceland in the 9th century, carrying with them the Old Norse language. Over time, Old Norse developed into "Western" and "Eastern" variants. Western Norse covered Norway (including its overseas settlements in Iceland, Greenland, the Faroe Islands and the Shetland Islands), while Eastern Norse developed in Denmark and south-central Sweden. The language of Iceland and Norway was practically the same up until the 1300s, when they started to deviate from each other.
The language phase traditionally dated to 1350–1525, is known as Middle Norwegian and is seen by many as a transitional period from Old Norse to Modern Norwegian. The reason for this is that although most languages are in a state of constant change, Norwegian phonology, morphology and syntax changed considerably during this time.[8] The use of grammatical case, and a great portion of the conjugation of verbs was lost and replaced by a more fixed syntax, use of prepositions and a greater use of auxiliary based verb forms. During the late Old Norse period and this period there was also a considerable adoption of Middle Low German vocabulary. Similar development in grammar and phonology happened in Swedish and Danish, keeping the dialect continuum in continental Scandinavia intact, but with greater dialectal variation. This process did not, however, occur in the same way in Faroese and Icelandic. These languages remain conservative to this day, when it comes to grammar and vocabulary, so mutual intelligibility with continental Scandinavia was lost.

[edit] Danish and Swedish rule



This article is part of the series on:
Norwegian language




Variants:
Official: Bokmål | Nynorsk
Unofficial: Riksmål |
Landsmål/Høgnorsk
Norwegian language struggle
Norwegian dialects
Use:
Alphabet
Phonology
Other topics:
Norwegian literature
Norwegian Sign Language
Norwegian Language Council




This box: view • talk • edit



In 1397, the Kalmar Union unified Norway, Sweden and Denmark, and from 1536 Norway was subordinated under the Kingdom of Denmark–Norway. Danish became the commonly written language among Norway's literate class. Spoken Danish was gradually adopted by the urban elite, first at formal occasions, and gradually a more relaxed variety was adopted in everyday speech. The everyday speech went through a koinéization process, involving grammatical simplification and Norwegianized pronunciation. When the union ended in 1814 the Dano-Norwegian koiné had become the mother tongue of a substantial part of the Norwegian elite, but the more Danish-sounding solemn variety was still used on formal occasions.
Norway was forced to enter a new personal union with Sweden, shortly after the end of the former one with Denmark. However, Norwegians began to push for true independence by embracing democracy and attempting to enforce the constitutional declaration of being a sovereign state. Part of this nationalist movement was directed towards the development of an independent Norwegian language. Three major paths were available: do nothing (Norwegian written language, i.e. Danish, was already different from Swedish), Norwegianize the Danish language, or build a new national language based on Modern Norwegian dialects. All three approaches were attempted.

[edit] Danish to Norwegian
Main article: Norwegian language struggle
From the 1840s, some writers experimented with a Norwegianized Danish by incorporating words that were descriptive of Norwegian scenery and folk life, and adopting a more Norwegian syntax. Knud Knudsen proposed to change spelling and inflection in accordance with the Dano-Norwegian koiné, known as "cultivated everyday speech." A small adjustment in this direction was implemented in the first official reform of Danish language in Norway in 1862 and more extensively after his death in two official reforms in 1907 and 1917.
Meanwhile, a nationalistic movement strove for the development of a new written Norwegian. Ivar Aasen, a self-taught linguist, began his work to create a new Norwegian language at the age of 22. He traveled around the country, comparing the dialects in different regions, and examined the development of Icelandic, which had largely escaped the influences Norwegian had come under. He called his work, which was published in several books from 1848 to 1873, Landsmål, meaning national language. The name "Landsmål" is sometimes interpreted as "rural language" or "country language," but this was clearly not Aasen's intended meaning.
The name of the Danish language in Norway was a topic of hot dispute through the 19th century. Its proponents claimed that it was a language common to Norway and Denmark, and no more Danish than Norwegian. The proponents of Landsmål thought that the Danish character of the language should not be concealed. In 1899, Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson proposed the neutral name Riksmål, meaning national language like Landsmål, and this was officially adopted along with the 1907 spelling reform. The name "Riksmål" is sometimes interpreted as "state language," but this meaning is secondary at best, compare to Danish rigsmål from where the name was borrowed.
After the personal union with Sweden was dissolved in 1905, both languages were developed further and reached what is now considered their classic forms after a reform in 1917. Riksmål was in 1929 officially renamed Bokmål (literally "Book language"), and Landsmål to Nynorsk (literally "New Norwegian"). A proposition to substitute Dano-Norwegian for Bokmål lost in parliament by a single vote. The name Nynorsk, the linguistic term for Modern Norwegian, was chosen for contrast to Danish and emphasis on the historical connection to Old Norwegian. Today this meaning is often lost, and it is commonly mistaken as a "new" Norwegian in contrast to the "real" Norwegian Bokmål.
Bokmål and Nynorsk were made closer by a reform in 1938. This was a result of a state policy to merge Nynorsk and Bokmål into one language, called "Samnorsk" (Common Norwegian). A 1946 poll showed that this policy was supported by 79% of Norwegians at the time. However, opponents of the official policy still managed to create a massive protest movement against Samnorsk in the 1950s, fighting in particular the use of "radical" forms in Bokmål text books in schools. In the reform in 1959, the 1938 reform was partially reversed in Bokmål, but Nynorsk was changed further towards Bokmål. Since then Bokmål has reverted even further toward traditional Riksmål, while Nynorsk still adheres to the 1959 standard. Therefore a small minority of Nynorsk enthusiasts uses a more conservative standard called Høgnorsk. The Samnorsk policy had little influence after 1960, and was officially abandoned in 2002.

[edit] Phonology
Main article: Norwegian phonology
The sound system of Norwegian is similar to Swedish. There is considerable variation among the dialects, but the variant generally taught to foreign students is Standard Østnorsk.

[edit] Consonants

Consonant phonemes of Eastern Norwegian


Labial
Dental/
Alveolar
Post-
alveolar
Palatal
Velar
Glottal


Nasal
m
n
ɳ

ŋ



Plosive
p
b
t
d
ʈ
ɖ

k
g



Fricative
f

s

ʂ
ʃ
ç


h


Approximant
ʋ
l
ɭ
j




Flap

ɾ
ɽ






[edit] Vowels

Vowel phonemes of Standard Østnorsk

Orthography
IPA
Description


a
/ɑ/
Open back unrounded


ai
/ɑɪ/



au
/æʉ/



e (short)
/ɛ/, /æ/
open mid front unrounded


e (long)
/e/, /æ/
close-mid front unrounded


e (weak)
/ə/
schwa (mid central unrounded)


ei
/æɪ/, /ɛɪ/



i (short)
/ɪ/
close front unrounded


i (long)
/i/
close front unrounded


o
/u, o, ɔ/
close back rounded


oi
/ɔʏ/



u
/ʉ/, /u/
close central rounded (close front extra rounded)


y (short)
/ʏ/
close front rounded (close front less rounded)


y (long)
/y/
close front rounded (close front less rounded)


æ
/æ/, /ɛ/
near open front unrounded


ø
/ø/
close-mid front rounded


øy
/øʏ/



å
/ɔ/
open-mid back rounded



[edit] Accent
Norwegian is a pitch accent language with two distinct pitch patterns. They are used to differentiate two-syllable words with otherwise identical pronunciation. For example in many East Norwegian dialects, the word "bønder" (farmers) is pronounced using tone 1, while "bønner" (beans or prayers) uses tone 2, just like in Danish. Though the difference in spelling occasionally allow the words to be distinguished in written language, in most cases the minimal pairs are written alike, since written Norwegian has no explicit accent marks. In most eastern low-tone dialects, accent 1 uses a low flat pitch in the first syllable, while accent 2 uses a high, sharply falling pitch in the first syllable and a low pitch in the beginning of the second syllable. In both accents, these pitch movements are followed by a rise of intonational nature (phrase accent), the size (and presence) of which signals emphasis/focus and which corresponds in function to the normal accent in languages that lack lexical tone, such as English. That rise culminates in the final syllable of an accentual phrase, while the utterance-final fall that is so common in most languages is either very small or absent.
There are significant variations in pitch accent between dialects. Thus, in most of western and northern Norway (the so-called high-pitch dialects) accent 1 is falling, while accent 2 is rising in the first syllable and falling in the second syllable or somewhere around the syllable boundary. The pitch accents (as well as the peculiar phrase accent in the low-tone dialects) give the Norwegian language a "singing" quality which makes it fairly easy to distinguish from other languages. Interestingly, accent 1 generally occurs in words that were monosyllabic in Old Norse, and accent 2 in words that were polysyllabic.

[edit] Written language

[edit] Alphabet
Main article: Norwegian alphabet
The Norwegian alphabet has 29 letters.


A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
Æ
Ø
Å


a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
m
n
o
p
q
r
s
t
u
v
w
x
y
z
æ
ø
å


The letters c, q, w, x and z are only used in loanwords. Some also spell their otherwise Norwegian family names using these letters.
Some letters may be modified by diacritics: é, è, ê, ó, ò, and ô. In Nynorsk, ì and ù and ỳ are occasionally seen as well. The diacritics are not compulsory, but may in a few cases distinguish between different meanings of the word, e.g.: for (for/to), fór (went), fòr (furrow) and fôr (fodder). Loanwords may be spelled with other diacritics, most notably ü, á and à.

[edit] Bokmål and Nynorsk
Main articles: Bokmål and Nynorsk
Like some other European countries, Norway has an official "advisory board" – Språkrådet (Norwegian Language Council) – that determines, after approval from the Ministry of Culture, official spelling, grammar, and vocabulary for the Norwegian language. The board's work has been subject to considerable controversy through the years, and much work lies ahead.
Both Nynorsk and Bokmål have a great variety of optional forms. The Bokmål that uses the forms that are close to Riksmål is called moderate or conservative, depending on one's viewpoint, while the Bokmål that uses the forms that are close to Nynorsk is called radical. Nynorsk has forms that are close to the original Landsmål and forms that are close to Bokmål.

[edit] Riksmål
Main article: Riksmål




Map of the official language forms of Norwegian municipalities as of 2007






Areas where Norwegian is spoken by a considerable amount of the population


Opponents of the spelling reforms aimed at bringing Bokmål closer to Nynorsk have retained the name Riksmål and employ spelling and grammar that predate the Samnorsk movement. Riksmål and conservative versions of Bokmål have been the de facto standard written language of Norway for most of the 20th century, being used by large newspapers, encyclopedias, and a significant proportion of the population of the capital Oslo, surrounding areas, and other urban areas, as well as much of the literary tradition. Since the reforms of 1981 and 2003 (effective in 2005), the official Bokmål can be adapted to be almost identical with modern Riksmål. The differences between written Riksmål and Bokmål are comparable to American and British English differences.
Riksmål is regulated by the Norwegian Academy, which determines acceptable spelling, grammar, and vocabulary.

[edit] Høgnorsk
Main article: Høgnorsk
There is also an unofficial form of Nynorsk, called Høgnorsk, discarding the post-1917 reforms, and thus close to Ivar Aasen's original Landsmål. It is supported by Ivar Aasen-sambandet, but has found no widespread use.

[edit] Current usage
About 86.2% of the pupils in the primary and lower secondary schools in Norway receive education in Bokmål, while about 13.8% receive education in Nynorsk. From the eighth grade onwards pupils are required to learn both. Out of the 431 municipalities in Norway, 161 have declared that they wish to communicate with the central authorities in Bokmål, 116 (representing 12% of the population) in Nynorsk, while 156 are neutral. Of 4,549 state publications in 2000 8% were in Nynorsk, and 92% in Bokmål. The large national newspapers (Aftenposten, Dagbladet and VG) are published in Bokmål or Riksmål. Some major regional newspapers (including Bergens Tidende and Stavanger Aftenblad), many political journals, and many local newspapers use both Bokmål and Nynorsk.

[edit] Dialects
Main article: Norwegian dialects
There is general agreement that a wide range of differences makes it difficult to estimate the number of different Norwegian dialects. Variations in grammar, syntax, vocabulary, and pronunciation cut across geographical boundaries and can create a distinct dialect at the level of farm clusters. Dialects are in some cases so dissimilar as to be unintelligible to unfamiliar listeners. Many linguists note a trend toward regionalization of dialects that diminishes the differences at such local levels; there is, however, a renewed interest in preserving distinct dialects.

[edit] Examples
Below are a few sentences giving an indication of the differences between Bokmål and Nynorsk, compared to the conservative (nearer to Danish) form Riksmål, Danish, as well as Old Norse, Swedish, Faroese, Icelandic (the living language closest to Old Norse) and other modern Germanic languages:


Language
Phrase


I come from Norway
What is his name?
This is a horse
The rainbow has many colours


Bokmål
Jeg kommer fra Norge
Hva heter han?
Dette er en hest
Regnbuen har mange farger


Riksmål
Regnbuen har mange farver


Danish
Hvad hedder han?


Nynorsk
Eg kjem frå Noreg
Kva heiter han?
Dette er ein hest
Regnbogen har mange fargar


Høgnorsk
Regnbogen hev mange fargar
Regnbogen er manglìta


Old Norse
Ek kem frá Noregi
Hvat heitir hann?
Þetta er hross/hestr
Regnboginn er marglitr


Icelandic
Ég er frá Noregi
Hvað heitir hann?
Þetta er hross/hestur
Regnboginn er marglitur


Swedish
Jag kommer från Norge
Vad heter han?
Detta är en häst
Regnbågen har många färger


Faroese
Eg komi frá Noreg/Norra
Hvussu eitur hann?
Hetta er eitt ross/ein hestur
Ælabogin hevur nógvar litir


German
Ich komme aus Norwegen
Wie heißt er?
Dies ist ein Hengst/Roß/Pferd
Der Regenbogen hat viele Farben


Dutch
Ik kom uit Noorwegen
Hoe heet hij?
Dit is een paard
De regenboog heeft veel kleuren


Afrikaans
Ek kom van Noorweë
Hoe heet hy?
Dit is 'n perd
Die reënboog het baie kleure



[edit] Morphology

[edit] Nouns
Norwegian nouns are inflected or declined in definiteness (indefinite/definite) and number (singular/plural). In some dialects, definite nouns are furthermore declined in case (nominative/dative).
As in most Indo-European languages (English being one of a few exceptions), nouns are classified by gender, which has consequences for the declension of agreeing adjectives and determiners. Norwegian dialects have three genders: masculine, feminine and neuter, except the Bergen dialect which has only two genders: common and neuter. Bokmål and Standard Østnorsk traditionally have two genders like Danish (and the Bergen dialect), but so called radical varieties have three genders.

Noun forms
båt (boat) in Bokmål

Singular
Plural


Indefinite
Definite
Indefinite
Definite


en båt
båten
båter
båtene


The declension of regular nouns depends on gender. Some dialects and variants of Nynorsk furthermore have different declension of weak and strong feminines and neuters.

Bokmål

m.
en gutt
(a boy)
gutten
(the boy)
gutter
(boys)
guttene
(the boys)


f.
ei/en dør
(a door)
døra/døren
(the door)
dører
(doors)
dørene
(the doors)


n.
et hus
(a house)
huset
(the house)
hus
(houses)
husene/husa
(the houses)


As of July 1 2005, all feminine nouns can be written as masculine nouns.

Nynorsk

m.
ein gut
(a boy)
guten
(the boy)
gutar
(boys)
gutane
(the boys)


f.
ei sol
(a sun)
sola/soli
(the sun)
soler
(suns)
solene
(the suns)


ei kyrkje/kyrkja
(a church)
kyrkja
(the church)
kyrkjer/kyrkjor
(churches)
kyrkjene/kyrkjone
(the churches)


n.
eit hus
(a house)
huset
(the house)
hus
(houses)
husa/husi
(the houses)


eit hjarta/hjarte
(a heart)
hjarta/hjartet
(the heart)
hjarto/hjarte
(hearts)
hjarto/hjarta
(the hearts)



[edit] Adjectives
Norwegian adjectives have two inflectional paradigms. The weak inflection is applicable when the argument is definite, the strong inflection is used when the argument is indefinite. In both paradigms the adjective is declined in comparison (positive/comparative/superlative). Strong, positive adjectives are furthermore declined in gender and number in agreement with their argument. In some southwestern dialects, the weak positive is also declined in gender and number, with one form for feminine and plural, and one form for masculine and neuter.

Weak adjective forms
grønn (green) in Bokmål

Positive
Comparative
Superlative


grønne
grønnere
grønneste



Strong adjective forms
(grønn (green) in Bokmål)

Positive
Comparative
Superlative


Masculine
Feminine
Neuter
Plural


grønn
grønn
grønt
grønne
grønnere
grønnest



[edit] Verbs
Norwegian finite verbs are inflected or conjugated in mood: indicative/imperative/subjunctive. The subjunctive mood is constrained to a handful of verbs. The indicative verbs are conjugated in tense, present / past. In Bokmål and Standard Østnorsk, the present tense also has a passive form. In a few dialects, indicative verbs are also conjugated in number. Conjugation in person is lost in Norwegian.
There are four non-finite verb forms: infinitive, passive infinitive, and the two participles perfective/past participle and imperfective/present participle.
The participles are verbal adjectives. The imperfective participle has no further declension, but the perfective participle is declined in gender (not in Bokmål and Standard Østnorsk) and number like strong, positive adjectives. The definite form of the participle is identical to the plural form.
As with other Germanic languages, Norwegian verbs can be either weak or strong.

Verb forms in Nynorsk
leva (to live)

Finite
Non-finite


Indicative
Subjunctive
Imperative
Verbal nouns
Verbal adjectives (Participles)


Present
Past
Infinitive
Imperfective
Perfective


Active
Passive
Masculine
Feminine
Neuter
Plural/Def


lever
levde
leve
lev
leva
levast
levande
levd
levd
levt
levde



Verb forms in Bokmål
leve (to live)

Finite
Non-finite


Indicative
Subjunctive
Imperative
Verbal nouns
Verbal adjectives (Participles)


Present
Past
Infinitive
Imperfective
Perfective


Active
Passive
Active
Passive
Singular
Plural/Def


lever
leves
levde/ levet
leve
lev
leve
leves
levende
levd
levde/ levet



[edit] Pronouns
Norwegian personal pronouns are declined in case, nominative / accusative. Some of the dialects that have preserved the dative in nouns, also have a dative case instead of the accusative case in personal pronouns, while others have accusative in pronouns and dative in nouns, effectively giving these dialects three distinct cases.
In the most comprehensive Norwegian grammar, Norsk referansegrammatikk, the categorization of personal pronouns by person, gender, and number is not regarded as inflection. As with nouns, adjectives must agree with the gender and number of pronoun arguments.
Other pronouns have no inflection.
The so called possessive, demonstrative and relative pronouns are no longer regarded to be pronouns.
Pronouns are a closed class.

Pronouns in Bokmål

Nominative
Accusative
English equivalent


jeg
meg
I, me


du
deg
you (singular)


han
ham/han
he, him


hun/ho
henne
she, her


den
den
it (masculine/feminine)


det
det
it (neuter)


vi
oss
we, us


dere
dere
you (plural)


de
dem
they, them



Pronouns in Nynorsk

Nominative
Accusative
English equivalent


eg
meg
I, me


du
deg
you (singular)


han
han/honom
he, him or it (masculine)


ho
ho/henne
she, her or it (feminine)


det
det
it (neuter)


me/vi
oss
we, us


de
dykk
you (plural)


dei
dei
they, them


Bokmål, like English, has two sets of 3rd person pronouns. Han and hun refer to male and female individuals respectively, den and det refer to impersonal or inanimate nouns, of masculine/feminine or neutral gender respectively. In contrast, Nynorsk and most dialects use the same set of pronouns (han (m.), ho (f.) and det (n.)) for both personal and impersonal references. Det also has expletive and cataphoric uses like in the English examples it rains and it was known by everyone (that) he had travelled the world.

[edit] Determiners
The closed class of Norwegian determiners are declined in gender and number in agreement with their argument. Not all determiners are inflected.

Determiner forms
egen (own) in Bokmål

Masculine
Feminine
Neuter
Plural


egen
egen/ega
eget
egne



Determiner forms
eigen (own) in Nynorsk

Masculine
Feminine
Neuter
Plural


eigen
eiga
eige
eigne



[edit] Particle classes
Norwegian has five closed classes without inflection, i.e. lexical categories with grammatical function and a finite number of members that may not be distinguished by morphological criteria. These are interjections, conjunctions, subjunctions, prepositions, and adverbs. The inclusion of adverbs here requires that traditional adverbs that are inflected in comparison be classified as adjectives, as is sometimes done.

[edit] Compound words
In Norwegian compound words, the head, i.e. the part determining the compound's class, is the last part. Only the first part has primary stress. For instance, the compound tenketank (think tank) has primary stress on the first syllable and is a noun (some sort of tank).
Compound words are written together in Norwegian, which can cause words to become very long, for example sannsynlighetsmaksimeringsestimator (maximum likelihood estimator) and menneskerettighetsorganisasjoner (human rights organisations). Another example is the title høyesterettsjustitiarius (originally a combination of supreme court and the actual title, justiciar). Note also the translation En midtsommernattsdrøm (A Midsummer Night's Dream).
If they are not written together, each part will naturally be read with primary stress, and the meaning of the compound is lost. This is sometimes forgotten, occasionally with humorous results. Instead of writing, for example, lammekoteletter (lamb chops), people make the mistake of writing lamme koteletter (lame, or paralyzed, chops). The original message can even be reversed, as when røykfritt (no smoking, lit. "smoke free") becomes røyk fritt (smoke freely).
Other examples include:

Terrasse dør ("Terrace dies") instead of Terrassedør ("Terrace door")
Tunfisk biter ("Tuna bites", verb) instead of Tunfiskbiter ("Tuna bits", noun)
Smult ringer ("Lard is calling", verb) instead of Smultringer ("Doughnuts")
Tyveri sikret ("Theft guaranteed") instead of Tyverisikret ("Theft proof")
Stekt kylling lever ("Fried chicken lives", verb) instead of Stekt kyllinglever ("Fried chicken liver", noun)
Smør brød ("Butter bread") instead of Smørbrød ("Sandwich")
Klipp fisk ("Cut fish", verb) instead of Klippfisk ("Clipfish")

These misunderstandings occur because most nouns can be interpreted as verbs or other types of words. Similar misunderstandings can be achieved in English too. The following are examples of phrases that both in Norwegian and English mean one thing as a compound word, and something different when regarded as separate words:

stavekontroll (spellchecker) or stave kontroll (spell c-h-e-c-k-e-r)
kokebok (cookbook) or koke bok (cooking a book)
ekte håndlagde vafler (real handmade waffles) or Ekte hånd lagde vafler. (a real hand made waffles.)


[edit] Vocabulary
By far the largest part of the modern vocabulary of Norwegian dates back to Old Norse. The largest source of loanwords is Middle Low German, which had a huge influence on Norwegian vocabulary from the late Middle Ages onwards partially even influencing grammatical structures, such as genitive constructions. At present, the main source of new loanwords is English e.g. rapper, e-mail, catering, juice, bag (originally a loan word to English from Old Norse). Norwegian is however considered to be less influenced by English than for instance Swedish or particularly Danish.
Some loanwords have their spelling changed to reflect Norwegian pronunciation rules, but in general Norwegianised spellings of these words tend to take a long time to sink in: e.g. sjåfør (from French chauffeur) and revansj (from French revanche) are now the common Norwegian spellings, but juice is more often used than the Norwegianised form jus, catering more often than keitering, service more often than sørvis, etc.

[edit] See also

Differences between the Norwegian and Danish languages
Det Norske Akademi for Sprog og Litteratur
Noregs Mållag
Norsk Ordbok
Riksmålsforbundet
Russenorsk
List of Indo-European languages
Numbers in various languages


[edit] References


^ Kristoffersen, Gjert (2000). The Phonology of Norwegian. Oxford University Press. p. 1. ISBN 9780198237655. http://www.oup.com/uk/catalogue/?ci=9780198237655. ; http://www.usenglish.org/foundation/research/lia/languages/norwegian.pdf
^ "Statistics Norway". http://www.ssb.no/english/subjects/02/befolkning_en/. Retrieved on 2007-09-17. 
^ Henriksen, Petter (ed.); Aschehoug og Gyldendals Store norske leksikon, 11 Nar-Pd; Kunnskapsforlaget; Oslo; 1998; ISBN 82-573-0703-3.
^ Kristoffersen, Gjert (2000). The Phonology of Norwegian. Oxford University Press. pp. 6–11. ISBN 9780198237655. http://www.oup.com/uk/catalogue/?ci=9780198237655. 
^ Venås, Kjell (1998). "Dialekt og normaltalemålet". Apollon 1. ISSN 0803-6926. http://www.apollon.uio.no/vis/art/1998/1/dialekt. 
^ Konvention mellan Sverige, Danmark, Finland, Island och Norge om nordiska medborgares rätt att använda sitt eget språk i annat nordiskt land, Nordic Council website. Retrieved on May 4, 2008.
^ 20th anniversary of the Nordic Language Convention, Nordic news, February 22, 2007. Retrieved on April 25, 2007.
^ pp. 49-95 Torp, Arne, Lars S. Vikør (1993)



[edit] Bibliography

Rolf Theil Endresen, Hanne Gram Simonsen, Andreas Sveen, Innføring i lingvistikk (2002), ISBN 82-00-45273-5
Torp, Arne, Lars S. Vikør (1993), Hovuddrag i norsk språkhistorie (3.utgåve), Gyldendal Norsk Forlag AS 2003


[edit] External links




Bokmål edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia





Nynorsk edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia




Wikibooks has a book on the topic of
Norwegian




Norwegian-English Dictionary (2)
Norwegian pronunciation guide (with sound clips)
Learn Norwegian! - List of online resources of Norwegian language








v • d • e

Norway topics





History

Timeline • Stone Age • Bronze Age • Viking Age • High Middle Ages • Kalmar Union • Denmark–Norway • Sweden–Norway • Dissolution of the union between Norway and Sweden in 1905 • World War II • History of Norway since 1945






Geography

Topography • Mountains • Islands • Rivers • Lakes • Climate • Protected areas • Flora • Fauna • Extreme Points






Law

Courts • Constitution • Law enforcement • Agencies • Nationality law






Politics

Constitution • Counties • Elections • European Union relations • Foreign relations • Government • Monarchy • Municipalities • Political parties • Prime Minister (List) • Romantic nationalism • Sámi Parliament • Parliament






Economy

Norwegian krone • National Bank • Oslo Stock Exchange • Science and technology • Education • Agriculture • Industry • Services • Mining • Energy • Communications • Tourism • Transport • Healthcare • Companies






Military

History • Ground Forces • Air Force • Naval Forces • Coast Guard • Home Guard






Symbols

National Flag • Flags • Coat of arms • Anthem • Motto • Name






Demographics

Administrative divisions • Cities • Postal codes • Languages • Religion • Minorities • Immigration • Norwegians • List of Norwegians






Culture

Architecture • Art • Cinema (Actors) • Music (Composers) • Cuisine • Norwegian language • Literature (Writers • Poets) • Philosophy • Bunad • Jul • Constitution Day • Media • Sport • Public holidays






Other topics

Human rights






WikiProject • Portal






[edit] Translation services

EasyTrans.org Easily translate words between English, Norwegian and Spanish.
Translators Choice Translate words and entire sentences between 35 languages.
translate.google.com Translation of words, text or websites(url) between Norwegian and common languages like English, Spanish, German etc..







 
Links to related articles














v • d • e

Norwegian language forms






Landsmål · Høgnorsk · Nynorsk · Samnorsk · Bokmål · Riksmål · Svorsk







Norwegian Language Council · Norwegian Academy · Noregs Mållag · Riksmålsforbundet · Norwegian dialects







Æ · Ø · Å






Norwegian language struggle












v • d • e

Modern Germanic languages








Afrikaans · Alemannic · Danish · Dutch · English · Faroese · German · Icelandic · Limburgish · Low German · Luxembourgish · North Frisian · Norwegian · Saterland Frisian · Scots · Swedish · West Frisian · Yiddish















v • d • e

Norwegian dictionaries





Riksmål

Norsk Riksmålsordbok · Norsk ordbok · Riksmålsordlisten






Bokmål

Bokmålsordboka · Norsk ordbok · Tanums store rettskrivningsordbok






Nynorsk

Nynorskordboka · Norsk Ordbok













  



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norwegian_language"
Categories: Norwegian language | Languages of Norway | North Germanic languages | ScandinaviaHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2009 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Articles containing Norwegian language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kernewek
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
Bahasa Melayu
Мокшень
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Occitan
Tok Pisin
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Sámegiella
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
Tiếng Việt
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 07:22.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
