













Network-centric warfare - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Network-centric_warfare";
		var wgTitle = "Network-centric warfare";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "1733505";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 279383959;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Network-centric warfare

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


War(fare)



Military history




Eras




Prehistoric
Ancient
Medieval
Gunpowder
Industrial
Modern





Battlespace




Air
Information
Land
Sea
Space






Weapons




Armor
Artillery
Biological
Cavalry
Chemical
Electronic
Infantry
Nuclear
Psychological






Tactics




Attrition warfare
Guerrilla warfare
Maneuver warfare
Siege
Total war
Trench warfare
Conventional warfare
Unconventional warfare
Asymmetric warfare
Counter-insurgency
Network-centric warfare






Strategy




Economic
Grand
Operational






Organization




Ranks
Command and control
Staff
Intelligence
Education and training






Logistics




Technology and equipment
Materiel
Supply chain management






Lists




Battles
Commanders
Operations
Sieges
Writers
Wars
War crimes
Weapons








Portal   v • d • e 


Network-centric warfare, now commonly called network-centric operations, is a new military doctrine or theory of war pioneered by the United States Department of Defense. It seeks to translate an information advantage, enabled in part by information technology, into a competitive warfighting advantage through the robust networking of well informed geographically dispersed forces.[1] This networking, combined with changes in technology, organization, processes, and people—may allow new forms of organizational behavior. Specifically, the theory contains the following four tenets in its hypotheses:[2]

A robustly networked force improves information sharing;
Information sharing enhances the quality of information and shared situational awareness;
Shared situational awareness enables collaboration and self-synchronization, and enhances sustainability and speed of command; and
These, in turn, dramatically increase mission effectiveness.

Network Enabled Capability is a term used in the United Kingdom and elsewhere for a similar doctrine. In Sweden, one of the first nations in Europe to begin the transformation, the term, translated, is Network Based Defence.[3] The term "netcentric warfare" may be used interchangeably with the term network-centric warfare.




Contents


1 Background and history
2 Related technologies and programs
3 Doctrinal tenets in United States
4 Some architectural and design challenges
5 International activities
6 Supporting comments
7 Contradictory views
8 See also
9 References
10 External links

10.1 International links







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Background and history
Network centric warfare can trace its immediate origins to 1996 when Adm. William Owens introduced the concept of a “system of systems” in a paper of the same name published by the Institute National Security Studies. Owens described the serendipitous evolution of a system of intelligence sensors, command and control systems, and precision weapons that enabled enhanced situational awareness, rapid target assessment, and distributed weapon assignment. The same year, the Joint Chiefs of Staff released Joint Vision 2010, which introduced the military concept of full-spectrum dominance. Full Spectrum Dominance described the ability of the US military to dominate the battlespace from peace operations through to the outright application of military power that stemmed from the advantages of information superiority.
As a distinct concept, however, network-centric warfare first appeared publicly in a 1998 US Naval Institute Proceedings article by Vice Admiral Arthur K. Cebrowski and John Gartska. The concepts were later given greater depth in the book, Network Centric Warfare coauthored by Gartska, David S. Alberts (Director of Research, OASD-NII), and Fred Stein of The MITRE Corporation. Published by the Command and Control Research Program (CCRP), the book derived a new theory of warfare from a series of case studies on how business was using information and communication technologies to improve situation analysis, accurately control inventory and production, as well as monitor customer relations.
Network-centric warfare was followed in 2001 by Understanding Information Age Warfare (UIAW), jointly authored by Alberts, Gartska, Richard Hayes of Evidence Based Research and David S. Signori of RAND. UIAW pushed the implications of the shifts identified by network-centric warfare in order to derive an operational theory of warfare. Starting with a series of premises on how the environment is sensed, UIAW posits a structure of three domains. The physical domain is where events take place and are perceived by sensors and individuals. Data emerging from the physical domain is transmitted through an information domain. Data is subsequently received and processed by a cognitive domain where it is assessed and acted upon. The process replicates the "observe, orient, decide, act" loop first described by Col. John Boyd of the USAF.
The last publication dealing with the developing theory of network centric warfare appeared in 2003 with Power to the Edge, also published by the CCRP. Power to the Edge is a speculative work suggesting that modern military environments are far too complex to be understood by any one individual, organisation, or even military service. Modern information technology permits the rapid and effective sharing of information to such a degree that "edge entities" or those that are essentially conducting military missions themselves, should be able to "pull" information from ubiquitous repositories, rather than having centralised agencies attempt to anticipate their information needs and "push" it to them. This would imply a major flattening of traditional military hierarchies, however. It is not yet clear whether the vision of Power to the Edge is realisable, although Alberts and Hayes argue in the book that the establishment of the Global Information Grid is the first step to accomplishing it.
Power To The Edge's radical ideas had been under investigation by the Pentagon since at least 2001. In UIAW, the concept of peer-to-peer activity combined with more traditional hierarchical flow of data in the network had been introduced. Shortly thereafter, the Pentagon began investing in peer-to-peer research, telling software engineers at a November 2001 peer-to-peer conference that there were advantages to be gained in the redundancy and robustness of a peer-to-peer network topology on the battlefield. Colonel Robert Wardell said "You have to empower the fringes if you are going to... be able to make decisions faster than the bad guy".[4]
Network-centric warfare/operations is a cornerstone of the ongoing transformation effort at the Department of Defense initiated by former Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld. It is also one of the five goals of the Office of Force Transformation, Office of the Secretary of Defense.
See Revolution in Military Affairs for further information on what is now known as "defense transformation" or "transformation".

[edit] Related technologies and programs




German Army Leopard 2A6M that incorporates systems designed to be used in conjunction with a networked battlefield


The US DoD has mandated that the Global Information Grid (GIG) will be the primary technical framework to support network-centric warfare/network-centric operations. Under this directive, all advanced weapons platforms, sensor systems, and command and control centers are eventually to be linked via the GIG. The term system of systems is often used to describe the results of these types of massive integration efforts.
The topic Net-Centric Enterprise Services addresses the applications context of the GIG.
A number of significant U.S. military programs are taking technical steps towards supporting network-centric warfare. These include the Cooperative Engagement Capability (CEC) of the United States Navy and the Future Combat Systems (FCS) program in the United States Army.
Net-Centric Enterprise Solutions for Interoperability (NESI) provides, for all phases of the acquisition of net-centric solutions, actionable guidance that meets network-centric warfare goals of the United States Department of Defense. The guidance in NESI is derived from the higher level, more abstract concepts provided in various directives, policies and mandates such as the Net-Centric Operations and Warfare Reference Model (NCOW RM) and the ASD(NII) Net-Centric Checklist.

[edit] Doctrinal tenets in United States
The doctrine of network-centric warfare for the United States armed forces draws its highest level of guidance from the concept of "team warfare", meaning the integration and synchronization of all appropriate capabilities across the various services, ranging from Army to Air Force to Coast Guard. This is part of the principle of joint warfare.
The tenets of network-centric warfare are:[5]

Tenet 1: A robustly networked force improves information sharing.
Tenet 2: Information sharing and collaboration enhance the quality of information and shared situational awareness.
Tenet 3: Shared situational awareness enables self-synchronization.
Tenet 4: These, in turn, dramatically increase mission effectiveness.


[edit] Some architectural and design challenges

The complexity of the Joint Tactical Radio System (JTRS) offers insight into the challenges of integrating numerous different communications systems into a unified whole. It is intended to be a software-defined radio for battlefield communications that will be backwards compatible with a very large number of other military and civilian radio systems.


An April 10, 2008 GAO report (GAO FCS report) highlighted the scalability of the network as a major risk factor to the Network Centric FCS program. The proposed system will be unable to network all the units into one self-forming, self-healing network.


The problem of coordinating bandwidth usage in a battlespace is a significant challenge, when every piece of mobile equipment and human participant becomes a potential source or relay of RF emissions.


It is difficult to efficiently transfer information between networks having different levels of security classification. Although multi-level security systems provide part of the solution, human intervention and decision-making is still needed to determine what specific data can and cannot be transferred.


Accurate locational awareness is limited when maneuvering in areas where Global Positioning System (GPS) coverage is weak or non-existent. These areas include the inside of buildings, caves, etc. as well as built-up areas and urban canyons, which are also settings for many modern military operations. Much work on reliable fusion of positional data from multiple sensors remains to be done.
Providing secure communications in network-centric warfare/network-centric operations is difficult, since successful key management for encryption is typically the most difficult aspect of cryptography, especially with mobile systems. The problem is exacerbated with the need for speedy deployment and nimble reconfiguration of military teams, to respond to rapidly changing conditions in the modern battlespace.


[edit] International activities
There is significant need to harmonize the technical and operational aspects of net-centric warfare and net-centric operations among multiple nations, in order to support coalition activities, joint operations, etc. Standard Agreement is the coordinating vehicle for establishing shared technical standards among NATO nations.
See also Partnership for Peace for information on extending coordination efforts to non-NATO nations that are keen to support military operations other than war activities, such as international peacekeeping, disaster response, humanitarian aid, etc.

[edit] Supporting comments
"With less than half of the ground forces and two-thirds of the military aircraft used 12 years ago in Desert Storm, we have achieved a far more difficult objective ... In Desert Storm, it usually took up to two days for target planners to get a photo of a target, confirm its coordinates, plan the mission, and deliver it to the bomber crew. Now we have near real-time imaging of targets with photos and coordinates transmitted by e-mail to aircraft already in flight. In Desert Storm, battalion, brigade, and division commanders had to rely on maps, grease pencils, and radio reports to track the movements of our forces. Today, our commanders have a real-time display of our armed forces on their computer screen."[6] -- former Vice President Richard Cheney .
"Net-centric warfare's effectiveness has greatly improved in 12 years. Desert Storm forces, involving more than 500,000 troops, were supported with 100 Mbit/s of bandwidth. Today, OIF forces, with about 350,000 warfighters, had more than 3,000 Mbit/s of satellite bandwidth, which is 30 times more bandwidth for a force 45 percent smaller. U.S. troops essentially used the same weapon platforms used in Operation Desert Storm with significantly increased effectiveness."[7]

[edit] Contradictory views


Our incipient NCW plans may suffer defeat by [adversaries] using primitive but cagey techniques, inspired by an ideology we can neither match nor understand; or by an enemy who can knock out our vulnerable Global Positioning System or use electromagnetic pulse weapons on a limited scale, removing intelligence as we have construed it and have come to depend upon. Fighting forces accustomed to relying upon downlinks for information and commands would have little to fall back upon.

—Charles Perrow, Information Assurance, National Defense University, May 2003

The aspiration of the Australian Defence Force (ADF) to embrace network-centric warfare is outlined in the document ADF Force 2020. This vision has been criticized by Aldo Borgu, director of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute (ASPI). By developing interoperability with U.S. systems, in his view, the three arms of the Australian Defence Force could end up operating better with their sister United States services than with each other.[8]
Network centric warfare is criticized by proponents of Fourth Generation Warfare (4GW) doctrine.
Also, since Network-centric warfare focuses so much on distributing information, one has to be wary of the effect of false, misleading, or misinterpreted information entering the system, be it through enemy deception or simple error. Just as the usefulness of correct information can be amplified, so too can the repercussions of incorrect data entering the system achieve much greater non-positive outcomes. One way that this can happen is through errors in initial conditions in an uncorrected, closed system that subsequently skew result-sets; the result-sets are then reused, amplifying the initial error by orders of magnitude in subsequent generations of result-sets; see chaos theory. Other possible failure modes or problem areas in network-centric warfare include the occurrence of the Byzantine generals' problem in peer-to-peer systems; problems caused by an inadequate or a shallow understanding of (or general disregard for) self-regulation, self-organization, systems theory, emergent behavior and cybernetics; in addition to this, there are potential issues arising from the very nature of any complex, rapidly-developed artificial system arising from complexity theory, which implies the possibility of failure modes such as congestion collapse or cascading failure.

[edit] See also

Battlespace
Command and Control Research Program
C4ISTAR
Defense Systems Communications Management Office
Fog of war
Fingerspitzengefühl
Joint Functional Component Command for Network Warfare
Joint Task Force-Global Network Operations
Net-centric
Net-Centric Enterprise Services
Network-centric organization
Network Centric Operations Industry Consortium
Network science
Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense, Networks and Information Integration (OASD/NII)
Office of Force Transformation
Peer-to-peer
Sensemaking
Swarming (Military)
Ubiquitous command and control An evolution of the NCW thesis developed by the Australian Defence Science and Technology Organisation
GPACSystem A practical Network-centric technology that provides Situational Awareness


[edit] References
Alberts, D.S., Garstka, J.J., Stein, F.P., (2000) Network Centric Warfare: Developing and Leveraging Information Superiority, CCRP Publ., 2nd Edition (Revised). Aug 1999, Second Print Feb 2000.

^ Department of Defense. The Implementation of Network-Centric Warfare. Washington, D.C., 2005, p. 4.
^ Department of Defense. The Implementation of Network-Centric Warfare. Washington, D.C., 2005, p. 7.
^ "LedsystT - Suppliers". Swedish Defence Materiel Administration. http://www.fmv.se/WmTemplates/Page.aspx?id=1421. Retrieved on 2008-11-16. 
^ Walker, Leslie (November 8, 2001). "Uncle Sam Wants Napster!". Washington Post (Washingtonpost.com). http://www.washingtonpost.com/ac2/wp-dyn?pagename=article&node=washtech/techthursday/columns/dotcom&contentId=A59099-2001Nov7. Retrieved on 2008-11-16. 
^ Alberts, D.S., (2002), Information Age Transformation: Getting to a 21st Century Military, Washington, DC, CCRP Publications. pp. 7-8. First published 1996.
^ "Crosstalk". Stsc.hill.af.mil. 2004-01-04. http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/crosstalk/2004/01/0401Raduege.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-16. 
^ Lt. Gen. Harry D. Raduege Jr., "Net-Centric Warfare Is Changing the Battlefield Environment", Defense Information Systems Agency
^ Blenkin, Max. AAP General News (Australia), 9/17/2003


[edit] External links

IDGA's Network Centric Warfare
The OASD-NII Command and Control Research Program (CCRP)
NCOW Wiki Network-Centric Operations Warfare Wiki
Net-Centric Enterprise Solutions for Interoperability (NESI)
Network centric warfare and wireless communications
Network Centric Warfare Solutions - Aeronautics Defense Systems
NCW related article on Crosstalk - Defense Software Engineering Journal
Army War College article: Principles of Warfare on the Network-Centric Battlefield
http://www.globalsecurity.org
NCW Topics on Defense Update
C4I.org - Computer Security & Intelligence
Network Centric Warfare on APA
Network-Centric Operations Industry Consortium (NCOIC)
Ericsson white paper: C4ISR for Network-Oriented Defense
Understanding Network Centric Warfare
Launching a new kind of warfare
High-Tech Military in Due Course
U.S. Air Force prepares to fight in cyberspace
Swedish Defence Materiel Administration, includes published technical documentation.
THE IMPORTANCE OF NETWORK ENABLED CAPABILITIES FOR 21st CENTURY DEFENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITYArticle by Air Marshal Subhash Bhojwani


[edit] International links

NATO Network Enabled Capabilities (NNEC)
NETWORKING IN THE INDIAN SCENARIO




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network-centric_warfare"
Categories: Net-centric | Command and control 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Deutsch
Eesti
Français
日本語
Română
Suomi
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 24 March 2009, at 16:00 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
