











Kurt Cobain - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Kurt_Cobain";
		var wgTitle = "Kurt Cobain";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "16707";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281814701;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Kurt Cobain

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





Kurt Cobain



Cobain at the 1992 MTV Video Music Awards



Background information


Birth name
Kurt Donald Cobain


Also known as
Kurdt Kobain


Born
February 20, 1967(1967-02-20)
Aberdeen, Washington, United States


Died
c. April 5, 1994 (aged 27)
Seattle, Washington, United States


Genre(s)
Alternative rock, grunge


Occupation(s)
Musician, Songwriter


Instrument(s)
Vocals
Guitar


Years active
1985–1994


Label(s)
Sub Pop
DGC / Geffen


Associated acts
Nirvana
Fecal Matter


Notable instrument(s)


Fender Jagstang
Fender Jaguar
Fender Mustang
Fender Stratocaster
Univox Hi-Flier


Kurt Donald Cobain (February 20, 1967 – c. April 5, 1994) was an American musician who served as lead singer, guitarist, and songwriter for the grunge band Nirvana.
With the lead single "Smells Like Teen Spirit" from Nirvana's second album Nevermind (1991), Cobain with Nirvana entered into the mainstream, bringing along with them a subgenre of alternative rock called grunge. Other Seattle grunge bands such as Alice in Chains, Pearl Jam, and Soundgarden also gained popularity, and, as a result, alternative rock became a dominant genre on radio and music television in the United States during the early-to-middle 1990s. As Nirvana's frontman, Cobain found himself referred to in the media as the "spokesman of a generation", with Nirvana serving as the "flagship band" of "Generation X".[1] Cobain was uncomfortable with the attention and placed his focus on the band's music, believing the band's message and artistic vision to have been misinterpreted by the public, challenging the band's audience with its third studio album In Utero (1993).
During the last years of his life, Cobain struggled with drug addiction and the media pressures surrounding him and his wife Courtney Love. On April 8, 1994, Cobain was found dead at his home in Seattle, the victim of what was officially ruled a self-inflicted shotgun wound to the head. In years following, the circumstances of his death have become a topic of fascination and debate.




Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Early life
1.2 Nirvana
1.3 Marriage
1.4 Drug addiction
1.5 Death


2 Musical influences
3 Legacy

3.1 Books and films on Cobain


4 See also
5 References
6 Notes
7 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Biography

Early life
Kurt Cobain was born to parents Donald and Wendy Cobain on February 20, 1967 in Aberdeen, Washington and spent his first six months living in the city of Hoquiam, Washington before the family moved to Aberdeen.[2] He began developing an interest in music early in his life. According to his Aunt Mari, "He was singing from the time he was two. He would sing Beatles songs like 'Hey Jude'. He had a lot of charisma from a very young age."[3]




A photograph of Cobain from a school yearbook; the picture was handed out at his memorial service.


At the age of eight, Cobain's parents divorced, an event which he later cited as having a profound impact on his life. His mother noted that his personality changed dramatically, with Cobain becoming more withdrawn.[4] In a 1993 interview, Cobain said, "I remember feeling ashamed, for some reason. I was ashamed of my parents. I couldn't face some of my friends at school anymore, because I desperately wanted to have the classic, you know, typical family. Mother, father. I wanted that security, so I resented my parents for quite a few years because of that."[5] After a year spent living with his mother following the divorce, Cobain moved to Montesano, Washington to live with his father, but after a few years his youthful rebellion became too overwhelming and he found himself being shuffled between friends and family.[6]
At school, Cobain took little interest in sports. At his father's insistence, Cobain joined the junior high wrestling team. While he was good at it, he despised it because of the abuse he received from the other teammates. Later, his father signed him up for a local baseball league, where Cobain would intentionally strike out to avoid having to play.[7] Instead, Cobain focused on his art courses. He often drew during classes, including objects associated with human anatomy. Cobain was friends with a gay student at his school, sometimes suffering bullying at the hands of homophobic students. That friendship led some to believe that he himself was gay. In a 1993 interview with The Advocate, Cobain claimed that he was "gay in spirit" and "probably could be bisexual". He also stated that he used to spray paint "God is Gay" on pickup trucks around Aberdeen. However, Aberdeen police records show that the phrase for which he was arrested was actually "Ain't got no how watchamacallit".[8] In one of his personal journals, Cobain wrote, "I am not gay, although I wish I were, just to piss off homophobes."[9] As a teenager growing up in small-town Washington, Cobain eventually found escape through the thriving Pacific Northwest punk scene, going to punk rock shows in Seattle. Eventually, Cobain began frequenting the practice space of fellow Montesano musicians The Melvins.
In the middle of tenth grade, Cobain moved back to live with his mother in Aberdeen. Two weeks before his graduation, Cobain dropped out of high school after realizing that he did not have enough credits to graduate. His mother gave him a choice: either get a job or leave. After a week or so, Cobain found his clothes and other belongings packed away in boxes.[10] Forced out of his mother's home, Cobain often stayed at friends' houses and sneaked into his mother's basement occasionally.[11] Cobain later claimed that when he could not find anywhere else to stay, he lived under a bridge over the Wishkah River,[11] an experience that inspired the Nevermind track "Something in the Way". However, Krist Novoselic claimed that Cobain never really lived there, saying, "He hung out there, but you couldn't live on those muddy banks, with the tides coming up and down. That was his own revisionism."[12]
In late 1986, Cobain moved into the first house he lived in alone and paid his rent by working at a coastal resort twenty miles from Aberdeen.[13] At the same time, Cobain was traveling more frequently to Olympia, Washington to check out rock shows.[14] During his visits to Olympia, Cobain started a relationship with Tracy Marander.

Nirvana
Main article: Nirvana (band)
For his fourteenth birthday, Cobain's uncle gave him the option of a guitar or a bicycle as a gift; Cobain chose the guitar. He started learning a few covers, including AC/DC's "Back in Black" and The Cars' "My Best Friend's Girl", and soon began working on his own songs.[6]
In high school, Cobain rarely found anyone with whom he could jam. While hanging out at the Melvins practice space, he met Krist Novoselic, a fellow devotee of punk rock. Novoselic's mother owned a hair salon and Cobain and Novoselic would occasionally practice in the upstairs room. A few years later, Cobain tried to convince Novoselic to form a band with him by lending him a copy of a home demo recorded by Cobain's earlier band, Fecal Matter. After months of asking, Novoselic finally agreed to join Cobain, forming the beginnings of Nirvana.[15]
During their first few years playing together, Novoselic and Cobain were hosts to a rotating list of drummers. Eventually, the band settled on Chad Channing, with whom Nirvana recorded the album Bleach, released on Sub Pop Records in 1989. Cobain, however, became dissatisfied with Channing's style, leading the band to seek out a replacement, eventually settling on Dave Grohl. With Grohl, the band found their greatest success via their 1991 major-label debut, Nevermind.
Cobain struggled to reconcile the massive success of Nirvana with his underground roots. He also felt persecuted by the media, comparing himself to Frances Farmer. Then he harbored resentment for people who claimed to be fans of the band but who completely missed the band's politics.
A vocal opponent of sexism and homophobia, Cobain was proud that Nirvana had played at a gay rights benefit supporting No on Nine in Oregon in 1992 and had been involved in Rock for Choice from the campaign inception by L7. An article from his posthumously released Journals declares that social liberation could be made possible only through the eradication of sexism.

Marriage
Courtney Love first saw Cobain perform in 1989 at a show in Portland, Oregon; the pair talked briefly after the show and Love developed a crush on him.[16] According to journalist Everett True, the pair were formally introduced at an L7 and Butthole Surfers concert in Los Angeles in May 1991.[17] In the weeks that followed, after learning from Dave Grohl that she and Cobain shared mutual crushes, Love began pursuing Cobain. After a few weeks of on-again, off-again courtship in the fall of 1991, the two found themselves together on a regular basis, often bonding through drug use.[18]
Around the time of Nirvana's 1992 performance on Saturday Night Live, Love discovered that she was pregnant with Cobain's child. A few days after the conclusion of Nirvana's Pacific Rim tour, on Monday, February 24, 1992, Cobain and Love married on Waikiki Beach in Hawaii; Cobain noted weeks later that, "In the last couple months I've gotten engaged and my attitude has changed drastically," Cobain said in an interview with Sassy magazine. "I can't believe how much happier I am. At times I even forget that I'm in a band, I'm so blinded by love. I know that sounds embarrassing, but it's true. I could give up the band right now. It doesn't matter, but I'm under contract."[19] On August 18, the couple's daughter, Frances Bean Cobain, was born.
In a 1992 article in Vanity Fair, Love admitted to using heroin while, unknowingly, pregnant. Love claimed that Vanity Fair had misquoted her,[20] but the event created controversy for the couple. While Cobain and Love's romance had always been something of a media attraction, the couple found themselves hounded by tabloid reporters after the article was published, many wanting to know if Frances was addicted to drugs at birth. The Los Angeles County Department of Children's Services took the Cobains to court, claiming that the couple's drug usage made them unfit parents.[21] Two-week-old Frances Bean Cobain was ordered by the judge to be taken from their custody and placed with Courtney's sister Jamie for several weeks, after which the couple obtained custody, but had to submit to urine tests and a regular visit from a social worker. After months of legal wrangling, the couple were eventually granted full custody of their daughter.

Drug addiction
Throughout most of his life, Cobain suffered from chronic bronchitis and intense physical pain due to an undiagnosed chronic stomach condition.[22] This last condition was especially debilitating to him emotionally, and he spent years trying to find its cause. However, none of the doctors he consulted were able to pinpoint the specific cause, guessing that it was either a result of Cobain's childhood scoliosis or related to the stresses of performing.
His first drug experience was with marijuana in 1980 at age 13. Cobain's first experience with heroin occurred sometime in 1986, administered to him by a local drug dealer in Tacoma, Washington, who had previously been supplying him with Percodan.[23] Cobain used heroin sporadically for several years, but, by the end of 1990, his use developed into a full-fledged addiction. Cobain claimed that he was "determined to get a habit" as a way to self-medicate his stomach condition. Related Cobain, "It started with three days in a row of doing heroin and I don't have a stomach pain. That was such a relief."[24]
His heroin use eventually began affecting the band's tour in support of Nevermind, with Cobain passing out during photo shoots. One memorable example came the day of the band's 1992 performance on Saturday Night Live, where Nirvana had a shoot with photographer Michael Levine. Having shot up beforehand, Cobain nodded off several times during the shoot. Cobain related to biographer Michael Azerrad, "I mean, what are they supposed to do? They're not going to be able to tell me to stop. So I really didn't care. Obviously to them it was like practicing witchcraft or something. They didn't know anything about it so they thought that any second, I was going to die."[25]
Cobain's heroin addiction worsened as the years progressed. Cobain made his first attempt at rehab in early 1992, not long after he and Love discovered they were going to become parents. Immediately after leaving rehab, Nirvana embarked on their Australian tour, with Cobain appearing pale and gaunt while suffering through withdrawals. Not long after returning home, Cobain's heroin use resumed.
Prior to a performance at the New Music Seminar in New York City in July 1993, Cobain suffered a heroin overdose. Rather than calling for an ambulance, Love injected Cobain with illegally acquired Narcan to bring him out of his unconscious state. Cobain proceeded to perform with Nirvana, giving the public no indication that anything out of the ordinary had taken place.[26]

Death
Main article: Death of Kurt Cobain
Following a tour stop at Terminal Eins in Munich, Germany, on March 1, 1994, Cobain was diagnosed with bronchitis and severe laryngitis. He flew to Rome the next day for medical treatment, and was joined there by his wife on March 3. The next morning, Love awoke to find that Cobain had overdosed on a combination of champagne and Rohypnol (Love had a prescription for Rohypnol filled after arriving in Rome). Cobain was immediately rushed to the hospital, and spent the rest of the day unconscious. After five days in the hospital, Cobain was released and returned to Seattle.[27] Love later stated that the incident was Cobain's first suicide attempt.[28]
On March 18, Love phoned police to inform them that Cobain was suicidal and had locked himself in a room with a gun. Police arrived and confiscated several guns and a bottle of pills from Cobain, who insisted that he was not suicidal and had locked himself in the room to hide from Love. When questioned by police, Love said that Cobain had never mentioned that he was suicidal and that she had not seen him with a gun.[29]
Love arranged an intervention concerning Cobain's drug use that took place on March 25. The ten people involved included musician friends, record company executives, and one of Cobain's closest friends, Dylan Carlson. But bassist Krist Novoselic tipped him off as he considered the idea to be "stupid". However, by the end of the day, Cobain had agreed to undergo a detox program.[30] Cobain arrived at the Exodus Recovery Center in Los Angeles, California on March 30. The following night, Cobain walked outside to have a cigarette, then climbed over a six-foot-high fence to leave the facility. He took a taxi to Los Angeles Airport and flew back to Seattle. Over the course of April 2 and April 3, Cobain was spotted in various locations around Seattle, but most of his friends and family were unaware of his whereabouts. On April 3, Love contacted a private investigator, Tom Grant, and hired him to find Cobain. On April 7, amid rumors Nirvana was going to break up, the band pulled out of that year's Lollapalooza music festival.
On April 8, 1994, Cobain's body was discovered at his Lake Washington home by an electrician who had arrived to install a security system. Apart from a minor amount of blood coming out of Cobain's ear, the electrician reported seeing no visible signs of trauma, and initially believed that Cobain was asleep until he saw the shotgun pointing at his chin. A suicide note was found that said, "I haven't felt the excitement of listening to as well as creating music, along with really writing . . . for too many years now". A high concentration of heroin and traces of Valium were also found in his body. Cobain's body had been lying there for days; the coroner's report estimated Cobain to have died on April 5, 1994.[31]
A public vigil was held for Cobain on April 10 at a park at Seattle Center which drew approximately seven thousand mourners.[32] Prerecorded messages by Krist Novoselic and Courtney Love were played at the memorial. Love read portions of Cobain's suicide note to the crowd and broke down, crying and chastising Cobain. Near the end of the vigil, Love arrived at the park and distributed some of Cobain's clothing to those who still remained.[33]

Musical influences
Cobain was a devoted champion of early alternative rock acts. His interest in the underground started when Buzz Osborne of the Melvins let him borrow a tape with songs by punk bands such as Black Flag, Flipper, and Millions of Dead Cops. He would often make reference to his favorite bands in interviews, often placing a greater importance on the bands that influenced him than on his own music. Interviews with Cobain were often littered with references to obscure performers like The Vaselines, The Melvins, Daniel Johnston, The Meat Puppets, Young Marble Giants, The Wipers, Flipper, Butthole Surfers, Captain Beefheart, and The Raincoats. His musical tastes were not limited simply to Western acts as Cobain expressed his admiration for Japanese rock bands such Shonen Knife.[34] Cobain also noted the influence of the Pixies, and commented that "Smells Like Teen Spirit" bore some similarities to their sound. Cobain told Melody Maker in 1992 that hearing Surfer Rosa for the first time convinced him to abandon his more Black Flag-influenced songwriting in favor of the "Iggy Pop / Aerosmith" type songwriting that appeared on Nevermind.[35]
The Beatles were an early and important musical influence on Cobain. Cobain expressed a particular fondness for John Lennon, whom he called his "idol" in his journals. Cobain once related that he wrote "About a Girl" after spending three hours listening to Meet The Beatles!.[36] He was heavily influenced by punk rock and hardcore punk, and often credited bands such as Black Flag and the Sex Pistols for his artistic style and attitude.
Even with all of Cobain's indie influences, Nirvana's early style was influenced by the major rock bands of the '70s, including Led Zeppelin, Black Sabbath, Queen, and Kiss. In its early days, Nirvana made a habit of regularly playing cover songs by those bands, including Led Zeppelin's "Immigrant Song", "Dazed and Confused", "Heartbreaker", Black Sabbath's "Hand of Doom" and made a studio recording of Kiss' "Do You Love Me?". Cobain also talked about the influence of bands like The Knack, Boston, and The Bay City Rollers.
There were also earlier influences: Nirvana's MTV Unplugged concert ended with a version of "Where Did You Sleep Last Night", a song popularized by blues artist Lead Belly, whom Cobain called one of his favorite performers. Critic Greil Marcus suggested that Cobain's "Polly" was a descendant of "Pretty Polly", a murder ballad that might have been a century old when Dock Boggs recorded it in 1927.
Cobain also made efforts to include his favorite performers in his musical endeavors. At the 1991 Reading Festival, Eugene Kelly of the Vaselines joined Nirvana onstage for a duet of "Molly's Lips", which Cobain would later proclaim to be one of the greatest moments of his life.[37] In 1993, when he decided that he wanted a second guitarist to help him on stage, he recruited Pat Smear of the legendary L.A. punk band The Germs. When rehearsals of three Meat Puppets covers for Nirvana's 1993 performance for MTV Unplugged went awry, Cobain placed a call to the two lead members of the band, Curt and Cris Kirkwood, who ended up joining the band on stage to perform the songs. Cobain also contributed backing guitar for a spoken word William S. Burroughs recording entitled "the "Priest" they called him".[38]
Where Sonic Youth had served to help Nirvana gain wider success, Nirvana attempted to help other indie acts attain success. The band submitted the song "Oh, the Guilt" to a split single with Chicago's The Jesus Lizard, helping Nirvana's indie credibility while opening The Jesus Lizard to a wider audience.

Legacy




The bench in Viretta Park has become a notable memorial to Cobain.






In 2005, a sign was put up in Aberdeen, Washington that reads "Welcome to Aberdeen - Come As You Are" as a tribute to Cobain.


In the years following his death, Cobain is now often remembered as one of the most iconic rock musicians in the history of alternative music. In 2005, a sign was put up in Aberdeen, Washington that read "Welcome to Aberdeen - Come As You Are" as a tribute to Cobain. The sign was paid for and created by the Kurt Cobain Memorial Committee, a non-profit organization created in May 2004 to honor Cobain. The Committee also planned to create a Kurt Cobain Memorial Park and a youth center in Aberdeen.
As Cobain has no gravesite (he was cremated, with his ashes scattered into the Wishkah River in Washington)[39], many Nirvana fans visit Viretta Park, near Cobain's former Lake Washington home, to pay tribute. On the anniversary of his death, fans gather in the park to celebrate his life and memory.
Gus Van Sant based his 2005 movie Last Days on what might have happened in the final hours of Cobain's life. In January 2007, Courtney Love began to shop the biography Heavier Than Heaven to various movie studios in Hollywood to turn the book into an A-list feature film about Cobain and Nirvana.

Books and films on Cobain
Prior to Cobain's death, writer Michael Azerrad published Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana, a book that chronicled Nirvana's career from its beginning, as well as the personal histories of the band members. The book explored Cobain's drug addiction, as well as the countless controversies surrounding the band. After Cobain's death, Azerrad re-published the book to include a final chapter discussing the last year of Cobain's life. The book is notable for its involvement of the band members themselves, who gave interviews and personal information to Azerrad specifically for the book. In 2006, Azerrad's taped conversations with Cobain were transformed into a documentary about Cobain, titled Kurt Cobain About a Son.
In the 1998 documentary Kurt & Courtney, filmmaker Nick Broomfield investigated Tom Grant's claim that Cobain was actually murdered, and took a film crew to visit a number of people associated with Cobain and Love, including Love's father, Cobain's aunt, and one of the couple's former nannies. Broomfield also spoke to Mentors bandleader Eldon "El Duce" Hoke, who claimed that Love had offered him $50,000 to kill Cobain. Although Hoke claimed that he knew who killed Cobain, he failed to mention a name, and offered no evidence to support his assertion. Broomfield inadvertently captured Hoke's last interview, as he died days later, reportedly hit by a train while drunk. In the end, however, Broomfield felt he hadn't uncovered enough evidence to conclude the existence of a conspiracy. In a 1998 interview, Broomfield summed it up by saying, "I think that he committed suicide. I don't think that there's a smoking gun. And I think there's only one way you can explain a lot of things around his death. Not that he was murdered, but that there was just a lack of caring for him. I just think that Courtney had moved on, and he was expendable."[40]
Journalists Ian Halperin and Max Wallace took a similar path and attempted to investigate the conspiracy for themselves. Their initial work, the 1999 book Who Killed Kurt Cobain? argued that, while there wasn't enough evidence to prove a conspiracy, there was more than enough to demand that the case be reopened.[41] A notable element of the book included their discussions with Grant, who had taped nearly every conversation that he had undertaken while he was in Love's employ. Over the next several years, Halperin and Wallace collaborated with Grant to write a second book, 2004's Love and Death: The Murder of Kurt Cobain.
In 2001, writer Charles R. Cross published a biography of Cobain titled Heavier Than Heaven. For the book, Cross conducted over 400 interviews, and was given access by Courtney Love to Cobain's journals, lyrics, and diaries.[42] In 2002, a sampling of Cobain's writings was published as Journals. The book is 280 pages with a simple black cover; the pages are arranged somewhat chronologically (although Cobain generally did not date them). The journal pages are reproduced in color, and there is a section added at the back that has explanations and transcripts of some of the less legible pages. The writings begin in the late 1980s and were continued until his death. A paperback version of the book, released in 2003, included a handful of writings that were not offered in the initial release. In the journals, Cobain talked about the ups and downs of life on the road, made lists of what music he was enjoying, and often scribbled down lyric ideas for future reference. Upon its release, reviewers and fans were conflicted about the collection. Many were elated to be able to learn more about Cobain and read his inner thoughts in his own words, but were disturbed by what was viewed as an invasion of his privacy.[43]
In 2003, Omnibus Press released Godspeed: The Kurt Cobain Graphic. It was written by Jim McCarthy and Barnaby Legg with illustrations by Flameboy. It depicts Cobain's life, but is not a factual biography. Rather, it uses artistic license to tell Cobain's story from his own point of view.
In 2007, the tapes that Michael Azerrad recorded to use in his book, Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana were made into a documentery entitled Kurt Cobain: About a Son. Though this film does not feature any music by Nirvana, it has songs by the artists that inspired Cobain.

See also

27 Club


References

Azerrad, Michael. Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana. Doubleday, 1994. ISBN 0-385-47199-8.
Burlingame, Jeff. Kurt Cobain: Oh Well, Whatever, Nevermind. Enslow, 2006. ISBN 0-7660-2426-1
Cross, Charles. Heavier Than Heaven: A Biography of Kurt Cobain. Hyperion, 2001. ISBN 0-7868-8402-9.
Summers, Kim. "Kurt Cobain". Allmusic. Accessed on May 9, 2005.
Kitts, Jeff, et al. Guitar World Presents Nirvana and the Grunge Revolution. Hal Leonard, 1998. ISBN 0-79-35900-6X.


Notes


^ Azerrad, Michael. "Inside the Heart and Mind of Nirvana." Rolling Stone. April 16, 1992.
^ Azerrad, p. 13
^ Gaar, Gillian. "Verse Chorus Verse: The Recording History of Nirvana." Goldmine Magazine. February 14, 1997.
^ Azerrad, p. 17
^ Savage, Jon. "Kurt Cobain: The Lost Interview". Guitar World. 1997.
^ a b Azerrad, p. 22
^ Azerrad, pp. 20–25
^ Cross, p. 68
^ Cobain, Kurt (2002). Journals. Riverhead Hardcover. ISBN 978-1573222327. 
^ Azerrad, p. 35
^ a b Azerrad, p. 37
^ Cross, Charles R. "Requiem for a Dream." Guitar World. October 2001.
^ Azerrad, p. 43
^ Azerrad, p. 46
^ Azerrad, p. 45
^ Azerrad, p. 169
^ True, Everett. "Wednesday March 1". Plan B Magazine Blogs. March 1, 2006.
^ Azerrad, p. 172. Courtney Love: "We bonded over pharmaceuticals."
^ Kelly, Christina. "Kurt and Courtney Sitting in a Tree". Sassy Magazine. April 1992.
^ Azerrad, p. 266
^ Azerrad, p. 270
^ Azerrad, p. 66
^ Azerrad, p. 41
^ Azerrad, p. 236.
^ Azerrad, p. 241
^ Cross, p. 296–297
^ Halperin, Ian & Wallace, Max (1998). Who Killed Kurt Cobain?. Birch Lane Press. ISBN 1-55972-446-3. 
^ David Fricke, "Courtney Love: Life After Death", Rolling Stone, December 15, 1994.
^ Seattle Police Department (1994). "Incident Report - March 18". http://www.justiceforkurt.com/investigation/documents/march_18_report.shtml. Retrieved on March 13 2006. 
^ The Seattle Times (1994). "Questions Linger After Cobain Suicide". http://www.justiceforkurt.com/coverage/newspapers/seattle_times.shtml. Retrieved on March 13 2006. 
^ Strauss, Neil (June 2, 1994). "The Downward Spiral". RollingStone.com. http://www.rollingstone.com/artists/nirvana/articles/story/5937930/cover_story_the_downward_spiral. Retrieved on June 4 2008. 
^ Azerrad, p. 346
^ Azerrad, p. 350
^ Mar, Alex (2005-03-01). "Shonen Knife Bring Sweets". Rolling Stone. RealNetworks, Inc. http://www.rollingstone.com/news/story/7069216/shonen_knife_bring_sweets. Retrieved on 2005-03-01. 
^ Cobain, Kurt. "Kurt Cobain of Nirvana Talks About the Records That Changed His Life". Melody Maker. August 29, 1992.
^ Cross, p. 121.
^ Cross, p. 195
^ Cross, p. 301
^ http://www.findagrave.com/cgi-bin/fg.cgi?page=gr&GRid=1488
^ Miller, Prairie. "Kurt and Courtney: Interview with Nick Broomfield". Minireviews.com. 1998.
^ ;Halperin & Wallace, p. 202
^ "Heavier than Heaven: A Biography of Kurt Cobain". HyperionBooks.com. http://www.hyperionbooks.com/titlepage.asp?ISBN=0786884029. 
^ Hartwig, David. "Nirvana releases a hit and miss." Notre Dame Observer. November 19, 2002.



External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Kurt Cobain





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Kurt Cobain 



Kurt Cobain at the Internet Movie Database
Kurt Cobain at Allmusic
The Kurt Cobain Equipment FAQ - Detailed information on Cobain's guitars, amplifiers, and effects.
Official police reports into Cobain's death at The Smoking Gun.








v • d • e

Nirvana





Kurt Cobain · Dave Grohl · Krist Novoselic
Aaron Burckhard · Chad Channing · Dale Crover · Jason Everman · Dave Foster · Dan Peters · Pat Smear





Studio albums

Bleach · Nevermind · In Utero






Live albums

MTV Unplugged in New York · From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah






Extended Plays

Blew · Hormoaning






Compilations

Incesticide · Singles · Nirvana · With the Lights Out  · Sliver: The Best of the Box






Singles

"Love Buzz" · "Sliver" · "Molly's Lips" · "Here She Comes Now" · "Smells Like Teen Spirit" · "Come as You Are" · "Lithium" · "In Bloom" · "Oh, the Guilt" · "Heart-Shaped Box" · "All Apologies"/"Rape Me" · "Pennyroyal Tea" · "About a Girl" · "The Man Who Sold the World" · "Where Did You Sleep Last Night?" · "Lake of Fire" · "Aneurysm (live)" · "Drain You (live)" · "You Know You're Right"






Videos

Live! Tonight! Sold Out!! · Classic Albums: Nirvana - Nevermind · MTV Unplugged in New York






Related bands

Dain Bramage · Eyes Adrift · Fecal Matter · Flipper · Foo Fighters · The Melvins · No WTO Combo · Scream · Sweet 75






Other

Discography · Nevermind It's an Interview · Awards and nominations · Songs · 1991: The Year Punk Broke · Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana · Smells Like Bleach









Persondata


NAME
Cobain, Kurt Donald


ALTERNATIVE NAMES



SHORT DESCRIPTION
American singer, guitarist in Nirvana


DATE OF BIRTH
February 20, 1967


PLACE OF BIRTH
Aberdeen, Washington


DATE OF DEATH
c. April 5, 1994


PLACE OF DEATH
Seattle, Washington





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kurt_Cobain"
Categories: 1967 births | 1994 deaths | American diarists | American feminists | American male singers | American rock guitarists | American rock singer-songwriters | Cause of death disputed | Deaths by firearm in Washington (U.S. state) | Feminist artists | Grunge musicians | Irish-American musicians | Musicians from Washington (U.S. state) | Nirvana members | People from Aberdeen, Washington | Popular musicians who committed suicide | Suicides by firearm in the United States | Suicides in Washington (U.S. state)Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism | Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Boarisch
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deitsch
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Gaeilge
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Latina
Lietuvių
Magyar
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
O'zbek
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Seeltersk
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 01:42.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
