













World Bank - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "World_Bank";
		var wgTitle = "World Bank";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "33309";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282408963;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); World Bank

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2007)







This article may contain wording that promotes the subject in a subjective manner without imparting real information. Please remove or replace such wording or find sources which back the claims.



World Bank


World Bank logo


Formation
27 December 1945


Type
International organization


Legal status
Treaty


Purpose/focus
Poverty elimination


Membership
185 countries


President
Robert B. Zoellick


Main organ
Board of Directors[1]


Parent organization
World Bank Group


Website
http://www.worldbank.org/


The World Bank is an international financial institution that provides financial and technical assistance[2] to developing countries for development programs (e.g. bridges, roads, schools, etc.) with the stated goal of reducing poverty.
The World Bank differs from the World Bank Group, in that the World Bank comprises only two institutions:

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
International Development Association (IDA)

Whereas the latter incorporates these two in addition to three more:[3]

International Finance Corporation (IFC)
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)





Contents


1 History

1.1 1945-1968
1.2 1968-1980
1.3 1980-1989
1.4 1989-Present


2 Activities

2.1 Millennium Development Goals
2.2 Five key factors
2.3 Loans
2.4 Grants
2.5 Other services


3 Leadership
4 Members
5 Areas of operation
6 Comprehensive development framework
7 Poverty reduction strategies
8 Clean Technology Fund management
9 Training wings

9.1 World Bank Institute
9.2 Global Development Learning Network
9.3 GDLN Asia Pacific


10 Country assistance strategies
11 Criticism

11.1 Knowledge Production
11.2 Structural Adjustment
11.3 Water Privatization


12 See also
13 Notes
14 References
15 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History




John Maynard Keynes (right) represented the UK at the conference, and Harry Dexter White represented the US.


The World Bank is one of two major financial institutions created as a result of the Bretton Woods Conference in 1944. The International Monetary Fund, a related but separate institution, is the second. Delegates from a wide variety of countries attended the Bretton Woods Conference, but the most powerful countries in attendance mainly shaped negotiations, the United States and Britain.[4]

[edit] 1945-1968
From the banks conception until 1968 the bank undertook a relatively small level of lending. Fiscal conservatism and careful screening of loan applications was generally accepted practice at the World Bank during this early period. Bank staff attempted to balance the priorities of providing loans for reconstruction and development with the need to instill confidence in the bank as a reliable institution suitable for investment[5]. Bank president John McCloy selected France to be the first recipient of World Bank aid, two other applications presented at this time from Poland and Chile were rejected. The loan was for $250 million dollars, half the amount requested and came with strict conditions. Staff from the World Bank would monitor the end use of the funds, ensuring that the French government presented a balanced budget, and give priority of debt repayment to the World Bank over other foreign governments. The United States State Department also acted at this time to inform the French Government that Communist elements within the Cabinet needed to be removed. The French Government complied with this request and removed the Communist elements from the 1947 coalition government. Within hours of this event the loan to France was approved[6]. The Marshall Plan of 1947 caused lending practices at the bank to be altered, as many European countries received aid that competed directly with World Bank Loans. Emphasis was shifted to Non-European countries and up until 1968 loans were primarily earmarked for projects that would directly enable a borrower country to repay loans (such projects as ports, highway systems, power plants).

[edit] 1968-1980
In the period lasting from 1968-1980 the bank focused on poverty alleviation and meeting the basic needs of people in the developing world. During this period the size and number of loans to borrower nations was greatly increased as the spectrum of loan targets expanded from infrastructure into social services and other sectors. These changes can to a large extent be attributed to Robert McNamara who assumed the Presidency in 1968 after being appointed by US president Lyndon B. Johnson[7]. McNamara imported a technocratic managerial style to the bank that he had employed during periods he had spent serving as United States Secretary of Defense, and President of the Ford Motor Company[8]. McNamara shifted the focus of bank policy towards measures such as building schools and hospitals, improving literacy rates and conducting large-scale agricultural reform. McNamara created a new system of gathering information from potential borrower nations that enabled the bank to process loan applications at a must faster rate. In order to finance the increased loan volume, McNamara tasked bank treasurer Eugene Rotberg to seek out new sources of capital outside of the northern banks that had previously been the primary sources of bank funding. Rotberg utilized the global bond market to greatly increase the amount of capital available to the bank[9]. One unfortunate consequence of the period of poverty alleviation lending was the rapid rise of third world debt. During the period of 1976-1980 third world debt rose at an average annual rate of 20%.[10][11].

[edit] 1980-1989
in 1980 A.W. Clausen replaced Robert McNamara as World Bank president after being nominated by US President Ronald Reagan. Clausen replaced a large number of bank staffers who had been active during the McNamara era and instituted a new ideological focus in the bank. The replacement of Chief Economist Hollis Chenery by Anne Krueger in 1982 marked a notable policy shift at the bank. Krueger was known for her criticism of development funding as well as Third World Governments as Rent seeking States. Lending for the purposes of servicing third world debt largely marked the period of 1980-1989. Structural adjustment policies aimed at streamlining the economies of developing nations (largely at the expense of health and social services reductions) were also a large part of World Bank policy during this period. UNICEF reported in the late 1980’s that the Structural Adjustment Programs of the World Bank were responsible for the “reduced health, nutritional, and educational levels for tens of millions of children in Asia, Latin America, and Africa”.[12]

[edit] 1989-Present
From 1989 to present, World Bank policy has shifted greatly largely in response to criticism from a plurality of groups. Environmental groups and NGOs are often now integrated into the lending practices of the bank in order to mitigate the negative results of the previous era that prompted such harsh criticism.[13] Bank projects now explicitly embrace a "green" focus.

[edit] Activities




The World Bank headquarters in Washington, D.C.



[edit] Millennium Development Goals
The World Bank's current focus is on the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), lending primarily to "middle-income countries" at interest rates which reflect a small mark-up over its own (AAA-rated) borrowings from capital markets; while the IDA provides low or no interest loans and grants to low income countries with little or no access to international credit markets. The IBRD is a market based non-profit organization, using its high credit rating to make up for the relatively low interest rate on its loans, while the IDA is funded primarily by periodic "replenishments" (grants) voted to the institution by its more affluent member countries.

[edit] Five key factors
The Bank’s mission is to aid developing countries and their inhabitants to achieve development and the reduction of poverty, including achievement of the MDGs, by helping countries develop an environment for investment, jobs and sustainable growth, thus promoting economic growth through investment and enabling the poor to share the fruits of economic growth. The World Bank sees the five key factors necessary for economic growth and the creation of an enabling business environment as:

Build capacity: Strengthening governments and educating government officials.
Infrastructure creation: implementation of legal and judicial systems for the encouragement of business, the protection of individual and property rights and the honoring of contracts.
Development of Financial Systems: the establishment of strong systems capable of supporting endeavors from micro credit to the financing of larger corporate ventures.
Combating corruption: Support for countries' efforts at eradicating corruption.
Research, Consultancy and Training: the World Bank provides platform for research on development issues, consultancy and conduct training programs (web based, on line, tele-/ video conferencing and class room based) open for those who are interested from academia, students, government and non-governmental organization (NGO) officers etc.

The Bank obtains funding for its operations primarily through the IBRD’s sale of AAA-rated bonds in the world’s financial markets. The IBRD’s income is generated from its lending activities, with its borrowings leveraging its own paid-in capital, plus the investment of its "float". The IDA obtains the majority of its funds from forty donor countries who replenish the bank’s funds every three years, and from loan repayments, which then become available for re-lending. –

[edit] Loans
The Bank offers two basic types of loans: investment loans and development policy loans. The former are made for the support of economic and social development projects, whereas the latter provide quick disbursing finance to support countries’ policy and institutional reforms. While the IBRD provides loans with a relatively low interest rate, the IDA’s "credits" are interest free. The project proposals of borrowers are evaluated for their economical, financial, social and environmental aspects prior to their approval. But not all of this is true; sometimes it's different.

[edit] Grants
The Bank also distributes grants for the facilitation of development projects through the encouragement of innovation, cooperation between organizations and the participation of local stakeholders in projects. IDA grants are predominantly used for:

Debt burden relief in the most indebted and poverty struck countries
Amelioration of sanitation and water supply
Support of vaccination and immunization programs for the reduction of communicable diseases such as malaria
Combating the HIV/AIDS pandemic
Support civil society organizations
Creating initiatives for the reduction of greenhouse gases
Taking to the forests and helping the people who live in the rainforests.


[edit] Other services
The Bank not only provides financial support to its member states, but also analytical and advisory services to facilitate the implementation of the lasting economic and social improvements that are needed in many under-developed countries, as well as educating members with the knowledge necessary to resolve their development problems while promoting.

[edit] Leadership




Current President Robert B. Zoellick


The President of the Bank, currently Robert B. Zoellick, is responsible for chairing the meetings of the Boards of Directors and for overall management of the Bank. Traditionally, the Bank President has always been a U.S. citizen nominated by the President of the United States, the largest shareholder in the bank. The nominee is subject to confirmation by the Board of Governors, to serve for a five-year, renewable term.[14]
The Executive Directors make up the Board of Directors, usually meeting twice a week to oversee activities such as the approval of loans and guarantees, new policies, the administrative budget, country assistance strategies and borrowing and financing decisions.
The Vice Presidents of the Bank are its principal managers, in charge of regions, sectors, networks and functions. There are 24 Vice-Presidents, 3 Senior Vice Presidents and 2 Executive Vice Presidents.

[edit] Members
Main article: List of World Bank members
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) has 185 member countries, while the International Development Association (IDA) has 168 members.[15] Each member state of IBRD should be also a member of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and only members of IBRD are allowed to join other institutions within the Bank (such as IDA).[16]

[edit] Areas of operation
The World Bank is active in the following areas [17]




Agriculture and Rural Development
Conflict and Development
Development Operations and Activities
Economic Policy
Education
Energy
Environment
Financial Sector
Gender
Governance
Health, Nutrition and Population
Industry
Information and Communication Technologies
Information, Computing and Telecommunications
International Economics and Trade
Labor and Social Protections




Law and Justice
Macroeconomic and Economic Growth
Mining
Poverty Reduction
Poverty
Private Sector
Public Sector Governance
Rural Development
Social Development
Social Protection
Trade
Transport
Urban Development
Water Resources
Water Supply and Sanitation





[edit] Comprehensive development framework
According to the World Bank, in virtually all successful assistance projects the country itself was the driving factor. The Bank therefore strives to help governments lead and implement their own development strategies and thus take a stronger hand in their own future development. The strategy was initiated by the former president of the bank, James Wolfensohn. Since 1999, it has followed a set of philosophies known as the Comprehensive Development Framework. These philosophies state that:

Development strategies should be comprehensive and shaped by a long-term vision
Development goals and strategies should be “owned” by the country, based on local stakeholder participation in shaping them
Countries receiving assistance should lead the management and coordination of aid programs through stakeholder partnerships
Development performance should be evaluated through measurable results on the ground in order to adjust the strategy to outcomes and a changing world


[edit] Poverty reduction strategies
For the poorest developing countries in the world the Bank’s assistance plans are based on Poverty Reduction Strategies; by combining a cross-section of local groups with an extensive analysis of the country’s financial and economical situation the World Bank develops a strategy pertaining uniquely to the country in question. The government then identifies the country’s priorities and targets for the reduction of poverty, and the World Bank aligns its aid efforts correspondingly.
The Bank supports certain kinds of poor people's organisations such as the Self-Employed Women's Union and Shack/Slum Dwellers International.
Forty-five countries pledged US$25.1 billion in "aid for the world's poorest countries", aid that goes to the World Bank International Development Association (I.D.A.) which distributes the gifts to eighty poorer countries. While wealthier nations sometimes fund their own aid projects, including those for diseases recently, and although I.D.A. is the recipient of criticism, Robert B. Zoellick, the president of the World Bank, said when the gifts were announced on December 15, 2007, that I.D.A. money "is the core funding that the poorest developing countries rely on".[18]

[edit] Clean Technology Fund management
The World Bank has been assigned temporary management responsibility of the Clean Technology Fund (CTF), focused on making renewable energy cost-competitive with coal-fired power as quickly as possible, but this may not continue after UN's Copenhagen climate change conference in December, 2009, because of its continued investment in coal-fired power plants. [19]

[edit] Training wings

[edit] World Bank Institute
The World Bank Institute (WBI) creates learning opportunities for countries, World Bank staff and clients, and people committed to poverty reduction and sustainable development. WBI's work program includes training, policy consultations, and the creation and support of knowledge networks related to international economic and social development.

[edit] Global Development Learning Network
The Global Development Learning Network (GDLN) is a partnership of over 120 learning centers (GDLN Affiliates) in nearly 80 countries around the world. GDLN Affiliates collaborate in holding events that connect people across countries and regions for learning and dialogue on development issues. Offering a combination of distance learning tools such as interactive videoconferencing and the internet, and expert facilitation and learning techniques, GDLN Affiliates enable individuals, teams, and organizations working in development around the world to communicate, share knowledge, and learn from each others’ experiences in a timely and cost-effective manner.
GDLN clients are typically NGOs, government, private sector and development agencies who find that they work better together on subregional, regional or global development issues and challenges using the facilities and tools offered by GDLN Affiliates. Clients also benefit from the ability of Affiliates to help them choose and apply these tools effectively, and to tap development practitioners and experts worldwide. GDLN Affiliates facilitate around 1000 videoconference-based activities a year on behalf of their clients, reaching some 90,000 people worldwide. Most of these activities bring together participants in two or more countries over a series of session. A majority of GDLN activities are organized by small government agencies and NGOs.

[edit] GDLN Asia Pacific
The GDLN in the East Asia and Pacific region has experienced rapid growth and Distance Learning Centers now operate, or are planned in 20 countries: Australia, Mongolia, Cambodia, China, Indonesia, Singapore, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Japan, Papua New Guinea, South Korea, Thailand, Laos, Timor Leste, Fiji, Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India, Nepal and New Zealand. With over 180 Distance Learning Centers, it is the largest development learning network in the Asia and Pacific region. The Secretariat Office of GDLN Asia Pacific is located in the Center of Academic Resources of Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
GDLN Asia Pacific was launched at the GDLN’s East Asia and Pacific regional meeting held in Bangkok from 22 to 24 May 2006. Its vision is to become “the premier network exchanging ideas, experience and know-how across the Asia Pacific Region”. GDLN Asia Pacific is a separate entity to The World Bank. It has endorsed its own Charter and Business Plan and, in accordance with the Charter, a GDLN Asia Pacific Governing Committee has been appointed.
The committee comprises China (2), Australia (1), Thailand (1), The World Bank (1) and finally, a nominee of the Government of Japan (1). The organization is currently hosted by Chulalongkorn University in Bangkok, Thailand, founding member of the GDLN Asia Pacific.
The Governing Committee has determined that the most appropriate legal status for the GDLN AP in Thailand is a “Foundation”. The World Bank is currently engaging a solicitor in Thailand to process all documentation in order to obtain this legal status.
GDLN Asia Pacific is built on the principle of shared resources among partners engaged in a common task, and this is visible in the organizational structures that exist, as the network evolves. Physical space for its headquarters is provided by the host of the GDLN Centre in Thailand – Chulalongkorn University; Technical expertise and some infrastructure is provided by the Tokyo Development Learning Centre (TDLC); Fiduciary services are provided by Australian National University (ANU) Until the GDLN Asia Pacific is established as a legal entity tin Thailand, ANU, has offered to assist the governing committee, by providing a means of managing the inflow and outflow of funds and of reporting on them. This admittedly results in some complexity in contracting arrangements, which need to be worked out on a case by case basis and depends to some extent on the legal requirements of the countries involved.

[edit] Country assistance strategies
As a guideline to the World Bank's operations in any particular country, a Country Assistance Strategy is produced, in cooperation with the local government and any interested stakeholders and may rely on analytical work performed by the Bank or other parties. In the case of low income countries, the Country Assistance Strategy is derived from the country’s Poverty Reduction

[edit] Criticism
The World Bank has long been criticized by a range of non-governmental organizations and academics, notably including its former Chief Economist Joseph Stiglitz, who is equally critical of the International Monetary Fund, the US Treasury Department, and US and other developed country trade negotiators.[20] Critics argue that the so-called free market reform policies – which the Bank advocates in many cases – in practice are often harmful to economic development if implemented badly, too quickly ("shock therapy"), in the wrong sequence, or in very weak, uncompetitive economies.[21]
In Masters of Illusion: The World Bank and the Poverty of Nations (1996), Catherine Caufield reveals how the assumptions and structure of the World Bank operation in the end harms southern nations rather than promoting them. In terms of assumption, Caufield first criticizes the highly homogenized and Western recipes of "development" held by the Bank. To the World Bank, different nations and regions are indistinguishable, and ready to receive the "uniform remedy of development". The danger of this assumption is that to attain even small portions of success, Western approaches to life are adopted and traditional economic structures and values are abandoned. A second assumption is that poor countries cannot modernize without money and advice from abroad.
A number of intellectuals in developing countries have argued that the World Bank is deeply implicated in contemporary modes of donor and NGO driven imperialism and that its intellectual contribution functions, primarily, to seek to try and blame the poor for their condition.[22]
Defenders of the World Bank contend that no country is forced to borrow its money. The Bank provides both loans and grants. Even the loans are concessional since they are given to countries that have no access to international capital markets. Furthermore, the loans, both to poor and middle-income countries, are at below market-value interest rates. The World Bank argues that it can help development more through loans than grants, because money repaid on the loans can then be lent for other projects.
One of the strongest criticisms of the World Bank has been the way in which it is governed. While the World Bank represents 184 countries, it is run by a small number of economically powerful countries. These countries choose the leadership and senior management of the World Bank and as such, their interests are dominant within the bank[23]. The World Bank has dual roles that are often contradictory: that of a political organization and that of an action-oriented organization. As a political organization, the World Bank must meet the demands of donor and borrowing governments, private capital markets as well as other international organizations. As an action-oriented organization, it must fulfill the role of a neutral organization specialized in delivering development aid, technical assistance and loans. These dual roles are often inconsistent with one another. The World Bank’s obligations to donor countries and private capital markets have caused it to adopt policies and programs that endorse liberal economic theory which dictates that poverty is best alleviated by the implementation of market-oriented policies.[24]
In the 1990s the World Bank and the IMF forged the Washington Consensus, a set of policies which included deregulation and liberalization of markets, privatization and the downscaling of government. Though the Washington Consensus was conceived as a policy that would best promote development, it was criticized for ignoring issues such as equity, employment and how reforms, such as privatization, were carried out. Many now agree that the Washington Consensus placed too much emphasis on the growth of GDP and not enough on the sustainability of that growth; economically, socially, politically and environmentally, or on questioning whether or not this growth actually contributed to increased living standards.[25]
Some critics of the World Bank believe that the institution was not started in order to reduce poverty but rather to support United States' business interests, and argue that the bank has actually increased poverty and been detrimental to the environment, public health, and cultural diversity.[26] Some critics also claim that the World Bank has consistently pushed a neoliberal agenda, imposing policies on developing countries which have been damaging, destructive and anti-developmental.[27][28] Some intellectuals in developing countries have argued that the World Bank is deeply implicated in contemporary modes of donor and NGO driven imperialism and that its intellectual output functions to blame the poor for their condition.[29]
The World Bank supported from the beginning the Brazilian Castello Branco’s authoritarian-rightist government, supplying it with a $80 million loan for power projects.[30]
It has also been suggested that the World Bank is an instrument for the promotion of U.S. or Western interests in certain regions of the world. Consequently, seven South American nations have established the Bank of the South in order to minimize U.S. influence in the region.[31] Criticisms of the structure of the World Bank refer to the fact that the President of the Bank is always a citizen of the United States, nominated by the President of the United States (though subject to the approval of the other member countries). There have been accusations that the decision-making structure is undemocratic, as the U.S. effectively has a veto on some constitutional decisions with just over 16% of the shares in the bank;[32] moreover, decisions can only be passed with votes from countries whose shares total more than 85% of the bank's shares.[33] A further criticism concerns internal governance and the manner in which the World Bank is alleged to lack transparency to external publics.[34]
In 2008, a World Bank report which found that biofuels had driven food prices up 75% was not published. Officials confided that they believed it was withheld from publication to avoid embarrassing the President of the United States, George W. Bush.[35]

[edit] Knowledge Production
The World Bank has been critiqued for the manner in which it engages in “the production, accumulation, circulation, and functioning” of knowledge . The Bank’s process in the production of knowledge has become integral to the funding and justification of large capital projects . The Bank relies on “a growing network of translocal scientists, technocrats, NGOs, and empowered citizens to help generate data and construct discursive strategies”.[36]Its capacity to produce authoritative knowledge is a response to intense scrutiny of Bank projects resulting from the successes of growing anti-Bank and alternative-development movements[37]. “Development has relied exclusively on one knowledge system, namely, the modern Western one. The dominance of this knowledge system has dictated the marginalization and disqualification of non-Western knowledge systems”[38]. It has been remarked, that in these alternative knowledge systems researchers and activists might find alternative rationales to guide interventionist action away from Western (Bank) produced ways of thinking . Knowledge production has become an asset to the Bank and “it is generated and used in highly strategic ways”[39] to provide justifications for development.

[edit] Structural Adjustment
The impact of structural adjustment policies on developing countries has been one of the most significant criticisms of the World Bank. The oil crisis in the late 1970s, the second in a decade, plunged many developing countries into economic crisis[40]. The World Bank responded with structural adjustment loans which distributed aid to ailing countries while enforcing policy changes meant to mitigate domestic inflation and fiscal imbalance. Some of these policies included encouraging production, investment and labour-intensive manufacturing, changing real exchange rates and altering the distribution of government resources.[41] Structural adjustment policies were most effective in countries with an institutional framework already in place that allowed for these policies to be implemented more easily[42]. For some countries, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa, with or without the implementation of structural adjustment policies, economic growth regressed and inflation worsened[43]. The alleviation of poverty was not a goal of structural adjustment loans and in fact, the circumstances of the poor often worsened due to a reduction in social spending and an increase in the price of food as subsidies were lifted.[44] By the late 1980s, international organizations began to recognize that structural adjustment policies were exacerbating the circumstances of the world’s poor. The World Bank responded by restructuring structural adjustment loans allowing for social spending to be maintained and encouraging a more gradual implementation of policies such as subsidy reductions and price changes[45]. In 1999 the World Bank and the IMF introduced the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper approach to replace structural adjustment loans[46]. The Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper approach has been interpreted as an extension of structural adjustment policies as it continues to reinforce and legitimize global inequities[47]. Neither approach has addressed the inherent flaws within the global economy that contribute to economic and social inequities within developing countries[48]. By reinforcing the relationship between lending and client states, many believe that the World Bank has prevented indebted countries from implementing autonomous national economic policy[49].

[edit] Water Privatization
Sociologist Michael Goldman has argued that “Industry analysts predict that private water will soon be a capitalized market as precious, and as war-provoking, as oil”[50] . Goldman continues to argue “These days, an indebted country cannot borrow capital from the World Bank or IMF without a domestic water privatization policy as a precondition”[51]. The Bank is utilizing “the "Washington Consensus" model of development to promote water privatization. Following this model, the World Bank is forcing many countries to commodify their water resources, rather then using their expertise in the public sector to acknowledge water as a universal human right and an essential public service[52]. The push for water privatization development plays upon “the shocking tragedy that much of the world lacks access to affordable and clean water” . This image creates “new opportunities in development though it may have little to do with ultimately quenching” the needs of impoverished countries . “The problem of water scarcity for the world’s poor has been analyzed by the World Bank as one in which the public sector has failed to deliver and has therefore prevented development from “taking off” and the economy from modernizing. If the state cannot deliver something as basic as water and sanitation, the argument goes, it is a strong indication of a general failure of public-sector capacity”[53]. However, “with the sale or lease of a public good comes more than simply a privatized service; alongside it comes a while set of postcolonial institutional forces that intervenes in state-citizen relations and North-South dynamics”[54].

[edit] See also

Praxis Discussion Series
Globalization
International Monetary Fund
Carbon finance
Globalization and Health
World Bank Development Marketplace Award
Global Justice Movement
infoDev


[edit] Notes


^ http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTABOUTUS/ORGANIZATION/BODEXT/0,,pagePK:64020055~theSitePK:278036,00.html
^ "About Us". World Bank. 2008-10-14. http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTABOUTUS/0,,pagePK:50004410~piPK:36602~theSitePK:29708,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-09. 
^ "About The World Bank (FAQs)". World Bank. http://go.worldbank.org/1M3PFQQMD0. Retrieved on 2007-10-07. 
^ Goldman, Michael. Imperial Nature: The World Bank and Struggles for Social Justice in the Age of Globalization. New York: Yale University Press, 2005 pp. 52-54
^ Goldman, Michael. Imperial Nature: The World Bank and Struggles for Social Justice in the Age of Globalization. New York: Yale University Press, 2005 pp. 56-60
^ Bird, Kai. The Chairman: John J. McCloy, the Making of the American Establisment. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1992, pp. 288, 290-291
^ Goldman, Michael. Imperial Nature: The World Bank and Struggles for Social Justice in the Age of Globalization. New York: Yale University Press, 2005 pp.60-63
^ Goldman, Michael. Imperial Nature: The World Bank and Struggles for Social Justice in the Age of Globalization. New York: Yale University Press, 2006 pp.62
^ Rotberg, Eugene. “Financial Operations of the World Bank.” In Bretton Woods: Looking to the Future, ed. Bretton Woods Commission. Washington, D.C.: Bretton Woods Commision, 1994
^ Mosley, Paul, Jane Harrigan, and John Toye. Aid and Power: The World Bank and Policy-Based Lending. London: Routledge, 1991
^ Toussaint, Eric. Your Money or Your Life! The Tyranny of Global Finance. London: Pluto Press, 1999
^ Cornia, Giovanni Andrea. Adjustment with a Human Face. 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987-1988
^ Goldman, Michael. Imperial Nature: The World Bank and Struggles for Social Justice in the Age of Globalization. New York: Yale University Press, 2005, pp. 93-97
^ "Organization". The World Bank Group. http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTABOUTUS/0,,contentMDK:20040580~menuPK:1696997~pagePK:51123644~piPK:329829~theSitePK:29708,00.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-25. 
^ "Members". The World Bank Group. http://go.worldbank.org/Y33OQYNE90. Retrieved on 2008-02-06. 
^ "Member countries". The World Bank Group. http://go.worldbank.org/PTLVNJ9DB0. Retrieved on 2008-02-06. 
^ "Topics in Development". World Bank. http://www.worldbank.org/html/extdr/thematic.htm. Retrieved on 2008-11-09. 
^ Landler, Mark (December 15, 2007). "Britain Overtakes U.S. as Top World Bank Donor". The New York Times (The New York Times Company). http://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/15/world/15worldbank.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-15. 
^ "Global Development: Views from the Center". Center for Global Development. 2008-05-20. http://blogs.cgdev.org/globaldevelopment/2008/05/climate_change_in_nashville_a.php. Retrieved on 2008-11-09. 
^ See Joseph Stiglitz, The Roaring Nineties, Globalization and Its Discontents, and Making Globalization Work.
^ Ibid.
^ For instance see David Moore's edited book 'The World Bank', University of KwaZulu-Natal Press, 2007
^ Woods, Ngaire. The Globalizers: The IMF, the World Bank, and Their Borrowers. Ithica and London: Cornell University Press, 2006, pp.190
^ Weaver, Catherine. Hypocrisy Trap: The World Bank and The Poverty of Reform Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2008,pp.31-32
^ Stiglitz, Joseph E. Making Globalization Work. New York and London: W.W. Norton & Company, 2006, pp. 17.
^ "Criticism of World Trade Organization, World Bank and International Monetary Fund - Editorial". The Ecologist (original), later republished at BNET Business Network. 2000-09. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m2465/is_6_30/ai_65653637. Retrieved on 2007-10-07. 
^ Uvin, P. (2002) On High Moral Ground: The Incorporation of Human Rights by the Development Enterprise. In: PRAXIS The Fletcher Journal of Development Studies, Volume XVII pp1-11. Medford MA: Tufts University. Online at: http://fletcher.tufts.edu/praxis/archives/xvii/Uvin.pdf
^ Hertz, N. (2004) I.O.U.: The Debt Threat and Why We Must Defuse It. London: Harper Perennial.
^ For arguments with regard to both of these claims see, for instance, David Moore's edited book The World Bank, University of KwaZulu-Natal Press, 2007
^ BRAZIL Toward Stability, TIME Magazine, December 31, 1965
^ BBC NEWS | Business | New South American bank planned
^ Wade, Robert (2002). "U.S. hegemony and the World Bank: the fight over people and ideas". Review of International Political Economy 9 (2): 215–243. doi:10.1080/09692290110126092. 
^ Monbiot, G. (2004) The Age of Consent. London: Harper Perennial.
^ Stone, Diane and Wright, Christopher eds. (2006) The World Bank and Governance: A Decade of Reform and Reaction, Routledge.
^ Aditya Chakrabortty. (2008). Secret report: biofuel caused food crisis. The Guardian.
^ Goldman, Michael. Imprerial Nature: The World Bank and Struggles for Social Justice in the Age of Globalization. New York: Yale University Press, 2005 pp.156
^ Goldman, Michael. Imprerial Nature: The World Bank and Struggles for Social Justice in the Age of Globalization. New York: Yale University Press, 2005 pp.179
^ Escobar, Arturo. “Encountering Development: the Making and Unmaking of the Third World.” New Jersey: Princeton University Press (1995), p. 13
^ Goldman, Michael. Imprerial Nature: The World Bank and Struggles for Social Justice in the Age of Globalization. New York: Yale University Press, 2005 pp.179
^ de Vries, Barend A. “The World Bank’s Focus on Poverty.” The World Bank: Lending on a Global Scale Eds. Jo Marie Griesgraber and Bernhard G. Gunter. London and Chicago: Pluto Press, 1996, pp.68.
^ de Vries, Barend A. “The World Bank’s Focus on Poverty.” The World Bank: Lending on a Global Scale Eds. Jo Marie Griesgraber and Bernhard G. Gunter. London and Chicago: Pluto Press, 1996, pp.69.
^ de Vries, Barend A. “The World Bank’s Focus on Poverty.” The World Bank: Lending on a Global Scale Eds. Jo Marie Griesgraber and Bernhard G. Gunter. London and Chicago: Pluto Press, 1996, pp.69.
^ de Vries, Barend A. “The World Bank’s Focus on Poverty.” The World Bank: Lending on a Global Scale Eds. Jo Marie Griesgraber and Bernhard G. Gunter. London and Chicago: Pluto Press, 1996, pp.69.
^ de Vries, Barend A. “The World Bank’s Focus on Poverty.” The World Bank: Lending on a Global Scale Eds. Jo Marie Griesgraber and Bernhard G. Gunter. London and Chicago: Pluto Press, 1996, pp.69.
^ de Vries, Barend A. “The World Bank’s Focus on Poverty.” The World Bank: Lending on a Global Scale Eds. Jo Marie Griesgraber and Bernhard G. Gunter. London and Chicago: Pluto Press, 1996, pp.70.
^ Tan, Celine. “The poverty of amnesia: PRSPs in the legacy of structural adjustment.” The World Bank and Governance: A Decade of Reform and Reaction Eds. Diane Stone and Christopher Wright London and New York: Routledge, 2007, pp. 147.
^ Tan, Celine. “The poverty of amnesia: PRSPs in the legacy of structural adjustment.” The World Bank and Governance: A Decade of Reform and Reaction Eds. Diane Stone and Christopher Wright London and New York: Routledge, 2007, pp. 152.
^ Tan, Celine. “The poverty of amnesia: PRSPs in the legacy of structural adjustment.” The World Bank and Governance: A Decade of Reform and Reaction Eds. Diane Stone and Christopher Wright London and New York: Routledge, 2007, pp. 152.
^ Chossudovsky M. The Globalization of Poverty: Impacts of IMF and World Bank Reforms Penang: Third World Network, 1997 in Tan, 152
^ Goldman, Michael. Imperial Nature: The World Bank and Struggles for Social Justice in the Age of Globalization. New York: Yale University Press, 2005 pp.232.
^ Ibid
^ http://www.globalpolicy.org/socecon/bwi-wto/wbank/2004/01waterpriv.html
^ Ibid
^ Goldman, Michael. Imperial Nature: The World Bank and Struggles for Social Justice in the Age of Globalization. New York: Yale University Press, 2005 pp.268



[edit] References

Transforming the Rural Nonfarm Economy: Opportunities and Threats in the Developing World. Edited by Steven Haggblade, Peter B. R. Hazell, and Thomas Reardon (2007). Johns Hopkins University Press.
Markwell, Donald (2006), John Maynard Keynes and International Relations: Economic Paths to War and Peace, Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press.


[edit] External links

World Bank site
World Bank Data and Analysis on Poverty and Economic Growth in South Asia
Ease of Doing Business Index
Partnership for Disaster reduction and recovery
iSimulate @ World Bank
Arno Tausch (2005) ‚World Bank Pension reforms and development patterns in the world system and in the “Wider Europe”. A 109 country investigation based on 33 indicators of economic growth, and human, social and ecological well-being, and a European regional case study’. A slightly re-worked version of a paper, originally presented to the Conference on “Reforming European pension systems. In memory of Professor Franco Modigliani. 24 and 25 September 2004”, Castle of Schengen, Luxembourg Institute for European and International Studies

Critical Perspectives

Essential Action
DC Indymedia
CADTM
WALHI
IFIwatchnet: an international network of independent organisations monitoring the World Bank and other International Financial Institutions
The Bank Information Center
The Bretton Woods Project
Free, online critical video on the World Bank, IMF etc
Eurodad report: Untying the knots - How the World Bank is failing to deliver real change on conditionality








v • d • e

Central banks










Global


Bank for International Settlements · Financial Stability Forum · Basel Committee on Banking Supervision














 
By continent










Africa


National Bank of Ethiopia · Central Bank of Libya · Bank Al-Maghrib (Morocco) · Central Bank of Nigeria · Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe







Americas


Central Bank of Argentina · Central Bank of Barbados · Central Bank of Brazil · Bank of Canada · Central Bank of Chile · Eastern Caribbean Central Bank · Bank of Mexico · Bank of the Republic · Central Reserve Bank of Peru · Federal Reserve System (United States) · Central Bank of Venezuela · Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago







Asia and Oceania


Reserve Bank of Australia · Bangladesh Bank · Brunei Currency and Monetary Board · People's Bank of China · Reserve Bank of India · Central Bank of Iran · Central Bank of Iraq · Bank of Israel · Bank Indonesia · Bank of Japan · Bank of Korea · Central Bank of Kuwait · Banque du Liban · Central Bank of Malaysia · Reserve Bank of New Zealand · State Bank of Pakistan · Central Bank of the Philippines · Monetary Authority of Singapore · Central Bank of Syria · Central Bank of the Republic of China · Bank of Thailand · State Bank of Vietnam · Hong Kong Monetary Authority







Europe


European Central Bank (Eurozone) · Bank of Abkhazia · Bank of Albania · Bulgarian National Bank · Croatian National Bank · Czech National Bank · Bank of England · Hungarian National Bank · Central Bank of Kosovo · Polish National Bank · National Bank of Romania · Central Bank of Russia  · Central Bank of Montenegro · National Bank of Serbia · Swiss National Bank  · Central Bank of Turkey · National Bank of Ukraine

















 
Policies and implementation










Policies


Expansionary monetary policy · Contractionary monetary policy · Capital requirement







Implementation


Open market operations · Capital control · Discount rate · Money creation · Interest rates · Sovereign wealth fund

















 
Bretton Woods system






World Bank · International Monetary Fund · International Bank for Reconstruction and Development · International Finance Corporation · International Development Association · Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency · International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes









List of central banks








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Bank"
Categories: World Bank | Carbon finance | Economics organizations | Banks | Banking institutesHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2007 | Articles with peacock terms 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Azərbaycan
Asturianu
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Furlan
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kiswahili
Latina
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
मराठी
Монгол
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
粵語
Žemaitėška
中文
吴语









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 20:07 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
