













Crimean War - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Crimean_War";
		var wgTitle = "Crimean War";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "46763";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281105381;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Crimean War

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For the World War II German offensive, see Crimean Campaign (1941–1942).  For the World War II Soviet offensive, see Crimean Offensive (1944).





Crimean War



Detail of Franz Roubaud's panoramic painting The Siege of Sevastopol (1904).





Date
1853–1856


Location
Crimean Peninsula,
Caucasus,
Balkans,
Black Sea,
Baltic Sea,
Pacific Ocean


Result
Allied victory, Treaty of Paris





Belligerents


 French Empire
 Ottoman Empire
 British Empire
 Kingdom of Sardinia
 Russian Empire
 Bulgarian Legion


Strength


300,000 Turks
400,000 French
250,000 British
18,000 Sardinians
700,000[1] Russians
4,000 Bulgarians


Casualties and losses


374,600 total dead[2] French: 100,000[2]
of which 10,240 killed in action; 20,000 died of wounds; ca 70,000 died of disease
British: 2,755 killed in action; 2,019 died of wounds; 16,323 died of disease
Sardinians: 36 casualties
Italians: 2,050 died from all causes[3]
Turks: total dead and wounded 200,000 est.[4]
total dead est. 50,000[5]
ca 522,000[6][7] killed, wounded and died of disease [8]
of which dead 60,000[9] to 110,000[3][10]
Other estimates:
ca 143,000 dead and 81,000 injured of which 25,000 killed in action; 16,000 died of wounds; 89,000 died of disease[11][12]













 
Crimean War







Oltenitza – Sinop – Kurekdere – Petropavlovsk – Alma – Sevastopol – Balaclava – Inkerman – Eupatoria – Taganrog – Chernaya River – Kars – Malakhoff – Kinburn













v • d • e

Russo-Ottoman Wars









1568–70 · 1571–72 · 1676–81 · 1686–1700 · 1687–89
1695–96 · 1710–11 · 1735–39 · 1768–74 · 1787–92
1806–12 · 1821–29 · 1828–29 · 1853–56 (Crimean War)
1877–78 · 1914–17 (World War I) · 1917–18











The Crimean War, also known in Russia as the Oriental War (Russian: Восточная война, Vostochnaya Voina) (October 1853[13][14]–February 1856) was fought between the Russian Empire on one side and an alliance of France, the United Kingdom, the Kingdom of Sardinia, and the Ottoman Empire on the other. The war was part of a long-running contest between the major European powers for influence over territories of the declining Ottoman Empire. Most of the conflict took place on the Crimean Peninsula, with additional actions occurring in western Turkey and the Baltic Sea region.
The Crimean War is sometimes considered to be the first "modern" conflict and "introduced technical changes which affected the future course of warfare".[15]




Contents


1 Pre-battle tensions

1.1 Conflict over the Holy Land
1.2 First hostilities
1.3 Peace attempts


2 Battles

2.1 Siege of Sevastopol
2.2 Azov Campaign
2.3 Baltic theatre
2.4 Genitchi Strait
2.5 Pacific
2.6 Italian involvement


3 End of the war
4 Criticisms and reform
5 Major events of the war
6 Prominent military commanders
7 Last veterans
8 Crimean War in fiction
9 See also
10 References

10.1 Notes
10.2 Bibliography
10.3 Further reading


11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Pre-battle tensions

[edit] Conflict over the Holy Land
The chain of events leading to France's and Britain's declaring war on Russia on 27 March and 28 March 1854[13] can be traced to the coup d'état of 1851 in France. Napoleon III had his ambassador to the Ottoman Empire force the Ottomans to recognize France as the "sovereign authority" in the Holy Land.[16]
Russia disputed this newest change in "authority" in the Holy Land. Pointing to two more treaties, one in 1757 and the other in 1774, the Ottomans reversed their earlier decision, renouncing the French treaty and insisting that Russia was the protector of the Orthodox Christians in the Ottoman Empire.
Napoleon III responded with a show of force, sending the ship of the line Charlemagne to the Black Sea, a violation of the London Straits Convention.[16] France's show of force, combined with aggressive diplomacy and money, induced Sultan Abdülmecid I to accept a new treaty, confirming France and the Roman Catholic Church as the supreme Christian authority in the Holy Land with control over the Christian holy places and possession of the keys to the Church of the Nativity, previously held by the Greek Orthodox Church.[17]
Tsar Nicholas I then deployed his 4th and 5th Army Corps along the River Danube, and had Count Karl Nesselrode, his foreign minister, undertake talks with the Ottomans. Nesselrode confided to Sir George Hamilton Seymour, the British ambassador in St. Petersburg:

[The dispute over the holy places] had assumed a new character - that the acts of injustice towards the Greek church which it had been desired to prevent had been perpetrated and consequently that now the object must be to find a remedy for these wrongs. The success of French negotiations at Constantinople was to be ascribed solely to intrigue and violence - violence which had been supposed to be the ultima ratio of kings, being, it had been seen, the means which the present ruler of France was in the habit of employing in the first instance.[18]

As conflict loomed over the question of the holy places, Nicholas I and Nesselrode began a diplomatic offensive which they hoped would prevent either Britain's or France's interfering in any conflict between Russia and the Ottomans, as well as to prevent their allying together.




Cornet Henry Wilkin, 11th Hussars, British Army. Photo by Roger Fenton


Nicholas began courting Britain through Seymour. Nicholas insisted that he no longer wished to expand Imperial Russia, but that he had an obligation to Christian communities in the Ottoman Empire.
The Tsar next dispatched a diplomat, Prince Menshikov, on a special mission to the Porte. By previous treaties, the Sultan was committed "to protect the Christian religion and its churches". Menshikov attempted to negotiate a new treaty, under which Russia would be allowed to interfere whenever it deemed the Sultan's protection inadequate. Further, this new synod, a religious convention, would allow Russia to control the Orthodox Church's hierarchy in the Ottoman Empire. Menshikov arrived at Constantinople on 16 February 1853 on the steam-powered warship Gromovnik. Menshikov broke protocol at the Porte when, at his first meeting with the Sultan, he condemned the Ottomans' concessions to the French. Menshikov also began demanding the replacement of highly-placed Ottoman civil servants.
The British embassy at Constantinople at the time was being run by Hugh Rose, chargé d'affaires for the British. Using his considerable resources within the Ottoman Empire, Rose gathered intelligence on Russian troop movements along the Danube frontier, and became concerned about the extent of Menshikov's mission to the Porte. Rose, using his authority as the British representative to the Ottomans, ordered a British squadron of warships to depart early for an eastern Mediterranean cruise and head for Constantinople. However, Rose's actions were not backed up by Whitley Dundas, the British admiral in command of the squadron, who resented the diplomat for believing he could interfere in the Admiralty's business. Within a week, Rose's actions were cancelled. Only the French sent a naval task force to support the Ottomans.

[edit] First hostilities




Battle of Sinope, by Ivan Aivazovsky


At the same time, however, the British government of Prime Minister Aberdeen sent Lord Stratford. Lord Stratford convinced the Sultan to reject the treaty, which compromised the independence of the Turks. Benjamin Disraeli blamed Aberdeen and Stratford's actions for making war inevitable, thus starting the process by which Aberdeen would be forced to resign for his role in starting the war. Shortly after he learned of the failure of Menshikov's diplomacy, the Tsar marched his armies into Moldavia and Wallachia (principalities along the Danube, under Ottoman suzerainty, in which Russia was acknowledged as a special guardian of the Orthodox Church), using the Sultan's failure to resolve the issue of the Holy Places as a pretext. Nicholas believed that the European powers, especially Austria, would not object strongly to the annexation of a few neighbouring Ottoman provinces, especially given Russian involvement in suppressing the Revolutions of 1848.
When on 2 July 1853[19] the Tsar sent his troops into the "Danubian Principalities", Britain, seeking to maintain the security of the Ottoman Empire, sent a fleet to the Dardanelles, where it joined another fleet sent by France. At the same time, however, the European powers hoped for a diplomatic compromise. The representatives of the four neutral Great Powers — Britain, France, Austria and Prussia — met in Vienna, where they drafted a note which they hoped would be acceptable to the Russians and Ottomans. The note met with the approval of Nicholas I; it was, however, rejected by Abdülmecid, who felt that the document's poor phrasing left it open to many different interpretations. Britain, France and Austria were united in proposing amendments to mollify the Sultan, but their suggestions were ignored in the court of St Petersburg.
Britain and France set aside the idea of continuing negotiations, but Austria and Prussia did not believe that the rejection of the proposed amendments justified the abandonment of the diplomatic process. The Sultan formally declared war on 23 October 1853[13] and proceeded to the attack, his armies moving on the Russian army near the Danube later that month.[20] Nicholas responded by dispatching warships, which in the Battle of Sinop on 30 November 1853 destroyed a patrol squadron of Ottoman frigates and corvettes while they were anchored at the port of Sinop, northern Turkey. The destruction of the Turkish ships provided Britain and France the casus belli for declaring war against Russia, on the side of the Ottoman Empire. By 28 March 1854, after Russia ignored an Anglo-French ultimatum to withdraw from the Danubian Principalities, Britain and France had formally declared war.[14][21][22]




Mahmudiye (1829), ordered by the Ottoman Sultan Mahmud II and built by the Imperial Naval Arsenal on the Golden Horn in Istanbul, was for many years the largest warship in the world. The 62x17x7 m ship-of-the-line was armed with 128 cannons on 3 decks. She participated in many important naval battles, including the Siege of Sevastopol (1854-1855) during the Crimean War (1854-1856). She was decommissioned in 1875



[edit] Peace attempts
Nicholas felt that because of Russian assistance in suppressing the Hungarian revolt of 1848, Austria would side with him, or at the very least remain neutral. Austria, however, felt threatened by the Russian troops. When Britain and France demanded the withdrawal of Russian forces from the principalities, Austria supported them and, though it did not immediately declare war on Russia, it refused to guarantee its neutrality.
Though the original grounds for war were lost when Russia withdrew its troops, Britain and France continued with hostilities. Determined to address the Eastern Question by putting an end to the Russian threat to the Ottoman Empire, the allies proposed several conditions for a peaceful resolution, including:

Russia was to give up its protectorate over the Danubian Principalities;
It was to abandon any claim granting it the right to interfere in Ottoman affairs on the behalf of the Orthodox Christians;
The Straits Convention of 1841 was to be revised;
All nations were to be granted access to the River Danube.

When the Tsar refused to comply with these Four Points, the Crimean War commenced.

[edit] Battles




French zouaves and Russian soldiers engaged in hand-to-hand combat at Malakhov Kurgan



[edit] Siege of Sevastopol
Main article: Siege of Sevastopol (1854–1855)
During the following month, though the immediate cause of war was withdrawn, allied troops landed in the Crimea and besieged the city of Sevastopol, home of the Tsar's Black Sea Fleet and the associated threat of potential Russian penetration into the Mediterranean.
The Russians had to scuttle their ships, and used the naval cannons as additional artillery and the ships' crews as marines. During the siege, the Russians lost four 110- or 120-gun 3-decker ships of the line, twelve 84-gun 2-deckers and four 60-gun frigates in the Black Sea, plus a large number of smaller vessels. Admiral Nakhimov suffered a fatal bullet wound to the head and died on 30 June 1855. The city was captured in September 9, 1855, after about a year-long siege.
In the same year, the Russians besieged and occupied the Turkish fortress of Kars (the Battle of Kurekdere had been fought between the two in the same general area the year before).

[edit] Azov Campaign
Main article: Siege of Taganrog
In spring 1855, the allied British-French commanders decided to send an Anglo-French naval squadron into the Azov Sea to undermine Russian communications and supplies to besieged Sevastopol. On May 12, 1855 British-French war ships entered the Kerch Strait and destroyed the coast battery of the Kamishevaya Bay. On 21 May 1855 the gunboats and armed steamers attacked the seaport of Taganrog, the most important hub in terms of its proximity to Rostov on Don and due to the vast amounts of food, especially bread, wheat, barley and rye that were amassed in the city after the outbreak of war prevented its exportation.




Bombardment of Taganrog from a British raft during the first siege attempt


The Governor of Taganrog, Yegor Tolstoy and lieutenant-general Ivan Krasnov refused the ultimatum, responding that "Russians never surrender their cities". The British-French squadron bombarded Taganrog for 6 1/2 hours and landed 300 troops near the Old Stairway in the downtown Taganrog, but they were thrown back by Don Cossacks and a volunteer corps.
In July 1855, the allied squadron tried to go past Taganrog to Rostov on Don, entering the Don River through the Mius River. On 12 July 1855 H.M.S. Jasper grounded near Taganrog thanks to a fisherman, who repositioned the buoys into shallow waters. The Cossacks captured the gunboat with all of its guns and blew it up. The third siege attempt was made August 19-31, 1855, but the city was already fortified and the squadron could not approach close enough for landing operations. The allied fleet left the Gulf of Taganrog on September 2, 1855, with minor military operations along the Azov Sea coast continuing until late autumn 1855.

[edit] Baltic theatre
See also: Charles John Napier#Baltic Campaign
The Baltic was a forgotten theatre of the war. The popularisation of events elsewhere had overshadowed the significance of this theatre, which was close to Saint Petersburg, the Russian capital. From the beginning, the Baltic campaign was a stalemate. The outnumbered Russian Baltic Fleet confined its movements to the areas around fortifications. At the same time, British and French commanders Sir Charles Napier and Alexandre Ferdinand Parseval-Deschenes – although they led the largest fleet assembled since the Napoleonic Wars – considered Russian coastal fortifications, especially the Sveaborg fortress, too well-defended to engage and they limited their actions to blockading Russian trade and conducting raids on less fortified sections of the Finnish coast.




Bombardment of Bomarsund during the Crimean War


Russia was dependent on imports for both the domestic economy and the supply of her military forces and the blockade seriously undermined the Russian economy. Raiding by allied British and French fleets destroyed forts on the Finnish coast including Bomarsund on the Åland Islands and Fort Slava. Other such attacks were not so successful, and the poorly planned attempts to take Hanko, Ekenäs, Kokkola and Turku were repulsed.
The burning of tar warehouses and ships in Oulu and Raahe led to international criticism, and in Britain, MP Thomas Gibson demanded in the House of Commons that the First Lord of the Admiralty explain "a system which carried on a great war by plundering and destroying the property of defenceless villagers". In the autumn, a squadron of three British warships led by HMS Miranda left the Baltic for the White Sea, where they shelled Kola (which was utterly destroyed) and the Solovki. Their attempt to storm Arkhangelsk proved abortive, as was the siege of Petropavlovsk in Kamchatka. Here, an Anglo-French naval squadron successfully shelled the town but a naval brigade of 800 sailors and marines landed the next day was repulsed.
In 1855, the Western Allied Baltic Fleet tried to destroy heavily defended Russian dockyards at Sveaborg outside Helsinki. More than 1,000 enemy guns tested the strength of the fortress for two days. Despite the shelling, the sailors of the 120-gun ship Rossiya, led by Captain Viktor Poplonsky, defended the entrance to the harbour. The Allies fired over twenty thousand shells but were unable to defeat the Russian batteries. A massive new fleet of more than 350 gunboats and mortar vessels was prepared, but before the attack was launched, the war ended.




"Bombardment of the Solovetsky Monastery in the White Sea by the Royal Navy". A lubok (popular print) from 1868


Part of the Russian resistance was credited to the deployment of newly created blockade mines. Perhaps the most influential contributor to the development of naval mining was inventor and civil engineer Immanuel Nobel, the father of Alfred Nobel. Immanuel helped the war effort for Russia by applying his knowledge of industrial explosives such as nitroglycerin and gunpowder. Modern naval mining is said to date from the Crimean War: "Torpedo mines, if I may use this name given by Fulton to self-acting mines underwater, were among the novelties attempted by the Russians in their defenses about Cronstadt and Sevastopol", as one American officer put it in 1860.[23]

[edit] Genitchi Strait
The Russians had built a large floating pontoon bridge across the Genitchi Strait, Sea of Azov, to connect the town of Genitchi to the Arabat Spit, and it served as the main supply route to reinforce their troops at Sevastopol. The destruction of the bridge would force the Russians to travel an extra 192 km (120 miles) to deliver supplies, and it therefore became a strategic objective for British forces. Two attacks to cut the floating bridge's hawsers had proved unsuccessful and alerted the Russian garrison. The British made a third attempt on 3 July 1855 using HMS Beagle's four-oared gig, commanded by Gunner John Hayles, and a small paddle-box steamer with one gun, under Midshipman Martin Tracy. The paddle-box steamer moored where the crew could see Russian soldiers marching about on shore and fired the first round in the breech, which drew the gun's securing bolts and made it useless. That left six men in a four-oared boat (including Joseph Trewavas), one rifle, ten rounds of ammunition, and a cutlass apiece to face two hundred enemy on shore behind heaps of coal.




The French ironclad floating battery Lave destroyed Russian batteries at the Battle of Kinburn (1855).


In Trewavas's own words, "As we paddled out of sight of our ship, on a little mound we could see the Russians motioning the soldiers on shore to keep down and our man in the bow with a loaded rifle wanted to have a 'go' at them but the gunner gave him orders not to do so. I was pulling the bow oar and when we were near the floating bridge, I leapt onto it, cut the hawsers and jumped back in the boat again and shoved off. During this time the Russians, who were only 80 metres off, had not fired a shot, and our man in the bow fired his rifle at them swearing he hit his man. The Russians then let fly. For some time we could not get away as the water was so shallow, and the shot came at us like hailstones, wounding three men and riddling the boat with shot. Reaching safety and the protection of our ship, our boat was sinking and full of water."
(Trewavas wondered why the Russians had not fired upon the British as they approached the pontoon bridge at Genitchi, but later a Russian officer explained that they had no idea the sailors planned to destroy the bridge, believing rather that they intended to destroy shipping, and therefore held fire with the intention of taking them prisoner.)

[edit] Pacific
Main article: Siege of Petropavlovsk
Minor naval skirmishes also occurred in the Far East, where a strong British and French Allied squadron (including HMS Pique) under Rear Admiral David Price and Contre-admiral Febrier-Despointes besieged a smaller Russian force under Rear Admiral Yevfimy Putyatin at Petropavlovsk on the Kamchatka Peninsula. An Allied landing force was beaten back with heavy casualties in September 1854, and the Allies withdrew. The Russians escaped under snow in early 1855 after Allied reinforcements arrived in the region.

[edit] Italian involvement
With the Italian Unification campaign going on at the time in the Italian states, Camillo di Cavour, under orders by Victor Emmanuel II of the Kingdom of Sardinia, sent troops to side with French and British forces during the war. This was an attempt at gaining the favour of the French especially when the issue of uniting Italy under the Sardinian throne would become an important matter. The deployment of Italian troops to the Crimea allowed Piedmont to be represented at the peace conference at the end of the war, where it could address the issue of the Risorgimento to other European powers.

[edit] End of the war
Peace negotiations began in 1856 under Nicholas I's son and successor, Alexander II, through the Congress of Paris. Furthermore, the Tsar and the Sultan agreed not to establish any naval or military arsenal on the Black Sea coast. The Black Sea clauses came at a tremendous disadvantage to Russia, for it greatly diminished the naval threat it posed to the Turks. Moreover, all the Great Powers pledged to respect the independence and territorial integrity of the Ottoman Empire.
The Treaty of Paris stood until 1871, when France was defeated by Prussia in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1871. Whilst Prussia and several other German states united to form a powerful German Empire, the Emperor of the French, Napoleon III, was deposed to permit the formation of a Third French Republic. During his reign Napoleon III, eager for the support of Great Britain, had opposed Russia over the Eastern Question. Russian interference in the Ottoman Empire, however, did not in any significant manner threaten the interests of France. Thus, France abandoned its opposition to Russia after the establishment of a Republic. Encouraged by the decision of the French, and supported by the German minister Otto Fürst von Bismarck, Russia denounced the Black Sea clauses of the treaty agreed to in 1856. As Great Britain alone could not enforce the clauses, Russia once again established a fleet in the Black Sea.
Having abandoned its alliance with Russia, Austria was diplomatically isolated following the war. This led to its defeat in the 1866 Austro-Prussian War and loss of influence in most German-speaking lands. Soon after, Austria would ally with Prussia as it became the new state of Germany. With France, now hostile to Germany, allied with Russia, and Russia competing with the newly re-named Austro-Hungarian Empire for an increased role in the Balkans at the expense of the Turks, the foundations were in place for creating the diplomatic alliances that would lead to World War I.
Notwithstanding the guarantees to preserve Ottoman territories specified in the Treaty of Paris, Russia, exploiting nationalist unrest in the Ottoman states in the Balkans and seeking to regain lost prestige, once again declared war on the Ottoman Empire on 24 April 1877. In this later Russo-Turkish War the states of Bulgaria, Romania, Serbia and Montenegro achieved independence.

[edit] Criticisms and reform




Photograph of the British army camp at Balaklava during the Crimean War. Albumen silver print by "Robertson & Beato", 1855


The Crimean War was notorious for military and logistical incompetence by the British army. However, it highlighted the work of women who served as army nurses. War correspondents for newspapers reported the scandalous treatment of wounded soldiers in the desperate winter that followed and prompted the work of Florence Nightingale, Mary Seacole, and others and led to the introduction of modern nursing methods.
The Crimean War also saw the first tactical use of railways and other modern inventions such as the telegraph. The war also employed modern military tactics, such as trenches and blind artillery fire. The use of the Minié ball for shot, coupled with the rifling of barrels, greatly increased Allied rifle range and damage.
The British Army system of sale of commissions came under great scrutiny during the war, especially in connection with the Battle of Balaclava, which saw the ill-fated Charge of the Light Brigade. This scrutiny eventually led to the abolition of the sale of commissions.
The Crimean War was a contributing factor in the Russian abolition of serfdom in 1861: Alexander II saw the military defeat of the Russian serf army by free troops from Britain and France as proof of the need for emancipation.[24] The Crimean War also led to the eventual realization by the Russian government of its current technological inferiority, namely in its military practices as well as its military weapons.[25]

[edit] Major events of the war




Crimean War Memorial near Regent Street, St James's Park, London



Some action also took place on the Russian Pacific coast, Asia Minor, the Baltic and White Seas
The roots of the war lay in the existing rivalry between the British and the Russians in other areas such as Afghanistan (The Great Game). Conflicts over control of holy places in Jerusalem led to aggressive actions in the Balkans, and around the Dardanelles.
Major battles

Destruction of the Ottoman Fleet at Sinop - 30 November 1853
The Siege of Petropavlovsk - 30-31 August 1854, on the Pacific coast
The Battle of Alma - 20 September 1854
Siege of Sevastopol (also known as "Sebastopol") - 25 September 1854 to 8 September 1855
The Battle of Balaclava - 25 October 1854 (see also Charge of the Light Brigade)
The Battle of Inkerman - 5 November 1854
Battle of Eupatoria, 17 February 1855
Battle of Chernaya River (aka "Traktir Bridge") - 25 August 1855
Anglo-French naval campaign in the Sea of Azoff (Azov), May to November 1855
Siege of Kars, June to 28 November 1855


It was the first war where the electric telegraph started to have a significant effect, with the first 'live' war reporting to The Times by William Howard Russell. Indeed, some credit Russell with prompting the resignation of the sitting British government through his reporting of the lacklustre shape of the British forces deployed to the Crimea. Additionally, the telegraph reduced the independence of British overseas possessions from their commanders in London due to such rapid communications. Newspaper readership informed public opinion in the United Kingdom and France as never before. It was the first European war to be photographed.
Florence Nightingale and Mary Seacole came to prominence for their contributions in the field of nursing.


[edit] Prominent military commanders




Chapel in Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, commemorating the Siege of Petropavlovsk in 1854



Russian commanders

Prince Mikhail Dmitriyevich Gorchakov
Count and Namestnik Ivan Feodorovich Paskevich
Admiral Pavel Stepanovich Nakhimov
General Eduard Ivanovich Totleben
Prince Aleksandr Sergeyevich Menshikov


British commanders

Earl of Cardigan
Lord Raglan
Sir Thomas James Harper
Sir Edmund Lyons (later 1st Lord Lyons)


French commanders

Marshal Jacques Leroy de Saint Arnaud
Marshal François Certain Canrobert
Marshal Aimable Pélissier


Ottoman commanders

General Abdülkerim Nadir Pasha
General Omar Pasha


Sardo-Piedmontese commanders

General Alfonso Ferrero La Marmora




[edit] Last veterans

Yves Prigent (1833-1938). Was in French Navy.[26]
Charles Nathan (1834-1934). Last French soldier, also saw action in Italy, Syria, Mexico and the Franco-Prussian War.
Edwin Hughes (1830-1927). Last survivor of the Charge of the Light Brigade.
Colonel Rookes Evelyn Bell Crompton (1845-1940). He was a cadet on HMS Dragon during the siege of Sevastopol, earning two campaign medals before his twelfth birthday.


[edit] Crimean War in fiction

The Charge of the Light Brigade by Alfred, Lord Tennyson depicted a disastrous but brave cavalry charge during the Battle of Balaclava.
Leo Tolstoy wrote a few short sketches on the Siege of Sevastopol, collected in The Sebastopol Sketches. The stories detail the lives of the Russian soldiers and citizens in Sevastopol during the siege. Because of this work, Tolstoy has been called the world's first war correspondent.
Jack Archer: A Tale of the Crimea by G.A. Henty, 1883, a historical novel, details the adventures of two sailors in the Crimean War.
"Hope" by Lesley Pearse describes the experiences of a nurse in the Crimean War as part of a wider and longer plot.
James Joyce's Finnegans Wake includes an episode known as "How Buckley Shot the Russian General" which is based on a story from the Crimean War and contains innumerable references to the war, its locales, the languages spoken there, and the literature inspired by the war, including "The Charge of the Light Brigade".
In Fire Emblem: Path of Radiance and Fire Emblem: Radiant Dawn, one of the countries that the characters come from is named Crimea.
Anti-Ice, by Stephen Baxter, and Queen Victoria's Bomb, by Ronald W. Clark, both depict alternate histories where nuclear weapons were used by the British in the war.
Captain Nemo: The Fantastic History of a Dark Genius, by Kevin J. Anderson, features several Jules Verne characters (such as Captain Nemo and Robur the Conqueror) serving in the Crimean War.
Detailed and vivid fictional accounts of the Crimean War, the Intelligence Department, the Charge of the Light Brigade, its aftermath and the experience of nursing during the war are portrayed, as part of a wider plot, in The Winter Journey, Volume 20 of The Morland Dynasty a series of historical novels by author Cynthia Harrod-Eagles. Although this is a recent work of fiction, the author is also a historian and cites many factual works as part of her research for this novel.
Flashman at the Charge, a 1973 novel by George MacDonald Fraser. Harry Flashman finds himself in the Crimea as an unwilling participant in the notable actions of the War, including The Thin Red Line, the Charge of the Heavy Brigade the infamous Charge of the Light Brigade.


Music

The song "The Trooper" by heavy metal band Iron Maiden tells a story from the point of view of a British soldier.
The song "Abdul Abulbul Amir" by Irish music hall performer Percy French was inspired by the Crimean War and reduces it to two fighters, the Turk Abdul and the Russian soldier Ivan Skavinsky Skivar, who duel over a triviality and both die, accomplishing nothing.
The Irish music song "The Kerry Recruit" deals with the experiences of a young man from Kerry who fights in the war.




[edit] See also

Anglo-Russian War (1807-1812)
Crimean War medals
Crimean War Memorial
Florence Nightingale
Fort Queenscliff
History of the Balkans
List of Crimean War Victoria Cross recipients
Mary Seacole
Roger Fenton, Crimean War photographer (the first war photographer)
Timothy (tortoise), naval mascot
Peace Concluded (painting)


[edit] References

[edit] Notes


^ Военная Энциклопедия, М., Воениздат 1999, т.4, стр.315
^ a b Napoleon III, Pierre Milza, Perrin edition, 2004
^ a b John Sweetman, Crimean War, Essential Histories 2, Osprey Publishing, 2001, ISBN 1 84176 186 9, p.89
^ Военная Энциклопедия, М., Воениздат 1999, т.4, стр.317
^ Clive Pointing, The Crimean War: The Truth Behind the Myth, Chatto & Windus, London, 2004, ISBN 0 7011 7390 4, p.344
^ Военная Энциклопедия, М., Воениздат 1999, т.4, стр.317
^ The Osprey Companion to Military History, R Cowley and G Parker (eds.), Osprey Publishing, 1996, ISBN 1 85532 663 9, p.116
^ Dupuy and Dupuy The Encyclopedia of Military History, Macdonald and Jane's, 1970, p.829 gives the following figure for the Russian casualties: 256,000 total, of which 128,000 battle casualties
^ Royle. The Books "Crimea" and The Great crimean war"
^ Clive Pointing, The Crimean War: The Truth Behind the Myth, Chatto & Windus, London, 2004, ISBN 0 7011 7390 4, p.344 gives the number of Russian dead as 475,000 which is much too high, probably a result of confusing the number of dead and wounded with the number of dead
^ Зайончковский А. М. Восточная война 1853—1856. СПб:Полигон, 2002
^ Восточный вопрос. Энциклопедический Словарь Ф. А. Брокгауза и И. А. Ефрона
^ a b c Kinglake (1863:354)
^ a b Sweetman (2001:7)
^ Royle. Preface
^ a b Royle. Pg 19
^ Royle. Pg 20
^ Royle. Pg 21
^ Kinglake (1863:195)
^ Encyclopædia Britannica: Crimean War. 1994. 
^ Correspondent (28 March 1854). "In the House of Lords". The Morning Chronicle: p. 4. 
^ Kinglake (1863:463–4)
^ Mining in the Crimean War
^ Moon, David (2001). The Abolition of Serfdom in Russia, 1762-1907. Harlow, England: Pearson Education. pp. 49–55. ISBN 058229486X. 
^ http://www.russianwarrior.com/STMMain.htm
^ dernier vétéran de la guerre de crimée et du siège de sébastopole



[edit] Bibliography

Bridge and Bullen, The Great Powers and the European States System 1814-1914, (Pearson Education: London), 2005
Bamgart, Winfried The Crimean War, 1853-1856 (2002) Arnold Publishers ISBN 0-340-61465-X
Ponting, Clive The Crimean War (2004) Chatto and Windus ISBN 0-7011-7390-4
Pottinger Saab, Anne The Origins of the Crimean Alliance (1977) University of Virginia Press ISBN 0-8139-0699-7
Rich, Norman Why the Crimean War: A Cautionary Tale (1985) McGraw-Hill ISBN 0-07-052255-3
Royce, Simon The Crimean War and its place in European Economic History (2001) University of London Press ISBN 0-3825-2868-6
Royle, Trevor Crimea: The Great Crimean War, 1854-1856 (2000) Palgrave Macmillan ISBN 1-4039-6416-5
Schroeder, Paul W. Austria, Great Britain, and the Crimean War: The Destruction of the European Concert (1972) Cornell University Press ISBN 0-8014-0742-7
Wetzel, David The Crimean War: A Diplomatic History (1985) Columbia University Press ISBN 0-88033-086-4
Russell, William Howard, "The Crimean War: As Seen by Those Who Reported It". Baton Rouge LA. :Louisiana State University Press, 2009 ISBN 978-0-8071-3445-0


[edit] Further reading

Hamley, The War in the Crimea, (London, 1891)
Kinglake, The Invasion of the Crimea, (nine volumes, London, 1863-87)
Russell, The War in the Crimea, 1854-56, (London, 1855-56)
Marx, The Eastern Question, 1853-56, (translated by E. M. and E. Aveling, London, 1897)
Lodomir, La guerre de 1853-56, (Paris, 1857)
Kovalevski, Der Krieg Russlands mit der Türkei in den Jahren 1853-54, (Leipzig, 1869)
Rein, Die Teilnahme Sardiniens am Krimkrieg und de öffentliche Meinung in Italien, (Leipzig, 1911)


[edit] External links




Military history of the Ottoman Empire portal






Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Crimean War



A small peace celebration: 29 May 1856
Anne S. K. Brown Military Collection, Brown University Library Prints, drawings, and watercolours
Austria Chronology Crimean War
Commander W. Gordon, R.N. (H.M.S Sansapareil). Balaclava and the Sevastopol Inquiry, 1855
Crimean War Research Society.
France Chronology Crimean War
Great Britain Chronology Crimean War
Immediate causes of the War detailed in context.
Italy Chronology Crimean War
Loading and Firing British Muskets in the Crimean War 1854-1856
Punch Sketches on Crimean War
Russia Chronology Crimean War
The Army Service of Hastings McAllister
The Baltic Campaign of the Crimean War
The Charge of the Light Brigade (1968 Movie)
The Tunisian Army in the Crimean War: A Military Mystery by Dr. Andrew McGregor
Turkey Chronology Crimean War





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crimean_War"
Categories: Crimean War | Wars involving France | Wars involving Italy | Wars involving Russia | Wars involving Turkey | Wars involving the United Kingdom | 19th century in France | 19th century in the United KingdomHidden categories: Articles containing Russian language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Azərbaycan
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Français
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
ភាសាខ្មែរ
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Walon
中文









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 16:46.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
