













Computational neuroscience - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Computational_neuroscience";
		var wgTitle = "Computational neuroscience";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "271430";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281310430;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Computational neuroscience

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2009)


Computational neuroscience is an interdisciplinary science that links the diverse fields of neuroscience, cognitive science, electrical engineering, computer science, physics and mathematics. Historically, the term was introduced by Eric L. Schwartz, who organized a conference, held in 1985 in Carmel, California at the request of the Systems Development Foundation, to provide a summary of the current status of a field which until that point was referred to by a variety of names, such as neural modeling, brain theory and neural networks. The proceedings of this definitional meeting were later published as the book "Computational Neuroscience" (1990).[1] The early historical roots of the field can be traced to the work of people such as Hodgkin & Huxley, Hubel & Wiesel, and David Marr, to name but a few. Hodgkin & Huxley developed the voltage clamp and created the first mathematical model of the action potential. Hubel & Wiesel discovered that neurons in primary visual cortex, the first cortical area to process information coming from the retina, have oriented receptive fields and are organized in columns.[2] David Marr's work focused on the interactions between neurons, suggesting computational approaches to the study of how functional groups of neurons within the hippocampus and neocortex interact, store, process, and transmit information. Computational modeling of biophysically realistic neurons and dendrites began with the work of Wilfrid Rall, with the first multicompartmental model using cable theory.
Computational neuroscience is distinct from psychological connectionism and theories of learning from disciplines such as machine learning, neural networks and statistical learning theory in that it emphasizes descriptions of functional and biologically realistic neurons (and neural systems) and their physiology and dynamics. These models capture the essential features of the biological system at multiple spatial-temporal scales, from membrane currents, protein and chemical coupling to network oscillations, columnar and topographic architecture and learning and memory. These computational models are used to test hypotheses that can be directly verified by current or future biological experiments.
Currently, the field is undergoing a rapid expansion. There are many software packages, such as GENESIS and NEURON, that allow rapid and systematic in silico modeling of realistic neurons. Blue Brain, a collaboration between IBM and École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, aims to construct a biophysically detailed simulation of a cortical column on the Blue Gene supercomputer.




Contents


1 Organizations
2 Major topics

2.1 Single-neuron modeling
2.2 Development, axonal patterning and guidance
2.3 Sensory processing
2.4 Memory and synaptic plasticity
2.5 Behaviors of networks
2.6 Cognition, discrimination and learning
2.7 Consciousness


3 See also
4 References
5 External links

5.1 Journals
5.2 Software
5.3 Conferences
5.4 Websites


6 Courses

6.1 Research groups
6.2 Papers







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Organizations
The Organization for Computational Neuroscience is a non-profit organization one of whose tasks is to organize the annual international Computational Neuroscience meeting.

[edit] Major topics
Research in computational neuroscience can be roughly categorized into several lines of inquiries. Most computational neuroscientists collaborate closely with experimentalists in analyzing novel data and synthesizing new models of biological phenomena.

[edit] Single-neuron modeling
Main article: Biological neuron models
Even single neurons have complex biophysical characteristics. Hodgkin and Huxley's original model only employed two voltage-sensitive currents, the fast-acting sodium and the inward-rectifying potassium. Though successful in predicting the timing and qualitative features of the action potential, it nevertheless failed to predict a number of important features such as adaptation and shunting. Scientists now believe that there are a wide variety of voltage-sensitive currents, and the implications of the differing dynamics, modulations and sensitivity of these currents is an important topic of computational neuroscience.[3]
The computational functions of complex dendrites are also under intense investigation. There is a large body of literature regarding how different currents interact with geometric properties of neurons.[4]
Some models are also tracking biochemical pathways at very small scales such as spines or synaptic clefts.

[edit] Development, axonal patterning and guidance
How do axons and dendrites form during development? How do axons know where to target and how to reach these targets? How do neurons migrate to the proper position in the central and peripheral systems? How do synapses form? We know from molecular biology that distinct parts of the nervous system release distinct chemical cues, from growth factors to hormones that modulate and influence the growth and development of functional connections between neurons.
Theoretical investigations into the formation and patterning of synaptic connection and morphology is still nascent. One hypothesis that has recently garnered some attention is the minimal wiring hypothesis, which postulates that the formation of axons and dendrites effectively minimizes resource allocation while maintaining maximal information storage.[5]

[edit] Sensory processing
Early models of sensory processing understood within a theoretical framework is credited to Horace Barlow. Somewhat similar to the minimal wiring hypothesis described in the preceding section, Barlow understood the processing of the early sensory systems to be a form of efficient coding, where the neurons encoded information which minimized the number of spikes. Experimental and computational work have since supported this hypothesis in one form or another.
Current research in sensory processing is divided among biophysical modelling of different subsystems and more theoretical modelling function of perception. Current models of perception have suggested that the brain performs some form of Bayesian inference and integration of different sensory information in generating our perception of the physical world.

[edit] Memory and synaptic plasticity
Main article: Synaptic plasticity
Earlier models of memory are primarily based on the postulates of Hebbian learning. Biologically relevant models such as Hopfield net have been developed to address the properties of associative, rather than content-addressable style of memory that occur in biological systems. These attempts are primarily focusing on the formation of medium-term and long-term memory, localizing in the hippocampus. Models of working memory, relying on theories of network oscillations and persistent activity, have been built to capture some features of the prefrontal cortex in context-related memory.[6]
One of the major problems in biological memory is how it is maintained and changed through multiple time scales. Unstable synapses are easy to train but also prone to stochastic disruption. Stable synapses forget less easily, but they are also harder to consolidate. One recent computational hypothesis involves cascades of plasticity[7] that allow synapses to function at multiple time scales. Stereochemically detailed models of the acetylcholine receptor-based synapse with Monte Carlo method, working at the time scale of microseconds, have been built.[8] It is likely that computational tools will contribute greatly to our understanding of how synapses function and change in relation to external stimulus in the coming decades.

[edit] Behaviors of networks
Biological neurons are connected to each other in a complex, recurrent fashion. These connections are, unlike most artificial neural networks, sparse and most likely, specific. It is not known how information is transmitted through such sparsely connected networks. It is also unknown what the computational functions, if any, of these specific connectivity patterns are.
The interactions of neurons in a small network can be often reduced to simple models such as the Ising model. The statistical mechanics of such simple systems are well-characterized theoretically. There have been some recent evidence that suggests that dynamics of arbitrary neuronal networks can be reduced to pairwise interactions.(Schneidman et al, 2006; Shlens et al, 2006.)[9] It's unknown, however, whether such descriptive dynamics impart any important computational function. With the emergence of two-photon microscopy and calcium imaging, we now have powerful experimental methods with which to test the new theories regarding neuronal networks.
While many neuro-theorists prefer models with reduced complexity, others argue that uncovering structure function relations depends on including as much neuronal and network structure as possible. Models of this type are typically built in large simulations platforms like GENESIS or Neuron. There have been some attempts to provide unified methods that bridge, and integrate, these levels of complexity.[10]

[edit] Cognition, discrimination and learning
Computational modeling of higher cognitive functions has only begun recently. Experimental data comes primarily from single-unit recording in primates. The frontal lobe and parietal lobe function as integrators of information from multiple sensory modalities. There are some tentative ideas regarding how simple mutually inhibitory functional circuits in these areas may carry out biologically relevant computation.[11]
The brain seems to be able to discriminate and adapt particularly well in certain contexts. For instance, human beings seem to have an enormous capacity for memorizing and recognizing faces. One of the key goals of computational neuroscience is to dissect how biological systems carry out these complex computations efficiently and potentially replicate these processes in building intelligent machines.

[edit] Consciousness
The ultimate goal of neuroscience is to be able to explain the every day experience of conscious life. Francis Crick and Christof Koch made some attempts in formulating a consistent framework for future work in neural correlates of consciousness (NCC), though much of the work in this field remains speculative.[12]

[edit] See also

Connectionism
Neural network
Biological neuron models
Electrophysiology
Important publications in neuroscience
Brain-computer interface
Memristor
Neural engineering
Neurotechnology
Neuroinformatics
Computational neurogenetic modeling


[edit] References


^ Schwartz, Eric (1990). Computational neuroscience. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-19291-8. 
^ Hubel DH, Wiesel TN (1962). "Receptive fields, binocular interaction and functional architecture in the cat's visual cortex". J. Physiol. (Lond.) 160: 106–54. PMID 14449617. PMC: 1359523. http://www.jphysiol.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=14449617. 
^ Wu, Samuel Miao-sin; Johnston, Daniel (1995). Foundations of cellular neurophysiology. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-10053-3. 
^ Koch, Christof (1999). Biophysics of computation: information processing in single neurons. Oxford [Oxfordshire]: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-510491-9. 
^ Chklovskii DB, Mel BW, Svoboda K (Oct 2004). "Cortical rewiring and information storage". Nature 431 (7010): 782–8. doi:10.1038/nature03012. PMID 15483599. 
Review article
^ Durstewitz D, Seamans JK, Sejnowski TJ (2000). "Neurocomputational models of working memory". Nat Neurosci. 3 (Suppl): 1184–91. doi:10.1038/81460. PMID 11127836. 
^ Fusi S, Drew PJ, Abbott LF (2005). "Cascade models of synaptically stored memories". Neuron 45 (4): 599–611. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2005.02.001. PMID 15721245. 
^ Coggan JS, Bartol TM, Esquenazi E, et al (2005). "Evidence for ectopic neurotransmission at a neuronal synapse". Science 309 (5733): 446–51. doi:10.1126/science.1108239. PMID 16020730. 
^ Schneidman E, Berry MJ, Segev R, Bialek W (2006). "Weak pairwise correlations imply strongly correlated network states in a neural population". Nature 440 (7087): 1007–12. doi:10.1038/nature04701. PMID 16625187. 
^ Anderson, Charles H.; Eliasmith, Chris (2004). Neural Engineering: Computation, Representation, and Dynamics in Neurobiological Systems (Computational Neuroscience). Cambridge, Mass: The MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-55060-1. 
^ Machens CK, Romo R, Brody CD (2005). "Flexible control of mutual inhibition: a neural model of two-interval discrimination". Science 307 (5712): 1121–4. doi:10.1126/science.1104171. PMID 15718474. 
^ Crick F, Koch C (2003). "A framework for consciousness". Nat Neurosci. 6 (2): 119–26. doi:10.1038/nn0203-119. PMID 12555104. 



Chklovskii DB (2004). "Synaptic connectivity and neuronal morphology: two sides of the same coin". Neuron 43 (5): 609–17. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2004.08.012. PMID 15339643. 
Sejnowski, Terrence J.; Churchland, Patricia Smith (1992). The computational brain. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-03188-4. 
Abbott, L. F.; Dayan, Peter (2001). Theoretical neuroscience: computational and mathematical modeling of neural systems. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-04199-5. 
Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF (28 Aug 1952). "A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve". J Physiol. (Lond.) 117 (4): 500–44. PMID 12991237. PMC: 1392413. http://www.jphysiol.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=12991237. 
William Bialek; Rieke, Fred; David Warland; Rob de Ruyter van Steveninck (1999). Spikes: exploring the neural code. Cambridge, Mass: MIT. ISBN 0-262-68108-0. 
Schutter, Erik de (2001). Computational neuroscience: realistic modeling for experimentalists. Boca Raton: CRC. ISBN 0-8493-2068-2. 
Sejnowski, Terrence J.; Hemmen, J. L. van (2006). 23 problems in systems neuroscience. Oxford [Oxfordshire]: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-514822-3. 
Michael A. Arbib, Shun-ichi Amari, Prudence H. Arbib (2002). The Handbook of Brain Theory and Neural Networks. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-01197-2. 


[edit] External links

[edit] Journals

Network: Computation in Neural Systems
Biological Cybernetics
Journal of Computational Neuroscience
Neural Computation
Neural Networks
Neurocomputing
Cognitive Neurodynamics


[edit] Software

ModelDB, a large open-access database of program codes of published computational neuroscience models
Genesis, a general neural simulation system
Neurospaces, an efficient neural simulation system that uses software engineering principles from the industry.
HNeT, Holographic Neural Technology.
Neuron, a neural network simulator
NEST, a simulation tool for large neuronal systems.
Neuroconstruct, software for developing biologically realistic 3D neural networks.
Neurofitter, a parameter tuning package for electrophysiological neuron models.
Neurojet, a neural network simulator specialized for the hippocampus
HHsim, a neuronal membrane simulator
MCell, A Monte Carlo Simulator of Cellular Microphysiology
Emergent, neural simulation software
Python tools : http://neuralensemble.org/

pyNN




[edit] Conferences

Computational and Systems Neuroscience (COSYNE) – a computational neuroscience meeting with a systems neuroscience focus.
Annual Computational Neuroscience Meeting (CNS) – a yearly computational neuroscience meeting.
Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) – a leading annual conference covering other machine learning topics as well.
Computational Cognitive Neuroscience Conference (CCNC) – a yearly conference.
International Conference on Cognitive Neurodynamics (ICCN) – a yearly conference.
UK Mathematical Neurosciences Meeting – a new yearly conference, focused on mathematical aspects.
The NeuroComp Conference – a yearly computational neuroscience conference (France)


[edit] Websites

Perlewitz's computational neuroscience on the web
compneuro.org, books and programs for neural modeling
Encyclopedia of Computational Neuroscience, part of Scholarpedia, an online expert curated encyclopedia on computational neuroscience, dynamical systems and machine intelligence
NeuroWiki, a wiki discussion forum about neuroscience research, especially systems, theoretical/computational, and cognitive neuroscience


[edit] Courses

NeuroWiki:CompNeuroCourses, a list of comp neuro courses with material available online
Methods in Computational Neuroscience Summer course at the MBL, which features major figures in the field (Abbott, Bialek, Sejnowski, et.al.) as guest faculty.
Okinawa Computational Neuroscience Course Summer course at OIST with international guest faculty and competitively selected international students.


[edit] Research groups

Center for Theoretical Neuroscience at Columbia University
Redwood Center for Theoretical Neuroscience at University of California, Berkeley
Bernstein Network for Computational Neuroscience (Berlin, Freiburg, Germany, Goettingen, Munich)
BM-Science – Brain & Mind Technologies Research Centre, Finland
Committee on Computational Neuroscience at The University of Chicago
Neuroengineering Laboratory at the University of Pennsylvania
Computational Neuroscience Group at the KFKI RIPNP of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences
Computational Neuroscience Laboratory, CNRS, Gif sur Yvette, France
Computational Neurobiology Laboratory at the Salk Institute (CNL)
Centre for Theoretical Neuroscience (CTN) at the University of Waterloo
MIT Media Lab, Synthetic Neurobiology Group
Institute for Theoretical Biology, Humboldt-Universitaet zu Berlin
Computational Neuroscience Group at King's College London
The Laboratory for Neuroengineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology
MIT Center for Biological & Computational Learning (CBCL)
NYU Center for Theoretical Visual Neuroscience
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience at Columbia University
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition at Carnegie Mellon University/University of Pittsburgh
Integrative and Computational Neuroscience Research Unit (UNIC), CNRS, Gif sur Yvette, France
Interdisciplinary Center for Neural Computation at Hebrew University
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit at University College London
Martinos Computational Neuroscience Center for integrating neuroimaging and computational neuroscience
Georgetown Laboratory for Computational Cognitive Neuroscience
Hertie Center for Clinical Brain Research, Laboratory for Action Representation and Learning
Computational Neuroscience Lab, University of Queensland
Computational Cognitive Neuroscience Lab, University of Colorado at Boulder
Theoretical Neuroscience Group, Florida Atlantic University
Centre for Cognitive Neuroscience and Cognitive Systems at the University of Kent
Computational Neuroscience Engineering Lab, University of Florida
Institute for Adaptive and Neural Computation, University of Edinburgh
Centre for Theoretical and Computational Neuroscience, University of Plymouth
Theoretical Neurobiology Lab, University of Antwerp
Computational Neuroscience Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology
Omneuron 3T MRI Research Center, California (PI: Christopher deCharms)
Group for Neural Theory, Ecole normale superieure, Paris
Computational Biology and Neurocomputing, Stockholm


[edit] Papers

Review – Sejnowski TJ, Koch C, Churchland PS (Sep 1988). "Computational neuroscience". Science 241 (4871): 1299–306. doi:10.1126/science.3045969. PMID 3045969. http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=3045969. 
A Theory of Object Recognition: Computations and Circuits in the Feedforward Path of the Ventral Stream in Primate Visual Cortex – Biologically-based vision algorithm








v • d • e

Neuroscience








Behavioral neurology · Cognitive neuroscience · Computational neuroscience · Molecular cellular cognition · Neural engineering · Neuroanatomy · Neurobiology · Neurochemistry · Neuroendocrinology · Neuroimaging · Neurolinguistics · Neurology · Neuromonitoring · Neuropharmacology · Neurophysiology · Neuropsychiatry · Neuropsychology · Neurosurgery · Systems neuroscience · Brain-computer interface · Neurotechnology · Neuroelectronics · Neuromodulation · Neuroprosthetics · Neurorehabilitation · Neurorobotics · Neurophysics · Neuroinformatics · Neural circuitry (both artificial and biological) · Neural tissue regeneration · Neurobioengineering · Neural signal processing















v • d • e

Subfields of and scientists involved in cybernetics





Subfields

Polycontexturality · Second-order cybernetics · Catastrophe theory · Connectionism · Control theory · Decision theory · Information theory · Semiotics · Synergetics · Biological cybernetics · Biosemiotics · Biomedical cybernetics · Biorobotics · Computational neuroscience · Homeostasis · Management cybernetics · Medical cybernetics · New Cybernetics · Neuro cybernetics · Sociocybernetics · Emergence · Artificial intelligence






Cyberneticists

Igor Aleksander · William Ross Ashby · Anthony Stafford Beer · Claude Bernard · Ludwig von Bertalanffy · Valentin Braitenberg · Gordon S. Brown · Walter Bradford Cannon · Heinz von Foerster · Charles François · Jay Wright Forrester · Buckminster Fuller · Ernst von Glasersfeld · Francis Heylighen · Erich von Holst · Stuart Kauffman · Sergei P. Kurdyumov · Niklas Luhmann · Warren McCulloch · Humberto Maturana · Talcott Parsons · Gordon Pask · Walter Pitts · Alfred Radcliffe-Brown · Robert Trappl · Valentin Turchin · Jakob von Uexküll  · Francisco Varela · Frederic Vester · Charles Geoffrey Vickers  · Stuart Umpleby · John N. Warfield · Kevin Warwick · Norbert Wiener









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computational_neuroscience"
Categories: Computational neuroscience | Cybernetics | Cognitive neuroscienceHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Español
فارسی
Français
Lietuvių
日本語
中文









 This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 16:02.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
