













Alexander Pope - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Alexander_Pope";
		var wgTitle = "Alexander Pope";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "48344";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281268878;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Alexander Pope

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Alexander Pope (disambiguation).


Alexander Pope



Alexander Pope (c.1727), an English poet best known for his Essay on Criticism, Rape of the Lock and The Dunciad


Born
21 May 1688(1688-05-21)
London


Died
30 May 1744 (aged 56)


Occupation
Poet


Alexander Pope (21 May 1688 – 30 May 1744) is generally regarded as the greatest English poet of the eighteenth century,[1] best known for his satirical verse and for his translation of Homer. He is the third most frequently quoted writer in the The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations, after Shakespeare and Tennyson.[2] Pope was a master of the heroic couplet.




Contents


1 Early life
2 Early literary career
3 The middle years: Homer and Shakespeare
4 Later career: "An Essay on Man" and satires
5 Literary legacy
6 Works
7 References
8 See also
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early life
Pope was born in the City of Dublin to Alexander (senior, a linen merchant) and Edith Pope (née Turner), who were both Catholic. Pope's education was affected by the laws in force at the time upholding the status of the established Church of England, which banned Catholics from teaching on pain of perpetual imprisonment. Pope was taught to read by his aunt and then sent to two surreptitious Catholic schools, at Twyford and at Hyde Park Corner. Catholic schools, while illegal, were tolerated in some areas.
From early childhood he suffered numerous health problems, including Pott's disease[3] (a form of tuberculosis affecting the spine) which deformed his body and stunted his growth, no doubt helping to end his life at the age of 56. He never grew beyond 1.37 metres (4 feet 6 inches) tall. Although he never married, he had many women friends and wrote them witty letters.
In 1700, his family was forced to move to a small estate in Binfield, Berkshire due to strong anti-Catholic sentiment and a statute preventing Catholics from living within 10 miles (16 km) of either London or Westminster. Pope would later describe the countryside around the house in his poem Windsor Forest.
With his formal education now at an end, Pope embarked on an extensive campaign of reading. As he later remembered: "In a few years I had dipped into a great number of the English, French, Italian, Latin, and Greek poets. This I did without any design but that of pleasing myself, and got the languages by hunting after the stories...rather than read the books to get the languages." His favourite author was Homer, whom he had first read at age eight in the English translation by John Ogilby. Pope was already writing verse: he claimed he wrote one poem, Ode to Solitude, at the age of twelve.
At Binfield, he also began to make many important friends. One of them, John Caryll (the future dedicatee of The Rape of the Lock), was twenty years older than the poet and had made many acquaintances in the London literary world. He introduced the young Pope to the ageing playwright William Wycherley and to William Walsh, a minor poet, who helped Pope revise his first major work, The Pastorals. He also met the Blount sisters, Martha and Teresa, who would remain lifelong friends.

[edit] Early literary career
First published in 1710 in a volume of Poetical Miscellanies by Jacob Tonson, The Pastorals brought instant fame to the twenty-year-old Pope. They were followed by An Essay on Criticism (1711), which was equally well received, although it incurred the wrath of the prominent critic John Dennis, the first of the many literary enmities which would play such a great role in Pope's life and writings. Windsor Forest (1713) is a topographical poem celebrating the "Tory Peace" at the end of the War of the Spanish Succession.
Around 1711, Pope made friends with the Tory writers John Gay, Jonathan Swift and John Arbuthnot, as well as the Whigs Joseph Addison and Richard Steele. Pope's friendship with Addison would later cool and he would satirise him as "Atticus" in his Epistle to Doctor Arbuthnot.
Pope, Swift, Arbuthnot and Thomas Parnell formed the Scriblerus Club in 1712. The aim of the club was to satirise ignorance and pedantry in the form of the fictional scholar Martinus Scriblerus. Pope's major contribution to the club would be Peri Bathous, or the Art of Sinking in Poetry (1728), a parodic guide on how to write bad verse.




Title page and frontispiece by George Vertue of Pope's Miscellany of Poems, the 1726 Fifth Edition.


The Rape of the Lock (two-canto version, The Rape of the Locke, 1712; revised version in five cantos, 1714) is perhaps Pope's most popular poem. It is a mock-heroic epic, written to make fun of a high society quarrel between Arabella Fermor (the "Belinda" of the poem) and Lord Petre, who had snipped a lock of hair from her head without her permission.
In 1714, the political situation worsened with the death of Queen Anne and the disputed succession between the Hanoverians and the Jacobites, leading to the attempted Jacobite invasion of 1715. Though Pope as a Catholic might be expected to have supported the Jacobites, according to Maynard Mack, "where Pope himself stood on these matters can probably never be confidently known". These events led to an immediate downturn in the fortunes of the Tories, and Pope's friend, Henry St John, 1st Viscount Bolingbroke fled to France.
The climax of Pope's early career was the publication of his Works in 1717. As well as the poems mentioned above, the volume included the first appearance of Eloisa to Abelard and Elegy to the Memory of an Unfortunate Lady; and several shorter works, of which perhaps the best are the epistles to Martha Blount.

[edit] The middle years: Homer and Shakespeare




A likeness of Pope derived from a portrait by William Hoare[4]


Pope had been fascinated by Homer since childhood. In 1713, he announced his plans to publish a translation of Homer's Iliad. The work would be available by subscription, with one volume appearing every year over the course of six years. Pope secured a revolutionary deal with the publisher Bernard Lintot, which brought him two hundred guineas a volume.
The commercial success of his translation made Pope the first English poet who could live off the sales of his work alone, "indebted to no prince or peer alive", as he put it. His translation of the Iliad duly appeared between 1715 and 1720. It was later acclaimed by Samuel Johnson as "a performance which no age or nation could hope to equal" (although the classical scholar Richard Bentley wrote: "It is a pretty poem, Mr. Pope, but you must not call it Homer."). The money he made allowed Pope to move to a villa at Twickenham in 1719, where he created a famous grotto and gardens. The grotto he decorated with alabaster, marbles, ores such as mundic, crystals: Cornish diamonds, stalactites, spars, snakestones and spongestone. Here and there he placed mirrors (very expensive embellishments for those times). He also installed a camera obscura to delight his visitors, of whom there were many. The serendipitous discovery of a spring during its excavations enabled the subterranean retreat to fill with the relaxing sound of trickling waters, which quietly echoes around its exotic chambers. Pope was said to have remarked that: “Were it to have nymphs as well – it would be complete in everything.“ Although house and gardens have long since been demolished or destroyed, much of this grotto still survives. The grotto now lies beneath St James Independent School for boys, and is opened to the public once a year.[5]
Encouraged by the very favourable reception of the Iliad, Pope translated the Odyssey. The translation appeared in 1726, but this time, confronted with the arduousness of the task, he enlisted the help of William Broome and Elijah Fenton. Pope attempted to conceal the extent of the collaboration (he himself translated only twelve books, Broome eight and Fenton four), but the secret leaked out. It did some damage to Pope's reputation for a time, but not to his profits.
In this period, Pope was also employed by the publisher Jacob Tonson to produce an opulent new edition of Shakespeare. When it finally appeared, in 1725, this edition silently "regularised" Shakespeare's metre and rewrote his verse in a number of places.[6] Pope also demoted about 1560 lines of Shakespearean material to footnotes, arguing that they were so "excessively bad" that Shakespeare could never have written them.[7] (Other lines were excluded from the edition altogether.[8]) In 1726, the lawyer, poet, and pantomime deviser Lewis Theobald published a scathing pamphlet called Shakespeare Restored, which catalogued the errors in Pope's work and suggested a number of emendations to the text. Pope and Theobald were probably well acquainted, and Pope no doubt interpreted this as a violation of the rules of friendship.[9] Pope retaliated to what he saw as Theobald's impudence by making him the mock-hero of the first version of his satire The Dunciad (1728), the first of the moral and satiric poems of his last period. A second edition of Pope's Shakespear appeared in 1728, but aside from making some minor revisions to the Preface, it seems that Pope had little to do with it. Most later eighteenth-century editors of Shakespeare dismissed Pope's aesthetically motivated approach to textual criticism. Pope's Preface, however, continued to be highly rated, and its suggestion that Shakespeare's texts were thoroughly contaminated by actors' interpolations would influence editors for most of the eighteenth century.[10]
Alexander Pope became a freemason and member of the Premier Grand Lodge of England.[11][12]




Alexander Pope, by Jean-Baptiste van Loo, ca 1742 (Lewis Walpole Library)



[edit] Later career: "An Essay on Man" and satires
Though the Dunciad was first published anonymously in Dublin, its authorship was not in doubt. As well as Theobald, it pilloried a host of other "hacks", "scribblers" and "dunces". Mack called its publication "in many ways the greatest act of folly in Pope's life". Though a masterpiece, "it bore bitter fruit. It brought the poet in his own time the hostility of its victims and their sympathizers, who pursued him implacably from then on with a few damaging truths and a host of slanders and lies...". The threats were physical too. According to his sister, Pope would never go for a walk without the company of his Great Dane, Bounce, and a pair of loaded pistols in his pocket.
In 1731, Pope published his "Epistle to Burlington", on the subject of architecture, the first of four poems which would later be grouped under the title Moral Essays (1731-35). In the epistle, Pope ridiculed the bad taste of the aristocrat "Timon". Pope's enemies claimed he was attacking the Duke of Chandos and his estate, Cannons. Though the charge was untrue, it did Pope a great deal of damage.
Around this time, Pope began to grow discontented with the ministry of Robert Walpole and drew closer to the opposition led by Bolingbroke, who had returned to England in 1725. Inspired by Bolingbroke's philosophical ideas, Pope wrote An Essay on Man (1733-4). He published the first part anonymously, in a cunning and successful ploy to win praise from his fiercest critics and enemies.
Despite the 'Essay' being written in heroic couplets, many translations into European languages rapidly followed, especially in Germany, where the 'Essay' was regarded as a serious contribution to philosophy.
The Imitations of Horace followed (1733-38). These were written in the popular Augustan form of the "imitation" of a classical poet, not so much a translation of his works as an updating with contemporary references. Pope used the model of Horace to satirise life under George II, especially what he regarded as the widespread corruption tainting the country under Walpole's influence and the poor quality of the court's artistic taste.
Pope also added a wholly original poem, An Epistle to Doctor Arbuthnot, as an introduction to the "Imitations". It reviews his own literary career and includes the famous portraits of Lord Hervey ("Sporus") and Addison ("Atticus"). In 1738 he wrote the Universal Prayer.[13]
Pope also wrote many epitaphs, including one for Isaac Newton:


“
Nature and nature's laws lay hid in night;
God said "Let Newton be" and all was light.

”


After 1738, Pope wrote little. He toyed with the idea of composing a patriotic epic in blank verse called Brutus, but only the opening lines survive. His major work in these years was revising and expanding his masterpiece The Dunciad. Book Four appeared in 1742, and a complete revision of the whole poem in the following year. In this version, Pope replaced the "hero", Lewis Theobald, with the poet laureate Colley Cibber as "king of dunces". By now Pope's health, which had never been good, was failing, and he died in his villa surrounded by friends on 30 May 1744. On the previous day, 29 May 1744, Pope called for a priest and received the Last Rites of the Catholic Church. He lies buried in the nave of the Church of St Mary the Virgin in Twickenham.

[edit] Literary legacy




The death of Alexander Pope from Museus, a threnody by William Mason. Diana holds the dying Pope, and John Milton, Edmund Spenser, and Geoffrey Chaucer prepare to welcome him to heaven.


The poetry of Alexander Pope holds an acknowledged place in the canon of English literature, although his work has gone in and out of fashion. One edition of the Oxford Dictionary of Quotations includes no fewer than 212 quotations from Pope.
Some quotations from Pope's work have passed so deeply into the English language that they are often taken as proverbial by those who do not know their source: "A little learning is a dang'rous thing" (from the Essay on Criticism); "To err is human, to forgive, divine" (ibid.); "For fools rush in where angels fear to tread" (ibid); "Hope springs eternal in the human breast" and "The proper study of mankind is man" (Essay on Man). This would have greatly pleased Pope, who wrote:

True wit is nature to advantage dress’d;
What oft was thought, but ne’er so well express’d.

Pope dominated his age to an extent few writers before or since have matched. After his death, it was almost inevitable a reaction would set in against his poetry, especially with the first stirrings of Romanticism in the late eighteenth century.
In An Essay on the Genius and Writings of Pope (1756 and 1782), Joseph Warton denied Pope was a "true poet", merely a "man of wit" and a "man of sense". In his Lives of the Poets Doctor Johnson countered: "...It is surely superfluous to answer the question that has once been asked, whether Pope was a poet, otherwise than by asking in return, if Pope be not a poet, where is poetry to be found?". But he was fighting a losing battle against changing taste.
The Romantics had little time for Pope, with the notable exception of Lord Byron, who acclaimed him as “the great moral poet of all times, of all climes, of all feelings, and all stages of existence”. Keats dismissed the style of writers who wrote in heroic couplets, saying:

They sway'd about upon a rocking horse,
And thought it Pegasus. (Sleep and Poetry)

In the Victorian era, Matthew Arnold dismissed Pope and Dryden as "classics of our prose". The 19th century considered his diction artificial, his versification too regular, and his satires insufficiently humane. The third charge has been disputed by various 20th century critics including William Empson, and the first does not apply at all to his best work. That Pope was constrained by the demands of "acceptable" diction and prosody is undeniable, but the elegance and flexibility with which Pope used this technique shows that great poetry could be written with these constraints. His expression is concise and forceful, conveying emotion as well as reason and wit.

[edit] Works




Pope's house at Twickenham, showing the grotto. From a watercolour produced soon after his death.



(1709) Pastorals
(1711) An Essay on Criticism
(1712) The Rape of the Lock
(1713) Windsor Forest
(1715-1720) Translation of the Iliad
(1717) Eloisa to Abelard
(1717) Elegy to the Memory of an Unfortunate Lady
(1723-25) The Works of Shakespear, in Six Volumes
(1725-1726) Translation of the Odyssey
(1728) The Dunciad
(1734) Essay on Man
(1735) The Prologue to the Satires (see the Epistle to Dr Arbuthnot and Who breaks a butterfly upon a wheel?)


[edit] References


^ Pat Rogers. The Cambridge Companion to Alexander Pope, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge University Press. December 2007
^ The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations, 5th ed. (Oxford University Press) 1999
^ RPO - Selected Poetry of Alexander Pope (1688-1744)
^ NPG 299; Alexander Pope
^ Alexandra Pope's Grotto at Twickenham Museum
^ A. D. J. Brown, "The Little Fellow Has Done Wonders," Cambridge Quarterly 21, no. 2 (1992): 120-49
^ R. B. McKerrow, "The Treatment of Shakespeare's Text by his Earlier Editors, 1709-1768," Proceedings of the British Academy 19 (1933): 108
^ Brown, "Little Fellow."
^ Michael F. Suarez, S.J., "Uncertain Proofs: Alexander Pope, Lewis Theobald, and Questions of Patronage," Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America 96, no. 3 (2002): 404-34
^ Robert E. Scholes, "Dr. Johnson and the Bibliographical Criticism of Shakespeare," Shakespeare Quarterly 11, no. 2 (1960): 164
^ Famous British Freemasons
^ W. J. Williams. Alexander Pope and Freemasonry. Kessinger Publishing, LLC. 26 June 2003.
^ The Universal Prayer




Maynard Mack, Alexander Pope: A Life (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985), the definitive biography)



[edit] See also

Spalding Gentlemen’s Society


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Alexander Pope 





Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Alexander Pope




Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Alexander Pope



Works by Alexander Pope at Project Gutenberg
University of Toronto "Representative Poetry Online" page on Pope
Various biographies:

http://www.kirjasto.sci.fi/apope.htm
http://www-unix.oit.umass.edu/~sconstan/popebio.html
http://www.island-of-freedom.com/POPE.HTM
http://members.aol.com/basfawlty/pope.htm]


Famous Quotes by Alexander Pope
A copy of "An Essay on Criticism"
Project Gutenberg e-text of An Essay On Man
Pope's Grave
The Twickenham Museum - Alexander Pope
Alexander Pope in Twickenham
St Mary Twickenham: Alexandra Pope Accessed 2007-08-09
Richmond Libraries’ Local Studies Collection. Local History Notes: Alexander Pope 1688-1744 Accessed 2007-08-09
 "Alexander Pope". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 1913. http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Catholic_Encyclopedia_(1913)/Alexander_Pope. 
Essay on Pope
Rape of the Lock Opera



Persondata


NAME
Pope, Alexander


ALTERNATIVE NAMES



SHORT DESCRIPTION
English poet


DATE OF BIRTH
21 May 1688


PLACE OF BIRTH
London


DATE OF DEATH
30 May 1744


PLACE OF DEATH



This article incorporates text from the public-domain Catholic Encyclopedia of 1913.



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_Pope"
Categories: 1688 births | 1744 deaths | Deaths from tuberculosis | English poets | English Roman Catholics | Neoclassical writers | People from the City of London | People from Binfield | Roman Catholic writers | Works by Alexander Pope | Catholic poetsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Français
Hrvatski
Ido
Italiano
עברית
Latina
Lëtzebuergesch
Magyar
मराठी
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Slovenčina
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 10:54.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
