













IP Multimedia Subsystem - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "IP_Multimedia_Subsystem";
		var wgTitle = "IP Multimedia Subsystem";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "1152833";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281508411;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); IP Multimedia Subsystem

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
The IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) is an architectural framework for delivering Internet Protocol (IP) multimedia services. It was originally designed by the wireless standards body 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), as a part of the vision for evolving mobile networks beyond GSM. Its original formulation (3GPP R5) represented an approach to delivering "Internet services" over GPRS. This vision was later updated by 3GPP, 3GPP2 and TISPAN by requiring support of networks other than GPRS, such as Wireless LAN, CDMA2000 and fixed line. Notably though, as of now, there is little evidence of many companies using IMS to deploy these services.
To ease the integration with the Internet, IMS uses IETF protocols wherever possible e.g. Session Initiation Protocol (SIP). According to the 3GPP[1], IMS is not intended to standardize applications but rather to aid the access of multimedia and voice applications from wireless and wireline terminals, i.e. create a form of fixed mobile convergence (FMC). This is done by having a horizontal control layer that isolates the access network from the service layer. From a logical architecture perspective, Services need not have their own control functions, as the control layer is a common horizontal layer. However in implementation this does not necessarily map into greater reduced cost and complexity.[citation needed]
Alternative and overlapping technologies for access and provisioning of services across wired and wireless networks include combinations of Generic Access Network, soft switches and "naked" SIP. This contributes to making the business case for the use of IMS less appealing.[citation needed] It is easier to sell services than to sell the virtues of "integrated services", but additionally the task to sell an IMS based on a service is also difficult as there are often (cheaper) alternatives to creating and deploying that service.
Since IMS was conceived years ago, it is becoming increasingly easier to access content and contacts using mechanisms outside the control of traditional wireless/fixed operators, and so those operators are likely to reconsider their strategies[2].
It is unclear how much of the 3GPP/3GPP2/TISPAN IMS specifications as exist today will ever be implemented or deployed.[citation needed]




Contents


1 History
2 Architecture

2.1 Access network
2.2 Core network

2.2.1 Home subscriber server

2.2.1.1 User identities


2.2.2 Call/session control
2.2.3 Application servers
2.2.4 Media Servers
2.2.5 Breakout Gateway
2.2.6 PSTN Gateways
2.2.7 Media Resources


2.3 NGN Interconnection
2.4 Charging
2.5 Interfaces description


3 Security aspects of early IMS systems
4 See also
5 References
6 External links
7 Books





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History

IMS was originally defined by an industry forum called 3G.IP, formed in 1999. 3G.IP developed the initial IMS architecture, which was brought to the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), as part of their standardization work for 3G mobile phone systems in UMTS networks. It first appeared in release 5 (evolution from 2G to 3G networks), when SIP-based multimedia was added. Support for the older GSM and GPRS networks was also provided.
3GPP2 (a different organization than 3GPP) based their CDMA2000 Multimedia Domain (MMD) on 3GPP IMS, adding support for CDMA2000.
3GPP release 6 added interworking with WLAN.
3GPP release 7 added support for fixed networks, by working together with TISPAN release R1.1, the function of AGCF(Access Gateway control function) and PES(PSTN Emulation Service) are introduced to the wire-line network for the sake of inheritance of services which can be provided in PSTN network.


[edit] Architecture



3GPP / TISPAN IMS Architectural Overview



The IP Multimedia Core Network Subsystem is a collection of different functions, linked by standardized interfaces, which grouped form one IMS administrative network. A function is not a node (hardware box): an implementer is free to combine 2 functions in 1 node, or to split a single function into 2 or more nodes. Each node can also be present multiple times in a single network, for load balancing or organizational issues.

[edit] Access network
The user can connect to an IMS network in various ways, all of which use the standard Internet Protocol (IP). Direct IMS terminals (such as mobile phones, personal digital assistants (PDAs) and computers) can register directly on an IMS network, even when they are roaming in another network or country (the visited network). The only requirement is that they can use IPv6 (also IPv4 in early IMS) and run Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) user agents. Fixed access (e.g., Digital Subscriber Line (DSL), cable modems, Ethernet), mobile access (e.g. W-CDMA, CDMA2000, GSM, GPRS) and wireless access (e.g. WLAN, WiMAX) are all supported. Other phone systems like plain old telephone service (POTS -- the old analogue telephones), H.323 and non IMS-compatible VoIP systems, are supported through gateways.

[edit] Core network

[edit] Home subscriber server
The Home Subscriber Server (HSS), or User Profile Server Function (UPSF), is a master user database that supports the IMS network entities that actually handle calls. It contains the subscription-related information (subscriber profiles), performs authentication and authorization of the user, and can provide information about the subscriber's location and IP information. It is similar to the GSM Home Location Register (HLR) and Authentication Centre (AUC).
A Subscriber Location Function (SLF) is needed to map user addresses when multiple HSSs are used. Both the HSS and the SLF communicate through the Diameter protocol. This Diameter is also called as AAA protocol i.e Authentication, Accounting and Authorization

[edit] User identities
Normal 3GPP networks use the following identities:

International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI)
Temporary Mobile Subscriber Identity (TMSI)
International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI)
Mobile Subscriber ISDN Number (MSISDN)

IMSI is a unique phone identity that is stored in the SIM. To improve privacy, a TMSI is generated per geographical location. While IMSI/TMSI are used for user identification, the IMEI is a unique device identity and is phone specific. The MSISDN is the telephone number of a user.
IMS also requires IP Multimedia Private Identity (IMPI) and IP Multimedia Public Identity (IMPU). Both are not phone numbers or other series of digits, but Uniform Resource Identifier (URIs), that can be digits (a tel-uri, like tel:+1-555-123-4567) or alphanumeric identifiers (a sip-uri, like sip:john.doe@example.com). There can be multiple IMPU per IMPI (often a tel-uri and a sip-uri). The IMPU can also be shared with another phone, so both can be reached with the same identity (for example, a single phone-number for an entire family).
The HSS subscriber database contains, the IMPU, IMPI, IMSI, and MSISDN, subscriber service profiles, service triggers and other information.

[edit] Call/session control
Several roles of Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) servers or proxies, collectively called Call Session Control Function (CSCF), are used to process SIP signalling packets in the IMS.

A Proxy-CSCF (P-CSCF) is a SIP proxy that is the first point of contact for the IMS terminal. It can be located either in the visited network (in full IMS networks) or in the home network (when the visited network isn't IMS compliant yet). Some networks may use a Session Border Controller for this function. The terminal discovers its P-CSCF with either DHCP, or it is assigned in the PDP Context (in General Packet Radio Service (GPRS)).

it is assigned to an IMS terminal during registration, and does not change for the duration of the registration
it sits on the path of all signalling messages, and can inspect every message
it authenticates the user and establishes an IPsec security association with the IMS terminal. This prevents spoofing attacks and replay attacks and protects the privacy of the user. Other nodes trust the P-CSCF, and do not have to authenticate the user again.
it can also compress and decompress SIP messages using SigComp, which reduces the round-trip over slow radio links
it may include a Policy Decision Function (PDF), which authorizes media plane resources e.g. quality of service (QoS) over the media plane. It's used for policy control, bandwidth management, etc. The PDF can also be a separate function.
it also generates charging records




A Serving-CSCF (S-CSCF) is the central node of the signalling plane. It is a SIP server, but performs session control too. It is always located in the home network. It uses Diameter Cx and Dx interfaces to the HSS to download and upload user profiles — it has no local storage of the user. All necessary information is loaded from the HSS.

it handles SIP registrations, which allows it to bind the user location (e.g. the IP address of the terminal) and the SIP address
it sits on the path of all signaling messages, and can inspect every message
it decides to which application server(s) the SIP message will be forwarded, in order to provide their services
it provides routing services, typically using Electronic Numbering (ENUM) lookups
it enforces the policy of the network operator
there can be multiple S-CSCFs in the network for load distribution and high availability reasons. It's the HSS that assigns the S-CSCF to a user, when it's queried by the I-CSCF.




An Interrogating-CSCF (I-CSCF) is another SIP function located at the edge of an administrative domain. Its IP address is published in the Domain Name System (DNS) of the domain (using NAPTR and SRV type of DNS records), so that remote servers can find it, and use it as a forwarding point (e.g. registering) for SIP packets to this domain. The I-CSCF queries the HSS using the Diameter Cx interface to retrieve the user location (Dx interface is used from I-CSCF to SLF to locate the needed HSS only), and then routes the SIP request to its assigned S-CSCF. Up to Release 6 it can also be used to hide the internal network from the outside world (encrypting part of the SIP message), in which case it's called a Topology Hiding Inter-network Gateway (THIG). From Release 7 onwards this "entry point" function is removed from the I-CSCF and is now part of the Interconnection Border Control Function (IBCF). The IBCF is used as gateway to external networks, and provides NAT and Firewall functions (pinholing).


[edit] Application servers
See also: Next Generation Network Services
Application servers (AS) host and execute services, and interface with the S-CSCF using Session Initiation Protocol (SIP). An example of an application server that is being developed in 3GPP is the Voice call continuity Function (VCC Server). Depending on the actual service, the AS can operate in SIP proxy mode, SIP UA (user agent) mode or SIP B2BUA (back-to-back user agent) mode. An AS can be located in the home network or in an external third-party network. If located in the home network, it can query the HSS with the Diameter Sh interface (for a SIP-AS) or the Mobile Application Part (MAP) interface (for IM-SSF).

SIP AS: native IMS application server
IP Multimedia Service Switching Function (IM-SSF): an IM-SSF interfaces with Customized Applications for Mobile networks Enhanced Logic (CAMEL) Application Servers using Camel Application Part (CAP)
Open Service Access-Service Capability Server (OSA-SCS): Interface to the OSA framework Application Server [3]


[edit] Media Servers
The Media Resource Function (MRF) provides media related functions such as media manipulation (e.g. voice stream mixing) and playing of tones and announcements.
Each MRF is further divided into a Media Resource Function Controller (MRFC) and a Media Resource Function Processor (MRFP).

The MRFC is a signalling plane node that acts as a SIP User Agent to the S-CSCF, and which controls the MRFP across an H.248 interface
The MRFP is a media plane node that implements all media-related functions.


[edit] Breakout Gateway
A Breakout Gateway Control Function (BGCF) is a SIP server that includes routing functionality based on telephone numbers. It is only used when calling from the IMS to a phone in a circuit switched network, such as the Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) or the Public land mobile network (PLMN).

[edit] PSTN Gateways
A PSTN/CS gateway interfaces with PSTN circuit switched (CS) networks. For signalling, CS networks use ISDN User Part (ISUP) (or BICC) over Message Transfer Part (MTP), while IMS uses Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) over IP. For media, CS networks use Pulse-code modulation (PCM), while IMS uses Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP).

A Signalling Gateway (SGW) interfaces with the signalling plane of the CS. It transforms lower layer protocols as Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP, an Internet Protocol (IP) protocol) into Message Transfer Part (MTP, an Signalling System 7 (SS7) protocol), to pass ISDN User Part (ISUP) from the MGCF to the CS network.
A Media Gateway Controller Function (MGCF) does call control protocol conversion between SIP and ISUP and interfaces with the SGW over SCTP. It also controls the resources in a Media Gateway (MGW) across an H.248 interface.
A Media Gateway (MGW) interfaces with the media plane of the CS network, by converting between RTP and PCM. It can also transcode when the codecs don't match (e.g. IMS might use AMR, PSTN might use G.711).


[edit] Media Resources
Media Resources are those components that operate on the media plane and are under the control of IMS Core functions. Specifically, Media Server (MS) and Media gateway (MGW)

[edit] NGN Interconnection
There are two types of Next Generation Networking Interconnection:

Service oriented Interconnection (SoIx): The physical and logical linking of NGN domains that allows carriers and service providers to offer services over NGN (i.e. IMS and PES) platforms with control, signalling (i.e. session based), which provides defined levels of interoperability. For instance, this is the case of "carrier grade" voice and/or multimedia services over IP interconnection. "Defined levels of interoperability" are dependent upon the service or the QoS or the Security, etc.
Connectivity oriented Interconnection (CoIx): The physical and logical linking of carriers and service providers based on simple IP connectivity irrespective of the levels of interoperability. For example, an IP interconnection of this type is not aware of the specific end to end service and, as a consequence, service specific network performance, QoS and security requirements are not necessarily assured. This definition does not exclude that some services may provide a defined level of interoperability. However only SoIx fully satisfies NGN interoperability requirements.

An NGN interconnection mode can be direct or indirect. Direct interconnection refers to the interconnection between two network domains without any intermediate network domain. Indirect interconnection at one layer refers to the interconnection between two network domains with one or more intermediate network domain(s) acting as transit networks. The intermediate network domain(s) provide(s) transit functionality to the two other network domains. Different interconnection modes may be used for carrying service layer signalling and media traffic.

[edit] Charging
Offline charging is applied to users who pay for their services periodically (e.g., at the end of the month). Online charging, also known as credit-based charging, is used for prepaid services, or real-time credit control of postpaid services. Both may be applied to the same session.

Offline Charging : All the SIP network entities (P-CSCF, I-CSCF, S-CSCF, BGCF, MRFC, MGCF, AS) involved in the session use the Diameter Rf interface to send accounting information to a Charging Collector Function (CCF) located in the same domain. The CCF will collect all this information, and build a Call Detail Record (CDR), which is sent to the billing system (BS) of the domain.
Each session carries an IMS Charging Identifier (ICID) as a unique identifier. Inter Operator Identifier (IOI) parameters define the originating and terminating networks.
Each domain has its own charging network. Billing systems in different domains will also exchange information, so that roaming charges can be applied.


Online charging : The S-CSCF talks to an Session Charging Function (SCF) which looks like a regular SIP application server. The SCF can signal the S-CSCF to terminate the session when the user runs out of credits during a session. The AS and MRFC use the Diameter Ro interface towards an Event Charging Function (ECF).

When Immediate Event Charging (IEC) is used, a number of credit units is immediately deducted from the user's account by the ECF and the MRFC or AS is then authorized to provide the service. The service is not authorized when not enough credit units are available.
When Event Charging with Unit Reservation (ECUR) is used, the ECF first reserves a number of credit units in the user's account and then authorizes the MRFC or the AS. After the service is over, the number of spent credit units is reported and deducted from the account; the reserved credit units are then cleared.




[edit] Interfaces description


Interface Name
IMS entities
Description
Protocol



Cr


MRFC, AS


Used by MRFC to fetch documents (scripts and other resources) from an AS


HTTP over dedicated TCP/SCTP channels




Cx


I-CSCF, S-CSCF, HSS


Used to communicate between I-CSCF/S-CSCF and HSS


Diameter




Dh


SIP AS, OSA, SCF, IM-SSF, HSS


Used by AS to find a correct HSS in a multi-HSS environment


Diameter




Dx


I-CSCF, S-CSCF, SLF


Used by I-CSCF/S-CSCF to find a correct HSS in a multi-HSS environment


Diameter




Gm


UE, P-CSCF


Used to exchange messages between UE and CSCFs


SIP




Go


PDF, GGSN


Allows operators to control QoS in a user plane and exchange charging correlation information between IMS and GPRS network


COPS (Rel5), Diameter (Rel6+)




Gq


P-CSCF, PDF


Used to exchange policy decisions-related information between P-CSCF and PDF


Diameter




ISC


S-CSCF, I-CSCF, AS


Used to exchange messages between CSCF and AS


SIP




Ma


I-CSCF -> AS


Used to directly forward SIP requests which are destinated to a Public Service Identity hosted by the AS


SIP




Mg


MGCF -> I-CSCF


MGCF converts ISUP signalling to SIP signalling and forwards SIP signalling to I-CSCF


SIP




Mi


S-CSCF -> BGCF


Used to exchange messages between S-CSCF and BGCF


SIP




Mj


BGCF -> MGCF


Used to exchange messages between BGCF and MGCF in the same IMS network


SIP




Mk


BGCF -> BGCF


Used to exchange messages between BGCFs in different IMS networks


SIP




Mm


I-CSCF, S-CSCF, external IP network


Used for exchanging messages between IMS and external IP networks


SIP




Mn


MGCF, IM-MGW


Allows control of user-plane resources


H.248




Mp


MRFC, MRFP


Used to exchange messages between MRFC and MRFP


H.248




Mr


S-CSCF, MRFC


Used to exchange messages between S-CSCF and MRFC


SIP




Mw


P-CSCF, I-CSCF, S-CSCF


Used to exchange messages between CSCFs

SIP



Rf


P-CSCF, I-CSCF, S-CSCF, BGCF, MRFC, MGCF, AS


Used to exchange offline charging information with CCF


Diameter




Ro


AS, MRFC


Used to exchange online charging information with ECF


Diameter




Sh


SIP AS, OSA SCS, HSS


Used to exchange information between SIP AS/OSA SCS and HSS


Diameter




Si


IM-SSF, HSS


Used to exchange information between IM-SSF and HSS


MAP




Sr


MRFC, AS


Used by MRFC to fetch documents (scripts and other resources) from an AS


HTTP




Ut


UE, AS (SIP AS, OSA SCS, IM-SSF)


Facilitates the management of subscriber information related to services and settings


HTTP(s), XCAP




[edit] Security aspects of early IMS systems
It is envisaged that security defined in TS 33.203 may not be available for a while especially because of the lack of USIM/ISIM interfaces and prevalence of devices that support IPv4. For this situation, to provide some protection against the most significant threats, 3GPP defines some security mechanisms, which are informally known as "early IMS security," in TR33.978.

[edit] See also

Next Generation Networking (NGN), 4G
Softswitch
SIGTRAN
Triple play
Voice over IP
Mobile VoIP
SIP
H.248
ENUM
SIMPLE
ISIM, USIM
3GPP Long Term Evolution, WiMAX, UMB (4G network efforts that will use technologies like IMS)
Mobile Broadband
Peer-to-peer video sharing
Video share
Image share
Text over IP
Multimedia Telephony (MMTel)
Voice call continuity
Push to talk
IMPS
Rich Communication Suite
Service Capability Interaction Manager
Generic Access Network


[edit] References

^ Technical Specification Group Services and System Aspects (2006), IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS), Stage 2, V5.15.0, TS 23.228, 3rd Generation Partnership Project 
^ Alexander Harrowell, Staff Writer (October 2006), A Pointless Multimedia Subsystem?, Mobile Communications International 
^ 3GPP TS 29.198


[edit] External links

http://www.rennes.enst-bretagne.fr/~gbertran/files/IMS_an_overview.pdf - A decent IMS tutorial
http://www.3gpp.org 3GPP home page


[edit] Books

"The 3G IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS): Merging the Internet and the Cellular Worlds" by Gonzalo Camarillo, Miguel-Angel García-Martín (John Wiley & Sons, 2006, ISBN 0-470-01818-6)
"The IMS: IP Multimedia Concepts and Services" by Miikka Poikselka, Aki Niemi, Hisham Khartabil, Georg Mayer (John Wiley & Sons, 2006, ISBN 0-470-01906-9)




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IP_Multimedia_Subsystem"
Categories: Multimedia | Network architecture | Telephony | VoIP terminology & concepts | Mobile telecommunications standards | 3rd Generation Partnership Project standards | 3rd Generation Partnership Project 2 standards | Technical terminology | Telecommunications infrastructure | Mobile technologyHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Česky
Deutsch
Español
Français
Italiano
Nederlands
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Svenska
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 14:49.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
