













Misogyny - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Misogyny";
		var wgTitle = "Misogyny";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "19168";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282327861;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Misogyny

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 



Look up misogyny in
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Part of a series of articles on
Discrimination


General forms



Ageism · Biphobia · Heterophobia · Homophobia · Racism · Sexism
 · Speciesism · Religious intolerance
Reverse discrimination · Xenophobia



Specific forms





Social



Ableism · Adultism
Anti-homelessness · Classism
Elitism · Ephebiphobia
Gerontophobia · Heightism
Heterophobia · Heterosexism
Homophobia · Lesbophobia
Lookism · Mentalism
Misandry · Misogyny
Monosexism · Pediaphobia
Sizeism · Transphobia





Against ethnic groups



American · Arab · Armenian
Blacks · Canadian · Catalan
Chinese · English · European · French
German · Igbo · Indian · Iranian · Irish
Italian · Japanese · Jewish · Korean
Malay · Mexican · Native Americans
Polish · Portuguese · Quebec · Roma
Romanian · Russian · Scottish
Serbian · Spanish · Turkish · Ukrainian · Whites





Against beliefs



Atheism · Bahá'í · Catholicism
Christianity · Hinduism · Judaism
Mormonism · Islam · Neopaganism
Protestantism
New religious movements
Shi'a Islam






Manifestations



Blood libel · Ethnic cleansing
Ethnocide · Gendercide
Genocide (examples)
Hate crime · Hate speech
Lynching · Paternalism · Pogrom
Police brutality · Racial profiling
Race war · Religious persecution
Slavery



Movements





Discriminatory



Aryanism · Hate groups · Ku Klux Klan
Neo-Nazism · American Nazi Party
South African National Party
Supremacism · Black supremacy  · White supremacy





Anti-discriminatory



Autistic rights · Abolitionism
Children's rights · Civil rights · Consumer/Survivor/Ex-Patient Movement · Disability rights (Inclusion)
Father's rights · Feminism · LGBT rights
Masculism · Men's rights · Mother's rights
Women's rights · Women's / Universal suffrage · Youth rights






Policies



Discriminatory
Racial/Religious/Sex segregation
Apartheid · Group rights · Redlining
Internment · Ethnocracy
Numerus clausus · Ghetto benches Affirmative action
Anti-discriminatory
Emancipation · Civil rights
Desegregation · Integration
Equal opportunity · Gender equality
Counter-discriminatory
Affirmative action · Group rights
Racial quota · Reservation (India)
Reparation · Forced busing
Employment equity (Canada)
Black Economic Empowerment (BEE)



Law



Discriminatory
Anti-miscegenation · Anti-immigration
Alien and Sedition Acts · Jim Crow laws
Test Act · Apartheid laws
Ketuanan Melayu · Nuremberg Laws
Diyya · Anti-homelessness legislation
Homosexuality laws of the world
Anti-discriminatory
Anti-discrimination acts ·
Anti-discrimination law ·
14th Amendment · Crime of apartheid
CERD · CEDAW · CDE



Other forms



Adultcentrism · Androcentrism · Anthropocentrism ·
Colorism · Cronyism · Ethnocentrism ·
Economic · Genism · Gynocentrism
Linguicism · Nepotism · Triumphalism



Related topics



Bigotry · Diversity ·
Eugenics · Eurocentrism
Multiculturalism · Oppression
Political correctness · Prejudice
Stereotype · Tolerance







Discrimination portal


This box: view • talk • edit



Misogyny (IPA [mɪs.ˈɒd.ʒɪni]) is hatred (or contempt) of women or girls. It is parallel to misandry—the hatred of men or boys. Misogyny is also comparable with misanthropy which is the hatred of humanity generally. Misogyny comes from Greek misogunia (μισογυνία) from misos (μῖσος, "hatred") and gynē (γυνή, "woman").
Marcus Tullius Cicero reports that Greek philosophers considered misogyny to be caused by gynophobia, a fear of women.[1]In the late 20th century, feminist theorists proposed misogyny as both a cause and result of patriarchal social structures.[2]




Contents


1 Usage
2 Greek literature
3 Feminist theory

3.1 Mythology


4 Religion

4.1 Christianity
4.2 Islam


5 Philosophy

5.1 Schopenhauer
5.2 Nietzsche
5.3 Weininger


6 See also
7 Notes and references
8 Bibliography

8.1 Dictionary of sociology articles
8.2 Core references
8.3 Katharine M Rogers
8.4 Other literature


9 External links

9.1 German
9.2 Greek
9.3 Religions







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Usage
Misogyny is sometimes confused with the similar looking word—misogamy (μισογαμία)—which means "hatred of marriage", hence the following error.[3]


Any doubt he may have ever cherished in his misogamic breast concerning a woman's creative capacity.

—Pall Mall Gazette, 7 January 1889

An example of correct use, from the same period is:


He ... walked the banks apart, a thing of misogyny, in a suit of flannel.

—Herman Charles Merivale, Faucit of Balliol, 1882

A clearer example of the sense, also from the same era but using the related word misogynist, is provided by Thackeray.


Confound all women, I say, muttered the young misogynist.

—William Makepeace Thackeray, The Virginians, 1878

In the second act of The Importance of Being Earnest, Oscar Wilde humorously has Miss Prism referring to Dr Chasuble as a womanthrope, but intending misogynist or misogamist:


You should get married. A misanthrope I can understand—a womanthrope, never!

—Oscar Wilde, The Importance of Being Earnest, 1895

Occasionally writers play on the similarity of sound between misogyny and miscegeny (mixed-race marriage).


This psychosocial analysis of the murder of a white civil rights activist by her mulatto lover (Joe Christmas) is replete with themes of fate, free will, sociopathy, family violence, misogyny, miscegeny, and isolation versus community.

—Karl Kirkland, 'On the Value of William Faulkner to Graduate Medical Education', 2001[4]


[edit] Greek literature




Euripides


Misogyny comes into English from the ancient Greek word, misogunia (μισογυνία), which survives in two passages.[5]
The earlier, longer and more complete passage comes from a stoic philosopher called Antipater of Tarsus in a moral tract known as On Marriage (c. 150 BC).[6][7]
Antipater argues that marriage is the foundation of the state, and considers it to be based on divine (polytheistic) decree.[7]
Antipater uses misogunia to describe Euripides' usual writing—tēn en to graphein misogunian (τὴν μισογυνίαν ἐν τῷ γράφειν "the misogyny in the writing").[7]
However, he mentions this by way of contrast. He goes on to quote Euripides at some length, writing in praise of wives.[7]Antipater doesn't tell us what it is about Euripides' writing that he believes is misogynistic,[7] he simply expresses his belief that even a man thought to hate women (namely Euripides) praises wives, so concluding his argument for the importance of marriage. He says, "This thing is truly heroic."[7]
Euripides' reputation as a misogynist is known from another source. Athenaeus, in Deipnosophistae or Banquet of the Learned, has one of the diners quoting Hieronymus of Cardia who confirms the view was widespread, while offering Sophocles' comment on the matter.


Euripides the poet, also, was much addicted to women: at all events Hieronymus in his Historical Commentaries speaks as follows,—"When some one told Sophocles that Euripides was a woman-hater, 'He may be,' said he, 'in his tragedies, but in his bed he is very fond of women.'"

—Athenaeus, Deipnosophists, 2nd/3rd century., [8]

Despite Euripides' reputation, Antipater is not the only writer to see appreciation of women in his writing. Katherine Henderson and Barbara McManus consider he "showed more empathy for women than any other ancient writer", citing "relatively modern critics" to support their claim.[9]
The other surviving use of the original Greek word is by Chrysippus, in a fragment from On affections, quoted by Galen in Hippocrates on Affections.[10] Here, misogyny is the first in a short list of three "disaffections"—women (misogunian), wine (misoinian, μισοινίαν) and humanity (misanthrōpian, μισανθρωπίαν).
Chrysippus' point is more abstract than Antipater's, and Galen quotes the passage as an example of an opinion contrary to his own. What is clear, however, is that he groups hatred of women with hatred of humanity generally, and even hatred of wine. "It was the prevailing medical opinion of his day that wine strengthens body and soul alike."[11]
So, as with his fellow stoic, Antipater, misogyny is viewed negatively, a disease, a dislike of something that is good. It is this issue of conflicted or alternating emotions that was philosophically contentious to the ancient writers. Ricardo Salles suggests the general stoic view was that, "A man may not only alternate between philogyny and misogyny, philanthropy and misanthropy, but be prompted to each by the other."[12]




Marcus Tullius Cicero


Misogynist is also found in the Greek—misogunēs (μισογύνης)—in Deipnosophistae (above) and in Plutarch's Parallel Lives, where it is used as the title of Heracles in the history of Phocion.
It was also the title of a play by Menander, which we know of from book seven (concerning Alexandria) of Strabo's 17 volume Geography,[13][5] and quotations of Menander by Clement of Alexandria and Stobaeus that relate to marriage.[14]
Menander also wrote a play called Misoumenos (Μισούμενος) or The Man (She) Hated. Another Greek play with a similar name, Misogunos (Μισόγυνος) or Woman-hater, is reported by Cicero (in Latin) and attributed to Atilius.[15]
The context is worth quoting in full, because it deals directly with matters already discussed in this article.


It is the same with other diseases; as the desire of glory, a passion for women, to which the Greeks give the name of philogyneia: and thus all other diseases and sicknesses are generated. But those feelings which are the contrary of these are supposed to have fear for their foundation, as a hatred of women, such as is displayed in the Woman-hater of Atilius; or the hatred of the whole human species, as Timon is reported to have done, whom they call the Misanthrope. Of the same kind is inhospitality. And all these diseases proceed from a certain dread of such things as they hate and avoid.

—Cicero, Tusculanae Quaestiones, 1st century BC.[1]

The more common form of this general word for woman hating is misogunaios (μισογύναιος).[5]

There are also some persons easily sated with their connection with the same woman, being at once both mad for women and women haters. — Philo, Of Special Laws, 1st Century.[16]
Allied with Venus in honourable positions Saturn makes his subjects haters of women, lovers of antiquity, solitary, unpleasant to meet, unambitious, hating the beautiful, ... — Ptolomy, 'Of the Quality of the Soul', 2nd century.[17]
I will prove to you that this wonderful teacher, this woman-hater, is not satisfied with ordinary enjoyments during the night. — Alciphron, 'Thais to Euthyedmus', 2nd century.[18]

The word is also found in Vettius Valens' Anthology and Damascius' Principles.[19][20]
In summary, Greek literature considered misogyny to be a disease, an anti-social condition, in that it ran contrary to their perceptions of the value of women as wives, and of the family as the foundation of society. These points are widely noted in the secondary literature.[7]

[edit] Feminist theory





This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details. (September 2007)







The examples and perspective in this article may not include all significant viewpoints. Please improve the article or discuss the issue on the talk page.


Traditional feminist theorists propose many different forms of misogyny. In its most overt expression, a misogynist will openly hate all women simply because they are female.
Other forms of misogyny may be less overt. Some misogynists may simply be prejudiced against all women, or may hate women who do not fall into one or more acceptable categories. Entire cultures may be said to be misogynistic if they treat women in ways that can be seen as harmful.
Examples include forcing women to tend to all domestic responsibilities, not allowing women to take jobs outside the home, or beating women. Subscribers to one model, the mother/whore dichotomy, hold that women can only be "mothers" or "whores." Another variant is the virgin/whore dichotomy, in which women who do not adhere to a saintly standard of moral purity (Abrahamic) are considered "whores".[citation needed]
Frequently, the term misogynist is used in a looser sense as a term of derision to describe anyone who holds an unpopular or distasteful view about women as a group. A man who considers himself "a great lover of women," therefore, might somewhat paradoxically be termed a misogynist by those who consider this treatment of women to be sexist. Archetypes of this type of man might be Giacomo Casanova and Don Juan, who were both reputed for their many libertine affairs with women.
Misogyny is a negative attitude towards women as a group, and so need not fully determine a misogynist's attitude towards each individual woman. The fact that someone holds misogynist views may not prevent him or her from having positive relationships with some women.
Conversely, simply having negative relationships with some women does not necessarily mean someone holds misogynistic views. The term, like most negative descriptions of attitudes, is used as an epithet and applied to a wide variety of behaviors and attitudes.
As with other terms, the more antipathetic one's position is in regards to misogyny, the larger the number of misogynists and the greater variety of attitudes and behaviors who fall into one's perception of "misogynist".[specify] This is, of course, the subject of much controversy and debate with opinions ranging widely as to the extent and breadth of misogyny in society.
Feminist theorist Marilyn Frye argues that misogyny is phallogocentric and homoerotic at its root. In Politics of Reality, Frye analyzes the alleged misogyny characteristic of the fiction and Christian apologetics of C.S. Lewis. Frye argues that such misogyny privileges the masculine as a subject of erotic attention. She compares the misogyny characteristic of Lewis' ideal of gender relations to underground male prostitution rings, which share the same quality of men seeking to dominate subjects seen as less likely to take on submissive roles by a patriarchal society, but in both cases doing so as a theatrical mockery of women.[21]

[edit] Mythology




Eve the First Pandora (Louvre)
Eva Prima Pandora, Jean Cousin Snr


J Holland sees evidence of misogyny in the mythology of the ancient world. In Greek mythology, the human race had already existed before the creation of women — a peaceful, autonomous existence as a companion to the gods.
When Prometheus decides to steal the secret of fire from the gods, Zeus becomes infuriated and decides to punish humankind with an "evil thing for their delight" — Pandora, the first woman, who carried a jar (usually described — incorrectly — as a box) she was told to never open.
Epimetheus (the brother of Prometheus) is overwhelmed by her beauty, disregards Prometheus' warnings about her, and marries her. Pandora cannot resist peeking into the jar, and by opening it all evil is unleashed into the world — labour, sickness, old age, and death.[22]
J Holland also sees evidence of misogyny in the Christian view on the Fall of Man based on the Book Genesis, which according to Christian interpretation brought tragedy and death into the world by a woman. (See also Original Sin.)

[edit] Religion




Eve rides astride the Serpent on a capital in Laach Abbey church, 13th century


See also: Feminist theology

[edit] Christianity
Main article: Women in Christianity
Katherine M. Rogers in The Troublesome Helpmate argues that the Pauline epistles in the New Testament contain texts that have historically been used by some Christian misogynists.


The foundations of early Christian misogyny — its guilt about sex, its insistence on female subjection, its dread of female seduction — are all in St. Paul's epistles.

—[23]


[edit] Islam
See also: Namus
The Quran declares boldly that "Men are the managers of women for that God has preferred in bounty one of them over another, and for that they have expended of their property" (Sura al-Nisa´ 4:34), thus both setting men in authority over women but also asserting that this is so because Almighty Allah "preferred" men instead of women.
Taj Hashmi discusses misogyny in relation to Muslim culture, and Bangladesh specifically, in Popular Islam and Misogyny: A Case Study of Bangladesh.


[T]hanks to the subjective interpretations of the Quran (almost exclusively by men), the preponderance of the misogynic mullahs and the regressive Shariah law in most “Muslim” countries, Islam is synonymously known as a promoter of misogyny in its worst form. Although there is no way of defending the so-called “great” traditions of Islam as libertarian and egalitarian with regard to women, we may draw a line between the Quranic texts and the corpus of avowedly misogynic writing and spoken words by the mullah having very little or no relevance to the Quran.

—[24]


[edit] Philosophy

[edit] Schopenhauer
Arthur Schopenhauer has been accused of misogyny for his essay "On Women" (Über die Weiber), in which he expressed his opposition to what he called "Teutonico-Christian stupidity" on female affairs. He claimed that "woman is by nature meant to obey."
The essay does give two compliments however: that "women are decidedly more sober in their judgment than men are" and are more sympathetic to the suffering of others. However, the latter was discounted as weakness rather than humanitarian virtue.

[edit] Nietzsche
Friedrich Nietzsche is known for arguing that every higher form of civilization implied stricter controls on women (Beyond Good and Evil, 7:238); he frequently insulted women, but is best known for phrases such as "Women are less than shallow," and "Are you going to women? Do not forget the whip!"[25]
Nietzsche's reputation as a misogynist is disputed by some, pointing out that he also made unflattering statements about men. Nietzsche can easily be interpreted as anti-feminist, believing that women were primarily mothers and opposing the modern notion of women's liberation on the grounds that he considered it a form of slave morality.
Whether or not this amounts to misogyny, whether his polemic statements against women are meant to be taken literally, and the exact nature of his opinions of women, are more controversial.[26]

[edit] Weininger
The philosopher Otto Weininger has been accused of misogyny for his 1903 book Sex and Character, in which he characterizes the "woman" part of each individual as being essentially "nothing," and having no real existence, having no effective consciousness or rationality.[27]
Weininger says, "No men who really think deeply about women retain a high opinion of them; men either despise women or they have never thought seriously about them." The author August Strindberg praised Weininger for probably having solved the hardest of all problems, the "woman problem."

[edit] See also

Chauvinism
Honor killing
Object relations theory
Violence against women


[edit] Notes and references


^ a b Marcus Tullius Cicero, Tusculanae Quaestiones, Book 3, Chapter 11. [LSJ typo has Book 4]
^ Kate Millet's Sexual Politics, adapted from her doctoral dissertation is normally cited as the originator; though Katharine M Rogers had also published substantially, regarding her reading of misogyny in literature prior to this.
^ Listed under both misogyny and misogamy by OED1, but cited in full only in the latter.
^ Family Medicine 33 (2001): 664.
^ a b c Henry George Liddell and Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon (LSJ), revised and augmented by Henry Stuart Jones and Roderick McKenzie, (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1940). ISBN 0198642261
^ The editio princeps is on page 255 of volume three of Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta (SVF, Old Stoic Fragments), see External links.
^ a b c d e f g A recent critical text with translation is in Appendix A to Will Deming, Paul on Marriage and Celibacy: The Hellenistic Background of 1 Corinthians 7, pp. 221–226. Misogunia appears in the accusative case on page 224 of Deming, as the fifth word in line 33 of his Greek text. It is split over lines 25–26 in von Arnim.
^ Athenaeus, The Deipnosophists, Book 13 §5.
^ "Although Euripides showed more empathy for women than any other ancient writer, many of his lines out of context sound misogynistic; only relatively modern critics have been able to rescue him from his centuries-old reputation as a woman-hater." Katherine Usher Henderson and Barbara F. McManus, Half Humankind: Contexts and Texts of the Controversy about Women in England, 1540-1640, (University of Illinois Press, 1985), p. 6. ISBN 9780252011740
^ SVF 3:103. Mysogyny is the first word on the page.
^ Teun L. Tieleman, Chrysippus' on Affections: Reconstruction and Interpretations, (Leiden: Brill, 2003), p. 162. ISBN 9004129987
^ Ricardo Salles, Metaphysics, Soul, and Ethics in Ancient Thought: Themes from the Work of Richard Sorabji, (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2005), 485.
^ Strabo,Geography, Book 7 [Alexandria] Chapter 3.
^ Menander, The Plays and Fragments, translated by Maurice Balme, contributor Peter Brown, Oxford University Press, 2002. ISBN 0192839837
^ He is supported (or followed) by Theognostus the Grammarian's 9th century Canones, edited by John Antony Cramer, Anecdota Graeca e codd. manuscriptis bibliothecarum Oxoniensium, vol. 2, (Oxford University Press, 1835), p. 88.
^ γυναικομανεῖς ἐν ταὐτῷ καὶ μισογῦναιοι. Editio critica: Philo, De Specialibus Legibus, (Greek) edited by Leopold Cohn, Johann Theodor Wendland and S. Reiter, Philonis Alexandrini opera quæ supersunt, 6 vols, (Berlin, 1896–1915): (vol. 5) book 3, chapter 14 § 79. [Misprint in LSJ has 2:312]. Translated by Charles Duke Yonge (London, 1854–1855).
^ Ptolomy, 'Of the Quality of the Soul', in Four Books, edited by Joachim Camerarius (Nuremberg, 1535), Latin translation by Philipp Melanchthon, reprinted (Basel, 1553): p. 159. Book 3 § 13. English translation.
^ τὸν διδάσκαλον τουτονὶ τὸν μισογύναιον. Alciphron, 'Thais to Euthyedmus', in Letters, (Greek) edited by MA Schepers, (Leipzig, 1905): as book 4, letter 7, page 115, line 15. ISBN 3598710232.Translated by the Athenian Society (1896): as book 1, letter 34.
^ Vettius Valens, Anthology, edited by Wilhelm Kroll (1908): p. 17, line 11.
^ Damascius, Principles, edited by CA Ruelle (Paris, 1889): p. 388.
^ Frye, Marilyn. The Politics of Reality: Essays in Feminist Theory. Trumansburg, NY: Crossing, 1983.
^ Holland, J: "Misogyny: The World's Oldest Prejudice," pp. 12-13. Avalon Publishing Group, 2006.
^ Rogers, Katherine M. The Troublesome Helpmate: A History of Misogyny in Literature, 1966.
^ Hashmi, Taj. Popular Islam and Misogyny: A Case Study of Bangladesh. Retrieved August 11, 2008.
^ Burgard, Peter J. (May 1994). Nietzsche and the Feminine. Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia Press. pp. 11. ISBN 0-8139-1495-7. 
^ Robert C. Holub, Nietzsche and The Women's Question. Coursework for Berkley University
^ Izenberg, Gerald N. (June 2001). "Review of Chandak Sengoopta's Otto Weininger: Sex, Science, and Self in Imperial Vienna". The American Historical Review 106 (3): 1074–1075. doi:10.2307/2692497. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8762%28200106%29106%3A3%3C1074%3AOWSSAS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-5. Retrieved on 2007-01-08. 



[edit] Bibliography

[edit] Dictionary of sociology articles

Marshall, Gordon. 'Misogyny'. In Oxford Dictionary of Sociology. Oxford University Press, 1998.
Johnson, Allan G. 'Misogyny'. In Blackwell Dictionary of Sociology: A User's Guide to Sociological Language. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2000.


[edit] Core references

Brownmiller, Susan. Against Our Will: Men, Women, and Rape. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1975.
Dijkstra, Bram. Idols of Perversity: Fantacies of Feminine Evil. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.
Chodorow, Nancy. The Reproduction of Mothering: Psychoanalysis and the Sociology of Gender. University of California, Berkeley, 1978.
Dworkin, Andrea. Woman Hating. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1974.
Griffin, Susan. . :,.
Klein, Melanie. The Collected Writings of Melanie Klein. 4 volumes. London: Hogarth Press, 1975.
Millett, Kate. Sexual Politics. New York: Doubleday, 1970.
Rich, Adrienne. :,.


[edit] Katharine M Rogers

Rogers, Katharine M. The Troublesome Helpmate: A History of Misogyny in Literature. 1966.


[edit] Other literature

Boteach, Shmuley. Hating Women: America's Hostile Campaign Against the Fairer Sex. 2005.
Clack, Beverley. Misogyny in the Western Philosophical Tradition.
Ellmann, Mary. Thinking About Women. 1968.
Ferguson, Frances and R. Howard Bloch. Misogyny, Misandry, and Misanthropy. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989. ISBN 9780520065444
Forward, Susan, and Joan Torres. Men Who Hate Women and the Women Who Love Them: When Loving Hurts and You Don't Know Why. Bantam Books, 1986. ISBN 0-553-28037-6
Gilmore, David D. Misogyny: the Male Malady. 2001.
Haskell, Molly. From Reverence to Rape: The Treatment of Women in the Movies. 1974. University of Chicago Press, 1987.
Holland, Jack. Misogyny: The World's Oldest Prejudice. 2006.
Kipnis, Laura. The Female Thing: Dirt, Sex, Envy, Vulnerability. 2006. ISBN 0-375-42417-2
Morgan, Fidelis. A Misogynist's Source Book.
Patai, Daphne, and Noretta Koertge. Professing Feminism: Cautionary Tales from the Strange World of Women's Studies. 1995. ISBN 0-465-09827-4
Penelope, Julia. Speaking Freely: Unlearning the Lies of our Fathers' Tongues. Toronto: Pergamon Press Canada, 1990.
Smith, Joan. Misogynies. 1989. Revised 1993.
World Health Organization Multi-country Study on Women's Health and Domestic Violence against Women* 2005.


[edit] External links

Misogyny, Misandry, and Misanthropy


[edit] German

Hans Friedrich August von Arnim. Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta (SVF, Old Stoic Fragments), 1903.


[edit] Greek

Volume 3.


[edit] Religions

Christianity and misogyny
Koran and misogyny








v • d • e

Discrimination










 
General forms






Ageism · Racism · Reverse discrimination · Religious intolerance · Sexism · Xenophobia














 
Specific forms










Social


Ableism · Adultism · Anti-homelessness · Biphobia · Classism · Elitism · Gerontophobia · Heightism · Heterophobia · Heterosexism · Homophobia · Monosexism · Lesbophobia · Lookism · Misandry · Misogyny · Polyphobia · Sizeism · Transphobia







Against cultures


American · Arab · Armenian · Canadian · Catalan · Chinese · English · Estonian  · European · French · German · Hispanic  · Igbo · Indian · Iranian · Irish · Italian · Japanese · Jewish · Korean · Malay · Mexican · Persian · Polish · Portuguese · Quebec · Roma · Romanian · Russian · Scottish · Serb · Spanish · Turkish · Ukrainian · Welsh







Against religions


Bahá'í · Catholicism · Christianity · Hinduism · Judaism · Mormonism · Islam · Protestantism · New religious movements · Shi'a Islam

















 
Manifestations






Blood libel · Ephebiphobia · Ethnic cleansing · Ethnocide · Gay bashing · Gendercide · Genocide (examples) · Hate crime · Hate speech · Lynching · Paternalism · Pogrom · Race war · Racial profiling · Religious persecution · Slavery














 
Movements










Discriminatory


American Nazi Party · Aryanism · Grey Wolves · Hate groups · Kahanism  · Ku Klux Klan · Neo-Nazism · South African National Party · Supremacism  · Uyoku dantai







Anti-discriminatory


Abolitionism · Autistic rights · Children's rights · Civil rights · Disability rights (Inclusion) · Egalitarianism · Father's rights · Feminism · LGBT rights · Masculism · Men's rights  · Mother's rights  · Women's rights  · Women's / Universal suffrage · Youth rights

















 
Policies










Discriminatory


Apartheid · Internment · Race / Religion / Sex segregation · Redlining · Numerus clausus · Ghetto benches







Anti-discriminatory


Civil rights · Desegregation · Emancipation · Integration · Equal opportunity · Gender equality







Counter-discriminatory


Affirmative action · Forced busing · Racial quota · Reparation · Reservation (India) · Employment equity (Canada)

















 
Law










Discriminatory


Alien and Sedition Acts · Anti-homelessness legislation · Anti-immigration · Anti-miscegenation · Apartheid laws · Criminal Tribes Act · Test Act · Jim Crow laws · Ketuanan Melayu · Nuremberg Laws · Ethnocracy · Terra nullius







Anti-discriminatory


Anti-discrimination acts · Anti-discrimination law · 14th Amendment · Crime of apartheid  · CERD  · CEDAW  · Convention against Discrimination in Education

















 
Other forms






Androcentrism · Adultcentrism · Colorism · Cronyism · Economic · Ethnocentrism · Gynocentrism · Linguicism · Nepotism · Triumphalism














 
Related topics






Afrocentrism  · Bigotry  · Diversity · Eugenics · Multiculturalism · Police brutality · Political correctness · Prejudice · Racialism · Reverse discrimination · Speciesism · Tolerance · Missing white woman syndrome ·












Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Misogyny"
Categories: Discrimination | Gender | Human sexuality | Sexism | Sexual and gender prejudices | Violence against womenHidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | Articles that may contain original research since September 2007 | All articles that may contain original research | Articles needing more viewpoints | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2007 | Articles needing more detailed references 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Català
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
فارسی
Français
Galego
Italiano
עברית
Lietuvių
Nederlands
日本語
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 12:36 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
