













Aphasia - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Aphasia";
		var wgTitle = "Aphasia";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "2088";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 279402798;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Aphasia

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





It has been suggested that Frenchay Aphasia Screening Test be merged into this article or section. (Discuss)


For other uses, see Aphasia (disambiguation).


Aphasia
Classification and external resources


ICD-10
F80.0-F80.2, R47.0


ICD-9
315.31, 784.3


DiseasesDB
4024


MedlinePlus
003204


eMedicine
neuro/437 


MeSH
D001037




Dysphasia
Classification and external resources


ICD-10
F80.1, F80.2, R47.0


ICD-9
438.12, 784.5






Look up aphasia, aphemia in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Aphasia (from Greek, aphatos : 'speechless'), also known as rhymnasia, is a loss of the ability to produce and/or comprehend language, due to injury to brain areas specialized for these functions, such as Broca's area, which governs language production, or Wernicke's area, which governs the interpretation of language. It is not a result of deficits in sensory, intellectual, or psychiatric functioning,[1] nor due to muscle weakness or a cognitive disorder.
Dysphasia (pronounced /dɪsˈfeɪziə/) is a language disorder in which there is an impairment (but not loss) of speech and of comprehension of speech. The term dysphasia has been eclipsed by the modern usage of the term aphasia particularly in the field of speech and language pathology so as not to confuse with the swallowing disorder dysphagia.
Depending on the area and extent of the damage, someone suffering from aphasia may be able to speak but not write, or vice versa, or display any of a wide variety of other deficiencies in language comprehension and production, such as being able to sing but not speak. Aphasia may co-occur with speech disorders such as dysarthria or apraxia of speech, which also result from brain damage.
Aphasia can be assessed in a variety of ways, from quick clinical screening at the bedside to several-hour-long batteries of tasks that examine the key components of language and communication. The prognosis of those with aphasia varies widely, and is dependent upon age of the patient, site and size of lesion, and type of aphasia.




Contents


1 Causes
2 Symptoms
3 Types

3.1 Acquired childhood aphasia


4 Classification

4.1 Localizationist model
4.2 Fluent, non-fluent and "pure" aphasias
4.3 Cognitive neuropsychological model
4.4 Primary and secondary aphasia


5 History
6 Famous sufferers
7 See also
8 Sources

8.1 Handbooks
8.2 Bibliographic Databases
8.3 Specialized Bibliographies
8.4 Academic references
8.5 Personal experiences of aphasia
8.6 References


9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Causes
Aphasia usually results from lesions to the language centres of the brain, such as Broca's area. These areas are almost always located in the left hemisphere, and in most people this is where the ability to produce and comprehend language is found. However, in a very small number of people, language ability is found in the right hemisphere. In either case, damage to these language areas can be caused by a stroke, traumatic brain injury, or other brain injury. Aphasia may also develop slowly, as in the case of a brain tumor or progressive neurological disease, e.g., Alzheimer's or Parkinson's disease. It may also be caused by a sudden hemorrhagic event within the brain. Certain chronic neurological disorders, such as epilepsy or migraine, can also include transient aphasia as a prodromal or episodic symptom.[citation needed] Aphasia is also listed as a rare side effect of the fentanyl patch, an opioid used to control chronic pain.[citation needed]

[edit] Symptoms
Any of the following may be considered symptoms of aphasia:

inability to comprehend language
inability to pronounce, not due to muscle paralysis or weakness
inability to speak spontaneously
inability to form words
inability to name objects
poor enunciation
excessive creation and use of personal neologisms
inability to repeat a phrase
persistent repetition of phrases
paraphasia (substituting letters, syllables or words)
agrammatism (inability to speak in a grammatically correct fashion)
dysprosody (alterations in inflexion, stress, and rhythm)
incompleted sentences
inability to read
inability to write


[edit] Types
The following table summarizes some major characteristics of different types of aphasia:


Type of aphasia
Repetition
Naming
Auditory comprehension
Fluency
Presentation


Wernicke's aphasia
mild–mod
mild–severe
defective
fluent paraphasic
Individuals with Wernicke's aphasia may speak in long sentences that have no meaning, add unnecessary words, and even create new "words" (neologisms). For example, someone with Wernicke's aphasia may say, "You know that smoodle pinkered and that I want to get him round and take care of him like you want before", meaning "The dog needs to go out so I will take him for a walk". They have poor auditory and reading comprehension, and fluent, but nonsensical, oral and written expression. Individuals with Wernicke's aphasia usually have great difficulty understanding the speech of both themselves and others and are therefore often unaware of their mistakes. They are also often unaware of their surroundings, and may present a risk to themselves and others around them.


Transcortical sensory aphasia
good
mod–severe
poor
fluent
Similar deficits as in Wernicke's aphasia, but repetition ability remains intact.


Conduction aphasia
poor
poor
relatively good
fluent
Conduction aphasia is caused by deficits in the connections between the speech-comprehension and speech-production areas. This might be damage to the arcuate fasciculus, the structure that transmits information between Wernicke's area and Broca's area. Similar sympthoms, however, can be present after damage to the insula or to the auditory cortex. Auditory comprehension is near normal, and oral expression is fluent with occasional paraphasic errors. Repetition ability is poor.


Nominal aphasia
mild
mod–severe
mild
fluent
Anomic aphasia, is essentially a difficulty with naming. The patient may have difficulties naming certain words, linked by their grammatical type (e.g. difficulty naming verbs and not nouns) or by their semantic category (e.g. difficulty naming words relating to photography but nothing else) or a more general naming difficulty. Patients tend to produce grammatic, yet empty, speech. Auditory comprehension tends to be preserved.


Broca's aphasia
mod–severe
mod–severe
mild difficulty
non-fluent, effortful, slow
Individuals with Broca's aphasia frequently speak short, meaningful phrases that are produced with great effort. Broca's aphasia is thus characterized as a nonfluent aphasia. Affected people often omit small words such as "is", "and", and "the". For example, a person with Broca's aphasia may say, "Walk dog" meaning, "I will take the dog for a walk". The same sentence could also mean "You take the dog for a walk", or "The dog walked out of the yard", depending on the circumstances. Individuals with Broca's aphasia are able to understand the speech of others to varying degrees. Because of this, they are often aware of their difficulties and can become easily frustrated by their speaking problems. It is associated with right hemiparesis, meaning that there can be paralysis of the patient's right face and arm.


Transcortical motor aphasia
good
mild–severe
mild
non-fluent
Similar deficits as Broca's aphasia, except repetition ability remains intact. Auditory comprehension is generally fine for simple conversations, but declines rapidly for more complex conversations. It is associated with right hemiparesis, meaning that there can be paralysis of the patient's right face and arm.


Global aphasia
poor
poor
poor
non-fluent
Individuals with global aphasia have severe communication difficulties and will be extremely limited in their ability to speak or comprehend language. They may be totally nonverbal, and/or only use facial expressions and gestures to communicate. It is associated with right hemiparesis, meaning that there can be paralysis of the patient's right face and arm.


Transcortical mixed aphasia
moderate
poor
poor
non-fluent
Similar deficits as in global aphasia, but repetition ability remains intact.


Subcortical aphasias




Characteristics and symptoms depend upon the site and size of subcortical lesion. Possible sites of lesions include the thalamus, internal capsule, and basal ganglia.



[edit] Acquired childhood aphasia
Acquired childhood aphasia (ACA) is a language impairment resulting from some kind of brain damage. This brain damage can have different causes, such as head trauma, tumors, cerebrovascular accidents, or seizure disorders. Most, but not all authors state that ACA is preceded by a period of normal language development.[2] Age of onset is usually defined as from infancy until but not including adolescence.
ACA should be distinguished from developmental aphasia or developmental dysphasia, which is a primary delay or failure in language acquisition.[3] An important difference between ACA and developmental childhood aphasia is that in the latter there is no apparent neurological basis for the language deficit.[4]
ACA is one of the more rare language problems in children and is notable because of its contribution to theories on language and the brain.[3] Because there are so few children with ACA, not much is known about what types of linguistic problems these children have. However, many authors report a marked decrease in the use of all expressive language. Children can just stop talking for a period of weeks or even years, and when they start to talk again, they need a lot of encouragement. Problems with language comprehension are less common in ACA, and don't last as long.[5]

[edit] Classification
Classifying the different subtypes of aphasia is difficult and has led to disagreements among experts. The localizationist model is the original model, but modern anatomical techniques and analyses have shown that precise connections between brain regions and symptom classification don't exist. The neural organization of language is complicated; language is a comprehensive and complex behavior and it makes sense that it isn't the product of some small, circumscribed region of the brain.
No classification of patients in subtypes and groups of subtypes is adequate. Only about 60% of patients will fit in a classification scheme such as fluent/nonfluent/pure aphasias. There is a huge variation among patients with the same diagnosis, and aphasias can be highly selective. For instance, patients with naming deficits (anomic aphasia) might show an inability only for naming buildings, or people, or colors. [6]

[edit] Localizationist model




Cortex


The localizationist model attempts to classify the aphasia by major characteristics and then link these to areas of the brain in which the damage has been caused. The initial two categories here were devised by early neurologists working in the field, namely Paul Broca and Carl Wernicke. Other researchers have added to the model, resulting in it often being referred to as the "Boston-Neoclassical Model". The most prominent writers on this topic have been Harold Goodglass and Edith Kaplan.

Individuals with Broca's aphasia (also termed expressive aphasia) were once thought to have ventral temporal damage though more recent work by Nina Dronkers using imaging and 'lesion analysis' has revealed that patients with Broca's aphasia have lesions to the medial insular cortex. Broca missed these lesions because his studies did not dissect the brains of diseased patients so only the more temporal damage was visible. Individuals with Broca's aphasia often have right-sided weakness or paralysis of the arm and leg because the frontal lobe is also important for body movement.


In contrast to Broca's aphasia, damage to the temporal lobe may result in a fluent aphasia that is called Wernicke's aphasia (also termed sensory aphasia). These individuals usually have no body weakness because their brain injury is not near the parts of the brain that control movement.


Working from Wernicke's model of aphasia, Ludwig Lichtheim proposed five other types of aphasia but these were not tested against real patients until modern imaging made more indepth studies available. The other five types of aphasia in the localizationist model are:


Pure word deafness
Conduction aphasia
Apraxia of speech, which is now considered a separate disorder in itself.
Transcortical motor aphasia
Transcortical sensory aphasia


Anomia is another type of aphasia proposed under what is commonly known as the Boston-Neoclassical model, which is essentially a difficulty with naming. A final type of aphasia, global aphasia, results from damage to extensive portions of the language areas of the brain.


[edit] Fluent, non-fluent and "pure" aphasias
The different types of aphasia can be divided into three categories: fluent, non-fluent and "pure" aphasias.[7]

Fluent aphasias, also called receptive aphasias, are impairments related mostly to the input or reception of language, with difficulties either in auditory verbal comprehension or in the repetition of words, phrases, or sentences spoken by others. Speech is easy and fluent, but there are difficulties related to the output of language as well, such as paraphasia. Examples of fluent aphasias are: Wernicke's aphasia, Transcortical sensory aphasia, Conduction aphasia, Anomic aphasia


Nonfluent aphasias, also called expressive aphasias are difficulties in articulating, but in most cases there is relatively good auditory verbal comprehension. Examples of nonfluent aphasias are: Broca's aphasia, Transcortical motor aphasia, Global aphasia


"Pure" aphasias are selective impairments in reading, writing, or the recognition of words. These disorders may be quite selective. For example, a person is able to read but not write, or is able to write but not read. Examples of pure aphasias are: Alexia, Agraphia, Pure word deafness


[edit] Cognitive neuropsychological model
The cognitive neuropsychological model builds on cognitive neuropsychology. It assumes that language processing can be broken down into a number of modules, each of which has a specific function. Hence there is a module which recognises phonemes as they are spoken and a module which stores formulated phonemes before they are spoken. Use of this model clinically involves conducting a battery of assessments (usually from the PALPA), each of which tests one or a number of these modules. Once a diagnosis is reached as to where the impairment lies, therapy can proceed to treat the individual module.
A few less common subtypes include:

Subcortical motor aphasia
Subcortical sensory aphasia
Mixed transcortical aphasia
Acquired epileptiform aphasia (Landau Kleffner Syndrome)

A combination of subtypes is possible.

[edit] Primary and secondary aphasia
Aphasia can be divided into primary and secondary aphasia.[8]

Primary aphasia is due to problems with language-processing mechanisms.
Secondary aphasia is the result of other problems, like memory impairments, attention disorders, or perceptual problems.


[edit] History
The first recorded case of aphasia is from an Egyptian papyrus, the Edwin Smith Papyrus, which details speech problems in a person with a traumatic brain injury to the temporal lobe.[9]

[edit] Famous sufferers

Maurice Ravel
Jan Berry of Jan and Dean
Sven Nykvist
Ralph Waldo Emerson[10]
Robert E. Lee
Joseph Chaikin
Antony Flew
Bob Woodruff
Kevin Ryder of The Kevin and Bean Show


[edit] See also

Aphasiology
Speech disorder
Dysnomia disorder
Aprosodia
Dysprosody


[edit] Sources

[edit] Handbooks

Primary Progressive Aphasia (PPA) Handbook (Northwestern University)
Handbook of Speech-Language, Pathology, and Audiology
Reference manual for communicative sciences and disorders: speech and language


[edit] Bibliographic Databases

MLA International Bibliography
Linguistics Abstracts Online
Linguistics and Language Behavior Abstracts
Encyclopedia of the Human Brain
PsycINFO


[edit] Specialized Bibliographies

MD Consult
Psychology and Behavioral Sciences Collection
Health Reference Complete (Academic)


[edit] Academic references

R. Chapey (Ed.) (2001). Language Intervention Strategies in Aphasia and Related Neurogenic Communication Disorders (Fourth Edition). Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.
Goodglass, H. & Kaplan, E. (1972). Assessment of Aphasia and Related Disorders. Philadelphia: Lea and Febinger.
Kay, J., Lesser, R., & Coltheart, M. (1992). Psycholinguistic Assessments of Language Processing in Aphasia (PALPA). Hove: Erlbaum.
Spreen, O. & Risser, A.H. (2003). Assessment of Aphasia. New York: Oxford University Press.
Tesak, Jürgen. Milestones in the history of aphasia: theories and protagonists. Hove, New York. Psychology Press: 2008.
LaPointe, Leonard L. Aphasia and related neurogenic language disorders. New York: Thieme: 2005
Duchan, Judith Felson. Byng, Sally. Challenging Aphasia Therapies: Broadening the Discourse and Extending the Boundaries. Hove, New York. Psychology Press: 2004.
Papathanasiou, Ilias. De Bleser, Ria. The sciences of aphasia : from therapy to theory. Amsterdam/Boston. Pergamon: 2003


[edit] Personal experiences of aphasia

Hale, S (2003), The Man Who Lost His Language, Penguin.
Paul E. Berger and Stephanie Mensh, How to Conquer the World With One Hand...And an Attitude, 2nd Ed., ISBN 0-9668378-7-8
Cindy Greatrex (2005) Aphasia in the Deaf Community.
Dardick, Geeta (1991), Prisoner of Silence, Reader's Digest, June issue


[edit] References


^ Brookshire, 1992; Goodglass 1993
^ B.E. Murdoch: Acquired Neurological Speech/Language Disorders in Childhood: Language Disorders in Childhood (1990)
^ a b B.T. Woods: Acquired Childhood Aphasia, in: H.S. Kirshner: Handbook of neurological speech and language disorders (1994).
^ P.F. Paquier & H.R. van Dongen: Is Acquired Childhood Aphasia Atypical? In: P. Coppens et al.: Aphasia in Atypical Populations (1998)
^ D.P: Cantwell: Developmental Speech and Language Disorders (1987)
^ Kolb & Whishaw: Fundamentals of Human Neuropsychology (2003), page 502, 505, 511.
^ Kolb & Whishaw: Fundamentals of Human Neuropsychology (2003), pages 502-504. The whole paragraph "fluent, non-fluent and pure aphasias" is written with help of this reference.
^ http://christofflab.psych.ubc.ca/psych260/docs/L12-Language.pdf
^ Paul R. McCrory and Samuel F. Berkovic (2001). Concussion: The history of clinical and pathophysiological concepts and misconceptions. Neurology, 57(12): 2283-2289. PMID 11756611.
^ Richardson, Robert D. Jr. Emerson: The Mind on Fire. Berkeley, California: University of California Press, 1995: 569. ISBN 0-520-08808-5.



[edit] External links

American Speech-Language-Hearing Association Description of aphasia and the role of the speech-language pathologist in assessment and treatment.
University of Michigan Aphasia Program in Ann Arbor, MI, U.S.
Aphasia Center of California in Oakland, CA, U.S.
Aphasia Center of West Texas in Midland, TX, U.S.
The Aphasia Institute Pat Arato Aphasia Center
Aphasia Centre of Ottawa Ottawa, Canada
NIDCD health information: Aphasia (public domain source)
"In So Many Words" Radio documentary broadcast on the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation's "The Sunday Edition" program on Sunday, December 15, 2002
"Picturing Aphasia" Documentary film about aphasia that uses drawings to help bridge the gap between hearing, seeing, and comprehending. Directed by Mores McWreath.
Description of four types of aphasia: auditory, afferent, efferent, and semantic at University of Washington
National Aphasia Association (U.S.)
Aphasia Project: Research into assistive devices for people with aphasia (Princeton University)
UK Based advice on aphasia and a forum for aphasics
Linguish - a play about aphasia
British Aphasiology Society
Eleanor M. Saffran Center for Cognitive Neuroscience
Aphasia and the Relationship of Language and Brain








v • d • e

Symptoms and signs: Speech and voice (R47-R49, 784)





Aphasia/Dysphasia

Expressive aphasia - Receptive aphasia - Conduction aphasia






Other speech disturbances

Dysarthria - Schizophasia - Aprosodia - Dysprosody






Symbolic dysfunctions

Dyslexia - Alexia - Agnosia (Prosopagnosia, Astereognosis, Gerstmann syndrome) - Apraxia (Ideomotor apraxia) - Acalculia - Agraphia






Voice disturbances

Dysphonia - Aphonia













v • d • e

WHO ICD-10 mental and behavioral disorders (F · 290–319)





Neurological/symptomatic

Dementia (Alzheimer's disease, multi-infarct dementia, Pick's disease, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, Huntington's disease, Parkinson's disease, AIDS dementia complex, Frontotemporal dementia, Elopement, Sundowning, Wandering) · Delirium · Post-concussion syndrome · Organic brain syndrome






Psychoactive substance

alcohol (acute alcohol intoxication, drunkenness, alcohol dependence, alcoholic hallucinosis, Alcohol withdrawal, delirium tremens, Korsakoff's syndrome, alcohol abuse) · opioids (opioid overdose, opioid dependency) · sedative/hypnotic (benzodiazepine overdose, benzodiazepine dependence, benzodiazepine withdrawal) · cocaine (cocaine dependence) · general (Intoxication/Drug overdose, Drug abuse, Physical dependence, Rebound effect, Withdrawal)






Schizophrenia, schizotypal
and delusional

Psychosis (Schizoaffective disorder, Schizophreniform disorder, Brief reactive psychosis) · Schizophrenia (Disorganized schizophrenia, Delusional disorder, Folie à deux) · Personality disorder (Schizotypal personality disorder)






Mood (affective)

Mania · Bipolar disorder (Bipolar I, Bipolar II, Cyclothymia) · Depression (Major depressive disorder, Dysthymia)






Neurotic, stress-related
and somatoform





Anxiety disorder/
adjustment disorder


phobic anxiety disorders: Agoraphobia · Social anxiety/Social phobia (Anthropophobia) · Specific phobia (Claustrophobia)
Panic disorder/Panic attack · Generalized anxiety disorder · OCD · stress (Acute stress reaction, PTSD)







Somatoform disorder


Somatization disorder · Body dysmorphic disorder · Hypochondriasis · Nosophobia · Da Costa's syndrome · Psychalgia · Conversion disorder (Ganser syndrome) · Neurasthenia







Dissociative disorder


Dissociative identity disorder · Psychogenic amnesia









Physiological/physical
behavioral





Eating disorder


Anorexia nervosa · Bulimia nervosa







Sleep disorder


Dyssomnia (Hypersomnia, Insomnia) · Parasomnia (REM behavior disorder, Night terror) · Nightmare







Sexual dysfunction


Erectile dysfunction · Premature ejaculation · Vaginismus · Dyspareunia · Hypersexuality · Female sexual arousal disorder







Postnatal


Postpartum depression · Postnatal psychosis









Adult personality
and behavior

Personality disorder · Impulse control disorder (Kleptomania, Trichotillomania, Pyromania) · Factitious disorder (Munchausen syndrome) · Ego-dystonic sexual orientation · Paraphilia (Voyeurism, Fetishism)






Mental disorders
diagnosed in childhood





Mental retardation


X-Linked mental retardation







Psychological development
(developmental disorder)






Specific


speech and language (expressive language disorder, aphasia, expressive aphasia, receptive aphasia, Landau-Kleffner syndrome, lisp) · Scholastic skills (dyslexia, dysgraphia, Gerstmann syndrome) · Motor function (developmental dyspraxia)







Pervasive


Autism · Rett syndrome · Asperger syndrome










Behavioral and emotional


ADHD · Conduct disorder (ODD) · emotional disorder (Separation anxiety disorder) · social functioning (Selective mutism, RAD, DAD) · Tic disorder (Tourette syndrome) · Speech (Stuttering, Cluttering) · Stereotypic movement disorder













Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aphasia"
Categories: Neurological disorders | Communication disorders | Language disorders | AphasiasHidden categories: Articles to be merged since March 2008 | All articles to be merged | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Български
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Ido
Italiano
עברית
Magyar
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Українська
اردو
中文









 This page was last modified on 24 March 2009, at 17:41.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
