













Vienna - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Vienna";
		var wgTitle = "Vienna";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "55866";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282164665;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Vienna

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Vienna (disambiguation).
"Wien" redirects here. For other uses, see Wien (disambiguation).


Vienna
Wien











Flag

Seal







Location of Vienna in Austria


Coordinates: 48°12′31.5″N 16°22′21.3″E﻿ / ﻿48.20875°N 16.372583°E﻿ / 48.20875; 16.372583


State
Austria


Government


 - Mayor and governor
Michael Häupl (SPÖ)


Area


 - City
414.90 km2 (160.2 sq mi)


 - Land
395.51 km2 (152.7 sq mi)


 - Water
19.39 km2 (7.5 sq mi)


Elevation
190 m (623 ft)


Population (1st quarter of 2009)


 - City
1.680.266 [2]


 - Density
4,011/km2 (10,388.4/sq mi)


 - Metro
2,268,656 (01.02.2007)


Time zone
CET (UTC+1)


 - Summer (DST)
CEST (UTC+2)


Website
www.wien.at




Historic Centre of Vienna*


UNESCO World Heritage Site


State Party
 Austria


Type
Cultural


Criteria
ii, iv, vi


Reference
1033


Region**
Europe and North America


Inscription history


Inscription
2001  (25th Session)


* Name as inscribed on World Heritage List.
** Region as classified by UNESCO.


Vienna (IPA: /viˈɛ:na/; in German: Wien IPA: [viːn]; see also other names) is the capital of the Republic of Austria and also one of the nine states of Austria. Vienna is Austria's primary city, with a population of about 1.7 million [1] (2.3 million within the metropolitan area), it is by far the largest city in Austria, as well as its cultural, economic, and political centre. It is the 10th largest city by population in the European Union, and was listed by Mercer Human Resource Consulting as having the 2nd highest quality of living (as of 2008).[2] Vienna is host to many major international organizations such as the United Nations and OPEC. Vienna lies in the very east of Austria and is close to the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Hungary. In 2001, the city centre was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site[3] and in 2005 an Economist Intelligence Unit study of 127 world cities ranked it first equal with Vancouver for the quality of life.[4]




Contents


1 History

1.1 Historical population


2 Geography and Climate
3 Districts
4 Politics
5 Religions
6 Culture

6.1 Music, theatre and opera
6.2 Museums
6.3 Architecture
6.4 Vienna balls


7 Education

7.1 Universities
7.2 International schools


8 Transportation

8.1 Public transportation
8.2 Railways
8.3 Road traffic
8.4 Air traffic
8.5 Water transportation


9 Leisure activities

9.1 Viennese parks and gardens
9.2 Sport


10 Culinary specialities

10.1 Food
10.2 Drink
10.3 Viennese cafés


11 Tourist attractions
12 International organizations in Vienna
13 Charitable organizations in Vienna
14 Twin cities
15 See also
16 References
17 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Main article: History of Vienna




Roman ruins at Michaelerplatz


Founded around 500 BC, Vienna was originally a Celtic settlement. In 15 BC, Vienna became a Roman frontier city (Vindobona) guarding the Roman Empire against Germanic tribes to the north.
In the 13th century Vienna was discovered by cavemen it had a large population of wooly mamoths Vienna came under the threat from theMongolian Empire, which stretched over much of present-day Russia and China. However, due to the death of its leader, Ogedei Khan, the Mongolian armies receded from the European frontier and did not return.
During the Middle Ages, Vienna was home to the Babenberg Dynasty, and in 1440 AD, it became the resident city of the Habsburg Dynasties, then it eventually grew to become the capital of the Holy Roman Empire and a cultural centre for arts and science, music and fine cuisine. In the 16th and 17th centuries, the Ottoman armies were stopped twice outside Vienna (see Siege of Vienna, 1529 and Battle of Vienna, 1683).




View of Vienna in 1758, by Canaletto


In 1804, Vienna became the capital of the Austrian Empire and continued to play a major role in European and world politics, including hosting the 1814 Congress of Vienna. After the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867, Vienna remained the capital of what was then the Austro-Hungarian Empire. During the latter half of the 19th century, the city developed what had previously been the bastions and glacis into the Ringstraße, a major prestige project. Former suburbs were incorporated, and the city of Vienna grew dramatically.
In 1918, after World War I, Vienna became capital of the First Austrian Republic. During the 1920s and 1930s, it was a bastion of socialism in Austria, and was known as the "Red Vienna." The city was a stage to the Austrian Civil War of 1934, when Chancellor Engelbert Dollfuss sent the Austrian Army to shell civilian housing occupied by the socialist militia. In 1938, after a triumphant entry into Austria, Adolf Hitler famously spoke to the Austrian people from the balcony of the Neue Burg, a part of the Hofburg at the Heldenplatz. Between 1938 (Anschluß) and the end of the Second World War, Vienna lost its status as a capital to Berlin.
In 1945, the Soviets successfully launched the Vienna Offensive against Germans who were holding Vienna. The city was besieged for about two weeks before it fell to the Soviets. After 1945, Vienna again became the capital of Austria, was initially divided into zones by the four powers (or the four prevailing nations), and was governed by the Allied Commission for Austria. The four-power occupation of Vienna differed in some respects from the four-power occupation of Berlin: the central area of Vienna had an international zone in which the four powers alternated on a monthly basis. When the Berlin blockade occurred in 1948, Vienna was even more vulnerable because there was no airport in the western sectors. However, despite fears, the Soviets did not blockade Vienna. Some have argued that this was because the Potsdam Agreement gave written rights of land access to the western sectors, whereas no such written guarantees had been given regarding Berlin. The true reason will, however, always remain a matter of speculation. During the 10 years of foreign occupation, Vienna became a hot-bed for international espionage between the Western and Eastern blocs. The atmosphere of four-power Vienna is captured in the Graham Greene novel The Third Man and by the movie which followed.
In the 1970s, Austrian Chancellor Bruno Kreisky inaugurated the Vienna International Centre, a new area of the city created to host international institutions. Vienna has regained a part of its former international relevance by hosting international organizations, such as the United Nations (UNIDO, UNOV, CTBTO and UNODC), the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

[edit] Historical population




Inhabitants according to official census figures: 1800 to 2005


Due to the industrialization and immigration from other parts of the Empire, the population of Vienna increased sharply during its time as the capital of Austria-Hungary (1867–1918). In 1910, Vienna had more than 2 million inhabitants, and was one of the six largest cities in the world.[citation needed] At the turn of the century, Vienna was the second largest Czech city, after Prague.[5] However, after World War I, many Czechs and Hungarians returned to their ancestral countries, resulting in a decline in the Viennese population. At the height of the migration, about one-third of the Viennese population was of Slavic or Hungarian. By 2001, 16% of people under the census living in Vienna had nationalities other than Austrian, nearly half of whom were from the former Yugoslavia, primarily the Serbs [6]; the next most numerous nationalities in Vienna were Turkish (39,000 or 2.5%), Polish (13,600 or 0.9%) and German (12,700 or 0.8%).[7]
However, the real numbers of people of different nationalities living today in Vienna is much higher due to high numbers of individuals not being counted in the census who either do not possess Austrian citizenship or who live illegally in Austria.




Year
1754
1800
1850
1900
1910
1923
1939


Total
population
175,460
271,800
551,300
1,769,137
2,083,630
1,918,720
1,770,938





Year
1951
1961
1971
1981
1991
2001
2008


Total
population
1,616,125
1,627,566
1,619,885
1,531,346
1,539,848
1,550,123
1,678,435





[edit] Geography and Climate
Vienna is located in north-eastern Austria, at the easternmost extension of the Alps in the Vienna Basin. The earliest settlement, at the location of today's inner city, was south of the meandering Danube while the city now spans both sides of the river. Elevation ranges from 151 to 524 m (495 to 1,719 ft).
Vienna has a humid continental climate according to Köppens climate. The city has warm summers with average high temperatures of 22 - 26°C (72 - 79°F) and lows of around 15°C (59°F). In the last several years due to the global warming, the summer high temperatures exceed 30°C (86°F). Winters are cold with average temperatures at about freezing point. Spring and autumn are cool to mild.
Precipitation is generally moderate throughout the year. Snowfall mainly occurs December through March.


 Weather averages for Vienna 


Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year


Average high °C (°F)
2
(36)
4
(39)
9
(49)
14
(57)
19
(67)
22
(72)
25
(77)
23
(73)
19
(66)
14
(57)
7
(44)
4
(39)


Average low °C (°F)
-3
(27)
-2
(28)
2
(35)
5
(41)
9
(49)
13
(55)
15
(59)
15
(59)
11
(52)
6
(43)
2
(35)
-1
(30)


Precipitation mm (inches)
38
(1.5)
43
(1.69)
40
(1.57)
51
(2.01)
61
(2.4)
74
(2.91)
64
(2.52)
58
(2.28)
46
(1.81)
41
(1.61)
51
(2.01)
43
(1.69)
600
(23.62)


Source: World Weather Information Service [8] 2008-01-06



[edit] Districts
Main article: Districts of Vienna




Map of the districts of Vienna with numbers






Satellite view of Vienna


Vienna is composed of 23 districts (Bezirke). Legally, they are not districts in the sense of administrative bodies with explicit powers (such as the districts in the other Austrian states), but mere subdivisions of the city administration. Elections at the district level give the representatives of the districts some political power in fields such as planning and traffic.
The 23 districts are numbered for convenience, in a roughly clockwise fashion, starting in the city centre:




Innere Stadt
Leopoldstadt
Landstraße
Wieden
Margareten
Mariahilf
Neubau
Josefstadt
Alsergrund
Favoriten
Simmering
Meidling




Hietzing
Penzing
Rudolfsheim-Fünfhaus
Ottakring
Hernals
Währing
Döbling
Brigittenau
Floridsdorf
Donaustadt
Liesing




The heart and historical city of Vienna, the Innere Stadt, was once surrounded by walls and open fields in order to defend itself from potential attackers. The walls were razed in 1857, making it possible for the city to expand and eventually merge with the surrounding villages. In their place, a broad boulevard called the Ringstraße was built, along which imposing public and private buildings, monuments, and parks now lie. These buildings include the Rathaus (town hall), the Burgtheater, the University, the Parliament, the twin museums of natural history and fine art, and the Staatsoper. It is also the location of the Hofburg, the former imperial palace. The mainly Gothic Stephansdom is located at the centre of the city, on Stephansplatz. Beyond the Ringstraße, there was another wall called the Linienwall, which was torn down in the latter half of the 19th century to make room for expanding suburbs. It is now a ring road called Gürtel.
Industries are located mostly in the southern and eastern districts. The Innere Stadt is situated away from the main flow of the Danube, but is bounded by the Donaukanal ("Danube canal"). Vienna's second and twentieth districts are located between the Donaukanal and the Danube River. Across the Danube are the newest districts, where also the Vienna International Centre is located.
Vienna's postal codes can be determined by the district where a given address is located; 1XXA - 1 denotes Vienna, XX the district number (if it is a single digit then with a leading zero), A is the number of the post office (irrelevant in this case, usually zero). Example: 1070 for Neubau. Exceptions include 1300 for the Vienna International Airport located in Lower Austria near Schwechat, 1400 for the UN Complex, 1450 for the Austria Center, and 1500 for the Austrian UN forces.

[edit] Politics




The Rathaus serves as the seat of the mayor and city council of the city of Vienna


Until 1918, Viennese politics were shaped by the Christian Social Party, in particular long-term mayor Karl Lueger. Vienna is today considered the centre of the Social Democratic Party of Austria. During the period of the First Republic (1918-1934), the Vienna Social Democrats undertook many overdue social reforms. At that time, Vienna's municipal policy was admired by Socialists throughout Europe, who therefore referred to the city as "Red Vienna" (Rotes Wien).
For most of the time since the First World War, the city has been governed by the Social Democratic Party with absolute majorities in the city parliament. Only between 1934 and 1945, when the Social Democratic Party was illegal, mayors were appointed by the austro-fascist and later by the Nazi authorities. The current mayor of Vienna is Michael Häupl. The Social Democrats currently hold 55% of the seats with a 49% share of the vote.[9] Many Austrian political experts believe that if not for the Social Democrats' nearly unbreakable hold on Vienna, the rival Austrian People's Party would dominate Austrian politics.
An example of the city’s many social democratic policies is its low-cost residential estates called Gemeindebauten.
Ever since Vienna obtained federal state (Bundesland) status of its own in 1921, the mayor has also had the role of the state governor (Landeshauptmann). The Rathaus accommodates the offices of the mayor and the state government (Landesregierung). The city is administered by a multitude of departments (Magistratsabteilungen).

[edit] Religions




St. Stephen's Cathedral (Stephansdom) in 1905


Vienna is the seat of the Viennese Roman Catholic archdiocese, and its current Archbishop is Cardinal Christoph Schönborn. The religions of the Viennese resident population is divided according to the 2001 census as follows [7]:


Roman Catholic
49.2%


No religion
25.7%


Muslim
7.8%


Orthodox
6.0%


Protestant (mostly Lutheran)
4.7%


Jewish
0.5%


Other or none indicated
6.3%


Many Roman Catholic churches in central Vienna also feature performances of religious or other music, including masses sung with classical music and organ.

[edit] Culture

[edit] Music, theatre and opera
See also: Music of Austria and Vienna State Opera Ballet




State Opera (Staatsoper), venue of the annual ball






Imperial Court Theatre (Burgtheater)


Art and culture have a long tradition in Vienna, including theater, opera, classical music and fine arts. The Burgtheater is considered one of the best theaters in the German-speaking world alongside its branch, the Akademietheater. The Volkstheater Wien and the Theater in der Josefstadt also enjoy good reputations. There is also a multitude of smaller theaters, in many cases devoted to less mainstream forms of performing arts, such as modern, experimental plays or cabaret.
Vienna is also home to a number of opera houses, including the Staatsoper and the Volksoper, the latter being devoted to the typical Viennese operetta. Classical concerts are performed at well known venues such as the Wiener Musikverein, home of the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra, and the Wiener Konzerthaus. Many concert venues offer concerts aimed at tourists, featuring popular highlights of Viennese music (particularly the works of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and Johann Strauss).
In recent years, the Theater an der Wien has become widely known for hosting premieres of musicals, although it has recently devoted itself to the opera again. The most successful musical by far was "Elisabeth", which was later translated into several other languages and performed all over the world. The Haus der Musik ("house of music") opened in 2000.

[edit] Museums




Kunsthistorisches Museum at Maria-Theresa-Square


The Hofburg is the location of the Schatzkammer (treasury), holding the imperial jewels of the Habsburg dynasty. The Sisi Museum (a museum devoted to Empress Elisabeth Amalie Eugenie of Austria) allows visitors to view the Imperial apartments as well as the silver cabinet. Directly opposite the Hofburg are the Kunsthistorisches Museum and the Naturhistorisches Museum, which houses many paintings by old masters, ancient and classical artifacts.
A number of museums are located in the Museumsquartier (museum quarter), the former Imperial Stalls which were converted into a museum complex in the 1990s. It houses the Museum of Modern Art,commonly known as the MUMOK (Ludwig Foundation), the Leopold Museum (focusing on works of the Viennese Secession, Viennese Modernism and Austrian Expressionism), additional halls with feature exhibitions and the Tanzquartier. The Liechtenstein Palace contains one of the world's largest private art collections. There are a multitude of other museums in Vienna, including the Military History Museum, the Technical Museum, the Vienna Clock Museum and the Burial Museum. The museums dedicated to Vienna's districts provide a retrospective of the respective districts.

[edit] Architecture
See also: Category:Buildings and structures in Austria




Hundertwasserhaus


A variety of architectural styles can be found in Vienna, such as the Romanesque Ruprechtskirche and the Baroque Karlskirche. Styles range from classicist buildings to modern architecture. Art Nouveau left many architectural traces in Vienna. The Secession, Karlsplatz Stadtbahn Station, and the Kirche am Steinhof by Otto Wagner rank among the best known examples of Art Nouveau in the world.
The Hundertwasserhaus by Friedensreich Hundertwasser, designed to counter the clinical look of modern architecture, is one of Vienna's most popular tourist attractions. Another example of unique architecture is the Wotrubakirche by sculptor Fritz Wotruba. In the 1990s, a number of quarters were adapted and extensive building projects were implemented in the areas around Donaustadt (north of the Danube) and Wienerberg (in southern Vienna). The 202 m-high Millennium Tower located at Handelskai is the highest building in Vienna.[10][11] In recent years, Vienna has seen numerous architecture projects completed which combine modern architectural elements with old buildings, such as the remodelling and revitalisation of the old Gasometer in 2001.
Most buildings in Vienna are relatively low; in early 2006 there were around 100 buildings higher than 40 m. The number of high-rise buildings is kept low by building legislation aimed at preserving green areas and districts designated as world cultural heritage. Strong rules apply to the planning, authorisation and construction of high-rise buildings. Consequently, much of the inner city is a high-rise free zone.

[edit] Vienna balls
Vienna is the last great capital of the nineteenth century ball. There are over 2 significant balls per year mine, some featuring as many as nine live orchestras. Balls are held in her hands the many beautiful palaces in Vienna, with the principal venue being the Hofburg Palace at Heldenplatz. While the Opera Ball is the best known internationally of all the Austrian balls, other balls such as the Kaffeesiederball (Cafe Owners Ball), the Jägerball (Hunter's Ball) and the Rudolfina Redoute are almost as well known within Austria and even better appreciated for their cordial atmosphere. Viennese of at least middle class may visit a number of balls in their lifetime. For many, the ball season lasts three months and can include up to ten or fifteen separate appearances.
Dancers and opera singers from the Vienna Staatsoper often perform at the openings of the larger balls.[citation needed]
A Vienna ball is an all-night cultural attraction. Major Viennese balls generally begin at 9pm and last until 5am, although many guests carry on the celebrations into the next day.

[edit] Education




University of Vienna






Academy of Fine Arts


Vienna is also Austria's main centre of education and home to many universities, professional colleges and gymnasiums.

[edit] Universities

Academy of Fine Arts Vienna
Medical University of Vienna
PEF Private University of Management Vienna
University of Applied Arts Vienna
University of Music and Performing Arts, Vienna
University of Natural Resources and Applied Life Sciences, Vienna
University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna
University of Vienna
Vienna University of Economics and Business Administration
Vienna University of Technology
Webster University Vienna


[edit] International schools




The Diplomatic Academy is housed in the Neue Favorita Palace



American International School Vienna
Danube International School
International University Vienna
Lycée Francais de Vienne
Vienna Christian School
Vienna International School
Diplomatic Academy of Vienna


[edit] Transportation
Twelve bridges cross the Danube in the city, which is divided by the Danube and its branch, the Neue Donau ("new Danube").

[edit] Public transportation




Four generations of tram stock called "Bim"






Stadtbahnstation Karlsplatz by Otto Wagner


Vienna has a large public transportation network.

Vienna S-Bahn
Vienna U-Bahn
Local Railways (Lokalbahn Wien-Baden)
Wiener Linien (= Vienna Lines, municipal company operating U-Bahn, tram, and most bus routes)

Vienna has an extensive train and bus network, the train network being third largest in the world.[citation needed] In the most populated areas of Vienna, public transport runs so frequently (even during off-peak hours) that any familiarity with departure timetables is virtually unnecessary. The convenience and flexibility of the public transport is in turn reflected by its popularity; 53% of Viennese workers travel to their workplace by public transport.[12] During night hours, public transport is continued by the Nightline buses operating on all the main routes, generally every half hour.
Fare prices within the city are independent of the length of the journey and covers all modes of public transport. Tickets are also available for various time periods, such as 24 hour, weekly, monthly, or yearly tickets.
The Viennese public transport services are incorporated into a larger concentric system of transport zones, the VOR (Verkehrsverbund Ostregion = eastern region transport association). VOR includes railway and bus lines operating 50 kilometers into the surrounding areas, and ticket prices are calculated according to the number of zones crossed, Vienna being a single zone. Tickets must be purchased (and usually punched ) prior to boarding or entering a station. Tickets are not routinely checked when entering a station or boarding, but there are surprise inspections on all routes.
There are also two miniature railways: the Liliputbahn in the Wiener Prater and the Donauparkbahn in the Donaupark. They are for amusement purposes and have no practical importance as a means of public transport.

[edit] Railways




Wien Westbahnhof, the starting point of the Austrian Western Railway.






Interior of Wien Praterstern


Historically, all transport was oriented towards the main cities in the Austro-Hungarian monarchy. Vienna has several train stations that form the beginning of several train lines:

Wien Franz-Josefs-Bahnhof, the starting point of the Franz Josef Railway
Wien Westbahnhof, starting point of the Western Railway
Wien Südbahnhof (Former South and East Station) for the Southern Railway and the Eastern Railway

There are also several through train stations:

Wien Hütteldorf on the Western Railway
Wien Heiligenstadt on the Franz Josef Railway
Wien Praterstern (Formerly known as Wien Nord or Wien Nord-Praterstern) on the Northern Railway.
Wien Meidling (Philadelphiabrücke) on the Southern Railway. This is Vienna's most frequented transit station.
Wien Mitte (Landstraße) on the S-Bahn Stammstrecke ("main line"); it is the nearest railway station to the centre of the city.

There are also a large number of smaller stations that are important for local passenger traffic. Since the mid 1990s, the Westbahnhof and Südbahnhof have handled all long-distance travel. Many trains also stop at Hütteldorf or Meidling, especially when inbound.
In order to bundle all long-distance traffic it has become necessary to build a tunnel, colloquially known as the Wildschweintunnel ("boar tunnel"), underneath Lainzer Tiergarten linking the Western Railway to the Southern Railway. The new bundled train line will connect to a new through train station called Wien Zentralbahnhof that will be constructed instead of the Südbahnhof.

[edit] Road traffic




River Danube, Brigittenauer Brücke (bridge) and Millennium Tower in Vienna (view from Donauturm)



To be translated from here

Similar to the train lines, Bundesstraßen leave the city in a star-shaped pattern. Some are named after their historical final destination (Prager Straße to Prague, Linzer Straße to Linz, Triester Straße to Trieste and Brünner Straße to Brno). Bundesstraßen can be compared to U.S. Highways in the United States, being two-lane in rural areas and multi-lane in urban areas...
Four national autobahns leave Vienna in the westerly (A1), northwesterly (A22), southerly (A2), and easterly directions (A4). Similar to the rail lines, they are commonly referred to after their exit direction (Westautobahn, Südautobahn, and Ostautobahn). In addition, several spur and branch autobahns circle around the southern and eastern areas of the city. The protected Wienerwald forest area in the western and northern areas has been left mostly untouched.

[edit] Air traffic
Vienna International Airport is located to the southeast of Vienna. The airport handled over 254,000 arrivals and departures in 2007 and was frequented by 18.77 million passengers.[13] Following lengthy negotiations with surrounding communities, the airport will be expanded to increase its capacity by adding a third runway. The airport is currently undergoing a major expansion, including a new terminal building and office park, to prepare for an expected increase in passengers.

[edit] Water transportation

To be translated from here

Vienna is connected to Rotterdam and German Industrial areas via the Rhine-Main-Danube Canal, and to Eastern European countries along the Danube to the Black Sea. The planned Danube-Oder-Canal remains unfinished.
The "Twin City Liner" boat service connects Vienna and Bratislava.
Nearly all of Vienna's drinking water is brought to the city via two large water pipelines, built in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The pipelines stretch 120 km (75 miles) and 200 km (124 miles) from the Alps to the city's Hietzing district. The Alpine sources are pristine and the water does not require treatment.

[edit] Leisure activities

[edit] Viennese parks and gardens





Panoramic view of Vienna towards the east, seen from "Himmel" (Heaven)







The "Alte Donau", one of the top bathing and recreation spots


Vienna possesses many park facilities, including the Stadtpark, the Burggarten, the Volksgarten (part of the Hofburg), the Schloßpark at Schloss Belvedere (home to the Vienna Botanic Gardens), the Donaupark, the Schönbrunner Schlosspark, the Prater, the Augarten, the Rathauspark, the Lainzer Tiergarten, the Dehnepark, the Resselpark, the Votivpark, the Kurpark Oberlaa, the Auer-Welsbach-Park and the Türkenschanzpark. Green areas include Laaer-Berg (including the Bohemian Prater) and the foothills of the Wienerwald, which reaches into the outer areas of the city. Small parks, known by the Viennese as Beserlparks, are everywhere in the inner city areas. Many of Vienna's famous parks include monuments, such as the Stadtpark with its statue of Johann Strauss II, and the gardens of the baroque palace, where the State Treaty was signed. Vienna's principal park is the Prater which is home to the Riesenrad, a Ferris wheel. The imperial Schönbrunn's grounds contain an 18th century park which includes the world's oldest zoo, founded in 1752. The Donauinsel, part of Vienna's flood defences, is a 21.1 km long artificial island between the Danube and Neue Donau dedicated to leisure activities.

[edit] Sport




Ernst-Happel-Stadion in the Prater


Vienna hosts many different sporting events including the Vienna City Marathon, which attracts more than 10,000 participants every year and normally takes place in May. In 2005 the Ice Hockey World Championships took place in Austria and the final was played in Vienna. Vienna's Ernst Happel Stadium was the venue of four Champions League and European Champion Clubs' Cup finals (1964, 1987, 1990 and 1995) and on June 29 it hosted the final of Euro 2008 which saw a Spanish 1-0 victory over Germany.
Austria's capital is home to numerous teams. The best known are the local football clubs SK Rapid Wien (32 Austrian Bundesliga titles), FK Austria Wien (23 Austrian Bundesliga titles and 26-time cup winners) and the oldest team, First Vienna FC. Other important sport clubs include the Dodge Vikings Vienna (American Football), who won the Eurobowl title between 2004 and 2007 4 times in a row, the Vienna Hot Volleys, one of Europe's premier Volleyball organisations, and the Vienna Capitals (Ice Hockey).vienna was also where the European handball federation (ehf) was foundered.

[edit] Culinary specialities

[edit] Food
See also: Austrian food




Wiener Schnitzel


Vienna is well known for Wiener schnitzel, a cutlet of veal that is pounded flat, coated in flour, egg and breadcrumbs, and fried in clarified butter. It is available in almost every restaurant that serves Viennese cuisine. Other examples of Viennese cuisine include Tafelspitz (very lean boiled beef), which is traditionally served with Geröstete Erdäpfel (boiled potatoes mashed with a fork and subsequently fried) and horseradish sauce, Apfelkren (a mixture of horseradish, cream and apple) and Schnittlauchsauce (a chives sauce made with mayonnaise and old bread).




Sachertorte


Vienna has a long tradition of cakes and desserts. These include Apfelstrudel (hot apple strudel), Palatschinken (sweet pancakes), and Knödel (dumplings) often filled with fruit such as apricots (Marillenknödel). Sachertorte, a dry chocolate cake with apricot jam from the Sacher Hotel, is world famous.
In winter, small street stands sell traditional Maroni (hot chestnuts) and potato fritters.
Sausages are popular and available from street vendors (Würstelstand) throughout the day and into the night. The sausage known as Wiener (German for Viennese) in the USA and Germany is, however, called Frankfurter. Other popular sausages are Burenwurst (a coarse beef and pork sausage, generally boiled), Käsekrainer (spicy pork with small chunks of cheese), and Bratwurst (a white pork sausage). Most can be ordered "mit Brot" (with bread) or as a "hot dog" (stuffed inside a long roll). Mustard is the traditional condiment and usually offered in two varieties: "suß" (sweet) or "scharf" (spicy).
Kebab and pizza are, increasingly, the snack food most widely available from small stands.
The Naschmarkt is a permanent market for fruit, vegetables, spices, fish, meat, etc. from around the world. The city centre has many delicatessen stores, such as the Julius Meinl am Graben.

[edit] Drink
Vienna, along with Paris, Prague and Bratislava, is one of the few remaining world capital cities with its own vineyards. The wine is served in small Viennese pubs known as Heuriger, which are especially numerous in the wine growing areas of Döbling (Grinzing, Neustift am Walde, Nußdorf, Salmannsdorf, Sievering) and Floridsdorf (Stammersdorf, Strebersdorf). The wine is often drunk as a spritzer ("G'spritzter") with sparkling water. The Grüner Veltliner, a dry white wine, is the most widely cultivated wine in Austria.
Beer is next in importance to wine. Vienna has a single large brewery, Ottakringer, and more than ten microbreweries. A "Beisl" is a typical small Austrian pub, of which Vienna has many.

[edit] Viennese cafés




Café Central


Viennese cafés have an extremely long and distinguished history that dates back centuries, and the caffeine addictions of some famous historical patrons of the oldest are something of a local legend. Traditionally, the coffee comes with a glass of water. Viennese cafés claim to have invented the process of filtering coffee from bounty captured after the second Turkish siege in 1683. Viennese cafés claim that when the invading Turks left Vienna, they abandoned hundreds of sacks of coffee beans. The Emperor gave Franz George Kolschitzky (Polish - Franciszek Jerzy Kulczycki) some of this coffee as a reward for providing information that allowed the Austrians to defeat the Turks. Kolschitzky then opened Vienna's first coffee shop. Julius Meinl set up a modern roasting plant in the same premises where the coffee sacks were found, in 1891.

[edit] Tourist attractions




Hofburg Imperial Palace seen from Heroes' Square


Major tourist attractions include the imperial palaces of the Hofburg and Schönbrunn (also home to the world's oldest zoo, Tiergarten Schönbrunn) and the Riesenrad in the Prater. Cultural highlights include the Burgtheater, the Wiener Staatsoper, the Lipizzaner horses at the spanische Hofreitschule and the Vienna Boys' Choir, as well as excursions to Vienna's Heuriger districts.
There are also more than 100 art museums, which together attract over eight million visitors per year.[14] The most popular ones are Albertina, Belvedere, Leopold Museum in the Museumsquartier, KunstHausWien, BA-CA Kunstforum, the twin Kunsthistorisches Museum and Naturhistorisches Museum, and the Technisches Museum Wien, each of which receives over a quarter of a million visitors per year.[15]
There are many popular sites associated with composers who lived in Vienna including Beethoven's various residences and grave at Zentralfriedhof (Central Cemetery) which is the largest cemetery in Vienna and the burial site of many famous people. Mozart has a memorial grave at the Habsburg gardens and at St. Marx cemetery (where his grave was lost). Vienna's many churches also draw large crowds, the most famous of which are St. Stephen's Cathedral, the Deutschordenskirche, the Jesuitenkirche, the Karlskirche, the Peterskirche, Maria am Gestade, the Minoritenkirche, the Ruprechtskirche, the Schottenkirche and the Votivkirche.
Modern attractions include the Hundertwasserhaus, the United Nations headquarters and the view from the Donauturm.








Schönbrunn Palace









Belvedere Palace









Albertina









Naturhistorisches Museum











The statue of Athena in front of the Austrian Parliament









The Secession building









The Riesenrad in the Wiener Prater









Modern Vienna






[edit] International organizations in Vienna




UN complex in Vienna, with the Austria Center Vienna in front, taken from the Danube Tower in the nearby Donaupark before the extensive building work


Vienna is the seat of a number of United Nations offices and various international institutions and companies, including the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO) and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). Currently Vienna is the world's 4th "UN city" (after New York, Geneva and The Hague). Additionally, Vienna is the seat of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law's secretariat (UNCITRAL). In conjunction, the University of Vienna annually hosts the prestigious Willem C. Vis Moot, an international commercial arbitration competition for students of law from around the world.
Various special diplomatic meetings have been held in Vienna in the latter half of the 20th century, resulting in various documents bearing the name Vienna Convention or Vienna Document. Among the more important documents negotiated in Vienna are the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, as well as the 1990 Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE).
See also: Vienna Convention

[edit] Charitable organizations in Vienna
Alongside the international and intergovernmental organisations, there are dozens of charitable organisations based in Vienna; these organisations provide relief goods and assistance to tens of thousands of disadvantaged children and needy people in developing countries.
One such organisation is the network of SOS Children's Villages, founded by Hermann Gmeiner in 1949. Today, SOS Children's Villages are active in 132 countries and territories worldwide. Others include HASCO and the Childrens Bridge of Hope.

[edit] Twin cities




The Hermesvilla, in rural Hietzing


Vienna is twinned with the following cities:




 Belgrade in Serbia
 Bratislava in Slovakia
 Budapest in Hungary
 Brno in Czech Republic
 Kiev in Ukraine
 Ljubljana in Slovenia
 Los Angeles in USA





 Istanbul in Turkey (since 2007)
 Tunis in Tunisia
 Moscow in Russia
 Tel Aviv in Israel
 Warsaw in Poland (since 2001)[16]
 Zagreb in Croatia




Other forms of cooperation and city friendship similar to the twin city programmes:

 Niš in Serbia

In addition, individual Viennese districts are twinned with Japanese cities/districts:

Alsergrund with Takarazuka, Hyōgo. (since 1994)
Döbling with Setagaya, Tokyo. (since 1985)
Donaustadt with Arakawa, Tokyo. (since 1996)
Floridsdorf with Katsushika, Tokyo. (since 1987)
Hernals with Fuchu, Tokyo. (since 1992)
Hietzing with Habikino, Osaka. (since 1995)
Innere Stadt with Taito, Tokyo. (since 1989)
Meidling with Gifu, Gifu. (since 1992)

Further, the Viennese district Leopoldstadt and the New York City borough Brooklyn entered into a partnership in 2007.[17]

[edit] See also

Donauinsel
Donauinselfest
History of Vienna
List of Honorary Citizens of Vienna
List of mayors of Vienna
List of Viennese
Vienna (Billy Joel song)
Vienna (Ultravox song)
Vienna Circle
Vienna International Airport
Viennese German
Vienna Biennale


[edit] References


^ official
^ [1] Quality of Living global city rankings – Mercer survey
^ "Historic Centre of Vienna". UNESCO. http://whc.unesco.org/pg.cfm?cid=31&id_site=1033. 
^ "Vancouver is 'best place to live'". BBC. October 4, 2005. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/business/4306936.stm. 
^ Czech and Slovak roots in Vienna, wieninternational.at
^ http://www.statistik.at/web_de/static/bevoelkerung_2001_nach_umgangssprache_staatsangehoerigkeit_und_geburtsland_022896.pdf
^ a b (in German) (PDF)Volkszählung. Hauptergebnisse I - Wien. Statistik Austria. 2003. ftp://www.statistik.at/pub/neuerscheinungen/vz01wien_web.pdf. 
^ "Weather Information for Vienna". World Weather Information Service]. http://www.weather.com. Retrieved on January 6 2008. 
^ "Gemeinderatswahl 2005". wien.at. http://www.wien.gv.at/wahl/NET/GR051/GR051-109.htm.  (German)
^ Vienna's 10 tallest skyscrapers
^ Millennium Tower - Emporis
^ Der Standard, Tuesday 27th March 2007
^ Vienna International Airport (2008-01-17). Sound traffic development in 2007. Press release. http://www.viennaairport.com/jart/prj3/via/website.jart?rel=en&content-id=1168245748284&reserve-mode=active. Retrieved on 2007-02-07. 
^ (page 10) "Vienna in figures: Special Issue for the EU Presidency 2006" (PDF). City of Vienna. http://www.wien.gv.at/statistik/pdf/viennainfigures.pdf (page 10). 
^ "Top 30 Sights, Museums, Exhibition Halls 2005" (xls). Vienna Tourist Board. http://www.wien-tourismus.at/data/Besucherstatistik-2005.xls. 
^ (Polish) "Miasta partnerskie Warszawy". um.warszawa.pl. Biuro Promocji Miasta. 2005-05-04. http://um.warszawa.pl/v_syrenka/new/index.php?dzial=aktualnosci&ak_id=3284&kat=11. Retrieved on 2008-08-29. 
^ http://diepresse.com/home/politik/aussenpolitik/289167/index.do?from=suche.intern.portal



Wien German language Wikipedia


[edit] External links

Find more about Vienna on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity
Official websites

Wien.info - Official site of the tourism board: events, sightseeing, cultural information, etc.
Wien.gv.at - Official site of the municipality, with interactive map.
List of Embassies in Vienna
Vienna travel guide from Wikitravel

Others

Google Map of Vienna

Pictures and videos of Vienna

Photos of Vienna at night (very-bored.com)
Photos of Vienna (zoomvienna.com)
PhotoGlobe Vienna - a collection of georeferenced photos of Vienna
Vienna. Pleasure and Melancholy A collection of photos of Vienna (willypuchner.com)
Panoramic pictures of Vienna (wienkultur.info)
360º virtual tour of Vienna, Austria (VRVienna.com)
Vienna Christmas market "Wiener Christkindlmarkt" (butkaj.com)
Photos of Vienna Sightseeings (butkaj.com)

History of Vienna

Hundreds of articles on historical buildings of Vienna: Churches, Palaces, Art, Culture and History of Vienna
Jews in Vienna (from Encyclopaedia Judaica 1971).







 
Vienna in the European Union














v • d • e

Capitals of European states and territories





Capitals of non-sovereign territories or constituent nations shown in bold italics









Central
Southern
Western
Northern








Berlin, Germany
Bratislava, Slovakia
Budapest, Hungary
Ljubljana, Slovenia
Prague, Czech Republic
Vienna, Austria
Warsaw, Poland
Vaduz, Liechtenstein
Eastern
Astana, Kazakhstan 1
Baku, Azerbaijan 1
Bucharest, Romania
Chişinău, Moldova
Kiev, Ukraine
Minsk, Belarus
Moscow, Russia 1
Sukhumi, Abkhazia 3
Tbilisi, Georgia 1
Tskhinvali, South Ossetia 3
Yerevan, Armenia 2





Ankara, Turkey 1
Athens, Greece
Belgrade, Serbia
Gibraltar, Gibraltar4
Nicosia, Cyprus 2
Nicosia, Northern Cyprus 2, 3
Podgorica, Montenegro
Pristina, Kosovo 3
Rome, Italy
San Marino, San Marino
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
Skopje, Republic of Macedonia
Sofia, Bulgaria
Tirana, Albania
Valletta, Malta
Vatican City, Vatican City
Zagreb, Croatia




Amsterdam, Netherlands
Andorra la Vella, Andorra
Berne, Switzerland
Brussels, Belgium 6
Douglas, Isle of Man4
Dublin, Ireland
Lisbon, Portugal
London, United Kingdom
Luxembourg, Luxembourg
Madrid, Spain
Monaco, Monaco
Paris, France
St. Helier, Jersey4
St. Peter Port, Guernsey4




Copenhagen, Denmark
Helsinki, Finland
Longyearbyen, Svalbard
Mariehamn, Åland Islands
Oslo, Norway
Reykjavík, Iceland
Riga, Latvia
Stockholm, Sweden
Tallinn, Estonia
Tórshavn, Faroe Islands
Vilnius, Lithuania











1 Transcontinental country.  2 Entirely in Southwest Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe.  3 Partially recognised country.  4 Crown Dependency or Overseas Territory of the United Kingdom.  5 Part of Spain.  6 Also the seat of the European Union, see Location of European Union institutions and Brussels and the European Union.












v • d • e

 Capital cities of the Member States of the European Union






Amsterdam · Athens · Berlin · Bratislava · Brussels · Bucharest · Budapest · Copenhagen · Dublin · Helsinki · Lisbon · Ljubljana · London · Luxembourg City · Madrid · Nicosia · Paris · Prague · Riga · Rome · Sofia · Stockholm · Tallinn · Valletta · Vienna · Vilnius · Warsaw




















v • d • e

States of Austria






Burgenland · Carinthia · Lower Austria · Salzburg · Styria · Tyrol · Upper Austria · Vienna · Vorarlberg













v • d • e

Districts of Vienna






Districts
by
Number


I. Innere Stadt · II. Leopoldstadt · III. Landstraße · IV. Wieden · V. Margareten · VI. Mariahilf ·VII. Neubau · VIII.Josefstadt · IX.Alsergrund · X. Favoriten · XI. Simmering · XII. Meidling · XIII. Hietzing · XIV. Penzing · XV. Rudolfsheim-Fünfhaus · XVI. Ottakring · XVII. Hernals · XVIII. Währing · XIX. Döbling  · XX. Brigittenau ·  XXI.  Floridsdorf  · XXII. Donaustadt · XXIII. Liesing














v • d • e

World Heritage Sites in Austria








Cultural Landscape of Fertö / Neusiedlersee (with Hungary) · Historic Centre of the City of Graz · Cultural Landscape of Hallstatt-Dachstein Salzkammergut · Palace and Gardens of Schönbrunn · Historic Centre of the City of Salzburg · Semmering railway · Historic Centre of Vienna · Cultural Landscape of Wachau


















v • d • e

The Danube





Countries

Germany · Austria · Slovakia · Hungary · Croatia · Serbia · Romania · Bulgaria · Ukraine · Moldova







Cities

Donaueschingen · Ulm · Ingolstadt · Regensburg · Passau · Linz · Vienna · Bratislava · Győr · Komárom · Komárno · Esztergom · Budapest · Baja · Vukovar · Novi Sad · Belgrade · Smederevo · Drobeta-Turnu Severin · Calafat · Vidin · Lom · Svishtov · Giurgiu · Rousse · Silistra · Cernavodă · Brăila · Galaţi · Tulcea · Sulina






Tributaries

Iller · Lech · Regen · Isar · Inn · Morava · Váh  · Hron  · Ipeľ · Drava · Tisza · Sava · Timiş · Velika Morava · Jiu · Iskar · Olt · Osam · Yantra · Vedea · Argeş · Ialomiţa · Siret · Prut






List of crossings





Coordinates: 48°12′30″N 16°22′23″E﻿ / ﻿48.20833°N 16.37306°E﻿ / 48.20833; 16.37306
 



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vienna"
Categories: World Heritage Sites in Austria | Capitals in Europe | Cities, towns and villages in Austria | Settlements on the Danube | NUTS 2 statistical regions of the European Union | Roman legions' camps in Central Europe | Settlements established in the 1st millennium BC | States of Austria | Turkish communities outside Turkey | Vienna | Wine regions of AustriaHidden categories: Articles containing German language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Bân-lâm-gú
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
Arpetan
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Fiji Hindi
Français
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Коми
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lingála
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
مصرى
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Occitan
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Română
Romani
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Scots
Seeltersk
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
Volapük
Võro
Winaray
吴语
ייִדיש
粵語
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 18:48.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
