













Space colonization - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Space_colonization";
		var wgTitle = "Space colonization";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "29248";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282107711;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Space colonization

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 




Artist's conception of a space habitat called the Stanford torus, by Don Davis


Space colonization (also called space settlement, space humanization, space habitation, etc.) is the concept of autonomous (self-sufficient) human habitation of locations outside Earth. It is a major theme in science fiction, as well as a long-term goal of various national space programs.
While many people think of space colonies on the Moon or Mars, others argue that the first colonies will be in orbit. They have determined that there are ample quantities of all the necessary materials on the Moon and Near Earth Asteroids, that solar energy is readily available in very large quantities.
In 2005 NASA Administrator Michael Griffin identified space colonization as the ultimate goal of current spaceflight programs, saying:

... the goal isn't just scientific exploration ... it's also about extending the range of human habitat out from Earth into the solar system as we go forward in time ... In the long run a single-planet species will not survive ... If we humans want to survive for hundreds of thousands or millions of years, we must ultimately populate other planets. Now, today the technology is such that this is barely conceivable. We're in the infancy of it. ... I'm talking about that one day, I don't know when that day is, but there will be more human beings who live off the Earth than on it. We may well have people living on the moon. We may have people living on the moons of Jupiter and other planets. We may have people making habitats on asteroids ... I know that humans will colonize the solar system and one day go beyond.
– Michael D. Griffin[1]

As of 2008, the International Space Station provides a permanent, yet still non-autonomous, human presence in space. The NASA Lunar outpost, providing a permanent human presence on the moon, is at the planning stage. There is an ongoing development of technologies that may be used in future space colonization projects.


Space colonization




Mercury
Venus
Earth

Moon
Lagrange points


Mars
Ceres
Asteroids

Outer solar system

Jupiter
Saturn

Titan


Trans-Neptunian Objects





This box: view • talk • edit







Contents


1 Method

1.1 Materials
1.2 Energy
1.3 Transportation

1.3.1 Space access
1.3.2 Cislunar and solar system travel


1.4 Communication
1.5 Life support
1.6 Radiation protection
1.7 Self-replication
1.8 Population size


2 Location

2.1 Planetary locations

2.1.1 Mars
2.1.2 Mercury
2.1.3 Venus
2.1.4 Gas giants
2.1.5 Ceres


2.2 Satellite locations

2.2.1 The Moon
2.2.2 Jovian moons - Europa, Callisto and Ganymede
2.2.3 Phobos and Deimos
2.2.4 Titan, Enceladus and other Saturnian moons
2.2.5 Moons of Uranus, Neptune's Triton and beyond


2.3 Free space locations

2.3.1 Space habitats
2.3.2 Earth orbit
2.3.3 Lagrange points
2.3.4 Asteroids

2.3.4.1 Near Earth Asteroids
2.3.4.2 Main Belt Asteroids


2.3.5 Statites




3 Outside the solar system

3.1 Starship
3.2 Example


4 Terrestrial analogues to space colonies
5 Literature
6 Justification
7 Objections
8 Counter arguments

8.1 The argument of need
8.2 The argument of cost

8.2.1 Military spending
8.2.2 Social spending programs


8.3 The argument of benefits
8.4 The argument of nationalism


9 Advocacy
10 In fiction

10.1 Written works
10.2 Games
10.3 Comics
10.4 Television
10.5 RPGs


11 See also
12 References
13 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Method
Building colonies in space will require access to food, space, people, construction materials, energy, transportation, communications, life support, simulated gravity, and radiation protection. Colonies will presumably be situated to help fulfill those requirements.

[edit] Materials
Colonies on the Moon, Mars and Ceres could use local materials, although the Moon is deficient in volatiles (principally hydrogen, and nitrogen) but possesses a great deal of oxygen, silicon, and metals such as iron, aluminum and titanium. Launching materials from Earth is very expensive, so bulk materials could come from the Moon, a Near-Earth Object (NEO — an asteroid or comet with an orbit near Earth), Phobos or Deimos where gravitational forces are much smaller, there is no atmosphere, and there is no biosphere to damage. Many NEOs contain substantial amounts of metals, oxygen, hydrogen and carbon. Certain NEOs may also contain some nitrogen.
Farther out, Jupiter's Trojan asteroids are thought to be high in water ice and probably other volatiles.[2]

[edit] Energy
Solar energy in orbit is abundant, reliable, and is commonly used to power satellites today. There is no night in space, and no clouds or atmosphere to block sunlight. The solar energy available, in watts per square meter, at any distance, d, from the Sun can be calculated by the formula E = 1366/d², where d is measured in astronomical units.
Particularly in the weightless conditions of space, sunlight can be used directly, using large solar ovens made of lightweight metallic foil so as to generate thousands of degrees of heat at no cost; or reflected onto crops to enable photosynthesis to proceed.
Large structures would be needed to convert sunlight into significant amounts of electrical power for settlers' use. In highly electrified nations on Earth, electrical consumption can average 1 kilowatt/person (or roughly 10 megawatt-hours per person per year.)[3]
Energy has been suggested as an eventual export item for space settlements, perhaps using wireless power transmission e.g. via microwave beams to send power to Earth or the Moon. This method has zero emissions, so would have significant benefits such as elimination of greenhouse gases and nuclear waste. Ground area required per watt would be less than conventional solar panels.
The Moon has nights of two Earth weeks in duration and Mars has night, dust, and is farther from the Sun, reducing solar energy available by a factor of about ½-⅔, and possibly making nuclear power more attractive on these bodies. Alternatively, energy could be beamed to the lunar and martian surfaces from a solar power satellite.
For both solar thermal and nuclear power generation in airless environments, such as the Moon and space, and to a lesser extent the very thin Martian atmosphere, one of the main difficulties is dispersing the inevitable heat generated. This requires fairly large radiator areas. Alternatively, the waste heat can be used to melt ice on the poles of a planet like Mars.

[edit] Transportation

[edit] Space access
Further information: Non-rocket spacelaunch
Transportation to orbit is often the limiting factor in space endeavours. To settle space, much cheaper launch vehicles are required, as well as a way to avoid serious damage to the atmosphere from the thousands, perhaps millions, of launches required. One possibility is the air-breathing hypersonic spaceplane under development by NASA and other organizations, both public and private. There are also proposed projects such as building a space elevator or a mass driver; or launch loops.

[edit] Cislunar and solar system travel
Transportation of large quantities of materials from the Moon, Phobos, Deimos, and Near Earth asteroids to orbital settlement construction sites is likely to be necessary.
Transportation using off-Earth resources for propellant in relatively conventional rockets would be expected to massively reduce in-space transportation costs compared to the present day; propellant launched from the Earth is likely to be prohibitively expensive for space colonization, even with improved space access costs.
Other technologies such as tether propulsion, VASIMR, ion drives, solar thermal rockets, solar sails, magnetic sails, and nuclear thermal propulsion can all potentially help solve the problems of high transport cost once in space.
For lunar materials, one well-studied possibility is to build mass drivers to launch bulk materials to waiting settlements. Alternatively, lunar space elevators might be employed.

[edit] Communication
Compared to the other requirements, communication is relatively easy for orbit and the Moon. A great proportion of current terrestrial communications already passes through satellites. Yet, as colonies further from the earth are considered, communication becomes more of a burden. Transmissions to and from Mars suffer from significant delays due to the speed of light and the greatly varying distance between conjunction and opposition — the lag will range between 7 and 44 minutes — making real-time communication impractical. Other means of communication that do not require live interaction such as e-mail and voice mail systems should pose no problem.

[edit] Life support
People need air, water, food, gravity and reasonable temperatures to survive for long periods. On Earth, a large complex biosphere provides these. In space settlements, a relatively small, closed ecological system must recycle or import all the nutrients without "crashing."
The closest terrestrial analogue to space life support is possibly that of the nuclear submarine. Nuclear submarines use mechanical life support systems to support humans for months without surfacing, and this same basic technology could presumably be employed for space use. However, nuclear submarines run "open loop" extracting oxygen from seawater, and typically dumping carbon dioxide overboard, although they recycle existing oxygen. Recycling of the carbon dioxide has been approached in the literature using the Sabatier process or the Bosch reaction.
Alternatively, and more attractive to many, the Biosphere 2 project in Arizona has shown that a complex, small, enclosed, man-made biosphere can support eight people for at least a year, although there were many problems. A year or so into the two-year mission oxygen had to be replenished, which strongly suggests that they achieved atmospheric closure.
The relationship between organisms, their habitat and the non-Earth environment can be:

Organisms and their habitat fully isolated from the environment (examples include artificial biosphere, Biosphere 2, life support system)
Changing the environment to become a life-friendly habitat, a process called terraforming.
Changing organisms to become more compatible with the environment, (See genetic engineering, transhumanism, cyborg)

97–99% of the light energy provided to the plant ends up as heat and needs to be dissipated somehow to avoid overheating the habitat.
A combination of the above technologies is also possible.

[edit] Radiation protection
Cosmic rays and solar flares create a lethal radiation environment in space. In Earth orbit, the Van Allen belts make living above the Earth's atmosphere difficult. To protect life, settlements must be surrounded by sufficient mass to absorb most incoming radiation. Somewhere around 5–10 tons of material per square meter of surface area is required. This can be achieved cheaply with leftover material (slag) from processing lunar soil and asteroids into oxygen, metals, and other useful materials, however it represents a significant obstacle to maneuvering vessels with such massive bulk. Inertia would necessitate powerful thrusters to start or stop rotation; however shielding material can be stationary around a rotating interior. Hull-metals can also be polarized with electrical current to provide additional protection without adding mass.

[edit] Self-replication
Self-replication is an optional attribute, but many think it the ultimate goal because it allows a much more rapid increase in colonies, while eliminating costs to and dependence on Earth. It could be argued that the establishment of such a colony would be Earth's first act of self-replication (see Gaia spore). Intermediate goals include colonies that expect only information from Earth (science, engineering, entertainment, etc.) and colonies that just require periodic supply of light weight objects, such as integrated circuits, medicines, genetic material and perhaps some tools.
See also: von Neumann probe, clanking replicator, Molecular nanotechnology

[edit] Population size
In 2002, the anthropologist John H. Moore estimated that a population of 150–180 would allow normal reproduction for 60 to 80 generations — equivalent to 2000 years.
A much smaller initial population of as little as two female humans should be viable as long as human embryos are available from Earth. Use of a sperm bank from Earth also allows a smaller starting base with negligible inbreeding.
Researchers in conservation biology have tended to adopt the "50/500" rule of thumb initially advanced by Franklin and Soule. This rule says a short-term effective population size (Ne) of 50 is needed to prevent an unacceptable rate of inbreeding, while a long‐term Ne of 500 is required to maintain overall genetic variability. The Ne = 50 prescription corresponds to an inbreeding rate of 1% per generation, approximately half the maximum rate tolerated by domestic animal breeders. The Ne = 500 value attempts to balance the rate of gain in genetic variation due to mutation with the rate of loss due to genetic drift.
Effective population size Ne depends on the number of males Nm and females Nf in the population according to the formula:




[edit] Location
Location is a frequent point of contention between space colonization advocates.
The location of colonization can be on a physical body or free-flying:

On a planet, natural satellite, or asteroid
In orbit around the Earth, Sun, Lagrangian point or other object


[edit] Planetary locations
Some planetary colonization advocates cite the following potential locations:

[edit] Mars
Main article: Colonization of Mars
Mars is a frequent topic of discussion. Its overall surface area is similar to the dry land surface of Earth, it may have large water reserves, and has carbon (locked as carbon dioxide in the atmosphere).
Mars may have gone through similar geological and hydrological processes as Earth and contain valuable mineral ores, but this is debated. Equipment is available to extract in situ resources (water, air, etc.) from the Martian ground and atmosphere. There is a strong scientific interest in colonizing Mars due to the possibility that life could have existed on Mars at some point in its history, and may even still exist in some parts of the planet.
However, its atmosphere is very thin (averaging 800 Pa or about 0.8% of Earth sea-level atmospheric pressure); so the pressure vessels necessary to support life are very similar to deep space structures. The climate of Mars is colder than Earth's. Its gravity is only around a third that of Earth's; it is unknown whether this is sufficient to support human beings for extended periods of time (all long-term human experience to date has been at around Earth gravity or one g).
The atmosphere is thin enough, when coupled with Mars' lack of magnetic field, that radiation is more intense on the surface, and protection from solar storms would require radiation shielding.
Mars is often the topic of discussion regarding terraforming to make the entire planet or at least large portions of it habitable.
See also: Exploration of Mars, Martian terraforming

[edit] Mercury
Main article: Colonization of Mercury
There is a suggestion that Mercury could be colonized using the same technology, approach and equipment that is used in colonization of the Moon. Such colonies would almost certainly be restricted to the polar regions due to the extreme daytime temperatures elsewhere on the planet. The recent discovery of ionized water has astounded scientists. This discovery significantly improves the small planet's prospects as a future colony.

[edit] Venus
Main article: Colonization of Venus
While the surface of Venus is far too hot and features atmospheric pressure at least 90 times that at sea level on Earth, its massive atmosphere offers a possible alternate location for colonization. At an altitude of approximately 50 km, the pressure is reduced to a few atmospheres, and the temperature would be between 40–100 °C, depending on the altitude. This part of the atmosphere is probably within dense clouds which contain some sulfuric acid. Even these may have a certain benefit to colonization, as they present a possible source for the extraction of water.
See also: Venerian terraforming

[edit] Gas giants
Main article: Colonization of Jupiter
It may also be possible to colonize the three farthest gas giants with floating cities in their atmospheres. By heating hydrogen balloons, large masses can be suspended underneath at roughly Earth gravity. Jupiter would be less suitable for habitation due to its high gravity, escape velocity and radiation. Such colonies could export Helium-3 for use in fusion reactors if they ever become practical. Escape from the gas giant planets (especially Jupiter) seems well beyond current or near-term foreseeable rocket technology however, due to the combination of large velocity and high acceleration needed even to achieve low orbit.

[edit] Ceres
Main article: Colonization of Ceres
Ceres is a dwarf planet in the main asteroid belt, comprising about one third the mass of the whole belt and being the sixth largest body in the inner Solar System by mass and volume. Being the largest body in the asteroid belt, Ceres could become the main base and transport hub for future asteroid mining infrastructure, allowing mineral resources to be transported further to Mars, the Moon and Earth. See further: Main Belt Asteroids.

[edit] Satellite locations

[edit] The Moon




Moon colony


Main article: Colonization of the Moon
Due to its proximity and relative familiarity, Earth's Moon is also frequently discussed as a target for colonization. It has the benefits of proximity to Earth and lower escape velocity, allowing for easier exchange of goods and services. A major drawback of the Moon is its low abundance of volatiles necessary for life such as hydrogen, nitrogen, and carbon. Water ice deposits that may exist in some polar craters could serve as a source for these elements. An alternative solution is to bring hydrogen from near earth asteroids and combine it with oxygen extracted from lunar rock.
The moon's low surface gravity is also a concern (it is unknown whether 1/6g is sufficient to support human habitation for long periods — see microgravity).
In his article in Earth Magazine entitled "Settling the Moon: A Home Away from Home" retired NASA Office of Inspector General Senior Special Agent Joseph Richard Gutheinz, Jr. discussed the prospect for a multi-national race to place a permanent manned presence on the moon. He opined that if "NASA succeeds, we may very well see the first permanent manned presence on the moon in 2024." [4] Gutheinz, who teaches risk management, once investigated the Mir Space Station fire and collision and frequently speaks out about unnecessary risks in space, although he considers settling the moon to be an acceptable risk. [5]

[edit] Jovian moons - Europa, Callisto and Ganymede
The Artemis Project designed a plan to colonize Europa, one of Jupiter's moons. Scientists were to inhabit igloos and drill down into the Europan ice crust, exploring any sub-surface ocean. This plan also discusses possible use of "air pockets" for human inhabitation. Europa is considered one of the more habitable bodies in the solar system and so merits investigation as a possible abode for life.
Ganymede is the largest moon in the Solar System. It may be attractive as Ganymede is also the only moon with a magnetosphere and so is less irradiated at the surface. The presence of magnetosphere, likely indicates a convecting molten core within Ganymede, which may in turn indicate a rich geologic history for the moon.
NASA performed a study called HOPE (Revolutionary Concepts for Human Outer Planet Exploration) regarding the future exploration of the solar system.[6] The target chosen was Callisto. It could be possible to build a surface base that would produce fuel for further exploration of the solar system.
The three out of four largest moons of Jupiter (Europa, Ganymede and Callisto) have an abundance of volatiles making future colonisation possible. Ganymede and Europa have been chosen for the joint NASA and ESA mission in 2020. [7]
See also: Colonization of Europa
See also: Colonization of Callisto
See also: Colonization of the outer solar system

[edit] Phobos and Deimos
The moons of Mars may be an appealing target for space colonization. Low delta-v is needed to reach the Earth from Phobos and Deimos, allowing delivery of material to cislunar space, as well as transport around the Martian system. The moons themselves may be suitable for habitation, with methods similar to those for asteroids.

[edit] Titan, Enceladus and other Saturnian moons
Main article: Colonization of Titan
Titan has been suggested as an appealing target for colonization,[8] because it is the only moon in our solar system to have a dense atmosphere and is rich in carbon-bearing compounds.[9] Robert Zubrin identified Titan as possessing an abundance of all the elements necessary to support life, making Titan perhaps the most advantageous locale in the outer Solar System for colonisation, and saying "In certain ways, Titan is the most hospitable extraterrestrial world within our solar system for human colonisation".
Enceladus is a small, icy moon orbiting close to Saturn, notable for its extremely bright surface and the geyser-like plumes of ice and water vapor that erupt from its southern polar region. If Enceladus has liquid water, it joins Mars and Jupiter’s moon Europa as one of the prime places in the solar system to look for extraterrestrial life and possible future settlements.
Other large satellites: Rhea, Iapetus, Dione, Tethys and Mimas, all have large quantities of volatiles, which can be used to support settlement.

[edit] Moons of Uranus, Neptune's Triton and beyond
The five large moons of Uranus (Miranda, Ariel, Umbriel, Titania and Oberon) and Triton - Neptune's moon, although very cold, all have large amounts of frozen water and other volatiles and could potentially be settled, only they would require a lot of nuclear power to sustain the habitats. Triton's thin atmosphere also contains some nitrogen and even some frozen nitrogen on the surface (the surface temperature is 38 K or about -391° Fahrenheit). Pluto is estimated to have a very similar structure to Triton.

[edit] Free space locations

[edit] Space habitats
Main article: Space habitat
Free space locations in space would necessitate a space habitat, also called space colony and orbital colony, or a space station which would be intended as a permanent settlement rather than as a simple waystation or other specialized facility. They would be literal "cities" in space, where people would live and work and raise families. Many design proposals have been made with varying degrees of realism by both science fiction authors and engineers.
A space habitat would also serve as a proving ground for how well a generation ship could function as a long-term home for hundreds or thousands of people. Such a space habitat could be isolated from the rest of humanity for a century, but near enough to Earth for help. This would test if thousands of humans can survive a century on their own before sending them beyond the reach of any help.

[edit] Earth orbit
Compared to other locations, Earth orbit has substantial advantages and one major, but solvable, problem. Orbits close to Earth can be reached in hours, whereas the Moon is days away and trips to Mars take months. There is ample continuous solar power in high Earth orbits, whereas all planets lose sunlight at least half the time. Weightlessness makes construction of large colonies considerably easier than in a gravity environment. Astronauts have demonstrated moving multi-ton satellites by hand. 0g recreation is available on orbital colonies, but not on the Moon or Mars. Finally, the level of (pseudo-) gravity is controlled at any desired level by rotating an orbital colony. Thus, the main living areas can be kept at 1 g, whereas the Moon has 1/6 g and Mars 1/3 g. It's not known what the minimum g-force is for ongoing health but 1 g is known to ensure that children grow up with strong bones and muscles.
The main disadvantage of orbital colonies is lack of materials. These may be expensively imported from the Earth, or more cheaply from extraterrestrial sources, such as the Moon (which has ample metals, silicon, and oxygen), Near Earth Asteroids, comets, or elsewhere.

[edit] Lagrange points
Main article: Lagrange Point Colonization




A contour plot of the effective potential (the Hill's Surfaces) of a two-body system (the Sun and Earth here), showing the five Lagrange points.


Another near-Earth possibility are the five Earth-Moon Lagrange points. Although they would generally also take a few days to reach with current technology, many of these points would have near-continuous solar power capability since their distance from Earth would result in only brief and infrequent eclipses of light from the Sun.
The five Earth-Sun Lagrange points would totally eliminate eclipses, but only L1 and L2 would be reachable in a few days' time. The other three Earth-Sun points would require months to reach.
However, the fact that Lagrange points L4 and L5 tend to collect dust and debris, while L1-L3 require active station-keeping measures to maintain a stable position, make them somewhat less suitable places for habitation than was originally believed.

[edit] Asteroids
Main article: Colonization of the asteroids

[edit] Near Earth Asteroids
Many small asteroids in orbit around the Sun have the advantage that they pass closer than Earth's moon several times per decade. In between these close approaches to home, the asteroid may travel out to a furthest distance of some 350,000,000 kilometers from the Sun (its aphelion) and 500,000,000 kilometers from Earth.

[edit] Main Belt Asteroids
Colonization of asteroids would require space habitats. The asteroid belt has significant overall material available, the largest object being Ceres, although it is thinly distributed as it covers a vast region of space. Unmanned supply craft should be practical with little technological advance, even crossing 1/2 billion kilometers of cold vacuum. The colonists would have a strong interest in assuring that their asteroid did not hit Earth or any other body of significant mass, but would have extreme difficulty in moving an asteroid of any size. The orbits of the Earth and most asteroids are very distant from each other in terms of delta-v and the asteroidal bodies have enormous momentum. Rockets or mass drivers can perhaps be installed on asteroids to direct their path into a safe course.

[edit] Statites
Main article: Statite
Statites or "static satellites" employ solar sails to position themselves in orbits that gravity alone could not accomplish. Such a solar sail colony would be free to ride solar radiation pressure and travel off the ecliptic plane. Navigational computers with an advanced understanding of flocking behavior could organize several statite colonies into the beginnings of the true "swarm" concept of a Dyson sphere.

[edit] Outside the solar system
Looking beyond our solar system, there are billions of potential suns with possible colonization targets.
Physicist Stephen Hawking has said:[10][11]

The long-term survival of the human race is at risk as long as it is confined to a single planet. Sooner or later, disasters such as an asteroid collision or nuclear war could wipe us all out. But once we spread out into space and establish independent colonies, our future should be safe. There isn't anywhere like the Earth in the solar system, so we would have to go to another star.


[edit] Starship
Space colonization technology could in principle allow human expansion at high, but sub-relativistic speeds, substantially less than the speed of light, c.  An interstellar colony ship would be similar to a space habitat, with the addition of major propulsion capabilities and independent energy generation. Hypothetical starship concepts proposed both by scientists and in hard science fiction include:

A generation ship would travel much slower than light, with consequent interstellar trip times of many decades or centuries. The crew would go through generations before the journey is complete, so that none of the initial crew would be expected to survive to arrive at the destination, assuming current human lifespans.
A sleeper ship, in which most or all of the crew spend the journey in some form of hibernation or suspended animation, allowing some or all who undertake the journey to survive to the end.
An Embryo-carrying Interstellar Starship (EIS), much smaller than a generation ship or sleeper ship, transporting human embryos or DNA in a frozen or dormant state to the destination. (Obvious biological and psychological problems in birthing, raising, and educating such voyagers, neglected here, may not be fundamental.)
A nuclear fusion or fission powered ship (e.g., ion drive) of some kind, achieving velocities of up to perhaps 10% c  permitting one-way trips to nearby stars with durations comparable to a human lifetime.
A Project Orion-ship, a nuclear-powered concept proposed by Freeman Dyson which would use nuclear explosions to propel a starship. A special case of the preceding nuclear rocket concepts, with similar potential velocity capability, but possibly easier technology.
Laser propulsion concepts, using some form of beaming of power from the Solar System might allow a light-sail or other ship to reach high speeds, comparable to those theoretically attainable by the fusion-powered electric rocket, above. These methods would need some means, such as supplementary nuclear propulsion, to stop at the destination, but a hybrid (light-sail for acceleration, fusion-electric for deceleration) system might be possible.

The above concepts all appear limited to high, but still sub-relativistic speeds, due to fundamental energy and reaction mass considerations, and all would entail trip times which might be enabled by space colonization technology, permitting self-contained habitats with lifetimes of decades to centuries. Yet human interstellar expansion at average speeds of even 0.1% of c  would permit settlement of the entire Galaxy (assuming it is not inhabited already) in less than one half of a galactic rotation period of ~250,000,000 years, which is comparable to the timescale of other galactic processes. Thus, even if interstellar travel at near relativistic speeds is never feasible (which cannot be clearly determined at this time), the development of space colonization could allow human expansion beyond the Solar System without requiring technological advances that cannot yet be reasonably foreseen. This could greatly improve the chances for the survival of intelligent life over cosmic timescales, given the many natural and human-related hazards that have been widely noted.

[edit] Example
The star Tau Ceti, about eleven light years away, has an abundance of cometary and asteroidal material in orbit around it. These materials could be used for the construction of space habitats for human settlement.

[edit] Terrestrial analogues to space colonies
The most famous attempt to build an analogue to a self-sufficient colony is Biosphere 2, which attempted to duplicate Earth's biosphere.
Many space agencies build testbeds for advanced life support systems, but these are designed for long duration human spaceflight, not permanent colonization.
Remote research stations in inhospitable climates, such as the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station or Devon Island Mars Arctic Research Station, can also provide some practice for off-world outpost construction and operation. The Mars Desert Research Station has a habitat for similar reasons, but the surrounding climate is not strictly inhospitable.
Nuclear Submarines provide an example of conditions encountered in artificial space environment. Crews of these vessels often spend long periods (6 months or more) submerged during their deployments. However, the submarine environment provides a somewhat open life support system since the vessel can replenish supplies of fresh water and oxygen from seawater.

[edit] Literature
The literature for space colonization began in 1869 when Edward Everett Hale wrote about an inhabited artificial satellite.[12]
The Russian schoolmaster and physicist Konstantin Tsiolkovsky foresaw elements of the space community in his book Beyond Planet Earth written about 1900. Tsiolkovsky had his space travelers building greenhouses and raising crops in space.[13]
Others have also written about space colonies as Lasswitz in 1897 and Bernal, Oberth, Von Pirquet and Noordung in the 1920s. Wernher von Braun contributed his ideas in a 1952 Colliers article. In the 1950s and 1960s, Dandridge M. Cole[14] published his ideas.
Another seminal book on the subject was the book The High Frontier: Human Colonies in Space by Gerard K. O'Neill[15] in 1977 which was followed the same year by Colonies in Space by T. A. Heppenheimer.[16]
M. Dyson wrote Home on the Moon; Living on a Space Frontier in 2003;[17] Peter Eckart wrote Lunar Base Handbook in 2006[18] and then Harrison Schmitt's Return to the Moon written in 2007.[19]

[edit] Justification
Main article: Space and survival
In 2001, the space news website Space.com asked Freeman Dyson, J. Richard Gott and Sid Goldstein for reasons why some humans should live in space. Their answers were:[20]

Spread life and beauty throughout the Universe
Ensure the survival of our species
Make money from solar power satellites, asteroid mining, and space manufacturing
Save the environment of Earth by moving people and industry into space
Provide entertainment value in order to distract from immediate surroundings
Ensure sufficient supply of rare materials, including from the Outer Solar System – natural gas (in connection with expected worldwide hydrocarbons peak) and drinking water (in connection with expected worldwide water shortage)

Louis J. Halle, formerly of the United States Department of State, wrote in Foreign Affairs (Summer 1980) that the colonization of space will protect humanity in the event of global nuclear warfare.[21]
The scientist Paul Davies also supports the view that if a planetary catastrophe threatens the survival of the human species on Earth, a self-sufficient colony could "reverse-colonize" the Earth and restore human civilization.
The author and journalist William E. Burrows and the biochemist Robert Shapiro proposed a private project, the Alliance to Rescue Civilization, with the goal of establishing an off-Earth backup of human civilization.[22]
Another important reason used to justify space is the effort to increase the knowledge and technological abilities of humanity.

[edit] Objections





This article contains weasel words, vague phrasing that often accompanies biased or unverifiable information. Such statements should be clarified or removed. (March 2009)







This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details. (September 2008)


Colonizing space would require massive amounts of financial, physical and human capital devoted to research, development, production, and deployment. While the total costs may be unknown, even maintaining the current budget of NASA is politically challenging in the US.
Even if the technology were available, and the costs of deploying a program relatively low, and the likelihood of success relatively high, only a small number of people would directly benefit from a colony (either enthusiastic colonists or high risk commercial interests), leaving most of financing the program to the public.
The fundamental problem of public things,needed for survival, such as space programs, is the free rider problem. Convincing the public to fund such programs would require additional self-interest arguments: If the objective of space colonization is to provide a "backup" in case everyone on Earth is killed, then why should someone on Earth pay for something that is only useful after they're dead? This assumes that space colonization is not widely acknowledged as a sufficiently valuable social goal (see Space and survival).
Other objections include concern about creating a culture in which humans are no longer seen as human, but rather as material assets. The issues of human dignity, morality, philosophy, culture, bioethics, and the threat of megalomaniac leaders in these new "societies" would all have to be addressed in order to space colonization to meet the psychological and social needs of people living in isolated colonies or generation ships.[23] Although they are not being utilized yet, cultural anthropologists may have something to offer to the space programs[citation needed].
As an alternative or addendum for the future of the human race, many science fiction writers have focused on the realm of the 'inner-space', that is the computer aided exploration of the human mind and human consciousness.

[edit] Counter arguments

[edit] The argument of need
The population of Earth continues to increase, while its carrying capacity and available resources do not. If the resources of space are opened to use and viable life-supporting habitats can be built, the Earth will no longer define the limitations of growth (see extraterrestrial population growth). On the other hand, extrapolations made using available figures for population growth, shows that the population of Earth will stop growing around 2070.[24]
Furthermore, even if humanity manages to avoid devastating the Earth through war, pestilence, pollution, global cooling, global warming, and even cometary impacts, the Earth will ultimately become uninhabitable by the heating of the Sun as it ages. If humanity has not made permanent habitations in space by the time any one of these incidents occurs, it may very well go extinct.


“
"Maybe the reason civilizations don’t get around to colonizing other planets is that there’s a narrow window when they have the tools, population and will to do so, and the window usually closes on them."
--J. Richard Gott III
"If it’s true that civilizations normally go extinct because they get stuck on their home planets, then the odds are against us"[25]
--J. Richard Gott III

”



[edit] The argument of cost
Many people overestimate how much money is spent on space and underestimate how much money is spent on defense or social programs.

[edit] Military spending
For example, as of 2008, over $845 billion has been spent on the current war in Iraq. In comparison, it only cost $2 billion to create the Hubble Space Telescope, and NASA's annual budget averages only about $16 billion. In other words, the money that has been spent on the Iraq war could have theoretically funded NASA for approximately 52 years.[26]

[edit] Social spending programs
The United States government spends ~$581 billion on its Social Security program, an additional ~$561 billion on Medicare, plus additional money on other social programs whose budget’s lies within the bounds of the "Other Discretionary Spending" category of the Federal Budget. This means that the United States spends more than $1.142 trillion on social programs per year (equal to more than $3,807 per person per year). In comparison, the United States space program costs a mere $53 per person per year.

[edit] The argument of benefits
Detractors of the development of permanent space colonies and infrastructure often cite the very high initial investment costs of space colonies and permanent space infrastructure yet they ignore all potential returns on that investment. The long-term vision of developing space infrastructure is that it will provide long-term benefits far in excess of the initial startup costs. Therefore, such a development program should be viewed more as a long-term investment and not like current social spending programs that incur spending commitments but provide little or no return on that investment.
Because current space launch costs are so high (on the order of $4,000 to $40,000 / kg launched into orbit) any serious plan to develop space infrastructure at a reasonable cost must include developing the ability of that infrastructure to manufacture most or all of its requirements plus those for permanent human habitation in space. Therefore, the initial investments must be made in the development of the initial capacity to provide these necessities: Materials, Energy, Transportation, Communication, Life support, Radiation protection, Self-replication, and Population.[27]
Once the needs of the permanent settlements have been met, any additional production capacity could be use to either extend that initial infrastructure (a concept commonly called "bootstrapping") or traded back to Earth in payment of the initial investment or in exchange for goods more easily manufactured on the Earth.
Although some items of the infrastructure requirements above can already be easily produced on the Earth and would therefore not be very valuable as trade items (oxygen, water, base metal ores, silcates, etc.), other high value items are more abundant, more easily produced, of higher quality, or can only be produced in space. These would provide (over the long-term) a very high return on the initial investment in space infrastructure.[28]
Some of these high trade value goods include precious metals,[29][30] gem stones,[31] power,[32] solar cells,[33] ball bearings,[33] semi-conductors,[33] and pharmceuticals.[33]


“
... the smallest Earth-crossing asteroid 3554 Amun (see orbit) is a mile-wide (2 km) lump of iron, nickel, cobalt, platinum, and other metals; it contains 30 times as much metal as Humans have mined throughout history, although it is only the smallest of dozens of known metallic asteroids and worth perhaps US$ 20 trillion if mined slowly to meet demand at 2001 market prices.[29]
”




“
In the 2,900 km³ of Eros, there is more aluminium, gold, silver, zinc and other base and precious metals than have ever been excavated in history or indeed, could ever be excavated from the upper layers of the Earth's crust.[31]
”


The main impediments to commercial exploitation of these resources are the very high cost of initial investment,[34] the very long period required for the expected return on those investments (estimated to be 50 years or more by some[35]), and because it has never been done before - the high-risk nature of the investment.

[edit] The argument of nationalism
Space proponents counter this argument by pointing out that humanity as a whole has been exploring and expanding into new territory since long before Europe's colonial period, going back into prehistory (the nationalist argument also ignores multinational cooperative space efforts); that seeing the Earth as a single, discrete object instills a powerful sense of the unity, connectedness of the human environment, and of the immateriality of political borders; and that in practice, international collaboration in space has shown its value as a unifying and cooperative endeavor.

[edit] Advocacy
Space advocacy organizations include

The Alliance to Rescue Civilization plans to establish backups of human civilization on the Moon and other locations away from Earth.
The Colonize the Cosmos site advocates orbital colonies.[36]
The Artemis Project plans to set up a private lunar surface station.
The British Interplanetary Society, founded in 1933, is the world's longest established space society.
The Living Universe Foundation has a detailed plan in which the entire galaxy is colonized.
The Mars Society promotes Robert Zubrin's Mars Direct plan and the settlement of Mars.
The National Space Society is an organization with the vision of "people living and working in thriving communities beyond the Earth."
The Planetary Society is the largest space interest group, but has an emphasis on robotic exploration and the search for extraterrestrial life.
The Space Frontier Foundation promotes strong free market, capitalist views about space development.
The Space Settlement Institute is searching for ways to make space colonization happen in our lifetimes.[37]
The Space Studies Institute was founded by Gerard K. O'Neill to fund the study of space habitats.
Students for the Exploration and Development of Space (SEDS) is a student organization founded in 1980 at MIT and Princeton.[38]
Foresight Nanotechnology Institute – The space challenge.[39]


[edit] In fiction
Although established space colonies are a stock element in science fiction stories, fictional works that explore the themes, social or practical, of the settlement and occupation of a habitable world are much rarer. The following list is restricted to works dealing primarily with the initial stages of colonization.

[edit] Written works

Coyote: A Novel of Interstellar Revolution (2002) by Allen Steele. Adventure story involving the colonization of a moon of 47 Ursae Majoris B.
Farmer in the Sky (1950) by Robert A. Heinlein. A family joins a not-yet-successful colony on Ganymede.
The Martian Chronicles (1950) by Ray Bradbury. Describes the exploration, settlement, and abandonment of colonies on Mars, in a poetic but unrealistic way.
Red Mars (1992) by Kim Stanley Robinson. Explores the initial stages of development of a Martian colony
The Dream Millennium (1974) by James White. Colonists fleeing an Earth wracked by pollution and violence to find a habitable planet.


[edit] Games

Alien Legacy (1994), computer game. Player has to manage new colonies on the planets of Beta Caeli.
Ascendancy (1995), computer game. Player tries to grow a colony into a spacefaring civilization.
Halo (2001), computer game. Player fights for Earth's colonies against the alien Covenant.
Outpost (1994), computer game. Player plans and manages a colony on another planet.
Outpost 2 (1997), computer game. Player manages a colony on the fictional planet of New Terra.
Sid Meier's Alpha Centauri (1999), computer game. Player tries to expand a human colony on Alpha Centauri.
Starfarers of Catan (1999), tabletop game. Player manages trade and colonization in the fictional planetary system of Catan.
Freelancer Players can explore several planets and systems colonized centuries prior to the start of the game.
Starlancer Several colonies located on planets in the Sol systems are mentioned throughout the game.
Marathon A early game by Bungie that show a human generation ship, fighting off alien slavers on their way to Tau Ceti.
Gradius Gaiden The player uses the Vic Viper and 3 other craft to defend planet Gradius and it's colonies against unknown forces from the Dark Nebula.
Mass Effect In the first mission of the game one of Earth's colonies "Eden Prime" is devastated by an alien attack
Xenosaga
Spore (2008 video game) The player may colonize planets with special tools


[edit] Comics

2001 Nights (1996) by Yukinobu Hoshino. Includes stories relating to problems of colonization.


[edit] Television

Star Trek, one of the oldest television franchise on sci-fi (1966-present). The TV series and films depict various eras spanning from the 22nd to the 24th century AD, by the end of which humans have mapped and explored about 20% of the Milky Way, they have colonized several star systems and have united with some of the other sentient species in it.
Battlestar Galactica (1978–1979) and (2003-2009), a television franchise. In both series, mankind lives on the Twelve Colonies as well as the thirteenth colony of Earth, having had an exodus from Earth to Kobol and then Kobol to the Colonies.
Gundam (1979-present), anime television franchise beginning with Mobile Suit Gundam (1979–1980). The series as well as its sequels and spin-offs mostly revolve around the conflicts between the Earth and the space colonies.
Macross (1982-present) or Robotech (1985), anime television franchise. The series and its sequels mostly revolve around space colony fleets known as "Macross".
Earth 2 (1994–1995), television series. A refugee group travels to and tries to colonize a distant Earth-like planet.
Firefly (2002–2003), a television series. The series, and the followup film Serenity, dealt with a mass exodus from an overcrowded Earth to a new solar system, involving the terraforming and colonisation of these new worlds.
Planetes (2003–2004), anime series. Humanity has colonized parts of Earth's Moon and Mars.
Doctor Who (2005–present), television series. The Great and Bountiful Human Empire is repeatedly mentioned to have sent colonists into different parts of space, sometimes interfering with or even destroying native species.
Futurama (TV series). Throughout the series, Humans have built Theme Parks on The Moon, inhabited Mars including a Mars University, built Nature Reserves on Pluto, built limited settlements on Mercury and built homes on the asteroid fields. There is also references to a human empire with Colonies across the Universe and Territory Wars on Several Planets.


[edit] RPGs

2300 AD (1987) by Game Designers Workshop, a role playing game. Mankind has colonized about 30 planets and found 8 different alien civilizations.


[edit] See also


Space archaeology
Space advocacy
Space habitat
Space mining
Space station
Space elevator
Space exploration
Space and survival
Sex in space
Spaceflight
Biosphere 2
BIOS-3
Domed city
Generation ship
Human adaptation to space
Closed ecological system
Launch loop
Ocean colonization
Planetary habitability
Private spaceflight
Space tourism
Commercial Astronaut
Recycling
Renewable energy
Solar analog
Terraforming
Underground city
Extraterrestrial liquid water
Floating city (science fiction)
List of private spaceflight companies
Space weather
Space stations and habitats in popular culture



[edit] References


^ "NASA's Griffin: 'Humans Will Colonize the Solar System'". Washington Post. September 25, 2005. pp. B07. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2005/09/23/AR2005092301691.html. 
^ http://www.berkeley.edu/news/media/releases/2006/02/01_patroclus.shtml
^ UNESCAP Electric Power in Asia and the Pacific
^ Settling the Moon: A Home Away from Home, by Joseph Richard Gutheinz, Jr. Earth Magazine, September 2008.
^ { http://www.pittsburghlive.com/x/pittsburghtrib/s_200242.html } A giant leap over rough terrain. The Associated Press, June 24, 2004.
^ Patrick A. Troutman (NASA Langley Research Center) et al., Revolutionary Concepts for Human Outer Planet Exploration (HOPE), accessed May 10, 2006 (.doc format)
^ NASA and ESA headed back to Jupiter's moons
^ Robert Zubrin, Entering Space: Creating a Spacefaring Civilization, section: Titan, pp. 163–166, Tarcher/Putnam, 1999, ISBN 978-1-58542-036-0
^ NASA page: News-Features-the Story of Saturn saturn.jpl.nasa.gov. Retrieved 8 January 2007.
^ "Move to new planet, says Hawking". 2006. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/6158855.stm. 
^ "Mankind must colonise other planets to survive, says Hawking". 2006. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/pages/live/articles/technology/technology.html?in_article_id=419573&in_page_id=1965. 
^ E. E. Hale. The Brick Moon. Atlantic Monthly, Vol. 24, 1869.
^ K. E. Tsiolkovsky. Beyond Planet Earth. Trans. by Kenneth Syers. Oxford, 1960
^ Dandridge M. Cole and Donald W. Cox Islands in Space. Chilton, 1964
^ G. K. O'Neill. The High Frontier: Human Colonies in Space. Morrow, 1977.
^ T. A. Heppenheimer. Colonies in Space. Stackpole Books, 1977
^ Marianne J. Dyson: Living on a Space Frontier. National Geographic, 2003
^ Peter Eckart. Lunar Base Handbook. McGraw-Hill, 2006
^ Harrison H. Schmitt. Return to the Moon. Springer, 2007.
^ Britt, Robert Roy (8 October 2001). "The Top 3 Reasons to Colonize Space". Space.com. http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/colonize_why_011008-1.html. 
^ Halle, Louis J. (Summer 1980). "A Hopeful Future for Mankind". Foreign Affairs. http://www.foreignaffairs.org/19800601faessay8146/louis-j-halle/a-hopeful-future-for-mankind.html. 
^ "Life After Earth: Imagining Survival Beyond This Terra Firma". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/08/01/science/01arc.html. 
^ http://er.jsc.nasa.gov/seh/sociology.html
^ Ciro Pabón y Ciro Pabón, Manual de Urbanismo, Editorial Leyer, Bogotá, 2007, ISBN 978-958-711-2962
^ http://www.nytimes.com/2007/07/17/science/17tier.html?ex=1342324800&en=ccf375ae9f268470&ei=5090&partner=rssuserland&emc=rss
^ Iraq war hits U.S. economy: Nobel winner | Reuters
^ http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space_colonization#Method
^ http://www.spacefuture.com/archive/the_technical_and_economic_feasibility_of_mining_the_near_earth_asteriods.shtml
^ a b http://members.nova.org/~sol/station/ast-mine.htm
^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/401227.stm
^ a b http://www.tricitiesnet.com/donsastronomy/mining.html
^ http://www.spacefuture.com/archive/conceptual_study_of_a_solar_power_satellite_sps_2000.shtml
^ a b c d http://www.panix.com/~kingdon/space/manuf.html
^ http://www.aiaa.org/content.cfm?pageid=406&gTable=Paper&gID=16257
^ http://www.orbdev.com/erosproj.html
^ Orbital Space Settlement
^ The Space Settlement Institute – Finding Ways to Make Space Settlement Happen in Our Lifetimes
^ Students for the Exploration and Development of Space (SEDS)
^ Foresight Challenges – Space Development



[edit] External links

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) Space Colonization Technical Committee (SCTC)
"Is the surface of a planet really the right place for expanding technological civilization?" Interviewing Gerard O'Neill
Biological Effects of Weightlessness
space colony – The Encyclopedia of Astrobiology, Astronomy, and Spaceflight
Visualizing the Steps of Solar System Colonization
HobbySpace: Life in Space: Section C: Colonies, Habitats, Space Industry, etc Extensive collection of links
Orbital Space Settlements NASA's orbital space habitats site, which includes a contest for K-12 students
The Political Economy of Very Large Space Projects John Hickman argues that only the state can afford the high initial investment for very large space development projects.
Spaceflight or Extinction Academics and other leaders explain that we should colonize space to improve our chance of survival. Authors include Stephen Hawking and Carl Sagan.
Using space colonization to prevent the end of civilization Academic Paper
PERMANENT Projects to Employ Resources of the Moon and Asteroids Near Earth in the Near Term; a guide to websites about asteroid mining and space settlement.
Mars colonization:

http://mars.esa.int
http://mars.jpl.nasa.gov/mer


Testimony of Michael D. Griffin Hearing on "The Future of Human Space Flight". Michael D. Griffin believes that the "human space flight program is in the long run possibly the most significant activity in which our nation is engaged".
Island One Society – ideas about libertarian space colonization.
National Space Society – non-profit organization that promotes a spacefaring civilization.
4Frontiers Corporation – for profit company pursuing a number of technology, education and entertainment ventures related to Mars settlement.
Mars Foundation – Non-Profit Organization pursing public outreach and technology development for Mars settlement.








v • d • e

Spaceflight





General spaceflight

History (Space Race, Accidents and incidents) · Astrodynamics · Lists and timelines







Applications

Earth observation satellites (Spy satellites, weather satellites) · Space exploration · Space tourism · Communication satellites · Satellite navigation · Space colonization






Human spaceflight





General


Astronaut  · Life support system







Hazards


Weightlessness (space adaptation syndrome)  · cosmic radiation







Major projects


Vostok · Mercury · Voskhod · Gemini · Soyuz · Apollo · Space Shuttle · Shenzhou · Mir · ISS · Constellation







Other


Extra-vehicular activity









Spacecraft

Launch vehicle · Space Shuttle · Robotic spacecraft · Self-replicating spacecraft · Spacecraft propulsion · Rocket






Destinations

Sub-orbital · Orbital (Geosynchronous orbit, Geocentric orbit)  · Interplanetary spaceflight · Interstellar travel · Intergalactic travel






Space launch

Expendable and Reusable systems · Escape velocity · Direct ascent · Non-rocket spacelaunch · Spaceport · Launch pad






Main agencies

ESA · NASA  · RKA  · CNSA · ISRO · JAXA






Other

Private spaceflight · Space weather · Lagrangian point · Space and survival













v • d • e

Space tourism





Major private companies

Bigelow Aerospace · Blue Origin · EADS Astrium · Rocketplane · Space Adventures · Scaled Composites · The Spaceship Company · Virgin Galactic







Organizations

ARCASPACE · Astronaute Club Européen · LiftPort Group · Personal Spaceflight Federation · Space Tourism Society · Association of Autonomous Astronauts






Successful spacecraft

SpaceShipOne · Genesis I · Genesis II






Living in space

Space station · Space habitat · Space colonization · Commercialization of space · Suborbital spaceplane · Space currency






Major Space competitions

Ansari X Prize · Google Lunar X Prize · America's Space Prize · N-Prize · Centennial Challenges (Elevator:2010 & MoonROx)













v • d • e

The Solar System













































The Sun · Mercury · Venus · Earth · Mars · Ceres · Jupiter · Saturn · Uranus · Neptune · Pluto · Haumea · Makemake · Eris








Planets · Dwarf planets · Moons: Terrestrial · Martian · Jovian · Saturnian · Uranian · Neptunian · Plutonian · Haumean · Eridian









Small bodies:   Meteoroids · Asteroids/Asteroid moons (Asteroid belt, Centaurs, TNOs: Kuiper belt/Scattered disc) · Comets (Oort cloud)







See also astronomical objects, the Solar System's list of objects, sorted by size, the list of minor planets, or the Solar System Portal








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space_colonization"
Categories: Space colonization | Space exploration | SpaceHidden categories: Articles with weasel words from March 2009 | Articles that may contain original research since September 2008 | All articles that may contain original research | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
Español
Français
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Nederlands
日本語
Português
Русский
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 13:40.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
