













Liechtenstein - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Liechtenstein";
		var wgTitle = "Liechtenstein";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "17810";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283529735;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Liechtenstein

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses of "Liechtenstein" or "Lichtenstein", see Lichtenstein (disambiguation).





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2009)




Principality of Liechtenstein
Fürstentum Liechtenstein









Flag





Motto: Für Gott, Fürst und Vaterland
For God, Prince and Fatherland


Anthem: Oben am jungen Rhein
"Up on the Young Rhine"







Location of  Liechtenstein  (circled in inset)
on the European continent  (white)  —  [Legend]





Capital
Vaduz
47°08.5′N 9°31.4′E﻿ / ﻿47.1417°N 9.5233°E﻿ / 47.1417; 9.5233


Largest city
Schaan


Official languages
German


Demonym
Liechtensteinian, locally Liechtensteiner/in


Government
Parliamentary democracy under constitutional monarchy


 - 
Prince
Hans-Adam II


 - 
Prince-Regent
Alois


 - 
Prime Minister
Klaus Tschütscher


 - 
Landtag Speaker
Klaus Wanger


Independence as principality


 - 
Treaty of Pressburg
1806 


 - 
Independence from the German Confederation
1866 


Area


 - 
Total
160.4 km2 (210th)
62 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
negligible


Population


 - 
2007 estimate
35,322[1] (204th)


 - 
2000 census
33,307 


 - 
Density
221/km2 (52nd)
571/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$4.16 billion[2] 


 - 
Per capita
$118,000[2] (1st)


GDP (nominal)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$4.993 billion[2] 


 - 
Per capita
$141,357[1][2] (1st)


Currency
Liechtenstein frank, Swiss franc (CHF)


Time zone
CET (UTC+1)


 - 
Summer (DST)
CEST (UTC+2)


Drives on the
right


Internet TLD
.li


Calling code
423


The Principality of Liechtenstein  /ˈlɪktənstaɪn/ (help·info) (German: Fürstentum Liechtenstein,  ˈfʏʁstəntuːm ˈliçtənʃtaɪn (help·info)) is a doubly landlocked alpine microstate in Western Europe, bordered by Switzerland to the west and by Austria to the east.
Liechtenstein is the smallest German-speaking country in the world. It is a constitutional monarchy divided into 11 municipalities. Its capital is Vaduz. Much of Liechtenstein's terrain is mountainous, making it a winter sports destination. Many cultivated fields and small farms characterize its landscape both in the north (Unterland) and in the south (Oberland). The country has a strong financial sector and has been identified as a tax haven. It is a member of the European Free Trade Agreement. Liechtenstein is not part of the European Union and has shown no interest in joining.




Contents


1 History
2 Government functions

2.1 New constitution
2.2 Honorary Consuls


3 Geography
4 Economy
5 Taxation
6 Demographics
7 Transport
8 Culture
9 Sports
10 Tourism
11 Military
12 See also
13 References
14 Sources
15 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Main article: History of Liechtenstein
At one time, the territory formed a part of the ancient Roman province of Raetia. For centuries this territory, geographically removed from European strategic interests, had little impact on European history. Prior to the reign of its current dynasty, the region was enfeoffed to a line of the counts of Hohenems.
The Liechtenstein dynasty, from which the principality takes its name, comes from Castle Liechtenstein in faraway Lower Austria, which the family possessed from at least 1140 to the thirteenth century, and from 1807 onward. Through the centuries, the dynasty acquired vast tracts of land, predominantly in Moravia, Lower Austria, Silesia, and Styria, though in all cases, these territories were held in fief under other more senior feudal lords, particularly under various lines of the Habsburg family, to whom several Liechtenstein princes served as close advisers. Thus, and without any territory held directly under the Imperial throne, the Liechtenstein dynasty was unable to meet a primary requirement to qualify for a seat in the Imperial diet, the Reichstag.
The family yearned for the added power a seat in the Imperial government would bring, and therefore sought to acquire lands that would be unmittelbar, or held without any feudal personage other than the Holy Roman Emperor himself having rights on the land. After some time, the family was able to arrange the purchase of the minuscule Herrschaft ("Lordship") of Schellenberg and county of Vaduz (in 1699 and 1712 respectively) from the Hohenems. Tiny Schellenberg and Vaduz possessed exactly the political status required; no feudal lord other than their comital sovereign and the suzerain Emperor.
Thereby, on January 23, 1719, after purchase had been duly made, Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor, decreed Vaduz and Schellenberg were united, and elevated the newly-formed territory to the dignity of Fürstentum (principality) with the name "Liechtenstein" in honour of "[his] true servant, Anton Florian of Liechtenstein". It is on this date that Liechtenstein became a sovereign member state of the Holy Roman Empire. It is a testament to the pure political expediency of the purchases that the Princes of Liechtenstein did not set foot in their new principality for over 120 years.




Schloss Vaduz, overlooking the capital, is still home to the prince of Liechtenstein


As a result of the Napoleonic Wars, by 1806, the Holy Roman Empire was under the control of French emperor Napoleon I. Napoleon dissolved the Empire and this had broad consequences for Liechtenstein: imperial, legal and political mechanisms broke down. The state ceased owing obligations to any feudal lord beyond its borders. Modern publications generally (although incorrectly) attribute Liechtenstein's sovereignty to these events. In reality, its prince merely became suzerain, as well as remaining sovereign lord. From 25 July 1806 when the Confederation of the Rhine was founded, the prince of Liechtenstein was a member, in fact a vassal of its hegemon, styled protector, French Emperor Napoleon I, until the dissolution of the Confederation on 19 October 1813.
Soon afterward, Liechtenstein joined the German Confederation (20 June 1815 – 24 August 1866, which was presided over by the Emperor of Austria).




Johann I Josef, Prince of Liechtenstein.


Then, in 1818, Johann I granted a constitution, although it was limited in its nature. 1818 also saw the first visit of a member of the house of Liechtenstein, Prince Alois; however, the first visit by a sovereign prince would not occur until 1842.
Liechtenstein also had many advances in the nineteenth century, as in 1836, the first factory was opened, making ceramics. In 1861, the Savings and Loans Bank was founded, as was the first cotton-weaving mill. Two bridges over the Rhine were built in 1868, and in 1872 a railway line across Liechtenstein was constructed.
When the Austro-Prussian War broke out in 1866, new pressure was placed on Liechtenstein, as, when peace was declared, Prussia accused Liechtenstein of being the cause of the war through a miscount of the votes for war with Prussia. This led to Liechtenstein refusing to sign a peace treaty with Prussia and remained at war although no actual conflict ever occurred. This was one of the arguments that were suggested to justify a possible invasion of Liechtenstein in the late 1930s.
Until the end of World War I, Liechtenstein first was closely tied to the Austrian Empire and later to Austria-Hungary; the ruling princes continued to derive much of their wealth from estates in the Habsburg territories, and they spent much of their time at their two palaces in Vienna. The economic devastation caused by WWI forced the country to conclude a customs and monetary union with its other neighbour Switzerland. Liechtenstein's army was disbanded in 1868 for financial reasons. At the time of the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, it was argued that Liechtenstein as a fief of the Holy Roman Empire was no longer bound to the emerging independent state Austria, since the latter did not consider itself as the legal successor to the Empire. This is partly contradicted by the coeval Liechtenstein perception that the dethroned Austro-Hungarian Emperor still maintained an abstract heritage of the Holy Roman Empire.




Franz I, Prince of Liechtenstein.


In the spring of 1938, just after the annexation of Austria into Greater Germany, eighty-four year-old Prince Franz I abdicated, naming his thirty-one year-old third cousin, Prince Franz Joseph, as his successor. While Prince Franz I claimed that old age was his reason for abdicating, it is believed that he had no desire to be on the throne if Germany were to gobble up Liechtenstein. His wife, whom he married in 1929, was a wealthy Jewish woman from Vienna, and local Liechtenstein Nazis had already singled her out as their Jewish "problem". Although Liechtenstein had no official Nazi party, a Nazi sympathy movement had been simmering for years within its National Union party.[3]
During World War II, Liechtenstein remained neutral, while family treasures within the war zone were taken to Liechtenstein (and London) for safekeeping. At the close of the conflict, Czechoslovakia and Poland, acting to seize what they considered to be German possessions, expropriated the entirety of the Liechtenstein dynasty's hereditary lands and possessions in Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia — the princes of Liechtenstein lived in Vienna until the Anschluss of 1938. The expropriations (subject to modern legal dispute at the World Court) included over 1,600 km2 (618 sq mi) of agricultural and forest land, also including several family castles and palaces. Citizens of Liechtenstein were also forbidden from entering Czechoslovakia during the Cold War. Liechtenstein gave asylum to approximately five hundred soldiers of the First Russian National Army (a collaborationist Russian force within the German Wehrmacht) at the close of World War II; this is commemorated by a monument at the border town of Hinterschellenberg which is marked on the country's tourist map. The act of granting asylum was no small matter as the country was poor and had difficulty feeding and caring for such a large group of refugees. Eventually, Argentina agreed to permanently resettle the asylum seekers. In contrast, the British repatriated the Russians who had fought for Germany to the USSR, and many of them perished in the Gulag.
In dire financial straits following the war, the Liechtenstein dynasty often resorted to selling family artistic treasures, including, for instance, the priceless portrait "Ginevra de' Benci" by Leonardo da Vinci, which was purchased by the National Gallery of Art of the United States in 1967. Liechtenstein prospered, however, during the decades following, as it used its low corporate tax rates to draw many companies to the country.
The Prince of Liechtenstein is the world's sixth wealthiest leader with an estimated wealth of USD $5 billion.[4] The country's population enjoys one of the world's highest standards of living.

[edit] Government functions




The Government building in Vaduz.


Main article: Politics of Liechtenstein
Liechtenstein's current constitution was adopted in October 1921. It established in Liechtenstein a constitutional monarchy headed by the reigning prince of the Princely House of Liechtenstein. It also established a parliamentary system, although the reigning prince retained substantial political authority.
The reigning prince of the Princely House of Liechtenstein is the head of state and, as such, represents Liechtenstein in its international relations (although Switzerland has taken responsibility for much of Liechtenstein's diplomatic relations). The prince may veto laws adopted by parliament. The prince can call referendums, propose new legislation, and dissolve parliament, although dissolution of parliament may be subject to a referendum.
Executive authority is vested in a collegial government (government) comprising the head of government (prime minister) and four government councilors (ministers). The head of government and the other ministers are appointed by the prince upon the proposal and concurrence of parliament, thus reflecting the partisan balance of parliament. The constitution stipulates that at least two members of the government be chosen from each of the two regions. The members of the government are collectively and individually responsible to parliament; parliament may ask the prince to remove an individual minister or the entire government.
Legislative authority is vested in the unicameral "Landtag" (Liechtenstein Parliament) made up of 25 members elected for maximum four-year terms according to a proportional representation formula. Fifteen members are elected from the "Oberland" (Upper Country or region) and ten members are elected from the "Unterland" (Lower Country or region). Parties must receive at least eight percent of the national vote to win seats in parliament. Parliament proposes and approves a government, which is formally appointed by the prince. Parliament may also pass votes of no confidence against the entire government or against individual members. Additionally, parliament elects from among its members a "Landesausschuss" (National Committee) made up of the president of the parliament and four additional members. The National Committee is charged with performing parliamentary oversight functions. Parliament can call for referendums on proposed legislation. Parliament shares the authority to propose new legislation with the prince and with the requisite number of citizens required for an initiative referendum.
Judicial authority is vested in the Regional Court at Vaduz, the Princely High Court of Appeal at Vaduz, the Princely Supreme Court, the Administrative Court, and the State Court. The State Court rules on the conformity of laws with the constitution. The State Court has five members elected by parliament.

[edit] New constitution
In March 2003, the results of a national referendum showed that nearly two-thirds of Liechtenstein's electorate agreed to vote in support of Hans-Adam II's proposal of a new constitution, to replace the 1921 one. The proposed constitution was criticised by many, including the Council of Europe, as expanding the powers of the monarchy (continuing the power to veto any law, and allowing the Prince to dismiss the Government or any Minister), and the criticisms were accentuated by a threat by the ruling prince that if the constitution failed, he would, among other things, convert some of the royal property for commercial use.

[edit] Honorary Consuls
On 1 July 2007, the Liechtenstein Ruling Prince, H.S.H. Hans-Adam II, and Liechtenstein's Prime Minister, Otmar Hasler, appointed Dr. Bruce S. Allen and Leodis C. Matthews, Esq., both in the United States of America, as the first two Honorary Consuls in history for the Principality of Liechtenstein. The U.S does not have an embassy in Liechtenstein and it is Switzerland's job to keep good relations between Switzerland, the U.S and the tiny principality.[5]

[edit] Geography
Main article: Geography of Liechtenstein




Satellite image faintly delineating Liechtenstein - enlarge to full page for clarity.






Grauspitz, the highest peak in Liechtenstein.


Liechtenstein is situated in the Upper Rhine valley of the European Alps and is bordered to the east by Austria and to the west by Switzerland. The entire western border of Liechtenstein is formed by the river. Measured north to south, the country is only about 24 km (15 mi) long. In its eastern portion, Liechtenstein rises to higher altitudes; its highest point, the Grauspitz, is 2,599 m (8,527 ft). Despite its alpine location, prevailing southerly winds make the climate of Liechtenstein comparatively mild. In winter, the mountain slopes are well suited to winter sports.
New surveys using more accurate measurements of the country's borders in 2006 have set its area at 160 km2 (61.776 sq mi), with borders of 77.9 km (48.4 mi).[6] Thus, Liechtenstein discovered in 2006 that its borders are 1.9 km (1.2 mi) longer than previously thought.[7]
Liechtenstein is one of only two doubly landlocked countries in the world[2]—being a landlocked country wholly surrounded by other landlocked countries (the other is Uzbekistan). It is the only country with a predominantly German-speaking population that does not share a border with the Federal Republic of Germany. Liechtenstein is the sixth-smallest independent nation in the world by land area.
The principality of Liechtenstein is divided into 11 municipalities called Gemeinden (singular Gemeinde). The Gemeinden mostly consist only of a single town. Five of them fall within the electoral district Unterland (the lower county), and the remainder within Oberland (the upper county).

[edit] Economy




Looking northward at Vaduz city-centre.






City-centre with Kunstmuseum (Liechtenstein Art Museum).


Main article: Economy of Liechtenstein
Despite its limited natural resources, Liechtenstein is one of the few countries in the world with more registered companies than citizens; it has developed into a prosperous, highly industrialized, free-enterprise economy, and boasts a financial service sector as well as a living standard which compares favourably to those of the urban areas of Liechtenstein's large European neighbours. Relatively low business taxes—the maximum tax rate is 20%[8]—as well as easy Rules of Incorporation have induced about 73,700 holding (or so-called 'letter box') companies to establish nominal offices in Liechtenstein. Such processes provide about 30% of Liechtenstein's state revenue. Liechtenstein also generates revenue from the establishment of stiftungs ("foundations"), which are financial entities created to increase the privacy of nonresident foreigners' financial holdings. The foundation is registered in the name of a Liechtensteiner, often a lawyer.
Recently, Liechtenstein has shown strong determination to prosecute any international money-laundering and worked to promote the country's image as a legitimate financing center. In February 2008, the country's LGT Bank was implicated in a tax-fraud scandal in Germany, which strained the ruling family's relationship with the German government. Crown Prince Alois has accused the German government of trafficking in stolen goods for its $7.3 million purchase of private banking information illegally offered by a former employee of LGT Group.[9][10] However, the US Senate's subcommittee on tax haven banks charged that the LGT bank which is owned by the royal family, and on whose board they serve, "is a willing partner, and an aider and abettor to clients trying to evade taxes, dodge creditors or defy court orders."[11]
Liechtenstein participates in a customs union with Switzerland and employs the Swiss franc as national currency. The country imports more than 90% of its energy requirements. Liechtenstein has been a member of the European Economic Area (an organization serving as a bridge between the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and the European Union) since May 1995. The government is working to harmonize its economic policies with those of an integrated Europe. Since 2002, Liechtenstein's rate of unemployment has doubled, although it stood at only 2.2% in the third quarter of 2004. Currently, there is only one hospital in Liechtenstein, the Liechtensteinisches Landesspital in Vaduz. The GDP (PPP) is $4.16 billion,[2] or $118,000 per person.
Liechtenstein's most recognizable international company and largest employer is Hilti, a manufacturer of direct fastening systems and other high-end power tools. Liechtenstein also is the home of the Curta calculator and the principality produces a large portion of the world's false teeth. (Ivoclar Vivadent, Schaan)

[edit] Taxation
The government of Liechtenstein taxes personal and business income and principal (wealth). The basic rate for the personal income tax is 1.2%. When combined with the additional income tax imposed by the communes, the combined income tax rate is 17.82%.[12] An additional income tax of 4.3% is levied on all employees for the country's social security program. This rate is higher for self-employed, up to a maximum of 11%, making the maximum income tax rate about 29% total. Income from employment is taxed through monthly withholdings by employer.
The maximum business income tax rate is 18-20%.[2]

Estate duty

Amount (SFr)
Rate


The first 200,000
1%


The next 400,000
2%


The next 600,000
3%


The next 800,000
4%


On residue over 2 million
5%


The basic tax rate on wealth is 0.06% and the combined total rate is 0.89%.
Liechtenstein's gifts and estate taxes vary depending upon the relationship the recipient has to the giver and the amount of the inheritance. The tax ranges between 0.5% and 0.75% for spouses and children and 18% to 27% for non-related recipients. The estate tax is progressive (see table opposite).
The rate above is halved if the estate passes to the spouse, children, or parents.[13]
The 2008 Liechtenstein tax affair is a series of tax investigations in numerous countries whose governments suspect that some of their citizens may have evaded tax obligations by using banks and trusts in Liechtenstein; the affair broke open with the biggest complex of investigations ever initiated for tax evasion in the Federal Republic of Germany.[14] It is seen also as an attempt to put pressure on Liechtenstein, one of the remaining uncooperative tax havens – along with Andorra and Monaco – as identified by the Paris-based Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in 2007.[15]

[edit] Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Liechtenstein
Liechtenstein is the fourth smallest country of Europe, after the Vatican City, Monaco, and San Marino. Its population is primarily Alemannic-speaking ethnic Germans, although its resident population is approximately one third foreign-born, primarily German speakers from the Federal Republic of Germany, Austria, and the Swiss Confederation, other Swiss, Italians, and Turks. Foreign-born people make up two-thirds of the country's workforce. Nationals are referred to by the plural: Liechtensteiners.
The official language is German; most speak Alemannic, a dialect of German that is highly divergent from Standard German (see Middle High German), but closely related to those dialects spoken in neighbouring regions. In Triesenberg, a dialect promoted by the municipality is spoken. According to the 2000 census, 87.9% of the population is Christian, of which 76% adhere to the Roman Catholic faith, while about 7% are Protestant. The religious affiliation for most of the remainder is Islam 4.8%, undeclared 4.1% and no religion 2.8%,[16] there are around 30 Jews that live today at Liechtenstein.
Liechtensteiners have an average life expectancy at birth of 79.68 years (76.1 years for males; 83.28 years for females). The infant mortality rate is 4.64 deaths per 1,000 live births, according to recent estimates. The literacy rate of Liechtenstein is 100%.[2] The Programme for International Student Assessment, coordinated by the OECD, currently ranks Liechtenstein's education as the 10th best in the world, being significantly higher than the OECD average.[17]

[edit] Transport

Road

There are about 250 km (155 mi) of paved roadway within Liechtenstein.

Rail

See also: Rail transport in Liechtenstein
9.5 km (5.9 mi) of railway connects Austria and Switzerland through Liechtenstein. The country's railways are administered by the Austrian Federal Railways as part of the route between Feldkirch, Austria, and Buchs SG, Switzerland. Four stations in Liechtenstein, namely Schaan-Vaduz, Forst Hilti, Nendeln, and Schaanwald, are served by an irregularly stopping train service running between Feldkirch and Buchs. While EuroCity and other long distance international trains also make use of the route, these do not call at Liechtenstein stations.

Bus

Liechtenstein Bus is a subsidiary of the Swiss Postbus system, but separately run, and connects to the Swiss bus network at Buchs SG and at Sargans as well as the Austrian city of Feldkirch.
N.B. Incidentally, with Liechtenstein's railways being run by the Austrian Federal Railways (ÖBB) and with special agreements existing between Liechtenstein's and Austria's Government, the country falls under the Austrian Verkehrsverbund Vorarlberg tariff region.

Bicycle

There are 90 km (56 mi) of marked bicycle paths in the country.

Air

Liechtenstein has no airport; the nearest large airport is Zürich. There is a small heliport at Balzers in Liechtenstein[18][19] available for charter helicopter flights.

[edit] Culture




Vineyard on the outskirts of Vaduz.


As a result of its small size Liechtenstein has been strongly affected by external cultural influences, most notably those originating in the southern German-speaking areas of Europe, including Austria, Bavaria, Switzerland, and Tirol. The Historical Society of the Principality of Liechtenstein plays a role in preserving the culture and history of the country.
The largest museum is the Kunstmuseum Liechtenstein, an international museum of modern and contemporary art with an important international art collection. The building by the Swiss architects Morger, Degelo and Kerez is a landmark in Vaduz. It was completed in November 2000 and forms a “black box” of tinted concrete and black basalt stone. The museum collection is also the national art collection of Liechtenstein.
The other important museum is the Liechtenstein National Museum (Liechtensteinisches Landesmuseum) showing permanent exhibition on the cultural and natural history of Liechtenstein as well as special exhibitions. There are also two more museums: a Stamp museum and a Ski museum.
The most famous historical sites are Vaduz Castle, Gutenberg Castle, the Red House and the ruins of Schellenberg.
Music and theatre are an important part of the culture. There are numerous music organizations such as the Liechtenstein Musical Company, the annual Guitar Days and the International Josef Gabriel Rheinberger Society; and two main theatres.
The Private Art Collection of the Prince of Liechtenstein, one of the world's leading private art collections, is shown at the Liechtenstein Museum in Vienna.

[edit] Sports




Marco Büchel, skier.


Liechtenstein football teams play in the Swiss football leagues. The Liechtenstein Cup allows access to one Liechtenstein team each year in the UEFA Cup; FC Vaduz, a team playing in the Swiss Axpo Super League, the first division in Swiss football, is the most successful team in the Cup, and scored their greatest success in the European Cup Winners' Cup in 1996 when they tied and defeated the Latvian team FC Universitate Riga by 1–1 and 4–2, to go on to a lucrative fixture against Paris St Germain, which they lost 0–4 and 0–3.
The Liechtenstein national football team has traditionally been regarded as an easy target for any team drawn against them, a fact that served as the basis for a book about Liechtenstein's unsuccessful qualifying campaign for the 2002 World Cup by British author, Charlie Connelly. In one surprising week during autumn 2004, however, the team managed a 2–2 draw with Portugal, which only a few months earlier had been the losing finalists in the European Championships. Four days later, the Liechtenstein team traveled to Luxembourg where they defeated the home team 4-0 in a 2006 World Cup qualifying match. They are still considered by many to be an easier touch than most; however, they have been steadily improving over the last few years, and are now considered the best of the European "minnows", even though they were recently humbled 7-1 by Malta in March 2008. In the qualification stage of the European Championship 2008, Liechtenstein beat Latvia 1-0, score which prompted the resignation of the Latvian coach. They went on to beat Iceland 3-0 (October 17, 2007), which is considered one of the most dramatic losses of the Icelandic national football team.
As an alpine country, the main opportunity for Liechtensteiners to excel is in winter sports such as downhill skiing: The country's single ski area is Malbun. Hanni Wenzel won two gold medals and one silver medal in the 1980 Winter Olympics (she won bronze in 1976), whereas her brother, Andreas , won one silver medal (1980) and one bronze medal 1984 in the Giant Slalom event. With nine medals overall (all in alpine skiing), Liechtenstein has won more Olympic medals per capita than any other nation.[20] It is also the smallest nation to win a medal in any Olympics, Winter or Summer, and the only nation to win medal in the Winter Games but not in the Summer Games. Other notable skiers from Liechtenstein are Marco Büchel, Willi Frommelt, Paul Frommelt and Ursula Konzett.
Vaduz, Liechtenstein, is considering a bid for either the 2018 Winter Olympics or 2022 Winter Olympics.
Amateur radio is practiced by some nationals and visitors. However, unlike virtually every other sovereign nation, Liechtenstein does not have its own ITU Prefix. It uses Switzerland's callsign prefixes (typically "HB") followed by a zero.

[edit] Tourism
Liechtenstein has no major tourist industries.

[edit] Military
Liechtenstein follows a policy of neutrality and is one of few countries in the world that maintains no military. The army was abolished soon after the Austro-Prussian War in which Liechtenstein fielded an army of 80 men. The demise of the German Confederation in the war freed Liechtenstein from its international obligation to maintain an army and parliament seized this opportunity and refused to provide further funding. The prince objected, as such a move would leave the country defenseless, but relented on February 12, 1868, and disbanded the force. The last soldier to serve under the colors of Liechtenstein died in 1939 at the age of 95.[21]

[edit] See also

Liechtenstein and the European Union
List of Liechtensteiners
European microstates
2008 Liechtenstein tax affair
Human rights in Liechtenstein


[edit] References


^ a b Population statistics, Landesverwaltung Liechtenstein.
^ a b c d e f g h CIA World Factbook - Liechtenstein.
^ Nazi Pressure? - TIME, 11 April 1938.
^ D. Pendleton, C. Vorasasun, C. von Zeppelin, T. Serafin(September 01, 2008). "The Top 15 Wealthiest Royals". Forbes Magazine.
^ Portal of the Principality of Liechtenstein - News & Statements
^ "Tiny Liechtenstein gets a little bigger", 29 December 2006.
^ Liechtenstein redraws Europe map, BBC News, 28 December 2006.
^ https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ls.html
^ Wiesmann, Gerrit. "Lilliput's giant-slayer." The Financial Times, 23 February 2008.
^ A Parasite's Priorities, 22 February 2008.
^ http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/content/2008/s2383439.htm
^ Encyclopedia of the Nations
^ Liechtenstein Personal Taxation
^ "Skandal gigantischen Ausmaßes" (in German). Süddeutsche Zeitung. 2008-02-15. http://www.sueddeutsche.de/,tt2m2/wirtschaft/artikel/599/158176/. Retrieved on 2008-02-21. 
^ Esterl, Mike; Simpson, Glenn R., Crawford, David (2008-02-19). "Stolen Data Spur Tax Probes". The Wall Street Journal (Google Groups). http://groups.google.com/group/alt.lawyers/browse_thread/thread/6782128a239af406/67aab034a3fcf850. Retrieved on 2008-02-20. 
^ Publikationen zur Volkszählung 2000 - Amt für Volkswirtschaft - Landesverwaltung Liechtenstein
^ Range of rank on the PISA 2006 science scale
^ Heliport Balzers FL LSXB
^ Heliports - Balzers LSXB - Heli-Website von Matthias Vogt
^ "Per Capita Olympic Medal Table". http://users.skynet.be/hermandw/olymp/reloly.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-24. 
^ Beattie, David. Liechtenstein: A Modern History. London: I.B. Tauris, 2004. pg. 30 (ISBN 185043459X).



[edit] Sources

Liechtenstein — A Modern History by David Beattie CMG, London, 2004, ISBN 1-85043-459-X.


[edit] External links

Find more about Liechtenstein on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Liechtenstein Official site of the Principality of Liechtenstein
Chief of State and Cabinet Members
Tourism Liechtenstein - The official tourism page of Liechtenstein
Kunstmuseum Liechtenstein - The national Gallery of Liechtenstein
Hochschule Liechtenstein - University of Applied Sciences Liechtenstein
History of Liechtenstein: Primary documents from EU Docs
Liechtenstein entry at The World Factbook
Liechtenstein from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Liechtenstein at the Open Directory Project
Wikimedia Atlas of Liechtenstein
Liechtenstein travel guide from Wikitravel
Photos of Liechtenstein
"Arukikata" Liechtenstein, Traveller's guide written in Japanese/English
Russian Portal about Principality of Liechtenstein
Sarah Lyall, "For Rent: One Principality. Prince Not Included." New York Times, 25 March 2003







 
Geographic locale














v • d • e

Countries of Europe








Albania · Andorra · Armenia2 · Austria · Azerbaijan1 · Belarus · Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus2 · Czech Republic · Denmark3 · Estonia · Finland · France1 · Georgia1 · Germany · Greece  · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy1 · Kazakhstan1 · Kosovo5 · Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Macedonia4 · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands3 · Norway3 · Poland · Portugal3 · Romania · Russia1 · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia · Slovenia · Spain1 · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey1 · Ukraine · United Kingdom3 · Vatican City
1 Has part of its territory outside Europe.  2 Entirely in West Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe.  3 Has dependencies or similar territories outside Europe. 4 Name disputed by Greece; see Macedonia naming dispute. 5 Declared independence from Serbia on February 17, 2008 and is recognised by 57 United Nations member states.















v • d • e

 States of the German Confederation (1815–66)





Empires

Austria







Kingdoms

Prussia · Bavaria · Saxony · Hanover · Württemberg  · Illyria






Electorates

Hesse






Grand Duchies

Baden · Hesse · Luxembourg · Mecklenburg (Schwerin · Strelitz) · Oldenburg · Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach






Duchies

Anhalt (Bernburg1 · Dessau1 · Köthen2) · Brunswick · Holstein · Limburg3 · Nassau · Saxony (Altenburg4 · Coburg-Saalfeld5 · Coburg-Gotha4 · Gotha-Altenburg5 · Hildburghausen5 · Lauenburg · Meiningen)






Principalities

Hesse-Homburg · Hohenzollern (Hechingen6 · Sigmaringen6) · Liechtenstein · Lippe · Reuss (Elder · Junior) · Schaumburg-Lippe · Schwarzburg (Rudolstadt · Sondershausen) · Waldeck and Pyrmont






City-states

Bremen · Frankfurt · Hamburg · Lübeck






1 Merged with Anhalt from 1863.   2 until 1847.   3 from 1839.   4 from 1826.   5 until 1826.   6 until 1850.


















 
International organizations














v • d • e

Member states of the Council of Europe






Albania · Andorra · Armenia · Austria · Azerbaijan · Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus · Czech Republic · Denmark · Estonia · Finland · France · Georgia · Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Macedonia1 · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands · Norway · Poland · Portugal · Romania · Russia · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia · Slovenia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey · Ukraine · United Kingdom







Observer member status: Argentina · Canada · Chile · Israel · Japan · Mexico · Morocco · United States of America · Vatican City
1 Provisionally referred to by the Council of Europe as the "former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia"; see Macedonia naming dispute.














v • d • e

Members of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA)








Iceland · Liechtenstein · Norway · Switzerland















v • d • e

Monarchies





Geography

Africa · Americas · Europe · Oceania









Absolute

Brunei · Saudi Arabia · Swaziland · Vatican City






Constitutional

Antigua and Barbuda · Australia · Andorra · Bahamas · Bahrain · Barbados · Belize · Belgium · Bhutan · Cambodia · Canada · Denmark · Grenada · Jamaica · Japan1 · Jordan · Kuwait · Liechtenstein · Lesotho · Luxembourg · Malaysia · Monaco · Morocco · Netherlands · New Zealand · Norway · Oman2 · Papua New Guinea · Qatar2 · Spain · Saint Kitts and Nevis · Saint Lucia · Saint Vincent and the Grenadines · Solomon Islands · Sweden · Thailand · Tonga · Tuvalu · United Arab Emirates3 · United Kingdom






Elective

Andorra · Cambodia · Kuwait · Malaysia · Swaziland · United Arab Emirates3 · Vatican City






Subnational





Ghana


Ashanti · Dagbon







Malaysia


Johor · Kedah · Kelantan · Negeri Sembilan · Pahang · Perak · Perlis · Selangor · Terengganu







Nigeria


Ibadan · Nri · Kano · Sokoto Caliphate · Lagos







Uganda


Ankole · Buganda · Bunyoro · Busoga · Toro







United Arab Emirates


Abu Dhabi · Ajman · Dubai · Fujairah · Ras al-Khaimah · Sharjah · Umm al-Qaiwain







Wallis and Futuna


Alo · Sigave · Uvea







Others


Māori (New Zealand) · Yogyakarta (Indonesia) · Zululand (South Africa) · Barotseland (Zambia)









Italics indicate Commonwealth realms, which each share the same monarch as head of state.
1 Monarch debatable as Head of State.   2 Technically constitutional, but effectively absolute.   3 Uses the title President.















Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liechtenstein"
Categories: Liechtenstein | German-speaking countries | Constitutional monarchies | Liberal democracies | States of the German Confederation | States of the Confederation of the Rhine | States of the Holy Roman Empire | NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union | NUTS 2 statistical regions of the European Union | NUTS 3 statistical regions of the European UnionHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2009 | Articles including recorded pronunciations | Articles containing German language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
සිංහල
አማርኛ
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
Arpetan
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deitsch
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
Hak-kâ-fa
Хальмг
한국어
Hawai`i
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Kalaallisut
Kapampangan
ქართული
Kaszëbsczi
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Коми
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lingála
Lojban
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
مصرى
Bahasa Melayu
Мокшень
Nāhuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
नेपाली
日本語
Нохчийн
Norfuk / Pitkern
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Occitan
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
O'zbek
پښتو
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Ποντιακά
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Ripoarisch
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
संस्कृत
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Tetun
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Удмурт
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
Volapük
Võro
Winaray
Wolof
吴语
ייִדיש
粵語
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 13 April 2009, at 09:21 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
