











Harry S. Truman - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Harry_S._Truman";
		var wgTitle = "Harry S. Truman";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "3418303";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280866929;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Harry S. Truman

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other persons named Harry Truman, see Harry Truman (disambiguation).



Harry S. Truman








33rd President of the United States



In office
April 12, 1945 – January 20, 1953


Vice President
None (1945–1949),
Alben Barkley (1949–1953)


Preceded by
Franklin D. Roosevelt


Succeeded by
Dwight D. Eisenhower




34th Vice President of the United States



In office
January 20, 1945 – April 12, 1945


President
Franklin D. Roosevelt


Preceded by
Henry A. Wallace


Succeeded by
Alben W. Barkley




United States Senator
from Missouri



In office
January 3, 1935 – January 17, 1945


Preceded by
Roscoe C. Patterson


Succeeded by
Frank P. Briggs






Born
May 8, 1884(1884-05-08)
Lamar, Missouri


Died
December 26, 1972 (aged 88)
Kansas City, Missouri


Political party
Democratic


Spouse
Bess Wallace Truman


Children
Mary Margaret Truman


Occupation
Small businessman (haberdasher), farmer


Religion
Baptist


Signature



Military service


Service/branch
United States Army
Missouri National Guard


Years of service
1905-1920


Rank
Captain


Commands
Battery D, 129th Field Artillery, 60th Brigade, 35th Infantry Division


Battles/wars
World War I


Harry S. Truman (May 8, 1884 – December 26, 1972) was the 33rd President of the United States (1945–1953). As the 34th vice president, he succeeded Franklin D. Roosevelt, who died less than three months after he began his fourth term.
During World War I Truman served as an artillery officer. After the war he became part of the political machine of Tom Pendergast and was elected a county commissioner in Missouri and eventually a United States senator. After he gained national prominence as head of the wartime Truman Committee, Truman replaced vice president Henry A. Wallace as Roosevelt's running mate in 1944.
Truman faced challenge after challenge in domestic affairs. The disorderly reconversion of the economy of the United States was marked by severe shortages, numerous strikes, and the passage of the Taft-Hartley Act over his veto. He confounded all predictions to win re-election in 1948, helped by his famous Whistle Stop Tour of rural America. After his re-election he was able to pass only one of the proposals in his Fair Deal program. He used executive orders to begin desegregation of the U.S. armed forces and to launch a system of loyalty checks to remove thousands of communist sympathizers from government office, even though he strongly opposed mandatory loyalty oaths for governmental employees, a stance that led to charges that his administration was soft on communism. Truman's presidency was also eventful in foreign affairs, with the end of World War II and his decision to use nuclear weapons against Japan, the founding of the United Nations, the Marshall Plan to rebuild Europe, the Truman Doctrine to contain communism, the beginning of the Cold War, the creation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and the Korean War. Corruption in Truman's administration reached the cabinet and senior White House staff. Republicans made corruption a central issue in the 1952 campaign.
Truman, whose demeanor was very different from that of the patrician Roosevelt, was a folksy, unassuming president. He popularized such phrases as "The buck stops here" and "If you can't stand the heat, you better get out of the kitchen."[1] He overcame the low expectations of many political observers who compared him unfavorably with his highly regarded predecessor. At different points in his presidency, Truman earned both the highest and the lowest public approval ratings that had ever been recorded.[2][3][4] Despite negative public opinion during his term in office, popular and scholarly assessments of his presidency became more positive after his retirement from politics and the publication of Truman's memoirs. Truman's legendary upset victory in 1948 over Thomas E. Dewey is routinely invoked by underdog presidential candidates. Truman has been consistently ranked by scholars as one of the greatest U.S. Presidents.





Contents


1 Personal life

1.1 World War I
1.2 Early business career


2 Politics

2.1 Jackson County judge
2.2 U.S. Senator

2.2.1 First term
2.2.2 1940 election
2.2.3 Defense policy statements
2.2.4 Truman Committee




3 Vice Presidency
4 Presidency 1945–1953

4.1 First term (1945–1949)

4.1.1 Assuming office
4.1.2 Atomic bomb use
4.1.3 Strikes and economic upheaval
4.1.4 United Nations, Marshall Plan and the Cold War
4.1.5 Fair Deal
4.1.6 Recognition of Israel
4.1.7 Berlin Airlift
4.1.8 Defense cutbacks
4.1.9 Civil rights


4.2 Election of 1948
4.3 Second term (1949–1953)

4.3.1 NATO
4.3.2 People's Republic of China
4.3.3 Soviet espionage and McCarthyism
4.3.4 Pakistan
4.3.5 Korean War
4.3.6 Indochina
4.3.7 White House renovations
4.3.8 Assassination attempt
4.3.9 Steel and coal strikes


4.4 Scandals and controversies
4.5 Administration and Cabinet
4.6 Judicial appointments

4.6.1 Supreme Court
4.6.2 Other courts


4.7 1952 election


5 Post-presidency

5.1 Truman Library, Memoirs, and life as a private citizen
5.2 Later life and death


6 Legacy

6.1 Historic sites


7 Truman's middle initial
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Personal life
Truman was born on May 8, 1884 in Lamar, Missouri, the oldest child of John Anderson Truman (1851-1914) and Martha Ellen Young Truman (1852-1947). His parents chose the name Harry after his mother's brother, Harrison Young (1846-1916), Harry's uncle.[5] His parents chose "S" as his middle name, in attempt to please both of Harry's grandfathers, Anderson Shippe Truman and Solomon Young; the initial did not actually stand for anything, as was a common practice among Scots-Irish.[6][7] A brother, John Vivian (1886–1965), soon followed, along with sister Mary Jane Truman (1889–1978).
John Truman was a farmer and livestock dealer. The family lived in Lamar until Harry was ten months old. They then moved to a farm near Harrisonville, then to Belton, and in 1887 to his grandparents' 600 acre (240 ha) farm in Grandview.[8] When Truman was six, his parents moved the family to Independence, so he could attend the Presbyterian Church Sunday School. Truman did not attend a traditional school until he was eight.
As a young boy, Truman had three main interests: music, reading, and history, all encouraged by his mother. He was very close to his mother for as long as she lived, and as president solicited political as well as personal advice from her.[9] He got up at five every morning to practice the piano, and went to a local music teacher twice a week until he was fifteen.[10] Truman also read a great deal of popular history. He was a page at the 1900 Democratic National Convention at Convention Hall in Kansas City.[11]
After graduating from Independence High School (now William Chrisman High School) in 1901, Truman worked as a timekeeper on the Santa Fe Railroad, sleeping in "hobo camps" near the rail lines;[12] he then worked at a series of clerical jobs. He worked briefly in the mail room of the Kansas City Star. Truman decided not join the International Typographical Union. He returned to the Grandview farm in 1906 and stayed there until 1917 when he went into military service.
The physically demanding work he put in on the Grandview farm was a formative experience. During this period he courted Bess Wallace and even proposed to her in 1911. She turned him down, and Truman said he wanted to make more money than a farmer before he proposed again. He did propose again in 1918, after coming back as a Captain from World War I, and she accepted.
Truman was the only president who served after 1897 not to earn a college degree: poor eyesight prevented him from applying to West Point (his childhood dream) and financial constraints prevented him from securing a degree elsewhere.[9] He did, however, study for two years toward a law degree at the Kansas City Law School (now the University of Missouri-Kansas City School of Law) in the early 1920s. Later in his life, at age 60, Truman was issued an invitation to become a member of Missouri-Kansas City's Lambda Chi Alpha fraternity, which he accepted.[13]

World War I




Truman in uniform ca. 1918


Truman enlisted in the Missouri Army National Guard in 1905, and served in it until 1911. With the onset of American participation in World War I, he rejoined the Guard. At his physical in 1905, his eyesight had been an unacceptable 20/50 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left.[14] Reportedly, he passed by secretly memorizing the eye chart.[15]
Before going to France, he was sent to Camp Doniphan, adjacent to Fort Sill, near Lawton, Oklahoma for training. He ran the camp canteen with Edward Jacobson, who had experience in a Kansas City clothing store as a clerk. At Ft. Sill he also met Lieutenant James M. Pendergast, the nephew of Thomas Joseph (T.J.) Pendergast, a Kansas City politician. Both men would have profound influences on later events in Truman's life.[16][17][18][19]
Truman was chosen to be an officer, and then battery commander in an artillery regiment in France. His unit was Battery D, 129th Field Artillery, 60th Brigade, 35th Infantry Division, known for its discipline problems.[20] During a sudden attack by the Germans in the Vosges Mountains, the battery started to disperse; Truman ordered them back into position using profanities that he had "learned while working on the Santa Fe railroad."[20] Shocked by the outburst, his men reassembled and followed him to safety. Under Captain Truman's command in France, the battery did not lose a single man.[20] On November 11, 1918 his artillery unit fired some of the last shots of World War I into German positions. The war was a transformative experience that brought out Truman's leadership qualities; he later rose to the rank of Colonel in the Army Reserves [21], and his war record made possible his later political career in Missouri.[20]

Early business career




The Trumans' wedding day, June 28, 1919


At the war's conclusion, Truman returned to Independence and married his longtime love interest, Bess Wallace, on June 28, 1919. The couple had one child, Mary Margaret (February 17, 1924 - January 29, 2008).
A month before the wedding, banking on their success at Fort Sill and overseas, Truman and Jacobson opened a haberdashery of the same name at 104 West 12th Street in downtown Kansas City. After a few successful years, the store went bankrupt during the recession of 1921, which greatly affected the farm economy.[9] Truman blamed the fall in farm prices on the policies of the Republicans; he worked to pay off the debts until 1934, just as he was going into the U.S. Senate, when banker William T. Kemper retrieved the note during the sale of a bankrupt bank and allowed Truman to pay it off for $1,000. (At the same time Kemper made a $1,000 contribution to Truman's campaign.)
Former comrades in arms and former business partners, Jacobson and Truman remained close friends for life. Decades later, Jacobson's advice to Truman on Zionism would play a critical role in the US government's decision to recognize Israel.[22]

Politics

Jackson County judge
In 1922, with the help of the Kansas City Democratic machine led by boss Tom Pendergast, Truman was elected as a judge of the County Court of the eastern district of Jackson County—an administrative, not judicial, position similar to county commissioners elsewhere.[9]
In 1922, Truman gave a friend $10 for an initiation fee for the Ku Klux Klan but later asked to get his money back; he was never initiated, never attended a meeting, and never claimed membership.[23][24][25] Though Truman at times expressed anger towards Jews in his diaries, his business partner and close friend Edward Jacobson was Jewish.[26][27][28] Truman's attitudes toward blacks were typical of white Missourians of his era, and were expressed in his casual use of terms like "nigger". Years later, another measure of his racial attitudes would come to the forefront: tales of the abuse, violence, and persecution suffered by many African American veterans upon their return from World War II infuriated Truman, and were a major factor in his decision to issue Executive Order 9981, in July 1948, to back civil rights initiatives and desegregate the armed forces.[29]
He was not reelected in 1924, but in 1926 was elected the presiding judge for the court, and was reelected in 1930.
In 1930 Truman coordinated the "Ten Year Plan", which transformed Jackson County and the Kansas City skyline with new public works projects, including an extensive series of roads, construction of a new Wight and Wight-designed County Court building, and the dedication of a series of 12 Madonna of the Trail monuments honoring pioneer women. Much of the building was done with Pendergast Ready Mixed concrete.[citation needed]
In 1933 Truman was named Missouri's director for the Federal Re-Employment program (part of the Civil Works Administration) at the request of Postmaster General James Farley as payback to Pendergast for delivering the Kansas City vote to Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 1932 presidential election. The appointment confirmed Pendergast's control over federal patronage jobs in Missouri and marked the zenith of his power. It was also to create a relationship between Truman and Harry Hopkins and assure avid Truman support for the New Deal.[30]

U.S. Senator

First term




Senator Truman seeks senatorial re-election during this July 1940 speech in Sedalia, Missouri.






Senate desk used by Truman


After serving as judge, Truman wanted to run for Governor or Congress, but Pendergast rejected these ideas. In 1934, Pendergast's aides suggested Harry Truman as a candidate for Senator; after three other men turned him down, Pendergast reluctantly backed Truman as the candidate for the 1934 U.S. Senate election for Missouri. During the Democratic primary, Truman defeated John J. Cochran and Tuck Milligan, the brother of federal prosecutor Maurice M. Milligan. Truman then defeated the incumbent Republican, Roscoe C. Patterson, by nearly 20 percent.
On election day, four people were killed at the polls, prompting various investigations into Kansas City election practices.[citation needed] Truman assumed office under a cloud as "the senator from Pendergast." He gave patronage decisions to Pendergast but always maintained he voted his conscience. Truman always defended the patronage by saying that by offering a little, he saved a lot.
In his first term as a U.S. Senator, Truman spoke out bluntly against corporate greed, and warned about the dangers of Wall Street speculators and other moneyed special interests attaining too much influence in national affairs.[31] He was, however, largely ignored by President Roosevelt, who appeared not to have taken him seriously at this stage. Truman reportedly had difficulty getting White House secretaries to return his calls.[32]
The 1936 election of Pendergast-backed Governor Lloyd C. Stark revealed even bigger voter irregularities in Missouri than had been uncovered in 1934. Milligan prosecuted 278 defendants in vote fraud cases; he convicted 259. Stark turned on Pendergast, urged prosecution, and was able to wrest federal patronage from the Pendergast machine.[33]
Ultimately Milligan discovered that Pendergast had not paid federal taxes between 1927 and 1937 and had conducted a fraudulent insurance scam. In 1939, Pendergast pled guilty and received a $10,000 fine and a 15-month sentence at Leavenworth Federal Prison. No charges were filed against Truman.

1940 election
Truman's prospects for re-election to the Senate looked bleak. In 1940, both Stark and Maurice Milligan challenged him in the Democratic primary for the Senate. Robert E. Hannegan, who controlled St. Louis Democratic politics, threw his support in the election behind Truman. (Hannegan would go on to broker the 1944 deal that put Truman on the vice presidential ticket for Roosevelt.) Truman campaigned tirelessly and combatively. In the end, Stark and Milligan split the anti-Pendergast vote in the Democratic primary, with Stark and Milligan having more combined votes than Truman.[34]
In September 1940, during the general election campaign, Truman was elected Grand Master of the Missouri Grand Lodge of Freemasonry.[35] In November of that year, he defeated Kansas City State Senator Manvel H. Davis by over 40,000 votes and retained his Senate seat.[36] Truman said later that the Masonic election assured his victory in the general election over State Senator Davis.[37]
The successful 1940 Senate campaign is regarded by many biographers as a personal triumph and vindication for Truman and as a precursor to the much more celebrated 1948 drive for the White House, another contest where he was underestimated.[38] It was the turning point of his political career.

Defense policy statements
On June 23, 1941, the day after Nazi Germany attacked the Soviet Union, Senator Truman declared: "If we see that Germany is winning we ought to help Russia and if Russia is winning we ought to help Germany, and that way let them kill as many as possible, although I don't want to see Hitler victorious under any circumstances. Neither of them thinks anything of their pledged word."[39] Although the sentiment was in line with what many Americans felt at the time, it was regarded by later biographers as both inappropriate and cynical.[40][41] The remark was the first in a long series of prominently inopportune off-the-cuff statements by Truman to members of the national press corps.

Truman Committee
Truman gained fame and respect when his preparedness committee (popularly known as the "Truman Committee") investigated the scandal of military wastefulness by exposing fraud and mismanagement. The Roosevelt administration had initially feared the Committee would hurt war morale, and Undersecretary of War Robert P. Patterson wrote to the president declaring it was "in the public interest" to suspend the committee. Truman wrote a letter to the president saying that the committee was "100 percent behind the administration" and that it had no intention of criticizing the military conduct of the war.[42] The committee was considered a success and is reported to have saved at least $15 billion. Truman's advocacy of common-sense cost-saving measures for the military attracted much attention. In 1943, his work as chairman earned Truman his first appearance on the cover of Time. He would eventually appear on nine Time covers and be named the magazine's Man of the Year for 1945 and 1948.[43] After years as a marginal figure in the Senate, Truman was cast into the national spotlight after the success of the Truman Committee.[44]

Vice Presidency
See also: The Democratic vice president nomination of 1944
Following months of uncertainty over the president's preference for a running mate, Truman was selected as Franklin Roosevelt's vice presidential candidate in 1944 as the result of a deal worked out by Hannegan, who was Democratic National Chairman that year.
Although his public image remained that of a robust, engaged world leader, Roosevelt's physical condition was in fact rapidly deteriorating in mid-1944. A handful of key FDR advisers, including outgoing Democratic National Committee Chairman Frank C. Walker, incoming Chairman Robert Hannegan, party treasurer Edwin W. Pauley, strategist Ed Flynn, and lobbyist George E. Allen closed ranks in the summer of 1944 to "keep Henry Wallace off the ticket."[45] They considered Wallace, the incumbent vice president, too liberal, and had grave concerns about the possibility of his ascension to the presidency. Allen would later recall that each of these men "realized that the man nominated to run with Roosevelt would in all probability be the next President. . ."[46]
After meeting personally with the party leaders, FDR agreed to replace Wallace as vice president; however, Roosevelt chose to leave the final selection of a running mate unresolved until the later stages of the Democratic National Convention in Chicago. James F. Byrnes of South Carolina was initially favored, but labor leaders opposed him. Roosevelt also opposed Byrnes, but was reluctant to disappoint any candidate and did not want to tell Byrnes of his opposition directly; thus the president told Hannegan to "clear it [Byrnes' nomination] with Sidney", meaning labor leader and Byrnes opponent Sidney Hillman, a few days before the convention.[47] In addition, Byrnes' status as a segregationist gave him problems with Northern liberals,[48] and he was also considered vulnerable because of his conversion from Catholicism.[49][50] Reportedly, Roosevelt offered the position to Governor Henry F. Schricker of Indiana, but he declined.[51] Before the convention began, Roosevelt wrote a note saying he would accept either Truman or Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas; state and city party leaders preferred Truman. Truman himself did not campaign directly or indirectly that summer for the number two spot on the ticket, and always maintained that he had not wanted the job of vice president. As a result, Roosevelt had to put a great deal of pressure on Truman to accept the vice presidency. On July 19, the party bosses summoned Truman to a suite in the Blackstone Hotel to listen in on a phone call that, unknown to the Senator, they had rehearsed in advance with the President. During the conversation, FDR asked the party bosses whether Truman would accept the position. When they said no, FDR angrily accused Truman of disrupting the unity of the Democratic party then hung up. Feeling as if he had no choice, Truman reluctantly agreed to become Roosevelt's running mate.[52]
Truman's candidacy was humorously dubbed the second "Missouri Compromise" at the 1944 Democratic National Convention in Chicago, as his appeal to the party center contrasted with the liberal Wallace and the conservative Byrnes. The nomination was well received, and the Roosevelt-Truman team went on to score a 432–99 electoral-vote victory in the 1944 presidential election, defeating Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York and Governor John Bricker of Ohio. Truman was sworn in as vice president on January 20, 1945, and served less than three months.
Truman's brief vice-presidency was relatively uneventful, and Roosevelt rarely contacted him, even to inform him of major decisions. Truman shocked many when he attended his disgraced patron Pendergast's funeral a few days after being sworn in. Truman was reportedly the only elected official who attended the funeral. Truman brushed aside the criticism, saying simply, "He was always my friend and I have always been his."[9]
On April 12, 1945, Truman was urgently called to the White House, where Eleanor Roosevelt informed him that the president had died after suffering a massive cerebral hemorrhage. Truman's first concern was for Mrs. Roosevelt. He asked if there was anything he could do for her, to which she replied, "Is there anything we can do for you? For you are the one in trouble now."[53]

Presidency 1945–1953

First term (1945–1949)

Assuming office




Official White House portrait of Harry S. Truman






Potsdam Conference: Clement Attlee, Ernest Bevin, Vyacheslav Molotov, Josef Stalin, William Daniel Leahy, James F. Byrnes, Harry S. Truman and others.






Josef Stalin, Harry S. Truman and Winston Churchill in Potsdam, July 1945






Sitting (from left): Clement Attlee, Harry S. Truman, Josef Stalin; behind: William Daniel Leahy, Ernest Bevin, James F. Byrnes and Vyacheslav Molotov.


Truman had been vice president for only 82 days when President Roosevelt died, April 12, 1945. He had had very little meaningful communication with Roosevelt about world affairs or domestic politics after being sworn in as vice president, and was completely uninformed about major initiatives relating to the successful prosecution of the war—notably the top secret Manhattan Project, which was about to test the world's first atomic bomb.
Shortly after taking the oath of office, Truman said to reporters:

"Boys, if you ever pray, pray for me now. I don't know if you fellas ever had a load of hay fall on you, but when they told me what happened yesterday, I felt like the moon, the stars, and all the planets had fallen on me."

A few days after his swearing in, he wrote to his wife, Bess: "It won't be long until I can sit back and study the whole picture and. . . there'll be no more to this job than there was to running Jackson County and not anymore worry."[9] However, the simplicity he had predicted would prove elusive.
Upon assuming the presidency, Truman asked all the members of FDR's cabinet to remain in place, told them that he was open to their advice, and laid down a central principle of his administration: he would be the one making decisions, and they were to support him.[54] Just a few weeks after he assumed office, on his 61st birthday, the Allies achieved victory in Europe.
Truman was much more difficult for the Secret Service to protect than the wheel chair–bound Roosevelt was. The Secret Service had been protecting Roosevelt for over 12 years. Because he was wheel chair–bound, most of the time, if he needed to go anywhere, his Secret Service agents would push him at their own speed. Truman had no such restrictions and was an avid walker, regularly taking walks around Washington D.C.[55]

Atomic bomb use
For more details on this topic, see Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.


“
We have discovered the most terrible bomb in the history of the world. It may be the fire destruction prophesied in the Euphrates Valley Era, after Noah and his fabulous Ark.
”



—Harry Truman, writting about the atomic bomb in his diary, [56]



Truman was quickly briefed on the Manhattan Project and authorized use of atomic weapons against the Japanese in August 1945, after Japan did not accept the Potsdam Declaration.[57][58] The atomic bombings that followed were the first, and so far the only, instance of nuclear warfare.
On the morning of August 6, 1945, at 8:15, the B-29 bomber Enola Gay dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima.[59] Two days later, having heard nothing from the Japanese government, the U.S. military proceeded with its plans to drop a second atomic bomb. On August 9, Nagasaki was also devastated.[60] Truman received news of the bombing while aboard the heavy cruiser USS Augusta on his way back to the U.S. after the Potsdam Conference. The Japanese agreed to surrender on August 14.[61]
At the Potsdam Conference, Truman indicated cryptically to Joseph Stalin the U.S. was about to use a new kind of weapon against the Japanese. Though this was the first time the Soviets had been officially given information about the atomic bomb, Stalin (through his spies in the U.S.) was already well aware of the bomb project, in fact learning about it long before Truman himself did.[62][63][64][65]
In the years since the bombings, however, questions about Truman's choice have become more pointed. Supporters of Truman's decision to use the bomb argue that it saved hundreds of thousands of lives that would have been lost in an invasion of mainland Japan. Eleanor Roosevelt spoke in support of this view in 1954, saying that Truman had "made the only decision he could," and that the bomb's use was necessary "to avoid tremendous sacrifice of American lives."[66] Others, including historian Gar Alperovitz, have argued that the use of nuclear weapons was unnecessary and inherently immoral.[67] Truman himself wrote later in life that, "I knew what I was doing when I stopped the war... I have no regrets and, under the same circumstances, I would do it again."[68]

Strikes and economic upheaval




President Harry Truman with "The Buck Stops Here" sign on his desk


The end of World War II was followed in the United States by uneasy and contentious conversion back to a peacetime economy. The president was faced with a sudden renewal of labor-management conflicts that had lain dormant during the war years, severe shortages in housing and consumer products, and widespread dissatisfaction with inflation, which at one point hit six percent in a single month.[69] In this polarized environment, there was a wave of destabilizing strikes in major industries, and Truman's response to them was generally seen as ineffective.[69] In the spring of 1946, a national railway strike, unprecedented in the nation's history, brought virtually all passenger and freight lines to a standstill for over a month. When the railway workers turned down a proposed settlement, Truman seized control of the railways and threatened to draft striking workers into the armed forces.[70] While delivering a speech before Congress requesting authority for this plan, Truman received word that the strike had been settled on his terms.[70] He announced this development to Congress on the spot and received a tumultuous ovation that was replayed for weeks on newsreels. Although the resolution of the crippling railway strike made for stirring political theater, it actually cost Truman politically: his proposed solution was seen by many as high-handed; and labor voters, already wary of Truman's handling of workers' issues, were deeply alienated.[69]

United Nations, Marshall Plan and the Cold War
As a Wilsonian internationalist, Truman strongly supported the creation of the United Nations, and included former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt on the delegation to the U.N.'s first General Assembly in order to meet the public desire for peace after the carnage of World War II. Faced with Communist abandonment of commitments to democracy made at the Potsdam Conference, and with Communist advances in Greece (leading to the Greek Civil War) and in Turkey that suggested a hunger for global domination, Truman and his foreign policy advisors concluded that the interests of the Soviet Union were quickly becoming incompatible with those of the United States. The Truman administration articulated an increasingly hard line against the Soviets.
Although he claimed no personal expertise on foreign matters, and although the opposition Republicans controlled the United States Congress, Truman was able to win bipartisan support for both the Truman Doctrine, which formalised a policy of containment, and the Marshall Plan, which aimed to help rebuild postwar Europe. To get Congress to spend the vast sums necessary to restart the moribund European economy, Truman used an ideological argument, arguing forcefully that Communism flourishes in economically deprived areas. His goal was to "scare the hell out of Congress."[71] As part of the U.S. Cold War strategy, Truman signed the National Security Act of 1947 and reorganized military forces by merging the Department of War and the Department of the Navy into the National Military Establishment (later the Department of Defense) and creating the U.S. Air Force. The act also created the CIA and the National Security Council.

Fair Deal
After many years of Democratic majorities in Congress and two Democratic presidents, voter fatigue with the Democrats delivered a new Republican majority in the 1946 midterm elections, with the Republicans picking up 55 seats in the House of Representatives and several seats in the Senate. Although Truman cooperated closely with the Republican leaders on foreign policy, he fought them bitterly on domestic issues. He failed to prevent tax cuts or the removal of price controls. The power of the labor unions was significantly curtailed by the Taft-Hartley Act, which was enacted by overriding Truman's veto.[72]
As he readied for the approaching 1948 election, Truman made clear his identity as a Democrat in the New Deal tradition, advocating national health insurance,[73] the repeal of the anti-union Taft-Hartley Act, and an aggressive civil rights program. Taken together, it all constituted a broad legislative agenda that came to be called the "Fair Deal".
Truman's proposals made for potent campaign rhetoric, but were not well received by Congress, even after Democratic gains in the 1948 election. Only one of the major Fair Deal bills, the Housing Act of 1949, was ever enacted.[74][75]

Recognition of Israel
Truman was a key figure in the establishment of the Jewish state in the Palestine Mandate. In shaping his policy toward Palestine, Truman experienced continuous pressures, especially from the Jewish community, virtually from the moment he took office as president.[76] Truman writes, "Top Jewish leaders in the United States were putting all sorts of pressure on me to commit American power and forces on behalf of the Jewish aspirations in Palestine."[77] In 1946, an Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry recommended the gradual establishment of two states in Palestine, with neither Jews nor Arabs dominating. However, there was little Zionist support for the two-state proposal.[78] Britain's empire was in rapid decline, and under pressure to withdraw from Palestine quickly because of attacks on British forces by armed Zionist groups.[79]
At the urging of the British, a special U.N. committee, UNSCOP, recommended the immediate partitioning of Palestine into two states, and with Truman's support, this initiative was approved by the General Assembly on November 29, 1947. According to Truman, "The facts were that not only were there pressure movements around the United Nations unlike anything that had been seen there before, but that the White House, too, was subjected to a constant barrage. I do not think I ever had as much pressure and propaganda aimed at the White House as I had in this instance. The persistence of a few of the extreme Zionist leaders — actuated by a political motive and engaging in political threats — disturbed and annoyed me."[80] The president noted in a letter to Eleanor Roosevelt, "I regret this situation very much because my sympathy has always been on their [Zionist] side."[81]
The British announced on November 30, 1947 that they would leave Palestine by May 15, 1948. A civil war broke out in Palestine and the Arab League Council nations began moving troops to Palestine's borders. The Zionist idea of a Jewish state in the Middle East was popular in the U.S., particularly among urban Jewish voters, one of Truman's key constituencies. Truman additionally viewed a viable Jewish state as the best way to resettle the some 250,000 Jewish Holocaust refugees living in displaced person camps.[82]
The State Department, however, disagreed with the decision. Secretary of State George Marshall and most of the foreign service experts strongly opposed the creation of a Jewish state in Palestine.[83][84] Thus, when Truman agreed to meet with Chaim Weizmann, at the request of Edward Jacobson he found himself overruling his own Secretary of State. In the end, Marshall did not publicly dispute the president's decision, as Truman feared he might. Secretary of Defense James Forrestal, was perhaps most vocal on the issue of Palestine and spoke repeatedly about the perils of arousing Arab hostility, which might result in denial of access to petroleum resources in the area[85] and about "the impact of this question on the security of the United States."[86] Truman recognized the State of Israel on May 14, 1948, eleven minutes after it declared itself a nation.[87][88]
Lenczowski writes:[78][89]

Whatever misgivings Truman might have had about the Zionist program, he eventually not only embraced it but added impetus to it by ordering the US delegation at the United Nations to vote for partition. It is not easy to give an evaluation of his motives in choosing this option. Initially, he was merely interested in relieving human misery by urging admission of displaced Jews to British-ruled Palestine. In that early stage, he appeared to be quite firm in rejecting "a political structure imposed on the Middle East that would result in conflict."[90] He was also aware, as we have seen, of the gains likely to accrue to the Soviets if Arabs were to be antagonized. Yet he ultimately chose a policy that did lead to conflict and opened the gates to Soviet penetration in the Arab world, as the examples of Nasser's, Egypt, Syria, Iraq, and other states showed. Was this policy based on his genuine conversion to the idea that the thus generated conflict in the Middle East was of secondary importance and that the Soviet factor could be safely disregarded? This alternative does not quite square with his determination to stop Soviet advances in the northern tier of Iran, Turkey, and Greece. Furthermore, as his arms embargo indicated, he did not identify US interest with Israel's victory and never went on record claiming that Israel was America’s ally or strategic asset. This leaves us with the other possible alternative — that despite his resentment of the political pressures at home he chose to give them priority over other considerations. Certain observers who stood close to the decision-making process of that era were convinced that domestic politics constituted a major motivation in Truman's behavior.[91] In the often quoted statement addressed to four American envoys from the middle east who, at a meeting in the White House on November 10, 1945, warned him of adverse effects of a pro-Zionist policy, he declared: "I am sorry, gentlemen, but I have to answer to hundreds of thousands who are anxious for the success of Zionism: I do not have hundreds of thousands of Arabs among my constituents."[92]


Berlin Airlift
For more details on this topic, see Berlin Blockade.
On June 24, 1948, the Soviet Union blocked access to the three Western-held sectors of Berlin. The Allies had never negotiated a deal to guarantee supply of the sectors deep within the Soviet-occupied zone. The commander of the American occupation zone in Germany, General Lucius D. Clay, proposed sending a large armored column driving peacefully, as a moral right, down the autobahn across the Soviet zone to West Berlin, with instructions to defend itself if it were stopped or attacked. Truman, however, following the consensus in Washington, believed this would entail an unacceptable risk of war. He approved a plan to supply the blockaded city by air. On June 25, the Allies initiated the Berlin Airlift, a campaign that delivered food and other supplies, such as coal, using military airplanes on a massive scale. Nothing remotely like it had ever been attempted before, and no other nation had the capability, either logistically or materially, to have accomplished it. The airlift worked; ground access was again granted on May 11, 1949. The airlift continued for several months after that. The Berlin Airlift was one of Truman's great foreign policy successes as president; it significantly aided his election campaign in 1948.[93]

Defense cutbacks
Truman, Congress, and the Pentagon followed a strategy of rapid demobilization after World War II, mothballing ships and sending the veterans home. The reasons for this strategy, which persisted through Truman's first term and well into his second, were largely financial. In order to fund domestic spending requirements, Truman had advocated a policy of defense program cuts for the U.S. armed forces at the end of the war. The Republican majority in Congress, anxious to enact numerous tax cuts, approved of Truman's plan to "hold the line" on defense spending.[94] In addition, Truman's experience in the Senate left him with lingering suspicions that large sums were being wasted in the Pentagon.[95] In 1949, Truman appointed Louis A. Johnson as Secretary of Defense. Impressed by U.S. advances in atomic bomb development, Truman and Johnson initially believed that the atomic bomb rendered conventional forces largely irrelevant to the modern battlefield. This assumption eventually had to be revisited, however, as the Soviet Union exploded its first atomic weapon in the same year.
Nevertheless, reductions continued, adversely affecting U.S. conventional defense readiness.[96][97] Both Truman and Johnson had a particular antipathy to Navy and Marine Corps budget requests.[97][98] Truman had a well-known dislike of the Marines dating back to his service in World War I, and famously said, "The Marine Corps is the Navy's police force, and as long as I am President that is what it will remain. They have a propaganda machine that is almost equal to Stalin's."[97][98] Indeed, Truman had proposed disbanding the Marine Corps entirely as part of the 1948 defense reorganization plan, a plan that was abandoned only after a letter-writing campaign and the intervention of influential congressmen who were Marine veterans.[97][98]
Under Truman defense budgets through Fiscal Year 1950, many Navy ships were mothballed, sold to other countries, or scrapped. The U.S. Army, faced with high turnover of experienced personnel, cut back on training exercises, and eased recruitment standards. Usable equipment was scrapped or sold off instead of stored, and even ammunition stockpiles were cut.[97][99] The Marine Corps, its budgets slashed, was reduced to hoarding surplus inventories of World War II-era weapons and equipment.[96][97][98] It was only after the invasion of South Korea by the North Koreans in 1950 that Truman sent significantly larger defense requests to Congress—and initiated what might be considered the modern period of defense spending in the United States.

Civil rights
Further information: President's Committee on Civil Rights
A 1947 report by the Truman administration titled To Secure These Rights presented a detailed ten-point agenda of civil rights reforms. In February 1948, the president submitted a civil rights agenda to Congress that proposed creating several federal offices devoted to issues such as voting rights and fair employment practices. This provoked a storm of criticism from Southern Democrats in the run up to the national nominating convention, but Truman refused to compromise, saying: "My forebears were Confederates. . . . But my very stomach turned over when I had learned that Negro soldiers, just back from overseas, were being dumped out of Army trucks in Mississippi and beaten."[23] In retirement however, Truman was less progressive on the issue. He described the 1965 Selma to Montgomery marches as silly, stating that the marches would not "accomplish a darned thing".[100]

Election of 1948
For more details on this topic, see United States presidential election, 1948.




Truman was so widely expected to lose the 1948 election that the Chicago Tribune ran this incorrect headline.


The 1948 presidential election is best remembered for Truman's stunning come-from-behind victory.[101] In the spring of 1948, Truman's public approval rating stood at 36 percent,[102] and the president was nearly universally regarded as incapable of winning the general election. The "New Deal" operatives within the party—including FDR's son James—tried to swing the Democratic nomination to General Dwight D. Eisenhower, a wildly popular figure whose political views—and party affiliation—were totally unknown. Eisenhower emphatically refused to accept, and Truman outflanked opponents to his nomination.
At the 1948 Democratic National Convention, Truman attempted to calm turbulent domestic political waters by placing a tepid civil rights plank in the party platform; the aim was to assuage the internal conflicts between the northern and southern wings of his party. Events overtook the president's efforts at compromise, however. A sharp address given by Mayor Hubert Humphrey of Minneapolis—as well as the local political interests of a number of urban bosses—convinced the Convention to adopt a stronger civil rights plank, which Truman approved wholeheartedly. All of Alabama's delegates, and a portion of Mississippi's, walked out of the convention in protest.[103] Unfazed, Truman delivered an aggressive acceptance speech attacking the 80th Congress and promising to win the election and "make these Republicans like it."[104]
Within two weeks, Truman issued Executive Order 9981, racially integrating the U.S. Armed Services.[105][106][107] Truman took considerable political risk in backing civil rights, and many seasoned Democrats were concerned that the loss of Dixiecrat support might destroy the Democratic Party. The fear seemed well justified—Strom Thurmond declared his candidacy for the presidency and led a full-scale revolt of Southern "states' rights" proponents. This revolt on the right was matched by a revolt on the left, led by former Vice President Henry A. Wallace on the Progressive Party ticket. Immediately after its first post-FDR convention, the Democratic Party found itself disintegrating. Victory in November seemed a remote possibility indeed, with the party not simply split but divided three ways.
There followed a remarkable 21,928-mile (35,290 km) presidential odyssey,[108] an unprecedented personal appeal to the nation. Truman and his staff crisscrossed the United States in the presidential train; his "whistlestop" tactic of giving brief speeches from the rear platform of the observation car Ferdinand Magellan came to represent the entire campaign. His combative appearances, such as those at the town square of Harrisburg, Illinois, captured the popular imagination and drew huge crowds. Six stops in Michigan drew a combined total of half a million people;[109] a full million turned out for a New York City ticker-tape parade.[110]
The large, mostly spontaneous gatherings at Truman's depot events were an important sign of a critical change in momentum in the campaign—but this shift went virtually unnoticed by the national press corps, which continued reporting Republican Thomas Dewey's apparent impending victory as a certainty. One reason for the press' inaccurate projection was polls conducted primarily by telephone in a time when many people, including much of Truman's populist base, did not own a telephone.[111] This skewed the data to indicate a stronger support base for Dewey than existed, resulting in an unintended and undetected projection error that may well have contributed to the perception of Truman's bleak chances. The three major polling organizations also stopped polling well before the November 2 election date—Roper in September, and Crossley and Gallup in October—thus failing to measure the very period when Truman appears to have surged past Dewey.[112][113]
In the end, Truman held his midwestern base of progressives, won most of the Southern states despite his civil rights plank, and squeaked through with narrow victories in a few critical "battleground" states, notably Ohio, California, and Illinois. The final tally showed that the president had secured 303 electoral votes, Dewey 189, and Thurmond only 39. Henry Wallace got none. The defining image of the campaign came after Election Day, when Truman held aloft the erroneous front page of the Chicago Tribune with a huge headline proclaiming "Dewey Defeats Truman."[114]
Truman's no-holds-barred style of campaigning in the face of seemingly impossible odds became a campaign tactic that would be repeated by, and appealed to by, many presidential candidates in years to come, notably George H. W. Bush in 1992, another trailing incumbent who fought constantly with Congress.
Truman did not have a vice president in his first term.[115] His running mate, and eventual vice president for the term that began January 20, 1949, was Alben W. Barkley.

Second term (1949–1953)
Truman's inauguration was the first ever televised nationally.
His second term was grueling, in large measure because of foreign policy challenges connected directly or indirectly to his policy of containment. For instance, he quickly had to come to terms with the end of the American nuclear monopoly. With information provided by its espionage networks in the United States, the Soviet Union's atomic bomb project progressed much faster than had been expected and they exploded their first bomb on August 29, 1949. On January 7, 1953, Truman announced the detonation of the first U.S. hydrogen bomb.

NATO
Truman was a strong supporter of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), which established a formal peacetime military alliance with Canada and many of the democratic European nations that had not fallen under Soviet control following World War II. Truman successfully guided the treaty through the Senate in 1949. NATO's stated goals were to check Soviet expansion in Europe and to send a clear message to communist leaders that the world's democracies were willing and able to build new security structures in support of democratic ideals. The United States, United Kingdom, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, Norway, Denmark, Portugal, Iceland, and Canada were the original treaty signatories; Greece and Turkey joined in 1952.

People's Republic of China
On December 21, 1949, Chiang Kai-shek (Jiang Jieshi) and his National Revolutionary Army left mainland China, fleeing to Taiwan in the face of successful attacks by Mao Zedong's communist army during the Chinese Civil War. In June 1950, Truman ordered the U.S. Navy's Seventh Fleet into the Taiwan Strait to prevent further conflict between the communist government at the China mainland and the Republic of China at Taiwan. Truman also called for Taiwan not to make any further attack on the mainland.[116]

Soviet espionage and McCarthyism
Throughout his presidency, Truman had to deal with accusations that the federal government was harboring Soviet spies at the highest level. Testimony in Congress on this issue garnered national attention, and thousands of people were fired as security risks. An optimistic, patriotic man, Truman was dubious about reports of potential Communist or Soviet penetration of the U.S. government, and his oft-quoted response was to dismiss the allegations as a "red herring."[117]
In August 1948, Whittaker Chambers, a former spy for the Soviets and a senior editor at Time magazine, testified before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) and presented a list of what he said were members of an underground communist network working within the United States government in the 1930s. One was Alger Hiss, a senior State Department official. Hiss denied the accusations.[118]
Chambers' revelations led to a crisis in American political culture, as Hiss was convicted of perjury, in a controversial trial. On February 9, 1950, Republican Senator Joseph McCarthy accused the State Department of having communists on the payroll, and specifically claimed that Secretary of State Dean Acheson knew of, and was protecting, 205 communists within the State Department.[119] At issue was whether Truman had discovered all the subversive agents that had entered the government during the Roosevelt years. Many on the right, such as McCarthy and Congressman Richard Nixon, insisted that he had not.
By spotlighting this issue and attacking Truman's administration, McCarthy quickly established himself as a national figure, and his explosive allegations dominated the headlines. His claims were short on confirmable details, but they nevertheless transfixed a nation struggling to come to grips with frightening new realities: the Soviet Union's nuclear explosion, the loss of U.S. atom bomb secrets, the fall of China to communism, and new revelations of Soviet intelligence penetration of other U.S. agencies, including the Treasury Department.[117] Truman, a pragmatic man who had made allowances for the likes of Tom Pendergast and Stalin, quickly developed an unshakable loathing of Joseph McCarthy.[120] He counterattacked, saying that "Americanism" itself was under attack by elements "who are loudly proclaiming that they are its chief defenders. ... They are trying to create fear and suspicion among us by the use of slander, unproved accusations and just plain lies. ... They are trying to get us to believe that our Government is riddled with communism and corruption. ... These slandermongers are trying to get us so hysterical that no one will stand up to them for fear of being called a communist. Now this is an old communist trick in reverse. ... That is not fair play. That is not Americanism."[119] Nevertheless Truman was never able to shake his image among the public of being unable to purge his government of subversive influences.[117]

Pakistan
President Truman recognised the newly created state of Pakistan in 1947 and the United States was one of the first countries in the world to do so. President Truman personally invited Pakistan's first Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan and his wife Begum Ra'ana to the United States for talks. Liaquat Ali Khan accepted the invitation and arrived in Washington in May 1950. Liaquat toured the United States and gave various speeches to the US Senate. At the time of the visit Pakistan was non-aligned between the US-led Western Bloc and the Soviet-led Eastern Bloc and it had recognised the Communist-led People's Republic of China, ignoring Washington's opposition to Peking. Despite the success of his US tour, Liaquat Ali's Government did not make any drastic change in its foreign policy of semi-non-alignment in the Cold War rivalry. In the UN Security Council, it did oppose North Korea's aggression against pro-American South Korea but refused to send Pakistani combat troops to join the UN force in the Korean Peninsula. This was mainly because Pakistan was recently recovering from its war with India over the disputed Kashmir in 1948.[121][122]

Korean War
For more details on this topic, see Korean War.




President Truman signing a proclamation declaring a national emergency that initiates U.S. involvement in the Korean War.


On June 25, 1950, the North Korean People's Army under the command of Kim Il-sung invaded South Korea, precipitating the outbreak of the Korean War. Poorly trained and equipped, without tanks or air support, the South Korean Army was rapidly pushed backwards, quickly losing the capital, Seoul.[123]
Stunned, Truman called for a naval blockade of Korea, which went into effect; while the U.S. Navy no longer possessed sufficient surface ships with which to enforce such a measure, no ships tried to challenge it.[124] Truman promptly urged the United Nations to intervene; it did, authorizing armed defense for the first time in its history. The Soviet Union, which was boycotting the United Nations at the time, was not present at the vote that approved the measure. However, Truman decided not to consult with Congress, an error that greatly weakened his position later in the conflict.[125]
In the first four weeks of the conflict, the American infantry forces hastily deployed to Korea proved too few and were under-equipped. The Eighth Army in Japan was forced to recondition World War II Sherman tanks from depots and monuments for use in Korea.[97][126]



"I fired him [MacArthur] because he wouldn't respect the authority of the President... I didn't fire him because he was a dumb son of a bitch, although he was, but that's not against the law for generals. If it was, half to three-quarters of them would be in jail."
—Harry S. Truman, quoted in Time magazine



Responding to criticism over readiness, Truman fired his Secretary of Defense, Louis A. Johnson, replacing him with retired General George Marshall. Truman (with UN approval) decided on a roll-back policy—that is, conquest of North Korea.[127] UN forces led by General Douglas MacArthur led the counterattack, scoring a stunning surprise victory with an amphibious landing at the Battle of Inchon that nearly trapped the invaders. UN forces then marched north, toward the Yalu River boundary with China, with the goal of reuniting Korea under UN auspices.
China surprised the UN forces with a large-scale invasion in November. The UN forces were forced back to below the 38th parallel, then recovered; by early 1951 the war became a fierce stalemate at about the 38th parallel where it had begun. UN and U.S. casualties were heavy. Truman rejected MacArthur's request to attack Chinese supply bases north of the Yalu, but MacArthur nevertheless promoted his plan to Republican House leader Joseph Martin, who leaked it to the press. Truman was gravely concerned that further escalation of the war might draw the Soviet Union further into the conflict: it was already supplying weapons and providing warplanes (with Korean markings and Soviet fliers). On April 11, 1951, Truman fired MacArthur from all his commands in Korea and Japan.
Relieving MacArthur of his command was among the least politically popular decisions in presidential history. Truman's approval ratings plummeted, and he faced calls for his impeachment from, among others, Senator Robert Taft. The Chicago Tribune called for immediate impeachment proceedings against Truman:

President Truman must be impeached and convicted. His hasty and vindictive removal of Gen. MacArthur is the culmination of series of acts which have shown that he is unfit, morally and mentally, for his high office. . . . The American nation has never been in greater danger. It is led by a fool who is surrounded by knaves. . . .[128]

Fierce criticism from virtually all quarters accused Truman of refusing to shoulder the blame for a war gone sour and blaming his generals instead. Many prominent citizens and officials, including Eleanor Roosevelt however supported and applauded Truman's decision. MacArthur meanwhile, returned to the United States to a hero's welcome, and, after his famous address before Congress—which Truman was reported to have said was a bunch of "damn bullshit". MacArthur was even rumored as a candidate for the presidency.[129]
The war remained a frustrating stalemate for two years, with over 30,000 Americans killed, until a peace agreement restored borders and ended the conflict.[130] In the interim, the difficulties in Korea and the popular outcry against Truman's sacking of MacArthur helped to make the president so unpopular that Democrats started turning to other candidates. In the New Hampshire primary on March 11, 1952, Truman lost to Estes Kefauver, who won the preference poll 19,800 to 15,927 and all eight delegates. Truman was forced to cancel his reelection campaign.[131] In February 1952, Truman's approval mark stood at 22 percent according to Gallup polls, which was, until 2008, the all-time lowest approval mark for an active American president. However it didn't last beyond March.[132]

Indochina
For more details on this topic, see First Indochina War.
United States' involvement in Indochina widened during the Truman administration. On V-J Day 1945, Vietnamese Communist leader Ho Chi Minh declared independence from France, but the U.S. announced its support of restoring French power. In 1950, Ho again declared Vietnamese independence, which was recognized by Communist China and the Soviet Union. Ho controlled a remote territory along the Chinese border, while France controlled the remainder. Truman's "containment policy" called for opposition to Communist expansion, and led the U.S. to continue to recognize French rule, support the French client government, and increase aid to Vietnam. However, a basic dispute emerged: the Americans wanted a strong and independent Vietnam, while the French cared little about containing China but instead wanted to suppress local nationalism and integrate Indochina into the French Union.[133]

White House renovations




View of the interior shell of the White House during reconstruction in 1950


In 1948 Truman ordered a controversial addition to the exterior of the White House: a second-floor balcony in the south portico that came to be known as the "Truman Balcony." The addition was unpopular.[134]
Not long afterwards, engineering experts concluded that the building, much of it over 130 years old, was in a dangerously dilapidated condition. That August, a section of floor collapsed and Truman's own bedroom and bathroom were closed as unsafe. No public announcement about the serious structural problems of the White House was made until after the 1948 election had been won, by which time Truman had been informed that his new balcony was the only part of the building that was sound. The Truman family moved into nearby Blair House; as the newer West Wing, including the Oval Office, remained open, Truman found himself walking to work across the street each morning and afternoon. In due course the decision was made to demolish and rebuild the whole interior of the main White House, as well as excavating new basement levels and underpinning the foundations. The famous exterior of the structure, however, was buttressed and retained while the renovations proceeded inside. The work lasted from December 1949 until March 1952.[135]

Assassination attempt
For more details on this topic, see Truman assassination attempt.
On November 1, 1950, Puerto Rican nationalists Griselio Torresola and Oscar Collazo attempted to assassinate Truman at Blair House. On the street outside the residence, Torresola mortally wounded a White House policeman, Leslie Coffelt, who shot Torresola dead before expiring himself. Collazo, as a co-conspirator in a felony that turned into a homicide, was found guilty of murder and was sentenced to death in 1952. Truman later commuted his sentence to life in prison.
Acknowledging the importance of the question of Puerto Rican independence, Truman allowed for a plebiscite in Puerto Rico to determine the status of its relationship to the United States.
The attack, which could easily have taken the president's life, drew new attention to security concerns surrounding his residence at Blair House. He had jumped up from his nap, and was watching the gunfight from his open bedroom window until a passerby shouted at him to take cover.[55]

Steel and coal strikes
For more details on this topic, see 1952 steel strike.
In response to a labor/management impasse arising from bitter disagreements over wage and price controls, Truman instructed his Secretary of Commerce, Charles W. Sawyer, to take control of a number of the nation's steel mills in April 1952. Truman cited his authority as Commander in Chief and the need to maintain an uninterrupted supply of steel for munitions to be used in the war in Korea. The Supreme Court found Truman's actions unconstitutional, however, and reversed the order in a major separation-of-powers decision, Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer. The 6–3 decision, which held that Truman's assertion of authority was too vague and was not rooted in any legislative action by Congress, was delivered by a Court composed entirely of Justices appointed by either Truman or Roosevelt. The high court's reversal of Truman's order was one of the notable defeats of his presidency.[136]
After coal miners went on strike in the spring of 1946, Truman threatened to draft the miners into the Army if they didn't return to work, or use members of the Army to replace the workers.[137][138][139]

Scandals and controversies
In 1950, the Senate, led by Estes Kefauver, investigated numerous charges of corruption among senior Administration officials, some of whom received fur coats and deep freezers for favors. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) was involved. In 1950, 166 IRS employees either resigned or were fired,[140] and many were facing indictments from the Department of Justice on a variety of tax-fixing and bribery charges, including the assistant attorney general in charge of the Tax Division. When Attorney General Howard McGrath fired the special prosecutor for being too zealous, Truman fired McGrath.[141] Historians agree that Truman himself was innocent and unaware—with one exception. In 1945, Mrs. Truman received a new, expensive, hard-to-get deep freezer. The businessman who provided the gift was the president of a perfume company and, thanks to Truman's aide and confidante General Harry Vaughan, received priority to fly to Europe days after the war ended, where he bought new perfumes. On the way back he "bumped" a wounded veteran from a flight that would have taken him back to the US. Disclosure of the episode in 1949 humiliated Truman. The President responded by vigorously defending Vaughan, an old friend with an office in the White House itself. Vaughan was eventually connected to multiple influence-peddling scandals.[142]
Charges that Soviet agents had infiltrated the government bedeviled the Truman Administration and became a major campaign issue for Eisenhower in 1952.[143] In 1947, Truman issued Executive Order 9835 to set up loyalty boards to investigate espionage among federal employees.[144] Between 1947 and 1952, "about 20,000 government employees were investigated, some 2500 resigned 'voluntarily,' and 400 were fired."[145] He did, however, strongly oppose mandatory loyalty oaths for governmental employees, a stance that led to charges that his Administration was soft on Communism.[146]
In 1953, Senator Joseph McCarthy and Attorney General Herbert Brownell, Jr. claimed that Truman had known Harry Dexter White was a Soviet spy when Truman appointed him to the International Monetary Fund.[147][148]

Administration and Cabinet
All of the cabinet members when Truman became president in 1945 had been previously serving under Franklin D. Roosevelt.


The Truman Cabinet


Office
Name
Term





President
Harry S. Truman
1945–1953


Vice President
none
1945–1949


Alben W. Barkley
1949–1953





Secretary of State
Edward R. Stettinius, Jr.
1945–1945


James F. Byrnes
1945–1947


George C. Marshall
1947–1949


Dean G. Acheson
1949–1953





Secretary of Treasury
Henry Morgenthau, Jr.
1945–1945


Fred M. Vinson
1945–1946


John W. Snyder
1946–1953





Secretary of War
Henry L. Stimson
1945–1945


Robert P. Patterson
1945–1947


Kenneth C. Royall
1947–1947





Secretary of Defense
James V. Forrestal
1947–1949


Louis A. Johnson
1949–1950


George C. Marshall
1950–1951


Robert A. Lovett
1951–1953





Attorney General
Francis Biddle
1945–


Tom C. Clark
1945–1949


J. Howard McGrath
1949–1952


James P. McGranery
1952–1953





Postmaster General
Frank C. Walker
1945–


Robert E. Hannegan
1945–1947


Jesse M. Donaldson
1947–1953





Secretary of the Navy
James V. Forrestal
1945–1947





Secretary of the Interior
Harold L. Ickes
1945–1946


Julius A. Krug
1946–1949


Oscar L. Chapman
1949–1953





Secretary of Agriculture
Claude R. Wickard
1945–


Clinton P. Anderson
1945–1948


Charles F. Brannan
1948–1953





Secretary of Commerce
Henry A. Wallace
1945–1946


W. Averell Harriman
1946–1948


Charles W. Sawyer
1948–1953





Secretary of Labor
Frances Perkins
1945–


Lewis B. Schwellenbach
1945–1948


Maurice J. Tobin
1948–1953



Judicial appointments

Supreme Court
Truman appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States:

Harold Hitz Burton—1945
Fred M. Vinson (Chief Justice)—1946
Tom C. Clark—1949
Sherman Minton—1949

Truman's judicial appointments have been called by critics "inexcusable."[149] A former Truman aide confided that it was the weakest aspect of Truman's presidency.[150] The New York Times condemned the appointments of Tom C. Clark and Sherman Minton in particular as examples of cronyism and favoritism for unqualified candidates.[150]
The four justices appointed by Truman joined with Justices Felix Frankfurter, Robert H. Jackson, and Stanley Reed to create a substantial seven-member conservative bloc on the Supreme Court.[150] This returned the court for a time to the conservatism of the Taft era.[150]

Other courts
Main article: Harry S. Truman judicial appointments
In addition to his four Supreme Court appointments, Truman appointed 27 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, and 101 judges to the United States district courts.

1952 election
For more details on this topic, see United States presidential election, 1952.




From left: President Harry S. Truman, Vice Presidential nominee, Alabama Senator John J. Sparkman and Presidential nominee, Illinois Governor Adlai Stevenson. Oval Office, 1952


In 1951, the U.S. ratified the 22nd Amendment, making a president ineligible to be elected for a third time, or to be elected for a second time after having served more than two years of a previous president's term. The latter clause would have applied to Truman in 1952, except that a grandfather clause in the amendment explicitly excluded the current president from this provision. However, Truman decided not to run for reelection.
At the time of the 1952 New Hampshire primary, no candidate had won Truman's backing. His first choice, Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson, had declined to run; Illinois Governor Adlai Stevenson had also turned Truman down; Vice President Barkley was considered too old; and Truman distrusted and disliked Senator Estes Kefauver, whom he privately called "Cowfever."[151][152]
Truman's name was on the New Hampshire primary ballot but Kefauver won. On March 29 Truman announced his decision not to run for re-election.[153] Stevenson, having reconsidered his presidential ambitions, received Truman's backing and won the Democratic nomination.
Dwight D. Eisenhower, now a Republican and the nominee of his party, campaigned against what he denounced as Truman's failures regarding "Korea, Communism and Corruption" and the "mess in Washington,"[154] and promised to "go to Korea."[155] Eisenhower defeated Stevenson decisively in the general election, ending 20 years of Democratic rule. While Truman and Eisenhower had previously been good friends, Truman felt betrayed that Eisenhower did not denounce Joseph McCarthy during the campaign.[156]

Post-presidency

Truman Library, Memoirs, and life as a private citizen
Truman returned to Independence, Missouri to live at the Wallace home he and Bess had shared for years with her mother. His predecessor, Franklin D. Roosevelt, had organized his own presidential library, but legislation to enable future presidents to do something similar still remained to be enacted. Truman worked to garner private donations to build a presidential library, which he then donated to the federal government to maintain and operate—a practice adopted by all of his successors.
Once out of office, Truman quickly decided that he did not wish to be on any corporate payroll, believing that taking advantage of such financial opportunities would diminish the integrity of the nation's highest office. He also turned down numerous offers for commercial endorsements. Since his earlier business ventures had proved unremunerative, he had no personal savings. As a result, he faced financial challenges. Once Truman left the White House, his only income was his old army pension: $112.56 per month. Former members of Congress and the federal courts received a federal retirement package; President Truman himself had ensured that former servants of the executive branch of government would receive similar support. In 1953, however, there was no such benefit package for former presidents.




Truman (seated right) and his wife Bess (behind him) attend the signing of the Medicare Bill on July 30, 1965, by President Lyndon B. Johnson.


He took out a personal loan from a Missouri bank shortly after leaving office, and then set about establishing another precedent for future former chief executives: a book deal for his memoirs of his time in office. Ulysses S. Grant had overcome similar financial issues with his own memoirs, but the book had been published posthumously, and he had declined to write about life in the White House in any detail. For the memoirs Truman received only a flat payment of $670,000, and had to pay two-thirds of that in tax; he calculated he got $37,000 after he paid his assistants.[157]
Truman's memoirs were a commercial and critical success;[158][159] they were published in two volumes in 1955 and 1956 by Doubleday (Garden City, N.Y) and Hodder & Stoughton (London): Memoirs by Harry S. Truman: Year of Decisions and Memoirs by Harry S. Truman: Years of Trial and Hope.
Truman was quoted in 1957 as saying to then-House Majority Leader John McCormack, "Had it not been for the fact that I was able to sell some property that my brother, sister, and I inherited from our mother, I would practically be on relief, but with the sale of that property I am not financially embarrassed."[160]
In 1958, Congress passed the Former Presidents Act, offering a $25,000 yearly pension to each former president, and it is likely that Truman's financial status played a role in the law's enactment. The one other living former president at the time, Herbert Hoover, also took the pension, even though he did not need the money; reportedly, he did so to avoid embarrassing Truman.[161] Hoover may have been remembering an old favor: Shortly after becoming President, Truman had invited Hoover to the White House for an informal chat about conditions in Europe. This was Hoover's first visit to the White House since leaving office, as the Roosevelt administration had shunned Hoover. The two remained good friends for the remainder of their lives.[162]

Later life and death
In 1956, Truman took a trip to Europe with his wife, and was a sensation. In Britain he received an honorary degree in Civic Law from Oxford University, an event that moved him to tears. He met with his friend Winston Churchill for the last time, and on returning to the U.S., he gave his full support to Adlai Stevenson's second bid for the White House, although he had initially favored Democratic Governor W. Averell Harriman of New York for the nomination.
Upon turning 80, Truman was feted in Washington and asked to address the United States Senate, as part of a new rule that allowed former presidents to be granted privilege of the floor. Truman was so emotionally overcome by the honor and by his reception that he was barely able to deliver his speech.[163] He also campaigned for senatorial candidates. A bad fall in the bathroom of his home in late 1964 severely limited his physical capabilities, and he was unable to maintain his daily presence at his presidential library.
In 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Medicare bill at the Truman Library and gave the first two Medicare cards to Truman and his wife Bess to honor his fight for government health care as president.
On December 5, 1972, he was admitted to Kansas City's Research Hospital and Medical Center with lung congestion from pneumonia. He subsequently developed multiple organ failure and died at 7:50 a.m. on December 26 at the age of 88. Bess Truman died nearly ten years later, on October 18, 1982.[164] He and Bess are buried at the Truman Library in Independence, Missouri. Truman decided against lying in state in the Capitol rotunda and a state funeral in Washington, opting instead for a simple service at the library.[165]

Legacy
When he left office in 1953, Truman was one of the most unpopular chief executives in history. His job approval rating of 22 percent in the Gallup Poll as of February 1952 was actually lower than Richard Nixon's was in August 1974 at 24 percent, the month that Nixon resigned. Public feeling toward Truman grew steadily warmer with the passing years, however, and the period shortly after his death consolidated a partial rehabilitation among both historians and members of the general public. Since leaving office, Truman has fared well in polls ranking the presidents. He has never been listed lower than ninth, and most recently was seventh in a Wall Street Journal poll in 2005. He has also had his critics. After a review of information available to Truman on the presence of espionage activities in the U.S. government, Democratic Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan concluded that Truman was "almost willfully obtuse" concerning the danger of American communism.[166]
Truman died during a time when the nation was consumed with crises in Vietnam and Watergate, and his death brought a new wave of attention to his political career.[167] In the early and mid-1970s, Truman captured the popular imagination much as he had in 1948, this time emerging as a kind of political folk hero, a president who was thought to exemplify an integrity and accountability many observers felt was lacking in the Nixon White House. Truman has been portrayed on screen many times, several in performances that have won wide acclaim, and the pop band Chicago recorded a nostalgic song, "Harry Truman" (1975).
Due to Truman's critical role in the US government's decision to recognize Israel, the Israeli village of Beit Harel was renamed Kfar Truman.
The Truman Scholarship, a federal program that seeks to honor U.S. college students who exemplified dedication to public service and leadership in public policy, was created in 1975.[168]
The President Harry S. Truman Fellowship in National Security Science and Engineering, a distinguished postdoctoral three-year appointment at Sandia National Laboratories was created in 2004.[169]
In 1951 President Truman established the Science Advisory Committee as part of the Office of Defence Mobilization. Renamed the President's Science Advisory Committee (PSAC) by President Dwight D. Eisenhower, it lasted until President Nixon disbanded it. It was reinstated by the first Bush administration under the name PCAST.
The USS Harry S. Truman was named on September 7, 1996. The ship, sometimes known as the 'HST', was authorized as USS United States, but her name was changed before the keel laying.
The University of Missouri established the Harry S. Truman School of Public Affairs to advance the study and practice of governance.[170] The university's Missouri Tigers athletics programs have an official mascot named Truman the Tiger.
To mark its transformation from a regional state teachers' college to a selective liberal arts university and to honor the only Missourian to become president, Northeast Missouri State University became Truman State University on July 1, 1996. A member institution of the City Colleges of Chicago, Harry S Truman College in Chicago, Illinois is named in honor of the president for his dedication to public colleges and universities. The headquarters for the State Department, built in the 1930s but never officially named, was dedicated as the Harry S Truman Building in 2000.
In 1991, Truman was inducted into the Hall of Famous Missourians, and a bronze bust depicting him is on permanent display in the rotunda of the Missouri State Capitol.
Thom Daniel, grandson of the Trumans accepted a star on the Missouri Walk of Fame in 2006 to honor his late grandfather. John Truman, Truman's nephew, would accept a star for Bess Truman in 2007. The Walk of Fame is in Marshfield, Missouri, a city Truman visited in 1948.

Historic sites

Harry S. Truman National Historic Site includes the Wallace House at 219 Delaware in Independence and the family farmhouse at Grandview, Missouri (Truman sold most of the farm for Kansas City suburban development including the Truman Corners Shopping Center).
Harry S. Truman Birthplace State Historic Site is the house where Truman was born and spent 11 months in Lamar, Missouri.[171]
Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum—The Presidential Library in Independence
Harry S. Truman Little White House—Truman's winter getaway at Key West, Florida


Truman's middle initial

Truman did not have a middle name, only a middle initial. In his autobiography, Truman stated, "I was named for . . . Harrison Young. I was given the diminutive Harry and, so that I could have two initials in my given name, the letter S was added. My Grandfather Truman's name was Anderson Shippe [sometimes also spelled 'Shipp'][172] Truman and my Grandfather Young's name was Solomon Young, so I received the S for both of them." He once joked that the S was a name, not an initial, and it should not have a period, but official documents and his presidential library all use a period.[7] The Harry S. Truman Library has numerous examples of the signature written at various times throughout Truman's lifetime where his own use of a period after the S is conspicuous. The Associated Press Stylebook has called for a period after the S since the early 1960s, when Truman indicated he had no preference.[173] However, the use of a period after his middle initial is not universal. Prior to 2008, his official White House biography did not use it.[174] All official US Navy listings of the USS Harry S. Truman (CVN-75) include the period after the S.
Truman's bare initial caused an unusual slip when he first became president and took the oath of office. At a meeting in the Cabinet Room, Chief Justice Harlan Stone began reading the oath by saying "I, Harry Shipp Truman, . . ." Truman responded: "I, Harry S. Truman, . . ."[175]

See also

Electoral history of Harry S. Truman
National Mental Health Act


Notes


^ McCullough, David (1992). Truman. New York: Simon and Schuster. p. 717. ISBN 0-671-86920-5. 
^ http://www.gallup.com/poll/4924/Bush-Job-Approval-Highest-Gallup-History.aspx
^ http://www.americanresearchgroup.com/economy/
^ http://www.pollingreport.com/BushJob.htm
^ McCullough, p. 24, 37
^ McCullough, p. 37
^ a b "Use of the Period After the "S" in Harry S. Truman's Name". Harry S. Truman's Library and Museum. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/speriod.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-14. 
^ "Birthplace of Harry S. Truman". Truman Library. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/kids/birthpla.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-01. 
^ a b c d e f Oshinsky, David M. (2004). "Harry Truman". in Alan Brinkley and Davis Dyer. The American Presidency. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. pp. 365–380. ISBN 0-618-38273-9. 
^ McCullough, p. 38
^ Ferrell, Robert Hugh (1996). Harry S. Truman: A Life. Columbia: University of Missouri Press. p. 87. ISBN 0826210503. 
^ "Drugstore Clerk at 14 His First Job". Truman Library. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/whistlestop/trumanfile/drugstorearticle1.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-26. 
^ "How Harry S. Truman Became a Lambda Chi," Cross & Crescent magazine, Lambda Chi Alpha fraternity, August 2006.
^ McCullough, p. 105.
^ "Harry Truman joins Battery B of the Missouri National Guard". Truman Library. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/anniversaries/nationalguard.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-26. 
^ Chronological Record of the 129th Field Artillery 1917-1919 - the Truman Library
^ McCullough, p. 105-110.
^ Gilwee, William J. Capt. Harry Truman Artilleryman and Future President - at the Doughboy Center
^ Marks, Ted (1962). "Oral History Interview with Ted Marks". Truman Library. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/oralhist/markst.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ a b c d Hanlon, Michael E. (2000). "Capt. Harry Truman, Artilleryman and Future President". Doughboy Center: The Story of the American Expeditionary Forces. Worldwar1.com Magazine. http://www.worldwar1.com/dbc/truman.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-19. 
^ "Military Personnel File of Harry S. Truman". Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/hstpaper/rg407.htm. Retrieved on 1 January 2009. 
^ Ferrell, p. 87
^ a b Truman, Margaret (1973). Harry S. Truman. William Morrow and Co. p. 429. 
^ Hamby, Alonzo L. (1995). Man of the People: A Life of Harry S. Truman. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195045467. 
^ Fuchs, James R. (March 15, 1962). "Oral History Interview with Edgar G. Hinde". Truman Library. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/oralhist/hindeeg.htm. Retrieved on 2008-10-06. 
^ "Harry S. Truman 1947 Diary". Truman Library. July 21, 1947. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/diary/page21.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-01. 
^ Foxman, Abraham H. (July 18, 2003). "Harry Truman, My Flawed Hero". Anti-Defamation League. http://www.adl.org/Anti_semitism/oped_truman.asp. Retrieved on 2007-08-01. 
^ Dana, Rebecca; Carlson, Peter (July 11, 2003). "Harry Truman's Forgotten Diary". The Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/ac2/wp-dyn?pagename=article&contentId=A40678-2003Jul10&notFound=true. Retrieved on 2007-08-16. 
^ "Executive Order 9981: Desegregation of the Armed Forces (1948)". Ourdocuments.gov. 1948. http://www.ourdocuments.gov/doc.php?flash=true&doc=84. Retrieved on 2007-07-19. 
^ Savage, Sean J. (1991). Roosevelt: The Party Leader, 1932–1945. Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky. p. 65. ISBN 0813117550. http://books.google.com/books?id=J7QlafgkrnUC. Retrieved on 2007-07-27. 
^ McCullough, p. 232
^ McCullough, p. 230
^ "The Pendergast Machine". Kansas City Police Officers Memorial — History. http://www.kcpolicememorial.com/history/pendergast_3.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-26. 
^ "Harry S. Truman Papers: Papers as Presiding Judge of the Jackson County (Missouri) Court — Partial Biographical Sketch 1920–1950". Truman Library. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/hstpaper/judge.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-26. 
^ "Harry S. Truman (1884–1972) Masonic Record". The Masonic Presidents Tour. Masonic Library and Museum. http://www.pagrandlodge.org/mlam/presidents/truman.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-26. 
^ McCullough, p. 252
^ "The Wonderful Wastebasket". Time: 3. March 24, 1952. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,816178-1,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-17. 
^ Haydock, Michael D. (2000). "American History: Harry Truman and the 1948 U.S. Presidential Election". American History Magazine via Historynet.com. http://www.historynet.com/culture/politics/3037581.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-28. 
^ The New York Times June 24, 1941; qtd in "Anniversary Remembrance," Time, July 2, 1951; reproduced as "Anniversary Remembrance," time.com.
^ McCullough, p. 262
^ Donovan, Robert J. (1996). Conflict and Crisis: The Presidency of Harry Truman, 1945–1948. Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press. p. 36. ISBN 0-8262-1066-X.  (Publisher's description of the book, retrieved August 2, 2007.)
^ Fleming, Thomas (2002). The New Dealers' War: F.D.R. And the War within World War II. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 0465024653. 
^ ""Truman on Time Magazine Covers"". Time. http://www.time.com/time/searchresults?D=Harry+Truman&sid=10AD665DE10C&Ntt=Harry+Truman&Ntk=WithBodyDate&internalid=endeca_dimension&Ntx=mode+matchallpartial&N=46+4294935559&Ns=p_date_sort%7c1&Nty=1. Retrieved on 2007-07-27. 
^ "Harry S. Truman: His Life and Times: Senator". Truman Library. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/lifetimes/senate.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-09. 
^ McCullough, p. 293.
^ McCullough, p. 295
^ Ferrell, p. 167
^ Newman, Mark (June 2004). "Civil Rights and Human Rights". Reviews in American History 32 (2): 247–254. doi:10.1353/rah.2004.0034. 
^ "Harry S. Truman, 34th Vice President (1945)". U.S. Senate. January 8, 1973. http://www.senate.gov/artandhistory/history/common/generic/VP_Harry_Truman.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-03. 
^ "A Little Touch of Harry". Time. January 8, 1973. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,910502,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-03. 
^ "Indiana Governor Henry Frederick Schricker (1883–1966)". Indiana Historical Bureau. http://www.in.gov/history/4132.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-03. 
^ PBS's American Experience Harry Truman
^ "Eleanor and Harry: The Correspondence of Eleanor Roosevelt and Harry S. Truman". Truman Library. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/eleanor/. Retrieved on 2007-07-26. 
^ McCullough, p. 348
^ a b McCullough
^ Hiroshima arguments rage 60 years on, BBC News, August 3, 2005
^ There is reason to believe the Japanese were waiting for a clarification of the seeming conflict between the Potsdam Declaration and the Atlantic Charter, as Alperovitz and Hasegawa point out.
^ "The Manhattan Project: An Interactive History". U. S. Department of Energy. http://www.cfo.doe.gov/me70/manhattan/potsdam_decision.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-14. 
^ Carter, Kit; Robert Mueller. "The Army Air Forces in World War II". Office of Air Force History, Washington, D.C. 1973: 685. 
^ "The Atomic Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki". Atomicarchive.com. http://www.atomicarchive.com/Docs/MED/med_chp10.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-07-26. 
^ "The answer reached the President at five minutes past four that afternoon, Tuesday, August 14. Japan had surrendered." McCullough, p. 461.
^ "Atomic Bomb Chronology: 1945–1946". Tokyo Physicians for the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons. http://www.ask.ne.jp/~hankaku/english/np7y.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-28.  "H. Truman told Y. Stalin about A-bomb experiment. Stalin was already informed by spy of Trinity but never revealed it."
^ "Interview Transcripts: The Potsdam Conference". The American Experience. PBS. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/truman/filmmore/it_3.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-26.  "Truman approached Stalin at the Potsdam conference and very carefully said to Stalin that he had this new weapon."
^ Truman, Harry S. (1955). Year of Decisions. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. p. 416. ISBN 156852062X.  "Stalin hoped we would make 'good use of it against the Japanese.'" 
^ David Holloway, Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy 1939-1956 (Yale University Press, 1994).
^ McNulty, Bryan. "The great atomic bomb debate". Perspectives. Ohio University. http://news.research.ohiou.edu/perspectives/archives/9701t/bomb2.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-02. 
^ ""The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb: Gar Alperovitz and the H-Net Debate"". Hiroshima: Was it Necessary?. Doug-long.com. http://www.doug-long.com/debate.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-27. 
^ Letter from Harry S. Truman to Irv Kupcinet (unsent), (5 August 1963), from The Papers of Harry S. Truman: Post-Presidential Papers, Harry S. Truman Library (digitized and online at National Archives Archival Research Catalog, ARC Identifier 201504).
^ a b c Grubin, David (1997). "The American Experience: Truman". PBS. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/truman/. Retrieved on 2007-08-03. 
^ a b "“Word Has Just Been Received”: Truman Speaks on the Railroad Strike: 1948–1952". History Matters. George Mason University. http://historymatters.gmu.edu/d/5137/. Retrieved on 2007-07-26. 
^ Holsti, Ole (1996). Public Opinion and American Foreign Policy. Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press. p. 214. ISBN 978-0-472-06619-3. 
^ ""Taft-Hartley: How It Works and How It Has Worked"". Time. October 19, 1959. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,869269,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-19. 
^ "President Truman Addresses Congress on Proposed Health Program, Washington, D.C.". This Day in Truman History. Truman Library & Museum. November 19, 1945. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/anniversaries/healthprogram.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ Binning, William C.; Larry E. Esterly and Paul A. Sracic (1999). Encyclopedia of American Parties, Campaigns, and Elections. Westport, CT: Greenwood. p. 417. ISBN 0813117550. http://books.google.com/books?id=fYs1RZ6NbFMC. Retrieved on 2007-07-29. 
^ "The Art of the Possible". "Time". June 6, 1949. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,801882,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-19. 
^ George Lenczowski, (1990), American Presidents and the Middle East, p. 27
^ Harry S. Truman, Memoirs 2, p. 153
^ a b Lenczowski, p. 27
^ "The Bombing of the King David Hotel". Jewish Virtual Library. http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/History/King_David.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-02. 
^ Lenczowski, p. 28, cite, Harry S. Truman, Memoirs 2, p. 158
^ Margaret Truman, Harry S. Truman, p. 420.
^ "Displaced Persons". United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. 2007-10-25. http://www.ushmm.org/wlc/article.php?lang=en&ModuleId=10005462. Retrieved on 2008-02-04. 
^ McCullough, pp. 614–620
^ Clifford, Clark; Richard Holbrooke (1991). Counsel to the President. New York: Random House. ISBN 0394569954. 
^ Lenczowski, p. 25
^ Walter Millis, ed. Forrestal Diaries, p. 322
^ Lenczowski, p. 26
^ Truman, Harry (1948-05-14). "Memo recognizing the state of Israel". Truman Presidential Museum & Library. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/whistlestop/study_collections/israel/large/documents/index.php?documentdate=1948-05-14&documentid=48&studycollectionid=ROI&pagenumber=1. Retrieved on 2007-04-02. 
^ Janos, Andrew C. (2000). "In Memoriam: George Lenczowski". University of California. http://www.universityofcalifornia.edu/senate/inmemoriam/GeorgeLenczowski.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ Truman, Memoirs 2, p. 140
^ William A. Eddy, F.D.R Meets Ibn Saud New York: American Friends of the Middle East, 1954),p. 57; Evan M. Wilson, Decision on Palestine, p58; Millis, ed. Forestall Diaries, p322; Emmanuel Neumann, “Abba Hillel Silver, History Maker,” American Zionist, February 5, 1953; and John S. Badeau, The Middle East Remembered (Washington, DC: Middle East Institute, 1983), p. 115
^ Eddy, FDR Meets Ibn Saud, p. 37. The four envoys were William A. Eddy, minister to Saudi Arabia; S. Pinkney Tuck, minister to Egypt; George Wadsworth, minister to Syria and Lebanon; and Lowell C. Pinkerton, general counsel in Jerusalem.
^ Giangreco, D. M.; Robert E. Griffin (1988). "The Airlift Begins: Airbridge to Berlin—The Berlin Crisis of 1948, its Origins and Aftermath". Truman Library. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/whistlestop/BERLIN_A/PAGE_11.HTM. Retrieved on 2007-08-04. 
^ LaFeber, Walter (1993). America, Russia, and the Cold War, 1945–1980 (7th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. 
^ McCullough, p. 741.
^ a b Hess, Jerry N. (November 21, 1972). "Oral History Interviews with Karl R. Bendetsen: General Counsel, Department of the Army, 1949; Assistant Secretary of the Army, 1950–52; Under Secretary of the Army, 1952". Oral Archives. Truman Presidential Library. http://www.korean-war.com/miakia.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-29. 
^ a b c d e f g Blair, Clay (2003). The Forgotten War: America in Korea, 1950–1953. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press. ISBN 1591140757. 
^ a b c d Krulak, Victor H. (Lt. Gen.) (1999). First to Fight: An Inside View of the U.S. Marine Corps. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press. ISBN 1557504644. 
^ Lane, Peter J., Steel for Bodies: Ammunition Readiness During the Korean War, Master's Thesis: U.S. Army Command and General Staff College (2003)
^ Civil rights movement, Virginia Center for Digital History
^ "The greatest upset in American political history: Harry Truman and the 1948 election". White House Studies 2006 (Winter). 
^ Burnes, Brian (2003). Harry S. Truman: His Life and Times. Kansas City, MO: Kansas City Star Books. p. 137. ISBN 0974000930. 
^ McCullough, p. 640.
^ "Truman's Democratic Convention Acceptance Speech". Presidential Links. PBS. 1948. http://www.pbs.org/newshour/character/links/truman_speech.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-26. 
^ "Chapter 12: The President Intervenes". Center of Military History. US Army. http://www.army.mil/cmh-pg/books/integration/IAF-12.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-27. 
^ "Executive Order 9981, Establishing the President's Committee on Equality of Treatment and Opportunity in the Armed Services, Harry S. Truman". Federal Register. 1948. http://www.archives.gov/federal-register/executive-orders/1948.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-27. 
^ "Desegregation of the Armed Forces". Truman Library. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/deseg.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-27. 
^ McCullough, p. 654
^ McCullough, p. 657
^ McCullough, p. 701
^ Curran, Jeanne; Takata, Susan R. (2002). "Getting a Sample Isn't Always Easy". Dear Habermas. California State University — Dominguez Hills. http://www.csudh.edu/dearhabermas/sampling01.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-28.  "(E)lection polls have found, that the use of telephone surveys doesn't include lots of people who don't have telephones. That can lead to disastrous results, as it did in the Dewey-Truman election in 1948."
^ Bennett, Stephen Earl. "Restoration of Confidence: Polling’s Comeback from 1948". Public Opinion Pros. http://www.publicopinionpros.com/from_field/2007/jan/bennett_printable.asp. Retrieved on 2007-07-28.  "Roper finished polling in September, Crossley’s last poll was October 18, and Gallup stopped polling after October 28."
^ Strout, Richard L.. "Oral History Interview with Richard L. Strout". Truman Presidential Library. http://www.publicopinionpros.com/from_field/2007/jan/bennett_printable.asp. Retrieved on 2007-07-28.  "Roper quit polling on September the ninth."
^ "The Story Behind "Dewey Defeats Truman"". Historybuff.com. http://www.historybuff.com/library/reftruman.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-28. 
^ "U.S. Constitution: Twenty-Fifth Amendment". FindLaw. http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/data/constitution/amendment25/. Retrieved on 2007-07-28.  Until the ratification of the Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1967, there was no provision for filling a mid-term vacancy in the office of vice president.
^ "Taiwan Status: From Grotius to WTO". Geocities. http://www.geocities.com/taiwanstatus/taiwanstatus. Retrieved on 2007-07-28. 
^ a b c Fried, Richard M. (1990). Nightmare in Red: The McCarthy Era in Perspective. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195043618. http://books.google.com/books?id=pVatMuvNTsoC. Retrieved on 2007-07-30. 
^ Tanenhaus, Sam (1998). Whittaker Chambers. New York: Modern Library. ISBN 0375751459. 
^ a b ""McCarthyism" v. "Trumanism"". Time. August 27, 1951. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,815218-1,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-27. 
^ "Telegram, Joseph McCarthy to Harry S. Truman, February 11, 1950, with Truman's draft reply; McCarthy, Joseph; General File; PSF; Truman Papers". Truman Presidential Library. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/exhibit_documents/index.php?pagenumber=1&titleid=203&tldate=1950-02-11&collectionid=mccarthy&PageID=-1&groupid=3435. Retrieved on 2007-07-28. 
^ Aziz, Qutubuddin. "Quaid-i-Millat's visit to the United States — The foundation of friendship and economic co-operation". Truman Library & Museum. http://www.jang.com.pk/thenews/spedition/liaqat_ali_khan/page2.htm.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-08. 
^ "Truman Library Photographs". Truman Library & Museum. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/photographs/search.php?access=selectbyname&nameid=1222. Retrieved on 2008-02-08. 
^ Appleman, Roy E. (1992). South to the Naktong, North to the Yalu (June–November 1950). Washington, DC: Center of Military History, US Army. ISBN 0-16-035958-9. http://www.army.mil/cmh-pg/books/korea/20-2-1/toc.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-27. 
^ "Memorandum of Information for the Secretary — Blockade of Korea". Truman Presidential Library—Archives. July 6, 1950. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/whistlestop/study_collections/korea/large/week2/kw_78_1.jpg. Retrieved on 2007-07-28. 
^ Kepley, David R. (1988). The Collapse of the Middle Way: Senate Republicans and the Bipartisan Foreign Policy, 1948–1952. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0313257841. 
^ Summers, Harry G. (1996). "The Korean War: A Fresh Perspective". Rt66.com. http://www.rt66.com/~korteng/SmallArms/24thID.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-28. 
^ Matray, James I. (1979). "Truman's Plan for Victory: National Self-determination and the Thirty-eighth Parallel Decision in Korea". Journal of American History 66 (2): 314–333. doi:10.2307/1900879. 
^ Strout, Lawrence N. (1999). "Covering McCarthyism: How the Christian Science Monitor Handled Joseph R. McCarthy, 1950–1954". Journal of Political and Military Sociology 2001 (Summer): 41. 
^ "Truman". PBS. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/presidents/video/truman_30.html#v187. Retrieved on 2008-09-28. 
^ "U.S. Military Korean War Statistics". Korean-war.com. http://www.korean-war.com/miakia.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-26. 
^ David, Paul T. (1954). Presidential Nominating Politics in 1952 Vol. 1. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins Press. pp. 33–40. 
^ "Comparing Past Presidential Performance". Public Opinion Archives. Roper Center. 2007. http://137.99.36.203/CFIDE/roper/presidential/webroot/presidential_rating.cfm. Retrieved on 2007-07-26. 
^ Duiker, William J. (1994). U.S. Containment Policy and the Conflict in Indochina. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.  (Untitled review (PDF) of this book by Christopher Jesperson, Journal of Conflict Studies, Fall 1995. Retrieved August 4, 2007.)
^ "Truman Reconstruction : 1948–1952". White House Museum. http://www.whitehousemuseum.org/special/renovation-1948.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-26. 
^ McCullough, pp. 593, 652, 725, 875ff.
^ Higgs, Robert (March 1, 2004). "Truman's Attempt to Seize the Steel Industry". The Freeman. The Independent Institute. http://www.independent.org/publications/article.asp?id=1394. Retrieved on 2007-08-03. 
^ McCullough, David. Truman. Simon and Schuster. http://books.google.com/books?id=8fp1A2s6aQwC&pg=PA605&lpg=PA605&dq=truman+coal+strike+draft+miners&source=bl&ots=6caAdm9Bbh&sig=qbJfte3eVtohR6WwR3YCJolSxqE&hl=en&sa=X&oi=book_result&resnum=8&ct=result. 
^ Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. p. 41. ISBN 0465041957. 
^ “Word Has Just Been Received”: Truman Speaks on the Railroad Strike. George Mason University. http://historymatters.gmu.edu/d/5137/. 
^ Smaltz, Donald C. (July 1998). "Independent Counsel: A View from Inside". The Georgetown Law Journal, Vol. 86, No. 6. 
^ Smaltz, Donald C. (January 29, 1996). "Speech Delivered by Donald C. Smaltz". University of North Texas Libraries. http://govinfo.library.unt.edu/oic/SMALTZ/speeches/gonzag.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-03. 
^ Donovan 1982, pp. 116–117
^ "The Corruption Issue: A Pandora's Box, referencing 1952 campaign, article 9/24/56". Time. 1956. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,867099-3,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-26. 
^ "Truman Loyalty Oath, 1947". Matrix. 1947. http://coursesa.matrix.msu.edu/~hst203/documents/loyal.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-19. 
^ Boyer, Paul (1994). By the Bomb's Early Light: American Thought and Culture at the Dawn of the Atomic Age. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press. p. 103. ISBN 9780807844809. 
^ Newman, Roger K. (1997). Hugo Black: A Biography. New York: Fordham University Press. p. 382. ISBN 0823217868.  "HST's stated desire to "keep something worse from happening" by implementing his loyalty check program" 
^ "The White Case Record". Time Magazine. November 30, 1953. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,823119,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-03. 
^ Moynihan, et al., Daniel Patrick (1997). Chairman's Foreword, Report of the Commission on Protecting and Reducing Government Secrecy. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Congress, U.S. Government Printing Office. http://www.gpo.gov/congress/commissions/secrecy/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-03. 
^ Eisler, Kim Isaac (1993). A Justice for All: William J. Brennan, Jr., and the decisions that transformed America. New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 76. ISBN 0671767879. 
^ a b c d Eisler, p. 76
^ McCullough p. 887
^ Ambrose, Stephen E. (1983). Eisenhower: 1890–1952. New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 515. ISBN 0671440691.  "Journalist Arthur Krock was told by a third party that in 1951 Truman privately offered the top spot on the Democratic ticket to Dwight D. Eisenhower, but Eisenhower, who turned out to be a Republican, supposedly declined. Truman and Eisenhower both denied the story" 
^ McCullough, pp. 887–893.
^ "The Way West, article 9/15/52". Time. 1952. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,816934-1,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-26. 
^ Hurwood, Burnhardt J.; Frank Gosfield (1969). Korea: Land of the 38th Parallel. New York: Parents Magazine Press. p. 123. http://www.bookbase.com/search;jsessionid=9D7150910EE9F9A087C77897586EA9DB?dealer_login=gunvilles&bookId=032761&method=POST. Retrieved on 2007-08-01. 
^ Gibbs, Nancy (November 10, 2008). "When New President Meets Old, It's Not Always Pretty". TIME. http://www.time.com/time/politics/article/0,8599,1857862,00.html. 
^ Ferrell, p. 387.
^ "The Man of Spirit". Time. August 13, 1956. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,865421,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-29. 
^ McCullough p. 949; quoting Allan Nevins writing for The New York Times Book Review 11/6/55, called Year of Decisions a "volume of distinction"
^ McCullough, p. 963
^ Martin, Joseph William (1960). My First Fifty Years in Politics as Told to Robert J. Donovan. New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 249. 
^ McCullough, pp. 389-90
^ McCullough, p. 983
^ "Biographical sketch of Mrs. Harry S. Truman". Truman Presidential Library. http://www.trumanlibrary.org/bwt-bio.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-28. 
^ "The World of Harry Truman". Time. 1973-01-08. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,910501-2,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-28. 
^ Moynihan, Daniel Patrick. "Chairman's Foreword". Moynihan Library. http://fas.org/sgp/library/moynihan/foreword.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Giving Them More Hell". Time. December 3, 1973. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,908217,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-29. 
^ "Our History: A Living Memorial". Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation. http://www.truman.gov/about/about_list.htm?cat_id=552. Retrieved on 2007-07-26. 
^ "Truman Fellowship". Sandia National Labs. http://sandia.gov/employment/special-prog/truman. Retrieved on 2008-06-18. 
^ "Harry S. Truman School of Public Affairs". http://truman.missouri.edu. Retrieved on 2008-06-18. 
^ "Harry S. Truman Birthplace State Historic Site". Missouri State Parks and Historic Sites. http://www.mostateparks.com/trumansite.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-18. 
^ McCullough, p. 19
^ Goldstein, Norm (2003). Associated Press Stylebook 2003. Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books. p. 256. ISBN 046500489X. 
^ "Biography of Harry S. Truman". The White House. http://www.whitehouse.gov/history/presidents/ht33.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-16. 
^ McCullough, p. 347



References
Main article: Bibliography of Harry S. Truman

Bernstein, Barton J. (ed.) (1966). The Truman Administration: A Documentary History (First edition ed.). HarperCollins. ISBN 0-060-90120-9. 
Bernstein, Barton J. (ed.) (1970). Politics and Policies of the Truman Administration (Second edition ed.). Franklin Watts. ISBN 0-531-06328-3. 
Ferrell, Robert H. (ed.) (1983). Dear Bess: The Letters from Harry to Bess Truman, 1910–1959. Appleton, Crofts Century. ISBN 0-390-18229-X. 
Ferrell, Robert H. (ed.) (1980). Off the Record: The Private Papers of Harry S. Truman. Harper & Row. ISBN 0-826-21119-4. 
Merrill, Dennis (ed.) (1969). Documentary History of the Truman Presidency. Frederick, Md.: Univ. Publ. of America. ISBN 1-556-55580-6.  (35 volumes)
Miller, Merle (1974). Plain Speaking: An Oral Biography of Harry S. Truman. Putnam Publishing Group. ISBN 0-399-11261-8. 
Neal, Steve; Remini, Robert V. (eds.) (2003). Miracle of '48: Harry Truman's Major Campaign Speeches & Selected Whistle-Stops. 


External links

Find more about Harry S. Truman on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

"President Harry S. Truman". American President: An Online Reference Resource. Miller Center of Public Affairs. http://www.millercenter.virginia.edu/index.php/academic/americanpresident/truman. Retrieved on 2007-08-14. 
Harry S. Truman biography, NNDB
"Truman Tapes". Presidential Recording Project. Miller Center of Public Affairs. http://millercenter.virginia.edu/index.php/academic/presidentialrecordings/pages/tapes_hst. Retrieved on 2007-08-14. 
The American Presidency Project at UCSB: The Most Comprehensive Resource on the Web
'The American Presidency: Transformation and Change - Harry Truman', lecture by Professor Vernon Bogdanor at Gresham College, 29 January 2008 [available for free audio, video and text download]
Harry Truman and Independence, Missouri: "This is Where I Belong", a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places (TwHP) lesson plan
An analysis of Harry Truman's personality
Harry Truman's cabinet
Medical and health history of Harry Truman
C-SPAN's Presidential Libraries: Harry S. Truman
PBS American Experience Video Biography of Harry Truman
White House biography




United States Senate


Preceded by
Roscoe C. Patterson
Senator from Missouri (Class 1)
1935 – 1945
Served alongside: Bennett Champ Clark, Forrest C. Donnell
Succeeded by
Frank P. Briggs


Political offices


Preceded by
Henry A. Wallace
Vice President of the United States
January 20, 1945 – April 12, 1945
Vacant
Title next held by
Alben W. Barkley


Preceded by
Franklin D. Roosevelt
President of the United States
April 12, 1945 – January 20, 1953
Succeeded by
Dwight D. Eisenhower


Party political offices


Preceded by
Henry A. Wallace
Democratic Party vice presidential candidate
1944
Succeeded by
Alben W. Barkley


Preceded by
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Democratic Party presidential candidate
1948
Succeeded by
Adlai Stevenson


Honorary titles


Preceded by
Herbert Hoover
Oldest U.S. President still living
October 20, 1964 – December 26, 1972
Succeeded by
Lyndon B. Johnson









v • d • e

Presidents of the United States






George Washington · John Adams · Thomas Jefferson · James Madison · James Monroe · John Quincy Adams · Andrew Jackson · Martin Van Buren · William Henry Harrison · John Tyler · James K. Polk · Zachary Taylor · Millard Fillmore · Franklin Pierce · James Buchanan · Abraham Lincoln · Andrew Johnson · Ulysses S. Grant · Rutherford B. Hayes · James A. Garfield · Chester A. Arthur · Grover Cleveland · Benjamin Harrison · Grover Cleveland · William McKinley · Theodore Roosevelt · William Howard Taft · Woodrow Wilson · Warren G. Harding · Calvin Coolidge · Herbert Hoover · Franklin D. Roosevelt · Harry S. Truman · Dwight D. Eisenhower · John F. Kennedy · Lyndon B. Johnson · Richard Nixon · Gerald Ford · Jimmy Carter · Ronald Reagan · George H. W. Bush · Bill Clinton · George W. Bush · Barack Obama














v • d • e

United States Democratic Party Presidential Nominees






Andrew Jackson · Martin Van Buren · James K. Polk · Lewis Cass · Franklin Pierce · James Buchanan · Stephen A. Douglas/John C. Breckinridge (SD) · George B. McClellan · Horatio Seymour · Horace Greeley · Samuel J. Tilden · Winfield Scott Hancock · Grover Cleveland · William Jennings Bryan · Alton B. Parker · William Jennings Bryan · Woodrow Wilson · James M. Cox · John W. Davis · Al Smith · Franklin D. Roosevelt · Harry S. Truman · Adlai Stevenson · John F. Kennedy · Lyndon B. Johnson · Hubert Humphrey · George McGovern · Jimmy Carter · Walter Mondale · Michael Dukakis · Bill Clinton · Al Gore · John Kerry · Barack Obama













v • d • e

Vice Presidents of the United States






John Adams · Thomas Jefferson · Aaron Burr · George Clinton · Elbridge Gerry · Daniel D. Tompkins · John C. Calhoun · Martin Van Buren · Richard Mentor Johnson · John Tyler · George M. Dallas · Millard Fillmore · William R. King · John C. Breckinridge · Hannibal Hamlin · Andrew Johnson · Schuyler Colfax · Henry Wilson · William A. Wheeler · Chester A. Arthur · Thomas A. Hendricks · Levi P. Morton · Adlai E. Stevenson I · Garret Hobart · Theodore Roosevelt · Charles W. Fairbanks · James S. Sherman · Thomas R. Marshall · Calvin Coolidge · Charles G. Dawes · Charles Curtis · John Nance Garner · Henry A. Wallace · Harry S. Truman · Alben W. Barkley · Richard Nixon · Lyndon B. Johnson · Hubert Humphrey · Spiro Agnew · Gerald Ford · Nelson Rockefeller · Walter Mondale · George H. W. Bush · Dan Quayle · Al Gore · Dick Cheney · Joe Biden














v • d • e

United States Democratic Party Vice Presidential Nominees






John C. Calhoun · Martin Van Buren · Richard Mentor Johnson · George M. Dallas · William Orlando Butler · William R. King · John C. Breckinridge · Herschel Vespasian Johnson / Joseph Lane · George H. Pendleton · Francis Preston Blair, Jr. · B. Gratz Brown · Thomas A. Hendricks · William Hayden English · Thomas A. Hendricks · Allen G. Thurman · Adlai E. Stevenson I · Arthur Sewall · Adlai E. Stevenson I · Henry G. Davis · John W. Kern · Thomas R. Marshall · Franklin D. Roosevelt · Charles W. Bryan · Joseph Taylor Robinson · John Nance Garner · Henry A. Wallace · Harry S. Truman · Alben W. Barkley · John Sparkman · Estes Kefauver · Lyndon B. Johnson · Hubert Humphrey · Edmund Muskie · Thomas Eagleton/Sargent Shriver · Walter Mondale · Geraldine Ferraro · Lloyd Bentsen · Al Gore · Joe Lieberman · John Edwards · Joe Biden













v • d • e

United States Senators from Missouri





Class 1

Benton • Geyer • Polk • Henderson • Schurz • Cockrell • Warner • Reed • Patterson • Truman • Briggs • Kem • Symington • Danforth • Ashcroft • Carnahan • Talent • McCaskill







Class 3

Barton • Buckner • Linn • Atchison • Green • Johnson • Wilson • Drake • Jewett • Blair • Bogy • Armstrong • Shields • Vest • Stone • Wilfley • Spencer • Williams • Hawes • Clark • Donnell • Hennings • Long • Eagleton • Bond













v • d • e

Cold War






Participants   NATO · Non-Aligned Movement · People's Republic of China · Warsaw Pact





1940s

Yalta Conference · Operation Unthinkable · Potsdam Conference · Gouzenko Affair · Iran crisis of 1946 · Chinese Civil War · Greek Civil War · Restatement of Policy on Germany · Truman Doctrine · Marshall Plan · Czechoslovak coup d'état of 1948 · Tito–Stalin split · Berlin Blockade · Western betrayal · Iron Curtain · Eastern Bloc






1950s

Korean War · First Indochina War · 1953 Iranian coup d'état · Uprising of 1953 in East Germany · 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état · First Taiwan Strait Crisis · Geneva Summit (1955) · Poznań 1956 protests · Hungarian Revolution of 1956 · Suez Crisis · Sputnik crisis · Second Taiwan Strait Crisis · Cuban Revolution · Kitchen Debate · Asian-African Conference · Bricker Amendment · McCarthyism · Operation Gladio · Hallstein Doctrine






1960s

Congo Crisis · Sino-Soviet split · 1960 U-2 incident · Bay of Pigs Invasion · Cuban Missile Crisis · Berlin Wall · Vietnam War · 1964 Brazilian coup d'état · U.S. invasion of the Dominican Republic · South African Border War · Transition to the New Order · Domino theory · Bangkok Declaration · Laotian Civil War · Greek military junta of 1967–1974 · Cultural Revolution · 1962 Sino-Indian War · Prague Spring · Goulash Communism · Sino-Soviet border conflict






1970s

Détente · Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty · Black September in Jordan · Cambodian Civil War · Ping Pong Diplomacy · Four Power Agreement on Berlin · 1972 Nixon visit to China · 1973 Chilean coup d'état · Yom Kippur War · Strategic Arms Limitation Talks · Angolan Civil War · Mozambican Civil War · Ogaden War · Cambodian-Vietnamese War · Sino-Vietnamese War · Iranian Revolution · Operation Condor · Bangladesh Liberation War  · Korean Air Lines Flight 902






1980s

Soviet war in Afghanistan · Olympic boycotts · History of Solidarity · Contras · Central American Crisis · RYAN · Korean Air Lines Flight 007 · Able Archer 83 · Strategic Defense Initiative · Invasion of Grenada · Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 · Singing Revolution · Invasion of Panama · Fall of the Berlin Wall · Revolutions of 1989 · Glasnost · Perestroika






1990s

Breakup of Yugoslavia · Dissolution of the USSR · Dissolution of Czechoslovakia






See also

Soviet and Russian espionage in U.S. · Soviet Union–United States relations · NATO-Russia relations






Establishments

ASEAN · Central Intelligence Agency · Comecon · European Community · KGB · Stasi






Races

Arms race · Nuclear arms race · Space Race






Ideologies

Capitalism · Liberal democracy · Communism · Stalinism · Trotskyism · Maoism






Propaganda

Pravda · Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty · Red Scare · Voice of America · Voice of Russia






Foreign policy

Truman Doctrine · Marshall Plan · Containment · Eisenhower Doctrine · Domino theory · Kennedy Doctrine · Peaceful coexistence · Ostpolitik · Johnson Doctrine · Brezhnev Doctrine · Nixon Doctrine · Ulbricht Doctrine · Carter Doctrine · Reagan Doctrine · Rollback






Timeline of events · Portal · Category












v • d • e

Notable figures of the Cold War






United States

Harry S. Truman · George Marshall (Secretary of State) · Dwight D. Eisenhower · John F. Kennedy · Lyndon B. Johnson · Richard Nixon · Henry Kissinger (Secretary of State) · Gerald Ford · Jimmy Carter · Ronald Reagan · George H. W. Bush






Soviet Union

Joseph Stalin · Nikita Khrushchev · Leonid Brezhnev · Yuri Andropov · Konstantin Chernenko · Mikhail Gorbachev · Boris Yeltsin · Andrei Gromyko (foreign minister) · Anatoly Dobrynin (ambassador to the U.S.)






United Kingdom

Winston Churchill · Clement Attlee · Ernest Bevin (foreign secretary) · Harold Macmillan · Harold Wilson · Margaret Thatcher






West Germany

Konrad Adenauer · Willy Brandt · Helmut Schmidt · Helmut Kohl






People's Republic of China

Mao Zedong · Zhou Enlai (Premier) · Hua Guofeng  · Deng Xiaoping · Zhao Ziyang (General Secretary)






France

Charles de Gaulle · Alain Poher · Georges Pompidou · Valéry Giscard d'Estaing · François Mitterrand






Eastern Europe

Enver Hoxha (Albania) · Josip Broz Tito (Yugoslavia) · Imre Nagy (Hungary) · Nicolae Ceauşescu (Romania) · Alexander Dubček (Czechoslovakia) · Erich Honecker (East Germany) · Lech Wałęsa (Poland) · Pope John Paul II (Poland/Vatican City)






Far East

Chiang Kai-shek · Chiang Ching-kuo (Republic of China) · Syngman Rhee · Park Chung-hee (South Korea) · Kim Il-sung (North Korea) · Ho Chi Minh (North Vietnam) · Ngo Dinh Diem (South Vietnam) · Pol Pot (Cambodia) · Aung San (Burma) · Indira Gandhi · Jawaharlal Nehru (India) · Sukarno · Suharto (Indonesia) · Nur Misuari · Jose Maria Sison · Ferdinand Marcos · Imelda Marcos (Philippines)






Canada

William Lyon Mackenzie King · Louis St. Laurent  · John Diefenbaker  · Lester Pearson  · Pierre Trudeau  · Joe Clark  · John Turner  · Brian Mulroney  · Kim Campbell






Latin America

Fidel Castro (Cuba) · Che Guevara (Argentina/Cuba) · Daniel Ortega (Nicaragua) · Salvador Allende · Augusto Pinochet (Chile)






Middle East

Mohammad Reza Pahlavi · Ayatollah Khomeini (Iran) · Saddam Hussein (Iraq) · Gamal Abdel Nasser · Anwar El Sadat (Egypt) · Muammar al-Gaddafi (Libya) Menachem Begin (Israel)






Africa

Patrice Lumumba · Mobutu Sese Seko (Congo/Zaire) · Kwame Nkrumah (Ghana) · Agostinho Neto · José Eduardo dos Santos · Jonas Savimbi (Angola) · Mengistu Haile Mariam (Ethiopia)






Timeline of events · Portal · Category












v • d • e

Time Persons of the Year










 
1927–1950







Charles Lindbergh (1927) · Walter Chrysler (1928) · Owen D. Young (1929) · Mahatma Gandhi (1930) · Pierre Laval (1931) · Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932) · Hugh Samuel Johnson (1933) · Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934) · Haile Selassie I (1935) · Wallis Simpson (1936) · Chiang Kai-shek / Soong May-ling (1937) · Adolf Hitler (1938) · Joseph Stalin (1939) · Winston Churchill (1940) · Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941) · Joseph Stalin (1942) · George Marshall (1943) · Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944) · Harry S. Truman (1945) · James F. Byrnes (1946) · George Marshall (1947) · Harry S. Truman (1948) · Winston Churchill (1949) · The American Fighting-Man (1950)















 
1951–1975







Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951) · Elizabeth II (1952) · Konrad Adenauer (1953) · John Foster Dulles (1954) · Harlow Curtice (1955) · Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956) · Nikita Khrushchev (1957) · Charles de Gaulle (1958) · Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959) · U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960) · John F. Kennedy (1961) · Pope John XXIII (1962) · Martin Luther King, Jr. (1963) · Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) · William Westmoreland (1965) · The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966) · Lyndon B. Johnson (1967) · The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968) · The Middle Americans (1969) · Willy Brandt (1970) · Richard Nixon (1971) · Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972) · John Sirica (1973) · King Faisal (1974) · American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Carol Sutton / Susie Sharp / Addie Wyatt (1975)















 
1976–2000







Jimmy Carter (1976) · Anwar Sadat (1977) · Deng Xiaoping (1978) · Ayatollah Khomeini (1979) · Ronald Reagan (1980) · Lech Wałęsa (1981) · The Computer (1982) · Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983) · Peter Ueberroth (1984) · Deng Xiaoping (1985) · Corazon Aquino (1986) · Mikhail Gorbachev (1987) · The Endangered Earth (1988) · Mikhail Gorbachev (1989) · George H. W. Bush (1990) · Ted Turner (1991) · Bill Clinton (1992) · The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F.W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin (1993) · Pope John Paul II (1994) · Newt Gingrich (1995) · David Ho (1996) · Andrew Grove (1997) · Bill Clinton / Kenneth Starr (1998) · Jeffrey P. Bezos (1999) · George W. Bush (2000)















 
2001–present







Rudolph Giuliani (2001) · The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins (2002) · The American Soldier (2003) · George W. Bush (2004) · The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates (2005) · You (2006) · Vladimir Putin (2007) · Barack Obama (2008)

















v • d • e

Cabinet of President Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933–1945)





Vice President

John Nance Garner (1933–1941) • Henry A. Wallace (1941–1945) • Harry S. Truman (1945)







Secretary of State

Cordell Hull (1933–1944) • Edward Stettinius, Jr. (1944–1945)






Secretary of War

George Dern (1933–1936) • Harry Hines Woodring (1936–1940) • Henry L. Stimson (1940–1945)






Secretary of the Treasury

William Hartman Woodin (1933–1934) • Henry Morgenthau, Jr. (1934–1945)






Attorney General

Homer Stille Cummings (1933–1939) • Frank Murphy (1939–1940) • Robert H. Jackson (1940–1941) • Francis Biddle (1941–1945)






Postmaster General

James Farley (1933–1940) • Frank Comerford Walker (1940–1945)






Secretary of the Navy

Claude A. Swanson (1933–1939) • Charles Edison (1940) • Frank Knox (1940–1944) • James Forrestal (1944–1945)






Secretary of the Interior

Harold L. Ickes (1933–1945)






Secretary of the Agriculture

Henry A. Wallace (1933–1940) • Claude R. Wickard (1940–1945)






Secretary of Commerce

Daniel Calhoun Roper (1933–1938) • Harry Hopkins (1939–1940) • Jesse Holman Jones (1940–1945) • Henry A. Wallace (1945)






Secretary of Labor

Frances Perkins (1933–1945)













v • d • e

United States presidential election, 1948





Democratic Party

1948 Democratic National Convention






Candidates

Kilgore · Russell · Truman · Wallace ·






VP Candidates

Barkley






Republican Party

1948 Republican National Convention






Candidates

Bender · Dewey · Hitchcock · McArthur · J. W. Martin · E. Martin · Saltonstall · Stassen · Vandenberg · Warren · Taft






VP Candidates

Stassen · Warren






State's Rights Democratic Party

Dixiecrat nomination






Candidates

Thurmond






VP Candidates

Wright






Progressive Party

Progressive Party nomination






Candidates

Wallace






VP Candidates

Taylor













v • d • e

Cabinet of President Harry S. Truman (1945–1953)





Vice President

None (1945–1949) • Alben W. Barkley (1949–1953)







Secretary of State

Edward Stettinius, Jr. (1945–1945) • James F. Byrnes (1945–1947) • George C. Marshall (1947–1949) • Dean G. Acheson (1949–1953)






Secretary of War

Henry L. Stimson (1945–1945) • Robert P. Patterson (1945–1947) • Kenneth C. Royall (1947–1947)






Secretary of Defense

James Forrestal (1947–1949) • Louis A. Johnson (1949–1950) • George C. Marshall (1950–1951) • Robert A. Lovett (1951–1953)






Secretary of the Treasury

Henry Morgenthau, Jr. (1945–1945) • Fred M. Vinson (1945–1946) • John W. Snyder (1946–1953)






Attorney General

Francis Biddle (1945) • Tom C. Clark (1945–1949) • J. Howard McGrath (1949–1952) • James P. McGranery (1952–1953)






Postmaster General

Frank C. Walker (1945) • Robert E. Hannegan (1945–1947) • Jesse M. Donaldson (1947–1953)






Secretary of the Navy

James Forrestal (1945–1947)






Secretary of the Interior

Harold L. Ickes (1945–1946) • Julius A. Krug (1946–1949) • Oscar L. Chapman (1949–1953)






Secretary of the Agriculture

Claude R. Wickard (1945) • Clinton P. Anderson (1945–1948) • Charles F. Brannan (1948–1953)






Secretary of Commerce

Henry A. Wallace (1945–1946) • W. Averell Harriman (1946–1948) • Charles W. Sawyer (1948–1953)






Secretary of Labor

Frances Perkins (1945) • Lewis B. Schwellenbach (1945–1948) • Maurice J. Tobin (1948–1953)











Persondata


NAME
Truman, Harry S.


ALTERNATIVE NAMES



SHORT DESCRIPTION
thirty-third President of the United States


DATE OF BIRTH
May 8, 1884


PLACE OF BIRTH
Lamar, Missouri


DATE OF DEATH
December 26, 1972


PLACE OF DEATH
Kansas City, Missouri


 



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harry_S._Truman"
Categories: Franklin D. Roosevelt administration cabinet members | Truman Administration cabinet members | American anti-communists | American memoirists | American military personnel of World War I | Scots-Irish Americans | Baptists from the United States | Cold War leaders | Congressional Gold Medal recipients | Democratic Party (United States) presidential nominees | Democratic Party (United States) vice presidential nominees | Deaths from pneumonia | Infectious disease deaths in Missouri | Deaths from multiple organ failure | Harry S. Truman | Presidency of Harry S. Truman | History of the United States (1945–1964) | Writers from Missouri | Pendergast era | People associated with the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki | People from Independence, Missouri | People from the Kansas City metropolitan area | People from Missouri | People of Huguenot descent | American people of the Korean War | Presidents of the United States | Time magazine Persons of the Year | United States presidential candidates, 1948 | United States Senators from Missouri | Vice Presidents of the United States | William Chrisman High School alumni | World War II political leaders | United States presidential candidates, 1952 | 1884 births | 1972 deathsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 | Featured articles 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Aragonés
Asturianu
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Cebuano
Česky
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Kapampangan
ქართული
Kiswahili
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Română
Rumantsch
Русский
संस्कृत
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Tiếng Việt
ייִדיש
中文









 This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 14:33.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
