













Conservative Judaism - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Conservative_Judaism";
		var wgTitle = "Conservative Judaism";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "6623";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281110222;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Conservative Judaism

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
Conservative Judaism (also known as Masorti Judaism in Israel and Europe) is a modern stream of Judaism that arose out of intellectual currents in Germany in the mid-19th century and took institutional form in the United States in the early 1900s.


Part of a series of articles on


Jews and Judaism


 


Who is a Jew? · Etymology · Culture




Religion
God in Judaism (Names)
Principles of faith · Mitzvot (613)
Halakha · Shabbat · Holidays
Prayer · Tzedakah
Brit · Bar / Bat Mitzvah
Marriage · Bereavement
Philosophy · Ethics · Kabbalah
Customs · Synagogue · Rabbi






Texts

Tanakh
(Torah · Nevi'im · Ketuvim)
Targum
Talmud (Mishnah · Gemara)
Rabbinic (Midrash · Tosefta)
Mishneh Torah · Tur
Shulchan Aruch
Zohar · Tanya






Ethnicities
Ashkenazi · Sephardi · Mizrahi
Romaniote · Italki · Yemenite
African · Beta Israel · Bukharan ·
Georgian Mountain · Chinese
Indian · Khazars · Crypto-Jews






Population
Jews by country · Rabbis
Population comparisons
Israel · United States · Russia
Iraq · Spain · Portugal · Italy
Poland · Germany · Bosnia
Latin America · France
England  · Netherlands · Canada
Australia · Hungary · India
Turkey · Greece · Africa
Iran · China · Pakistan · Romania ·
Lists of Jews






Denominations
Orthodox · Conservative
Reform · Reconstructionist
Liberal · Karaite · Humanistic
Renewal · Alternative






Languages
Hebrew · Yiddish
Judeo-Persian · Ladino
Judeo-Aramaic · Judeo-Arabic






History
Timeline · Leaders
Ancient · Temple
Babylonian exile
Jerusalem
(in Judaism · Timeline)
Hasmoneans · Sanhedrin
Schisms · Pharisees
Jewish-Roman wars
Christianity and Judaism
Islam and Judaism
Diaspora · Middle Ages
Sabbateans · Hasidism · Haskalah
Emancipation · Holocaust · Aliyah
Israel (history)
Arab conflict · Land of Israel
Baal teshuva · Persecution
Antisemitism (history)






Politics

Zionism
(Labor · Revisionist 
 Religious · General)
The Bund · World Agudath Israel
Jewish feminism · Israeli politics





v • d • e



The principles of Conservative Judaism include:[1]

A deliberately non-fundamentalist teaching of Jewish principles of faith;
A positive attitude toward modern culture; and
An acceptance of both traditional rabbinic modes of study and modern scholarship and critical text study when considering Jewish religious texts.

Conservative Judaism has its roots in the school of thought known as Positive-Historical Judaism, developed in 1850s Germany as a reaction to the more liberal religious positions taken by Reform Judaism. The term conservative was meant to signify that Jews should attempt to conserve Jewish tradition, rather than reform or abandon it, and does not imply the movement's adherents are politically conservative. Because of this potential for confusion, a number of Conservative Rabbis have proposed renaming the movement[2], and outside of the United States and Canada, in many countries including Israel[3] and the UK[4], it is today known as Masorti Judaism (Hebrew for "Traditional").




Contents


1 Conservative movement is a sub-set of Conservative Judaism
2 History
3 Conservative Judaism in America

3.1 Jewish Theological Seminary


4 Gender equality
5 Conservative Judaism in Israel
6 Trends in the 21st century
7 Beliefs

7.1 God
7.2 Revelation
7.3 Jewish law
7.4 Jewish identity


8 Organizations
9 Notable figures
10 Criticism
11 See also
12 External links
13 References
14 Bibliography

14.1 Traditional-Egalitarian Judaism
14.2 Observance of Conservative Jews







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Conservative movement is a sub-set of Conservative Judaism
The term Conservative Judaism doesn't refer to a narrowly defined movement or school of thought. Rather, it refers to a broad religious movement with an overlapping range of beliefs and practices that are more liberal than what is affirmed in Orthodoxy, and more traditional than what is affirmed in Reform.
This definition covers a wide range of groups and individual prayer communities outside of the formal Conservative movement.
The Conservative movement, more narrowly defined, refers to a specific religious group with a well-defined organizational structure, specifically the LCCJ, Leadership Council of Conservative Judaism, and any people affiliated with any of these organizations.
Conservative Jewish groups in the broader sense include the Union for Traditional Judaism, Traditional-Egalitarian synagogues, and many non-movement affiliated synagogues, kehillot and chavurot, and any people affiliated with any of these organizations. [5], [6], [7]

[edit] History
Like Reform Judaism, the Conservative movement developed in Europe and the United States in the 1800s, as Jews reacted to the changes brought about by the Enlightenment and Jewish emancipation. In Europe the movement was known as Positive-Historical Judaism, and it is still known as "the historical school."
Positive-Historical Judaism, the intellectual forerunner to Conservative Judaism, was developed as a school of thought in the 1840s and 1850s in Germany. Its principal founder was Rabbi Zecharias Frankel, who had broken with the German Reform Judaism in 1845 over its rejection of the primacy of the Hebrew language in Jewish prayer and the rejection of the laws of kashrut. In 1854, Frankel became the head of the Jewish Theological Seminary of Breslau, Germany. At the seminary, Frankel taught that Jewish law was not static, but rather has always developed in response to changing conditions. He called his approach towards Judaism "Positive-Historical," which meant that one should have a positive attitude towards accepting Jewish law and tradition as normative, yet one should be open to developing the law in the same fashion that it has always historically developed. Frankel rejected the innovations of Reform Judaism as insufficiently based in Jewish history and communal practice. However, Frankel's use of modern methods of historical scholarship in analyzing Jewish texts and developing Jewish law set him apart from neo-Orthodox Judaism, which was concurrently developing under the leadership of Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch.
The Conservative coalition splintered in 1963, when advocates of the Reconstructionist philosophy of Mordecai Kaplan seceded from the movement to form a distinct Reconstructionist Judaism. Kaplan had been a leading figure at JTS for 54 years, and had pressed for liturgical reform and innovations in ritual practice from inside of the framework of Conservative Judaism. Frustrated by the perceived dominance of the more traditionalist voices at JTS, Kaplan's followers decided that the ideas of Reconstructionism would be better served through the creation of separate denomination. In 1968, the split became formalized with the establishment of the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College.

[edit] Conservative Judaism in America
In the latter half of the 19th century, the debates occurring in German Judaism were replicated in America. Conservative Judaism in America similarly began as a reaction to Reform Judaism's rejection of traditional Jewish law and practice. The differences between the more modern and traditional branches of American Judaism came to a head in 1883, at the "Trefa Banquet" at the Highland House entertainment pavilion, which was at the top of the Mount Adams Incline[8][9] - where shellfish and other non-kosher dishes were served at the celebration of the first graduating class of Hebrew Union College in Cincinnati. The adoption of the radical Pittsburgh Platform in 1885, which dismissed observance of the ritual commandments and Jewish peoplehood as "anachronistic", created a permanent wedge between the Reform movement and more traditional American Jews.
Conservative Judaism has had a large impact on education in America. Many Conservative schools dot the United States. The Solomon Schechter day schools, including The Epstein School in Atlanta, Georgia, are an example.

[edit] Jewish Theological Seminary
In 1886, prominent Sephardi Rabbis Sabato Morais and H. Pereira Mendes founded the Jewish Theological Seminary (JTS) in New York City as a more traditional alternative to HUC. The Seminary's brief affiliation with the traditional congregations that established the Union of Orthodox Congregations in 1898 was severed due to the Orthodox rejection of the Seminary's academic approach to Jewish learning. At the turn of the century, the Seminary lacked a source of permanent funding and was ordaining on average no more than one rabbi per year.
The fortunes of Conservative Judaism underwent a dramatic turnaround when in 1902, the famed scholar Solomon Schechter accepted the invitation to become president of JTS. Under Schechter's leadership, JTS attracted a distinguished faculty and became a highly regarded center of Jewish learning. In 1913, the Conservative Movement founded its congregational arm, the United Synagogue of America.
Conservative Judaism enjoyed rapid growth in the first half of the 20th century, becoming the largest American Jewish denomination. Its combination of modern innovation (such as mixed gender seating) and traditional practice particularly appealed to first and second-generation Eastern European Jewish immigrants, who found Orthodoxy too restrictive, but Reform Judaism foreign. After World War II, Conservative Judaism continued to thrive. The 1950s and early 1960s featured a boom in synagogue construction as upwardly-mobile American Jews moved to the suburbs. Conservative Judaism occupied an enviable middle position during a period where American society prized consensus.
In the 1990s, the American Jewish University (formerly the University of Judaism) in Los Angeles established the Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies as an independent rabbinical school.

[edit] Gender equality
In the 1970s and early 1980s, Conservative Judaism was divided over issues of gender equality. In 1973, the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards voted, without adopting an explanatory responsum, to permit synagogues to count women toward a minyan, but left the choice to individual congregations. After a further decade of debate, in 1983, JTS voted to admit women for ordination as Conservative rabbis, also without adopting an explanatory responsum. Some opponents of these decisions left the Conservative movement to form the Union for Traditional Judaism.
In 2002, the Committee adopted a responsum that provides an official religious-law foundation for its past actions and articulates the current Conservative approach to the role of women in Judaism.[10]
In December 2006, a responsum was adopted by the Committee that approved the ordination of gay and lesbian rabbis and permitted commitment ceremonies for lesbian and gay Jews (but not same-sex marriage), while maintaining the traditional prohibition against anal sex between men.[11] An opposing responsum, that maintained the traditional prohibitions against ordinations and commitment ceremonies, was also approved. Both responsa were enacted as majority opinions, with some members of the Committee voting for both. This result gives individual synagogues, rabbis, and rabbinical schools discretion to adopt either approach.[12]

[edit] Conservative Judaism in Israel
Conservative congregations in Israel are increasing in popularity. Attendance has grown by as much as 40 percent over the last decade. In 2008, there are 52 congregations. Despite investing much time and effort the Conservative movement remains tiny,failing to draw Israelis. Overwhelming the members are American immigrants. [13]

[edit] Trends in the 21st century
At the time of the 1990 National Jewish Population Survey, Conservative Judaism remained the largest denomination in America, with 43 percent of Jewish households affiliated with a synagogue belonging to Conservative synagogues (compared to 35 percent for Reform and 16 percent for Orthodox). In 2000, the NJPS showed that only 33 percent of synagogue-affiliated American Jews belonged to a Conservative synagogue. For the first time in nearly a century, Conservative Judaism is no longer the largest denomination in America. At the same time, however, certain Conservative institutions, particular day schools, have shown significant growth. Conservative leaders agree that these contrasting trends indicate that the movement has reached a crossroads as it heads into the 21st century.
The Jews leaving the Conservative movement move in three distinct directions. Some are joining Reform Judaism; a smaller but still significant fraction are joining Modern Orthodox congregations. Many people, however, are staying theologically and halakhically within Conservative Judaism, but have moved outside of the Conservative movement, creating their own traditional-egalitarian synagogues, and non-movement affiliated kehillot and chavurot.
It is precisely this last phenomenon which has led to the development of groups designed to address this issue: [14], [15],[16], [17]

HaYom: The Coalition for the Transformation of Conservative Judaism


HaYom



The Shefa Network


The Shefa Network


[edit] Beliefs





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2008)


In 1988, the Leadership Council of Conservative Judaism issued an official statement of belief, Emet Ve-Emunah: Statement of Principles of Conservative Judaism. Emet Ve-Emunah affirms belief in God and in the divine inspiration of the Torah; however, it also affirms the legitimacy of multiple interpretations of these issues. Atheism, Trinitarian views of God, and polytheism are ruled out. Conservative Judaism rejects both relativism and fundamentalism.

[edit] God
Conservative Judaism affirms monotheism. Its members have varied beliefs about the nature of God, and no one understanding of God is mandated. Among the beliefs affirmed are: Maimonidean rationalism; Kabbalistic mysticism; Hasidic panentheism (neo-Hasidism, Jewish Renewal); limited theism (as in Harold Kushner's When Bad Things Happen to Good People); and organic thinking in the fashion of Alfred North Whitehead and Charles Hartshorne, also known as process theology (such as Rabbis Max Kaddushin and William E. Kaufman).
Mordecai Kaplan's religious naturalism (Reconstructionist Judaism) used to have an influential place in the movement, but since Reconstructionism developed as an independent movement, this influence has waned. Papers from a recent Rabbinical Assembly conference on theology were printed in a special issue of the journal Conservative Judaism (Winter 1999); the editors note that Kaplan's naturalism seems to have dropped from the movement's radar screen.

[edit] Revelation
Conservative Judaism allows its adherents to hold to a wide array of views on the subject of revelation. Many Conservative Jews reject the traditional Jewish idea that God literally dictated the words of the Torah to Moses at Mount Sinai in a verbal revelation, but they hold the traditional Jewish belief that God inspired the later prophets to write the rest of the Tanakh. Many Conservative Jews believe that Moses was inspired by God in the same manner as the later prophets.
Conservative Jews who reject the concept of verbal revelation believe that God revealed his will to Moses and other prophets in a non-verbal form — that is, God's revelation did not include the particular words of the divine texts.
Conservative Judaism is comfortable with the higher criticism, including the documentary hypothesis, the theory that the Torah was redacted from several earlier sources. The movement's rabbinic authorities and its official Torah commentary (Etz Hayim: A Torah Commentary) affirm that Jews should make use of modern critical literary and historical analysis to understand how the Bible developed.
Concerning the degree of revelation of Torah, Conservative Judaism rejects the Orthodox position of a direct verbal revelation of the Torah. However, Conservative Judaism also rejects the Reform view, that the Torah was not revealed but divinely inspired.[citation needed] In contrast to both, most Conservative positions affirm the divine but nonverbal revelation of written Torah as the authentic, historically correct Jewish view. In this view, Oral Torah is considered inspired by Torah, but not necessarily of a straightforward divine origin.

[edit] Jewish law
Main article: Conservative Halakha
Conservative Judaism views halakha (Jewish religious law) as normative and binding. Examining Jewish history and rabbinic literature through the lens of academic criticism, Conservative Judaism believes that halakha has always evolved to meet the changing realities of Jewish life, and that it must continue to do so in the modern age.
This view, together with Conservative Judaism's diversity of opinion concerning divine revelation, accounts for some of the diversity and disagreement in the Conservative movement's halakha. When considering changes to halakha, Conservative Judaism's rabbinical authorities may rely on historical analysis as well as religious considerations. As Solomon Schechter noted, "however great the literary value of a code may be, it does not invest it with infallibility, nor does it exempt it from the student or the Rabbi who makes use of it from the duty of examining each paragraph on its own merits, and subjecting it to the same rules of interpretation that were always applied to Tradition".[18]
See also: Conservative responsa
Concerning interpretation of Halakha (or Jewish law): because of Judaism's legal tradition, the fundamental differences between modern Jewish denominations also involve the relevance, interpretation, and application of Jewish law and tradition. Conservative Judaism believes that its approach is the most authentic expression of Judaism as it was traditionally practiced. Conservative Jews believe that movements to its left, such as Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism, have erred by rejecting the traditional authority of Jewish law and tradition. They believe that the Orthodox Jewish movements, on the theological right, have erred by slowing down, or stopping, the historical development of Jewish law: "Conservative Judaism believes that scholarly study of Jewish texts indicates that Judaism has constantly been evolving to meet the needs of the Jewish people in varying circumstances, and that a central halakhic authority can continue the halakhic evolution today." (Soc. Culture. Jewish Usenet Newsgroup FAQ) The Conservative movement makes a conscious effort to use historical sources to determine what kind of changes to Jewish tradition have occurred, how and why they occurred, and in what historical context. With this information they believe that can better understand the proper way for rabbis to interpret and apply Jewish law to our conditions today. See also under Modern Orthodox Judaism.
Mordecai Waxman, a leading figure in the Rabbinical Assembly, writes that "Reform has asserted the right of interpretation but it rejected the authority of legal tradition. Orthodoxy has clung fast to the principle of authority, but has in our own and recent generations rejected the right to any but minor interpretations. The Conservative view is that both are necessary for a living Judaism. Accordingly, Conservative Judaism holds itself bound by the Jewish legal tradition, but asserts the right of its rabbinical body, acting as a whole, to interpret and to apply Jewish law." (Mordecai Waxman Tradition and Change: The Development of Conservative Judaism)
Conservative Judaism views the process by which Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism make changes to Jewish tradition as potentially invalid[citation needed]. Thus, Conservative Judaism rejects patrilineal descent and would hold that a child of a non-Jewish mother who was raised as a Reform or Reconstructionist Jew is not legally Jewish and would have to undergo conversion to become a Jew. The Conservative movement is committed to Jewish pluralism and respects the religious practices of Reform and Reconstructionist Jews. For example, the Conservative movement recognizes their clergy as rabbis, even if it does not necessarily accept their specific decisions.[citation needed]
Conservative Judaism accepts that the Orthodox approach to halakhah is generally valid. Accordingly, a Conservative Jew could usually satisfy their halakhic obligations by participation in Orthodox rituals. Occasionally, however, they may come into conflict. For instance, if two men and a woman were to eat a meal together, a Conservative Jew would believe that the presence of three adult Jews would obligate the group to say a communal form of the Grace After Meals, while an Orthodox Jew would believe that, lacking three adult Jewish males, the group would be forbidden to do such. Thus, though often de facto the case, Conservative Judaism's halakhic system does not inherently see Orthodox halakhic practice as acceptable and legitimate halakhic practice for a Conservative Jew.

[edit] Jewish identity
Conservative Judaism maintains the Rabbinic understanding of Jewish identity: A Jew is someone who was born to a Jewish mother, or who converts to Judaism in accordance with Jewish law and tradition. Conservatism thus rejects patrilineal descent, which is accepted by the Reform movement. Conservative Rabbis are not allowed to perform intermarriages (marriages between Jews and non-Jews). However, the Leadership Council of Conservative Judaism has a different sociological approach to this issue than does Orthodoxy, although agreeing religiously. In a press release it has stated:[citation needed]

"In the past, intermarriage...was viewed as an act of rebellion, a rejection of Judaism. Jews who intermarried were essentially excommunicated. But now, intermarriage is often the result of living in an open society....If our children end up marrying non-Jews, we should not reject them. We should continue to give our love and by that retain a measure of influence in their lives, Jewishly and otherwise. Life consists of constant growth and our adult children may yet reach a stage when Judaism has new meaning for them. However, the marriage between a Jew and non-Jew is not a celebration for the Jewish community. We therefore reach out to the couple with the hope that the non-Jewish partner will move closer to Judaism and ultimately choose to convert. Since we know that over 70 percent of children of intermarried couples are not being raised as Jews...we want to encourage the Jewish partner to maintain his/her Jewish identity, and raise their children as Jews."


[edit] Organizations
In the more limited sense of the term, Conservative Judaism is a unified movement; the international body of Conservative rabbis is the Rabbinical Assembly (RA), the organization of synagogues is the United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism (USCJ), and the primary seminaries are the Jewish Theological Seminary of America (JTS) in New York City and the Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies at the American Jewish University (formerly the University of Judaism) in Los Angeles. Conservative Judaism outside the USA is often called Masorti Judaism; Masorti rabbis belong to the Rabbinical Assembly.[19]
Affiliated seminaries outside the USA include the Marshall Meyer Seminario Rabínico Latinoamericano in Argentina, and Machon Schechter (in Jerusalem.)
Many Jews both inside and outside of this formal Conservative movement identify Conservative Judaism as a worldview which is significantly larger than the USCJ and RA. Sociologically and religiously, there is social and religious overlap between the USCJ, the Union for Traditional Judaism, and much of the Chavurah movement.[citation needed] A growing number of congregations which are not affiliated, but which identify themselves as "post-denominational," practice traditional Judaism while emphasizing equal roles for women, for example as prayer leaders.[20] Rabbis trained at JTS and the Ziegler School often serve these synagogues and chavurot, and members of these synagogues and chavurot often pray at, or are members of, USCJ synagogues[citation needed].

[edit] Notable figures

Bradley Shavit Artson - Dean of the Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies at the American Jewish University(formerly the University of Judaism), author, theologian, and public speaker
Ben Zion Bokser - Rabbi, halakhic expert, scholar, and community leader.
Elliot N. Dorff - Professor of philosophy at the American Jewish University(formerly the University of Judaism) professor, theologian, member of the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards
Arnold Eisen - Chancellor of the Jewish Theological Seminary
Shya Finestone - Shaare Zion Congregation Religious Affairs Committee (Canada)
Louis Finkelstein - Talmud scholar
Zecharias Frankel - founder of positive-historical Judaism.
Neil Gillman - Theologian, Philosophy Professor at Jewish Theological Seminary of America (JTS)
Louis Ginzberg - Talmud scholar and halakhic expert, early member of the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards
Robert Gordis - Rabbi, Theologian, Educator
Simon Greenberg Rabbi and Institution Builder
Judith Hauptman - JTS Talmud scholar
Jules Harlow - Primary liturgist of the Conservative movement
Abraham Joshua Heschel - Theologian and social activist
Louis Jacobs - Rabbi, founder of Masorti Judaism in the United Kingdom
Isaac Klein - Rabbi, expert in Jewish law, early member of the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards
Sheldon Levin - Former President of the CA, also former member of the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards
David Lieber- President Emeritus of the American Jewish University(formerly the University of Judaism), past President of the Rabbinical Assembly, Editor of the Etz Hayim Humash
Saul Lieberman - Talmud scholar at JTS
Aaron L. Mackler - Rabbi, Bioethicist, Theologian,Professor of Theology (Duquesne Univ.), member of the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards, Chair, Bioethics Subcommittee, former faculty, JTS Philosophy Department
Daniel S. Nevins - Dean of the JTS Rabbinical School, Halakhic Scholar.
Mayer E. Rabinowitz - JTS Talmud scholar, former member of the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards
Joel Roth - JTS Talmud scholar, former member of the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards
Solomon Schechter - Researcher, early leader of JTS, creator of the United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism
Mathilde Roth Schechter - Founder of the Women's League of Conservative Judaism and of Hadassah
Ismar Schorsch - Former chancellor of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America
Harold Schulweis - Rabbi in Los Angeles, theologian, founder of the Havurah movement and the Jewish World Watch
Gordon Tucker - Former Dean of Jewish Theological Seminary rabbinical school, part-time faculty member at JTS and member of Committee on Jewish Law and Standards, Senior Rabbi of Temple Israel Center in White Plains, New York
David Wolpe - Rabbi, author, public speaker in Los Angeles, California.
Samuel Schafler - Rabbi, historian, President of Hebrew College, Boston; Superintendent of the Board of Jewish Education, Chicago; Camp Ramah educational director
Mordecai Waxman, Rabbi of Temple Israel of Great Neck on Long Island. Responsible for opening dialogue between American Jews and The Vatican under Pope John Paul II in 1987 as chairman of the International Jewish Committee on Interreligious Consultations.


[edit] Criticism
Main article: Criticism of Conservative Judaism
Conservative Judaism has come under criticism from a variety of sources such as:

Orthodox Jews who question the movement's commitment to Halakha.
Conservative Traditionalists who criticize the Halakhic process when dealing with issues such as women in Judaism as well as homosexuality.
For more details on this topic, see Conservative Halakha.


Orthodox Jewish leaders vary considerably in their dealings with the Conservative movement and with individual Conservative Jews. Some Modern Orthodox leaders cooperate and work with the Conservative movement, while haredi ("ultra-Orthodox") Jews often eschew formal contact with Conservative Judaism, or at least its rabbinate.[21] From the Orthodox perspective, Conservative Jews are considered just as Jewish as Orthodox Jews, but they are viewed as misguided, consistent violators of halakha.[22]
Over the years, Conservative Judaism has experienced internal criticism. Due to halakhic disputes, such as the controversies over the role of women and homosexuality, some Conservative Talmudic scholars and experts in halakha have left the Jewish Theological Seminary and the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards.[23][24] and the seminary's former Chancellor, Rabbi Ismar Schorsch, complained of the movement's "erosion of [its] fidelity to Halacha ... [which] brings [it] close to Reform Judaism."[25]
In matters of marriage and divorce, the State of Israel relies on its Chief Rabbinate to determine who is Jewish; the Chief Rabbinate, following Orthodox practice, does not recognize the validity of conversions performed by Conservative rabbis and will require a Jew who was converted by a Conservative rabbi to undergo a second, Orthodox conversion to be regarded as a Jew for marriage and other purposes.

[edit] See also

Committee on Jewish Law and Standards
Keshet Rabbis
Rabbinical Assembly
Role of women in Judaism
Reform Judaism
Orthodox Judaism
Liberal Judaism


[edit] External links

American Jewish University
Additional reading
An intro to Conservative Judaism
The Rabbinical Assembly
The United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism
The Jewish Theological Seminary of America
The Masorti Movement
Standards for Congregational Practice
Principles of Masorti Judaism
The Core Principles of Conservative Judaism
What is Masorti Judaism?
Formulating Jewish Law For Our Time
A Guide to Jewish Religious Practice - Official work on Jewish law
The role of women in Conservative Judaism
United Synagogue Youth
Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies


[edit] References


^ Emet Ve-Emunah, Statement of Principles of Conservative Judaism, 2nd Printing, 1990
^ "In what Direction is the Conservative Movement Headed", Jewish News Weekly of Northern California, January 20, 2006
^ Masorti Movement in Israel
^ Assembly of Masorti Synagogues
^ The Conservative Movement in Judaism: Dilemmas and Opportunities, Daniel J. Elazar, Rela Mintz Geffen, SUNY Press, 2000
^ Beyond Dogma, Jerusalem Post Magazine, Feb 11, 2005
^ Conservative Judaism at a Crossroads: Pulse of the People, Wed. Aug 29, 2007, The Forward
^ 2005AjajFinal.indb
^ Cablecars/Inclines
^ Rabbi David J. Fine, Women and the Minyan, Committee on Jewish Law and Standards, Rabbinical Assembly, June 12, 2002.
^ Rabbis Elliot N. Dorff, Daniel S. Nevins, and Avram I. Reisner, Homosexuality, Human Dignity, & Halakhah, Committee on Jewish Law and Standards, Rabbinical Assembly, December 6, 2006.
^ "Conservative Jews Allow Gay Rabbis and Unions", The New York Times, December 7, 2006
^ http://www.haaretz.com/hasen/spages/1037251.html, Like in America
^ http://www.forward.com/articles/103796/ Coalition Seeks Overhaul of Conservative Movement, Anthony Weiss, March 10, 2009, Jewish Daily Forward
^ http://jta.org/news/article/2009/03/10/1003593/conservative-group-calls-for-greater-role-in-movements-future Conservative group calls for greater role in movement's future Ben Harris, March 10, 2009, JTA news
^ http://www.forward.com/articles/104010/ Conservative Shuls Hint They’ll Leave United Synagogue Absent Big Reforms, Anthony Weiss, March 16, 2009, Jewish Daily Forward
^ http://www.shefanetwork.org/shefajournal5769a.pdf "USCJ & the Future of Conservative Judaism" Shefa Journal 5769:1, Shevat 5769 / February 2009, The ShefaNetwork, Shefanetwork.org
^ Solomon Schechter, Studies in Judaism, First Series, 1896, Jewish Publication Society of America.
^ Masorti - About the Movement
^ Rosenthal, Rachel (2006). "What's in a name?". Kedma (Winter 2006). 
^ Cf. Responsa of Rabbi Moshe Feinstein
^ Avi Shafran, "The Conservative Lie", Moment, February 2001.
^ Avraham Weiss, "Open Orthodoxy! A Modern Orthodox Rabbi's Creed"PDF (766 KiB), Judaism, Fall 1997.
^ Conservative Jews Allow Gay Rabbis and Unions - New York Times
^ Jennifer Siegel, "Conservative Rabbi, in Swan Song, Warns Against Liberal Shift", The Jewish Daily Forward, March 24, 2006.



[edit] Bibliography

Conservative Judaism: An American Religious Movement. Marshall Sklare. University Press of America (Reprint edition), 1985.
Conservative Judaism: Our Ancestors To Our Descendants (Revised Edition), Elliot N. Dorff, United Synagogue New York, 1996
The Conservative Movement in Judaism: Dilemmas and Opportunities, Daniel J. Elazar, Rela Mintz Geffen, SUNY Press, 2000
Conservative Judaism: The New Century, Neil Gillman, Behrman House 1993
Halakha For Our Time: A Conservative Approach To Jewish Law, David Golinkin, United Synagogue, 1991
A Guide to Jewish Religious Practice, Isaac Klein, JTS Press, New York, 1992
Conservative Judaism in America: A Biographical Dictionary and Sourcebook, Pamela S. Nadell, Greenwood Press, NY 1988
Emet Ve-Emunah: Statement of Principles of Conservative Judaism, Ed. Robert Gordis, JTS, New York, 1988
Etz Hayim: A Torah Commentary, Ed. David Lieber, Chaim Potok and Harold Kushner, The Jewish Publication Society, NY, 2001
Jews in the Center: Conservative Synagogues and Their Members. Jack Wertheimer (Editor). Rutgers University Press, 2000.


[edit] Traditional-Egalitarian Judaism

Beyond Dogma, Jerusalem Post Magazine
Can anyone save Conservative Judaism from itself? The Jewish Journal of Greater Los Angeles
David Fine, Women and the Minyan, Committee on Jewish Law and Standards of the Rabbinical Assembly, OH 55:1, 2002PDF (194 KiB)


[edit] Observance of Conservative Jews

Conservative Leader Takes Heat for Standards Stance, Forward, March 2002


Eight Up: The College Years, Survey of Conservative Jewish youth from middle school to college. Ariela Keysar and Barry Kosmin








v • d • e

Jews and Judaism





Denominations

Schisms · Intra-Jewish relations · Orthodox (Haredi · Hasidic · Modern Orthodox) · Conservative · Reform · Reconstructionist · Jewish Renewal · Rabbinic · Karaite · Samaritan · Humanistic






Philosophy

Principles of faith · Chosen people · Eschatology · Ethics · Halakha · Holocaust theology · Kabbalah · Kashrut · Messianism · Minyan · Mussar Movement · Names of God · Seven Laws of Noah · Tzedakah · Tzniut






Religious texts

Tanakh (Torah · Nevi'im · Ketuvim) · Arba'ah Turim · Chumash · Kuzari · Midrash · Mishnah Berurah · Mishneh Torah · Piyyut · Rabbinic works · Shulchan Aruch · Siddur · Talmud · Tosefta · Zohar






Jewish leadership

Abraham · Isaac · Jacob · Sarah · Rebecca · Rachel · Leah · Moses · Deborah · Ruth · David · Solomon · Elijah · Hillel · Shammai · Judah haNasi · Saadia Gaon · Rashi · Isaac Alfasi · Abraham ibn Ezra · Tosafists · Rambam · Nahmanides · Asher ben Jehiel · Gersonides · Joseph Albo · Yosef Karo · Baal Shem Tov · Shneur Zalman of Liadi · Vilna Gaon · Leopold Zunz · Israel Jacobson · Abraham Geiger · Ben Ish Chai · Avrohom Mordechai Alter · Ovadia Yosef · Moshe Feinstein · Elazar Shach · Menachem Schneerson






Life and culture

Who is a Jew? · Bar and Bat Mitzvah · Bereavement · Brit milah · Etymology of the word Jew · Marriage · Wedding · Niddah · Pidyon haben · Secular Jewish culture · Hiloni · Shidduch · Zeved habat






Roles and places

Four Holy Cities (Jerusalem · Safed · Hebron · Tiberias) · Beth din · Gabbai · Hazzan · Kohen · Maggid · Mashgiach · Mikvah · Mohel · Rabbi · Rebbe · Rosh yeshiva · Synagogue · Temple · Tabernacle · Western Wall






Religious articles

Aleinu · Amidah · Four Species · Gartel · Hallel · Havdalah · Kaddish · Kittel · Kol Nidre · Ma Tovu · Menorah (Hanukiah) · Mezuzah · Prayer · Sefer Torah · Services · Shema Yisrael · Shofar · Tallit · Tefillin · Tzitzit · Yad · Kippah/Yarmulke






Other religions

Jewish views of religious pluralism · Abrahamic religions · Christianity (Catholicism · Christian-Jewish reconciliation · Judeo-Christian · Mormonism) · Islam · Jewish Buddhist · Judeo-Paganism · Others






Languages

Hebrew · Judeo-Arabic · Judeo-Aramaic · Judeo-Persian · Ladino · Yiddish






History

Ancient · Temple in Jerusalem · Babylonian captivity · Jerusalem (Significance · Timeline) · Hasmonean · Herod · Sanhedrin · Pharisees · Saducees · Essenes · First Jewish-Roman War · Bar Kokhba revolt · Diaspora · Middle Ages · Muslim rule · Sabbateans · Haskalah · Emancipation · The Holocaust · Aliyah · Israel (History) · Arab-Israeli / Israeli-Palestinian conflicts · Land of Israel · Baal teshuva movement · Judaism by country






Politics

Zionism (General · Labor · Religious · Revisionist) · Political movements (Jewish left · Jewish right · Jewish anarchism) · General Jewish Labor Union · World Agudath Israel · Feminism · Politics of Israel






Antisemitism

History · Persecution · New · Racial · Religious · Secondary













v • d • e

Major Articles in Conservative Judaism





Core articles

Conservative responsa - Conservative Halakha -






Organizations

Leadership Council of Conservative Judaism - United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism - Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies - Jewish Theological Seminary of America - Schechter Institute of Jewish Studies - Rabbinical Assembly - Committee on Jewish Law and Standards - United Synagogue Youth - Kadima - Ravnet - Solomon Schechter Day School Association - American Jewish University (formerly University of Judaism) - Conservative Yeshiva - Masorti - Camp Ramah - Koach -






Related

Criticism of Conservative Judaism - more...









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservative_Judaism"
Categories: Conservative JudaismHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from November 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Français
Galego
Italiano
עברית
Lietuvių
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Русский
Slovenščina
Svenska
Türkçe
ייִדיש









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 17:13.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
