













Ghazal - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Ghazal";
		var wgTitle = "Ghazal";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "427926";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281879608;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Ghazal

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Music of Pakistan



Classical · Ghazal · Qawwali · Hamd · Pop · Filmi · Rock · Hip Hop



Media


Awards

Lux Style Awards · MTV Awards · Indus Music Awards · The Musik Awards



Charts

AAG 10 · The Musik Countdown



Festivals

All Pakistan Music Conference



Media

MTV Pakistan · Indus Music · The Musik · AAG



National
anthem

"Qaumi Tarana"



Regional folk styles


Balochi  · Dari  · Farsi  · Kashmiri  · Khowar  · Pastho  · Punjabi  · Saraiki  · Sindhi  · Hindko







The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. Please improve this article or discuss the issue on the talk page.


The ghazal (Arabic/Persian/Urdu: غزل; Hindi: ग़ज़ल; Punjabi: ਗ਼ਜ਼ਲ, غزل; Turkish: gazel) is a poetic form consisting of rhyming couplets and a refrain. Each line must share the same meter. A ghazal may be understood as a poetic expression of both the pain of loss or separation and the beauty of love in spite of that pain. The form is ancient, originating in 6th century pre-Islamic Arabic verse. It is derived from the Arabian panegyric qasida. The structural requirements of the ghazal are similar in stringency to those of the Petrarcan sonnet. In its style and content it is a genre which has proved capable of an extraordinary variety of expression around its central themes of love and separation. It is one of the principal poetic forms the Indo-Perso-Arabic civilization offered to the eastern Islamic world.
The ghazal spread into South Asia in the 12th century under the influence of the new Islamic Sultanate courts and Sufi mystics. Although the ghazal is most prominently a form of Urdu poetry, today, it is found in the poetry of many languages.
Ghazals were written by the Persian mystics and poets Jalal al-Din Muhammad Rumi (13th century) and Hafez (14th century), the Azeri poet Fuzuli (16th century), as well as Mirza Ghalib (1797–1869) and Muhammad Iqbal (1877–1938), who both wrote ghazals in Persian and Urdu. Through the influence of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832), the ghazal became very popular in Germany in the 19th century, and the form was used extensively by Friedrich Rückert (1788–1866) and August von Platen (1796–1835). The Kashmiri-American poet Agha Shahid Ali was a proponent of the form, both in English and in other languages; he edited a volume of "real ghazals in English".
In some ghazals the poet's name is featured somewhere in the last verse.




Contents


1 Pronunciation
2 Details of the form
3 Themes

3.1 Illicit unattainable love
3.2 In the context of Sufism


4 Important poets of Urdu ghazal
5 Translations and Performance of Classical ghazal
6 Ghazal and its popularity
7 Western context: English-language ghazal

7.1 Ghazals composed in English by notable poets


8 Ghazal singers
9 Notes
10 References
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Pronunciation
The Arabic word غزل (ġazal) is pronounced [ˈɣazal], roughly like the English word guzzle, but with the first, g-like consonant pronounced as a voiced velar fricative, i.e. without a complete closure between the tongue and the soft palate. In South Asia, the name itself sounds exotic, as the voiced velar fricative is not found in native Indic words. In English, the word is often pronounced /ˈɡæzæl/[1] or /ˈɡʌzʌl/[2].

[edit] Details of the form



Part of a series on Islamic Culture




Architecture



Arab · Azeri
Indo-Islamic · Iwan
Moorish · Moroccan · Mughal
Ottoman · Persian
Sudano-Sahelian · Tatar



Art



Calligraphy · Miniature · Rugs



Dance



Sema · Whirling



Dress



Abaya · Agal · Boubou
Burqa · Chador · Jellabiya
Niqab · Salwar kameez · Taqiya
Thawb · Jilbāb · Hijab



Holidays



Ashura · Arba'een · al-Ghadeer
Chaand Raat · al-Fitr · al-Adha
Imamat Day · al-Kadhim
New Year · Isra and Mi'raj
al-Qadr · Mawlid · Ramadan
Mugham · Mid-Sha'ban



Literature



Arabic · Azeri · Bengali
Indonesian · Javanese · Kashmiri
Kurdish · Persian · Sindhi · Somali
South Asia · Turkish · Urdu



Music


Dastgah · Ghazal · Madih nabawi
Maqam · Mugham · Nasheed
Qawwali



Theatre



Karagöz and Hacivat · Ta'zieh





Islam Portal
 v • d • e 




A ghazal is composed of couplets, five or more.
The second line of each couplet (or sher) in a ghazal usually ends with the repetition of a refrain of one or a few words, known as a radif (pronounced Radeef), preceded by a rhyme known as the qaafiyaa. In Arabic, Persian and Turkic the couplet is termed a bayt and the line within the bayt is called a misra. In the first couplet, which introduces the theme, both lines end in the rhyme and refrain so that the ghazal's rhyme scheme is AA BA CA etc
There can be no enjambement across the couplets in a strict ghazal; each couplet must be a complete sentence (or several sentences) in itself.
All the couplets, and each line of each couplet, must share the same meter.
Ghazal is simply the name of a form, and is not language-specific. Ghazals also exist, for example in the Pashtu, Kashmiri, Gujarati and Marathi languages.
In South Asian languages some ghazals do not have any radif. This is, however, rare. Such ghazals are called "ġair-muraddaf" ghazal. The pre-Islamic Arabian qasida was in monorrhyme; like the rest of the qasida the ghazal itself did not have a radif.
Although every sher may be an independent poem in itself, it is possible for all the shers to be on the same theme or even have continuity of thought. This is called a musalsal ghazal, or "continuous ghazal". The ghazal "chupke chupke raat din aasUU bahaanaa yaad hai" is a famous example of a musalsal ghazal.
In modern Urdu poetry, there are a few ghazals which do not follow the restriction that the same beher must be used in both the lines of a sher. But even in these ghazals, qaafiyaa and, usually, radif are present.
By placing his or her takhallus in the final sher or maqtaa the poet traditionally attempted to secure credit for his or her work. Poets often made elegant use of their takhallus in the maqta. However, some modern ghazals do not have a maqtaa. The name of the poet shaayar is sometimes placed in the last sher of the ghazal.


[edit] Themes

[edit] Illicit unattainable love
The ghazal not only has a specific form, but traditionally deals with just one subject: Love. And not any kind of love, but specifically, an illicit and unattainable love. The subcontinental ghazals have an influence of Islamic Mysticism and the subject of love can usually be interpreted for a higher being or for a mortal beloved. The love is always viewed as something that will complete a human being, and if attained will lift him or her into the ranks of the wise, or will bring satisfaction to the soul of the poet. Traditional ghazal love may or may not have an explicit element of sexual desire in it, and the love may be spiritual. The love may be directed to a man or a woman.
The ghazal is always written from the point of view of the unrequited lover whose beloved is portrayed as unattainable. Most often either the beloved does not return the poet's love or returns it without sincerity, or else the societal circumstances do not allow it. The lover is aware and resigned to this fate but continues loving nonetheless; the lyrical impetus of the poem derives from this tension. Representations of the lover's powerlessness to resist his feelings often include lyrically exaggerated violence. The beloved's power to captivate the speaker may be represented in extended metaphors about the "arrows of his eyes", or by referring to the beloved as an assassin or a killer. Take for example the following couplets from Amir Khusro's Persian ghazal Nami danam chi manzil buud shab:

Nami-danam chi manzil buud shab jaay ki man buudam; Baharsu raqs-e bismil buud shab jaay ki man buudam. Pari paikar nigaar-e sarw qadde laala rukhsare; Sarapa aafat-e dil buud shab jaay ki man buudam.
I wonder what was the place where I was last night,
All around me were half-slaughtered victims of love, tossing about in agony.
There was a nymph-like beloved with cypress-like form and tulip-like face,
Ruthlessly playing havoc with the hearts of the lovers.

(translated by S.A.H. Abidi)


[edit] In the context of Sufism
It is not possible to get a full understanding of ghazal poetry without at least being familiar with some concepts of Sufism. All the major historical post-Islamic ghazal poets were either avowed Sufis themselves (like Rumi or Hafiz), or were sympathizers with Sufi ideas. Most ghazals can be viewed in a spiritual context, with the Beloved being a metaphor for God, or the poet's spiritual master. It is the intense Divine Love of sufism that serves as a model for all the forms of love found in ghazal poetry.
Most ghazal scholars today recognize that some ghazal couplets are exclusively about Divine Love (ishq-e-haqiqi), others are about "earthly love" (ishq-e-majazi), but many of them can be interpreted in either context.
Traditionally invoking melancholy, love, longing, and metaphysical questions, ghazals are often sung by Iranian, Afghan, Pakistani, and Indian musicians. The form has roots in seventh-century Arabia, and gained prominence in the thirteenth- and fourteenth-century thanks to such Persian poets as Rumi and Hafiz. In the eighteenth-century, the ghazal was used by poets writing in Urdu, a mix of the medieval languages of Northern India, including Persian. Among these poets, Ghalib is the recognized master.

[edit] Important poets of Urdu ghazal
In Urdu some important and respected ghazal poets are Wali, Mir Taqi Mir, Mirza Rafi Sauda, Mirza Ghalib, Zauq, Dard, Daagh, Iqbal, and Jigar Moradabadi. Post-partition poets include Firaq Gorakhpuri, Majrooh Sultanpuri, Faiz Ahmed Faiz, Shakeb Jalali, Parveen Shakir , Qamar Jalalabadi, Ahmed Faraz, Makhdoom Mohiuddin, Sahir Ludhianvi, Nida Fazli, Gulzar,Jaun Elia

[edit] Translations and Performance of Classical ghazal
Enormous collections of ghazal have been created by hundreds of well-known poets over the past thousand years in Persian, Turkish, and Urdu, as well as in the Central Asian Turkic languages. Ghazal poems are performed in Uzbek-Tajik Shashmakom, Turkish Makam, Persian Dastgah and Uyghur Muqam. There are many published translations from Persian and Turkish by Annemarie Schimmel, Arthur John Arberry, and many others.
Ghazal "Gayaki", the Urdu art of performing the classical ghazal in singing, is very old. Singers like Ustad Barkat Ali and many other singers in the past used to practice it, but due to the lack of historical records, many names are anonymous. It was with Begum Akhtar, and later on Ustad Mehdi Hassan, that classical rendering of ghazals became popular amongst the masses. The categorization of ghazal singing as a form of "light classical" music is a misconception. Classical ghazals are difficult to render because of the varying moods of the "shers" or couplets in the ghazal. Begum Akhtar, Mehdi Hassan, Farida Khanum, and Ustad Ghulam Ali have been popular classical ghazal singers.

[edit] Ghazal and its popularity
Because of the complexity of the words, only people of the upper class had the education to understand the ghazal. The common masses could not understand most of the lyrics and the traditional classical raagas they were rendered in were also difficult to understand. The ghazal has undergone some transformations which help it to reach a larger audience around the world. The simplification of the ghazal in terms of the words and phrases helps the masses to enjoy it. Most of the ghazals are now sung with various styles which are not limited to 'khayaal', 'thumri', 'raaga', 'taala' and other classical and light classical genres. However, these forms of the ghazal are looked down on by purists of the Indian Classical tradition. Singers like Jagjit Singh (he was the first ghazal singer to incorporate the Western guitar in ghazals),Ahmed hussain Mohd. hussain ,Hariharan, Pankaj Udhas and many others have been able to give a new shape to the ghazal by incorporating elements of modern music into it. Another young Canadian talent, Cassius Khan has also been hailed as the only classical ghazal singer in the world who can accompany himself on the tabla. He is also capable of singing in the recitational style of ghazal singing while playing the tabla, which is unique.

[edit] Western context: English-language ghazal
After nearly a century of "false starts" -- that is, early experiments by James Clarence Mangan, James Elroy Flecker, Adrienne Rich, Phyllis Webb., etc., many of which did not adhere wholly or in part to the traditional principles of the form, experiments dubbed as "the bastard ghazal"[3] -- , the ghazal finally began to be recognized as a viable closed form in English-language poetry sometime in the early to mid 1990s. This came about largely as a result of serious, true-to-form examples being published by noted American poets John Hollander, W. S. Merwin and Elise Paschen, as well as by acclaimed Kashmiri-American poet Agha Shahid Ali (d. 2001), who had been teaching and spreading word of the ghazal at various American universities over the previous two decades. Ali, it is worth noting, had also published by this time a collection (The Rebel's Silhouette) of translations of the legendary Urdu poet Faiz Ahmed Faiz (b. 1911, d. 1984), and although the selected poems were presented in English in a free verse style, their romantic and revolutionary-Marxist sociopolitical impact was not entirely lost upon Western readers.
Recognizing the growing interest, in 1996 Ali decided to compile and edit the world's first anthology of English-language ghazals. Finally published by Wesleyan University Press in 2000, Ravishing DisUnities: Real Ghazals in English served as material proof that the ghazal had indeed finally arrived in the English-speaking Western world. (Still fewer than one in ten of the ghazals collected in "Real Ghazals in English" observe the constraints of the form.) Sadly, succumbing to brain cancer in December 2001, Ali did not live long enough to witness the book's full impact and further evolution of the Western ghazal.
Much of the ghazal's English-language evolution in the years subsequent to Ali's death can be seen in or traced to the work of R. W. Watkins and Gene Doty (also known as Gino Peregrini). Watkins, a rather controversial enfant terrible on the fringes of avant-garde Canadian poetry, launched Contemporary Ghazals, the world's first English-language poetry journal dedicated exclusively to the ghazal, in the spring of 2003. Four years before that, Doty introduced The Ghazal Page, a website dedicated to the verse form in English. Both have done much to advance the Western ghazal, publishing many new and seasoned practitioners alike, critical essays and articles, and translations or adaptations of classic Persian and Urdu ghazals.
Other notable English-language poets currently working in the ghazal form include Marcyn Del Clements, R. L. Kennedy, Teresa M. Pfeifer, Taylor Graham, and Denver Butson. Also, vocalist and poet Paula Jeanine explores the ghazal musically in her project, American Ghazal.
A ghazal is composed of couplets, five or more. The couplets may have nothing to do with one another, except for the formal unity derived from a strict rhyme and rhythm pattern.
A ghazal in English which observes the traditional restrictions of the form:

Where are you now? Who lies beneath your spell tonight?
Whom else from rapture’s road will you expel tonight?
Those “Fabrics of Cashmere--“ ”to make Me beautiful--“
“Trinket”-- to gem– “Me to adorn– How– tell”-- tonight?
I beg for haven: Prisons, let open your gates–
A refugee from Belief seeks a cell tonight.
God’s vintage loneliness has turned to vinegar–
All the archangels– their wings frozen– fell tonight.
Lord, cried out the idols, Don’t let us be broken
Only we can convert the infidel tonight.
Mughal ceilings, let your mirrored convexities
multiply me at once under your spell tonight.
He’s freed some fire from ice in pity for Heaven.
He’s left open– for God– the doors of Hell tonight.
In the heart’s veined temple, all statues have been smashed
No priest in saffron’s left to toll its knell tonight
God, limit these punishments, there’s still Judgment Day–
I’m a mere sinner, I’m no infidel tonight.
Executioners near the woman at the window.
Damn you, Elijah, I’ll bless Jezebel tonight.
The hunt is over, and I hear the Call to Prayer
fade into that of the wounded gazelle tonight.
My rivals for your love– you’ve invited them all?
This is mere insult, this is no farewell tonight.
And I, Shahid, only am escaped to tell thee–
God sobs in my arms. Call me Ishmael tonight.
(Agha Shahid Ali)


[edit] Ghazals composed in English by notable poets

Agha Shahid Ali, "Ghazal ('...exiles')"
Douglas Barbour, Breath Takes (Wolsak and Wynn), 2001.
Denver Butson, "Drowning Ghazals (1, 2 & 3)", "Four Drowning Ghazals"
Robert Bly, The Night Abraham Called to the Stars and My Sentence Was a Thousand Years of Joy
Gabrielle Calvocoressi, "Backdrop"
Marcyn del Clements, "Night"
Noel Cobb, "Falling out of the Skin and into the Soul"
Lorna Crozier, "Bones in Their Wings"
William Dennis, "Lunar Ruin", "Brim-Full Again",
Gene Doty (also known as Gino Peregrini), "Ghazal Spirit", "...silence"
Judith Fitzgerald, Twenty-Six Ways Out of This World (Oberon), 1999.
Suzanne Gardinier, "Today: 101 Ghazals" (2008)
Taylor Graham, "A Ghazal of Gardens", "Almost Every Day Now"
Thomas Hardy, "The Mother Mourns"
Jim Harrison, Outlyer and Ghazals (Touchstone), 1971
John Hollander, "Ghazal On Ghazals"
R. L. Kennedy, "Memphis Jazz"
Maxine Kumin, "On the Table"
Marilyn Krysl, "Ghazals for the Turn of the Century"
W. S. Merwin, "The Causeway"
William Matthews, "Guzzle", "Drizzle"
Elise Paschen, "Sam's Ghazal"
Teresa M. Pfeifer, "In Open Meadow"
Robert Pinsky, "The Hall"
Spencer Reece, "Florida Ghazals"
Adrienne Rich, "Ghazals: Homage to Ghalib"
John Thompson, Stilt Jack (Anansi), 1978.
R. W. Watkins, "That Nice, Clean, Filthy Lucre", "Ghazal For Shahid"
Phyllis Webb, Water and Light: Ghazals and Anti Ghazals (Coach House), 1984.
Bill West, "Daybreak"
Bruce Williams, "End Without World"
John Edgar Wideman, "Lost Letter"


[edit] Ghazal singers
Some well-known ghazal singers are:

Rafique Shaikh
Yateesh M. Acharya
Salma Agha
Begum Akhtar
Najma Akhtar
Ghulam Ali
Malini Awasthi
Talat Aziz
Iqbal Bano
Munni Begum
Asha Bhosle
Sabri Brothers
Abhirup Chakrabarty
Hussain Bux Gullo
Hariharan
Mehdi Hassan
Anup Jalota





Ataullah Khan
Cassius Khan
Ghulam Abbas Khan
Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan
Ustad Sarwat Hussain Khan(Bhopal)
Late Ustad Rahat Ali Khan(Gorakhpur)
Farida Khanum
Runa Laila
Master Madan
Talat Mahmood
Lata Mangeshkar
Penaz Masani
Habib Wali Mohammad
Ustad Sakhawat Hussain Khan Nishat(Rampur)
Nayyara Noor
Noorjehan
Shishir Parkhie
Abida Parveen
Anuradha Paudwal
Malika Pukhraj




Alhaj Muhammad Owais Raza Qadri
Mohammad Rafi
Pt Vitthal Rao
Reshma
Rochana
Mohammad Hussain Sarahang
Mohammad Reza Shajarian
Bhupinder Singh & Mitali Singh
Chitra Singh
Jagjit Singh & Chitra Singh
Jasvinder Singh
Tahira Syed
Manhar Udhas
Pankaj Udhas
Ghanshyam Vaswani
Ahmad Wali
Kiran Ahluwalia




Many Indian and Pakistani film singers are famous for singing ghazals. These include:

Ghulam Abbas Khan
Asha Bhosle
Hariharan
Noor Jehan
Lata Mangeshkar
Srilekha Parthasarathy
K. L. Saigal


[edit] Notes

^ Oxford English Dictionary
^ Oxford BBC Guide to Pronunciation
^ That Bastard Ghazal


[edit] References

Agha Shahid Ali (ed.). Ravishing Disunities: Real Ghazals in English. ISBN 0-8195-6437-0.
Agha Shahid Ali. Call Me Ishmael Tonight: A Book of Ghazals. ISBN 0-393-05195-1.
Bailey, J. O. The Poetry of Thomas Hardy: A handbook and Commentary. ISBN 0-8078-1135-1
Doty, Gene (ed./sitemaster). The Ghazal Page; various postings, 1999--2006.
Faiz, Faiz Ahmed. The Rebel's Silhouette: Selected Poems. Translated by Agha Shahid Ali. University of Massachusetts Press, 1995.
Kanda, K.C., editor. Masterpieces of the Urdu Ghazal: From the 17th to the 20th Century. Sterling Pub Private Ltd., 1991.
Mufti, Aamir. "Towards a Lyric History of India." boundary 2, 31: 2, 2004
Reichhold, Jane (ed.). Lynx; various issues, 1996--2000.
Watkins, R. W. (ed.). Contemporary Ghazals; Nos. 1 and 2, 2003--2004.


[edit] External links

Ghazals Portal - Ghazals online Community


A Desertful of Roses The Divan-e Ghalib - in Urdu, with Devanagari and Roman transliterations. Also includes a collection of concise commentaries on each verse by well-known scholars, as well as other critical information.
Big collection of classical Urdu ghazals
The Ghazal Page, an online journal devoted to the ghazal in English.
Ghazalville A ghazal reading series in New York City.








v • d • e

Urdu poetry






Bait • Bait-ul-Ghazal • Beher • Diwan • Husn-E-Matla • Kalam • Kulyat • Maqta • Matla • Mavra • Misra • Mushaira • Qaafiyaa • Radif • Sher • Shayar • Shayari • Tah-Tul-Lafz • Takhallus • Tarannum • Triveni • Doha • Fard • Geet • Ghazal • Hamd • Hazal • Hijv • Kafi • Madah • Manqabat • Marsia • Masnavi • Munajat • Musaddas • Mukhammas • Naat • Nazm • Noha • Qasida • Qat'ã • Qawwali • Rubai • Salam • Sehra • Shehr a'ashob • Soz • Wasokht • Poets









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ghazal"
Categories: Poetic form | Arabic literature | Pakistani music | Ghazal | Persian literature | Urdu poetryHidden categories: Articles with limited geographic scope | Articles containing Hindi language text | Articles containing Punjabi language text | Articles containing Turkish language text | Articles containing Arabic language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Bosanski
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
हिन्दी
Italiano
മലയാളം
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
پښتو
Polski
Română
Русский
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
اردو









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 11:41.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
