













Simon Critchley - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Simon_Critchley";
		var wgTitle = "Simon Critchley";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "2767172";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 290977034;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Simon Critchley

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 

Simon Critchley

Western Philosophy
21st-century philosophy





Full name
Simon Critchley


School/tradition
Phenomenology, Deconstruction


Main interests
Politics, Ethics, Post-Religion, Psychoanalysis, Aesthetics




Influenced by
Plato, Aristotle, Rousseau, Kant, Hegel, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Husserl, Heidegger, Levinas, Lacan, Derrida, Laclau, Nancy




Simon Critchley (born February 27, 1960) is an English philosopher now teaching in the U.S., who works in continental philosophy, history of philosophy, literature, ethics and politics. Critchley argues that philosophy begins in disappointment, either religious or political. In many ways, these two axes of disappointment organize his published work. Religious disappointment raises the question of meaning and has to deal with the problem of nihilism. Political disappointment provokes the question of justice and raises the need for an ethics.




Contents


1 Academic career
2 Works

2.1 The Ethics of Deconstruction (1992)
2.2 Very Little... Almost Nothing (1997)
2.3 Ethics-Politics-Subjectivity (1999)
2.4 Continental Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction (2001)
2.5 On Humour (2002)
2.6 Things Merely Are (2005)
2.7 Infinitely Demanding (2007)
2.8 The Book of Dead Philosophers (2008)
2.9 On Heidegger’s Being and Time (2008)
2.10 Der Katechismus des Bürgers (2008)


3 References
4 The Critchley-Zizek debate
5 Selected bibliography

5.1 As editor


6 See also
7 Trivia
8 External links

8.1 Online writings
8.2 Interviews
8.3 Reviews







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Academic career
Critchley studied philosophy at the University of Essex in England (BA 1985, PhD 1988) and at the University of Nice in France (M.Phil. 1987). Among his teachers were Robert Bernasconi, Jay Bernstein, Frank Cioffi, Dominique Janicaud and Onora O'Neill. Critchley's M.Phil. thesis dealt with the problem of the overcoming of metaphysics in Martin Heidegger and Rudolf Carnap and his Ph.D. dissertation was on the ethics of deconstruction in Emmanuel Levinas and Jacques Derrida.
After a position as University Fellow at Cardiff University, Critchley was appointed Lecturer in Philosophy at the University of Essex in 1989, where he became Reader in 1995 and Professor in 1999. Also at the University of Essex, he was Director of the Centre for Theoretical Studies and collaborated closely with Ernesto Laclau.
Critchley was President of the British Society for Phenomenology from 1994-99. In 1997 and 2001, he held a Humboldt Research Fellowship in Philosophy at the University of Frankfurt. Between 1998-2004, Critchley was a Programme Director of the Collège international de philosophie, Paris. In 2006-7, he was a Scholar at the Getty Research Institute in Los Angeles.[1] Since 2004 he has been Professor of Philosophy at the New School for Social Research, New York. In addition, he has held visiting professorships at Nijmegen (1997), the Universities of Sydney (2000), Notre Dame (2002), Cardozo Law School in New York (2005), and Oslo (2006). In 2009, he was appointed a part-time Professor of Philosophy at Tilburg University in the Netherlands. (see Critchley's Tilburg Homepage)
Critchley is also Chief Philosopher with the International Necronautical Society, a semi-fictitious avant garde network that surfaces through publications, proclamations, denunciations and live events, which has been described by Untitled Magazine as “the most comprehensive total art work we have seen in years” [2] and by Art Monthly as “a platform for fantastically mobile thinking”.[3] He has collaborated closely with novelist Tom McCarthy on a number of projects, including the society's declaration on inauthenticity.[4]
See also the review of the Necronautical Society in the New York Review of Books [5], their joint publication on James Joyce[6], and their most recent event held at the Tate Britain where Critchley and McCarthy were played by actors.[7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14]









"Critchley" & "McCarthy"









INS Logo









Critchley Podium









McCarthy Podium






[edit] Works

[edit] The Ethics of Deconstruction (1992)
Critchley’s first book was The Ethics of Deconstruction: Derrida and Levinas (Blackwell, 1992), which became an acclaimed source on deconstruction and was the first book to argue for an ethical dimension to deconstruction. A second expanded edition was published in 1999 by Edinburgh University Press. Rather than being concerned with deconstruction in terms of the contradictions inherent in any text — an approach typical of the early Derrida and those in literary criticism aiming to extract a critical method for an application to literature — Critchley concerns himself with the philosophical context necessary for an understanding of the ethics of deconstructive reading.
Far from being some sort of value-free nihilism or textual free-play, Critchley showed the ethical impetus that was driving Derrida’s work. His claim was that Derrida’s understanding of ethics has to be understood in relation to his engagement with the work of Levinas and the book attempts to lay out the details of their philosophical confrontation.

[edit] Very Little... Almost Nothing (1997)
Critchley’s second book, Very Little... Almost Nothing (Routledge, 1997) develops in a very different direction and shows his concern with the relation between philosophy and literature and the problem of nihilism. A second edition with additional material and a new preface was published in 2004.
At the centre of "Very Little... Almost Nothing" is the problem of the meaning of life and what sense can be made of this problem in the absence of any religious belief. By way of a series of ‘lectures’ on Maurice Blanchot, Samuel Beckett, Stanley Cavell and romanticism, Critchley argues for a conception of meaninglessness understood as the achievement of the everyday, a view which, he thinks, redeems us from the need for religious redemption.

[edit] Ethics-Politics-Subjectivity (1999)
Ethics-Politics-Subjectivity (Verso, 1999) is a collection of essays that includes his debate with Richard Rorty, as well as series of essays on Derrida, Levinas, Jacques Lacan, Jean-Luc Nancy. These essays also show a political and psychoanalytic turn to Critchley’s thinking. A new edition will appear in Verso’s Radical Thinkers series.

[edit] Continental Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction (2001)
In Continental Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford University Press, 2001), is both an introduction to that tradition of thinking and an essay in meta-philosophy, which lays out the way in which Critchley sees the role of theory and reflection. It has been translated into nine languages. In the book, Critchley addresses the perennial question of the two major Western philosophical traditions, that of analytical philosophy and continental philosophy. Critchley tries to avoid sectarianism, and argues that the professional opposition between analytic and Continental philosophy is something that needs to be transcended. Critchley accepts that there is risk within continental philosophy of obscurantism, just as there is a risk of scientism in much analytic philosophy. But the primary purpose of philosophy, which to understand ourselves, our world and, as Hegel puts it, to comprehend one’s time in thought. Critchley offers the example of the ‘will of God’ as the prime example of obscurantism, but within continental philosophy also the ‘drives’ in Sigmund Freud, ‘archetypes’ in Carl Jung, the ‘real’ in Lacan, ‘power’ in Michel Foucault, ‘différance’ in Derrida, the ‘trace of God’ in Levinas, and the ‘epochal withdrawal of being in and as history’ in Heidegger.

[edit] On Humour (2002)
Since 2000, Critchley has turned his attention to what he calls ‘impossible objects’: humour, poetry and music. His On Humour (Routledge, 2002) continues the meditation on nihilism begun in Very Little…Almost Nothing; but he continues it in a very different key, analysing the meaning and importance of humour. Critchley argues that humour is an oblique phenomenology of ordinary bringing about a change of situation that exerts a powerful critical function. On Humour has been translated into 8 languages.

[edit] Things Merely Are (2005)
In Things Merely Are (Routledge, 2005), Critchley examines the relation between philosophy and poetry through an extended meditation on the poetry of Wallace Stevens. The book also contains Critchley’s essay on Terence Malick’s The Thin Red Line.

[edit] Infinitely Demanding (2007)
Infinitely Demanding (Verso, 2007) is a systematic overview of Critchley's philosophical position - ranging from phenomenological ethics, to political theory, and political analysis. Critchley argues for an ethically committed political anarchism. It is being translated into 5 languages. The book has led to some heated polemics, notably with Slavoj Zizek (See below, the Critchley-Zizek Debate).

[edit] The Book of Dead Philosophers (2008)
An extended defense of the idea that to philosophize is to learn how to die, The Book of Dead Philosophers was published by Granta in the UK, Vintage in the US and Melbourne University Press in Australia. It is being translated into 6 languages and has been on The New York Times Best-Seller List since March 8th, 2009.

[edit] On Heidegger’s Being and Time (2008)
This volume (Routledge, 2008) combines Reiner Schürmann's lectures at the New School for Social Research on Heidegger’s Being and Time with Critchley’s New School lectures on the relation between Heidegger and Husserl and his own interpretation of Being and Time. Where Critchley argues that we must see Being and Time as a radicalization of Husserlian phenomenology, Reiner Schürmann's proposal is to read Heidegger ‘backward’, arguing that Heidegger’s later work is the key to unraveling Being and Time. Critchley concludes the volume with an extended critique of Heidegger’s concept of authenticity.

[edit] Der Katechismus des Bürgers (2008)
This small volume on the problem of politics and religion was published in German. It is understood that an extended English version will appear in the future.

[edit] References


^ Religion and ritual drives scholarly pursuits for 2006-2007 academic year at the Getty Research Institute. September 12, 2006. Retrieved August 27, 2008.
^ How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb by Diana Baldon Summer 2004
^ Deathly Pursuits, profile of INS General Secretary, Tom McCarthy by Marcus Verhagen June 2004
^ The State of Authenticity by Peter Schwenger Fall 2007
^ Two Paths for the Novel by Zadie Smith November 20, 2008
^ Of Chrematology: Joyce and Money by Simon Critchley and Tom McCarthy 2003
^ Linda McCartney Vegetarian Sausages For Nicolas Bourriaud
^ International Necronautical Society (INS) delivers keynote declaration on Inauthenticity, Tate Britain
^ Tate Britain Press Release
^ Review in 3ammagazine
^ Real Inauthenticity from Anthem Magazine
^ Crackling Embers IV: Art’s Dirty Secret Redux (3AM Magazine)
^ The Matter of Past Loving London
^ Tate Triennial 2009 Prologue 4: Borders: Simon Critchley & Tom McCarthy - Declaration on Inauthenticity



[edit] The Critchley-Zizek debate

Critchley: Infinitely Demanding: Ethics of Commitment, Politics of Resistance (Verso, London & New York, 2007; ISBN 1844671216).
Zizek: Resistance Is Surrender in the London Review of Books.
T.J. Clark's and David Graeber's Responses in the London Review of Books.
Zizek's Response a letter in the London Review of Books.
Critchley's response, an article titled, "Crypto-Schmittianism" at state of nature.org
Zizek's In Defense of Lost Causes (Verso, London & New York, 2008), pp.337-350.
Critchley: "Violent Thoughts on Slavoj Zizek" in Naked Punch (Autumn 2008).


[edit] Selected bibliography

(1991) Re-Reading Levinas, ed. with Robert Bernasconi, Indiana University Press, Bloomington.
(1992) The Ethics of Deconstruction: Derrida and Levinas, Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, (2nd edition, 1999)
(1996) Deconstructive Subjectivities, ed. with Peter Dews, State University of New York Press, Ithaca, NY.
(1996) Emmanuel Levinas: Basic Philosophical Writings, ed. with Adriaan T. Peperzak and Robert Bernasconi, Indiana University Press, Bloomington.
(1997) Very Little... Almost Nothing: Death, Philosophy, Literature, Routledge, London & New York (2nd Edition, 2004).
(1998) A Companion to Continental Philosophy, ed. with William J. Schroeder, Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
(1999) Ethics-Politics-Subjectivity: Essays on Derrida, Levinas, and Contemporary French Thought, Verso, London (Reissued, 2007).
(2001) Continental Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford University Press.
(2002) The Cambridge Companion to Levinas, ed. with Robert Bernasconi, Cambridge University Press.
(2002) On Humour, Routledge, London.
(2004) Laclau, A Critical Reader, ed. with Oliver Marchart, Routledge, London.
(2005) On the Human Condition, with Dominique Janicaud & Eileen Brennan, Routledge, London.
(2005) Things Merely Are: Philosophy in the Poetry of Wallace Stevens, Routledge, London.
(2007) Infinitely Demanding. Ethics of Commitment, Politics of Resistance, Verso, London & New York.
(2008) The Book of Dead Philosophers, Granta Books, London; Vintage, New York; Melbourne University Press, Melbourne.
(2008) On Heidegger’s ‘Being and Time’, with Reiner Schürmann, edited by Steven Levine, Routledge, London and New York.
(2008) Der Katechismus des Bürgers, Diaphanes Verlag, Berlin.
(2008) Democracy and Disappointment: On the Politics of Resistance (DVD) - Alain Badiou and Simon Critchley in Conversation, Slought Books, Philadelphia.


[edit] As editor
Critchley has edited the following book series:

Thinking the Political (Routledge)
Blackwell Readings in Continental Philosophy (Blackwell)
Thinking in Action (Routledge)
How to Read... (Granta, London, and W.W. Norton, New York)


[edit] See also

deconstruction
deconstruction-and-religion
list of deconstructionists
necronauts


[edit] Trivia

Askmelissa.com How do you applaud the launch of Simon Critchley’s Book of Dead Philosophers? With a séance, of course! At least that’s how the Accompanied Literary Society chose to celebrate at an out-of-this-world party at Bobo.
Under the name of Critchley & Simmons, Critchley has produced a CD called Humiliation (2004) and a series of short films. This project was launched in an event at the Sydney Opera House in August 2004.
Critchley gave the name The Bleach Boys to a Hitchin based band previously known as The Fur Coughs.
Critchley himself played guitar in a number of North Hertfordshire bands including The Good Blokes and Social Class 5.


[edit] External links

Critchley's webpage at The New School for Social Research
Video of Critchley's Talk "Branding Democracy: Barack Obama and the American Void"
The Heights of Ecstasy - A Halloween Sermon on Self-Deification, Cabinet Magazine & Slought Foundation, October 31st, 2008
Critchley's "Book of Dead Philosophers" on New York Magazine's Approval Matrix
Philosopher’s Guide to NYC


[edit] Online writings

Cynicism We Can Believe In Op-Ed piece in The New York Times
Back to the Great Outdoors Review of Quentin Meillassoux's After Finitude for The Times Literary Supplement
The American Void
Oscar Wilde's Faithless Christianity
What’s Left After Obama?
Crypto-Schmittianism
The Problem of Hegemony
Calm: On Terrence Malick's The Thin Red Line
Ethics, Politics and Radical Democracy - The History of a Disagreement
I Want to Die, I Hate my Life - Phaedra's Malaise
Of Chrematology: Joyce and Money with Tom McCarthy
Philosophy in Germany with Axel Honneth
Demanding Approval: On the Ethics of Alain Badiou
Obituary for Emmanuel Levinas
Obituary for Dominique Janicaud
A Heroism of the Decision, a Politics of the Event


[edit] Interviews

Nihilism, Punk and the International Necronautical Society: an interview with Simon Critchley in 3AM Magazine
Philosophy in the Boudoir and the Streets: An Interview with Simon Critchley in Ephemera: Theory and Politics in Organization
Living With Music: A Playlist by Simon Critchley Interview with PaperCuts Blog for The New York Times
10 Ideas Video Interviews for Big Think
Author Sums Up Philosophers' Thoughts On Death Audio Interview for NPR's All Things Considered
Video Interview for Swedish Television (VIASAT)
Revista
Krisis
Podularity
The Believer
Culture Wars
3AM magazine
The Necronautical Society


[edit] Reviews

Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for Kansas City.com
Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in The Telegraph (Calcutta, India)
Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' by Lewis Lapham - Harper's Magazine, May 2009
Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for Christiantoday.com
On the Death of Med-Tech — and the Fear of Dying Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for Medical Device Daily Perspectives.com
Invitaciones a la filosofía Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in El Pais
A Sunny Look At Death Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in Forbes Magazine
Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for Christiantoday.com
What's the Meaning of Life? Turn to the Last Page Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for The Washington Post
Mike Tyson, Naomi Campbell Meet 50-Foot Lady, Dead Philosophers Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for Bloomberg.com
Don’t Fear the Reaper Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for TheSecondPass.com
The Dead Philosopher's Society Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for TheDay.com
Kunsten a do Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for DN Magasinet
Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for The San Francisco Chronicle
Notable books: 'Dead Philosophers' Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for Azcentral.com
Let Death Change Your Life Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for Salon.com
Cazan los hombres, hablan las bestias Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in El Pais
Lecciones filosóficas de la muerte Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in La Nacion
Exit Wisely Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in The New York Observer
Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for Blogcritics.com
Dead Head - Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in Time Out New York
Death: Bad? - Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in The New York Times
Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for Playbackstl.com
Simon Critchley Explains What Happens After We Die - Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for Flavorwire.com
Dead Books, Dead Bodies - Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for Bookslut
Best of the Month: February - Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' for Amazon.com
New in Paperback - Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in USA Today
De Profundis - Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in El Pais
New in Paperback - Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in January Magazine
Dying and Death: When You Sort It Out, What’s It All About, Diogenes? - Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in The New York Times
Death and Praxis - Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in VeryShortList.com
Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in Booklist
Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in Biblioklept
Nonfiction Reviews Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in Publisher's Weekly
Books of the year 2008 Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in New Statesman
Has Bad Philosophy Killed the Booker Prize? - Comments on Simon Critchley' in The Guardian
Famous Last Words: Notes from the Philosophers' Graveyard - Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in New Statesman
Laugh, If Your Death Mask Will Allow It - Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in The Daily Telegraph
Simon Critchley's Top 10 Philosophers' Deaths - On 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in The Guardian
Mortality Tales Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in The Financial Times
With Their Boots On Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in The New Yorker
Laughing At the Last Things Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in The Irish Times
The Small Matters of Life and Death Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in The Age
Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' in M/C Reviews
Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' - in The Independent
Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' - in New Humanist
Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' - in The Guardian
Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' - in The Australian
Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' - in The Time Out New York
Review of 'The Book of Dead Philosophers' - in The Philosopher's Magazine




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simon_Critchley"
Categories: 1960 births | Living people | 21st-century philosophers | Academics of the University of Essex | British philosophers | Deconstruction 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch









 This page was last modified on 19 May 2009, at 16:48 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
