













Marcel Proust - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Marcel_Proust";
		var wgTitle = "Marcel Proust";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "21018";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281738036;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Marcel Proust

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (October 2007)


"Proust" redirects here. For other uses, see Proust (disambiguation).


Marcel Proust





Born
10 July 1871(1871-07-10)
Auteuil, France


Died
18 November 1922 (aged 51)
Paris, France


Occupation
Novelist, essayist, critic


Genres
modernism


Notable work(s)
In Search of Lost Time







Influences






Saint-Simon, Brantôme, Honoré de Balzac, Charles Baudelaire, Anatole France, Henri Bergson, Fyodor Dostoevsky, John Ruskin, Leo Tolstoy, Arthur Schopenhauer, Stendhal, William Shakespeare















Influenced






Ahmet Altan, John Banville, Samuel Beckett, Jean Cocteau, Graham Greene, Jack Kerouac, Naguib Mahfouz, Manuel Mujica Láinez, Iris Murdoch, Vladimir Nabokov, Orhan Pamuk, Truman Capote, John Updike,[1] Edmund White, Virginia Woolf.










Valentin Louis Georges Eugène Marcel Proust (French pronunciation: [maʁsɛl pʁust]) (10 July 1871 – 18 November 1922) was a French novelist, essayist and critic, best known as the author of À la recherche du temps perdu (in English, In Search of Lost Time; earlier translated as Remembrance of Things Past), a monumental work of twentieth-century fiction published in seven parts from 1913 to 1927.




Contents


1 Biography
2 Early writing
3 In Search of Lost Time
4 Bibliography
5 See also
6 References
7 External links

7.1 Online texts







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography
Proust was born in Auteuil (the southern sector of Paris's then-rustic 16th arrondissement) at the home of his great-uncle, two months after the Treaty of Frankfurt formally ended the Franco-Prussian War. His birth took place during the violence that surrounded the suppression of the Paris Commune, and his childhood corresponds with the consolidation of the French Third Republic. Much of In Search of Lost Time concerns the vast changes, most particularly the decline of the aristocracy and the rise of the middle classes, that occurred in France during the Third Republic and the fin de siècle.
Proust's father, Achille Adrien Proust, was a prominent pathologist and epidemiologist, responsible for studying and attempting to remedy the causes and movements of cholera through Europe and Asia; he was the author of many articles and books on medicine and hygiene. Proust's mother, Jeanne Clémence Weil, was the daughter of a rich and cultured Jewish family from Alsace [2]. She was literate and well-read; her letters demonstrate a well-developed sense of humour, and her command of English was sufficient for her to provide the necessary impetus to her son's later attempts to translate John Ruskin.[3]
By the age of nine, Proust had his first serious asthma attack, and thereafter he was considered a sickly child. Proust spent long holidays in the village of Illiers. This village, combined with aspects of the time he spent at his great-uncle's house in Auteuil, became the model for the fictional town of Combray, where some of the most important scenes of In Search of Lost Time take place. (Illiers was renamed Illiers-Combray on the occasion of the Proust centenary celebrations).
In 1882, at the age of eleven, Proust became a pupil at the Lycée Condorcet but his education was disrupted because of his illness. Despite this he excelled in Literature receiving an award in his final year. It was his through his classmates that he was able to gain access to some of the salons of the upper bourgeoisie and this would be a major element of In Search of Lost Time [4].
Despite his poor health, Proust served a year (1889–90) as an enlisted man in the French army, stationed at Coligny Caserne in Orléans, an experience that provided a lengthy episode in The Guermantes' Way, part three of his novel. As a young man, Proust was a dilettante and a social climber, whose aspirations as a writer were hampered by his lack of application. His reputation from this period, as a snob and an amateur, contributed to his later troubles with getting Swann's Way, the first part of his large-scale novel, published in 1913.
Proust had a close relationship with his mother. In order to appease his father, who insisted that he pursue a career, Proust obtained a volunteer position at the Bibliothèque Mazarine in the summer of 1896. After exerting considerable effort, he obtained a sick leave that extended for several years until he was considered to have resigned. He never worked at his job, and he did not move from his parents' apartment until after both were dead.[3]




Grave of Marcel Proust at Père Lachaise Cemetery.


Proust, who was homosexual,[5] was one of the first European novelists to treat homosexuality openly and at length.
His life and family circle changed considerably between 1900 and 1905. In February 1903, Proust's brother Robert married and left the family home. His father died in November of the same year [6]. Finally, and most crushingly, Proust's beloved mother died in September 1905. She left him a considerable inheritance. (In US dollars circa 2006, the principal amount was worth about $6 million, with a monthly income of about $15,000). His health throughout this period continued to deteriorate.
Proust spent the last three years of his life mostly confined to his cork-lined bedroom, sleeping during the day and working at night to complete his novel. He died of pneumonia and a pulmonary abscess in 1922. He was buried in the Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.

[edit] Early writing
Proust was involved in writing and publishing from an early age. In addition to the literary magazines with which he was associated, and in which he published, while at school, La Revue verte and La Revue lilas, from 1890–91 Proust published a regular society column in the journal Le Mensuel. [3] In 1892 he was involved in founding a literary review called Le Banquet (also the French title of Plato's Symposium), and throughout the next several years Proust published small pieces regularly in this journal and in the prestigious La Revue Blanche.
In 1896 Les Plaisirs et les Jours, a compendium of many of these early pieces, was published. The book included a foreword by Anatole France, drawings by Mme. Lemaire, and was so sumptuously produced that it cost twice the normal price of a book its size.
That year Proust also began working on a novel which was eventually published in 1954 and titled Jean Santeuil by his posthumous editors. Many of the themes later developed in In Search of Lost Time find their first articulation in this unfinished work, including the enigma of memory and the necessity of reflection; several sections of In Search of Lost Time can be read in first draft in Jean Santeuil. The portrait of the parents in Jean Santeuil is quite harsh, in marked contrast to the adoration with which the parents are painted in Proust's masterpiece. Following the poor reception of Les Plaisirs et les Jours, and internal troubles with resolving the plot, Proust gradually abandoned Jean Santeuil in 1897 and stopped work on it entirely by 1899.


French literature


By category


French literary history



Medieval
16th century · 17th century
18th century · 19th century
20th century · Contemporary



French writers



Chronological list
Writers by category
Novelists · Playwrights
Poets · Essayists
Short story writers



France portal


Literature portal
This box: view • talk • edit



Beginning in 1895 Proust spent several years reading Carlyle, Emerson and John Ruskin. Through this reading Proust began to refine his own theories of art and the role of the artist in society. Also, in Time Regained Proust's universal protagonist recalls having translated Ruskin's Sesame and Lilies. The artist's responsibility is to confront the appearance of nature, deduce its essence and retell or explain that essence in the work of art. Ruskin's view of artistic production was central to this conception, and Ruskin's work was so important to Proust that he claimed to know "by heart" several of Ruskin's books, including The Seven Lamps of Architecture, The Bible of Amiens, and Praeterita.[7]
Proust set out to translate two of Ruskin's works into French, but was hampered by an imperfect command of English. In order to compensate for this he made his translations a group affair: sketched out by his mother, the drafts were first revised by Proust, then by Marie Nordlinger, the English cousin of his friend and sometime lover Reynaldo Hahn, then by Proust again finally polished. Confronted about his method by an editor, Proust responded, "I don't claim to know English; I claim to know Ruskin".[8] The Bible of Amiens, with Proust's extended introduction, was published in French in 1904. Both the translation and the introduction were very well reviewed; Henri Bergson called Proust's introduction "an important contribution to the psychology of Ruskin" and had similar praise for the translation.[3] At the time of this publication, Proust was already at work on translating Ruskin's Sesame and Lilies, which he completed in June 1905, just prior to his mother's death, and published in 1906. Literary historians and critics have ascertained that, apart from Ruskin, Proust's chief literary influences included Saint Simon, Montaigne, Stendhal, Flaubert, George Eliot, Fyodor Dostoevsky and Leo Tolstoy.
1908 was an important year for Proust's development as a writer. During the first part of the year he published in various journals pastiches of other writers. These exercises in imitation may have allowed Proust to solidify his own style. In addition, in the spring and summer of the year Proust began work on several different fragments of writing that would later coalesce under the working title of Contre Saint-Beuve. Proust described what he was working on in a letter to a friend: "I have in progress: a study on the nobility, a Parisian novel, an essay on Sainte-Beuve and Flaubert, an essay on women, an essay on pederasty (not easy to publish), a study on stained-glass windows, a study on tombstones, a study on the novel".[3]




Robert de Montesquiou, the inspiration for Baron de Charlus in À la recherche du temps perdu


From these disparate fragments Proust began to shape a novel on which he worked continually during this period. The rough outline of the work centered on a first-person narrator, unable to sleep, who during the night remembers waiting as a child for his mother to come to him in the morning. The novel was to have ended with a critical examination of Sainte-Beuve and a refutation of his theory that biography was the most important tool for understanding an artist's work. Present in the unfinished manuscript notebooks are many elements that correspond to parts of the Recherche, in particular, to the "Combray" and "Swann in Love" sections of Volume 1, and to the final section of Volume 7. Trouble with finding a publisher, as well as a gradually changing conception of his novel, led Proust to shift work to a substantially different project that still contained many of the same themes and elements. By 1910 he was at work on À la recherche du temps perdu.

[edit] In Search of Lost Time
Main article: In Search of Lost Time
Begun in 1909, À la recherche du temps perdu consists of seven volumes spanning some 3,200 pages and teeming with more than 2,000 literary characters. Graham Greene called Proust the "greatest novelist of the 20th century", and W. Somerset Maugham called the novel the "greatest fiction to date." Proust died before he was able to complete his revision of the drafts and proofs of the final volumes, the last three of which were published posthumously and edited by his brother, Robert.
The book was translated into English by C. K. Scott Moncrieff, appearing as Remembrance of Things Past between 1922 and 1931. Scott Moncrieff translated volumes one through six of the seven volumes, dying before completing the last. This last volume was rendered by other translators at different times. When Scott Moncrieff's translation was later revised (first by Kilmartin, then by Enright) the title of the novel was changed to the more literal In Search of Lost Time.
In 1995, Penguin undertook a fresh translation of the book by editor Christopher Prendergast and seven translators in three countries, based on the latest, most complete and authoritative French text. Its six volumes (comprising Proust's seven) were published in Britain under the Allen Lane imprint in 2002. The first four (those which under American copyright law are in the public domain) have since been published in the U.S. under the Viking imprint and in paperback under the Penguin Classics imprint.

[edit] Bibliography

1896 Les plaisirs et les jours ("Pleasures and Days")
1904 La Bible D'Amiens; a translation of Ruskin's The Bible of Amiens
1906 Sésame et les lys; a translation of Ruskin's Sesame and Lilies
1913–27 À la recherche du temps perdu (In Search of Lost Time, also Remembrance of Things Past)





Vol.
French titles
Published
English titles


1
Du côté de chez Swann
1913
Swann's Way
The Way by Swann's


2
À l'ombre des jeunes filles en fleurs
1919
Within a Budding Grove
In the Shadow of Young Girls in Flower


3
Le Côté de Guermantes
(published in two volumes)
1920/21
The Guermantes Way


4
Sodome et Gomorrhe
(published in two volumes)
1921/22
Cities of the Plain
Sodom and Gomorrah


5
La Prisonnière
1923
The Captive
The Prisoner


6
La Fugitive
Albertine disparue
1925
The Fugitive
The Sweet Cheat Gone
Albertine Gone


7
Le Temps retrouvé
1927
The Past Recaptured
Time Regained
Finding Time Again






1919 Pastiches et mélanges ("Mixtures")
1954 Contre Sainte-Beuve ("Against Sainte-Beuve")
1954 Jean Santeuil (unfinished)


[edit] See also

In Search of Lost Time
Involuntary memory
Proust Questionnaire
"Proust", an essay by Samuel Beckett


[edit] References


^ James Marcus, review of John Updike's Due Considerations (2007), 28 October 2007, "Updike [is] a self-proclaimed 'Proust-lover'" Link
^ http://www.literaryreview.co.uk/massie_10_07.html
^ a b c d e Tadié, J-Y. (Euan Cameron, trans.) Marcel Proust: A life. New York: Penguin Putnam, 2000.
^ Painter, George D. (1959)
^ White, Edmund (1999). "Marcel Proust". http://www.nytimes.com/books/first/w/white-proust.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-13. 
^ Carter, William C (2000)
^ (Tadié 350)
^ (Tadié)




Adorno, Theodor. "Prisms." The MIT Press: Cambridge, MA. 1967.
Aciman, André (2004) The Proust Project. New York Farrar, Straus and Giroux
Albaret, Céleste (Barbara Bray, trans.) 2003 Monsieur Proust. New York: The New York Review of Books
Bernard, Anne-Marie (2002) The World of Proust, as seen by Paul Nadar. Cambridge: MIT Press
Carter, William C. (2000) Marcel Proust: A Life. New Haven: Yale University Press
Davenport-Hines, Richard (2006) A Night at the Majestic. London: Faber and Faber ISBN 9780571220090
De Botton, Alain (1998) How Proust Can Change Your Life. New York: Vintage Books
Deleuze, Gilles (2004) Proust and Signs: The Complete Text. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press
Painter, George D (1959) Marcel Proust A Biography Vols. 1 & 2. London: Chatto & Windus
Shattuck, Roger (1963) Proust's Binoculars: A Study of Memory, Time, and Recognition in À la recherche du temps perdu. New York: Random House
Shattuck, Roger (2000) Proust's Way: A Field Guide To In Search of Lost Time, New York: W. W. Norton
Tadié, Jean-Yves: Marcel Proust: A Life. Viking, New York, 2000
White, Edmund (1998) Marcel Proust. New York: Viking Books



[edit] External links





This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links.



Find more about Marcel Proust on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

The Kolb-Proust Archive for Research
Marcel Proust, a personal site in Italian
Essay by Stephan Reimertz on Proust in Germany (in French)
Works by Marcel Proust in English, at Project Gutenberg Australia
Marcel Proust et l'aviation, Proust and airplanes.
Proust and Deleuze (Madrid)
Why Proust? And Why Now? - an essay on the lasting relevance of Proust and his work
Reading Proust- A reader enjoys the new Penguin/Viking translations of In Search of Lost Time.
TempsPerdu.com- links including to online texts of Lost Time in French and English
Marcel Proust's Album Proust receives a tribute in this album of "recomposed photographs"
Proust lu sur Internet : Le Baiser de la Matrice Web-film of the reading of "In Search of Lost Time" online, in French, by 4000 websurfers


[edit] Online texts

A la recherche du temps perdu, french text : Proust.tv
Works by Marcel Proust at Project Gutenberg French text of volumes 1-4 and Swann's Way in English translation
University of Adelaide Library French text of volumes 1-4 and the complete novel in English translation
Works by Marcel Proust (public domain in Canada)








v • d • e

The writings of Marcel Proust





Novels and essays

Les plaisirs et les jours · Pastiches et mélanges · Contre Sainte-Beuve · Jean Santeuil






Translations

La Bible D'Amiens (Ruskin's The Bible of Amiens) · Sésame et les lys (Ruskin's Sesame and Lilies)






In Search of Lost Time

Du côté de chez Swann · À l'ombre des jeunes filles en fleurs · Le Côté de Guermantes · Sodome et Gomorrhe · La Prisonnière · Albertine disparue · Le Temps retrouvé








Persondata


NAME
Proust, Marcel


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Proust, Valentin Louis Georges Eugène Marcel


SHORT DESCRIPTION
French Novelist, essayist


DATE OF BIRTH
10 July 1871


PLACE OF BIRTH
Auteuil, France


DATE OF DEATH
18 November 1922


PLACE OF DEATH
Paris, France





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcel_Proust"
Categories: 1871 births | 1922 deaths | People from Paris | 20th-century French writers | Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery | French essayists | French Jews | French novelists | Gay writers | LGBT writers from France | LGBT Jews | Prix Goncourt winnersHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations | Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Aragonés
مصرى
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kiswahili
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Монгол
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
Volapük
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 18:03.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
