











Mary I of Scotland - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Mary_I_of_Scotland";
		var wgTitle = "Mary I of Scotland";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "20603";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282297899;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["autoconfirmed"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 


wgOggPlayer.msg = {"ogg-play": "Play", "ogg-pause": "Pause", "ogg-stop": "Stop", "ogg-no-player": "Sorry, your system does not appear to have any supported player software.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload a player\x3c/a\x3e.", "ogg-player-videoElement": "Native browser support", "ogg-player-oggPlugin": "Browser plugin", "ogg-player-cortado": "Cortado (Java)", "ogg-player-vlc-mozilla": "VLC", "ogg-player-vlc-activex": "VLC (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-quicktime-mozilla": "QuickTime", "ogg-player-quicktime-activex": "QuickTime (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-totem": "Totem", "ogg-player-kaffeine": "Kaffeine", "ogg-player-kmplayer": "KMPlayer", "ogg-player-mplayerplug-in": "mplayerplug-in", "ogg-player-thumbnail": "Still image only", "ogg-player-selected": "(selected)", "ogg-use-player": "Use player:", "ogg-more": "More…", "ogg-download": "Download file", "ogg-desc-link": "About this file", "ogg-dismiss": "Close", "ogg-player-soundthumb": "No player", "ogg-no-xiphqt": "You do not appear to have the XiphQT component for QuickTime.\nQuickTime cannot play Ogg files without this component.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload XiphQT\x3c/a\x3e or choose another player."};
wgOggPlayer.cortadoUrl = "http://upload.wikimedia.org/jars/cortado.jar";
wgOggPlayer.extPathUrl = "/w/extensions/OggHandler";


.ogg-player-options {
	border: solid 1px #ccc;
	padding: 2pt;
	text-align: left;
	font-size: 10pt;
}
 <!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Mary I of Scotland

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"Mary, Queen of Scots" redirects here. For other uses, see Mary, Queen of Scots (disambiguation).


Mary I


Queen of Scots
Queen consort of France





Reign
14 December 1542 – 24 July 1567


Coronation
9 September 1543


Predecessor
James V


Successor
James VI


Spouse
Francis II of France
m. 1558; dec. 1560
Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley
m. 1565; dec. 1567
James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell
m. 1567; dec. 1578


Issue


James VI of Scotland & I of England


House
House of Stuart


Father
James V of Scotland


Mother
Mary of Guise


Born
8 December 1542
Linlithgow Palace, Linlithgow


Died
8 February 1587 (aged 44)
Fotheringhay Castle, Northamptonshire


Burial
Peterborough Cathedral; Westminster Abbey


Mary I (popularly known in the English-speaking world as Mary, Queen of Scots and, in France, as Marie Stuart) (8 December 1542 – 8 February 1587) was Queen of Scots from 14 December 1542 to 24 July 1567.
She was the only surviving legitimate child of King James V. She was six days old when her father died and made her Queen of Scots. Her mother, Mary of Guise, assumed regency and her daughter was crowned nine months later.
In 1558, she married Francis, Dauphin of France, who ascended the French throne as Francis II in 1559. However, Mary was not Queen of France for long; she was widowed by December 1560.
Soon after her husband's death, Mary returned to Scotland, arriving in Leith on 19 August 1561. Four years later, Mary remarried, choosing her first cousin, Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, as her second husband. Their union was not happy and following the birth of their son, James, on 19 June 1566, a plot was hatched to remove Darnley. In February 1567, an explosion occurred in the house at Kirk o'Field, and Darnley was found dead in the garden.
She soon married James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell - today, it is believed that she was forced into marriage. Mary was imprisoned in Loch Leven Castle on 15 June and forced to abdicate the throne in favour of her one-year-old son. After an unsuccessful attempt to regain the throne, Mary fled to England seeking protection from her father's first cousin, Queen Elizabeth I, whose kingdom she was to inherit. Elizabeth, however, ordered her arrest, because of threat of being deposed by Mary, who was considered the rightful ruler of England by English Catholics.
After a long period of custody in England, she was tried and executed for treason following her alleged involvement in three plots to assassinate Elizabeth and place herself on the English throne.




Contents


1 Heritage
2 Reign

2.1 The "Rough Wooing"
2.2 Childhood in France
2.3 Claim to the English throne
2.4 Religious divide
2.5 Marriage to Darnley


3 Abdication and imprisonment
4 Trial and execution
5 Aftermath
6 Legacy
7 Remains
8 Privy Council of Mary, 1561
9 Ancestry
10 In culture
11 See also
12 References
13 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Heritage
During the 15th century reign of Robert III of Scotland, it had been confirmed that the Scottish Crown would only be inherited by males in the line of Robert's children—all sons—who were listed in that parliamentary Act. Females and female lines could inherit only after extinction of male lines.
Mary ascended to the throne because, with the demise of her father, James V, Robert II had no remaining direct male descendants of unquestionably legitimate origins. John Stewart, Duke of Albany, grandson of James II of Scotland and at one time regent for the young James V, was the last direct male heir of Robert II (other than the king himself) when he died in 1536.
Mary was the first member of the royal House of Stuart to use the Gallicised spelling Stuart, rather than the earlier Stewart. Mary adopted the French spelling Stuart during her time in France, and her descendants continued to use it.[1]
Mary was born at Linlithgow Palace, Linlithgow, Scotland, on 8 December 1542 to King James V of Scotland and his French wife, Mary of Guise. A popular legend, written by John Knox, states that James, upon hearing of the birth of a daughter, ruefully exclaimed, "It came with a lass, it will pass with a lass!".[2] The House of Stewart, which originated in Brittany, had gained the throne of Scotland by the marriage of Marjorie Bruce, daughter of Robert the Bruce, to the high steward of Scotland. James thus felt that since the crown came with a woman, a woman would be responsible for the loss of the crown from their family. This legendary statement came true, when Sophia of Hanover, daughter of Elizabeth Stuart, became the heir to Anne of Great Britain and with her son George Louis of Hanover becoming King of Great Britain, replacing the House of Stuart in England.

Reign
The six or seven day old Mary became Queen of Scotland when her father died at the age of 30, probably from cholera,[2] although his contemporaries believed his death to have been caused by grief over the Scots' loss to the English at the Battle of Solway Moss. James Hamilton, 2nd Earl of Arran was the next in line for the throne after Mary; he acted as regent for Mary until 1554, when he was succeeded by the Queen's mother, who continued as regent until her death in 1560.
In July 1543, when Mary was six months old, the Treaties of Greenwich[3] promised Mary to be married to Edward, son of King Henry VIII of England in 1552, and for their heirs to inherit the Kingdoms of Scotland and England. Mary's mother was strongly opposed to the proposition, and she hid with Mary two months later in Stirling Castle, where preparations were made for Mary's coronation. At the age of nine months Mary was crowned Queen of Scots in the Chapel Royal at Stirling Castle on 9 September 1543. The ceremony, conducted in a hasty manner, was described as solemn with little rejoicing, and the pro-English party was conspicuously absent.[4]

The "Rough Wooing"
The Treaties of Greenwich fell apart soon after Mary's coronation. The betrothal did not sit well with the Scots, especially since Henry VIII suspiciously tried to change the agreement so that he could possess Mary years before the marriage was to take place. He also wanted them to break their traditional alliance with France. Fearing an uprising among the people, the Scottish Parliament broke off the treaty and the engagement at the end of the year. Henry then began his "rough wooing"[5] designed to impose the marriage to his son on Mary. This consisted of a series of raids on Scottish territory and other military actions. It lasted until June 1551, costing over half a million pounds and many lives. In May 1544, the English Earl of Hertford (later created Duke of Somerset by Edward VI) arrived in the Firth of Forth hoping to capture the city of Edinburgh and kidnap Mary, but Mary of Guise hid her in the secret chambers of Stirling Castle.




Mary, around the time of her wedding to Francis in 1558


On 10 September 1547, known as "Black Saturday", the Scots suffered a bitter defeat at the Battle of Pinkie Cleugh. Mary of Guise, fearful for her daughter, sent her temporarily to Inchmahome Priory, and turned to the French ambassador Monsieur D'Oysel for help.
The French, remaining true to the Auld Alliance, came to the aid of the Scots. The new French King, Henry II, was now proposing to unite France and Scotland by marrying the little Queen to his three-year old son, the Dauphin François. This seemed to Mary of Guise to be the only sensible solution to her troubles. In February 1548, hearing that the English were on their way back, Mary of Guise moved Mary to Dumbarton Castle. The English left a trail of devastation behind once more and seized the strategically located town of Haddington. By June, the much awaited French help had arrived. On 7 July with it the French Marriage Treaty was signed at a nunnery near Haddington.

Childhood in France




Mary (age 17) and Francis (age 15) shortly after Francis became king in 1559.


With her marriage agreement in place, five-year-old Mary was sent to France in 1548 to spend the next thirteen years at the French court. Henry II had offered to guard and raise her. On 7 August 1548, the French fleet sent by Henry II sailed back to France from Dumbarton carrying the five-year-old Queen of Scots on board. She was accompanied by her own little court consisting of two lords, two half-brothers, and the "four Marys", four little girls her own age, all named Mary, and the daughters of some of the noblest families in Scotland: Beaton, Seton, Fleming, and Livingston.




Coin of Francis II and Mary Stuart, 1558.


Vivacious, beautiful, and clever (according to contemporary accounts), Mary had a promising childhood. While in the French court, she was a favourite. She received the best available education, and at the end of her studies, she had mastered French, Latin, Greek, Spanish, and Italian in addition to her native Scots. She also learned how to play two instruments and learned prose, poetry, horsemanship, falconry, and needlework. She formed a close friendship with her future sister-in-law, Elisabeth of Valois, of whom Mary retained the most nostalgic memories in later life.[6]Her grandmother Antoinette de Bourbon exerted one of the strongest influences on her childhood,[7]and acted as one of her principal advisors.
Portraits of Mary show that she had a small, well-shaped head, a long, graceful neck, bright auburn hair, hazel-brown eyes, under heavy lowered eyelids and finely arched brows, smooth lustrous skin, a high forehead, and regular, firm features. While not a beauty in the classical sense, she was an extremely pretty child who would become a strikingly attractive woman. In fact, her effect on the men with whom she later came into contact was certainly that of a beautiful woman.[8]
Despite the fact that Mary was tall for her age (she attained an adult height of 5'11")[9] and fluent in speech, while Henry II's son and heir Francis was abnormally short and stuttered, Henry commented that "from the very first day they met, my son and she got on as well together as if they had known each other for a long time"[10] On 24 April 1558 Mary married the Dauphin Francis at Notre Dame de Paris, Francis assuming the title King consort of Scots. When Henry II died on 10 July 1559, Mary, Queen of Scots, became Queen consort of France; her husband becoming Francis II of France.




Mary's Arms as Queen of Scots and Queen consort of France



Claim to the English throne
Under the ordinary laws of succession, Mary was next in line to the English throne after her father's cousin, Elizabeth I, who was childless. In the eyes of many Catholics, Elizabeth was illegitimate, thus making Mary the true heir as Mary II of England. However the Third Succession Act of 1543 provided that Elizabeth would succeed Mary I of England on the throne.
The anti-Catholic Act of Settlement was not passed until 1701, but the last will and testament of Henry VIII, (given legal force by the Third Succession Act), had excluded the Stuarts from succeeding to the English throne. Mary's troubles were still further increased by the Huguenot rising in France, called le tumulte d'Amboise (6 March-17 March 1560), making it impossible for the French to help Mary's supporters in Scotland. The question of the succession was therefore a real one.
François died on 5 December 1560, of an ear infection which led to an abscess in his brain. Mary's mother-in-law, Catherine de' Medici, became regent for the late king's brother Charles IX, who inherited the French throne. Under the terms of the Treaty of Edinburgh, signed by Mary's representatives on 6 July 1560 following the death of her mother, France undertook to withdraw troops from Scotland and recognise Elizabeth's right to rule England. The 17-year-old Mary, still in France, refused to ratify the treaty.

Religious divide




Mary in mourning for Francis


Mary returned to Scotland soon after her husband's death and arrived in Leith on 19 August 1561. Despite her talents, Mary's upbringing had not given her the judgment to cope with the dangerous and complex political situation in the Scotland of that time.
Mary, being a devout Catholic, was regarded with suspicion by many of her subjects as well as by Elizabeth, who was her father's cousin and the monarch of the neighbouring Protestant country. Scotland was torn between Catholic and Protestant factions, and Mary's illegitimate half-brother, James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray, was a leader of the Protestant faction. The Protestant reformer John Knox also preached against Mary, condemning her for hearing Mass, dancing, dressing too elaborately, and many other real and imagined offences.
To the disappointment of the Catholic party, however, Mary tolerated the newly-established Protestant ascendancy, and kept James Stewart as her chief advisor. In this, she was acknowledging her lack of effective military power in the face of the Protestant Lords. She joined with James in the destruction of Scotland's leading Catholic magnate, Lord Huntly, in 1562 after he led a rebellion in the Highlands against her.[11]
Mary was also having second thoughts about the wisdom of having crossed Elizabeth, and attempted to make up the breach by inviting Elizabeth to visit Scotland. Elizabeth refused, and the bad blood remained between them. Mary then sent William Maitland of Lethington as an ambassador to the English court to put the case for Mary as a potential heir to the throne. Elizabeth's response is said to have included the words "As for the title of my crown, for my time I think she will not attain it." However, Mary, in her own letter to her maternal uncle Francis, Duke of Guise, reports other things that Maitland told her, including Elizabeth's supposed statement that, "I for my part know none better, nor that my self would prefer to her." Elizabeth was mindful of the role Parliament would have to play in the matter.
In December 1561 arrangements were made for the two queens to meet, this time in England. The meeting had been fixed for York "or another town" in August or September 1562, but Elizabeth sent Sir Henry Sidney to cancel in July because of the Civil War in France. In 1563, Elizabeth made another attempt to neutralize Mary by suggesting she marry Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester (Sidney's brother-in-law), whom Elizabeth trusted and thought she could control. Dudley, being a Protestant, would have solved a double problem for Elizabeth. She sent an ambassador to tell Mary that, if she would marry someone (as yet unnamed) of Elizabeth's choosing, Elizabeth would "proceed to the inquisition of her right and title to be our next cousin and heir". This proposal was rejected.

Marriage to Darnley




Mary with her second husband, Darnley






James Hepburn 4th Earl of Bothwell


At Holyrood Palace on 29 July 1565, Mary married Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, her half first cousin (The validity of this marriage has been disputed, as some say she was forced into it by Lord Darnley. However, the issue was not brought up during her lifetime). Henry was a member of the House of Stewart (or Stuart) like Mary was, but he was not an agnatic descendant of Stewart Kings, but rather of their immediate ancestors, the High Stewarts of Scotland. The union infuriated Elizabeth, who felt she should have been asked permission, as Darnley was an English subject. Elizabeth also felt threatened by the marriage, because both Mary and Darnley were claimants to the English throne, being direct descendants of Margaret Tudor, the elder sister of Henry VIII. Their children would inherit both parents' claims, and thus, be next in line for the English throne.
This marriage, to a leading Catholic, precipitated Mary's half-brother, the James Stewart, Earl of Moray, to join with other Protestant Lords in open rebellion. Mary set out for Stirling on 26 August 1565 to confront them, and returned to Edinburgh the following month to raise more troops. Moray and the rebellious lords were routed and fled into exile, the decisive military action becoming known as the Chaseabout Raid.
Before long, Darnley became arrogant and demanded power commensurate with his courtesy title of "King". On one occasion he attacked Mary in an unsuccessful attempt to cause her to miscarry their unborn child. Darnley was jealous of Mary's friendship with her private secretary, David Rizzio, and, in March 1566 Darnley allegedly entered into a secret conspiracy with the nobles who had rebelled against Mary in the Chaseabout Raid. On 9 March a group of the lords, accompanied by Darnley, murdered Rizzio in front of Mary while the two were in conference at Holyrood Palace. Darnley changed sides again and betrayed the lords, but the murder was the catalyst for the breakdown of their marriage.




Mary with her only son, James VI


Following the birth of their son, James, on 19 June 1566, a plot was hatched to remove Darnley, who was already ill (possibly suffering from syphilis)[12]. He was recuperating in a house in Edinburgh where Mary visited him frequently, so that it appeared a reconciliation was in prospect. In February 1567, an explosion occurred in the house at Kirk o'Field, and Darnley was found dead in the garden, apparently of strangulation; historian Alison Weir, however, concludes he died of post-explosion suffocation. This event, which should have been Mary's salvation, only harmed her reputation. James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell, an adventurer who would become her third husband, was generally believed to be guilty of the assassination, and was brought before a mock trial but acquitted. Mary attempted to regain support among her Lords while Bothwell got some of them to sign the Ainslie Tavern Bond, in which they agreed to support his claims to marry Mary.

Abdication and imprisonment




Mary in captivity, c. 1578


On 24 April 1567, Mary visited her son at Stirling for the last time. On her way back to Edinburgh Mary was abducted, willingly or not, by Bothwell and his men and taken to Dunbar Castle, where she was allegedly raped and mentally destroyed by Bothwell. She became pregnant with twins. On 6 May they returned to Edinburgh and on 15 May, at the Palace of Holyroodhouse, Mary and Bothwell were married according to Protestant rites. He had divorced his first wife, Jean Gordon twelve days previously.[13]
The Scottish nobility turned against Mary and Bothwell and raised an army against them. Mary and Bothwell confronted the Lords at Carberry Hill on 15 June, but there was no battle as Mary agreed to follow the Lords on condition that they let Bothwell go.[14] However, the Lords broke their promise, and took Mary to Edinburgh and imprisoned her in Loch Leven Castle, situated on an island in the middle of Loch Leven. Between 18 July and 24 July 1567, Mary miscarried the twins. On 24 July 1567, she was also forced to abdicate the Scottish throne in favour of her one-year-old son James.
On 2 May 1568, Mary escaped from Loch Leven and once again managed to raise a small army. After her army's defeat at the Battle of Langside on 13 May, she fled to England. When Mary entered England on 19 May, she was imprisoned by Elizabeth's officers at Carlisle. During her imprisonment, she famously had the phrase En ma Fin gît mon Commencement ("In my end is my beginning") embroidered on her cloth of estate.
Mary was moved to Bolton Castle on 16 July 1568 and remained there under the care of Henry the 9th Lord Scrope, until 26 January 1569, when she was moved to Tutbury Castle.
After some wrangling over the question of whether Mary should be tried for the murder of Darnley, Elizabeth ordered an inquiry instead of a trial, which was held in York between October 1568 and January 1569. The inquiry was politically influenced, but Elizabeth did not wish to convict Mary of murder.




Mary in captivity, c. 1580


Mary refused to acknowledge the power of any court to try her since she was an anointed Queen, and the man ultimately in charge of the prosecution, James Stewart, Earl of Moray, was ruling Scotland in Mary's absence. His chief motive was to keep Mary out of Scotland and her supporters under control. Mary was not permitted to see them or to speak in her own defence at the tribunal. She refused to offer a written defence unless Elizabeth would guarantee a verdict of not guilty, which Elizabeth would not do.
The inquiry hinged on the "Casket letters"— eight letters purportedly from Mary to Bothwell, reported by James Douglas, 4th Earl of Morton to have been found in Edinburgh in a silver box engraved with an F (supposedly for Francis II), along with a number of other documents, including the Mary/Bothwell marriage certificate. The authenticity of the Casket Letters has been the source of much controversy among historians. The originals have since been lost, and the copies available in various collections do not form a complete set. Mary argued that her handwriting was not difficult to imitate, and it has frequently been suggested either that the letters are complete forgeries, that incriminating passages were inserted before the inquiry, or that the letters were written to Bothwell by some other person. Comparisons of writing style have often concluded that they were not Mary's work.
However, in 1570, Elizabeth was persuaded by representatives of Charles IX of France to promise to help Mary regain her throne. As a pre-condition, she demanded the ratification of the Treaty of Edinburgh, something Mary would still not agree to. Nevertheless, William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley, continued negotiations with Mary on Elizabeth's behalf.
The Ridolfi Plot, which attempted to unite Mary and the Duke of Norfolk in marriage, caused Elizabeth to reconsider. With the queen's encouragement, Parliament introduced a bill in 1572 barring Mary from the throne. Elizabeth unexpectedly refused to give it the royal assent. The furthest she ever went was in 1584, when she introduced a document (the "Bond of Association") aimed at preventing any would-be successor from profiting from her murder. It was not legally binding, but was signed by thousands, including Mary herself.


Wikisource has original text related to this article:
A Letter to Sir Amyas Paulet


Mary eventually became a liability that Elizabeth could no longer tolerate. Elizabeth did ask Mary's final custodian, Amias Paulet, if he would contrive some accident to remove Mary. [1] He refused on the grounds that he would not allow such "a stain on his posterity." In 1569, Elizabeth's chief minister William Cecil had unofficially appointed one Sir Francis Walsingham to organize a secret service for the protection of the realm, particularly the Queen's person. Mary was thus implicated in a succession of plots.[15]
Elizabeth considered Mary's designs on the English throne to be a serious threat, and so eighteen years of confinement followed, much of it in Sheffield Castle and Sheffield Manor in the custody of George Talbot, 6th Earl of Shrewsbury and his redoubtable wife Bess of Hardwick. Bothwell was imprisoned in Denmark, became insane, and died in 1578, still in prison. In 1580 Mary's confinement was transferred to Sir Amias Paulet, and she was under his care for the rest of her life.

Trial and execution




Contemporary sketch of the execution


Mary was put on trial for treason by a court of about 40 noblemen, including Catholics, after being implicated in the Babington Plot and after having allegedly sanctioned the attempted assassination of Elizabeth. Mary denied the accusation and was spirited in her defence. One of her more memorable comments from her trial was "Remember Gentlemen the Theatre of history is wider than the Realm of England." She drew attention to the fact that she was denied the opportunity to review the evidence or her papers that had been removed from her, that she had been denied access to legal counsel, and that she had never been an English subject and thus could not be convicted of treason. The extent to which the plot was created by Sir Francis Walsingham and the English Secret Services will always remain open to conjecture.
In a trial presided over by England's Lord Chancellor, Sir Thomas Bromley.[16] and Attorney General Sir John Popham, (later Lord Chief Justice), Mary was ultimately convicted of treason, and was sentenced to beheading.
Although Mary had been found guilty and sentenced to death, Elizabeth hesitated to actually order her execution. She was fearful of the consequences, especially if, in revenge, Mary's son James of Scotland formed an alliance with the Catholic powers, France and Spain, and invaded England. She was also concerned about how this would affect the Divine Right of Kings. She went so far as to request that Paulet simply murder Mary, thus taking the matter out of her hands, and threw a tantrum when he refused.
She did eventually sign the death warrant and entrusted it to William Davison, a privy councillor. Later, the privy council, having been summoned by Lord Burghley without Elizabeth's knowledge, decided to carry out the sentence at once before she could change her mind.[17]
At Fotheringhay Castle, Northamptonshire, on 7th February 1587, Mary was told that she was to be executed the next day. She spent the last hours of her life in prayer and also writing letters and her will. She expressed a request that her servants should be released. She also requested that she should be buried in France. The scaffold that was erected in the great hall was three feet tall and draped in black. It was reached by five steps and the only things on it were a disrobing stool, the block, a cushion for her to kneel on, and a bloody butcher's axe that had been previously used on animals. At her execution the executioners knelt before her and asked forgiveness. According to a contemporary account by Robert Wynkfield, she replied that she forgave them, for "you are about to end my troubles!"[18] The executioners and her two servants helped remove a black outer gown, two petticoats, and her corset to reveal a deep red chemise—the liturgical colour of martyrdom in the Catholic Church. As she disrobed she smiled faintly to the executioner and said, "Never have I had such assistants to disrobe me, and never have I put off my clothes before such a company."[18] She was then blindfolded and knelt down on the cushion in front of the block. She positioned her head on the block and stretched her arms out behind her.








A 1895 reproduction of the historic scene, produced by Edison Manufacturing Co.


In Lady Antonia Fraser's biography, Mary Queen of Scots, the author writes that it took two strikes to decapitate Mary: The first blow missed her neck and struck the back of her head, at which point the Queen's lips moved. (Her servants reported they thought she had whispered the words "Sweet Jesus.") The second blow severed the neck, except for a small bit of sinew that the executioner severed by using the axe as a saw. Robert Wynkfield recorded a detailed account of the moments leading up to Mary's execution, also describing that it took two strikes to behead the Queen. Afterward, the executioner held her head aloft and declared, "God save the Queen." At that moment, the auburn tresses in his hand came apart and the head fell to the ground, revealing that Mary had very short, grey hair.[18] The chemise that Mary wore at her execution is displayed at Coughton Court near Alcester in Warwickshire, which was a Catholic household at that time.
It has been suggested that it took three strikes to decapitate Mary instead of two. If so, then Mary would have been executed with the same number of axe strikes as Essex. It has been postulated that said number was part of a ritual devised to protract the suffering of the victim.[19]




One of The London Dungeon's exhibitions is about Mary, Queen of Scots


There are several (possibly apocryphal) stories told about the execution. One already mentioned and thought to be true is that, when the executioner picked up the severed head to show it to those present, it was discovered that Mary was wearing a wig. The headsman was left holding the wig, while the late queen's head rolled on the floor.[18] It was thought that she had tried to disguise the greying of her hair by wearing an auburn wig, the natural colour of her hair before her years of imprisonment began. She was 24 when first imprisoned by Protestants in Scotland, and she was only 44 years of age at the time of her execution. Another well-known execution story related in Robert Wynkfield's first-hand account concerns a small dog owned by the queen, which is said to have been hiding among her skirts, unseen by the spectators. Because her dress and layers of clothing were so immensely regal, it would have been easy for the tiny pet to have hidden there as she slowly made her way to the scaffold. Following the beheading, the dog refused to be parted from its owner and was covered in blood. It was finally taken away by her ladies-in-waiting and washed.[18]

Aftermath
When the news of the execution reached Elizabeth she was extremely indignant, and her wrath was chiefly directed against Davison, who, she asserted, had disobeyed her instructions not to part with the warrant. The secretary was arrested and thrown into prison. He was later released, after paying a heavy fine, but his career was ruined.[17]
Not long after Mary's death, the Spanish Armada sailed to England to depose Elizabeth, but it sailed into a North Sea storm, was dispersed and then lost 5 ships in the Battle of Gravelines and retreated sailing around England and Ireland. (The traditional view that Mary's execution was the trigger for Spain sending the Armada is now disputed.)
Mary's body was embalmed and left unburied at her place of execution for a year after her death. Her remains were placed in a secure lead coffin (thought to be further signs of fear of relic hunting). She was initially buried at Peterborough Cathedral in 1588, but her body was exhumed in 1612 when her son, King James I of England, ordered she be reinterred in Westminster Abbey. It remains there, along with at least 40 other descendants, in a chapel on the other side of the Abbey from the grave of her father's cousin Elizabeth I. In the 1700s her tomb and that of Elizabeth were opened to try to ascertain where James I was buried; he was ultimately found buried with Henry VII.
In February 2008, a copy of the warrant for the execution of Mary Queen of Scots was purchased for £72,485 by the Archbishop of Canterbury's library at Lambeth Palace, therefore preserving it for the nation.[20]

Legacy




A statue of Queen Mary in the Luxembourg Gardens, Paris


Although the Casket Letters were accepted by the inquiry as genuine after a study of the handwriting, and of the information contained therein, and were generally held to be certain proof of guilt if authentic, the inquiry reached the conclusion that nothing was proven. From the start, this could have been predicted as the only conclusion that would satisfy Elizabeth. James MacKay comments that one of the stranger 'trials' in legal history ended with no finding of guilt with the result that the accusers went home to Scotland and the accused remained detained in 'protective custody'."
It is impossible now to prove the case either way. Without the Casket Letters, there would have been no case against Mary, and with hindsight it is difficult to say that any of the major parties involved considered the truth to be a priority. However, it is notable that Lady Antonia Fraser, James MacKay, and John Guy who have written well-respected biographies of Mary come to the same conclusion that they were forged. Guy has actually examined the Elizabethan transcripts of the letters rather than relying upon later printed copies.[21] He points out that the letters are disjointed. He also draws attention to the fact that the French version of one of the letters is bad in its use of language and grammar. Mary was an educated woman who could read, write, and speak French fluently; the construction of one of the letters in French has mistakes that a woman with her understanding would not make.
Another point made by these commentators is that the Casket Letters did not appear until the Conference of York. Mary had been forced to abdicate in 1567 and held captive for the best part of a year in Scotland. No reference can be found to the letters being used as evidence against Mary during this period. There was every reason for these letters to be made public to support her imprisonment and forced abdication. The originals disappeared after the Conference of York, thus adding to the sense that the letters were probably forged.




Mary is said to have nursed Darnley under this Plane tree at Darnley in Glasgow



Though Mary Stuart has not been canonised by the Catholic Church, many consider her a martyr, and there are relics of her. Her prayer book was long shown in France. Her apologist published, in an English journal, a sonnet which Mary was said to have composed, written with her own hand in this book. A celebrated German actress, Frau Hendel-Schutz, who excited admiration by her attitudes, and performed Friedrich Schiller's "Maria" with great applause in several German cities, affirmed that a cross which she wore on her neck was the very same that once belonged to the unfortunate queen.
Relics of this description have never yet been subjected to the proof of their authenticity. If there is anything which may be reasonably believed to have once been the property of the queen, it is the veil with which she covered her head on the scaffold, after the executioner had wounded the unfortunate victim in the shoulder by a false blow (whether from awkwardness or confusion is uncertain). This veil came into the possession of Sir John Coxe Hippisley, who claimed to be descended from the House of Stuart on his mother's side. In 1818, he had an engraving made from it by Matteo Diottavi in Rome and gave copies to his friends. However, the eagerness with which the executioners burned her clothing and the executioners' block may mean that it will never be possible to be certain.




Replica of the tomb of Mary on display at the Museum of Scotland


The veil is embroidered with gold spangles by (as is said) the queen's own hand, in regular rows crossing each other, so as to form small squares, and edged with a gold border, to which another border has been subsequently joined, in which the following words are embroidered in letters of gold:

"Velum Serenissimæ Mariæ, Scotiæ et Galliæ Reginæ Martyris, quo induebatur dum ab Heretica ad mortem iniustissimam condemnata fuit. Anno Sal. MDLXXXVI. a nobilissima matrona Anglicana diu conservatum et tandem, donationis ergo Deo, Societati Jesu consecratum."

On the plate there is an inscription, with a double certificate of its authenticity, which states, that this veil, a family treasure of the expelled house of Stuart, was finally in possession of the last branch of that family, Henry Benedict Stuart, the Cardinal of York, who preserved it for many years in his private chapel, among the most precious relics, and at his death bequeathed it to Sir John Coxe Hippisley, together with a valuable Plutarch, a Codex with painted (illuminated) letters, and a gold coin struck in Scotland during Mary's reign.




Mary's personal breviary, which she took with her to the scaffold, is preserved in the National Library of Russia of St. Petersburg.


The plate was specially consecrated by Pope Pius VII in his palace on the Quirinal, 29 April 1818. Hippisley, during a former residence at Rome, had been very intimate with the cardinal of York, and was instrumental in obtaining for him, when he with the other cardinals emigrated to Venice in 1798, a pension of £4,000 a year from King George IV of the United Kingdom, then Prince of Wales. But for the pension, the fugitive cardinal, whose revenues were all seized by the forces of the French Revolution, would have been exposed to the greatest distress.
The cardinal desired to requite this service by the bequest of what he considered so valuable. According to a note on the plate, the veil is eighty-nine English inches long and forty-three broad, so that it seems to have been rather a kind of shawl or scarf than a veil. Melville in his Memoirs, which Schiller had read, speaks of a handkerchief belonging to the queen, which she gave away before her death, and Schiller founds upon this anecdote the well-known words of the farewell scene, addressed to Hannah Kennedy.

"Accept this handkerchief! with my own hand
For thee I've work'd it in my hours of sadness
And interwoven with my scalding tears:
With this thou'lt bind my eyes."


Remains
Mary's remains rest in Westminster Abbey on the instructions of her son, James VI. Christine Grahame, Member of the Scottish Parliament, is calling for her remains to be returned to Scotland.

Privy Council of Mary, 1561
(appointed 6 September 1561 following Mary's return to Scotland from France)

Lord James Stewart, (later Earl of Moray)
William Maitland of Lethington - Secretary of State
James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell - Lord High Admiral of Scotland
George Gordon, 4th Earl of Huntly - Lord Chancellor
James Hamilton, Duc de Châtellerault, 2nd Earl of Arran - Heir to the throne
Archibald Campbell, 5th Earl of Argyll - Lord Justice General
James Douglas, 4th Earl of Morton
John Stewart, 4th Earl of Atholl
Alexander Cunningham, 4th Earl of Glencairn
George Hay, 7th Earl of Erroll
William Graham, 2nd Earl of Montrose
William Keith, 4th Earl Marischal
John Erskine, 6th Lord Erskine, (later Earl of Mar)
Robert Richardson - Lord High Treasurer
James MacGill of Nether Rankeillour - Lord Clerk Register
Sir John Bellenden of Auchinoul - Lord Justice Clerk


Ancestry



v • d • e
Ancestors of Mary I of Scotland






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

16. James II of Scotland



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

8. James III of Scotland

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

17. Mary of Guelders



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

4. James IV of Scotland

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

18. Christian I of Denmark



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

9. Margaret of Denmark

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

19. Dorothea of Brandenburg



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

2. James V of Scotland

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

20. Edmund Tudor, 1st Earl of Richmond



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

10. Henry VII of England

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

21. Margaret Beaufort



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

5. Margaret Tudor

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

22. Edward IV of England



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

11. Elizabeth of York

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

23. Elizabeth Woodville



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

1. Mary I of Scotland

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

24. Frederick VI, Count of Vaudémont



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

12. René II, Duke of Lorraine

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

25. Yolande of Anjou



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

6. Claude, Duke of Guise

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

26. Adolf, Duke of Guelders



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

13. Philippine of Guelders

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

27. Catherine de Bourbon



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

3. Mary of Guise

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

28. Jean VIII, Count of Vendôme



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

14. François, Count of Vendôme

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

29. Isabelle de Beauveau



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

7. Antoinette de Bourbon

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

30. Peter II de Luxembourg, Count of St. Pol



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

15. Marie de Luxembourg

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

31. Marguerite of Savoy



 




 


 


 


 


 










In culture
Main article: Mary I of Scotland in popular culture

See also

Act Anent the demission of the Crown in favour of our Sovereign Lord, and his Majesty's Coronation 1567
Rising of the North


References


^ History of the Monarchy > The Stewarts > Mary, Queen of Scots
^ a b "The Kings and Queens of Scotland (Stroud, 2004) by Richard Oram, ISBN 0-7524-2971-X
^ "Exhibitions | Uniting the Kingdoms?". The National Archives. http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/utk/scotland/religion.htm. Retrieved on 2009-02-08 {{{accessyear}}}. 
^ Antonia Fraser, Mary, Queen of Scots, p.24
^ The "Rough Wooings": Mary, Queen of Scots 1542-1551 (East Linton 2000) Marcus Merriman, ISBN 1-86232-090-X
^ Antonia Fraser, Mary, Queen of Scots, pps. 49-50
^ Antonia Fraser, Mary, Queen of Scots,p.42
^ Antonia Fraser "Mary, Queen of Scots",pages 88-90
^ Lady Antonia Fraser "Mary,Queen of Scots"
^ Guy, John, My Heart is my Own, London, Fourth Estate, 2004, ISBN 0-00-71930-8:47
^ Fraser, pp.220-231
^ The Medieval Society
^ Fraser, p.370
^ "About Scotland". Aboutscotland.com. http://www.aboutscotland.com/mqs/carberry.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-08 {{{accessyear}}}. 
^ "Scotland: The Story of a Nation" (HarperCollins, 2000) by Magnus Magnusson, p. 379
^ "Thomas Bromley". Westminster Abbey. http://www.westminster-abbey.org/search/12144. 
^ a b Elizabeth's Spy Master: Francis Walsingham and the secret war that saved England by Robert Hutchinson
^ a b c d e "The Execution of Mary Queen of Scots". tudorhistory.org. http://tudorhistory.org/primary/exmary.html. 
^ For a modern discussion of this see the essay in, "Death, the Scaffold and the Stage…" in "Christopher Marlowe and English Renaissance Culture", by Darryll Grantley, Ashgate Publishing (May 25, 1999).
^ "stv News report, February 2008: Purchase of Mary Queen of Scots' Death Warrant". Scotlandontv.tv. 2006-10-24. http://www.scotlandontv.tv/scotland_on_tv/video.html?vxSiteId=60fdd544-9c52-4e17-be7e-57a2a2d76992&vxChannel=History%20Key%20Events&vxClipId=1380_SMG1833&vxBitrate=300. Retrieved on 2009-02-08 {{{accessyear}}}. 
^ GUY, John. My Heart is My Own, 2005.



External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Mary I of Scotland 



Mary's biography at the UK government's official website
A transcription of The Casket Letters
The New Student's Reference Work/Mary Queen of Scots
Mary Stuart Portraits
Portraits of Mary
Langside Heritage Trail featuring Mary Queen of Scots at the Battle of Langside
 "Mary Queen of Scots". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 1913. http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Catholic_Encyclopedia_(1913)/Mary_Queen_of_Scots. 
Biography of Mary, with primary and secondary sources related to her life.




Mary I of Scotland
House of Stuart
Born: 8 December 1542 Died: 8 February 1587


Regnal titles


Preceded by
James V
Queen of Scots
14 December 1542 – 24 July 1567
Succeeded by
James VI


French royalty


Preceded by
Catherine de' Medici
Dauphine of France
24 April 1558 – 10 July 1559
Succeeded by
Maria Anna of Bavaria


Queen of France
10 July 1559 – 5 December 1560
Succeeded by
Elisabeth of Austria


Scottish royalty


Preceded by
James Hamilton,
2nd Earl of Arran
Heir to the Scottish throne
as heiress presumptive
8 December - 14 December, 1542
Succeeded by
James Hamilton,
2nd Earl of Arran


English royalty


Preceded by
Lady Elizabeth Tudor(never designated an heir)
Potential Heir to the English and Irish Thrones
by cognatic primogeniture17 November 1558 - 8 February 1587
Succeeded by
James VI of Scotland


Titles in pretence


Mary I of England
dies
— TITULAR —
 Queen of England
17 November 1558 – 24 July 1587
Reason for succession failure:
English throne passed to Elizabeth I. In the eyes of many Catholics, Elizabeth was illegitimate, thus making Mary the true heir.
Mary's heir becomes
James I of England









v • d • e

Pictish and Scottish Monarchs





Monarchs of the Picts (traditional)



Drest I · Talorc I · Nechtan I · Drest II · Galan · Drest III · Drest IV · Gartnait I · Cailtram · Talorc II · Drest V · Galam Cennalath · Bridei I · Gartnait II · Nechtan II · Cinioch · Gartnait III · Bridei II · Talorc III · Talorgan I · Gartnait IV · Drest VI · Bridei III · Taran · Bridei IV · Nechtan III · Drest VII · Alpín I · Óengus I · Bridei V · Ciniod I · Alpín II · Talorgan II · Drest VIII · Conall · Constantine (I) · Óengus II · Drest IX · Uuen · Uurad · Bridei VI · Ciniod II · Bridei VII · Drest X






Monarchs of the Scots (traditional)



Kenneth I MacAlpin · Donald I · Constantine I (II) · Áed · Giric · Eochaid (doubtful) · Donald II · Constantine II (III) · Malcolm I · Indulf · Dub · Cuilén · Amlaíb · Kenneth II · Constantine III (IV) · Kenneth III · Malcolm II · Duncan I · Macbeth · Lulach · Malcolm III Canmore · Donald III · Duncan II · Donald III · Edgar · Alexander I · David I · Malcolm IV · William I · Alexander II · Alexander III · Margaret (disputed)  · First Interregnum · John · Second Interregnum · Robert I · David II · Robert II · Robert III · James I · James II · James III · James IV · James V · Mary I · James VI* · Charles I* · Charles II · The Covenanters · The Protectorate · Charles II* · James VII* · Mary II* · William II* · Anne*






* also monarch of England and Ireland.












v • d • e

Chronology of French Queens and Empresses





Medieval France (987–1328)
House of Capet

Adelaide of Aquitaine (987–996) • Rozala of Italy (996) • Bertha of Burgundy (996-1000) • Constance of Arles (1003-1031) • Matilda of Frisia (1034–1044) • Anne of Kiev (1051–1060) • Bertha of Holland (1071–1092) • Bertrade de Montfort (1092–1108) • Adélaide de Maurienne (1115–1137) • Eleanor, Duchess of Aquitaine (1137–1152) • Constance of Castile (1154–1160) • Adèle of Champagne (1164–1180) • Isabelle of Hainaut (1180–1190) • Ingeborg of Denmark (1193-1193) • Agnes of Merania (1196–1200) • Ingeborg of Denmark (1200–1223) • Blanche of Castile (1223 – 1226) • Marguerite of Provence (1234-1270) • Isabella of Aragon (1270-1271) • Maria of Brabant (1274-1285) • Joan I of Navarre (1285-1305) • Margaret of Burgundy (1314-1315) • Clementia of Hungary (1315-1316) • Joan II, Countess of Burgundy (1316-1322) • Blanche of Burgundy (1322) • Maria of Luxembourg (1322-1324) • Jeanne d'Évreux (1325-1328)






Medieval France (1328–1498)
House of Valois

Joan the Lame (1328–1348) • Blanche of Navarre (1350) • Joan, Countess of Auvergne (1350–1360) • Joanna of Bourbon (1364–1378) • Isabeau of Bavaria (1385–1422) • Marie of Anjou (1422–1461) • Charlotte of Savoy (1461–1483) • Anne of Brittany (1491-1498)






Early Modern France (1498–1515)
House of Valois-Orléans

Joan of Valois (1498) • Anne, Duchess of Brittany (1498-1514) • Mary of England






Early Modern France (1515–1589)
House of Valois-Angoulême

Claude, Duchess of Brittany (1515–1524) • Eleanor of Habsburg (1530–1547) • Catherine de' Medici (1547–1559) • Mary I of Scotland (1559–1560) • Elisabeth of Austria (1570–1574) • Louise de Lorraine-Vaudémont (1575-1589)






Early Modern France (1589–1792)
House of Bourbon

Marguerite de Valois (1589–1599) • Marie de' Medici (1600–1610) • Anne of Austria (1615–1643) • Maria Theresa of Spain (1660–1683) • Françoise d'Aubigné (1685–1715) • Maria Leszczyńska (1725–1768) • Marie Antoinette of Austria (1774-1792) • Marie Josephine Louise of Savoy (1795-1810)






First Empire (1804–1814)
House of Bonaparte

Josephine de Beauharnais (1804–1810) • Marie Louise of Austria (1810-1814)






Bourbon Restoration (1814, 1815–1830)
House of Bourbon

Marie-Thérèse-Charlotte of France (1830) (disputed)






July Monarchy (1830–1848)
House of Orléans

Maria Amalia of the Two Sicilies (1830–1848)






Second Empire (1852–1870)
House of Bonaparte

Eugénie de Montijo (1853–1870)








Persondata


NAME
Mary I of Scotland


ALTERNATIVE NAMES



SHORT DESCRIPTION
Scottish monarch


DATE OF BIRTH
8 December 1542


PLACE OF BIRTH
Linlithgow Palace, West Lothian


DATE OF DEATH
8 February 1587


PLACE OF DEATH
Fotheringhay Castle, Northamptonshire






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mary_I_of_Scotland"
Categories: 1542 births | 1587 deaths | Mary I of Scotland | Scottish monarchs | Queens regnant of Scotland | Scottish princesses | Queens regnant | French queens consort | Heirs to the English and British thrones | House of Stuart | House of Valois | Lutenists | Scottish Roman Catholics | Roman Catholic monarchs | People executed by decapitation | People executed under the Tudors | Dauphines of France | Burials at Westminster Abbey | Modern child rulers | People from Linlithgow | Executed Scottish women | People executed for treason against England | French people of Scottish descent | Scots of French descent | Smallpox survivorsHidden categories: Articles containing video clips 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Français
Gàidhlig
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Latina
Latviešu
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 08:12.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
