













Constitutional monarchy - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Constitutional_monarchy";
		var wgTitle = "Constitutional monarchy";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "5649";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281737217;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Constitutional monarchy

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Part of the Politics series on


Monarchism








Varieties

Absolute · Constitutional
Elective · Regency







History

Magna Carta
Foundation of the Ottoman Empire
Glorious Revolution
French Revolution
First Spanish Civil War
First French Empire
Second French Empire
Fall of Qing Dynasty
Russian Revolution of 1917
Second Spanish Civil War
Birth of the Italian Republic
Iranian Revolution
Modern Cambodia
Nepalese Civil War







Related topics

Autocracy
Divine Right of Kings
Thomas Hobbes
Mandate of Heaven
Monarchy
Montesquieu
Oligarchy




 


Monarchism Portal



v • d • e





 


This article is part of the
Politics series


Forms of
government


 


List of forms of
government





Anarchy
Aristocracy
Authoritarianism
Autocracy
Communist state
Confederation
Corporatocracy
Consociational state
Demarchy
Democracy
Direct
Representative
Consensus

Despotism
Dictatorship
Military

Ethnocracy
Exilarchy
Federation
Feudalism
Military junta
Kleptocracy
Kratocracy
Kritocracy
Kritarchy
Logocracy
Meritocracy
Geniocracy

Minarchism/Night Watchman
Monarchy
Absolute
Constitutional
Diarchy/Co-Kingship

Noocracy
Ochlocracy/Mobocracy
Oligarchy
Panarchism
Plutocracy
Puppet state
Republic
Crowned
Capitalist
Constitutional
Federal
Parliamentary
Federal


Socialist state
Sociocracy
Technocracy
Cyberocracy
Netocracy

Theocracy
Theodemocracy
Timocracy
Totalitarianism
Tribal
Chiefdom






Politics portal



v • d • e



A constitutional monarchy is a form of constitutional government, where either an elected or hereditary monarch is the head of state, unlike in an absolute monarchy, wherein the king or the queen is the sole source of political power, as he or she is not legally bound by the constitution. Most constitutional monarchies have a parliamentary system (Australia, Belgium, Cambodia, Canada, Denmark, Japan, Malaysia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, United Kingdom) in which the monarch is the head of state, but a directly- or indirectly-elected prime minister is head of government. Although contemporary constitutional monarchies mostly are representative, constitutional democratic monarchies,[citation needed] they have co-existed with fascist and quasi-fascist constitutions (Italy, Spain) and with military dictatorships.




Contents


1 Constitutional monarchies and absolute monarchies

1.1 Constitutional monarchy in the European tradition
1.2 Modern constitutional monarchy


2 Constitutional monarchies today
3 List of current reigning monarchies
4 Previous monarchies
5 Other situations
6 See also
7 Notes
8 References





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Constitutional monarchies and absolute monarchies

[edit] Constitutional monarchy in the European tradition
In Britain, the Glorious Revolution of 1688 led to a constitutional monarchy restricted by laws such as the Bill of Rights 1689 and the Act of Settlement 1701, although limits on the power of the monarch are much older than that.
Constitutional monarchy occurred in continental Europe after the French revolution. General Napoleon Bonaparte is considered the first monarch proclaiming himself as embodiment of the nation, rather than as a divinely-appointed ruler; this interpretation of monarchy is basic to continental constitutional monarchies. G.W.F. Hegel, in Philosophy of Right (1820) justified it philosophically, according well with evolving contemporary political theory and with the Protestant Christian view of Natural Law. Hegel forecast a constitutional monarch of limited powers, whose function is embodying the national character and constitutional continuity in emergencies, per the development of constitutional monarchy in Europe and Japan. Moreover, the ceremonial office of president (e.g. European and Israeli parliamentary democracies), is a contemporary type of Hegel's constitutional monarch (whether elected or appointed), yet, his forecast of the form of government suitable to the modern world might be perceived as prophetic. The Russian and French presidents, with their stronger powers, might be Hegelian, wielding power suited to the national will embodied.

[edit] Modern constitutional monarchy
As originally conceived, a constitutional monarch was quite a powerful figure, head of the executive branch even though his or her power was limited by the constitution and the elected parliament. Some of the framers of the US Constitution may have conceived of the president as being an elected constitutional monarch, as the term was understood in their time, following Montesquieu's account of the separation of powers in the United Kingdom[1], it was the democratically elected parliaments, and their leader, the prime minister, who had become those who exercised power. In many cases even the monarchs themselves, while still at the very top of the political and social hierarchy, were given the status of "servants of the people" to reflect the new, egalitarian view.
In present terms, the difference between a parliamentary democracy that is a constitutional monarchy, and one that is a republic, is considered more a difference of detail than of substance, particularly in the common case in which the head of state serves the traditional role of embodying and representing the nation. This is reflected, for example, in all but the most die-hard Spanish Republicans accepting their country's returning to constitutional monarchy after the death of Francisco Franco.

[edit] Constitutional monarchies today




Constitutional monarchies with representative parliamentary systems are shown in red. Other constitutional monarchies are shown in violet.


Today constitutional monarchies are mostly associated with Western European countries such as the United Kingdom, The Netherlands, Belgium, Norway, Denmark, Spain, Luxembourg, Monaco, Liechtenstein, and Sweden. In such cases it is the prime minister who holds the day-to-day powers of governance, while the King or Queen (or other monarch, such as a Grand Duke, in the case of Luxembourg, or Prince in the case of Monaco and Liechtenstein) retains only minor to no powers. Different nations grant different powers to their monarchs. In the Netherlands, Denmark and in Belgium, for example, the Monarch formally appoints a representative to preside over the creation of a coalition government following a parliamentary election, while in Norway the King chairs special meetings of the cabinet. In nearly all cases, the monarch is still the nominal chief executive, but is bound by constitutional convention to act on the advice of the Cabinet. Only a few monarchies (most notably Japan and Sweden) have amended their constitutions so that the monarch is no longer even the nominal chief executive.
The most significant family of constitutional monarchies in the world today are the sixteen Commonwealth realms under Elizabeth II. Unlike some of their continental European counterparts, the Monarch and her Governors-General in the Commonwealth Realms hold significant "reserve" or "prerogative" powers, to be wielded in times of extreme emergency or constitutional crises usually to uphold parliamentary government. An instance of a Governor General exercising his power was during the 1975 Australian constitutional crisis, when the Australian Prime Minister of the time, Gough Whitlam, was effectively fired from his position. This led to much speculation as to whether this use of the Governor General's reserve powers was appropriate, and whether Australia should become a republic.
In both the United Kingdom and elsewhere, a common debate centres around when it is appropriate for a monarch to use his or her political powers. When a monarch does act, political controversy can often ensue, partially because the neutrality of the crown is seen to be compromised in favour of a partisan goal. While political scientists may champion the idea of an "interventionist monarch" as a check against possible illegal action by politicians, the monarchs themselves are often driven by a more pragmatic sense of self-preservation, in which avoiding political controversy can be seen as an important way to retain public legitimacy and popularity.
There also exist today several federal constitutional monarchies. In these countries, each subdivision has a distinct government and head of government, but all subdivisions share a monarch who is head of state of the federation as a united whole.

[edit] List of current reigning monarchies


State
Last constitution established
Type of monarchy
Monarch selected by


 Andorra
1993
Co-Principality
Selection of Bishop of La Seu d'Urgell and election of French President


 Bahrain
2002
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Belgium
1831
Kingdom; popular monarchy[2]
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Bhutan
2007
Kingdom
Hereditary succession


 Brunei
1959
Sultanate; Islamic absolute monarchy
Hereditary succession


 Cambodia
1993
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Denmark
1953
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Japan
1946
Empire
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Jordan
1952
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Kuwait
1962
Emirate
Hereditary succession directed approval of al-Sabah family and majority of National Assembly


 Lesotho
1993
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed approval of College of Chiefs


 Liechtenstein
1862
Principality
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Luxembourg
1868
Grand duchy
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Malaysia
1957
Elective monarchy
Selected from nine hereditary Sultans of the Malay states


 Monaco
1911
Principality
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Morocco
1962
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Netherlands
1815
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Norway
1814
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Oman
1996
Sultanate; Islamic absolute monarchy
Hereditary succession


 Qatar
2003
Emirate; absolute monarchy
Hereditary succession


 Saudi Arabia
1992
Kingdom; Islamic absolute monarchy
Hereditary succession


 Spain
1978
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Swaziland
1968
Kingdom; absolute monarchy
Hereditary succession


 Sweden
1974
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Thailand
2007
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Tonga
1970
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 United Arab Emirates
1971
Elective monarchy
Chosen by Federal Supreme Council from rulers of Abu Dhabi


 Vatican City

Theocratic elective monarchy
Chosen by College of Cardinals


 United Kingdom
1688
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Antigua and Barbuda
1981
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Australia
1901
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 The Bahamas
1973
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Barbados
1966
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Belize
1981
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Canada
1867
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Grenada
1974
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Jamaica
1962
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 New Zealand
1907
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Papua New Guinea
1975
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Saint Kitts and Nevis
1983
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Saint Lucia
1979
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
1979
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Solomon Islands
1978
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution


 Tuvalu
1978
Kingdom
Hereditary succession directed by constitution



[edit] Previous monarchies

The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, formed after the Union of Lublin in 1569 and lasting until the final partition of the state in 1795, operated much like many modern European constitutional monarchies. The legislators of the unified state truly did not see it as a monarchy at all, but as a republic under the presidency of the King. Poland-Lithuania also followed the principle of "Rex regnat et non gubernat", had a bicameral parliament, and a collection of entrenched legal documents amounting to a constitution along the lines of the modern United Kingdom. The King was elected, and had the duty of maintaining the people's rights.
The Anglo-Corsican Kingdom was a brief period in the history of Corsica (1794-1796) when the island broke with Revolutionary France and sought military protection from Great Britain. Corsica became an independent kingdom under George III of England, but with its own elected parliament and a written constitution guaranteeing local autonomy and democratic rights.
France, several times during the 19th century. Napoléon Bonaparte proclaimed himself Emperor of the French in what was ostensibly a constitutional monarchy, though modern historians often class his reign as a military dictatorship. The Bourbon Restoration (under Louis XVIII and Charles X), the July Monarchy (under Louis-Philippe), and the Second Empire (under Napoleon III) were also constitutional monarchies, although the power of the monarch varied considerably between them.
The German Empire from 1871 to 1918, (as well as earlier confederations, and the monarchies it consisted of) was also a constitutional monarchy—see Constitution of the German Empire.
Prior to the Iranian Revolution in 1979, Iran was a constitutional monarchy under Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi, which had been originally established during the Persian Constitutional Revolution in 1906.
Portugal until 1910 when Manuel II was overthrown by a military coup.
Kingdom of Serbia, until 1918, when it merged with the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs into the unitary Yugoslav Kingdom, that was led by the Serbian dynasty of Karadjordjevic
Mexico was twice an Empire. First from July 21, 1822 to March 19, 1823 with Agustín de Iturbide serving as emperor. Then, with the help of the Austrian and Spanish crowns, Napoleon III of France installed Maximilian of Habsburg as Emperor of Mexico. This attempt to create a European-style monarchy lasted three years, from 1864 to 1867.
Brazil from 1815 (United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and Algarves) until 1822, with the proclamation of independence and rise of the Empire of Brazil by Pedro I of Brazil. The empire ended in 1889, when Pedro II was deposed by a military coup.
Hawaiʻi was a constitutional monarchy from the unification of the smaller independent chiefdoms of Oʻahu, Maui, Molokaʻi, Lānaʻi, and the Hawaiʻi (or the "Big Island") in 1810 until the overthrow of Queen Liliʻuokalani in 1893 by conspirators from United States.
The Grand Duchy of Finland was a constitutional monarchy though its ruler, Alexander I, was simultaneously an autocrat and absolute ruler in Russia.
The Kingdom of Hungary in 1848–1849 and 1867–1918 as part of Austria-Hungary. In the interwar period (1920–1944) Hungary remained a constitutional monarchy without a reigning monarch.
The Korean Empire from 1897 to 1910.
Montenegro until 1918 when it merged with Serbia and other areas to form Yugoslavia.
Yugoslavia until 1945 when Peter II was deposed by the communist government.
Romania until 1947 when Michael I was forced to abdicate at gunpoint by the communists.
Bulgaria until 1946 when Tsar Simeon was deposed by the communist assembly.
Greece until 1967 when Constantine II was deposed by the military government. The decision was formalised by a plebiscite in 05/04/1974.
Italy until 1947 when a referendum proclaimed the end of the Kingdom and the begin of the Republic.
Many Commonwealth republics were constitutional monarchies for some period after their independence.
Nepal until May 28, 2008, when King Gyanendra was deposed, and the Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal was declared.


[edit] Other situations

Japan is the only country with a reigning emperor.
Luxembourg is the only country with a reigning Grand Duke.
Andorra, Monaco and Liechtenstein are the only countries with a reigning Prince.
Andorra is the only monarchy where the head of state is vested jointly in two individuals (conversely, San Marino is the only republic where the head of state is vested jointly in two individuals: the Captains Regent).


[edit] See also
Figurehead

[edit] Notes


^ Baron de Montesquieu, The Spirit of Laws. Legal Classics Library, 1984.
^ Belgium is the only existing popular monarchy — a system in which the monarch's title is linked to the people rather than a state. The title of Belgian kings is not King of Belgium, but instead King of the Belgians. Another unique feature of the Belgian system is that the new monarch does not automatically assume the throne at the death or abdication of his predecessor; he only becomes monarch upon taking a constitutional oath.



[edit] References





This includes a list of references or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (August 2007)



G. W. F. Hegel, Elements of the Philosophy of Right (Allen W. Wood, ed., H.B. Nisbet, trans.). Cambridge University Press, 1991. ISBN 0-521-34438-7 (originally published as Georg Friedrich Wilhelm Hegel, Philosophie des Rechts, 1820).
John Locke, Two Treatises of Government and A Letter Concerning Toleration. (Ian Shapiro, ed., with essays by John Dunn, Ruth W. Grant and Ian Shapiro.) New Haven: Yale University Press, 2003 (Two Treatises first pub. 1690). ISBN 0-300-10017-5.




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constitutional_monarchy"
Categories: Forms of government | MonarchismHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2007 | Articles lacking in-text citations 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Bân-lâm-gú
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Français
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latina
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Македонски
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Svenska
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
Vèneto
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 17:58.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
