











Brian Eno - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Brian_Eno";
		var wgTitle = "Brian Eno";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "21222062";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280535484;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Brian Eno

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Brian Eno



Brian Eno at The Long Now Foundation, 26 June 2006



Background information


Birth name
Brian Peter George Eno


Also known as
Eno
Brian Peter George St. John le Baptiste de la Salle Eno


Born
15 May 1948 (1948-05-15) (age 60)
Woodbridge, Suffolk


Origin
London, England


Genre(s)
Experimental rock, ambient, electronic, art rock, glam rock


Occupation(s)
Producer, musician


Instrument(s)
Synthesizer, keyboards, vocals, guitar


Years active
1970–present


Label(s)
EG, Astralwerks, Thirsty Ear


Associated acts
Roxy Music


Website
www.enoshop.co.uk


Brian Peter George St. John le Baptiste de la Salle Eno[1] (born 15 May 1948), commonly known as Brian Eno (pronounced /ˈiːnoʊ/), is an English musician, composer, record producer, music theorist and singer, who, as a solo artist, is best known as the father of ambient music.
Art school-educated and inspired by minimalism, Eno became prominent in the early 1970s as the keyboards and synthesiser player of the glam rock and art rock band Roxy Music. Upon leaving the group, he recorded four influential rock albums, including Another Green World (1975), his first venture into more abstract musical territory. Eno then concentrated on sound landscapes in records such as Discreet Music (1975) and Ambient 1/Music for Airports (1978), continuing to make ambient music over the next several decades. Before and After Science (1977) was Eno's last solo album emphasising his own singing until 2005's Another Day on Earth.
From 1976 to 1979 Eno worked with David Bowie on the avant-garde "Berlin Trilogy"; helped to popularise the band Devo and the punk rock-influenced "No Wave" genre; and introduced the concepts of chance music to wider audiences, partly through his collaborations with popular musicians.[2] Eno has worked frequently with Harold Budd, John Cale, Cluster, Robert Fripp and David Byrne. He produced three albums by Talking Heads including Remain in Light (1980), six albums by U2 including No Line on the Horizon (2009), and albums by James, Laurie Anderson and Coldplay.
As an artist, Brian Eno pursues ventures in parallel to his music career: art installations, a newspaper column in The Observer, and "Oblique Strategies", with Peter Schmidt, a deck of cards wherein each card has a cryptic remark or random insight meant to resolve a dilemma. In 2008, he released Everything That Happens Will Happen Today with David Byrne, designed the sound for the video game Spore and wrote a chapter to Sound Unbound: Sampling Digital Music and Culture, edited by Paul D. Miller (a.k.a. DJ Spooky).




Contents


1 Education and early musical career
2 Roxy Music
3 Solo work

3.1 Obscure Records label
3.2 Collaboration
3.3 1990s
3.4 2000s


4 Record producer and other projects

4.1 Record production
4.2 The Microsoft Sound
4.3 Generative music
4.4 Other work


5 Politics
6 Discography
7 Bibliography
8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Education and early musical career
Brian Eno was educated at St. Joseph's College, Birkfield, Ipswich, [3] and at Ipswich Art School in Roy Ascott's Groundcourse, and the Winchester School of Art, graduating in 1969. In school, he used a tape recorder as musical instrument, and experimented with his first, sometimes improvisational, bands. St. Joseph's College teacher and painter Tom Phillips encouraged him, recalling "Piano Tennis" with Eno, in which, after collecting pianos, they stripped and aligned them in a hall, striking them with tennis balls. From that collaboration, he became involved in Cornelius Cardew's Scratch Orchestra. The first, released recording in which Eno played is the Deutsche Grammophon edition of Cardew's The Great Learning (rec. Feb. 1971), as one of the voices in the recital of The Great Learning Paragraph 7. Another early recording was the Berlin Horse soundtrack, by Malcom Le Grice, a nine-minute, 2 x 16mm-double-projection, released in 1970 and presented in 1971. [4]

Roxy Music
Main article: Roxy Music
Brian Eno's professional music career began in London, as a member (1971–1973) of the glam/art rock band Roxy Music, playing the mixing desk, altering the band's sound with a VCS3 synthesizer, tape recorders, etc., and singing back-up. In the event, he appeared on stage as member of Roxy Music, flamboyantly costumed. He quit the band on completing the promotion tour for the band's second album, For Your Pleasure because of disagreements with lead singer Bryan Ferry and boredom with the rock star life. [5]
In 1992, he described his Roxy Music tenure as important to his career: "As a result of going into a subway station and meeting Andy [saxophonist Andy Mackay], I joined Roxy Music, and, as a result of that, I have a career in music. If I'd walked ten yards farther, on the platform, or missed that train, or been in the next carriage, I probably would have been an art teacher now". [6]

Solo work
Eno embarked on a solo career almost immediately. Between 1973 and 1977 he created four solo albums of electronically inflected pop songs – Here Come the Warm Jets, Taking Tiger Mountain (By Strategy), Another Green World and Before and after Science. Tiger Mountain contains the galloping "Third Uncle", one of Eno's best-known songs, due in part to its later being covered by Bauhaus. Critic Dave Thompson writes that the song is "a near punk attack of riffing guitars and clattering percussion, 'Third Uncle' could, in other hands, be a heavy metal anthem, albeit one whose lyrical content would tongue-tie the most slavish air guitarist."[7]




Brian Eno pictured on his 1977 album Before and After Science.


All four of his vocal albums were remastered and reissued in 2004 by Virgin's Astralwerks label. Due to Eno's decision not to add any extra tracks of the original material, a handful of tracks originally issued as singles have not been reissued. ("Seven Deadly Finns" and "The Lion Sleeps Tonight" were included on the deleted Eno Vocal Box set and the single mix of "King's Lead Hat" has never been reissued.)
During this period, Eno also played three dates with Phil Manzanera in the band 801, a "supergroup" that performed more or less mutated selections from albums by Eno, Manzanera, and Quiet Sun, as well as covers of songs by The Beatles and The Kinks.
In 1972, Eno developed a tape-delay system first utilized by Eno and Robert Fripp (from King Crimson), described as 'Frippertronics', and the pair released an album in 1973 called (No Pussyfooting). It is said the technique was borrowed from minimalist composer Terry Riley, whose tape delay feedback system with a pair of Revox tape recorders (a setup Riley used to call the "Time Lag Accumulator") was first used on Riley's album Music for The Gift in 1963. [8] In 1975, Fripp and Eno released a second album, Evening Star, and also played several live shows in Europe.
Eno was a prominent member of the performance art-classical orchestra the Portsmouth Sinfonia - having started playing with them in 1972. In 1973 he produced the orchestra's first album The Portsmouth Sinfonia Plays the Popular Classics (released in March 1974) and in 1974 he produced the live album Hallellujah! The Portsmouth Sinfonia Live At The Royal Albert Hall of their infamous May 1974 concert (released in October 1974.) In addition to producing both albums, Eno performed in the orchestra on both recordings - playing the clarinet. Eno also deployed the orchestra's famously dissonant string section on his second solo album Taking Tiger Mountain (By Strategy). The orchestra at this time included other musicians whose solo work he would subsequently release on his Obscure label including Gavin Bryars and Michael Nyman. That year he also composed music for the album Lady June's Linguistic Leprosy, with Kevin Ayers, to accompany the poet June Campbell Cramer.
Eno continued his career by producing a larger number of highly eclectic and increasingly ambient electronic and acoustic albums. He is widely credited with coining the term "ambient music",[9] low-volume music designed to modify one's perception of a surrounding environment.
His first such work, 1975's Discreet Music, (again created via an elaborate tape-delay methodology, which Eno diagrammed on the back cover of the LP ), is considered the landmark album of the genre. This was followed by his Ambient series (Music for Airports (Ambient 1), The Plateaux of Mirror (Ambient 2), Day of Radiance (Ambient 3) and On Land (Ambient 4)). Eno was the primary musician on these releases with the exception of Ambient 2 which featured Harold Budd on keyboard, and Ambient 3 where the American composer Laraaji was the sole musician playing the zither and hammered dulcimer with Eno producing.
In 1981, having returned from Ghana and before On Land, he discovered Miles Davis' 1974 ambient jazz dirge "He Loved Him Madly": "Teo Macero's revolutionary production on that piece seemed to me to have the "spacious" quality I was after, and like "Amarcord", it too became a touchstone to which I returned frequently."[10]
In 1980 he provided a film score for Herbert Vesely's Egon Schiele Exzess und Bestrafung also known as Egon Schiele Excess and Punishment. The ambent style score was an unusual choice for a historical piece but fits the film's themes of sexual obsession and death and is highly effective, possible his best film score.
Eno describes himself as a "non-musician" and coined the term "treatments" to describe his modification of the sound of musical instruments, and to separate his role from that of the traditional instrumentalist. His skill at using "The Studio as a Compositional Tool"[11] (the title of an essay by Eno) led in part to his career as a producer. His methods were recognized at the time (mid-1970s) as unique, so much so that on Genesis's The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway, he is credited with 'Enossification'; on Robert Wyatt's Ruth is Stranger Than Richard with a Direct inject anti-jazz raygun and on John Cale's Island albums as simply being 'Eno'.

Obscure Records label
Main article: Obscure Records
Eno started the Obscure Records label in Britain in 1975 to release works by lesser-known composers. The first group of three releases included his own composition, Discreet Music, and the now-famous The Sinking of the Titanic (1969) and Jesus' Blood Never Failed Me Yet (1971) by Gavin Bryars. The second side of Discreet Music consisted of several versions of Pachelbel's Canon, the composition which Eno had previously chosen to precede Roxy Music's appearances on stage, to which various algorithmic transformations have been applied, rendering it almost unrecognizable. Side 1 consisted of a tape loop system for generating music from relatively sparse input. These tapes had previously been used as backgrounds in some of his collaborations with Fripp, most notably on Evening Star. Only 10 albums were released on Obscure, including works by John Adams, Michael Nyman, and John Cage. At this time he was also affiliating with artists in the Fluxus movement.

Collaboration
In 1975 Eno performed as the Wolf in a rock version of Sergei Prokofiev's classic Peter and The Wolf. Produced by Robin Lumley and Jack Lancaster, the album featured Gary Moore, Manfred Mann, Phil Collins, Stephane Grapelli, Chris Spedding, Cozy Powell, Jon Hiseman, Bill Bruford and Alvin Lee. In 1980-81 Eno collaborated with David Byrne of Talking Heads (which he had already anagrammatized as 'King's Lead Hat') on My Life in the Bush of Ghosts, which was built around radio broadcasts Eno collected while living in the United States, along with sampling recordings from around the world. He worked with David Bowie as a writer and musician on Bowie's influential 1977-79 'Berlin Trilogy' of albums, Low, "Heroes" and Lodger, on Bowie's later album Outside, and on the song "I'm Afraid of Americans". In 1980 Eno developed an interest in altered guitar tunings, which led to Guitarchitecture discussions with Chuck Hammer, former Lou Reed guitarist. Following on from his No-Wave involvement which brought him in contact with the "renegade" artist Greg Belcastro, who introduced him to the guitar techniques of a fledgling Sonic Youth, Eno has also collaborated with John Cale, former member of Velvet Underground, on his trilogy Fear, Slow Dazzle and Helen of Troy, Robert Wyatt on his Shleep CD, with Jon Hassell, with the German duo Cluster, with composers Harold Budd, Philip Glass and Roberto Carnevale. A new collaboration between David Byrne and Brian Eno titled Everything That Happens Will Happen Today was released digitally on 18 August 2008, with the enhanced CD released in October.

1990s
In 1992, Eno released an album featuring heavily syncopated rhythms entitled Nerve Net, with contributions from several former collaborators including Robert Fripp, Benmont Tench, Robert Quine and John Paul Jones. This album was a last-minute substitution for My Squelchy Life, which featured more pop oriented material, with Eno on vocals. (Several tracks from My Squelchy Life later appeared on 1993's retrospective box set Eno Box II: Vocals.) Eno also released in 1992 a work entitled The Shutov Assembly, recorded between 1985 and 1990. This album embraces atonality and abandons most conventional concepts of modes, scales and pitch. Much of the music shifts gradually and without discernible focus, and is one of Eno's most varied ambient collections. Conventional instrumentation is eschewed, save for treated keyboards.
During the 1990s, Eno became increasingly interested in self-generating musical systems, the results of which he called generative music. The basic premise of generative music is the blending of several independent musical tracks, of varying sounds, length, and in some cases, silence. When each individual track concludes, it starts again mixing with the other tracks allowing the listener to hear an almost infinite combination. In one instance of generative music, Eno calculated that it would take almost 10,000 years to hear the entire possibilities of one individual piece. Eno has presented this music in his own, and other artists', art and sound installations, most notably "I Dormienti (The Sleepers)", Lightness: Music for the Marble Palace, Music for Civic Recovery Centre, The Quiet Room and "Music for Prague".

2000s
In 2004, Fripp and Eno recorded another ambient collaboration album, The Equatorial Stars.
Eno returned in June 2005 with Another Day on Earth, his first major album since Wrong Way Up (with John Cale) to prominently feature vocals (a trend continued with Everything That Happens Will Happen Today). The album differs from his 70s solo work as musical production has changed since then, evident in its semi-electronic production.
In early 2006, Eno collaborated with David Byrne, again, for the reissue of My Life in the Bush of Ghosts in celebration of the influential album's 25th anniversary. Eight previously unreleased tracks, recorded during the initial sessions in 1980/81, were added to the album, while one track, Qu'ran, was removed due to requests from Muslims.[12] An unusual interactive marketing strategy that coincided with its re-release, the album’s promotional website features the ability for anyone to officially and legally download the multi-tracks of two songs from the album, "A Secret Life" and "Help Me Somebody". Individuals can then remix and upload new mixes of these tracks to the website so others can listen to and rate them.
In late 2006, Eno released 77 Million Paintings, a program of generative video and music specifically for the PC. As its title suggests, there is a possible combination of 77 million paintings where the viewer will see different combinations of video slides prepared by Eno each time the program is launched. Likewise, the accompanying music is generated by the program so that it's almost certain the listener will never quite hear the same arrangement twice. The second edition of "77 Million Paintings" featuring improved morphing and a further two layers of sound was released on 14 January 2008.
In 2007, Eno's music was featured in a movie adaption of Irvine Welsh's best-selling collection Ecstasy: Three Tales of Chemical Romance.
Also in 2007, Eno contributed a composition titled "Grafton Street" to Dido's third album, Safe Trip Home, scheduled for release in November 2008.[13]
In December 2008 Paramount Pictures confirmed Brian Eno is scoring music for Peter Jackson’s film adaptation of “The Lovely Bones,” set to be released in December 2009.[14]

Record producer and other projects

Record production





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2009)


From the beginning of his solo career in 1973, Eno was in demand as a producer - though his management now describe him as a "sonic landscaper" rather than a producer. The first album with Eno credited as producer was Lucky Leif and the Longships by Robert Calvert. Eno's lengthy string of producer credits includes albums for Talking Heads, U2, Devo, Ultravox and James. He also produced part of the 1993 album When I Was a Boy by Jane Siberry. He won the best producer award at the 1994 and 1996 BRIT Awards.
Despite being a self-professed "non-musician", Eno has contributed to recordings by artists as varied as Nico, Robert Calvert, Genesis, David Bowie, and Zvuki Mu, in various capacities such as use of his studio/synthesizer/electronic treatments, vocals, guitar, bass guitar, and as just being 'Eno'. In 1984, he (along with several other authors) composed and performed the "Prophecy Theme" for the David Lynch film Dune; the rest of the soundtrack was composed and performed by the group Toto. Eno produced performance artist Laurie Anderson's Bright Red album, and also composed for it. The work is avant-garde spoken word with haunting and magnifying sounds. Eno played on David Byrne's musical score for The Catherine Wheel, a project commissioned by Twyla Tharp to accompany her Broadway dance project of the same name.
Eno co-produced The Unforgettable Fire (1984), The Joshua Tree (1987), Achtung Baby (1991), and All That You Can't Leave Behind (2000) for U2 with his frequent collaborator Daniel Lanois, and produced 1993's Zooropa for the band alone. In 1995, U2 and Eno joined forces to create the album Original Soundtracks 1 under the group name Passengers; songs from OST1 included "Your Blue Room" and "Miss Sarajevo". He also produced Laid (1993), Wah Wah (1994) and Pleased To Meet You (2001) for James.
Eno played on the 1986 album Measure for Measure by Australian band Icehouse. He remixed two tracks for Depeche Mode, "I Feel You" and "In Your Room", both single releases from the album Songs of Faith and Devotion in 1993. In 1995, Eno provided one of several remixes of "Protection" by Massive Attack (originally from their Protection album) for release as a single. The single also included more remixes by DJs J-Swift, Tom D, and Underdog.
In 2007, he produced the fourth studio album by Coldplay entitled Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends, which was released in 2008. Also in 2008, he worked with Grace Jones on her album Hurricane, credited for "production consultation" and as a member of the band, playing keyboards, treatments and background vocals. With frequent collaborator Daniel Lanois, he worked on the twelfth studio album by U2, titled No Line on the Horizon. It was recorded in Morocco, South France and Dublin and due to be released in Europe on 27 February 2009 and worldwide on 2 March 2009.

The Microsoft Sound





It has been suggested that The Microsoft Sound be merged into this article or section. (Discuss)


In 1994 Microsoft corporation designers Mark Malamud and Erik Gavriluk approached Brian Eno to compose music for the Windows 95 project. The result — composed by Eno on an Apple MacIntosh computer — was the six-second start-up music-sound of the Windows 95 operating system, The Microsoft Sound. In the San Francisco Chronicle he said: [15]


“
The idea came up at the time when I was completely bereft of ideas. I'd been working on my own music for a while and was quite lost, actually. And I really appreciated someone coming along and saying, "Here's a specific problem — solve it."
The thing from the agency said, "We want a piece of music that is inspiring, universal, blah- blah, da-da-da, optimistic, futuristic, sentimental, emotional," this whole list of adjectives, and then at the bottom it said "and it must be 31/4 seconds long."
I thought this was so funny and an amazing thought to actually try to make a little piece of music. It's like making a tiny little jewel.
In fact, I made 84 pieces. I got completely into this world of tiny, tiny little pieces of music. I was so sensitive to microseconds at the end of this that it really broke a logjam in my own work. Then when I'd finished that and I went back to working with pieces that were like three minutes long, it seemed like oceans of time.

”



Generative music
In 1996, he collaborated in developing the SSEYO Koan generative music system (by Pete Cole and Tim Cole of intermorphic) that he used in composing the hybrid music in the album Generative Music 1:


“
Some very basic forms of generative music have existed for a long time, but as marginal curiosities. Wind chimes are an example, but the only compositional control you have over the music they produce is in the original choice of notes that the chimes will sound. Recently, however, out of the union of synthesisers and computers, some much finer tools have evolved. Koan Software is probably the best of these systems, allowing a composer to control, not one, but one hundred and fifty, musical and sonic parameters, within which the computer then improvises (as wind improvises the wind chimes).
The works I have made with this system symbolise, to me, the beginning of a new era of music. Until a hundred years ago, every musical event was unique: music was ephemeral and unrepeatable, and even classical scoring couldn't guarantee precise duplication. Then came the gramophone record, which captured particular performances, and made it possible to hear them identically, over and over again.
But now, there are three alternatives: live music, recorded music, and generative music. Generative music enjoys some of the benefits of both its ancestors. Like live music, it is always different. Like recorded music, it is free of time-and-place limitations — you can hear it when and where you want.
I really think it is possible that our grandchildren will look at us in wonder and say: "You mean you used to listen to exactly the same thing over and over again?"

”


As C.S.J. Bofop, in 1996, he said:


“
Each of the twelve pieces on Generative Music 1 has a distinctive character. There are, of course, the ambient works ranging from the dark, almost mournful "Densities III" (complete with distant bells), to [the] translucent "Lysis (Tungsten)". These are contrasted with pieces in dramatically different styles, such as "Komarek", with its hard-edged, angular melodies, reminiscent of Schoenberg's early serial experiments, and "Klee 42" whose simple polyphony is similar to that of the early Renaissance, but, of course, the great beauty of Generative Music is that those pieces will never sound quite that way again.
”



Other work
Eno has also been active in other artistic fields, producing videos for gallery display and collaborating with visual artists in other endeavours. One is the set of "Oblique Strategies" cards that he and artist Peter Schmidt, produced in the mid-70s, described as "100 Worthwhile Dilemmas" and intended as guides to shaking up the mind in the process of producing works of art. Another was his collaboration with artist Russell Mills on the book More Dark Than Shark. He was also the provider of music for Robert Sheckley's In the Land of Clear Colours, a narrated story with music originally published by a small art gallery in Spain.
In March 2008 Eno collaborated with the Italian artist Mimmo Paladino on a show of the latter's works with Eno's soundscapes at Ara Pacis in Rome.
In 2008, Eno designed the procedurally-generated music for the video game Spore.[16]
In October 2008, Eno collaborated with Peter Chilvers to create an application titled Bloom for the iPhone and iPod Touch platform.[17]

Politics
Brian Eno has been active politically throughout his life, frequently writing letters to government ministers and appearing on political debates, and writing newspaper columns on his political views. He was sharply critical of the Thatcher government's decision to reduce funding to the BBC World Service, arguing that the £5million cut to its £25 million budget was damaging, and was the equivalent cost of "just one wing of one F16 fighter jet"- a reference to a large order of military hardware the government had just made.[citation needed]
In 1996, Eno and others started the Long Now Foundation to educate the public about the very long term future of society. He is also a columnist for the British newspaper The Observer.
In 2003, he appeared on a UK Channel 4 discussion about the Iraq war with a top military spokesman; Eno was highly critical of the war. In 2005, he spoke at an anti-war demonstration in Hyde Park, London. In March 2006, he spoke at an anti-war demonstration at Trafalgar Square; he noted that 2 billion people on this planet do not have clean drinking water, and that water could have been supplied to them for about one-fifth of the cost of the Iraq war.[citation needed]
Eno appeared as Father Brian Eno at the "It's Great Being a Priest!" convention, in "Going to America", the final episode of the television sitcom Father Ted, which originally aired on 1 May 1998 on Channel 4.
The Nokia 8800 Sirocco Edition mobile phone features exclusive music composed by Eno.[18] Between 8 January 2007 and 12 February 2007, ten units of Nokia 8800 Sirocco Brian Eno Signature Edition mobile phones, individually numbered and engraved with Eno's signature were auctioned off. All proceeds went to two charities chosen by Eno: the Keiskamma Aids Treatment program and The World Land Trust.[19]
In 2006, Eno was one of more than 100 artists and writers who signed an open letter calling for an international boycott of Israeli political and cultural institutions. [20]
In 2007, he appeared playing keyboards in Voila, Belinda Carlisle's solo album sung entirely in French. In December that year, the newly-elected Leader of Liberal Democrats, Nick Clegg appointed Eno as his youth affairs adviser.[21]
In January 2009, Eno wrote an opinion piece in the CounterPunch web site to condemn Israel's attack on Gaza strip.[22]
On 10 January 2009, Eno took part in a protest through London, joining 20,000 other protesters to condemn Israel's attacks on the Gaza Strip.[23]

Discography
Main article: Brian Eno discography

Bibliography

Bracewell, Michael Roxy Music: Bryan Ferry, Brian Eno, Art, Ideas, and Fashion (Da Capo Press, 2005) ISBN 0-306-81400-5
Eno, Brian, Russell Mills and Rick Poynor More Dark Than Shark (Faber & Faber, 1986, out of print)
Eno, Brian A Year with Swollen Appendices: Brian Eno's Diary (Faber & Faber, 1996) ISBN 0-571-17995-9
I Dormienti with Mimmo Paladino (2000). Limited edition of 2000.
Sheppard, David On Some Faraway Beach: The Life and Times of Brian Eno (Orion Books, 2008) ISBN 978-0-7528-7570-5
Tamm, Eric Brian Eno: His Music and the Vertical Color of Sound (Da Capo Press, 1995, first published 1989) ISBN 0-306-80649-5 (Full text available at author's website [1])
Dayal, Geeta 33 1/3: Brian Eno's Another Green World (Continuum 2007) ISBN 978-08264-2786-1


References


^ Estrella,Espie Ambient Music, about.com
^ Prendergast, Mark The Ambient Century, Bloomsbury UK, 2000. ISBN 0747542139
^ St Joseph's College - Welcome to St Joseph's College
^ Malcom Le Grice Installation
^ "Eno Left Roxy Music to do His Laundry"
^ Prendergast, Mark (2001). The Ambient Century: From Mahler to Trance: The Evolution of Sound in the Electronic Age. Bloomsbury Publishing. pp. p118. ISBN 1582341346. 
^ All Music review
^ The Birth of Loop
^ Prendergast, The Ambient Century: p.93
^ Ambient 4: On Land 1986 release notes
^ "Pro Session - The Studio as Compositional Tool"
^ Dahlen, Chris (2006-07-17). "Interview: David Byrne". Pitchfork Media. http://www.pitchforkmedia.com/article/feature/37176/Interview_Interview_David_Byrne. 
^ Aizlewood, John. "In The Studio". Q Magazine. October 2007.
^ ""Brian Eno: The Lovely Bones"". http://upcomingfilmscores.blogspot.com/2008/12/brian-eno-lovely-bones.html. 
^ "Q and A With Brian Eno"
^ http://pc.gamespy.com/pc/spore/907564p2.html
^ http://blog.wired.com/music/2008/10/review-brian-en.html
^ Nokia Press Release (4 September 2006). "Winds of change"
^ Nokia Press Release (20 December 2006. "Nokia and Brian Eno pair up for two great causes" ; "Nokia 8800 Sirocco Brian Eno Signature Edition Charity Auction"
^ Israel boycott may be the way to peace, The Guardian letters, 15 December 2006
^ Clegg hires Brian Eno as youth adviser
^ Stealing Gaza: An Experiment in Provocation: article by Brian Eno at CounterPunch
^ "UK protests in support of Gaza" article by BT Yahoo News



External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Brian Eno



BBC Collective video interview about 77 Million Paintings
EnoWeb (unofficial website)
The Eno newsletter
More Dark Than Shark (unofficial archive)
Brian Eno at the Internet Movie Database
Brian Eno: His Music and the Vertical Color of Sound by Eric Tamm (free book) zip pdf
Interview with Brian Eno from The Guardian, 19 May 2006
Interview with Brian Eno from San Francisco Chronicle, 2 June 1996
Audio of interview with Brian Eno from KPFA, 2 February 1980








v • d • e

Brian Eno





Solo albums

Here Come the Warm Jets · Taking Tiger Mountain (By Strategy) · Another Green World · Discreet Music · Before and after Science · Music for Airports · Music for Films · Ambient #4, On Land · Thursday Afternoon · Nerve Net · The Shutov Assembly · Neroli · The Drop · Extracts from Music for White Cube · Kite Stories · Music for Civic Recovery Centre · Compact Forest Proposal · Lightness: Music for the Marble Palace · I Dormienti · January 07003-Bell Studies · Another Day on Earth






With Roxy Music

Roxy Music · For Your Pleasure






With Robert Fripp

(No Pussyfooting) · Evening Star · The Equatorial Stars · Beyond Even (1992–2006)






With Cluster

Cluster & Eno · After the Heat · Begegnungen · Begegnungen II






With David Byrne

My Life in the Bush of Ghosts · Everything That Happens Will Happen Today






Other collaborations

June 1, 1974 · 801 Live · The Plateaux of Mirror · Day of Radiance · Fourth World, Vol 1: Possible Musics · Fourth World, Vol 2: Dream Theory in Malaya · Apollo: Atmospheres and Soundtracks · Music For Films Volume 2 · The Pearl · Hybrid · Music for Films III · Wrong Way Up · Wah Wah · Spinner · Original Soundtracks 1 · Music for Onmyo-Ji · Drawn from Life · Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends · No Line on the Horizon






Compilations

More Blank Than Frank/Desert Island Selection · Curiosities · 77 Million Paintings






Publications

A Year with Swollen Appendices · I Dormienti






Related

Discography · Obscure Records · "Strange Overtones" · Songs of David Byrne and Brian Eno Tour · Long Now Foundation · Russell Mills · No New York · Oblique Strategies · Robert Sheckley · Bloom (software)













v • d • e

Roxy Music





Bryan Ferry · Andy Mackay · Phil Manzanera · Paul Thompson
Brian Eno · Eddie Jobson · Graham Simpson · Paul Carrack · Andy Newmark · Rick Wills · Alan Spenner · Gary Tibbs · David Skinner





Studio albums

Roxy Music · For Your Pleasure · Stranded · Country Life · Siren · Manifesto · Flesh + Blood · Avalon






Singles

"Virginia Plain" · "Angel Eyes" · "In the Midnight Hour" · "More Than This"






Live albums

Viva! · The High Road · Heart Still Beating · Concert Classics · Concerto · Live






Compilations

Greatest Hits · The First Seven Albums · The Atlantic Years · Street Life: 20 Great Hits · The Ultimate Collection · More Than This · The Thrill of It All · The Early Years · Slave To Love · The Best of Roxy Music






Related articles

Discography · Chris Thomas









Persondata


NAME
Eno, Brian


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Eno, Brian Peter George; Eno, Brian Peter George St. John le Baptiste de la Salle


SHORT DESCRIPTION
Producer, musician


DATE OF BIRTH
1948-5-15


PLACE OF BIRTH
Woodbridge, Suffolk, England


DATE OF DEATH



PLACE OF DEATH






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brian_Eno"
Categories: Brian Eno | 1948 births | Ambient musicians | Aphorists | English electronic musicians | English experimental musicians | English record producers | Grammy Award winners | Living people | New Age musicians | People from Suffolk | Roxy Music membersHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2009 | Articles to be merged since November 2008 | All articles to be merged | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Français
한국어
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Kiswahili
Lietuvių
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Suomi
Svenska
Українська









 This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 00:24.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
