













Tom Clancy - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Tom_Clancy";
		var wgTitle = "Tom Clancy";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "30265";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282574625;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Tom Clancy

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 

For the member of the Irish folk band The Clancy Brothers, see Tom Clancy (singer); for the American Celticist, see Thomas Owen Clancy.


Tom Clancy


Born
April 12, 1947 (1947-04-12) (age 62)
Baltimore County,
Maryland,
United States


Occupation
Novelist


Nationality
United States


Writing period
1984 - 2003


Genres
Techno-thriller, Crime fiction,
Military fiction, nonfiction







Influenced






Dale Brown,
James Wesley Rawles










Thomas Leo Clancy Jr. (born April 12, 1947) is an American author, best known for his technically detailed espionage and military science storylines set during and in the aftermath of the Cold War. His name is also a brand for similar movie scripts written by ghost writers and many series of non-fiction books on military subjects and merged biographies of key leaders. He is also part-owner of the Baltimore Orioles, a Major League Baseball team. He officially is the Orioles' Vice Chairman of Community Activities and Public Affairs.




Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Political views


2 Bibliography

2.1 By publication date
2.2 By series plot chronology

2.2.1 Novels not in the series
2.2.2 Jack Ryan/John Clark Universe
2.2.3 Op-Center Universe
2.2.4 NetForce Explorers Universe
2.2.5 Ghost Recon Universe


2.3 Non-fiction


3 Video games
4 Board games
5 Achievements and awards
6 References
7 See also
8 External links

8.1 Literary reviews and criticism







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography
Thomas Leo Clancy Jr. was born in Baltimore County, Maryland, United States. He attended Loyola Blakefield in Towson, Maryland, graduating with the class of 1965. He studied English Literature at Loyola College in Baltimore, graduating in 1969.[1] Though he wanted to serve in the United States military, he was rejected after failing a required hearing exam in the ROTC. Before making his literary debut, he spent some time running an independent insurance agency.
In 1993, Tom Clancy joined a group of investors that included Peter Angelos and bought the Baltimore Orioles from Eli Jacobs. In 1998, he reached an agreement to purchase the Minnesota Vikings, but had to abandon the deal due to the cost of his divorce settlement.
On June 26, 1999, Clancy, at age 53, married freelance journalist Alexandra Marie Llewellyn, who at 32 years of age was 21 years his junior."[2] Llewellyn is the first cousin of Colin Powell, who originally introduced the couple to each other.[3]
In 2008, the use of Clancy's name was purchased by French video game manufacturer Ubisoft for an undisclosed sum. It will be used in conjunction with video games and related products such as movies, and books.[4]

[edit] Political views
Clancy has generally been regarded as a political conservative, and has donated over US$256,000 to Republican Party political candidates.[5]
A week after the 9/11 attack, on The O'Reilly Factor, Clancy stated that left-wing politicians in the United States were partly responsible for September 11 due to their "gutting" of the CIA.[3] Clancy has also associated himself with General Anthony Zinni, a critic of the George W. Bush administration, and has been critical of former Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld.[6] He was categorized as a northern paleoconservative.[7]
Some of his books bear dedications to Republican political figures, most notably Ronald Reagan. In his novels countries portrayed as hostile to the U.S. include the former Soviet Union, China, India, Iran, and Japan while Russia, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan and the United Kingdom are shown as close allies of the USA.

[edit] Bibliography
The Hunt for Red October, Patriot Games, Clear and Present Danger, and The Sum of All Fears have been turned into commercially successful films with actors Alec Baldwin, Ben Affleck, and Harrison Ford as Clancy's most famous fictional character Jack Ryan, while his second most famous character John Clark has been played by actors Willem Dafoe and Liev Schreiber. The first NetForce novel was adapted as a television movie, starring Scott Bakula and Joanna Going. The first Op-Center novel was released to coincide with a 1995 NBC television mini-series of the same name (Tom Clancy's Op-Center) starring Harry Hamlin and a cast of stars. Though the mini-series didn't continue the book series did, but it had little in common with the first mini-series other than the title and the names of the main characters.
The website IMDB reports that Tom Clancy's novel Without Remorse is to be made into a movie and is expected to be released in 2011.
With the release of The Teeth of the Tiger, Clancy introduced Jack Ryan's son and two nephews as main characters.
Clancy has written several nonfiction books about various branches of the U.S. armed forces (see non-fiction listing, below). Clancy has also branded several lines of books with his name that are written by other authors, following premises or storylines generally in keeping with Clancy's works:

Tom Clancy's Op-Center
Tom Clancy's Power Plays
Tom Clancy's Net Force
Tom Clancy's Net Force Explorers
Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell
Tom Clancy's EndWar
Tom Clancy's Ghost Recon
Tom Clancy's HAWX

These are sometimes referred to by fans as "apostrophe" books; Clancy did not initially acknowledge that these series were being authored by others, only thanking the actual authors in the headnotes for their "invaluable contribution to the manuscript".
In 1997, Clancy signed a book deal with Penguin Putnam Inc. (both part of Pearson Education), that paid him US$50 million for the world-English rights to two new books. He then signed a second agreement for another US$25 million for a four-year book/multimedia deal. Clancy followed this up with an agreement with Berkley Books for 24 paperbacks to tie in with the ABC television miniseries Tom Clancy's Net Force aired in the fall/winter of 1998. The OP-Center universe has laid the ground for the series of books written by Jeff Rovin, which was in an agreement worth US $22 million bringing the total value of the package to US$97 million.
All but two of Clancy's novels feature Jack Ryan or John Clark.

[edit] By publication date

The Hunt for Red October (1984)
Clancy's first published novel. CIA analyst Jack Ryan assists in the defection of a respected Soviet naval captain, along with the most advanced ballistic missile submarine of the Soviet fleet. The movie (1990) stars Alec Baldwin as Ryan and Sean Connery as Captain Ramius.
Red Storm Rising (1986)
War between NATO and USSR. The basis of the combat game of the same name, this book is not a member of the Ryan story series (although the protagonist of the story has many similarities with Jack Ryan). He co-wrote it with Larry Bond.
Patriot Games (1987)
The first book that Clancy wrote, Patriot Games predates The Hunt for Red October in chronological order. Jack Ryan foils an attack in London on the Prince and Princess of Wales by the "Ulster Liberation Army". The ULA then attacks Ryan's Maryland home while he is hosting the Prince and Princess for dinner. The movie stars Harrison Ford as Ryan and Samuel L. Jackson as Robby Jackson.
The Cardinal of the Kremlin (1988)
First appearance of John Clark and Sergey Golovko. Ryan leads a CIA operation which forces the head of the KGB to defect. Other elements include anti-satellite lasers and other SDI-type weapons, and the Soviet war in Afghanistan. Major Alan Gregory is introduced here. (He appears later, updating SAM software in The Bear and the Dragon).
Clear and Present Danger (1989)
The President authorizes the CIA to use American military forces in a covert war against cocaine producers in Colombia. The operation is betrayed. Ryan meets John Clark as they lead a mission to rescue abandoned soldiers. Domingo "Ding" Chavez ( Clark's protege in later novels) is one of the rescued soldiers. The movie (1994) stars Harrison Ford as Ryan, Willem Dafoe as Clark and Raymond Cruz as Chavez.
The Sum of All Fears (1991)
Arab terrorists find a nuclear weapon that had been lost by Israel, and use it to attack the United States. This nearly triggers a war between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, due to the incompetence of the new President and his advisor. Ryan intervenes to avert the war. The 2002 movie stars Ben Affleck as Ryan, Liev Schreiber as Clark, and changes the identity and motivation of the terrorists to neo-Nazis.
Without Remorse (1993)
This is chronologically the first book, taking place during the Vietnam War, when Jack Ryan was a teenager. Ex-SEAL John Clark (then John Kelly) fights a bloody one-man war against drug dealers in Baltimore, attracting the attention of Jack's father Emmett, a Baltimore police detective. He also helps plan and execute a raid on a prisoner-of-war camp in North Vietnam. Clark joins the Central Intelligence Agency(CIA).
Debt of Honor (1994)
A secret cabal of extreme nationalists gains control of Japan (having acquired some nuclear weapons), and start a war with the U.S. Ryan, now National Security Advisor, and Clark and Chavez, agents in Japan, help win the war. The Vice President resigns in a scandal, and the President appoints Ryan to replace him just before the President is assassinated by a vengeful Japanese die-hard. Ryan thus becomes President.
Executive Orders (1996)
This is the immediate sequel to Debt of Honor. President Ryan survives press hazing, an assassination attempt, and a biological warfare attack on the USA. Clark and Chavez trace the virus to a Middle Eastern madman, and the U.S. military goes to work.
SSN: Strategies for Submarine Warfare (1996)
Follows the missions of USS Cheyenne in a future war with China precipitated by China's invasion of the disputed Spratly Islands. Also not a Ryanverse book, SSN is actually a loosely connected collection of "scenario" chapters in support of the eponymous computer game.
Rainbow Six (1998)
Released to coincide with the computer game of the same name. John Clark and Ding, who is now Clark's son-in-law, lead an elite multi-national anti-terrorist unit that combats a worldwide genocide attempt by eco-terrorists. (Jack Ryan is the U.S. President and only mentioned or referred to as either 'The President' or 'Jack'.)
The Bear and the Dragon (2000)
War between Russia and China. Ryan recognizes the independence of Taiwan, a Chinese police officer kills a diplomat, and the American armed forces help Russia defeat a Chinese invasion of Siberia.
Red Rabbit (2002)
In the early 1980s, CIA analyst Ryan aids in the defection of a Soviet officer who knows of a plan to assassinate Pope John Paul II.
The Teeth of the Tiger (2003)
Jack Ryan's son, Jack Ryan Jr., becomes an intelligence analyst, and then a field consultant, for The Campus, an off-the-books intelligence agency with the freedom to discreetly assassinate individuals "who threaten national security", following the end of the Jack Ryan Sr. presidential administration. This is the latest book of the Jack Ryan series by Tom Clancy, introducing Ryan's son and two nephews as heirs to his spook-legacy.


[edit] By series plot chronology

[edit] Novels not in the series

Red Storm Rising (1986)
SSN (1996)


[edit] Jack Ryan/John Clark Universe

Without Remorse (1993) (John Clark, Jack's father Emmett Ryan)
Patriot Games (1987)
Red Rabbit (2002)
The Hunt for Red October (1984)
The Cardinal of the Kremlin (1988)
Clear and Present Danger (1989)
The Sum of All Fears (1991)
Debt of Honor (1994)
Executive Orders (1996)
Rainbow Six (1998) (John Clark, Jack Ryan by reference)
The Bear and the Dragon (2000)
The Teeth of the Tiger (2003) (Jack Ryan Jr.)


[edit] Op-Center Universe

Op-Center (1995) by Jeff Rovin
Mirror Image (1996) by Jeff Rovin
Games of State (1996) by Jeff Rovin
Acts of War (1997) by Jeff Rovin
Balance of Power
State of Siege
Net Force (1998) by Steve Perry
Hidden Agendas (1999) by Steve Perry
Night Moves (1999) by Steve Perry
Breaking Point (1999) by Steve Perry
Point of Impact (2001) by Steve Perry
CyberNation (2001) by Steve Perry
State of War (2003) by Steve Perry and Larry Segriff
Changing of the Guard (2003) by Steve Perry and Larry Segriff
Springboard (2004) by Steve Perry and Larry Segriff
The Archimedes Effect (2006) by Steve Perry and Larry Segriff


[edit] NetForce Explorers Universe

Virtual Vandals
The Deadliest Game
One is the Loneliest Number
The Ultimate Escape
End Game
Cyberspy
The Great Race
Shadow of Honor
Private Lives
Safe House
The Clone Warsruthless.com (computer game, 1998) by Red Storm Entertainment
Shadow Watch (novel, 1999) by Jerome Preisler
Shadow Watch (computer game, 1999) by Red Storm Entertainment
Bio-Strike (novel, 2000) by Jerome Preisler
Cold War (novel, 2001) by Jerome Preisler
Cutting Edge (novel, 2002) by Jerome Preisler
Zero Hour (novel, 2003) by Jerome Preisler
Wild Card (novel, 2004) by Jerome Preisler


[edit] Ghost Recon Universe

Tom Clancy's Ghost Recon by Grant Blackwood as David Michaels


[edit] Non-fiction
Guided Tour

Submarine: A Guided Tour Inside a Nuclear Warship (1993)
Armored Cav: A Guided Tour of an Armored Cavalry Regiment (1994)
Fighter Wing: A Guided Tour of an Air Force Combat Wing (1995)
Marine: A Guided Tour of a Marine Expeditionary Unit (1996)
Airborne: A Guided Tour of an Airborne Task Force (1997)
Carrier: A Guided Tour of an Aircraft Carrier (1999)
Special Forces: A Guided Tour of U.S. Army Special Forces (2001)

Study in Command

Into the Storm - On the Ground in Iraq (with Fred Franks) (1997)
Every Man a Tiger - the Gulf War Air Campaign (with Chuck Horner) (1999)
Shadow Warriors - Inside the Special Forces (with Carl Stiner) (2002)
Battle Ready (with Anthony Zinni) (2004)

Other

The Tom Clancy Companion - Edited by Martin H. Greenberg - Writings by Clancy along with a concordance of all his fiction novels, detailing characters and military units or equipment.


[edit] Video games
In 1996, Clancy co-founded the computer game developer Red Storm Entertainment and ever since he has had his name on several of Red Storm's most successful games. Red Storm was later bought by publisher Ubisoft Entertainment, which continues to use the Clancy name. This game series includes

Red Storm Rising (video game): A submarine sim game loosely based on the novel of the same name. Produced in 1988 by MicroProse for IBM PC Compatible, C64, and Amiga.
SSN: The novel of the same name is based on it.
Shadow Watch: Turn based strategy based on the Power Play novel [1].
Rainbow Six Series: Squad-based first-person shooters, based on the novel of the same name, typically taking place in closed urban environments.

Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six (1998)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Eagle Watch (1999)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Rogue Spear (1999)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Rogue Spear: Urban Operations (2000)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Covert Operations Essentials (2000)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Rogue Spear: Black Thorn (2001)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Take-Down – Missions in Korea (2001)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Lone Wolf (2002)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six 3 (2003)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six 3: Raven Shield (2003)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Broken Wing (2003)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Urban Crisis (2003)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six 3: Black Arrow (2004)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six 3: Athena Sword (2004)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six 3: Iron Wrath (2005)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Lockdown (2005)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Critical Hour (2006)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Vegas (2006)
Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Vegas 2 (2008)


Ghost Recon Series: Squad-based first-person shooters/third-person shooters. As opposed to the Rainbow Six games, Ghost Recon usually takes place in larger, outdoor environments.

Tom Clancy's Ghost Recon (2001)
Tom Clancy's Ghost Recon: Desert Siege (2003)
Tom Clancy's Ghost Recon: Island Thunder (2003)
Tom Clancy's Ghost Recon: Jungle Storm (2004)
Tom Clancy's Ghost Recon 2 (2004)
Tom Clancy's Ghost Recon 2: Summit Strike (2005)
Tom Clancy's Ghost Recon: Advanced Warfighter (2006)
Tom Clancy's Ghost Recon Advanced Warfighter 2 (2007)


Splinter Cell Series: Third person stealth games, lately spawned a line of books written by a series of different authors, all writing under the pseudonym David Michaels.

Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell (2002)
Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Pandora Tomorrow (2004)
Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Chaos Theory (2005)
Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Essentials (2006)
Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Double Agent (2006)
Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Conviction (2010)


End War Series : Franchise set in a speculative World War 3, taking place in 2020.

Tom Clancy's EndWar (2008)


Air Combat Series : Upcoming air combat.

Tom Clancy's H.A.W.X. (2009)



There were also video games based on the novel The Hunt for Red October and the film adaptation thereof. The two games were published by Grandslam Entertainment. The version based on the film was available on the Sinclair ZX Spectrum, Amiga, Atari ST, IBM PC, Amstrad, Nintendo Entertainment System, Super NES and Game Boy systems, whereas the version based on the book was available on the Atari ST, Amiga, Amstrad 1512 pc, Amstrad CPC, Apple Macintosh, Sinclair ZX Spectrum and Commodore 64 systems. In 2002 and 2003 a video game based on the film version of The Sum of All Fears was released for the PC and Nintendo Gamecube system. Although very similar to the Rainbow Six games, The Sum Of All Fears was poorly received.
Many of the games bearing the Clancy name have been very successful, spawning several sequels and expansions. It is unknown how much input Clancy actually has into the games.
World news media is a fictional news network that had been feature in many Tom Clancy's video games.

[edit] Board games

The Hunt for Red October (1988)

Naval wargame published by TSR, Inc., based on the novel of the same name. It covered modern naval warfare between NATO and the Warsaw Pact.




Red Storm Rising (1989)

Ground warfare wargame published by TSR, Inc., based on the novel of the same name. It covered an attack on NATO forces in western Europe by the Warsaw Pact. It included rules for integration with The Hunt for Red October game of the year before. The publisher reused the system for Europe Aflame (1989), a strategic World War II game, and A Line in the Sand, a strategic game about the First Gulf War.


Tom Clancy's Politika [2]


[edit] Achievements and awards

Clancy is one of only two authors to have sold two million copies on a first printing in the 1990s. (John Grisham is the other author.) Clancy's 1989 novel Clear and Present Danger sold 1,625,544 hardcover copies, making it the #1 bestselling novel of the 1980s.[8]


Clancy received an honorary doctorate in humane letters and delivered the commencement address at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1992, and has since worked a reference to the school into many of his main works.[9]


Clancy is an honorary Yeoman Warder of The Tower of London holding the title "Supernumerary Yeoman".[10] On the television show Ace of Cakes his wife commissioned, for his 60th birthday, a special cake in the shape of the Tower of London in acknowledgment of his status. In the episode, Tom Clancy referred to the Beefeaters as, "Just a terrific bunch of guys".


[edit] References


^ alt.books.tom-clancy post by Tom Clancy
^ "Alexandra Llewellyn, Tom Clancy," The New York Times, June 27, 1999.
^ a b NNDB - Tom Clancy
^ Clancy name bought by Ubisoft, worth big bucks
^ Tom Clancy - Political Donations at newsmeat.com
^ Paperback Writer, The New Republic, 25 May 2004
^ The Social Contract - Profiling In an Age of Terrorism
^ http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/style/longterm/books/25thann/bestsellers.htm Washington Post
^ Rensselaer Magazine: Summer 2004: At Rensselaer
^ TC Post: Clancy Speaks Again Briefly



[edit] See also

List of bestselling novels in the United States
List of other novelists
Joel C. Rosenberg
Stephen Coonts
John le Carré
Ian Fleming
James Clancy Phelan
Frederick Forsyth
Charles Cumming


[edit] External links

Find more about Tom Clancy on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Transcript of interview with Deborah Norville on the War in Iraq - April 2004
Detailed Tom Clancy Book Reviews
Tom Clancy FAQ
Internet Book Database of Fiction bibliography
Tom Clancy at the Internet Movie Database
The Page of Tom Clancy's Primary Publisher


[edit] Literary reviews and criticism

"Something for the Boys" by Christopher Hitchens, The New York Review of Books, November 14, 1996. A review of Clancy's Marine: A Guided Tour of a Marine Expeditionary Unit.








v • d • e

Works by Tom Clancy





Novels



The Hunt for Red October (1984) · Red Storm Rising (1986) · Patriot Games (1987) · The Cardinal of the Kremlin (1988) · Clear and Present Danger (1989) · The Sum of All Fears (1991) · Without Remorse (1993) · Debt of Honor (1994) · Executive Orders (1996) · SSN (1996) · Rainbow Six (1998) · The Bear and the Dragon (2000) · Red Rabbit (2002) · The Teeth of the Tiger (2003)








Non-fiction



Submarine (1993) · Armored Cavalry (1994) · Fighter Wing (1995) · Marine (1996) · Into the Storm (1997) · Airborne (1997) · Carrier (1999) · Every Man a Tiger (1999) · Special Forces (2001) · Shadow Warriors (2002) · Battle Ready (2004)















v • d • e

Tom Clancy video games





Rainbow Six series

Rainbow Six · Rogue Spear · Take-Down · Raven Shield · Black Arrow · Lockdown · Critical Hour · Vegas · Vegas 2






Ghost Recon series

Ghost Recon · Island Thunder · Jungle Storm · Ghost Recon 2 · Summit Strike · Advanced Warfighter · Advanced Warfighter 2 · Ghost Recon 4






Splinter Cell series

Splinter Cell · Pandora Tomorrow · Chaos Theory · Essentials · Double Agent · Conviction






Other titles

The Hunt for Red October · Red Storm Rising · SSN · Politika · ruthless.com · Shadow Watch · The Sum of All Fears · EndWar · H.A.W.X.









Persondata


NAME
Clancy, Tom


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Clancy, Thomas Leo, Jr.


SHORT DESCRIPTION
Novelist


DATE OF BIRTH
12 April 1947


PLACE OF BIRTH
Baltimore County, Maryland, United States


DATE OF DEATH



PLACE OF DEATH






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tom_Clancy"
Categories: 1947 births | Living people | Roman Catholic writers | American thriller writers | Irish-Americans | Irish-American writers | Maryland Republicans | Writers from Maryland | Tom Clancy | American Roman Catholics | American novelists | American military writers | Republicans (United States) | Techno-thrillers | Loyola College in Maryland alumni | People from Calvert County, Maryland 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Български
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Français
Galego
Italiano
עברית
Lëtzebuergesch
Magyar
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 16:00 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
