













Tuvalu - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Tuvalu";
		var wgTitle = "Tuvalu";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "30227";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280086731;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Tuvalu

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Tuvalu (disambiguation).



Tuvalu










Flag
Coat of arms





Motto: "Tuvalu mo te Atua"  (Tuvaluan)
"Tuvalu for the Almighty"


Anthem: Tuvalu mo te Atua  (Tuvaluan)
Tuvalu for the Almighty
Royal anthem: God Save the Queen










Capital
Funafuti
8°31′S 179°13′E﻿ / ﻿8.517°S 179.217°E﻿ / -8.517; 179.217


Official languages
Tuvaluan, English


Demonym
Tuvaluan


Government
Parliamentary Democracy with a Constitutional monarchy


 - 
Queen
Elizabeth II


 - 
Governor General
Filoimea Telito


 - 
Prime Minister
Apisai Ielemia


Independence


 - 
from the UK
1 October 1978 


Area


 - 
Total
26 km2 (226th)
10 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
negligible


Population


 - 
July 2007 estimate
11,992 (222nd)


 - 
Density
441/km2 (22nd)
1,142/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2002 estimate


 - 
Total
$14.94 million (228th)


 - 
Per capita
$1,600 (2002 estimate) (148th if ranked)


HDI (2003)
n/a (unranked) (n/a)


Currency
Tuvaluan dollar
Australian dollar (AUD)


Time zone
(UTC+12)


Drives on the
left


Internet TLD
.tv


Calling code
688


Tuvalu ( /tuːˈvɑːluː/ (help·info) or /ˈtuːvəluː/), formerly known as the Ellice Islands, is a Polynesian island nation located in the Pacific Ocean midway between Hawaii and Australia. Its nearest neighbours are Kiribati, Samoa and Fiji. It comprises four reef islands and five true atolls. Its population of 11,992 makes it the third-least-populated independent country in the world, with only Vatican City and Nauru having fewer inhabitants. It is also the second-smallest member by population of the United Nations. In terms of physical land size, at just 26 square kilometres (10 sq mi) Tuvalu is the fourth smallest country in the world, larger only than the Vatican City—0.44 km²; Monaco—1.95 km² and Nauru—21 km².
The first inhabitants of Tuvalu were Polynesian people. The islands came under the UK's sphere of influence in the late 19th century. The Ellice Islands were administered by Britain as part of a protectorate from 1892 to 1916 and as part of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony from 1916 to 1974. In 1974 the Ellice Islanders voted for separate British dependency status as Tuvalu, separating from the Gilbert Islands which became Kiribati upon independence. Tuvalu became fully independent within The Commonwealth in 1978.




Contents


1 History
2 Politics
3 Districts
4 Foreign relations
5 Geography
6 Economy
7 Demographics
8 Culture

8.1 Heritage
8.2 Cuisine
8.3 Sport and Leisure
8.4 Music


9 Transportation
10 Climate change
11 See also
12 References
13 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Main article: History of Tuvalu




Tuvaluan man in traditional costume drawn by Alfred Agate in 1841 during the United States Navy Exploring Expedition.


Tuvaluans are a Polynesian people who settled the islands around 3000 years ago[1] coming from Tonga and Samoa. During pre-European-contact times there was frequent canoe voyaging between the nearer islands. Eight of the 9 islands of Tuvalu were inhabited; thus the name, Tuvalu, means "eight standing together" in Tuvaluan. Possible evidence of fire in the Caves of Nanumanga may indicate human occupation thousands of years before that.
Tuvalu was first sighted by Europeans in 1568 with the arrival of Álvaro de Mendaña de Neira from Spain who also encountered the island of Nui (atoll) but was unable to land.
No other Europeans turned up again until the late 1700s when other European explorers reached the area. By the early 1800s whalers were roving the Pacific though visiting Tuvalu only infrequently, because of the difficulties of landing ships on the atolls, and no settlements were established by them.
Peruvian slave raiders ("blackbirders") combed the Pacific between 1862 and 1864 and Tuvalu was one of the hardest-hit Pacific island groups with over 400 people taken from Funafuti and Nukulaelae, none of whom returned.
In 1865 the London Missionary Society, Protestant congregationalists, began their process of evangelisation of Tuvalu and the people's conversion to Christianity was complete by the 1920s[citation needed]. Also in the late 1800s, European traders began to live on the islands hoping to profit from local resources.




A man from the Nukufetau atoll 1831


In 1892 the islands became part of the British protectorate known as the Ellice Islands. The protectorate was incorporated into the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony in 1916. In 1943, during World War II, Tuvalu was selected as an operations base for Allied forces battling the Japanese in the Pacific. Thousands of marines were stationed there until December 1945.
In 1974 ethnic differences within the colony caused the Polynesians of the Ellice Islands to vote for separation from the Micronesians of the Gilbert Islands (to become Kiribati). The following year the Ellice Islands became the separate British colony of Tuvalu. Independence was granted in 1978.
Tuvalu Independence Day is celebrated on 1 October. In 1979 Tuvalu signed a treaty of friendship with the United States that recognized Tuvalu's rightful possession of four small islands formerly claimed by the United States.
As low-lying islands, lacking a surrounding shallow shelf, the island communities of Tuvalu are especially susceptible to changes in sea level and storm patterns that hit the island undissipated. It is estimated that a sea level rise of 20–40 centimetres (8–16 inches) in the next 100 years could make Tuvalu uninhabitable.[2][3] The South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC) suggests that while Tuvalu is vulnerable to climate change there are additional environmental problems such as population growth and poor coastal management that are affecting sustainable development on the island. SOPAC ranks the country as extremely vulnerable using the Environmental Vulnerability Index.[4] While some commentators have called for the relocation of the population of Tuvalu to Australia, New Zealand, or Kioa (Fiji), the former Prime Minister Maatia Toafa said his government did not regard rising sea levels as such a threat that the entire population would need to be evacuated.[5][6] In spite of persistent Internet rumours that New Zealand has agreed to accept an annual quota of 75 evacuees, the annual residence quota of 75 Tuvaluans under the Pacific Access Category (and 50 places for people from Kiribati) replaced the previous Work Schemes from the two countries and are not related to environmental concerns. [7]

[edit] Politics
Main article: Politics of Tuvalu
Tuvalu is a constitutional monarchy and Commonwealth realm, with Queen Elizabeth II recognised as the official Queen of Tuvalu. She is represented in Tuvalu by a Governor General, who is appointed upon the advice of the Prime Minister. The local unicameral parliament, or Fale I Fono, has 15 members and is elected every four years. Its members elect a Prime Minister who is the head of government. The Cabinet is appointed by the Governor General on the advice of the Prime Minister. Each island also has its own high-chief or ulu-aliki, and several sub-chiefs (alikis) and elders. The elders form together an island council of elders or te sina o fenua (literally:"grey-hairs"). In the past, another caste, namely the one of the priests (tofuga) was also amongst the decision-makers. The sina o fenua, aliki and ulu-aliki exercise informal authority on a local level. Ulu-aliki are always chosen based on hericy, and their powers are now shared with the pule o kaupule (elected village presidents; one on each atol). [8]There are no formal political parties and election campaigns are largely on the basis of personal/family ties and reputation.
The highest court in Tuvalu is the High Court; there are eight Island Courts with limited jurisdiction. Rulings from the High Court can be appealed to the Court of Appeal of Tuvalu. From the Court of Appeal there is a right of appeal to Her Majesty in Council, ie the Privy Council in London.
Tuvalu has no regular military forces, and spends no money on the military. Its police force includes a Maritime Surveillance Unit for search and rescue missions and surveillance operations. The police have a Pacific-class patrol boat (Te Mataili) provided by Australia under the Pacific Patrol Boat Program for use in maritime surveillance and fishery patrol.
The government of Tuvalu is represented in the United Kingdom by an honorary consul, based at Tuvalu House, London.

[edit] Districts




Map of Tuvalu


Main article: Islands of Tuvalu
Tuvalu's small population is distributed across 9 islands, 5 of which are atolls. The smallest island, Niulakita, was uninhabited until it was resettled by people from Niutao in 1949.
Local government districts consisting of more than one islet:

Funafuti
Nanumea
Nui
Nukufetau
Nukulaelae
Vaitupu

Local government districts consisting of only one island:

Nanumanga
Niulakita
Niutao








v • d • e

Islands and atolls of Tuvalu





Islands

Nanumanga • Niulakita • Niutao







Atolls

Funafuti • Nanumea • Nui • Nukufetau • Nukulaelae • Vaitupu






Islets of Funafuti

Amatuku • Avalau • Falaoigo • Fale Fatu • Fatato • Fongafale • Fuafatu • Fuagea • Fualefeke • Fualopa • Funafala • Funamanu • Luamotu • Mateika • Motugie • Motuloa • Mulitefala Nukusavalevale • Papa Elise • Pukasavilivili • Te Afuafou • Te Afualiku • Tefala • Telele • Tengasu • Tepuka • Tepuka Vili Vili • Tutanga • Vasafua






Islets of Nanumea

Lakena • Lefogaki • Teatua a Taepoa • Temotufoliki






Islets of Nui

Fenua Tapu • Meang • Motupuakaka • Pakantou • Piliaieve • Pongalei • Talalolae • Tokinivae • Unimai






Islets of Nukufetau

Faiava Lasi • Fale • Funaota • Kongo Loto Lafanga • Lafanga • Matanukulaelae • Motufetau • Motulalo • Motuloa (north of Nukufetau) • Motuloa (south of Nukufetau) • Motumua • Niualuka • Niuatui • Oua • Sakalua • Savave • Teafatule • Teafuaniua • Teafuanonu • Teafuone • Temotuloto






Islets of Vaitupu

Luasamotu • Isles of Mosana • Motutanifa • Temotu • Te Motu Olepa • Tofia







[edit] Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of Tuvalu
Tuvalu maintains close relations with Fiji, New Zealand, Australia and the United Kingdom. It has diplomatic relations with the Republic of China (Taiwan); Taiwan maintains the only resident embassy in Tuvalu and has a large assistance program in the islands.
Tuvalu became a member of United Nations in 2000 and maintains a mission at the UN in New York. A major international priority for Tuvalu in the UN, at the World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg and in other international fora is promoting concern about global warming and possible sea level rise. Tuvalu advocates ratification and implementation of the Kyoto Protocol. It also is a member of the Asian Development Bank.
Tuvalu is a party to a treaty of friendship with the United States, signed soon after independence and ratified by the U.S. Senate in 1983, under which the United States renounced prior territorial claims to four Tuvaluan islands under the Guano Act. [9]

[edit] Geography




A beach at Funafuti atoll on a sunny day.


Main article: Geography of Tuvalu
Tuvalu consists of four reef islands and five true atolls. Its small, scattered group of atolls has poor soil and a total land area of only about 26 square kilometres (less than 10 sq. mi.) making it the fourth smallest country in the world. The land is very low lying with narrow coral atolls. Funafuti is the largest atoll of the nine low reef islands and atolls that form the Tuvalu volcanic island chain. It comprises numerous islets around a central lagoon that is approximately 25.1 kilometres (15.6 mi) (N-S) by 18.4 kilometres (11.4 mi) (W-E), centred on 179°7’E and 8°30’S. An annular reef rim surrounds the lagoon, with several natural reef channels.
The highest elevation is 4.5 metres (15 ft) above sea level,[10] which gives Tuvalu the second-lowest maximum elevation of any country (after the Maldives). Because of this low elevation, the islands that make up this nation may be threatened by any future sea level rise. Under such circumstances, the population may evacuate to New Zealand, Niue or the Fijian island of Kioa. Additionally, Tuvalu is affected by what is known as a King Tide, which can raise the sea level higher than a normal high tide.[11] In the future, this may threaten to submerge the nation entirely.
Tuvalu has very poor land and the soil is hardly usable for agriculture. There is almost no reliable supply of drinking water.
Tuvalu has westerly gales and heavy rain from November to March and tropical temperatures moderated by easterly winds from March to November.

[edit] Economy
Main article: Economy of Tuvalu
Tuvalu has almost no natural resources, and its main form of income consists of foreign aid. Virtually the only jobs in the islands that pay a steady wage or salary are with the government. Subsistence farming and fishing remain the primary economic activities, particularly off the capital island of Funafuti. Government revenues largely come from the sale of stamps and coins, fishing licenses and worker remittances.
About 800 Tuvaluans previously worked in Nauru in the phosphate mining industry or aboard foreign ships as sailors. When phosphate mining ceased in Nauru, 378 Tuvaluans were stranded in the country until they were repatriated in 2006 by a joint program in which Australia, New Zealand, and the EU paid most of the cost of their return passage, and Taiwan paid the back wages they were owed.[12] Substantial income is received annually from the Tuvalu Trust Fund, which was established in 1987 by Australia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom and supported also by Japan and South Korea. This fund grew from an initial $17 million to over $35 million in 1999. The US government is also a major revenue source for Tuvalu, with 1999 payments from a 1988 treaty on fisheries at about $9 million, a total which is expected to rise annually. In an effort to reduce its dependence on foreign aid, the government is pursuing public sector reforms, including privatization of some government functions and personnel cuts of up to 7%.[citation needed]
In 1998, Tuvalu began deriving revenue from use of its area code for "900" lines and from the sale of its ".tv" Internet domain name. In 2000, Tuvalu negotiated a contract leasing its Internet domain name ".tv" for $50 million in royalties. However, the Canadian entrepreneur who negotiated the deal, Jason Chapnik, was unable to raise the $50 million in the contracted time period, and the contract eventually fell into other hands.
Due to the country's remoteness, tourism does not provide much income; a hundred tourists are estimated to visit Tuvalu annually.[13] Almost all visitors are government officials, aid workers, non-governmental organization officials or consultants.
Tuvalu allegedly participated in Japan's vote-buying scheme at the International Whaling Commission in 2006. Greenpeace maintains that vote-buying took place[14] and Tuvalu was one of the countries to receive economic assistance from Japan in 2006.[15]

[edit] Demographics




A woman from Tuvalu dated 1894


Main article: Demographics of Tuvalu
The island population has more than doubled since 1980 and was estimated to reach 11,810 in July 2006.[16] The population of Tuvalu is primarily of Polynesian ethnicity; about 4% of the population is Micronesian. About 97% of the Tuvaluans are members of the Church of Tuvalu, a Protestant Christian church. The religion has been mixed with some elements of the indigenous religions. Other religions practised on the island include Seventh-Day Adventist (1.4%) and Bahá'í (1%).[16]
The Tuvaluan language is spoken by virtually everyone, while a language very similar to Gilbertese is spoken on Nui. English is also an official language, but is not spoken in daily use. Parliament and official functions are conducted in Tuvaluan.

[edit] Culture

[edit] Heritage
The traditional community system still survives to a large extent on Tuvalu. Each family has its own task, or salanga, to perform for the community, such as fishing, house building or defence. The skills of a family are passed on from father to son.
Most islands have their own futi, or government owned shops. Similar to a convenience store, you can buy canned foods and bags of rice, but goods are cheaper and fusis give better prices for their own goods due to government subsidy.
Another important building is the falekaupule or village hall, where important matters are discussed and which is used with certain events.

[edit] Cuisine
The traditional foods eaten in Tuvalu are pulaka, seafood (crab, turtle, some fish), bananas and breadfruit, coconut, and pork. Pulaka is the main source for carbohydrates. It is grown in large pits below the watertable in composted soil. Seafood is the main source of protein. Bananas and breadfruit are supplemental crops. Finally, coconut is used for its juice, making beverages and to make food tastier. Pork is eaten most with fateles (or parties with dance to celebrate certain events)

[edit] Sport and Leisure
A traditional sport played in Tuvalu is kilikiti, which is similar to cricket.[17] Another sport popular and specific to Tuvalu is ano, which is played with 2 round balls of 12cm diameter.
More common sports such as football, cycling and rugby are also played in the country as recreational activities. Tuvalu has a national football team and competes officially with local nations, despite not being a FIFA member. However, there are no records of a rugby team, in either code, and rugby remains undeveloped in the country, although it is hoped that exposure to the NRL Grand Final, which is televised across the Pacific Islands will increase the popularity of rugby league enough to create a viable and competitive team. There are no training facilities for any sport in the country.
Tuvalu entered the Olympic Games for the first time at the 2008 summer games in Beijing, China, sending three competitors in two events.

[edit] Music
See also: Music of Tuvalu
Traditional music prior to European contact included poems performed in a sort of monotonal recitation, though this tradition has since become extinct[citation needed], as well as work songs which the women performed to encourage the men while they worked.
The most famous form of Tuvaluan dance music, fatele, is influenced by European melody and harmony[citation needed] and is competitive, with each island divided into two sides or teams (called feitu's).[citation needed] Feitus exist not only with the dancing at fatele's (which is conducted much like a competition), but for other activities as well.
The two primary traditional dances of Tuvalu are the fakanu and fakaseasea. Of these, the fakanu has since died out, though the fakaseasea lives on, performed only by elders.[citation needed]

[edit] Transportation

Main article: Transportation in Tuvalu

Funafuti International Airport serves the country.

[edit] Climate change
At its highest, Tuvalu is only 4.5 m above sea level, and could be one of the first nations to experience the effects of sea level rise caused by climate change. Not only could parts of the island be flooded, the rising saltwater table could destroy deep rooted food crops such as coconut and taro.
In 1978, a tide gauge was installed at Funafuti by the University of Hawaii and measured a sea rise of 1.2 millimetres per year over 23 years, a figure consistent with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) global mean estimate of 1-2 mm per year over the twentieth century.[18] The 40 cm rise in sea level predicted by the IPCC by the end of the twenty-first century (not including potential increases in sea level rise from dynamic ice sheet behaviour), could have significant effects for Tuvalu.[19]
This concern is compounded by the effects of subsidence, both as the islands naturally sink into the sea and as non-natural land use (such as farming) causes compaction.

[edit] See also

Communications in Tuvalu
Education in Tuvalu
ISO 3166-2:TV


[edit] References


^ Howe, Kerry (2003). The Quest for Origins. New Zealand: Penguin. pp. 68, 70. ISBN 0-14-301857-4. 
^ Patel, S. S. 2006. A sinking feeling Nature 440:734-736
^ Hunter, J. A. 2002. Note on Relative Sea Level Change at Funafuti, Tuvalu URL Accessed 2006-05-13
^ SOPAC. 2005. Tuvalu - Environmental Vulnerability Index URL Accessed 2006-05-13
^ Political Parties Cautious On Tuvalu-Kioa Plan, Pacific Magazine, February 21, 2006 URL Accessed 2006-05-13
^ Kioa relocation not priority: Tuvalu PM, Tuvalu Online, February 21 2006 URL Accessed 2006-05-13
^ "Government announces Pacific access scheme". http://www.beehive.govt.nz/ViewDocument.aspx?DocumentID=12740. 
^ Time & Tide: The islands of Tuvalu by Lonely Planet
^ DOI Office of Insular Affairs (OIA) - FORMERLY DISPUTED ISLANDS
^ Lewis, James (December 1989). "Sea level rise: Some implications for Tuvalu". The Environmentalist 9 (4): 269-275. doi:10.1007/BF02241827. http://www.springerlink.com/content/7661437042415227/. 
^ "Tuvalu struggles to hold back tide". BBC News. 2008-01-22. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/7203313.stm. Retrieved on 2008-08-05. 
^ TUVALUANS STRANDED ON NAURU TO RETURN HOME - July 31, 2006
^ Travel And Tourism in Tuvalu
^ Japan's vote buying Greenpeace International
^ Japan Provides Grant Assistance to Tuvalu » Press Releases » Embassy of Japan in Fiji
^ a b CIA World Fact Book URL accessed 2006-05-13.
^ Squires, N. April 1, 2006. Testing time for tiny Tuvalu. BBC News URL Accessed 2006-05-13
^ Kennedy Warne, "Dance of a Dangerous Sea", Canadian Geographic Magazine, October 2008, p. 58
^ Kennedy Warne, ibid, p. 61



[edit] External links

Find more about Tuvalu on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Government


Government of Tuvalu
Chief of State and Cabinet Members


General information


Tuvalu entry at The World Factbook
Tuvalu from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Tuvalu at the Open Directory Project
Wikimedia Atlas of Tuvalu


Travel


Timeless Tuvalu Official Travel Website
Tuvalu travel guide from Wikitravel


Other


Paradis Perdus: Les derniers jours de Tuvalu (part of the documentary)
Tuvalu's options on setting up defences against the rising sea
SOPAC working with Tuvalu to defend it against the rising sea by strengthening the island trough the filling of the US borrow pits
Tuvalu: That Sinking Feeling from PBS Rough Cut
Effects of Climate Change on Tuvalu
Environment: Tiny Tuvalu Fights for Its Literal Survival IPS News
The Sinking of Tuvalu








v • d • e

Polynesia





Polynesian triangle

Austral Islands · Cook Islands · Easter Island · Gambier Islands · Hawaiian Islands · Loyalty Islands · Marquesas · New Zealand · Pitcairn Islands · Sala y Gómez · Samoan Islands · Society Islands · Tokelau · Tonga · Tuamotus · Tuvalu · Wallis and Futuna Islands






Polynesian outliers and
peripheral cultures

Anuta · Emae · Futuna · Kapingamarangi · Mele · Nuguria · Nukumanu · Nukuoro · Ontong Java · Ouvéa · Pileni · Rennell · Rotuma · Sikaiana · Takuu · Tikopia













v • d • e

Countries and territories of Oceania





Sovereign states

Australia · East Timor1 · Fiji · Indonesia1 · Kiribati · Papua New Guinea · Federated States of Micronesia · Marshall Islands · Nauru · New Zealand · Palau · Samoa · Solomon Islands · Tonga · Tuvalu · Vanuatu






Dependencies and
other territories





Australia


Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands · Norfolk Island







France


French Polynesia · New Caledonia · Wallis and Futuna







New Zealand


Cook Islands · Niue · Tokelau







United Kingdom


Pitcairn Islands







United States


American Samoa · Guam · Hawaii · Northern Mariana Islands







Chile


Easter Island









1 Transcontinental country












v • d • e

Culture of Indigenous Oceania





List of resources about traditional arts and culture





Art

ahu · Australia · Hawaiʻi · kapa (Hawaiʻi) · lei (Hawaii) · magimagi · Māori · moai · New Zealand · Oceania · reimiro · tā moko · tapa ["masi" (Fiji), "ngatu" (Tonga), "siapo" (Sāmoa), " ʻuha" (Rotuma)] · tabua · ta'ovala · tattoo · tēfui · tivaivai






Broad culture

betel nut · Kava culture · kava, [" ʻawa" (Hawaii), " ʻava" (Sāmoa), "yaqona" (Fiji), or "sakau" (Pohnpei)] · Lapita · Māori · Polynesia · Polynesian navigation · wood carving






Country-specific

Australia · Cook Islands · Easter Island · Fiji · Fiji's Lau Islands · Fijian traditions and ceremonies · Guam · Hawaiʻi · Hawaiian massage · Kiribati · French Polynesia's Marquesas Islands · Marshall Islands · Federated States of Micronesia · Nauru · New Caledonia · New Zealand · Niue · Norfolk Island · Papua New Guinea · Pitcairn Islands · Sāmoa · Solomon Islands · Tonga · Tuvalu · Vanuatu · Wallis and Futuna






Dance

'aparima · cibi · fara · fire dancing · firewalking · haka · hivinau · hula · kapa haka · Kiribati · meke · 'ote'a · pa'o'a · poi · Rotuma · Tahiti · tāmūrē · tautoga · Tonga · 'upa'upa






Music

Austral Islands (French Polynesia) · Australia · Cook Islands · didgeridoo · Easter Island · Fiji · Guam · Hawaiʻi · Kiribati · lali · Māori · Melanesia · Northern Mariana Islands · Micronesia · Federated States of Micronesia · Nauru · New Caledonia · New Zealand · Niue · Palau · Papua New Guinea · Polynesia · Sāmoa · Solomon Islands · Tahiti · Tokelau · Tonga · Tuvalu · Vanuatu · Wallis and Futuna






People

Indigenous Australians · Chamorro · Hawaiian · Māori · Marshallese · Melanesian · Micronesian · Negrito · Norfolk Islanders · Polynesian · Rapanui · Rotumans · Sāmoan






Festivals

Australia's Garma Festival · Hawaiʻi's Aloha Festivals, Merrie Monarch Festival, and World Invitational Hula Festival · New Zealand's Pasifika Festival · The Pacific Community's Festival of Pacific Arts · Festivals in Papua New Guinea






Not included: Oceanian: cinema, languages, cuisine












v • d • e

Austronesian-speaking countries and territories





Formosan

Taiwan






Malayo-Polynesian

American Samoa · Brunei · Burma (Myanmar) · Cambodia · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands · Cook Islands · Easter Island · East Timor · Fiji · French Polynesia · Guam · Hainan · Hawaii · Indonesia · Kiribati · Madagascar · Malaysia · Marshall Islands · FS Micronesia · Nauru · New Caledonia · New Zealand · Niue · Northern Mariana Islands · Orchid Island · Palau · Papua New Guinea · Patani · Philippines · Samoa · Singapore · Solomon Islands · Sri Lanka · Suriname · Tokelau · Tonga · Tuvalu · United States · Vanuatu · Vietnam · Wallis and Futuna













v • d • e

  Commonwealth realms






Antigua and Barbuda · Australia · Bahamas · Barbados · Belize · Canada · Grenada · Jamaica · New Zealand · Papua New Guinea · St Kitts and Nevis · St Lucia · St Vincent and the Grenadines · Solomon Islands · Tuvalu · United Kingdom













v • d • e

Monarchies





Geography

Africa · Americas · Europe · Oceania









Absolute

Brunei · Saudi Arabia · Swaziland · Vatican City






Constitutional

Antigua and Barbuda · Australia · Andorra · Bahamas · Bahrain · Barbados · Belize · Belgium · Bhutan · Cambodia · Canada · Denmark · Grenada · Jamaica · Japan1 · Jordan · Kuwait · Liechtenstein · Lesotho · Luxembourg · Malaysia · Monaco · Morocco · Netherlands · New Zealand · Norway · Oman2 · Papua New Guinea · Qatar2 · Spain · Saint Kitts and Nevis · Saint Lucia · Saint Vincent and the Grenadines · Solomon Islands · Sweden · Thailand · Tonga · Tuvalu · United Arab Emirates3 · United Kingdom






Elective

Andorra · Cambodia · Kuwait · Malaysia · Swaziland · United Arab Emirates3 · Vatican City






Subnational





Ghana


Ashanti · Dagbon







Malaysia


Johor · Kedah · Kelantan · Negeri Sembilan · Pahang · Perak · Perlis · Selangor · Terengganu







Nigeria


Ibadan · Nri · Kano · Sokoto Caliphate · Lagos







Uganda


Ankole · Buganda · Bunyoro · Busoga · Toro







United Arab Emirates


Abu Dhabi · Ajman · Dubai · Fujairah · Ras al-Khaimah · Sharjah · Umm al-Qaiwain







Wallis and Futuna


Alo · Sigave · Uvea







Others


Māori (New Zealand) · Yogyakarta (Indonesia) · Zululand (South Africa) · Barotseland (Zambia)









Italics indicate Commonwealth realms, which each share the same monarch as head of state.
1 Monarch debatable as Head of State.   2 Technically constitutional, but effectively absolute.   3 Uses the title President.





 



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tuvalu"
Categories: Tuvalu | 1978 establishments | Polynesia | Constitutional monarchies | Liberal democracies | Microstates | Island countries | Least Developed Countries | Members of the Commonwealth of NationsHidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | Articles including recorded pronunciations | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Aragonés
Arpetan
Asturianu
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Fiji Hindi
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Ido
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kapampangan
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
कश्मीरी - (كشميري)
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nāhuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
O'zbek
پښتو
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Reo Mā`ohi
Ripoarisch
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Sámegiella
संस्कृत
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Tok Pisin
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Volapük
Wolof
Zazaki
Zeêuws
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 21:26.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
