













Brain-computer interface - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Brain-computer_interface";
		var wgTitle = "Brain-computer interface";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "623686";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281161155;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Brain-computer interface

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Neuropsychology


Topics



Brain-computer interface
Traumatic brain injury
Brain regions • Clinical neuropsychology
Cognitive neuroscience • Human brain
Neuroanatomy • Neurophysiology
Phrenology • Misconceptions



Brain functions



arousal • attention
consciousness • decision making
executive functions • natural language
learning • memory
motor coordination • sensory perception
planning • problem solving • thought



People



Arthur L. Benton • David Bohm
António Damásio • Phineas Gage
Norman Geschwind • Elkhonon Goldberg
Patricia Goldman Rakic • Pasko Rakic
Donald O. Hebb • Kenneth Heilman
Edith Kaplan • Muriel Lezak
Benjamin Libet • Rodolfo Llinás
Alexander Luria • Brenda Milner
Karl H. Pribram • Oliver Sacks
Roger W. Sperry • H. M. • K. C.



Tests



Bender-Gestalt Test
Benton Visual Retention Test
Clinical Dementia Rating
Continuous Performance Task
Glasgow Coma Scale
Hayling and Brixton tests
Johari window • Lexical decision task
Mini-mental state examination
Stroop effect
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale
Wisconsin card sorting



Mind and Brain Portal
This box: view • talk • edit



A brain-computer interface (BCI), sometimes called a direct neural interface or a brain-machine interface, is a direct communication pathway between a brain and an external device. BCIs were aimed at assisting, augmenting or repairing human cognitive or sensory-motor functions.
Research on BCIs began in the 1970s at the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) under a grant from the National Science Foundation followed by a contract from DARPA. [1][2]. These papers also mark the first appearance of the expression "Brain Computer Interface" in the scientific literature.
The field has since blossomed spectacularly, mostly toward neuroprosthetics applications that aim at restoring damaged hearing, sight and movement. Thanks to the remarkable cortical plasticity of the brain, signals from implanted prostheses can, after adaptation, be handled by the brain like natural sensor or effector channels.[3] Following years of animal experimentation, the first neuroprosthetic devices implanted in humans appeared in the mid-nineties.




Contents


1 BCI versus Neuroprosthetics
2 Animal BCI research

2.1 Early work
2.2 Prominent research successes


3 Human BCI research

3.1 Invasive BCIs
3.2 Partially-invasive BCIs
3.3 Non-invasive BCIs

3.3.1 EEG
3.3.2 MEG and MRI


3.4 Commercialization and companies


4 Military applications
5 Cell-culture BCIs
6 Ethical considerations
7 Theme in fiction
8 See also
9 References
10 External links

10.1 Organizations
10.2 Researchers listed in above text
10.3 Portals and articles
10.4 Lectures and videos







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] BCI versus Neuroprosthetics
Main article: Neuroprosthetics
Neuroprosthetics is an area of neuroscience concerned with neural prostheses—using artificial devices to replace the function of impaired nervous systems or sensory organs. The most widely used neuroprosthetic device is the cochlear implant, which was implanted in approximately 100,000 people worldwide as of 2006.[4] There are also several neuroprosthetic devices that aim to restore vision, including retinal implants.
The differences between BCIs and neuroprosthetics are mostly in the ways the terms are used: neuroprosthetics typically connect the nervous system to a device, whereas BCIs usually connect the brain (or nervous system) with a computer system. Practical neuroprosthetics can be linked to any part of the nervous system--for example, peripheral nerves--while the term "BCI" usually designates a narrower class of systems which interface with the central nervous system.
The terms are sometimes used interchangeably, and for good reason. Neuroprosthetics and BCIs seek to achieve the same aims, such as restoring sight, hearing, movement, ability to communicate, and even cognitive function. Both use similar experimental methods and surgical techniques.

[edit] Animal BCI research




Rats implanted with BCIs in Theodore Berger's experiments


Several laboratories have managed to record signals from monkey and rat cerebral cortices in order to operate BCIs to carry out movement. Monkeys have navigated computer cursors on screen and commanded robotic arms to perform simple tasks simply by thinking about the task and without any motor output.[5] Other research on cats has decoded visual signals.

[edit] Early work
Studies that developed algorithms to reconstruct movements from motor cortex neurons, which control movement, date back to the 1970s. Work by groups led by Schmidt, Fetz and Baker in the 1970s established that monkeys could quickly learn to voluntarily control the firing rate of individual neurons in the primary motor cortex via closed-loop operant conditioning, a training method using punishment and rewards.[6]
In the 1980s, Apostolos Georgopoulos at Johns Hopkins University found a mathematical relationship between the electrical responses of single motor-cortex neurons in rhesus macaque monkeys and the direction that monkeys moved their arms (based on a cosine function). He also found that dispersed groups of neurons in different areas of the brain collectively controlled motor commands but was only able to record the firings of neurons in one area at a time because of technical limitations imposed by his equipment.[7]
There has been rapid development in BCIs since the mid-1990s.[8] Several groups have been able to capture complex brain motor centre signals using recordings from neural ensembles (groups of neurons) and use these to control external devices, including research groups led by Richard Andersen, John Donoghue, Phillip Kennedy, Miguel Nicolelis, and Andrew Schwartz.

[edit] Prominent research successes
Phillip Kennedy and colleagues built the first intracortical brain-computer interface by implanting neurotrophic-cone electrodes into monkeys.




Yang Dan and colleagues' recordings of cat vision using a BCI implanted in the lateral geniculate nucleus (top row: original image; bottom row: recording)


In 1999, researchers led by Yang Dan at University of California, Berkeley decoded neuronal firings to reproduce images seen by cats. The team used an array of electrodes embedded in the thalamus (which integrates all of the brain’s sensory input) of sharp-eyed cats. Researchers targeted 177 brain cells in the thalamus lateral geniculate nucleus area, which decodes signals from the retina. The cats were shown eight short movies, and their neuron firings were recorded. Using mathematical filters, the researchers decoded the signals to generate movies of what the cats saw and were able to reconstruct recognizable scenes and moving objects.[9] Similar results in humans have been since then achieved by researchers in Japan (see below).
Miguel Nicolelis has been a prominent proponent of using multiple electrodes spread over a greater area of the brain to obtain neuronal signals to drive a BCI. Such neural ensembles are said to reduce the variability in output produced by single electrodes, which could make it difficult to operate a BCI.
After conducting initial studies in rats during the 1990s, Nicolelis and his colleagues developed BCIs that decoded brain activity in owl monkeys and used the devices to reproduce monkey movements in robotic arms. Monkeys have advanced reaching and grasping abilities and good hand manipulation skills, making them ideal test subjects for this kind of work.
By 2000, the group succeeded in building a BCI that reproduced owl monkey movements while the monkey operated a joystick or reached for food.[10] The BCI operated in real time and could also control a separate robot remotely over Internet protocol. But the monkeys could not see the arm moving and did not receive any feedback, a so-called open-loop BCI.




Diagram of the BCI developed by Miguel Nicolelis and colleagues for use on Rhesus monkeys


Later experiments by Nicolelis using rhesus monkeys, succeeded in closing the feedback loop and reproduced monkey reaching and grasping movements in a robot arm. With their deeply cleft and furrowed brains, rhesus monkeys are considered to be better models for human neurophysiology than owl monkeys. The monkeys were trained to reach and grasp objects on a computer screen by manipulating a joystick while corresponding movements by a robot arm were hidden.[11][12] The monkeys were later shown the robot directly and learned to control it by viewing its movements. The BCI used velocity predictions to control reaching movements and simultaneously predicted hand gripping force.
Other labs that develop BCIs and algorithms that decode neuron signals include John Donoghue from Brown University, Andrew Schwartz from the University of Pittsburgh and Richard Andersen from Caltech. These researchers were able to produce working BCIs even though they recorded signals from far fewer neurons than Nicolelis (15–30 neurons versus 50–200 neurons).
Donoghue's group reported training rhesus monkeys to use a BCI to track visual targets on a computer screen with or without assistance of a joystick (closed-loop BCI).[13] Schwartz's group created a BCI for three-dimensional tracking in virtual reality and also reproduced BCI control in a robotic arm.[14] The group created headlines when they demonstrated that a monkey could feed itself pieces of zucchini using a robotic arm controlled by the animal's own brain signals.[15][16]
Andersen's group used recordings of premovement activity from the posterior parietal cortex in their BCI, including signals created when experimental animals anticipated receiving a reward.[17]
In addition to predicting kinematic and kinetic parameters of limb movements, BCIs that predict electromyographic or electrical activity of muscles are being developed.[18] Such BCIs could be used to restore mobility in paralyzed limbs by electrically stimulating muscles.
Miguel Nicolelis worked with John Chapin, Johan Wessberg, Mark Laubach, Jose Carmena, Mikhail Lebedev, Antonio Pereira, Jr., Sidarta Ribeiro and other colleagues showed that activity of large neural ensembles can predict arm position. This work made possible creation of brain-machine interfaces - electronic devices that read arm movement intentions and translate them into movements of artificial actuators. Carmena et al. (2003) programmed the neural coding in a brain-machine interface allowed a monkey to control reaching and grasping movements by a robotic arm, and Lebedev et al. (2005) argued that brain networks reorganize to create a new representation of the robotic appendage in addition to the representation of the animal's own limbs.
A new 'wireless' approach uses light-gated ion channels such as Channelrhodopsin to control the activity of genetically defined subsets of neurons in vivo. In the context of a simple learning task, illumination of transfected cells in the somatosensory cortex influenced the decision making process of freely moving mice.[19]

[edit] Human BCI research

[edit] Invasive BCIs
Invasive BCI research has targeted repairing damaged sight and providing new functionality to persons with paralysis. Invasive BCIs are implanted directly into the grey matter of the brain during neurosurgery. As they rest in the grey matter, invasive devices produce the highest quality signals of BCI devices but are prone to scar-tissue build-up, causing the signal to become weaker or even lost as the body reacts to a foreign object in the brain.




Jens Naumann, a man with acquired blindness, being interviewed about his vision BCI on CBS's The Early Show


In vision science, direct brain implants have been used to treat non-congenital (acquired) blindness. One of the first scientists to come up with a working brain interface to restore sight was private researcher William Dobelle.
Dobelle's first prototype was implanted into "Jerry," a man blinded in adulthood, in 1978. A single-array BCI containing 68 electrodes was implanted onto Jerry’s visual cortex and succeeded in producing phosphenes, the sensation of seeing light. The system included cameras mounted on glasses to send signals to the implant. Initially, the implant allowed Jerry to see shades of grey in a limited field of vision at a low frame-rate. This also required him to be hooked up to a two-ton mainframe, but shrinking electronics and faster computers made his artificial eye more portable and now enable him to perform simple tasks unassisted.[20]




Dummy unit illustrating the design of a BrainGate interface


In 2002, Jens Naumann, also blinded in adulthood, became the first in a series of 16 paying patients to receive Dobelle’s second generation implant, marking one of the earliest commercial uses of BCIs. The second generation device used a more sophisticated implant enabling better mapping of phosphenes into coherent vision. Phosphenes are spread out across the visual field in what researchers call the starry-night effect. Immediately after his implant, Jens was able to use his imperfectly restored vision to drive slowly around the parking area of the research institute.
BCIs focusing on motor neuroprosthetics aim to either restore movement in individuals with paralysis or provide devices to assist them, such as interfaces with computers or robot arms.
Researchers at Emory University in Atlanta led by Philip Kennedy and Roy Bakay were first to install a brain implant in a human that produced signals of high enough quality to simulate movement. Their patient, Johnny Ray, suffered from ‘locked-in syndrome’ after suffering a brain-stem stroke. Ray’s implant was installed in 1998 and he lived long enough to start working with the implant, eventually learning to control a computer cursor.[21]
Tetraplegic Matt Nagle became the first person to control an artificial hand using a BCI in 2005 as part of the first nine-month human trial of Cyberkinetics Neurotechnology’s BrainGate chip-implant. Implanted in Nagle’s right precentral gyrus (area of the motor cortex for arm movement), the 96-electrode BrainGate implant allowed Nagle to control a robotic arm by thinking about moving his hand as well as a computer cursor, lights and TV.[22]

[edit] Partially-invasive BCIs
Partially invasive BCI devices are implanted inside the skull but rest outside the brain rather than within the grey matter. They produce better resolution signals than non-invasive BCIs where the bone tissue of the cranium deflects and deforms signals and have a lower risk of forming scar-tissue in the brain than fully-invasive BCIs.
Electrocorticography (ECoG) measures the electrical activity of the brain taken from beneath the skull in a similar way to non-invasive electroencephalography (see below), but the electrodes are embedded in a thin plastic pad that is placed above the cortex, beneath the dura mater.[23] ECoG technologies were first trialed in humans in 2004 by Eric Leuthardt and Daniel Moran from Washington University in St Louis. In a later trial, the researchers enabled a teenage boy to play Space Invaders using his ECoG implant.[24] This research indicates that control is rapid, requires minimal training, and may be an ideal tradeoff with regards to signal fidelity and level of invasiveness.
(Note: These electrodes were not implanted in the patients for BCI experiments. Implanting foreign objects into people's brains solely for experimental purposes would be unethical. The patients were suffering from severe epilepsy and had the electrodes temporarily implanted to help their physicians localize seizure foci; the researchers simply took advantage of this.)
Light Reactive Imaging BCI devices are still in the realm of theory. These would involve implanting a laser inside the skull. The laser would be trained on a single neuron and the neuron's reflectance measured by a separate sensor. When the neuron fires, the laser light pattern and wavelengths it reflects would change slightly. This would allow researchers to monitor single neurons but require less contact with tissue and reduce the risk of scar-tissue build-up.
This signal can be either subdural or epidural, but is not taken from within the brain parenchyma itself. It has not been studied extensively until recently due to the limited access of subjects. Currently, the only manner to acquire the signal for study is through the use of patients requiring invasive monitoring for localization and resection of an epileptogenic focus.
ECoG is a very promising intermediate BCI modality because it has higher spatial resolution, better signal-to-noise ratio, wider frequency range, and lesser training requirements than scalp-recorded EEG, and at the same time has lower technical difficulty, lower clinical risk, and probably superior long-term stability than intracortical single-neuron recording. This feature profile and recent evidence of the high level of control with minimal training requirements shows potential for real world application for people with motor disabilities.

[edit] Non-invasive BCIs
As well as invasive experiments, there have also been experiments in humans using non-invasive neuroimaging technologies as interfaces. Signals recorded in this way have been used to power muscle implants and restore partial movement in an experimental volunteer. Although they are easy to wear, non-invasive implants produce poor signal resolution because the skull dampens signals, dispersing and blurring the electromagnetic waves created by the neurons. Although the waves can still be detected it is more difficult to determine the area of the brain that created them or the actions of individual neurons.

[edit] EEG
Main article: Electroencephalography




Recordings of brainwaves produced by an electroencephalogram


Electroencephalography (EEG) is the most studied potential non-invasive interface, mainly due to its fine temporal resolution, ease of use, portability and low set-up cost. But as well as the technology's susceptibility to noise, another substantial barrier to using EEG as a brain-computer interface is the extensive training required before users can work the technology. For example, in experiments beginning in the mid-1990s, Niels Birbaumer of the University of Tübingen in Germany used EEG recordings of slow cortical potential to give paralysed patients limited control over a computer cursor.[25] (Birbaumer had earlier trained epileptics to prevent impending fits by controlling this low voltage wave.) The experiment saw ten patients trained to move a computer cursor by controlling their brainwaves. The process was slow, requiring more than an hour for patients to write 100 characters with the cursor, while training often took many months.
Another research parameter is the type of waves measured. Birbaumer's later research with Jonathan Wolpaw at New York State University has focused on developing technology that would allow users to choose the brain signals they found easiest to operate a BCI, including mu and beta waves.
A further parameter is the method of feedback used and this is shown in studies of P300 signals. Patterns of P300 waves are generated involuntarily (stimulus-feedback) when people see something they recognize and may allow BCIs to decode categories of thoughts without training patients first. By contrast, the biofeedback methods described above require learning to control brainwaves so the resulting brain activity can be detected.
Lawrence Farwell and Emanuel Donchin developed an EEG-based brain-computer interface in the 1980s.[26] Their "mental prosthesis" used the P300 brainwave response to allow subjects, including one paralyzed Locked-In syndrome patient, to communicate words, letters, and simple commands to a computer and thereby to speak through a speech synthesizer driven by the computer. A number of similar devices have been developed since then. In 2000, for example, research by Jessica Bayliss at the University of Rochester showed that volunteers wearing virtual reality helmets could control elements in a virtual world using their P300 EEG readings, including turning lights on and off and bringing a mock-up car to a stop.[27]
In 1999, researchers at Case Western Reserve University led by Hunter Peckham, used 64-electrode EEG skullcap to return limited hand movements to quadriplegic Jim Jatich. As Jatich concentrated on simple but opposite concepts like up and down, his beta-rhythm EEG output was analysed using software to identify patterns in the noise. A basic pattern was identified and used to control a switch: Above average activity was set to on, below average off. As well as enabling Jatich to control a computer cursor the signals were also used to drive the nerve controllers embedded in his hands, restoring some movement.[28]
Electronic neural networks have been deployed which shift the learning phase from the user to the computer. Experiments by scientists at the Fraunhofer Society in 2004 using neural networks led to noticeable improvements within 30 minutes of training.[29]
Experiments by Eduardo Miranda aim to use EEG recordings of mental activity associated with music to allow the disabled to express themselves musically through an encephalophone.[30]
The Emotiv company plans to produce a commercial video game controller (known as the Epoc) in 2009, which uses electromagnetic sensors.[31]

[edit] MEG and MRI
Main articles: Magnetoencephalography and Magnetic resonance imaging




ATR Labs' reconstruction of human vision using fMRI (top row: original image; bottom row: reconstruction from mean of combined readings)


Magnetoencephalography (MEG) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) have both been used successfully as non-invasive BCIs. In a widely reported experiment, fMRI allowed two users being scanned to play Pong in real-time by altering their haemodynamic response or brain blood flow through biofeedback techniques.[32]
fMRI measurements of haemodynamic responses in real time have also been used to control robot arms with a seven second delay between thought and movement.[33]
More recently, research developed in the Advanced Telecommunications Research (ATR) Computational Neuroscience Laboratories in Kyoto, Japan allowed the scientists to reconstruct images directly from the brain and display them on a computer. The article announcing these achievements was the cover story of the journal Neuron of 10 December 2008[34]. While the early results are limited to black and white images of 10x10 squares (pixels), according to the researchers further development of the technology may make it possible to achieve color images, and even view or record dreams.[35][36]

[edit] Commercialization and companies
John Donoghue and fellow researchers founded Cyberkinetics. Now listed on a US stock exchange and known as Cyberkinetic Neurotechnology Inc, the company markets its electrode arrays under the BrainGate product name and has set the development of practical BCIs for humans as its major goal. The BrainGate is based on the Utah Array developed by Dick Normann.
Philip Kennedy founded Neural Signals in 1987 to develop BCIs that would allow paralysed patients to communicate with the outside world and control external devices. As well as an invasive BCI, the company also sells an implant to restore speech. Neural Signals' Brain Communicator BCI device uses glass cones containing microelectrodes coated with proteins to encourage the electrodes to bind to neurons.
Although 16 paying patients were treated using William Dobelle's vision BCI, new implants ceased within a year of Dobelle's death in 2004. A company controlled by Dobelle, Avery Biomedical Devices, and Stony Brook University are continuing development of the implant, which has not yet received FDA approval for human implantation.[37]
Ambient, at a TI developers conference in early 2008, demoed a product they have in development call The Audeo. The Audeo is being developed to create a human-computer interface for communication without the need of physical motor control or speech production. Using signal processing, unpronounced speech representing the thought of the mind can be translated from intercepted neurological signals.[38]
Mindball is a product developed and commercialized by Interactive Productline in which players compete to control a ball's movement across a table by becoming more relaxed and focused.[39] Interactive Productline is a Swedish company whose objective is to develop and sell easy understandable EEG products that train the ability to relax and focus.[40]
There are three main consumer-devices commercial-competitors in this area (expected launch date mentioned in brackets) which are going to launch such devices primarily for gaming- and PC-users:

Neural Impulse Actuator (April, 2008)
Emotiv Systems (Summer, 2009)
NeuroSky (Not Declared)


[edit] Military applications
The United States military has begun to explore possible applications of BCIs beginning in 2008 to enhance troop performance as well as a possible development by adversaries.[41] As one report concluded,

The most successful implementation of invasive interfaces has occurred in medical applications in which nerve signals are used as the mechanism for information transfer. Adversarial actions using this approach to implement enhanced, specialized sensory functions could be possible in limited form now, and with developing capability in the future. Such threat potential would be limited to adversaries with access to advanced medical technology. [42]


[edit] Cell-culture BCIs
Main article: Cultured neuronal networks
Researchers have built devices to interface with neural cells and entire neural networks in cultures outside animals. As well as furthering research on animal implantable devices, experiments on cultured neural tissue have focused on building problem-solving networks, constructing basic computers and manipulating robotic devices. Research into techniques for stimulating and recording from individual neurons grown on semiconductor chips is sometimes referred to as neuroelectronics or neurochips.




World first: Neurochip developed by Caltech researchers Jerome Pine and Michael Maher


Development of the first working neurochip was claimed by a Caltech team led by Jerome Pine and Michael Maher in 1997.[43] The Caltech chip had room for 16 neurons.
In 2003, a team led by Theodore Berger at the University of Southern California started work on a neurochip designed to function as an artificial or prosthetic hippocampus. The neurochip was designed to function in rat brains and is intended as a prototype for the eventual development of higher-brain prosthesis. The hippocampus was chosen because it is thought to be the most ordered and structured part of the brain and is the most studied area. Its function is to encode experiences for storage as long-term memories elsewhere in the brain.[44]
Thomas DeMarse at the University of Florida used a culture of 25,000 neurons taken from a rat's brain to fly a F-22 fighter jet aircraft simulator.[45] After collection, the cortical neurons were cultured in a petri dish and rapidly began to reconnect themselves to form a living neural network. The cells were arranged over a grid of 60 electrodes and used to control the pitch and yaw functions of the simulator. The study's focus was on understanding how the human brain performs and learns computational tasks at a cellular level.

[edit] Ethical considerations





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2008)


Discussion about the ethical implications of BCIs has been relatively muted. This may be because the research holds great promise in the fight against disability and BCI researchers have yet to attract the attention of animal rights groups. It may also be because BCIs are being used to acquire signals to control devices rather than the other way around, although vision research is the exception to this.
This ethical debate is likely to intensify as BCIs become more technologically advanced and it becomes apparent that they may not just be used therapeutically but for human enhancement. Today's brain pacemakers, which are already used to treat neurological conditions such as depression could become a type of BCI and be used to modify other behaviours. Neurochips could also develop further, for example the artificial hippocampus, raising issues about what it actually means to be human.
Some of the ethical considerations that BCIs would raise under these circumstances are already being debated in relation to brain implants and the broader area of mind control.

[edit] Theme in fiction
The prospect of BCIs and brain implants of all kinds have been important themes in science fiction. See brain implants in fiction and philosophy for a review of this literature.

[edit] See also







v • d • e

Brain-computer interface





Technologies

Brain implant, Biomechatronics, Cyberware, Neuroprosthetics, Neurotechnology, BrainGate, Brainport, Sensory substitution, Intelligence amplification, Isolated brain, Exocortex







Scientific Phenomena

Neuroplasticity, Neural ensemble, Electrocorticography (ECoG)






Disciplines

Cognitive science, NBIC, Neural engineering, Neuroscience, Computational neuroscience, Cognitive neuroscience






Speculative

Whole-body transplant, Mind uploading, Cyborg






People

Miguel Nicolelis, Peter Kyberd, Kevin Warwick, Yoky Matsuoka, Matt Nagle, Steve Mann, Merlin Donald, Douglas Engelbart, J.C.R. Licklider, Charles Stross, Vernor Vinge






Other

Human enhancement, Mind control, Neurohacking, Simulated reality, Transhumanism







[edit] References


^ J. Vidal, "Toward Direct Brain-Computer Communication", in Annual Review of Biophysics and Bioengineering, L.J. Mullins, Ed., Annual Reviews, Inc., Palo Alto, Vol. 2, 1973, pp. 157-180.
^ J. Vidal, "Real-Time Detection of Brain Events in EEG" , in IEEE Proceedings, May 1977, 65-5:633-641.
^ S. P. Levine, J. E. Huggins, S. L. BeMent, R. K. Kushwaha, L. A. Schuh, M. M. Rohde, E. A. Passaro, D. A. Ross, K. V. Elisevich, and B. J. Smith, "A direct brain interface based on event-related potentials," IEEE Trans Rehabil Eng, vol. 8, pp. 180-5, 2000
^ Laura Bailey. "University of Michigan News Service". http://www.umich.edu/news/index.html?Releases/2006/Feb06/r020606a. Retrieved on February 6 2006. 
^ Miguel Nicolelis et al. (2001) Duke neurobiologist has developed system that allows monkeys to control robot arms via brain signals
^ Schmidt E M et al. 1978 Fine control of operantly conditioned firing patterns of cortical neurons Exp. Neurol. 61 349–69
^ Georgopoulos AP, Lurito JT, Petrides M, Schwartz AB, Massey JT (1989) Mental rotation of the neuronal population vector. Science 243: 234-236
^ Lebedev MA, Nicolelis MA (2006),Brain-machine interfaces: past, present and future. Trends Neurosci 29: 536-546 Loaded 18 October 2006
^ G. B. Stanley, F. F. Li, and Y. Dan. Reconstruction of natural scenes from ensemble responses in the LGN, J. Neurosci., 19(18):8036-8042, 1999
^ Wessberg J, Stambaugh CR, Kralik JD, Beck PD, Laubach M, Chapin JK, Kim J, Biggs SJ, Srinivasan MA, Nicolelis MA. (2000) Real-time prediction of hand trajectory by ensembles of cortical neurons in primates. Nature 16: 361-365
^ Carmena, J.M., Lebedev, M.A., Crist, R.E., O’Doherty, J.E., Santucci, D.M., Dimitrov, D.F., Patil, P.G., Henriquez, C.S., Nicolelis, M.A.L. (2003) Learning to control a brain-machine interface for reaching and grasping by primates. PLoS Biology, 1: 193-208
^ Lebedev, M.A., Carmena, J.M., O’Doherty, J.E., Zacksenhouse, M., Henriquez, C.S., Principe, J.C., Nicolelis, M.A.L. (2005) Cortical ensemble adaptation to represent actuators controlled by a brain machine interface. J. Neurosci. 25: 4681-4693
^ Serruya M.D., Hatsopoulos, N.G., Paninski, L., Fellows, M.R., Donoghue, J.P., (2002) Instant neural control of a movement signal. Nature 416: 141-142
^ Taylor DM, Tillery SI, Schwartz AB (2002) Direct cortical control of 3D neuroprosthetic devices. Science 296: 1829-1832
^ Pitt team to build on brain-controlled arm, Pittsburgh Tribune Review, 5 September 2006.
^ YouTube - Monkey controls a robotic arm
^ Musallam S, Corneil BD, Greger B, Scherberger H, Andersen RA (2004) Cognitive control signals for neural prosthetics. Science 305: 258-262
^ Santucci, D.M., Kralik, J.D., Lebedev, M.A., Nicolelis, M.A.L. (2005) Frontal and parietal cortical ensembles predict single-trial muscle activity during reaching movements. Eur. J. Neurosci., 22: 1529-1540
^ Huber et al. (2008) [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18094685 Sparse optical microstimulation in barrel cortex drives learned behaviour in freely moving mice. Nature 2008, 451(7174):61-4.
^ Vision quest, Wired Magazine, September 2002
^ Kennedy, P.R., Bakay R.A. (1998) Restoration of neural output from a paralyzed patient by a direct brain connection. Neuroreport. June 1;9(8):1707-11
^ Leigh R. Hochberg; Mijail D. Serruya, Gerhard M. Friehs, Jon A. Mukand, Maryam Saleh, Abraham H. Caplan, Almut Branner, David Chen, Richard D. Penn and John P. Donoghue (2006-07-13). "Neuronal ensemble control of prosthetic devices by a human with tetraplegia". Nature 442: 164–171. doi:10.1038/nature04970. 
^ Serruya MD, Donoghue JP. (2003) Chapter III: Design Principles of a Neuromotor Prosthetic Device in Neuroprosthetics: Theory and Practice, ed. Kenneth W. Horch, Gurpreet S. Dhillon. Imperial College Press.
^ Teenager moves video icons just by imagination, press release, Washington University in St Louis, 9 October 2006
^ Just short of telepathy: can you interact with the outside world if you can't even blink an eye?, Psychology Today, May-June 2003
^ Farwell, L. A. and Donchin, E. (1988)Talking Off The Top Of Your Head: A Mental Prosthesis Utilizing Event-Related Brain Potentials. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 70: 510-513.
^ Press release, University of Rochester, 3 May 2000
^ The Next BrainiacsWired Magazine, August 2001.
^ Artificial Neural Net Based Signal Processing for Interaction with Peripheral Nervous System. In: Proceedings of the 1st International IEEE EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering. pp. 134-137. March 20-22, 2003.
^ Mental ways to make music, Cane, Alan, Financial Times, London (UK), 22 April 2005, p12
^ http://news.bigdownload.com/2008/12/01/emotiv-epoc-brain-wave-pc-controller-delayed-until-2009/
^ Mental ping-pong could aid paraplegics, Nature, 27 August 2004
^ To operate robot only with brain, ATR and Honda develop BMI base technology, Tech-on, 26 May 2006
^ Miyawaki, Y (10 December 2008), "Decoding the Mind's Eye - Visual Image Reconstruction from Human Brain Activity using a Combination of Multiscale Local Image Decoders", Neuron (Elsevier, Cell Press) 60 (5): 915–929, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2008.11.004, http://www.cell.com/neuron/fulltext/S0896-6273(08)00958-6 
^ "Scientists extract images directly from brain". PinkTentacle.com. 12 December 2008. http://www.pinktentacle.com/2008/12/scientists-extract-images-directly-from-brain/. 
^ "あなたの夢、映像化できるかも！？". Chunichi Web. 11 December 2008. http://www.chunichi.co.jp/article/national/news/CK2008121102000053.html.  (Japanese)
^ Press release, Stony Brook University Center for Biotechnology, 1 May 2006
^ [1]
^ [2]
^ [3]
^ [4] Noah Shachtman, Wired.com, 7/09/08.
^ [5] Commission pentagon report on brain-computer interfaces and neuroplasticity, March 2008.
^ Press release, Caltech, 27 October 1997
^ Coming to a brain near you, Wired News, 22 October 2004
^ 'Brain' in a dish flies flight simulator, CNN, 4 November 2004



[edit] External links





This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Brain-computer interfaces 



[edit] Organizations
(for a list of universities see Neural Engineering - Neural Engineering Labs)

Avery Biomedical, invasive vision restoration BCI
Cyberkinetics Neurotechnology Inc, human trials of the Braingate BCI
Neural Signals, Brain Communicator invasive BCI
US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA):

Human-Assisted Neural Devices program to develop a non-invasive neuroprosthetic BCI
Bio: Info: Micro Interface program to develop invasive BCIs (terminated, funding withdrawn)




[edit] Researchers listed in above text

Theodore Berger at the University of Southern California
Niels Birbaumer at the University of Tuebingen
Thomas DeMarse at the University of Florida
John Donoghue's lab at Brown University
Eberhart E. Fetz at the Washington National Primate Research Center
Apostolos Georgopoulos at the University of Minnesota
Eduardo Reck Miranda at the University of Plymouth, England
Miguel Nicolelis’ lab at Duke University
Hunter Peckham at Case Western Reserve University
Jerome Pine's lab at Caltech
Andrew Schwartz at the University of Pittsburgh
Yang Dan at University of California, Berkeley
Jonathan Wolpaw at the New York State Department of Health
Nitish Thakor at the Johns Hopkins University, department of Biomedical Engineering


[edit] Portals and articles




Neuroscience portal




BCI-info.org, BCI news and research portal
Monkey Neural Interfacing, Monkeys Consciously Control A Robot Arm Using Only Brain Signals
The open-source Electroencephalography project and Programmable chip version, Sourceforge open source EEG projects
BCI Competition, run by Fraunhofer Institute, third and most recent competition closed mid-2005
EEG database, Team Phypa's public hub for BCI data exchange
The Next Brainiacs Wired Magazine, August 2001, article on Jim Jatich’s implant
Controlling robots with the mind, Scientific American, 16 September 2002, article on Miguel Nicolelis
Vision quest, Wired Magazine, September 2002, article on artificial vision
Lymnaea stagnalis and the development of neuroelectronic technologies, Journal of Neuroscience Research, 2004, academic paper on a cell-culture BCI
'Brain' in a dish flies flight simulator, CNN, 4 November 2004, article on cell-culture BCI
How to talk when you can't speak, Slate, 10 February 2005, article on using EEG to communicate with minimally conscious patients
Mind Control, Wired Magazine, March 2005, article on Matt Nagle
...a step towards neuron-based functional chips, Biosens Bioelectron, January 2006, academic paper on a cell-culture BCI
Functional alignment of feedback effects from visual cortex to thalamus Nature Neuroscience 9, 1330-1336 (2006), 17 September 2006, recent advances in decoding LGN visual signals
The Memory Hacker, PopSci.com, April 2007, article on Theodore Berger, retrieved 10 April 2007
The Outer Limits, Mind Reacher
Brain Machine implant website
Electronic system prearranged to replace in the electronic games the existing manual controls with equivalent controls directly commanded by the brain.


[edit] Lectures and videos

"Brain-Computer Interfaces" video lecture by Krishna Shenoy (Stanford University)








v • d • e

Neuropsychology





Topics

Brain-computer interface • Traumatic brain injury • Brain regions • Clinical neuropsychology • Cognitive neuroscience • Human brain • Neuroanatomy • Neurophysiology • Phrenology • Misconceptions






Brain functions

Arousal • Attention • Consciousness • Decision making • Executive functions • Natural language • Learning • Memory • Motor coordination • Sensory perception • Planning • Problem solving • Thought






People

Arthur L. Benton • David Bohm • António Damásio • Phineas Gage • Norman Geschwind • Elkhonon Goldberg • Donald O. Hebb • Kenneth Heilman • 	 Edith Kaplan • Muriel Lezak • Benjamin Libet • Rodolfo Llinás • Alexander Luria • Brenda Milner • Karl H. Pribram • Oliver Sacks • Roger W. Sperry • H. M. • K. C.






Tests

Bender-Gestalt Test • Benton Visual Retention Test • Clinical Dementia Rating • Continuous Performance Task • Glasgow Coma Scale • Hayling and Brixton tests • Johari window • Lexical decision task • Mini-mental state examination • Stroop effect • Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale • Wisconsin card sorting






Mind and Brain Portal








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brain-computer_interface"
Categories: Brain-computer interfacing | Neuroprosthetics | Neural engineering | Human-computer interaction | User interface techniques | Virtual realityHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from October 2008 | Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
Español
Français
Hrvatski
Italiano
Nederlands
日本語
Polski
Русский
தமிழ்
中文
Svenska









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 21:46.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
