













Biblical canon - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Biblical_canon";
		var wgTitle = "Biblical canon";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "12494909";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281147422;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Biblical canon

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 



Part of a series on
The Bible











Biblical canon and books


Tanakh: Torah · Nevi'im · Ketuvim
Old Testament · Hebrew Bible
New Testament · New Covenant
Deuterocanon · Antilegomena
Chapters & verses
Apocrypha: Jewish · OT · NT


Development and authorship


Panbabylonism
Jewish Canon
Old Testament canon
New Testament canon
Mosaic authorship
Pauline epistles
Johannine works


Translations and manuscripts


Septuagint
Samaritan Pentateuch
Dead Sea scrolls
Targums · Peshitta
Vetus Latina · Vulgate
Masoretic text
Gothic Bible · Luther Bible
English Bibles


Biblical studies


Dating the Bible
Biblical criticism
Higher criticism
Textual criticism
Novum Testamentum Graece
NT textual categories
Documentary hypothesis
Synoptic problem
Historicity (People)
Internal Consistency
Archeology (artifacts)
Science and the Bible


Interpretation


Hermeneutics · Pesher
Midrash · Pardes
Allegorical
Literalism
Prophecy


Views


Inerrancy
Infallibility
Criticism
Islamic
Qur'anic
Gnostic
Judaism and Christianity
Biblical law



This box: view • talk • edit





Bible portal






A Biblical canon or canon of scripture[1] is a list or set of Biblical books considered to be authoritative as scripture by a particular religious community, generally in Judaism or Christianity. The term itself was first coined by Christians, but the idea is found in Jewish sources.[2] The internal wording of the text can also be specified, for example: the Masoretic Text is the canonical text for Judaism, and the King James Version is the canonical text for the King-James-Only Movement, but this is not the general meaning of canon.
These lists, or canons, have been developed through debate and agreement by the religious authorities of those faiths. Believers consider these canonical books to be inspired by God or to express the authoritative history of the relationship between God and his people. Books excluded from a particular canon are considered non-canonical — however, many disputed books considered non-canonical or even apocryphal by some are considered Biblical apocrypha or Deuterocanonical or fully canonical, by others. There are differences between the Jewish and Christian canons, and between the canons of different Christian denominations. The differing criteria and processes of canonization dictate what the communities regard as the inspired books.
The canons listed below are usually considered closed (i.e., books cannot be added or removed[3]). The closure of the canon reflects a belief that public revelation has ended and thus the inspired texts may be gathered into a complete and authoritative canon.[4] By contrast, an open canon permits the addition of additional books through the process of continuous revelation. In Christian traditions, an open canon is most commonly associated with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons).




Contents


1 Canonic texts
2 Jewish canon
3 Samaritan canon
4 Christian canons

4.1 Earliest Christian Communities
4.2 Apostolic Fathers
4.3 Greek Fathers
4.4 Latin Fathers
4.5 Luther
4.6 Closing of the canons


5 Modern interpretation

5.1 Ethiopian and Syriac Churches
5.2 American Evangelical Protestant view


6 See also
7 Footnotes
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Canonic texts
The word "canon" is derived from the Greek noun κανών "kanon" meaning "reed" or "cane," or also "rule" or "measure," which itself is derived from the Hebrew word קנה "kaneh" and is often used as a standard of measurement. Thus, a canonic text is a single authoritative edition for a given work. The establishing of a canonic text may involve an editorial selection from biblical manuscript traditions with varying interdependence. Significant separate manuscript traditions in the Hebrew Bible are represented in the Septuagint, the Targums and Peshitta, the Samaritan Pentateuch, the Masoretic Text, and the Dead Sea scrolls.
New Testament Greek and Latin texts presented enough significant differences that a manuscript tradition arose of presenting diglot texts, with Greek and Latin on facing pages. New Testament manuscript traditions include the Codex Vaticanus, Codex Sinaiticus, Codex Bezae, Codex Alexandrinus, Textus Receptus, Vetus Latina, Vulgate, and others, see Categories of New Testament manuscripts.

[edit] Jewish canon
Main article: Development of the Jewish Bible canon
Rabbinic Judaism recognizes the twenty-four books of the Masoretic Text, commonly called the Tanakh or Hebrew Bible. Evidence suggests that the process of canonization occurred between 200 BCE and 200 CE, indeed a popular position is that the Torah was canonized circa 400 BCE, the Prophets circa 200 BCE, and the Writings circa 100 CE[5] perhaps at a hypothetical Council of Jamnia—however this position is increasingly criticised by modern scholars. The book of Deuteronomy includes a prohibition against adding or subtracting (4:2, 12:32) which might apply to the book itself (i.e. a closed book, a prohibition against future scribal editing) or to the instruction received by Moses on Mt. Sinai.[6] The book of 2 Maccabees, itself not a part of the Jewish canon, describes Nehemiah (around 400 BCE) as having "founded a library and collected books about the kings and prophets, and the writings of David, and letters of kings about votive offerings" (2:13-15). The Book of Nehemiah suggests that the priest-scribe Ezra brought the Torah back from Babylon to Jerusalem and the Second Temple (8-9) around the same time period. Both I and II Maccabees suggest that Judas Maccabeus (around 167 BCE) likewise collected sacred books (3:42-50, 2:13-15, 15:6-9), indeed some scholars argue that the Jewish canon was fixed by the Hasmonean dynasty.[7] However, these primary sources do not suggest that the canon was at that time closed; moreover, it is not clear that these sacred books were identical to those that later became part of the canon. Today, there is no scholarly consensus as to when the Jewish canon was set.



Part of a series on




                




Judaism



Portal | Category


Jews · Judaism · Denominations


Orthodox · Conservative · Reform


Haredi · Hasidic · Modern Orthodox


Reconstructionist · Renewal


Rabbinic · Humanistic · Karaite · Samaritanism


Jewish philosophy


Principles of faith · Minyan · Kabbalah


Noahide laws · God · Eschatology · Messiah


Chosenness · Holocaust · Modesty


Tzedakah · Ethics · Mussar


Religious texts


Torah · Tanakh · Talmud · Midrash · Tosefta


Rabbinic literature · Kuzari · Mishneh Torah


Ḥumash · Siddur · Piyutim · Zohar


Religious Law


Talmud · Mishne Torah · Tur


Shulchan Aruch · Mishnah Berurah · Chazon Ish


Kashrut · Rov · Chazakah · Hechsher · Chametz


Holy cities


Jerusalem · Safed · Hebron · Tiberias


Important figures


Abraham · Sarah · Isaac · Rebecca ·


Jacob/Israel · Rachel · Leah · Twelve Tribes · Moses


Deborah · Ruth · Solomon · David


Hillel · Shammai · Rabbi Akiva · Judah the Prince


Rav · Saadia Gaon · Rif · Rashi · Tosafists


Maimonides · Nahmanides · Yosef Karo


Jewish life cycle


Brit · Bar/Bat Mitzvah · Shidduch · Marriage


Niddah · Naming · Pidyon haben · Bereavement


Religious roles


Rabbi · Rebbe · Posek · Hazzan


Kohen/Priest · Mashgiah · Gabbai · Maggid


Mohel · Beth din · Rosh yeshiva


Religious Kehilla & institutions


Cheder · Talmud Torah · Yeshiva · Synagogue


Mikvah · Gemach · Chevra Kadisha · Kollel


Religious buildings


Holy Temple / Tabernacle


Synagogue · Mikvah · Sukkah


Religious articles


Tallit · Tefillin · Kippah · Sefer Torah


Tzitzit · Mezuzah · Menorah · Hanukiah · Shofar


4 Species · Kittel · Gartel · Yad


Jewish prayers and services


Shema · Adon Olam · Amidah · Aleinu · Kol Nidre


Musaf · Kaddish · Hallel · Ma Tovu · Selichot


Birkat HaMazon · Tefilat HaDerech · Shehecheyanu


Tachanun · Kabbalat Shabbat · Havdalah


Jewish Clothing Articles


Shtreimel · Bekishe · Fedora · Yarmulke


Sheitel · Tichel


Judaism & other religions


Christianity · Islam · "Judeo-Christian" · Others


Abrahamic faiths · Judeo-Paganism · Pluralism


Related topics


Antisemitism · Criticism


Philo-Semitism · Slavery · Yeshiva · Zionism



v • d • e





[edit] Samaritan canon
Main article: Samaritan Pentateuch
A Samaritan Pentateuch exists which is another version of the Torah, in this case in the Samaritan alphabet. The relationship to the Masoretic Text and the Septuagint is still disputed. Scrolls among the Dead Sea scrolls have been identified as proto-Samaritan Pentateuch text-type.[8] This text is associated with the Samaritans, a people of whom the Jewish Encyclopedia[9] states: "Their history as a distinct community begins with the taking of Samaria by the Assyrians in 722 B.C."
The Samaritans accept the Torah but do not accept any other parts of the Bible, probably a position also held by the Sadducees.[10] Moreover, they did not expand their Pentateuchal canon even by adding any Samaritan compositions.
Both texts from the Church Fathers and old Samaritan texts provide us with reasons for the limited extent of the Samaritan Canon. According to some of the information the Samaritans parted with the Jews (Judeans) at such an early date that only the books of Moses were considered holy; according to other sources the group intentionally rejected the Prophets and (possibly) the other Scriptures and entrenched themselves in the Law of Moses.
The small community of the remnants of the Samaritans in Palestine includes their version of the Torah in their canon[11] The Samaritan community possesses a copy of the Torah that they believe to have been penned by Abisha, a grandson of Aaron.[citation needed]

[edit] Christian canons
Main article: Christian Biblical canons
See also: Development of the Christian Biblical canon
The Biblical canon is the set of books Christians regard as divinely inspired and thus constituting the Christian Bible.

[edit] Earliest Christian Communities
Though the Early Church used the Old Testament according to the canon of the Septuagint (LXX),[12] the apostles did not otherwise leave a defined set of new scriptures; instead the New Testament developed over time.




A folio from P46, an early 3rd century collection of Pauline epistles.


The writings attributed to the apostles circulated amongst the earliest Christian communities. The Pauline epistles were circulating in collected form by the end of the first century AD. Justin Martyr, in the early second century, mentions the "memoirs of the apostles," which Christians called "gospels" and which were regarded as on par with the Old Testament.[13]
The first major figure to codify the Biblical canon was Origen of Alexandria[citation needed]. He was a scholar well educated in the realm of both theology and pagan philosophy. Origen decided to make his canon include all of the books in the current Catholic canon except for four books: James, 2nd Peter, and 2nd and 3rd epistles of John[14]. He also included the Shepherd of Hermas which was later rejected. The religious scholar Bruce Metzger described Origen's efforts, saying “The process of canonization represented by Origen proceeded by way of selection, moving from many candidates for inclusion to fewer.”[citation needed] This was the first major attempt at the compilation of certain books and letters as authoritative and inspired teaching for the Catholic Church at the time.
Needless to say there are various theologians of the 2nd and 3rd centuries that wrote a great deal of works and used the letters of the apostles as foundation and justification for their own personal beliefs. However, there was still the problem of the Roman Empire, and while the persecutions of the Roman Empire were many and extreme, the persecution still occurred and possibly interfered with the initial canonization of the New Testament. This period in church history writings is known as the "Edificatory Period" and was followed by the "Apologetic" "Polemical" and "Scientific" Periods. Some of the Christian writers of this edificatory Period are: Irenaus, Hippolytus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Justin Martyr, Clement of Rome.[citation needed] This stagnation of official writings lead to a sudden explosion of discussions after Constantine I legalized Christianity in the early 4th century.




Part of a series on
Christianity




 


Jesus Christ


Virgin birth · Crucifixion
Resurrection · Easter



Foundations


Church · New Covenant
Apostles · Kingdom · Gospel
Timeline · Paul · Peter



Bible


Old Testament · New Testament
Books · Canon · Apocrypha


Christian theology


Salvation · Baptism · Trinity
Father · Son · Holy Spirit
History of theology · Christology
Mariology · Apologetics



History and traditions


Early · Constantine
Councils · Creeds · Missions
Chrysostom · East-West Schism
Crusades · Reformation



Denominations





Catholic


Roman Catholic · Anglican · Independent Catholic · Old Catholic




Protestant


Lutheran · Reformed · Anabaptist · Baptist · Methodist · Adventist · Evangelical · Holiness · Pentecostal




Eastern



Eastern Orthodox · Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) · Assyrian





Nontrinitarian



Jehovah's Witness · Latter Day Saint · Unitarian · Christadelphian · Oneness Pentecostal






Topics in Christianity


Preaching · Prayer · Ecumenism
Relation to other religions
Christian movements
Music · Liturgy · Calendar
Symbols · Art · Criticism


 Christianity Portal




This box: view • talk • edit




[edit] Apostolic Fathers
A four gospel canon (the Tetramorph) was asserted by Irenaeus, c. 160.[15] By the early 200's, Origen of Alexandria may have been using the same 27 books found in modern New Testament editions, though there were still disputes over the canonicity of Hebrews, James, II Peter, II and III John, and Revelation (see also Antilegomena).[16] Likewise by 200 the Muratorian fragment shows that there existed a set of Christian writings somewhat similar to what is now the New Testament, which included four gospels and argued against objections to them.[17] Thus, while there was a good measure of debate in the Early Church over the New Testament canon, the major writings were accepted by almost all Christians by the middle of the third century.[18]

[edit] Greek Fathers
In his Easter letter of 367, Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, gave a list of exactly the same books as what would become the New Testament canon,[19] and he used the phrase "being canonized" (kanonizomena) in regards to them.[20]

[edit] Latin Fathers
The African Synod of Hippo, in 393, approved the New Testament, as it stands today, together with the Septuagint books, a decision that was repeated by Councils of Carthage in 397 and 419. These councils were under the authority of St. Augustine, who regarded the canon as already closed.[21] Pope Damasus I's Council of Rome in 382, if the Decretum Gelasianum is correctly associated with it, issued a biblical canon identical to that mentioned above,[22] or if not the list is at least a sixth century compilation.[23] Likewise, Damasus's commissioning of the Latin Vulgate edition of the Bible, c. 383, was instrumental in the fixation of the canon in the West.[24] In 405, Pope Innocent I sent a list of the sacred books to a Gallic bishop, Exsuperius of Toulouse. When these bishops and councils spoke on the matter, however, they were not defining something new, but instead "were ratifying what had already become the mind of the Church."[25] Thus, from the fourth century, there existed unanimity in the West concerning the New Testament canon (as it is today),[26] and by the fifth century the East, with a few exceptions, had come to accept the Book of Revelation and thus had come into harmony on the matter of the canon.[27]

[edit] Luther
There is some evidence that the first decision to omit these books entirely from the Bible was made by Protestant laity rather than clergy. Bibles dating from shortly after the Reformation have been found whose tables of contents included the entire Roman Catholic canon, but which did not actually contain the disputed books, leading some historians to think that the workers at the printing presses took it upon themselves to omit them. However, Anglican and Lutheran Bibles usually still contained these books until the 20th century, while Calvinist Bibles did not. Several reasons are proposed for the omission of these books from the canon. One is the support for Catholic doctrines such as Purgatory and Prayer for the dead found in 2 Maccabees. Luther himself said he was following Jerome's teaching about the Veritas Hebraica.
Luther made an attempt to remove the books of Hebrews, James, Jude and Revelation from the canon (echoing the consensus of several Catholics, also labeled Christian Humanists — such as Cardinal Ximenez, Cardinal Cajetan, and Erasmus — and partially because they were perceived to go against certain Protestant doctrines such as sola gratia and sola fide), but this was not generally accepted among his followers. However, these books are ordered last in the German-language Luther Bible to this day.[28]
Luther also eliminated the deuterocanonical books from the Catholic Old Testament, terming them "Apocrypha, that are books which are not considered equal to the Holy Scriptures, but are useful and good to read".[29] He also argued unsuccessfully for the relocation of Esther from the Canon to the Apocrypha, since without the deuterocanonical sections, it never mentions God. As a result Catholics and Protestants continue to use different canons, which differ in respect to the Old Testament.
Luther argued unsuccessfully for the relocation of Esther from the Canon to the Apocrypha, since without the deuterocanonical sections, it never mentions God. As a result Catholics and Protestants continue to use different canons, which differ in respect to the Old Testament and in the concept of the Antilegomena of the New Testament.

[edit] Closing of the canons
Nonetheless, a full dogmatic articulation of the canon was not made until the Council of Trent of 1546 for Roman Catholicism,[30] the Thirty-Nine Articles of 1563 for the Church of England, the Westminster Confession of Faith of 1647 for British Calvinism, and the Synod of Jerusalem of 1672 for the Greek Orthodox.

[edit] Modern interpretation

[edit] Ethiopian and Syriac Churches
Some Christian groups do not accept the theory that the Christian Bible was not known until various local and Ecumenical Councils, which they deem to be "Roman-dominated", made their official declarations. For example, the Ethiopian and Syriac Christian churches which did not participate in these councils developed their own bibical traditions. These groups believe that, in spite of the disagreements about certain books in early Christianity and, indeed, still today, the New Testament supports the view that Paul (2 Timothy 4:11–13), Peter (2 Peter 3:15–16), and ultimately John (Revelation 22:18–19) finalized the canon of the New Testament. Some note that Peter, John, and Paul wrote 20 (or 21) of the 27 books of the NT and personally knew all the other NT writers. (The books which are attributed to authors other than these three are: Matthew, Mark, Luke, Acts, James, and Jude. The authorship of Hebrews has long been disputed.)

[edit] American Evangelical Protestant view
Evangelicals tend not to accept the Septuagint as the inspired Hebrew Bible, though many recognize its wide use by Greek-speaking Jews in the first century. They note that early Christians knew the Hebrew Bible, since around 170 Melito of Sardis listed all the books of the Old Testament that those in the Evangelical faiths now use (without mentioning, at least explicitly, the Book of Esther and, on the other hand, explicitly including the deuterocanonical Book of Wisdom and Esdras. Melito's canon is found in Eusebius EH4.26.13–14[31]:


Accordingly when I went East and came to the place where these things were preached and done, I learned accurately the books of the Old Testament, and send them to thee as written below. Their names are as follows: Of Moses, five books: Genesis, Exodus, Numbers, Leviticus, Deuteronomy; Jesus Nave, Judges, Ruth; of Kings, four books; of Chronicles, two; the Psalms of David, the Proverbs of Solomon, Wisdom also, Ecclesiastes, Song of Songs, Job; of Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah; of the twelve prophets, one book ; Daniel, Ezekiel, Esdras. From which also I have made the extracts, dividing them into six books.


Melito's account, as well as including the Book of Wisdom, does not determine that the specific documentary tradition used by the Jews was necessarily that which was eventually assembled into the Masoretic text, several centuries later.
St Athanasius is often quoted as endorsing 39 books in his Old Testament, rejecting any apocryphal writings. However his 39 books are a little different from the Protestant canon in that he rejects Esther and includes Baruch.


But for greater exactness I add this also, writing of necessity; that there are other books besides these not indeed included in the Canon, but appointed by the Fathers to be read by those who newly join us, and who wish for instruction in the word of godliness. The Wisdom of Solomon, and the Wisdom of Sirach, and Esther, and Judith, and Tobit, and that which is called the Teaching of the Apostles, and the Shepherd. But the former, my brethren, are included in the Canon, the latter being [merely] read; nor is there in any place a mention of apocryphal writings. But they are an invention of heretics, who write them when they choose, bestowing upon them their approbation, and assigning to them a date, that so, using them as ancient writings, they may find occasion to lead astray the simple.[32]


Many modern Protestants point to the following four "Criteria for Canonicity" to justify the selection of the books that have been included in the New Testament:

Apostolic Origin — attributed to and based on the preaching/teaching of the first-generation apostles (or their close companions).
Universal Acceptance — acknowledged by all major Christian communities in the ancient world (by the end of the fourth century).
Liturgical Use — read publicly when early Christian communities gathered for the Lord's Supper (their weekly worship services).
Consistent Message — containing a theological outlook similar or complementary to other accepted Christian writings.

The basic factor for recognizing a book's canonicity for the New Testament was divine inspiration, and the chief test for this was apostolicity. The term apostolic as used for the test of canonicity does not necessarily mean apostolic authorship or derivation, but rather apostolic authority. According to these Protestants, Apostolic authority is never detached from the authority of the Lord.[citation needed] See Apostolic succession.

[edit] See also




Bible portal




Books of the Bible for a side-by-side comparison of Jewish, Catholic, Orthodox and Protestant canons.
Table of books of Judeo-Christian Scripture
Deuterocanonical books
Non-canonical books referenced in the Bible
Standard Works - several books (including the Bible) that constitute the open scriptural canon of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church)
Canon (fiction) - a concept inspired by Biblical canon


[edit] Footnotes


^ McDonald & Sanders, editors of The Canon Debate, 2002, The Notion and Definition of Canon by Eugene Ulrich, page 29 defines canon as follows: "...the definitive list of inspired, authoritative books which constitute the recognized and accepted body of sacred scripture of a major religious group, that definitive list being the result of inclusive and exclusive decisions after serious deliberation."; page 34 defines canon of scripture as follows: "...the definitive, closed list of the books that constitute the authentic contents of scripture."
^ McDonald & Sanders, editors of The Canon Debate, 2002, The Notion and Definition of Canon by Eugene Ulrich, page 28; also from the Introduction on page 13: "We should be clear, however, that the current use of the term "canon" to refer to a collection of scripture books was introduced by David Ruhnken in 1768 in his Historia critica oratorum graecorum for lists of sacred scriptures. While it is tempting to think that such usage has its origins in antiquity in reference to a closed collection of scriptures, such is not the case." The technical discussion includes Athanasius's use of "kanonizomenon=canonized" and Eusebius's use of kanon and "endiathekous biblous=encovenanted books".
^ Athanasius Letter 39.6.3: "Let no man add to these, neither let him take ought from these."
^ McDonald & Sanders, page 32-33: Closed list; page 30: "But it is necessary to keep in mind Bruce Metzger's distinction between "a collection of authoritative books" and "an authoritative collection of books." "
^ McDonald & Sanders, page 4
^ McDonald & Sanders, ed., The Canon Debate, page 60, chapter 4: The Formation of the Hebrew Canon: Isaiah as a Test Case by Joseph Blenkinsopp.
^ Philip R. Davies in The Canon Debate, page 50: "With many other scholars, I conclude that the fixing of a canonical list was almost certainly the achievement of the Hasmonean dynasty."
^ The Canon Debate, McDonald & Sanders editors, 2002, chapter 6: Questions of Canon through the Dead Sea Scrolls by James C. VanderKam, page 94, citing private communication with Emanuel Tov on biblical manuscripts: Qumran scribe type c.25%, proto-Masoretic Text c. 40%, pre-Samaritan texts c.5%, texts close to the Hebrew model for the Septuagint c.5% and nonaligned c.25%.
^ Jewish Encyclopedia: Samaritans
^ Jewish Encyclopedia: Sadducees: "With the destruction of the Temple and the state the Sadducees as a party no longer had an object for which to live. They disappear from history, though their views are partly maintained and echoed by the Samaritans, with whom they are frequently identified (see Hippolytus, "Refutatio Hæresium," ix. 29; Epiphanius, l.c. xiv.; and other Church Fathers, who ascribe to the Sadducees the rejection of the Prophets and the Hagiographa; comp. also Sanh. 90b, where "Ẓadduḳim" stands for "Kutim" [Samaritans]; Sifre, Num. 112; Geiger, l.c. pp. 128-129), and by the Karaites (see Maimonides, commentary on Ab. i. 3; Geiger, "Gesammelte Schriften," iii. 283-321; also Anan ben David; Karaites)."
^ JewishEncyclopedia.com - SAMARITANS
^ McDonald & Sanders's 2002 The Canon Debate, page 259: "the so-called Septuagint was not in itself formally closed." — attributed to Albert Sundberg's 1964 Harvard dissertation.
^ Everett Ferguson, "Factors leading to the Selection and Closure of the New Testament Canon," in The Canon Debate. eds. L. M. McDonald & J. A. Sanders (Hendrickson, 2002) pp. 302–303; cf. Justin Martyr, First Apology 67.3.
^ Prat, Ferdinand. "Origen and Origenism." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 11. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1911. 31 Jul. 2008.<http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/11306b.htm>. According to Eusebius' Church History 6.25: a 22 book OT [though Eusebius doesn't name Minor Prophets, presumably just an oversight?] + 1 DeuteroCanon ["And outside these are the Maccabees, which are entitled S<ph?>ar beth sabanai el."] + 4 Gospels but on the Apostle "Paul ... did not so much as write to all the churches that he taught; and even to those to which he wrote he sent but a few lines."
^ Everett Ferguson, "Factors leading to the Selection and Closure of the New Testament Canon," in The Canon Debate. eds. L. M. McDonald & J. A. Sanders (Hendrickson, 2002) pp. 301; cf. Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses 3.11.8
^ Both points taken from Mark A. Noll's Turning Points, (Baker Academic, 1997) pp 36–37
^ H. J. De Jonge, "The New Testament Canon," in The Biblical Canons. eds. de Jonge & J. M. Auwers (Leuven University Press, 2003) p. 315
^ The Cambridge History of the Bible (volume 1) eds. P. R. Ackroyd and C. F. Evans (Cambridge University Press, 1970) p. 308
^ Lindberg, Carter (2006). A Brief History of Christianity. Blackwell Publishing. pp. 15. ISBN 1405110783. 
^ David Brakke, "Canon Formation and Social Conflict in Fourth Century Egypt: Athanasius of Alexandria's Thirty Ninth Festal Letter," in Harvard Theological Review 87 (1994) pp. 395–419
^ Everett Ferguson, "Factors leading to the Selection and Closure of the New Testament Canon," in The Canon Debate. eds. L. M. McDonald & J. A. Sanders (Hendrickson, 2002) p. 320; F. F. Bruce, The Canon of Scripture (Intervarsity Press, 1988) p. 230; cf. Augustine, De Civitate Dei 22.8
^ Lindberg, Carter (2006). A Brief History of Christianity. Blackwell Publishing. pp. 15. ISBN 1405110783. 
^ F. F. Bruce, The Canon of Scripture (Intervarsity Press, 1988) p. 234
^ F. F. Bruce, The Canon of Scripture (Intervarsity Press, 1988) p. 225
^ Everett Ferguson, "Factors leading to the Selection and Closure of the New Testament Canon," in The Canon Debate. eds. L. M. McDonald & J. A. Sanders (Hendrickson, 2002) p. 320; Bruce Metzger, The Canon of the New Testament: Its Origins, Development, and Significance (Oxford: Clarendon, 1987) pp. 237–238; F. F. Bruce, The Canon of Scripture (Intervarsity Press, 1988) p. 97
^ F. F. Bruce, The Canon of Scripture (Intervarsity Press, 1988) p. 215
^ The Cambridge History of the Bible (volume 1) eds. P. R. Ackroyd and C. F. Evans (Cambridge University Press, 1970) p. 305; cf. the Catholic Encyclopedia, Canon of the New Testament
^ http://www.bibelcenter.de/bibel/lu1545/ note order: ... Hebr�er, Jakobus, Judas, Offenbarung; see also http://www.bible-researcher.com/links10.html
^ The Popular and Critical Bible Encyclopædia and Scriptural Dictionary, Fully Defining and Explaining All Religious Terms, Including Biographical, Geographical, Historical, Archæological and Doctrinal Themes, p.521, edited by Samuel Fallows et al, The Howard-Severance company, 1901,1910. - Google Books
^ Catholic Encyclopedia, Canon of the New Testament
^ Fathers, New Advent.
^ NPNF2-04. Athanasius: Select Works and Letters | Christian Classics Ethereal Library



[edit] References

Anchor Bible Dictionary
Ante-Nicene Fathers, Eerdmans Press
Apostolic Fathers, Lightfoot-Harmer-Holmes, ISBN 978-0-8010-5676-5
Encyclopedia of the Early Church, Oxford
Beckwith, R.T. OT Canon of the NT Church ISBN 978-0-8028-3617-5
Brakke, David. "Canon formation and social conflict in fourth century Egypt," in Harvard Theological Review 87:4 (1994) pp. 395–419. Athanasius' role in the formation of the N.T. canon.
Bruce, F.F., Canon of Scripture ISBN 978-0-8308-1258-5
Davis, L.D. First Seven Ecumenical Councils ISBN 978-0-8146-5616-7
Ferguson Encyclopedia of Early Christianity
Fox, Robin Lane. The Unauthorized Version. 1992.
Gamble. NT Canon ISBN 1579109098
Hennecke-Schneemelcher. NT Apocrypha
Jurgens, W.A. Faith of the Early Fathers ISBN 978-0-8146-5616-7
Metzger, Bruce. Canon of the NT ISBN 978-0-19-826180-3
Noll, Mark A. Turning Points. Baker Academic, 1997. ISBN 978-0-8010-6211-7
John Salza, Scripture Catholic, Septuagint references
Sundberg. OT of the Early Church Harvard Press 1964


[edit] Further reading

Barnstone, Willis (ed.) The Other Bible: Ancient Alternative Scriptures. HarperCollins, 1984, ISBN 978-0739484340.
Childs, Brevard S., The New Testament as canon: an introduction ISBN 0334022126
Gamble, Harry Y., The New Testament canon: its making and meaning ISBN 0800604709
McDonald, Lee Martin, The formation of the Christian biblical canon ISBN 0687132932
McDonald, Lee Martin, Early Christianity and its sacred literature ISBN 1565632664
McDonald, Lee Martin, The Biblical canon: its origin, transmission, and authority ISBN 9781565639256
McDonald, Lee Martin, and James A. Sanders (eds.) The canon debate ISBN 1565635175
Metzger, Bruce Manning, The Canon of the New Testament: its origin, development, and significance ISBN 0198261802
Souter, Alexander, The text and canon of the New Testament, 2nd. ed., Studies in theology; no. 25. London: Duckworth (1954)
Wall, Robert W., The New Testament as canon: a reader in canonical criticism ISBN 1850753741
Westcott, Brooke Foss, A general survey of the history of the canon of the New Testament, 4th. ed, London: Macmillan (1875)


[edit] External links

Old Testament Reading Room & New Testament Reading Room: Extensive links to online resources for OT and NT theology & history (Tyndale Seminary)
The Development of the Canon of the New Testament - includes very detailed charts and direct links to ancient witnesses
Catholic Encyclopedia: Canon of the New Testament
Scholarly articles on the Protestant Biblical Canon from the Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary Library
Jewish Encyclopedia: Bible Canon
What's in Your Bible? - a chart comparing Jewish, Orthodox, Catholic, Syriac, Ethiopian, and Protestant canons.








v • d • e

Books of the Bible





Major Divisions





Old Testament
(Hebrew Protocanon)


Genesis · Exodus · Leviticus · Numbers · Deuteronomy · Joshua · Judges · Ruth · 1-2 Samuel · 1-2 Kings · 1-2 Chronicles · Ezra · Nehemiah · Esther · Job · Psalms · Proverbs · Ecclesiastes · Song · Isaiah · Jeremiah · Lamentations · Ezekiel · Daniel · Hosea · Joel · Amos · Obadiah · Jonah · Micah · Nahum · Habakkuk · Zephaniah · Haggai · Zechariah · Malachi







Deuterocanon
& Apocrypha


Catholic, Orthodox: Baruch & Letter of Jeremiah · Additions to Daniel (Susanna, Song of the Three Children, Bel & the Dragon)  · Additions to Esther · Judith · 1 Maccabees · 2 Maccabees  · Sirach  · Tobit · Wisdom  · Orthodox: Prayer of Manasseh · 1 Esdras · 2 Esdras · Orthodox: 3 Maccabees · 4 Maccabees · Odes  · Psalm 151 · Syriac Peshitta only: 2 Baruch  · Psalms 152–155 · Ethiopian Orthodox only: 4 Baruch · Enoch · Jubilees · 1-3 Meqabyan







New Testament


Matthew • Mark • Luke • John • Acts • Romans • 1 Corinthians • 2 Corinthians • Galatians • Ephesians • Philippians • Colossians • 1 Thessalonians • 2 Thessalonians • 1 Timothy • 2 Timothy  • Titus  • Philemon • Hebrews • James • 1 Peter • 2 Peter • 1 John • 2 John • 3 John • Jude • Revelation









Canon

Development: Old Testament · New Testament · Christian Canon
Others: Deuterocanon · Apocrypha: Biblical · New Testament






More divisions

Chapters and verses · Pentateuch · History · Wisdom · Major & Minor prophets · Gospels (synoptic) · Epistles (Pauline, Johannine, pastoral, general) · Apocalyptic literature






Translations

Vulgate · Luther · Wyclif · Tyndale · KJV · Modern English Bibles · Debate · Dynamic v. Formal · JPS · RSV · NASB · Amp · NAB · NEB · TLB · GNB · NIV · NJB · NRSV · REB · NLT · ESV · Msg






Manuscripts

Septuagint · Samaritan Pentateuch · Dead Sea scrolls · Targum · Diatessaron · Muratorian fragment · Peshitta · Vetus Latina · Masoretic Text · New Testament manuscripts






See also

Authorship · Esdras · Non-canonical books referenced in the Bible · Studies · Synod of Hippo · Textual criticism






Category · Portal · WikiProject












v • d • e

Part of a series on Christianity





Jesus Christ

Virgin birth · Crucifixion · Resurrection · Easter







Foundations

Church · New Covenant · Twelve Apostles · Kingdom of God · Gospel · Timeline · Paul · Peter






Bible

Books · Canon · Old Testament · New Testament · Apocrypha






Theology

Salvation · Baptism · Trinity · Father · Son · Holy Spirit · History of theology · Christology · Mariology · Apologetics






History &
Traditions

Early · Constantine · Ecumenical council · Creeds · Missions · Chrysostom · East-West Schism · Crusades · Protestant Reformation






Denominations

Catholic: Roman Catholic · Anglican · Independent Catholic · Old Catholic
Protestant: Lutheran · Reformed · Anabaptist · Baptist · Methodist · Adventist · Evangelical · Holiness · Pentecostal
Eastern: Eastern Orthodox · Oriental Orthodox · Assyrian
Nontrinitarian: Jehovah's Witness · Latter Day Saint · Unitarian · Christadelphian · Oneness Pentecostal






Topics

Preaching · Prayer · Ecumenism · Relation to other religions · Movements · Music · Liturgy · Calendar · Symbols · Art · Criticism






Christianity portal












v • d • e

History of Christianity





Jesus & the Apostles

Background · Timeline · Ministry · Good News · Death & Resurrection · Holy Spirit · Gospels · Acts · Apostolic Age · The 12 · Paul · Jerusalem Council






Ante-Nicene Church

History Of · Justin Martyr · Ignatius · Persecutions · Church Fathers · Irenaeus · Marcionism · NT Canon · Tertullian · Montanism · Origen






Christian Roman Empire

Constantine · Monasticism · Councils: Nicaea I · Athanasius · Arianism · Constantinople I · Nicene Creed · Jerome · Augustine · Ephesus · Chalcedon






Eastern Christianity

History Of · History of E. Orthodoxy · Asia · Oriental Orxy. · Coptic · Syria · Armenia · Chrysostom · Islam · Icon · East-West Schism · Fall · Russian · Under the Ottomans · 20th century






Middle Ages

Pelagianism · Gregory I · Celtic · Germanic & Scandinavian · Investiture · Anselm of Canterbury · Abelard · Bernard of Clairvaux · Crusades · Inquisition
Scholasticism · Dominic · Francis of Assisi · 4th Lateran · Bonaventure · Thomas Aquinas · Wycliffe · Avignon · Papal Schism · Jan Hus · Conciliarism






Protestant
Reformation

Protestantism, History of · Erasmus · Five Solas · Eucharistic Theologies · Calvinist v. Arminian · Arminianism · Synod of Dort · Wars · Colonization
Lutheranism · Martin Luther · 95 Theses · Diet of Worms · Melanchthon · Crypto-Calvinism · Gnesio-Lutherans · Lutheran Orthodoxy · Eucharist · Book of Concord
Reformed · Zwinglianism · In Switzerland · John Calvin · History of Calvinism · John Knox · TULIP · Synod of Dort
Anabaptism · Radical Reformation · Conrad Grebel · Swiss Brethren · Müntzer · Menno Simons
English Reformation: History, Timeline · Henry VIII · Cranmer · Elizabethan Settlement · 39 Articles · Book of Common Prayer · In Scotland · Civil War






Roman Catholicism

History of the Papacy · Lateran IV · Trent · Counter-Reformation · Thomas More · Leo X · Guadalupe · Jesuits · Francis Xavier
Dissolution of the Monasteries · Wars · Paul III · Pius V · Tridentine Mass · Teresa of Avila · Bellarmine · Oratory of Neri · Vatican I · Vatican II · Roman Catholic Timeline






Age of Reason & Revival

17th century denominations in England · Adventism · Baptists · Congregationalism · First Great Awakening · History of Jehovah's Witnesses · History of the Anglican Communion · History of the Latter Day Saint movement · History of the Seventh-day Adventist Church · Latter Day Saint movement · Methodism · Millerites · Neo-Lutheranism · Old Lutherans · Pietism · Puritanism · English Civil War · Wars of Religion · Restoration Movement · Restorationism · Revivalism






Industrial Age

Camp meeting · Holiness movement · Independent Catholic Churches · Second Great Awakening






Age of Ideologies

Azusa Street Revival · Ecumenism · Evangelicalism · Jesus movement · Mainline (Protestant) · Pentecostalism · Charismatic movement






Christianity · Christianity Timeline · Christian Theology · Christian Martyrs · Timeline of Christian missions — History of: Eastern Orthodoxy · Oriental Orthodoxy · Protestantism · Roman Catholicism








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biblical_canon"
Categories: Judeo-Christian topics | Hebrew Bible topics | Christian theology of the Bible | Old Testament theology | Bible | Christian Biblical canonHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Català
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Français
Furlan
한국어
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 20:32.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
