













Qawwali - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Qawwali";
		var wgTitle = "Qawwali";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "517367";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280786984;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Qawwali

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Music of Pakistan



Classical · Ghazal · Qawwali · Hamd · Pop · Filmi · Rock · Hip Hop



Media


Awards

Lux Style Awards · MTV Awards · Indus Music Awards · The Musik Awards



Charts

AAG 10 · The Musik Countdown



Festivals

All Pakistan Music Conference



Media

MTV Pakistan · Indus Music · The Musik · AAG



National
anthem

"Qaumi Tarana"



Regional folk styles


Balochi  · Dari  · Farsi  · Kashmiri  · Khowar  · Pastho  · Punjabi  · Saraiki  · Sindhi  · Hindko


Qawwali (Urdu/Persian/Pashto/Sindhi/Seraiki: قوٌالی; Punjabi/Multani: ਕ਼ੱਵਾਲੀ, قوٌالی; Brajbhasha/Hindi: क़व्वाली) is a form of Sufi devotional music popular in South Asia, particularly in areas with a historically strong Muslim presence, such as southern Pakistan, and parts of North India. The style is rare, though not entirely absent, in North and West Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Kashmir. It's a vibrant musical tradition that stretches back more than 700 years. Often listeners, and even artists themselves, are transported to a state of wajad, a trance-like state where they feel at one with God, generally considered to be the height of spiritual ecstasy in Sufism, and the ultimate goal of the practice.
Originally performed mainly at Sufi shrines or dargahs throughout the subcontinent, it has also gained mainstream popularity. Qawwali music received international exposure through the work of the late Pakistani singer Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, largely due to several releases on the Real World label, followed by live appearances at WOMAD festivals. Other famous Qawwali singers include Pakistan's Sabri Brothers.
Although famous throughout the world, its hub remains the Punjab province of Pakistan from where it gained entry into the mainstream commercial music industry and international fame.




Contents


1 Origins
2 Song content
3 Composition of a qawwali party
4 Musical structure
5 Traditional sequence of a Chishtiya Sufi order qawwali performance
6 Legendary qawwals of the past
7 Well-known qawwals of today
8 See also
9 External links
10 References





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Origins


Music of India



Bhajan · Filmi · Folk · Hip hop · Ghazal
Pop · Qawwali · Rock



Timeline · Samples


Genres

Classical (Carnatic · Hindustani)



Awards

Bollywood · Punjabi  · Tamil



Festivals

Sangeet Natak Akademi
Thyagaraja Aradhana
Cleveland Thyagaraja Aradhana



Media

Sruti
The Music Magazine



National
anthem

"Jana Gana Mana"



National
song

"Vande Mataram"



By state/territory



Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Andhra Pradesh · Arunachal Pradesh · Assam
Bihar · Chhattisgarh · Goa · Gujarat · Haryana
Himachal Pradesh · Jammu · Jharkhand
Karnataka · Kashmir · Kerala
Madhya Pradesh · Maharashtra · Manipur
Meghalaya · Mizoram · Nagaland · Orissa
Punjab · Rajasthan · Sikkim · Tamil Nadu
Tripura · Uttar Pradesh · Uttaranchal
West Bengal



The roots of Qawwali can be traced back to 8th century Persia (today's Iran and Afghanistan). During the first major migration from Persia, in the 11th century, the musical tradition of Sema migrated to the Indian subcontinent, Turkey and Uzbekistan. Amir Khusro Dehelvi of the Chisti order of Sufis is credited with fusing the Persian and Indian musical traditions to create Qawwali as we know it today in the late 13th century in India (Hindustani classical music is also attributed to him). The word Sama is often still used in Central Asia and Turkey to refer to forms very similar to Qawwali, and in India, Pakistan and Bangladesh, the formal name used for a session of Qawwali is Mehfil-e-Sama.
Qaul (Arabic) is an "utterance (of the prophet)", Qawwāl is someone who often repeats (sings) a Qaul, Qawwāli is the style of singing of Qawwāls.

[edit] Song content
The songs which constitute the qawwali repertoire are mostly in Urdu and Punjabi (almost equally divided between the two), although there are several songs in Persian, Brajbhasha and Siraiki.[1][2] There is also qawwali in some regional languages (e.g., Chhote Babu Qawwal sings in Bengali), but the regional language tradition is relatively obscure. Also, the sound of the regional language qawwali can be totally different from that of mainstream qawwali. This is certainly true of Chhote Babu Qawwal, whose sound is much closer to Baul music than to the qawwali of Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, for example.
The poetry is implicitly understood to be spiritual in its meaning, even though the lyrics can sometimes sound wildly secular, or outright hedonistic. The central themes of qawwali are love, devotion and longing (of man for the Divine).
Qawwalis are classified by their content into several categories:

A hamd (arabic for praise) is a song in praise of Allah. Traditionally, a qawwali performance starts with a hamd.
A naat (arabic for description) is a song in praise of the Prophet Muhammad. The opening hamd is traditionally followed by a naat.
A manqabat (arabic for characteristics) is a song in praise of either Imam Ali or one of the Sufi saints. Interestingly, manqabats in praise of Ali are sung at both Sunni and Shi'a gatherings. If one is sung, it will follow right after the naat. There is usually at least one manqabat in a traditional programme.
A marsiya (arabic for lamentation for a dead person) is a lamentation over the death of much of Imam Husayn's family in the Battle of Karbala. Once again, this would typically be sung only at a Shi'a concert.
A ghazal (arabic for love song) is a song that sounds secular on the face of it. There are two extended metaphors that run through ghazals -- the joys of drinking and the agony of separation from the beloved. These songs feature exquisite poetry, and can certainly be taken at face value, and enjoyed at that level. In fact, in Pakistan and India, ghazal is also a separate, distinct musical genre in which many of the same songs are performed in a different musical style, and in a secular context. In the context of that genre, the songs are usually taken at face value, and no deeper meaning is necessarily implied. But in the context of qawwali, these songs of intoxication and yearning use secular metaphors to poignantly express the soul's longing for union with the Divine, and its joy in loving the Divine. In the songs of intoxication, "wine" represents "knowledge of the Divine", the "cupbearer" (saaqi) is God or a spiritual guide, the "tavern" is the metaphorical place where the soul may (or may not) be fortunate enough to attain spiritual enlightenment. (The "tavern" is emphatically not a conventional house of worship. Rather, it is taken to be the spiritual context within which the soul exists.) Intoxication is attaining spiritual knowledge, or being filled with the joy of loving the Divine. In the songs of yearning, the soul, having been abandoned in this world by that cruel and cavalier lover, God, sings of the agony of separation, and the depth of its yearning for reunion.
A kafi is a poem in Punjabi, Seraiki or Sindhi, which is in the unique style of poets such as Shah Hussain, Bulleh Shah and Sachal Sarmast. Two of the more well-known Kafis include Ni Main Jana Jogi De Naal and Mera Piya Ghar Aaya.
A munadjaat (arabic for a conversation in the night) is a song where the singer displays his thanks to Allah through a variety of linguistic techniques. It is often sung in Persian, with Mawlana Jalāl-ad-Dīn Rumi credited as its inventor.


[edit] Composition of a qawwali party



Part of a series on Islamic Culture




Architecture



Arab · Azeri
Indo-Islamic · Iwan
Moorish · Moroccan · Mughal
Ottoman · Persian
Sudano-Sahelian · Tatar



Art



Calligraphy · Miniature · Rugs



Dance



Sema · Whirling



Dress



Abaya · Agal · Boubou
Burqa · Chador · Jellabiya
Niqab · Salwar kameez · Taqiya
Thawb · Jilbāb · Hijab



Holidays



Ashura · Arba'een · al-Ghadeer
Chaand Raat · al-Fitr · al-Adha
Imamat Day · al-Kadhim
New Year · Isra and Mi'raj
al-Qadr · Mawlid · Ramadan
Mugham · Mid-Sha'ban



Literature



Arabic · Azeri · Bengali
Indonesian · Javanese · Kashmiri
Kurdish · Persian · Sindhi · Somali
South Asia · Turkish · Urdu



Music


Dastgah · Ghazal · Madih nabawi
Maqam · Mugham · Nasheed
Qawwali



Theatre



Karagöz and Hacivat · Ta'zieh





Islam Portal
 v • d • e 



A group of qawwali musicians, called a party, typically consists of eight or nine men — women are, for all intents and purposes, excluded from traditional Muslim music as respectable women are traditionally prohibited from singing in the presence of men, though these traditions are changing — including a lead singer, one or two side singers, one or two harmoniums (which may be played by the lead singer, side singer or someone else), and percussion. If there is only one percussionist, he plays the tabla and dholak, usually the tabla with the dominant hand and the dholak with the other one (i.e. a left-handed percussionist would play the table with his left hand). Often there will be two percussionists, in which case one might play the tabla and the other the dholak. There is also a chorus of four or five men who repeat key verses, and who aid and abet percussion by hand-clapping.
The performers sit cross-legged on the ground in two rows — the lead singer, side singers and harmonium players in the front row, and the chorus and percussionists in the back row.
Before the fairly recent introduction of the harmonium, qawwalis were usually accompanied by the sarangi. The sarangi had to be retuned between songs; the harmonium didn't, and was soon preferred.

[edit] Musical structure
Songs are usually between 15 to 30 minutes long. However, the longest commercially released qawwali runs slightly over 115 minutes (Hashr Ke Roz Yeh Poochhunga by Aziz Mian Qawwal). The qawwali maestro Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan has at least two songs that are more than 60 minutes long.
Qawwalis tend to begin gently and build steadily to a very high energy level in order to induce hypnotic states both among the musicians and within the audience. Songs are usually arranged as follows:

They start with an instrumental prelude where the main melody is played on the harmonium, accompanied by the tabla, and which may include improvised variations of the melody.
Then comes the alap, a long tonal improvised melody during which the singers intone different long notes, in the raag of the song to be played.
The lead singer begins to sing some preamble verses which are typically not part of the main song, although thematically related to it. These are sung unrhythmically, improvised following the raag, and accompanied only by the harmonium. After the lead singer sings a verse, one of the side singers will repeat the verse, perhaps with his own improvisation. A few or many verses will be sung in this way, leading into the main song.
As the main song begins, the tabla, dholak and clapping begin. All members join in the singing of the verses that constitute the refrain. Normally neither the lyrics of the main verses nor the melodies that go with them are improvised; in fact, these are often traditional songs sung by many groups, especially within the same lineage. As the song proceeds, the lead singer or one of the side singers may break out into an alap. Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan also popularized the interjection of sargam singing at this point. The song usually builds in tempo and passion, with each singer trying to outdo the other in terms of vocal acrobatics. Some singers may do long periods of sargam improvisation, especially alternating improvisations with a student singer. The songs usually end suddenly.

The singing style of qawwali is different from Western singing styles in many ways. For example, in words beginning with an "m", Western singers are apt to stress the vowel following the "m" rather than the "m" itself, whereas in qawwali, the "m" will usually be held, producing a muted tone. Also in qawwali, there is no distinction between what is known as the chest voice and the neck voice (the different areas that sound will resonate in depending on the frequency sung). Rather, qawwals sing very loudly and forcefully, which allows them to extend their chest voice to much higher frequencies than those used in Western singing, even though this usually causes a more noisy or strained sound than would be acceptable in the West.

[edit] Traditional sequence of a Chishtiya Sufi order qawwali performance

Instrumental: This is supposed to be the announcement of the arrival of Khawaja Moinuddin Chishti, as Sufi believes their saints are free of time-space. Also that Nabi, Siddiq, Shaheed, and Saleh category of faithfuls are never dead, just gone into some other state from where they visit whenever they are mentioned, especially if there is a function in their honor.
Hamd
Naat
Manqabat Ali
Manqabat Ghous: Praise of Shaikh Abdul-Qadir Gilani
Manqabat Khwaja: Praise of Khwaja Moinuddin Chishti
Manqabat Shaikh: Praise of the Shaikh/Pir if it is his anniversary
Rang or Badhawa: If it is the death anniversary of the Pir, then it is usually Rang, a poem by Amir Khusro. If it is the Shaikh's birthday, it is usually the Badhawa.


[edit] Legendary qawwals of the past

Aziz Ahmed Warsi
Aziz Mian Qawwal
Badar Miandad
Bahauddin Qutbuddin
Fateh Ali Khan
Jafar Husain Khan Badauni
Mubarak Ali Khan
Muhammed Saeed Chishti
Munshi Raziuddin
Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan
Sabri Brothers


[edit] Well-known qawwals of today

Abida Parveen
Amjad Sabri
Aziz Nazan
Bakshi Javed Salamat
Chhote Aziz Nazan
Faiz Ali Faiz
Fareed Ayaz
Ghulam Sabir Nizami and Ghulam Waris Nizami
Mehr Ali Sher Ali
Najmuddin Saifuddin
Rahat Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan
Sher Miandad Khan
Waheed and Naveed Chishti


[edit] See also

Islamic music
Religious ecstasy
Music of Pakistan
Music of India
Filmi qawwali
Sema


[edit] External links

Origin and History of the Qawwali, Adam Nayyar, Lok Virsa Research Centre, Islamabad. 1988.
Fan site of the Legend of Qawwali, Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan
Qawwali songs in Punjabi and Urdu to stream (Windows Media Player and Realplayer) or download (MP3 format)
QAWWALI PAGE Islamic Devotional Music by David Courtney, Ph.D.
Blog with a large selection of Urdu/Hindi Sufi inspired poetry including qawwali translations and transliterations
Yahoo discussion group dedicated to Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan and Qawwali (includes photographs, lyrics, translations, song lists)
Munshi Raziuddin and Fareed Ayaz Qawwal (Self-promotional site)
Site dedicated to Rizwan-Muazzam Qawwali
Documentary: Music of Pakistan (52 min.)
Qawwali lyrics with few translations (Nusrat, Sabri, Aziz Mian, Rizwan Muazzam, Abida, Fareed Ayaz, and more)


[edit] References


^ "Bollywood Reinvents the Qawwali – With a Vengeance". The Day After: An International Illustrated Newsmagazine of India. http://www.dayafterindia.com/dec206/silver_screen1.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-23. 
^ "Delhi’s Qawwal Bachchon ka Gharana lights up Ramadan night at T2F". Daily Times: Leading News Resource of Pakistan. http://www.dailytimes.com.pk/default.asp?page=2007%5C09%5C22%5Cstory_22-9-2007_pg12_10. Retrieved on 2007-02-23. 









v • d • e

Tasawwuf (Sufism)





Ideas:

Ihsan · Noor · Maqaam · Haal · Manzil · Yaqeen · Fanaa · Baqaa · Haqiqah · Marifah · Nafs · Dhawq · Sulook · Cosmology · Kashf · Metaphysics · Psychology · Tajalli






Practices:

Dhikr · Hadhra · Muraqaba · Qawwali · Sema · Whirling






Sufi orders:

Chishti · Mevlevi · Murīdiyya · Naqshbandi · Qadri · Rifa'i · Shadhili · Suhrawardi · Tijaniyyah · Qadiri Boutchichi · Ni'matullāhī List of tariqas






Early Notable Sufis:

Uwais al-Qarni · Hasan Basri · Rabia Basri · Bayazid Bastami · Junayd Baghdadi · Dhu n-Nun · Hallaj · Abolkheir · Ghazali · Kharaqani · Gilani · Moinuddin Chishti · Suhrawardi · Rifa'i · Bakhtiar Kaki · Baba Farid · Ibn Arabi · Shams Tabrizi · Rumi · Saadi · Attar · Shabistari · Nizamuddin Auliya · Ganj Bakhsh · Baha-ud-Din Naqshband · Amir Khusro · Safi  · Nimatullah  · Kubra · Jami · Jazouli · Sabir Pak · Shah Waliullah · Ata Allah · Waris Pak · Zarruq · Yesevi · Emre · Semnani · Sirhindi · Bhittai · Haddad






Notable Modern Sufis:

Tahir ul-Qadri · Tahir Allauddin · Abdal Hakim Murad · Shaykh Nazim · Hisham Kabbani · Nuh Keller  · Muhammad al-Maliki · Abdalqadir as-Sufi · Qalander Ba Ba Auliya · Shamsuddin Azeemi · Reshad Feild · Ahmad al-Alawi · Ozak · Bawa Muhaiyaddeen · Galib · Omar Shah · Haeri · Gohar Shahi






Sufi studies:

Shah · Lings · Chittick · Ernst · Sells · Corbin · Frager · Schimmel · Hixon · Aguéli · Guénon · Nasr · Burckhardt · Almqvist · Lindbom · Schuon ·






Topics in Sufism:

Art · Fiction  · History · Music · Poetry · Shrines  · Texts













v • d • e

Urdu poetry






Bait • Bait-ul-Ghazal • Beher • Diwan • Husn-E-Matla • Kalam • Kulyat • Maqta • Matla • Mavra • Misra • Mushaira • Qaafiyaa • Radif • Sher • Shayar • Shayari • Tah-Tul-Lafz • Takhallus • Tarannum • Triveni • Doha • Fard • Geet • Ghazal • Hamd • Hazal • Hijv • Kafi • Madah • Manqabat • Marsia • Masnavi • Munajat • Musaddas • Mukhammas • Naat • Nazm • Noha • Qasida • Qat'ã • Qawwali • Rubai • Salam • Sehra • Shehr a'ashob • Soz • Wasokht • Poets









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qawwali"
Categories: Islamic music | Pakistani styles of music | Sufi music | Indian styles of music | Islam in Pakistan | Islam in India | Pakistani culture | Qawwali | Religious music 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
Español
Français
हिन्दी
Italiano
日本語
Русский
Simple English
Suomi
Türkçe









 This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 03:06.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
