













Pocahontas - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Pocahontas";
		var wgTitle = "Pocahontas";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "237523";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282165635;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Pocahontas

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For the Disney animated feature, see Pocahontas (1995 film).
For other uses, see Pocahontas (disambiguation).




A 1616 engraving of Pocahontas by Simon van de Passe.
The original English caption (not visible here) reads "Matoaks als Rebecka daughter to the mighty Prince Powhâtan Emperour of Attanoughkomouck als virginia converted and baptized in the Christian faith, and wife to the wor.ff Mr. Joh Rolfe ."[1]
The inscription under the portrait reads "Ætatis suæ 21 A. 1616", Latin for "at the age of 21 in the year 1616".


Pocahontas (c. 1595 – March 21, 1617[2]) was a Native American woman who married an Englishman, John Rolfe, and became a celebrity in London in the last year of her life. She was a daughter of Wahunsunacawh (also known as Chief or Emperor Powhatan), who ruled an area encompassing almost all of the tribes in the Tidewater region of Virginia (called Tenakomakah at the time). Her formal names were Matoaka (or Matoika) and Amonute[3]; Pocahontas was a childhood nickname referring to her frolicsome nature (in the Powhatan language it meant "little wanton", according to William Strachey[4]). After her baptism, she went by the name Rebecca, becoming Rebecca Rolfe on her marriage.




Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Encounter with John Smith
1.2 Capture
1.3 Marriage to John Rolfe
1.4 Journey to England and death


2 Descendants
3 Title and status
4 Posthumous legend
5 Namesakes
6 References
7 Footnotes
8 Further reading
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography

[edit] Encounter with John Smith




19th century illustration of Pocahontas saving Smith's life.


In May 1607, when the English colonists arrived in Virginia and began building settlements, Pocahontas was between twelve and fourteen years old,[5] and her father was the leader of the Powhatan Confederacy. One of the leading colonists, John Smith, subsequently recounted that he was captured by a group of Powhatan hunters and brought to Werowocomoco, one of the chief villages of the Powhatan Empire. According to Smith, he was laid across a stone and was about to be executed (by being beaten with clubs), when Pocahontas threw herself across his body: "Pocahontas, the Kings dearest daughter, when no intreaty could prevaile, got his head in her armes, and laid her owne upon his to save him from death".[6] She earned respect from the other people and the English Settlements.[7]
John Smith's version of events is the only source, and, since the 1860s, skepticism has increasingly been expressed about its veracity. One reason for such doubt is: despite having published two earlier books about Virginia, Smith's earliest surviving account of his rescue by Pocahontas dates from 1616, nearly ten years later, in a letter entreating Queen Anne to treat Pocahontas with dignity.[7] The time gap in publishing his story raises the possibility Smith may have exaggerated or invented the event to enhance Pocahontas's image; however, in a recent book, J.A.O. Lemay points out that Smith's earlier writing was primarily geographical and ethnographic in nature and did not dwell on his personal experience; hence, there was no reason for him to write down the story until this point.[8]




A Pocahontas statue was erected in Jamestown, Virginia in 1922


Further skepticism arose from the fact that Smith had earlier told a very similar story of being rescued through the intervention of a beautiful young girl after he was captured by Turks in Hungary in 1602.[9] Even if Smith's version of events was accurate, some experts have recently suggested that, although Smith believed he had been rescued, he had in fact been involved in a ritual intended to symbolize his death and rebirth as a member of the tribe.[10][11] However, in Love and Hate in Jamestown, David A. Price notes this is only guesswork, since little is known of Powhatan rituals, and there is no evidence for any similar rituals among other North American tribes.[12]
Whatever really happened, this encounter initiated a friendly relationship with Smith and the Jamestown colony, and Pocahontas would often come to the settlement and play games with the boys there.[13] During a time when the colonists were starving, "every once in four or five days, Pocahontas with her attendants brought him [Smith] so much provision that saved many of their lives that else for all this had starved with hunger."[14] As the colonists expanded further, however, some of the Native Americans felt their lands were threatened, and conflicts arose again.
In 1608, Pocahontas is said to have saved Smith a second time. Smith and some other colonists were invited to Werowocomoco by Chief Powhatan on friendly terms. They were treated kindly and traded with the Indians, but they missed the tide and had to spend the night. That night, Pocahontas came to Smith's hut and told him that her father was planning to send men with food who would kill them when they put down their weapons to eat. She had been told not to inform them, but she begged the Englishmen to leave. Being forewarned, the English kept their weapons ready by them even while eating, and no attack came.[15]
In 1609, an injury from a gunpowder explosion forced Smith to return to England for medical care. The English told the natives Smith was dead, that he had been captured by a French pirate, that the pirate ship had been wrecked on the Brittany coast, and that it had gone down with all hands.[16] Pocahontas believed Smith was dead until she arrived in England several years later, the wife of John Rolfe.[17]
According to William Strachey, Pocahontas married a Powhatan warrior called Kocoum at some point before 1612; nothing more is known about this marriage.[18]
There is no suggestion in any of the historical records that Smith and Pocahontas were lovers. This romantic version of the story appears only in fictionalized versions of their relationship (such as the animated version by Walt Disney.)

[edit] Capture




The Abduction of Pocahontas, engraving by Johann Theodore de Bry, c. 1618


In March 1613, Pocahontas was residing at Passapatanzy, a village of the Patawomecks, a Native American tribe that did some trading with Powhatans. They lived in present-day Stafford County on the Potomac River near Fredericksburg, about 65 miles (105 km) from Werowocomoco. Smith writes in his Generall Historie she had been in the care of the Patawomec chief, Japazaws (or Japazeus), since 1611 or 1612.
When two English colonists began trading with the Patawomec, they discovered Pocahontas' presence. With the help of Japazaws, they tricked Pocahontas into captivity. Their purpose, as they explained in a letter, was to ransom her for some English prisoners held by Chief Powhatan, along with various weapons and tools the Powhatans had stolen.[19] Powhatan returned the prisoners, but failed to satisfy the colonists with the amount of weapons and tools he returned, and a long standoff ensued.
During the year-long wait, Pocahontas was kept at Henricus, in modern-day Chesterfield County, Virginia. Little is known about her life there although colonist Ralph Hamor wrote she received "extraordinary courteous usage."[20] An English minister, Alexander Whitaker, taught her about Christianity and helped to improve her English. After she was baptized, she took the name Rebecca as her English name.[21]
In March 1614, the standoff built to a violent confrontation between hundreds of English and Powhatan men on the Pamunkey River. At the Powhatan town of Matchcot, the English encountered a group that included some of the senior Powhatan leaders (but not Chief Powhatan himself, who was away). The English permitted Pocahontas to talk to her countrymen; however, according to the deputy governor, Thomas Dale, Pocahontas rebuked her absent father for valuing her "less than old swords, pieces, or axes" and told them she preferred to live with the English.[22]

[edit] Marriage to John Rolfe




John Gadsby Chapman, The Baptism of Pocahontas (1840)


During her stay in Henricus, Pocahontas met John Rolfe. Rolfe, whose English-born wife had died, had successfully cultivated a new strain of tobacco in Virginia and spent much of his time there tending to his crop. He was a pious man who agonized over the potential moral repercussions of marrying a heathen. In a long letter to the governor requesting permission to wed her, he expressed both his love for her and his belief he would be saving her soul. He claimed he was not motivated by:

"the unbridled desire of carnal affection, but for the good of this plantation, for the honor of our country, for the Glory of God, for my own salvation… namely Pocahontas, to whom my hearty and best thoughts are, and have been a long time so entangled, and enthralled in so intricate a labyrinth that I was even a-wearied to unwind myself thereout."[23]

Pocahontas's feelings about Rolfe and the marriage are unknown.
They were married on April 5, 1614. For a few years after the marriage, the couple lived together on Rolfe's plantation, Varina Farms, which was located across the James River from the new community of Henricus. They had a child, Thomas Rolfe, born on January 30, 1615.
Their marriage was unsuccessful in winning the English captives back, but it did create a climate of peace between the Jamestown colonists and Powhatan's tribes for several years; in 1615, Ralph Hamor wrote ever since the wedding "we have had friendly commerce and trade not only with Powhatan but also with his subjects round about us".[24]

[edit] Journey to England and death
The Virginia Colony's sponsors found it difficult to lure new colonists and investors to Jamestown. They used Pocahontas as an enticement and as evidence to convince people in Europe the New World's natives could be colonized, and the settlement made safe.[25] In 1616, the Rolfes traveled to England, arriving at the port of Plymouth on the 12th of June[26] and, then journeying to London by coach in June 1616. They were accompanied by a group of around eleven other Powhatan natives including Tomocomo, a holy man.[27] John Smith was living in London at the time and, while Pocahontas was in Plymouth she learned he was still alive.[28] Smith did not meet Pocahontas at this point, but he wrote a letter to Queen Anne urging Pocahontas be treated with respect as a royal visitor, because if she were treated badly, her "present love to us and Christianity might turn to… scorn and fury", and England might lose the chance to "rightly have a Kingdom by her means".[7]
Pocahontas was entertained at various society gatherings. On January 5, 1617 she and Tomocomo were brought before the King at the Banqueting House in Whitehall Palace at a performance of Ben Jonson's masque The Vision of Delight. According to Smith, King James was so unprepossessing neither of the Natives realized whom they had met until it was explained to them afterward.[28]




A photograph of the "Sedgeford Portrait," said to represent Pocahontas and her son although its authenticity is debated.[29]


Pocahontas and Rolfe lived in the suburb of Brentford, Middlesex for some time, as well as Rolfe's family home at Heacham Hall, Heacham, Norfolk. In early 1617, Smith visited them at a social gathering. According to Smith, when Pocahontas saw him "without any words, she turned about, obscured her face, as not seeming well contented" and was left alone for two or three hours. Later, they spoke more; Smith's record of what she said to him is fragmentary and enigmatic. She reminded him of the "courtesies she had done" and "you did promise Powhatan what was yours would be his, and he the like to you". She then discomfited him by calling him "father", explaining Smith had called Powhatan "father" when a stranger in Virginia, "and by the same reason so must I do you". Smith did not accept this form of address, since Pocahontas outranked him as "a King's daughter". Pocahontas then, "with a well-set countenance", said[28]


“
Were you not afraid to come into my father's country and caused fear in him and all his people (but me) and fear you here I should call you 'father'? I tell you then I will, and you shall call me child, and so I will be for ever and ever your countryman.
”


Finally, she said the natives had thought Smith dead but her father had told Tomocomo to seek him "because your countrymen will lie much".[28]




The statue of Pocahontas in St George's church


In March 1617, Rolfe and Pocahontas boarded a ship to return to Virginia. However, the ship had only gone as far as Gravesend on the River Thames when Pocahontas became ill. The nature of the illness is unknown, but since she had been described as sensitive to London's smoky air, pneumonia or tuberculosis are likely, although smallpox has also been suggested.[30] She was taken ashore and died. According to Rolfe, she died saying "all must die, but tis enough that her child liveth."[31] Her funeral took place on March 21, 1617 in the parish of Saint George's, Gravesend. The site of her grave is unknown, but her memory is recorded in Gravesend with a life-size bronze statue at St George's Church. [32]

[edit] Descendants
Pocahontas and Rolfe had one child, Thomas Rolfe, who was born at Varina Farms in 1615 before his parents left for England. Through this son Pocahontas has many living descendants. Many First Families of Virginia trace their roots to Pocahontas and Chief Powhatan, including such notable individuals as Edith Wilson, wife of Woodrow Wilson; George Wythe Randolph; Admiral Richard Byrd; Virginia Governor Harry Flood Byrd; fashion-designer and socialite Pauline de Rothschild; former First-Lady Nancy Reagan; and astronomer and mathematician Percival Lowell.

[edit] Title and status
Pocahontas was the daughter of Wahunsunacock or Wahunsenacawh (spellings vary), chief or leader of the Native American confederation which is now known as the Powhatan. Wahunsunacock referred to himself as 'Powhatan', and thus is commonly known in English as Chief Powhatan, yet 'Powhatan' was not a personal name, but a title. As John Smith explained in A Map of Virginia, "Their chiefe ruler is called Powhatan, and taketh his name of the principall place of dwelling called Powhatan. But his proper name is Wahunsonacock."
However, although the young Pocahontas was a favorite of her powerful father—his "delight and darling" according to one of the colonists[33]—it is not certain that her society regarded her to have a high social rank. This is because Powhatan society was structured differently from that of Europe. While women could inherit power in Powhatan society, Pocahontas herself could not have done so, because the inheritance of power was matrilineal. In A Map of Virginia John Smith explains:


“
His [Powhatan's] kingdome descendeth not to his sonnes nor children: but first to his brethren, whereof he hath 3 namely Opitchapan, Opechancanough, and Catataugh; and after their decease to his sisters. First to the eldest sister, then to the rest: and after them to the heires male and female of the eldest sister; but never to the heires of the males.
”


Because of this, Pocahontas would not have inherited his power under any circumstances. Furthermore, her mother's status was probably lowly. In his Relation of Virginia (1609), Henry Spelman explains that Powhatan had many wives and always sent them away after they had given birth to their first child, so that they resumed their commoner status.[34] It is not certain whether Pocahontas' status was regarded as equal only to her mother's.
Regardless of the exact nature of Pocahontas' status among the Powhatan, it is clear that many English people regarded her as a princess in the European sense. One example of a contemporary English view is the 1616 engraving of Pocahontas. The inscription to which reads "MATOAKA ALS REBECCA FILIA POTENTISS : PRINC : POWHATANI IMP:VIRGINIÆ". This translates as: "Matoaka, alias Rebecca, daughter of (filia) the most powerful (potentiss[imi]) prince (princ[eps] of the Powhatan Empire (imp[erii]) of Virginia." Thus, at least some contemporary English recognised Wahunsunacock as ruler of an empire, and presumably accorded what they considered as appropriate status to Pocahontas (Matoaka). This is supported by Captain John Smith's 1616 letter of recommendation to Queen Anne (King James' wife) concerning Pocahontas, which refers to "Powhatan their chief King".[7] Samuel Purchas recalled Pocahontas in London, saying that she impressed those she met because she "carried her selfe as the daughter of a king"[35] and when he met her in London, Smith referred to her deferentially as a "Kings daughter".[36] A more ambivalent English view of Wahunsunacock's status can be seen in the description of him as a "barbarous prince" by Lord Carew on 20 June 1616 (as reported by Charles Dudley Warner in his essay on Pocahontas[37]).
William Stith writes that "her real Name, it seems, was originally Matoax; which the Indians carefully concealed from the English, and changed it to Pocahontas, out of a superstitious Fear, lest they, by the knowledge of her true Name, should be enabled to do her some hurt." (History of the First Discovery and Settlement of Virginia, p. 136)
There is no evidence that Pocahontas was formally presented to King James and his court, but she was introduced to him at a masque, at which the letter-writer John Chamberlain recorded that she was "well placed"—that is, given a good seat that suited her status.[38] Furthermore, Purchas recorded that the Bishop of London "entertained her with festival state and pomp beyond what I have seen in his greate hospitalitie afforded to other ladies".[35]

[edit] Posthumous legend




Based on the engraved image by Simon van de Passe, but with European features






A 19th century depiction


After her death, increasingly fanciful and romanticized representations of Pocahontas were produced. The only contemporary portrait of Pocahontas is Simon Van de Passe's copperplate engraving of 1616. In this portrait, her Native American facial structure is clear, despite her European clothing. Later portraits often 'Europeanized' her appearance.
Subsequent images and reworkings of Pocahontas' story presented her as an emblem of the potential of Native Americans to be assimilated into European society. For example, the United States Capitol prominently displays an 1840 painting by John Gadsby Chapman, The Baptism of Pocahontas, in the Rotunda. A government pamphlet was circulated, entitled The Picture of the Baptism of Pocahontas, explaining the characters in the painting, congratulating the Jamestown settlers for introducing Christianity to the "heathen savages", and thus showing that the settlers did not simply "exterminate the ancient proprietors of the soil, and usurp their possessions".
In another development, Pocahontas' story was romanticized so that her 'rescue' of Smith begins a love story between the two. Although there had been earlier examples, the first writer to tell such a story at length was John Davis in his Travels in the United States of America (1803).[39] Because Pocahontas' well-documented marriage to Rolfe did not fit this interpretation, at least one author, John R. Musick, retold the story to "clarify" the relationship between the three.[citation needed] In Musick's account, Rolfe is a back-stabbing liar who, seeing the opportunity to marry "royalty," tells the "Indian princess" Pocahontas that her true love, Smith, is dead. She then reluctantly agrees to marry Rolfe. After the two begin preparations to leave England, Pocahontas encounters Smith, still alive. Overcome by emotion and recollections, she dies of a broken heart three days later.
Several films about Pocahontas have been made, beginning with a silent film in 1924. In recent film versions of her story, Pocahontas has been seen less as an image of idealized assimilation, and more as an image of the perceived superiority of traditional Native American values over western ones. The Walt Disney Company's 1995 animated feature Pocahontas presents a highly-romanticized and fictional view of a love affair between Pocahontas and John Smith, but in this version, Pocahontas teaches Smith the value of respect for nature. The sequel, Pocahontas II: Journey to a New World, depicts her journey to England. Pocahontas: The Legend is the second feature film based on the life of Pocahontas (Sandrine Holt and Miles O'Keeffe) that was released in 1995. John Rolfe does not appear in this motion picture but was portrayed by Robert Clarke in Captain John Smith and Pocahontas (1953). In Terrence Malick's film The New World, an attempt at greater historical accuracy, Pocahontas (Q'Orianka Kilcher) and Smith (Colin Farrell) are still depicted as lovers.
Neil Young recorded an eponymous song about Pocahontas which detailed a meeting between Marlon Brando and the songwriter around a campfire discussing Hollywood, the Astrodome stadium and the genocide of Native American peoples. The song appeared as the fourth track on 1979's Rust Never Sleeps.

[edit] Namesakes
Several places and landmarks take their name from Pocahontas.

Pocahontas was the namesake for one of the richest seams of bituminous coal ever found in Virginia and West Virginia, and the Pocahontas Land Company, a subsidiary of the Norfolk and Western Railway.
From 1930 into the 1960s, one of the Norfolk and Western Railway's named luxury trains was the "Pocahontas" and ran between Norfolk, Virginia and Cincinnati, Ohio behind the Norfolk and Western Railway's famous J class 4-8-4 streamlined steam engines. In 1946, the Norfolk and Western Railway added the similarly-equipped "Powhatan Arrow" on the same route.
The town of Pocahontas, Virginia.
Pocahontas County, West Virginia.
The village of Indian Queens in Cornwall, UK is sometimes said to be named after her, although this is highly dubious.
Matoaca, Virginia is located in Chesterfield County on the Appomattox River. County historians say this is the site of the Indian village Matoax, where she was raised. It is about three miles (5 km) from the present city of Petersburg, Virginia — which in 1784 incorporated another town that had been called 'Pocahontas', where her great grandson, Col. John Bolling, had run a tobacco warehouse. This is still called the "Pocahontas neighbourhood" of Petersburg today.
Matoaka, West Virginia.
Pocahontas, Iowa is in Pocahontas County.
Pocahontas, Arkansas.
Pocahontas, Illinois.
Po-ca-hon-tas, or The Gentle Savage is a 19th-century burlesque about the woman by John Brougham
Fort Pocahontas was an American Civil War fortification in Charles City County, Virginia.
Lake Matoaka, part of the campus of the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia.
Pocahontas State Park in Chesterfield Virginia.
Pocahontas Village, a neighborhood in Virginia Beach, Virginia.
MV Pocahontas is a river tour boat operated from Gravesend in London, UK.
Four United States Navy ships named USS Pocahontas and one named USS Princess Matoika.
Pocahontas, Mississippi.

In Henrico County, Virginia, where Pocahontas and John Rolfe lived together at the Varina Farms Plantation, a middle school has been named after each of them. Pocahontas Middle School and John Rolfe Middle School thus reunite the historic couple in the local educational system—Henrico being one of 5 remaining original shires that date to the early 17th century of the Virginia Colony.

[edit] References


Argall, Samuel. Letter to Nicholas Hawes. June 1613. Repr. in Jamestown Narratives, ed. Edward Wright Haile. Champlain, VA: Roundhouse, 1998. p. 754.
Bulla, Clyde Robert. 'Little Nantaquas'. In "Pocahontas and The Strangers", ed Scholastic inc., 730 Broadway, New York, NY 10003. 1971. p. 156.
Dale, Thomas. Letter to 'D.M.' 1614. Repr. in Jamestown Narratives, ed. Edward Wright Haile. Champlain, VA: Roundhouse, 1998. p. 843–844.
Dale, Thomas. Letter to Sir Ralph Winwood. 3 June 1616. Repr. in Jamestown Narratives, ed. Edward Wright Haile. Champlain, VA: Roundhouse, 1998. p. 878.
Gleach, Frederic W. Powhatan's World and Colonial Virginia. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1997.
Hamor, Ralph. A True Discourse of the Present Estate of Virginia. 1615. Repr. in Jamestown Narratives, ed. Edward Wright Haile. Champlain, VA: Roundhouse, 1998. p. 804.
Herford, C.H. and Percy Simpson, eds. Ben Jonson (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1925–1952).
Kupperman, Karen Ordahl. Indians and English: Facing Off in Early America. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2000. 114, 174.
Lemay, J.A. Leo. Did Pocahontas Save Captain John Smith? Athens, Georgia: The University of Georgia Press, 1992, p. 25.
Price, David A. Love and Hate in Jamestown. New York: Vintage, 2003.
Purchas, Samuel. Hakluytus Posthumus or Purchas His Pilgrimes. 1625. Repr. Glasgow: James MacLehose, 1905–1907. vol. 19, p. 118.
Rolfe, John. Letter to Thomas Dale. 1614. Repr. in Jamestown Narratives, ed. Edward Wright Haile. Champlain, VA: Roundhouse, 1998. p. 851.
Rolfe, John. Letter to Edwin Sandys. June 8, 1617. Repr. in The Records of the Virginia Company of London, ed. Susan Myra Kingsbuy. Washington: US Government Printing Office, 1906–1935. Vol. 3, p. 71.
Smith, John. A True Relation of such Occurrences and Accidents of Noate as hath Hapned in Virginia. 1608. Repr. in The Complete Works of John Smith (1580–1631). Ed. Philip L. Barbour. Chapel Hill: University Press of Virginia, 1983. Vol. 1, pp. 27–97.
Smith, John. A Map of Virginia. 1612. Repr. in The Complete Works of John Smith (1580–1631). Ed. Philip L. Barbour. Chapel Hill: University Press of Virginia, 1983. Vol. 1, pp. 305–363.
Smith, John. Letter to Queen Anne. 1616. Repr. as 'John Smith's Letter to Queen Anne regarding Pocahontas'. Caleb Johnson's Mayflower Web Pages. 1997. Accessed 23 April, 2006.
Smith, John. The Generall Historie of Virginia, New-England, and the Summer Isles. 1624. Repr. in Jamestown Narratives, ed. Edward Wright Haile. Champlain, VA: Roundhouse, 1998. pp. 198–199, 259.
Spelman, Henry. A Relation of Virginia. 1609. Repr. in Jamestown Narratives, ed. Edward Wright Haile. Champlain, VA: Roundhouse, 1998. pp. 488–489.
Strachey, William. The Historie of Travaile into Virginia Brittania. c1612. Repr. Boston: Elibron Classics, 2001.
Symonds, William. The Proceedings of the English Colonie in Virginia. 1612. Repr. in The Complete Works of Captain John Smith. Ed. Philip L. Barbour. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1986. Vol. 1, pp. 251–252
Tilton, Robert S. Pocahontas: The Evolution of an American Narrative. Cambridge UP, 1994.
Warner, Charles Dudley. Captain John Smith, 1881. Repr. in Captain John Smith Project Gutenberg Text, accessed 4 July, 2006



[edit] Footnotes


^ "1616 engravingg of Pocahontas by Simon van de Passe also John Sith". Virginia Historical Society. http://www.vahistorical.org/img/news/jqsf_poc_300dpi.jpg. Retrieved on 2008-12-28. 
^ "The Story of Princess Pocahontas" (PDF). Pocahontas and St. Georges Church was called worship pocahontas.. St. George's Church, Gravesend. page 4. http://www.stgeorgesgravesend.org.uk/The_Story_of_Pocahontas.pdf#page=4. Retrieved on 2007-07-02.  "(Photograph of entry in the Gravesend St. George composite parish register)" 
^ Price, Love and Hate, p. 66.
^ Strachey, Historie, p. 111
^ Smith, True Relation, p. 93.
^ John Smith, The generall historie of Virginia, New England & the Summer Isles, p. 101.
^ a b c d Smith."John Smith's 1616 Letter to Queen Anne of Great Britain". Digital History. http://www.digitalhistory.uh.edu/learning_history/pocohontas/pocahontas_smith_letter.cfm. Retrieved on 2009-01-22. 
^ Lemay, in Birchfield, Did Pocahontas, p. 25.
^ Karen Ordahl Kupperman, The Jamestown Project (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2007), 51–60.
^ Gleach, Powhatan's World, pp. 118–21.
^ Kupperman, Indians and English, pp. 114, 174.
^ Price, pp. 243–244
^ Strachey, Historie, p. 65
^ Smith, General History, p. 152.
^ Carbone,Elisa, Blood on the River: James Town 1607, Pages 180-181
^ Donald Culross Peattie, America's First Great Lady, Reader's Digest April 1947 pg. 94.
^ Smith, Generall Historie, 261.
^ Strachey, Historie, p. 54.
^ Argall, Letter to Nicholas Hawes. p. 754.
^ Hamor, True Discourse, p. 804.
^ http://www.dhr.state.va.us/hiway_markers/marker.cfm?mid=3334 Pocahontas Highway Marker
^ Dale, Letter to 'D.M.', p. 843–844.
^ Rolfe. Letter to Thomas Dale. p. 851.
^ Hamor. True Discourse. p. 809.
^ Price, Love and Hate. p. 163.
^ The Family Magazine - Page 90 (1837)
^ Dale. Letter to Sir Ralph Winwood. p. 878.
^ a b c d Smith, General History. p. 261.
^ Palmer, Vera. "Pocahontas' Earrings," Richmond Times-Dispatch (March 17 , 1935), also reproduced at Manataka.
^ Price, Love and Hate. p. 182.
^ Rolfe. Letter to Edwin Sandys. p. 71.
^ "Virginia Indians Festival: reports and pictures". http://www.gravesham.gov.uk/index.cfm?articleid=2777. 
^ Hamor, True Discourse. p. 802.
^ Spelman, Relation. 1609.
^ a b Purchas, Hakluytus Posthumus. Vol. 19 p. 118.
^ Smith, Generall Historie, p. 261.
^ Warner, Captain John Smith, 1881. Repr. in Captain John Smith Project Gutenberg Text, accessed 4 July, 2006.
^ Qtd. in Herford and Simpson, eds. Ben Jonson, vol. 10, 568–569.
^ Robert S. Tilton, Pocahontas: The Evolution of an American Narrative (Cambridge UP, 1994), pp. 35, 41.



[edit] Further reading

Barbour, Philip L. Pocahontas and Her World. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1970. ISBN 0-7091-2188-1
Neill, Rev. Edward D. Pocahontas and Her Companions. Albany: Joel Munsell, 1869.
Price, David A. Love and Hate in Jamestown. Alfred A. Knopf, 2003 ISBN 0-375-41541-6
Rountree, Helen C. Pocahontas's People: The Powhatan Indians of Virginia Through Four Centuries. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1990. ISBN 0-8061-2280-3
Sandall, Roger. 2001 The Culture Cult: Designer Tribalism and Other Essays ISBN 0-8133-3863-8
Townsend, Camilla. Pocahontas and the Powhatan Dilemma. New York: Hill and Wang, 2004. ISBN 0-8090-7738-8
Warner Charles Dudley, Captain John Smith, 1881. Repr. in Captain John Smith Project Gutenberg Text, accessed 4 July, 2006
Warner Charles Dudley, The Story of Pocahontas, Repr. in The Story of Pocahontas Project Gutenberg Text, accessed 4 July, 2006
Woodward, Grace Steele. Pocahontas. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1969. ISBN 0-8061-0835-5 or ISBN 0-8061-1642-0


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Category:Pocahontas



Chief Roy Crazy Horse. 'The Pocahontas Myth'. Ranokus Indian Reservation. A sceptical reading of the Pocahontas legend, presenting her as a victim of oppression.
'Pocahontas'. Virginia Places. Summary of the history.
Pocohantas Encyclopaedia Britannica
Virginia Historical Society. 'Contact and Conflict'. The Story of Virginia: An American Experience.
Virginia Historical Society. 'The Anglo-Powhatan Wars'. The Story of Virginia: An American Experience.
David Morenus. 'The Real Pocahontas'. David's Townhouse. Compares the historical Pocahontas to the Disney version. Pictures and extensive links.
David Morenus. 'Pocahontas Descendants'. David's Townhouse. Family tree and genealogy of her descendants.
Stan Birchfield, 'Did Pocahontas Save Captain John Smith?'. 1998. Summarises J.A.O. Lemay's book on the subjet.
The American Studies Group. Pocahontas: Icon At The Crossroads Of Race And Sex. Links to several articles on the Pocahontas legend and its cultural meaning.
Zabelle Stodola, 'Tucson Presentation on Smith’s Pocahontas and Disney’s Pocahontas'—Essay on teaching the Pocahontas legends.
' John Smith's Letter to Queen Anne regarding Pocahontas'. Repr. in Caleb Johnson's Mayflower Web Pages.
Virtual Jamestown Includes text of many original accounts, including:

"A True Relation of Occurrences and Accidents in Virginia," by John Smith, 1608
"A Map of Virginia, with a Description of its Commodities, People, Government, and Religion," by John Smith, 1612.


Pocahontas and her Descendants
In Search of Pocahontas in Gravesend
Pocahontas: Patron Saint of Colonial Miscegenation? by Kiros Auld Scroll down to middle of page for essay described as "first definitive examination of Pocahontas written by a Powhatan Native American descendant."





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pocahontas"
Categories: 1590s births | 1617 deaths | American folklore | Converts to Christianity | Gravesham | Rolfe family | British people of Native American descent | People of the Powhatan Confederacy | Native American people | People from Virginia | Algonquian personal names | Burial place unknown | Bolling familyHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Bosanski
Català
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Français
한국어
Hrvatski
Иронау
Italiano
עברית
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Türkçe
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 18:52.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
