













Lemuria (continent) - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Lemuria_(continent)";
		var wgTitle = "Lemuria (continent)";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "477815";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280421969;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Lemuria (continent)

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
Lemuria (IPA: /lɨˈmjʊəriə/[1]) is the name of a hypothetical "lost land" variously located in the Indian and Pacific Oceans. The concept's 19th century origins lie in attempts to account for discontinuities in biogeography. The concept of Lemuria has been rendered obsolete by modern understanding of plate tectonics. Although sunken continents do exist — see Zealandia in the Pacific and the Kerguelen Plateau in the Indian Ocean — there is no known geological formation under the Indian or Pacific Oceans that corresponds to the hypothetical Lemuria.
Though Lemuria is no longer considered a valid scientific hypothesis, it has been adopted by writers involved in the occult, as well as some Tamil writers of India. Accounts of Lemuria differ, but all share a common belief that a continent existed in ancient times and sank beneath the ocean as a result of a geological, often cataclysmic, change. There is no scientific evidence to support these claims.




Contents


1 Scientific origins

1.1 Superseded


2 Madame Blavatsky's Lemuria
3 Lemuria and Mount Shasta
4 Kumari Kandam and Lemuria
5 Lemuria's reptilian beings
6 Use of Lemuria in modern fiction
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Scientific origins
Though living lemur species are only found in Madagascar and several surrounding islands, the biogeography of extinct lemurs extends from Pakistan to Malaysia. The wide range of the animals inspired the name Lemuria, which was coined in 1864 by the zoologist Philip Sclater in an article "The Mammals of Madagascar" in The Quarterly Journal of Science. Puzzled by the presence of fossil lemurs in both Madagascar and India, but not in Africa nor the Middle East, Sclater proposed that Madagascar and India had once been part of a larger continent.
Sclater's theory was hardly unusual for his time. The acceptance of Darwinism led scientists to seek to trace the diffusion of species from their points of evolutionary origin. Prior to the acceptance of continental drift, biologists frequently postulated submerged land masses in order to account for populations of land-based species now separated by barriers of water. Similarly, geologists tried to account for striking resemblances of rock formations on different continents. The first systematic attempt was made by Melchior Neumayr in his book Erdgeschichte in 1887. Many hypothetical submerged land bridges and continents were proposed during the 19th century, in order to account for the present distribution of species.
After gaining some acceptance within the scientific community, the concept of Lemuria began to appear in the works of other scholars. Ernst Haeckel, a German Darwinian taxonomist, proposed Lemuria as an explanation for the absence of "missing link" fossil records. According to another source, Haeckel put forward this thesis prior to Sclater (but without using the name 'Lemuria'). [2] Locating the origins of the human species on this lost continent, he claimed the fossil record could not be found because it had sunk beneath the sea.
Other scientists hypothesized that Lemuria had extended across parts of the Pacific oceans, seeking to explain distributions of species across Asia and the Americas.

[edit] Superseded
The Lemuria theory disappeared completely from conventional scientific consideration after the theories of plate tectonics and continental drift were accepted by the larger scientific community. According to the theory of plate tectonics (now the only accepted paradigm in geology), Madagascar and India were indeed once part of the same landmass (thus accounting for geological resemblances), but plate movement caused India to break away millions of years ago, and move to its present location. The original landmass broke apart - it did not sink beneath sea level.
In 1999, drilling by the JOIDES Resolution research vessel in the Indian Ocean discovered evidence [1] that a large island, the Kerguelen Plateau, was submerged about 20 million years ago by rising sea levels. Samples showed pollen and fragments of wood in a 90 million-year-old sediment. Although this discovery might encourage scholars to expect similarities in dinosaur fossil evidence, and may contribute to understanding the breakup of the Indian and Australian land masses, it does not support the concept of Lemuria as a land bridge for mammals.

[edit] Madame Blavatsky's Lemuria
Lemuria entered the lexicon of the Occult through the works of Madame Helena Blavatsky, who claimed in the 1880s to have been shown an ancient, pre-Atlantean Book of Dzyan by the Mahatmas. According to L. Sprague de Camp, Blavatsky was influenced by other writers on the theme of Lost Continents, notably Ignatius L. Donnelly, American cult leader Thomas Lake Harris and the French writer Louis Jacolliot.
Within Blavatsky's complex cosmology, which includes seven "Root Races", Lemuria was occupied by the "Third Root Race", described as about seven foot tall, sexually hermaphroditic, egg-laying, mentally undeveloped and spiritually more pure than the following "Root Races". Before the coming of the Lemurians, the second "Root Race" is said to have dwelled in Hyperborea. After the subsequent creation of mammals, Mme Blavatsky revealed to her readers, some Lemurians turned to bestiality. The gods, aghast at the behavior of these "mindless" men, sank Lemuria into the ocean and created a "Fourth Root Race"—endowed with intellect—on Atlantis.
One of the most elaborate accounts of lost continents was given by the later theosophical author William Scott Elliott. The English theosophist said he received his knowledge from the Theosophical Masters by "astral clairvoyance." In 1896, in "The Story of Atlantis & The Lost Lemuria", he described the continent of Lemuria as stretching from the east coast of Africa across the Indian and the Pacific Oceans.
James Bramwell described Lemuria in his book, Lost Atlantis, as “a continent that occupied a large part of what is now the South Pacific Ocean.”[3] Quoting Story of Atlantis, by William Scott-Elliott; “Atlantis, according to Scott-Elliott’s first map, which shows it 1,000,000 years ago, extended ‘from a point a few degrees east of Iceland to about the site now occupied by Rio de Janeiro in South America. Embracing Texas and the Gulf of Mexico, the Southern and Eastern states of America, up to and including Labrador, it stretched across the ocean to our own islands, - Scotland and Ireland… embraced Brazil and the whole stretch of ocean across to the African Gold Coast.”[4]
Bramwell described the people of Lemuria in detail and attributed them with being one of the “root-races of humanity.” According to Bramwell, Lemurians are the ascendants of the Atlanteans, who survived the period “of the general racial decadence which affected the Lemurians in the last stages of their evolution.” From “a select division of” the Atlanteans - after their promotion to decadence - Bramwell claims the Aryan race arose. “Lemurians, Atlanteans, and Aryans are root-races of humanity,” according to Bramwell.[5]
James Churchward, another prolific writer on the theme of lost lands, identified Lemuria with Mu.

[edit] Lemuria and Mount Shasta
In 1894, Frederick Spencer Oliver published A Dweller on Two Planets, which claimed that survivors from a sunken continent called Lemuria were living in or on Mount Shasta in northern California. The Lemurians lived in a complex of tunnels beneath the mountain and occasionally were seen walking the surface dressed in white robes.
This belief has been repeated by such individuals as the cultist Guy Warren Ballard in the 1930s who formed the I AM Foundation. It is also repeated by followers of the Ascended Masters and the Great White Brotherhood. This list includes such organizations as Bridge to Freedom, The Summit Lighthouse, Church Universal and Triumphant, The Temple of The Presence, and The Hearts Center.
Nowadays this thesis is also described by Kryon.
Popular novels have also repeated the belief that Lemurians inhabit Mount Shasta. Among such novels, Vin Smith's The Outrageous Views of Professor Fogelman links Lemurians to Ancient Egypt, UFOs and a method of travel called vortex portals--essentially a pathway to sacred places on Earth as well as points unknown in the universe.
In Robert A. Heinlein's short story "Lost Legacy", three ordinary people rediscover innate human psychic abilities. They immediately come under attack from evil (but human) hidden elites, and are forced take refuge among a hidden colony of ancient masters in Mt. Shasta. Here they find that benevolent rebels of ancient times stored the secret history of humanity in Mt. Shasta and other mountains, to aid in humanity's eventual path to redemption. This history includes the rise and fall of the lost empire Mu, due to arrogance and the pursuit of power rather than enlightenment. The fall of Mu is said to have doomed humanity to the current 'Dark Age', in which the evil hidden elites forcefully maintain the ignorance of the masses.

[edit] Kumari Kandam and Lemuria




"Lemuria" in Tamil nationalist mysticist literature, connecting Madagascar, South India and Australia (covering most of the Indian Ocean). Mount Meru stretches southwards from Sri Lanka.


Kumari Kandam is a legendary sunken kingdom sometimes compared with Lemuria (cf. works of G. Devaneyan, Tamil: ஞானமுத்தன் தேவநேயன்).In Tamil tradition, Kumari Kandam is referred to as the Land of Purity, a sophisticated kingdom of higher learning, located south of Kanyakumari or Cape Comorin. During a violent geologic catastrophy the entire island was submerged under the water. The survivors migrated to the present Indian subcontinent and supposedly sparked the Indus Valley civilization. This mass of land is often compared to the island of Lemuria[6].
According to these modernist interpretations of motifs in classical Tamil literature — the epics Cilappatikaram and Manimekalai that describe the submerged city of Puhar[7]— the Dravidians originally came from land south of the present day coast of South India that became submerged by successive floods. There are various claims from Tamil authors that there was a large land mass connecting Australia and the present day Tamil Nadu coast.
Another piece of literature in Ayyavazhi mytholgy, specifically Akilatirattu Ammanai speaks of a sunken land about 152 miles south or south east of present day Kanyakumari. It goes on to describe the civilization with exactly 16008 streets[7].

[edit] Lemuria's reptilian beings
In reptilian conspiracy literature, a sunken Pacific continent (usually styled as Lemuria or Mu) is sometimes posited as the homeland of a reptilian race of creatures, often identified with dragons or nagas. Various bits of mythology and folklore are assembled in support, such as the Cambodian naga traditions. Folkloric claims of Australian aborigines sighting "dinosaur-like" creatures are also often viewed as evidence.
The earliest attestation of such notions in modern literature seems to have occurred in the works of H.P. Blavatsky, notably in The Secret Doctrine (1888), where she writes of "Dragon-men" who once had a mighty civilization on a Lemurian continent, until their rampant use of black magic brought about the end of their civilization, and their continent sank. Blavatsky in turn claims to have obtained this information from The Book of Dzyan. However, many consider that Blavatsky invented the book herself. Blavatsky believed that the terms "Dragon-men" or "Serpent-men" used to describe the Lemurian Lizard Beings in the Book of Dzyan were symbolic, intended to symbolize their advanced knowledge and magical powers.
Other occurrences of the idea seem to be in the Alley Oop (1932) comic-strip, and the Brazilian Piteco (1964), where lands named Moo (or "Mu") and Lem (adapted from Mu and Lemuria respectively) are presented as dinosaur-infested lands. This matched H. P. Lovecraft's descriptions of the city of R'lyeh in his Cthulhu Mythos.

[edit] Use of Lemuria in modern fiction

Richard Sharpe Shaver's "I Remember Lemuria" and "Thought Records of Lemuria" featured in the science fiction magazine Amazing Stories, in the March 1945 and June 1945 issues respectively.[8]
Lin Carter set his "Thongor" series of sword and sorcery novels in Lemuria, beginning with The Wizard of Lemuria in 1965 and Thongor of Lemuria in 1966.
H. P. Lovecraft mentioned Lemuria as a previous resting place for the Shining Trapezohedron in the Cthulhu Mythos story "The Haunter of the Dark". In his world of fiction, Lemuria may also be Mu or R'lyeh.
In the video game Golden Sun series for the Game Boy Advance, Lemuria is a major plot point. In the first title, the mythical land of Lemuria is the motivation behind the construction of Babi's Lighthouse and in the sequel, Golden Sun: The Lost Age, one of the main characters, Piers, is a Lemurian and travel to the hidden land of Lemuria is possible.
In Marvel Comics, Lemuria is the underwater home of Princess Llyra, an antagonist to Namor the Sub-Mariner of Atlantis.
In Ultimate Marvel continuity, Namor claims that Lemuria fought an ancient war with Atlantis, destroying both continents.
In DC Comics, the Lemurians are a scaly race of humanoids living below the sea. (Super Team Family #13-14.)
In the Dark Horse Comics series Hellboy by Mike Mignola, Lemuria is an ancient dead civilization with spiritual power over Lovecraftian Elder Gods. Hellboy's adoptive father taught him the language at a young age.
In the Kull stories by Robert E. Howard, Lemuria is a group of islands that are the peaks of the sunken continent of Mu.
Was featured prominently in the 1990s cartoon series Mighty Max, one of the main characters, Virgil (voiced by Tony Jay) was a Lemurian as was the villain Skullmaster (voiced by Tim Curry).
In the TSR Inc. novel series of Agent 13: The Midnight Avenger, Lemuria is an advanced civilisation in prehistoric times. Humans accept a Lemurian as their god, but when his flaws are revealed they chase him back to Lemuria, which they then destroy.
The film The Golden Voyage of Sinbad has the bulk of its adventures taking place on the lost continent of Lemuria.
Transformers: Cybertron, in its initial form of Transformers: Galaxy Force, featured Lemuria as the name of a starship.
Epic Metal Bal-Sagoth has an album named A Black Moon Broods over Lemuria which features Lemuria themes.
In KID's Ever 17: The Out of Infinity visual novel, LeMU, a underwater research facility is named after Lemuria, and there are numerous references to the lost continent.
The Swedish symphonic metal band Therion released together in 2004, two albums titled Lemuria & Sirus B, in which there are multiple references of Lemuria as a place of a lost civilization.
Lemuria, Mu, and Atlantis are referenced in the 1995 film Gamera: Guardian of the Universe.
In the Japanese television series GoGo Sentai Boukenger, the character Natsuki is a survivor of ancient Lemuria.
In the Perry Rhodan series, Lemuria was the home continent of the Lemurians (also called the First Humanity) 50000 years ago.


[edit] See also

Augustus Le Plongeon
James Churchward
Lost city
Phantom islands
Atlantis
Mu (lost continent)
Lemuria and Easter island
A Black Moon Broods over Lemuria
Oahspe
Ramtha
Kumari Kandam
After Man: A Zoology of the Future


[edit] References


^ OED
^ L. Sprague de Camp, Lost Continents, 1954 (First Edition), p. 52
^ Bramwell, James. Lost Atlantis. (Hollywood: Newcastle, 1974), 193.
^ Bramwell, 194.
^ Bramwell, 195.
^ The Atlantis Encyclopedia By Frank Joseph
^ a b Geomatics in Tsunami By Sm Ramasamy, India Dept. of Science and Technology. Natural Resources Database
^ The cover of I remember Lemuria is featured in an article Warum Aliens nicht grün sein müssen (German) (Why Aliens don't have to be green) at Telepolis.



[edit] Further reading

Ramaswamy, Sumathi (2004). The Lost Land of Lemuria: Fabulous Geographies, Catastrophic Histories. University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-24032-4. 
Frederick Spencer Oliver, A Dweller on Two Planets, 1905


[edit] External links

The Stanzas of Dzyan, by H.P. Blavatsky
Manufactured folklore: Shasta Lemuria.








v • d • e

Continents of the world













   



Africa





Antarctica





Asia





Australasia





Europe





N. America





S. America
















   



Afro-Eurasia





Americas





Eurasia





Oceania
















   


Geological supercontinents
Gondwana · Laurasia · Pangaea · Pannotia
Rodinia · Columbia · Kenorland · Ur · Vaalbara





Historical continents
Arctica · Asiamerica · Atlantica · Avalonia · Baltica · Cimmeria · Congo craton · Euramerica · Kalaharia · Kazakhstania · Laurentia · Siberia · South China · Ur

















   



Submerged continents
Kerguelen Plateau · Zealandia






Possible future supercontinents
Pangaea Ultima · Amasia






Mythical and theorized continents
Atlantis · Lemuria · Meropis  · Mu · Terra Australis
















See also Regions of the world








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lemuria_(continent)"
Categories: Mythological places | Pseudoarchaeology | Esoteric anthropogenesis | Theosophical philosophical concepts | Theoretical continents 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Česky
Deutsch
Español
Français
Gàidhlig
Galego
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Македонски
日本語
Polski
Português
Русский
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
中文









 This page was last modified on 29 March 2009, at 14:29.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
