













Jack London - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Jack_London";
		var wgTitle = "Jack London";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "42978";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282147150;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Jack London

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other persons named Jack London, see Jack London (disambiguation).


Jack London



Jack London in 1900


Born
January 12, 1876(1876-01-12)
San Francisco, California
United States


Died
November 22, 1916 (aged 40)
Glen Ellen, California
United States


Occupation
Novelist, journalist, short story writer, essayist and socialist


Literary movement
Realism and Naturalism







Influences






Ouida, Charles Darwin, Herbert Spencer, Friedrich Nietzsche, David Starr Jordan, Thomas Henry Huxley, John Tyndall, Ernest Haeckel, Karl Marx















Influenced






Richard Wright, Jack Kerouac, Robert E. Howard, George Orwell, Scott Sigler, Anton LaVey, Christopher McCandless













Signature



Jack London (January 12, 1876 – November 22, 1916)[1][2][3][4] was an American author who wrote The Call of the Wild, White Fang, and The Sea Wolf along with many other popular books. A pioneer in the then-burgeoning world of commercial magazine fiction, he was one of the first Americans to make a lucrative career exclusively from writing.[5]




Contents


1 Personal background
2 Early life
3 Gold rush and first success
4 First marriage (1900-1904)

4.1 Membership of the Bohemian Club


5 Second marriage
6 Beauty Ranch (1905-1916)
7 Accusations of plagiarism
8 Political views

8.1 Socialism

8.1.1 Influence on writing


8.2 Racial views


9 Death
10 Works

10.1 Short stories
10.2 Novels
10.3 Nonfiction and autobiographical memoirs
10.4 Apocrypha

10.4.1 Jack London Credo
10.4.2 The Scab
10.4.3 Might is Right
10.4.4 B. Traven




11 Bibliography
12 Cultural references
13 Legacy
14 References
15 Further Reading

15.1 Books
15.2 External links







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Personal background




Bust of Jack London on campus of Centenary College of Oregon in Salem


London's mother, Flora Wellman, a music teacher and spiritualist who claimed to channel the spirit of an Indian chief, became pregnant, presumably from her union with William Chaney, an astrologer she lived with in San Francisco. According to Flora Wellman's account as recorded in the San Francisco Chronicle of June 4, 1875, Chaney demanded that she have an abortion, and when she refused, he disclaimed responsibility for the child. In desperation, she shot herself. She was not seriously wounded, but she was temporarily deranged. After she gave birth, Flora turned the baby over to ex-slave Virginia Prentiss, who would remain a major maternal figure throughout London's life. Late in the same year of 1876, Flora Wellman married John London, a partially disabled Civil War veteran, and baby John, later known as Jack, came to live with the newly married couple. The family moved around the San Francisco Bay Area before settling in Oakland, where Jack completed grade school. In 1897, when he was 21 and a student at the University of California, Berkeley, Jack London searched for and read the newspaper accounts of his mother's suicide attempt and the name of his biological father. He wrote to William Chaney, then living in Chicago. Chaney responded bizarrely, considering the nature of the exchange, that he could not be Jack's father because he was impotent; he casually asserted that Jack's mother had relations with other men and averred that she had slandered him when she said he insisted on an abortion. In fact, he concluded, he was more to be pitied than Jack.[6] London was devastated. In the months following his discovery of his origins, he quit school at Berkeley and went to the Klondike.
Biographer Clarice Stasz and others believe that Jack London's father was astrologer William Chaney.[7] Whether Wellman and Chaney were legally married is unknown. Most San Francisco civil records were destroyed by the vast fires which followed the 1906 earthquake. For the same reason, it is not known with certainty what name appeared on his birth certificate. Stasz notes that in his memoirs Chaney refers to Jack London's mother Flora Wellman as having been his "wife" and also cites an advertisement in which Flora calls herself "Florence Wellman Chaney".

[edit] Early life
Jack London was born near 3rd and Brannan Streets in San Francisco. The house of his birth burned down in the fire after the 1906 San Francisco earthquake, and a plaque was placed at this site by the California Historical Society in 1953. Though the family was working class, it was not as impoverished as London's later accounts claimed. London was essentially self-educated. He taught himself in the public library, mainly just by reading books. In 1885 he found and read Ouida's long Victorian novel Signa, which describes an unschooled Italian peasant child who achieves fame as an opera composer. He credited this as the seed of his literary aspiration.[8]
An important event was his discovery in 1886 of the Oakland Public Library and a sympathetic librarian, Ina Coolbrith (who later became California's first poet laureate and an important figure in the San Francisco literary community).
In 1889, London began working 12 to 18 hours a day at Hickmott's Cannery. Seeking a way out of this gruelling labor, he borrowed money from his black foster-mother Virginia Prentiss, bought the sloop Razzle-Dazzle from an oyster pirate named French Frank, and became an oyster pirate himself. In John Barleycorn he claims to have stolen French Frank's mistress Mamie.[9][10][11] After a few months his sloop became damaged beyond repair. He switched to the side of the law and became a member of the California Fish Patrol.
In 1893, he signed on to the sealing schooner Sophie Sutherland, bound for the coast of Japan. When he returned, the country was in the grip of the panic of '93 and Oakland was swept by labor unrest. After gruelling jobs in a jute mill and a street-railway power plant, he joined Kelly's Army and began his career as a tramp.
In 1894, he spent 30 days for vagrancy in the Erie County Penitentiary at Buffalo. In The Road, he wrote:

"Man-handling was merely one of the very minor unprintable horrors of the Erie County Pen. I say 'unprintable'; and in justice I must also say undescribable. They were unthinkable to me until I saw them, and I was no spring chicken in the ways of the world and the awful abysses of human degradation. It would take a deep plummet to reach bottom in the Erie County Pen, and I do but skim lightly and facetiously the surface of things as I there saw them."

After many experiences as a hobo, and as a sailor, he returned to Oakland and attended Oakland High School, where he contributed a number of articles to the high school's magazine, The Aegis. His first published work was "Typhoon off the coast of Japan", an account of his sailing experiences.
Jack London desperately wanted to attend the University of California, Berkeley and, in 1896 after a summer of intense cramming, did so; but financial circumstances forced him to leave in 1897 and so he never graduated. Kingman says that "there is no record that Jack ever wrote for student publications".[12]

[edit] Gold rush and first success
On July 12 1897, Jack London and his brother-in-law, James Shepard, sailed to join the Klondike Gold Rush where he would later set his first successful stories. London's time in the Klondike, however, was quite detrimental to his health. Like so many others malnourished in the Klondike Gold Rush, he developed scurvy. His gums became swollen, eventually leading to the loss of his four front teeth. A constant gnawing pain affected his hip and leg muscles, and his face was stricken with marks that would forever remind him of the struggles he faced in the Klondike. Fortunately for him and others who were suffering with a variety of medical ills, Father William Judge, "The Saint of Dawson," had a facility in Dawson which provided shelter, food and any available medicine. London survived the hardships of the Klondike, and these struggles inspired what is often called his best short story, To Build a Fire.
His landlords in Dawson were two Yale and Stanford-educated mining engineers Marshall and Louis Bond. Their father Judge Hiram Bond was a wealthy mining investor. The Bonds, especially Hiram, were active Republicans. Marshall Bond's diary mentions friendly sparring on political issues as a camp pastime.
Jack left Oakland a believer in the work ethic with a social conscience and socialist leanings and returned to become an active proponent of socialism. He also concluded that his only hope of escaping the work trap was to get an education and "sell his brains." Throughout his life he saw writing as a business, his ticket out of poverty, and, he hoped, a means of beating the wealthy at their own game.
On returning to Missouri in 1898, he began struggling seriously to break into print, a struggle memorably described in his novel, Martin Eden. His first published story was the fine and frequently anthologized "To the Man On Trail". When The Overland Monthly offered him only five dollars for it—and was slow paying—Jack London came close to abandoning his writing career. In his words, "literally and literarily I was saved" when The Black Cat accepted his story "A Thousand Deaths," and paid him $40—the "first money I ever received for a story."
Jack London was fortunate in the timing of his writing career. He started just as new printing technologies enabled lower-cost production of magazines. This resulted in a boom in popular magazines aimed at a wide public, and a strong market for short fiction. In 1900, he made $2,500 in writing, the equivalent of perhaps over $200,000 today. His career was well under way.
Among the works he sold to magazines was a short story known as either "Batard" or "Diable" in two editions of the same basic story. A cruel French Canadian brutalizes his dog. The dog, out of revenge, kills the man. He told some of his critics that man's actions are the main cause of the behavior of their animals and he would show this in another short story.
"On January 26, 1903, Jack London submitted the completed manuscript of The Call of the Wild to the Saturday Evening Post. On February 12 the editor agreed to purchase the story if he would cut it by five thousand words, and they asked him to set his price. Jack agreed to shorten it and set the price at three cents a word. On March 3 he received a check for seven hundred and fifty dollars. Twenty-two days later Macmillan bought the book rights for two thousand dollars with a promise to give it extensive advertising. At the time it seemed a very sensible thing to do. His previous books had not hit the best seller lists, and neither he nor Macmillan New York publisher George Platt Brett, Sr. had any idea that The Call of the Wild would do much better. If Jack had known at the time that his book would become a classic in American literature, and the royalties from it would have made him wealthy, he would have bargained differently. Yet, without the extensive promotional program, it could have easily become just another dog book. The answer will never be known, but Jack never regretted his decision, feeling that the extra promotion by Macmillan had been a major factor in its success." [13]
This short story for the Saturday Evening Post The Call of the Wild ran away in length. The story begins on an estate in Santa Clara Valley and features a St. Bernard/Scotch Shepherd mix named Buck. In fact the opening scene is a description of the Bond family farm and Buck is based on a dog he was lent in Dawson by his landlords. London visited Marshall Bond in California having run into him again at a political lecture in San Francisco in 1901.
While living at his rented villa on Lake Merritt in Oakland, London met poet George Sterling and in time they became best friends. In 1902, Sterling helped London find a home closer to his own in nearby Piedmont. In his letters London addressed Sterling as "Greek" owing to his aquiline nose and classical profile, and signed them as "Wolf". London was later to depict Sterling as Russ Brissenden in his autobiographical novel Martin Eden (1909) and as Mark Hall in The Valley of the Moon (1913).
In later life Jack London indulged his very wide-ranging interests with a personal library of 15,000 volumes, referring to his books as "the tools of my trade."[14]

[edit] First marriage (1900-1904)
Jack London married Bessie Maddern on April 7, 1900, the same day The Son of the Wolf was published. Bess had been part of his circle of friends for a number of years. Stasz says "Both acknowledged publicly that they were not marrying out of love, but from friendship and a belief that they would produce sturdy children."[15] Kingman says "they were comfortable together …. Jack had made it clear to Bessie that he did not love her, but that he liked her enough to make a successful marriage."[16]
During the marriage, Jack London continued his friendship with Anna Strunsky, co-authoring The Kempton-Wace Letters, an epistolary novel contrasting two philosophies of love. Anna, writing "Dane Kempton's" letters, arguing for a romantic view of marriage, while Jack, writing "Herbert Wace's" letters, argued for a scientific view, based on Darwinism and eugenics. In the novel, his fictional character contrasts two women he has known:

[The first was] a mad, wanton creature, wonderful and unmoral and filled with life to the brim. My blood pounds hot even now as I conjure her up … [The second was] a proud-breasted woman, the perfect mother, made preeminently to know the lip clasp of a child. You know the kind, the type. "The mothers of men", I call them. And so long as there are such women on this earth, that long may we keep faith in the breed of men. The wanton was the Mate Woman, but this was the Mother Woman, the last and highest and holiest in the hierarchy of life.[17]

Wace declares:

I propose to order my affairs in a rational manner …. Wherefore I marry Hester Stebbins. I am not impelled by the archaic sex madness of the beast, nor by the obsolescent romance madness of later-day man. I contract a tie which reason tells me is based upon health and sanity and compatibility. My intellect shall delight in that tie.[18]

Analyzing why he "was impelled toward the woman" he intends to marry, Wace says:

it was old Mother Nature crying through us, every man and woman of us, for progeny. Her one unceasing and eternal cry: PROGENY! PROGENY! PROGENY![19]

In real life, Jack's pet name for Bess was "Mother-Girl" and Bess's for Jack was "Daddy-Boy".[20] Their first child, Joan, was born on January 15, 1901, and their second, Bessie (later called Becky), on October 20, 1902. Both children were born in Piedmont, California, where London also wrote one of his most celebrated works, The Call of the Wild.
Captions to pictures in a photo album, reproduced in part in Joan London's memoir, Jack London and His Daughters, published posthumously, show Jack London's unmistakable happiness and pride in his children. But the marriage itself was under continuous strain. Kingman (1979) says that by 1903 "the breakup … was imminent …. Bessie was a fine woman, but they were extremely incompatible. There was no love left. Even companionship and respect had gone out of the marriage." Nevertheless, "Jack was still so kind and gentle with Bessie that when Cloudsley Johns was a house guest in February 1903 he didn't suspect a breakup of their marriage."[21]
According to Joseph Noel (1940), "Bessie was the eternal mother. She lived at first for Jack, corrected his manuscripts, drilled him in grammar, but when the children came she lived for them. Herein was her greatest honor and her first blunder." Jack complained to Noel and George Sterling that "she's devoted to purity. When I tell her morality is only evidence of low blood pressure, she hates me. She'd sell me and the children out for her damned purity. It's terrible. Every time I come back after being away from home for a night she won't let me be in the same room with her if she can help it.".[22] Stasz writes that these were "code words for [Bess's] fear that [Jack] was consorting with prostitutes and might bring home venereal disease."[23]
On July 24, 1903, Jack London told Bessie he was leaving and moved out; during 1904 Jack and Bess negotiated the terms of a divorce, and the decree was granted on November 11, 1904.[24]

[edit] Membership of the Bohemian Club
On August 18th, 1904 Jack London went with a close friend the poet George Sterling to Summer High Jinks at the Bohemian Grove.
Going first in 1904, Jack London became an active member of the Bohemian Club. Charmian London wrote: ". . .whenever feasible, our world-wanderings led us homeward in mid-summer, that he might spend at least one week of Hi-Jinks at the Bohemian Grove, situated but a few miles from the Ranch. He dreaded foregoing the marvellous annual Grove Play, words and music, acting and staging, all done by members of the Grove only." Other noted members of the Bohemian Club during this period of time included: George Sterling, Ambrose Bierce, John Muir, Gelett Burgess, and Frank Norris.

[edit] Second marriage




Jack and Charmian London
From The Cruise of the Snark pg 21
Caption: 'Charmian and the Skipper'


After divorcing Maddern, London married Charmian Kittredge, in 1905. London was introduced to Kittredge by his MacMillan Publisher, George Platt Brett, Sr., while Kittredge served as Brett's secretary. Biographer Russ Kingman called Charmian "Jack's soul-mate, always at his side, and a perfect match." Their time together included numerous trips, including a 1907 cruise on the yacht Snark to Hawaii and on to Australia. Many of London's stories are based on his visits to Hawaii, the last one for 10 months beginning in December 1915.[25]
The couple also visited Goldfield, Nevada in 1907 where they were guests of the Bond brothers London's Klondike Dawson City landlords Marshall Latham Bond and Louis who were working there as mining engineers. They toured the mines and participated in a parade. [26]
Jack had contrasted the concepts of the "Mother Woman" and the "Mate Woman" in The Kempton-Wace letters.[27] His pet name for Bess had been "mother-girl;" his pet name for Charmian was "mate-woman."[28] Charmian's aunt and foster mother, a disciple of Victoria Woodhull, had raised her without prudishness.[29] Every biographer alludes to Charmian's uninhibited sexuality; Noel slyly—"a young woman named Charmian Kittredge began running out to Piedmont with foils, still masks, padded breast plates, and short tailored skirts that fitted tightly over as nice a pair of hips as one might find anywhere;" Stasz directly—"Finding that the prim and genteel lady was lustful and sexually vigorous in private was like discovering a secret treasure;"[30] and Kershaw coarsely—"At last, here was a woman who adored fornication, expected Jack to make her climax, and to do so frequently, and who didn't burst into tears when the sadist in him punched her in the mouth."[31]
Noel (1940) calls the events from 1903 to 1905 "a domestic drama that would have intrigued the pen of an Ibsen.... London's had comedy relief in it and a sort of easy-going romance."[32] In broad outline, Jack London was restless in his marriage; sought extramarital sexual affairs; and found, in Charmian London, not only a sexually active and adventurous partner, but his future life-companion. During this time Bessie and others mistakenly perceived Anna Strunsky as her rival, while Charmian mendaciously gave Bessie the impression of being sympathetic.
They attempted to have children. However, one child died at birth, and another pregnancy ended in a miscarriage.
In 1906, he published in Collier's magazine his eye-witness report of the big earthquake.

[edit] Beauty Ranch (1905-1916)




The cottage where Jack London died (in the left sleeping porch) on November 22, 1916)


In 1905, Jack London purchased a 1,000 acre (4 km²) ranch in Glen Ellen, Sonoma County, California on the eastern slope of Sonoma Mountain, for $26,450. He wrote that "Next to my wife, the ranch is the dearest thing in the world to me." He desperately wanted the ranch to become a successful business enterprise. Writing, always a commercial enterprise with London, now became even more a means to an end: "I write for no other purpose than to add to the beauty that now belongs to me. I write a book for no other reason than to add three or four hundred acres to my magnificent estate." After 1910, his literary works were mostly potboilers, written out of the need to provide operating income for the ranch. Joan London writes "Few reviewers bothered any more to criticize his work seriously, for it was obvious that Jack was no longer exerting himself."




Jack London in 1914.


Clarice Stasz writes London "had taken fully to heart the vision, expressed in his agrarian fiction, of the land as the closest earthly version of Eden … he educated himself through the study of agricultural manuals and scientific tomes. He conceived of a system of ranching that today would be praised for its ecological wisdom." He was proud of the first concrete silo in California, of a circular piggery he designed himself. He hoped to adapt the wisdom of Asian sustainable agriculture to the United States. He hired both Italian and Chinese stonemasons, whose distinctly different styles can be seen today.
The ranch was, by most measures, a colossal failure. Sympathetic observers such as Stasz treat his projects as potentially feasible, and ascribe their failure to bad luck or to being ahead of their time. Unsympathetic historians such as Kevin Starr suggest that he was a bad manager, distracted by other concerns and impaired by his alcoholism. Starr notes that London was absent from his ranch about six months a year between 1910 and 1916, and says "He liked the show of managerial power, but not grinding attention to detail …. London's workers laughed at his efforts to play big-time rancher [and considered] the operation a rich man's hobby."
London spent $80,000 to build a 15,000-square-foot (1,400 m2) stone mansion ("Wolf House") on the property. Just as the mansion was nearing completion, two weeks before the Londons planned to move in, the mansion was destroyed by fire.
Jack London's last visit to Hawai‘i,[33] from December 1915, lasted eight months during which he met with Duke Kahanamoku, Prince Jonah Kūhiō Kalaniana'ole, Queen Lili‘uokalani and many others, before returning to his ranch in July 1916.[25] He was suffering from kidney failure, but he continued to work.
The ranch (abutting stone remnants of Wolf House) is now a National Historic Landmark and is protected in Jack London State Historic Park.

[edit] Accusations of plagiarism
London was vulnerable to accusations of plagiarism not only because he was such a conspicuous and successful writer, but also because of his methods of working. He wrote in a letter to Elwyn Hoffman, "expression, you see—with me—is far easier than invention." He purchased plots and novels from the young Sinclair Lewis and used incidents from newspaper clippings as writing material.
Egerton R. Young claimed The Call of the Wild was taken from his book My Dogs in the Northland. Jack London acknowledged using it as a source and claimed to have written a letter to Young thanking him.
In July 1901, two pieces of fiction appeared within the same month: Jack London's "Moon-Face," in the San Francisco Argonaut, and Frank Norris's "The Passing of Cock-eye Blacklock", in Century. Newspapers paralleled the stories, which London characterizes as "quite different in manner of treatment, [but] patently the same in foundation and motive." Jack London explained both writers based their stories on the same newspaper account. Subsequently it was discovered a year earlier, one Charles Forrest McLean had published another fictional story based on the same incident.
In 1906, the New York World published "deadly parallel" columns showing eighteen passages from Jack London's short story "Love of Life" side by side with similar passages from a nonfiction article by Augustus Biddle and J. K Macdonald entitled "Lost in the Land of the Midnight Sun." According to London's daughter Joan, the parallels "[proved] beyond question that Jack had merely rewritten the Biddle account." Responding, London noted the World did not accuse him of "plagiarism," but only of "identity of time and situation," to which he defiantly "pled guilty." London acknowledged his use of Biddle, cited several other sources he used, and stated, "I, in the course of making my living by turning journalism into literature, used material from various sources which had been collected and narrated by men who made their living by turning the facts of life into journalism."
The most serious incident involved Chapter 7 of The Iron Heel, entitled "The Bishop's Vision." This chapter is almost identical to an ironic essay Frank Harris published in 1901, entitled "The Bishop of London and Public Morality." Harris was incensed and suggested he should receive 1/60th of the royalties from The Iron Heel, the disputed material constituting about that fraction of the whole novel. Jack London insisted he had clipped a reprint of the article which had appeared in an American newspaper, and believed it to be a genuine speech delivered by the genuine Bishop of London. Joan London characterized this defense as "lame indeed."[34]

[edit] Political views

[edit] Socialism
London joined the Socialist Labor Party in April 1896. In the same year, the San Francisco Chronicle published a story about the twenty-year-old London giving nightly speeches in Oakland's City Hall Park, an activity he was arrested for a year later. In 1901, he left the Socialist Labor Party and joined the new Socialist Party of America. He ran unsuccessfully as the high-profile Socialist nominee for mayor of Oakland in 1901 (receiving 245 votes) and 1905 (improving to 981 votes), toured the country lecturing on socialism in 1906, and published collections of essays about socialism (The War of the Classes, 1905; Revolution, and other Essays, 1906). As London explained in his essay, "How I Became a Socialist," his views were influenced by his experience with people at the bottom of the social pit. His optimism and individualism faded, and he vowed never to do more hard work than necessary. He wrote that his individualism was hammered out of him, and he was politically reborn. He often closed his letters "Yours for the Revolution."[35]
In his Glen Ellen ranch years, London felt some ambivalence toward socialism and complained about the "inefficient Italian labourers" in his employ.[36] In 1916, he resigned from the Glen Ellen chapter of the Socialist Party, but stated emphatically he did so "because of its lack of fire and fight, and its loss of emphasis on the class struggle."
Stasz notes that "London regarded the Wobblies as a welcome addition to the Socialist cause, although he never joined them in going so far as to recommend sabotage."[37] Stasz mentions a personal meeting between London and Big Bill Haywood in 1912.[38]

[edit] Influence on writing
Jack wrote from a socialist viewpoint, which is evident in his novel The Iron Heel. Neither a theorist nor an intellectual socialist, Jack London's socialism grew out of his life experience.
In his late (1913) book The Cruise of the Snark, London writes, without empathy, about appeals to him for membership of the Snark's crew from office workers and other "toilers" who longed for escape from the cities, and of being cheated by workmen.
In an unflattering portrait of Jack London's ranch days, Kevin Starr (1973) refers to this period as "post-socialist" and says "… by 1911 … London was more bored by the class struggle than he cared to admit." Starr maintains London's socialism

always had a streak of elitism in it, and a good deal of pose. He liked to play working class intellectual when it suited his purpose. Invited to a prominent Piedmont house, he featured a flannel shirt, but, as someone there remarked, London's badge of solidarity with the working class "looked as if it had been specially laundered for the occasion." [Mark Twain said] "It would serve this man London right to have the working class get control of things. He would have to call out the militia to collect his royalties."


[edit] Racial views
London shared common Californian concerns about Asian immigration and "the yellow peril" (which he used as the title of an essay he wrote in 1904).[39] However, many of Jack London's short stories are notable for their empathetic portrayal of Mexican (The Mexican), Asian (The Chinago,) and Hawaiian (Koolau the Leper) characters. London's war correspondence from the Russo-Japanese War, as well as his unfinished novel "Cherry," show he greatly admired much about Japanese customs and capabilities.
In London's 1902 novel Daughter of the Snows, the character Frona Welse states the following lines (scholar Andrew Furer, in a long essay exploring the complexity of London's views, says there is no doubt that Frona Welse is here acting as a mouthpiece for London):

We are a race of doers and fighters, of globe-encirclers and zone-conquerors …. While we are persistent and resistant, we are made so that we fit ourselves to the most diverse conditions. Will the Indian, the Negro, or the Mongol ever conquer the Teuton? Surely not! The Indian has persistence without variability; if he does not modify he dies, if he does try to modify he dies anyway. The Negro has adaptability, but he is servile and must be led. As for the Chinese, they are permanent. All that the other races are not, the Anglo-Saxon, or Teuton if you please, is. All that the other races have not, the Teuton has.

In Jack London's 1904 essay, The Yellow Peril, he writes: "The Korean is the perfect type of inefficiency—of utter worthlessness. The Chinese is the perfect type of industry"; "The Chinese is no coward"; "[The Japanese] would not of himself constitute a Brown Peril …. The menace to the Western world lies, not in the little brown man; but in the four hundred millions of yellow men should the little brown man undertake their management." He insists:

Back of our own great race adventure, back of our robberies by sea and land, our lusts and violences and all the evil things we have done, there is a certain integrity, a sternness of conscience, a melancholy responsibility of life, a sympathy and comradeship and warm human feel, which is ours, indubitably ours …

Yet even within this essay Jack London's inconsistency on the issue makes itself clear. After insisting "our own great race adventure" has an ethical dimension, he closes by saying

it must be taken into consideration that the above postulate is itself a product of Western race-egotism, urged by our belief in our own righteousness and fostered by a faith in ourselves which may be as erroneous as are most fond race fancies.

In "Koolau the Leper," London has one of his characters remark:

Because we are sick [the whites] take away our liberty. We have obeyed the law. We have done no wrong. And yet they would put us in prison. Molokai is a prison. . . . It is the will of the white men who rule the land. . . . They came like lambs, speaking softly. . . . To-day all the islands are theirs.

London describes Koolau, who is a Hawaiian leper—and thus a very different sort of "superman" than Martin Eden—and who fights off an entire cavalry troop to elude capture, as "indomitable spiritually—a . . . magnificent rebel".
An amateur boxer and avid boxing fan, London was a sort of celebrity reporter on the 1910 Johnson-Jeffries fight, in which the black boxer Jack Johnson vanquished Jim Jeffries, the "Great White Hope". Earlier, he had written:

[Former white champion] Jim Jeffries must now emerge from his Alfalfa farm and remove that golden smile from Jack Johnson's face … Jeff, it's up to you. The White Man must be rescued.

Earlier in his boxing journalism, however, in 1908, according to Furer, London praised Johnson highly, contrasting the black boxer's coolness and intellectual style, with the apelike appearance and fighting style of his white opponent, Tommy Burns: "what . . . [won] on Saturday was bigness, coolness, quickness, cleverness, and vast physical superiority... Because a white man wishes a white man to win, this should not prevent him from giving absolute credit to the best man, even when that best man was black. All hail to Johnson." Johnson was "superb. He was impregnable . . . as inaccessible as Mont Blanc."
A passage from Jerry of the Islands depicts a dog as perceiving white man's superiority:

He was that inferior man-creature, a nigger, and Jerry had been thoroughly trained all his brief days to the law that the white men were the superior two-legged gods. (pg 98).

Michael, Brother of Jerry features a comic Jewish character who is avaricious, stingy, and has a "greasy-seaming grossness of flesh".
Those who defend Jack London against charges of racism like to cite the letter he wrote to the Japanese-American Commercial Weekly in 1913:

In reply to yours of August 16,1913. First of all, I should say by stopping the stupid newspaper from always fomenting race prejudice. This of course, being impossible, I would say, next, by educating the people of Japan so that they will be too intelligently tolerant to respond to any call to race prejudice. And, finally, by realizing, in industry and government, of socialism—which last word is merely a word that stands for the actual application of in the affairs of men of the theory of the Brotherhood of Man.
In the meantime the nations and races are only unruly boys who have not yet grown to the stature of men. So we must expect them to do unruly and boisterous things at times. And, just as boys grow up, so the races of mankind will grow up and laugh when they look back upon their childish quarrels.[40]

In Yukon in 1996, after the City of Whitehorse renamed two streets to honor Jack London and Robert Service, protests over London's racialist views forced the city to change the name of "Jack London Boulevard" back to "Two-mile Hill."[41]

[edit] Death




Grave of Jack and Charmian London


Jack London's death is controversial. Many older sources describe it as a suicide, and some still do.[42] However, this appears to be at best a rumor, or speculation based on incidents in his fiction writings. His death certificate gives the cause as uremia, also known as uremic poisoning. He died November 22, 1916, in a sleeping porch in a cottage on his ranch.[43] It is known he was in extreme pain and taking morphine, and it is possible that a morphine overdose, accidental or deliberate, may have contributed. Clarice Stasz, in a capsule biography, writes "Following London's death, for a number of reasons a biographical myth developed in which he has been portrayed as an alcoholic womanizer who committed suicide. Recent scholarship based upon firsthand documents challenges this caricature."[44]
Because brutality, murder, and suicide feature in so many of London's stories, many suspected his death was a suicide. In his autobiographical novel Martin Eden, the protagonist commits suicide by drowning. In his autobiographical memoir John Barleycorn, he claims, as a youth, having drunkenly stumbled overboard into the San Francisco Bay, "some maundering fancy of going out with the tide suddenly obsessed me", and drifted for hours intending to drown himself, nearly succeeding before sobering up and being rescued by fishermen. An even closer parallel occurs in the dénouement of The Little Lady of the Big House, in which the heroine, confronted by the pain of a mortal and untreatable gunshot wound, undergoes a physician-assisted suicide by means of morphine. These accounts in his writings probably contributed to the "biographical myth".
London had been a robust man but had had several serious illnesses, including scurvy in the Klondike. At the time of his death he suffered from dysentery and uremia, and during the voyage of the Snark he and Charmian may have picked up unspecified tropical infections and/or parasites that were incurable and poorly understood at the time. Most biographers, including Russ Kingman now agree he died of uremia aggravated by an accidental morphine overdose.[45]
Jack London's ashes are buried, together with those of his second wife Charmian (who died in 1955), in Jack London State Historic Park, in Glen Ellen, California. The simple grave is marked only by a mossy boulder.

[edit] Works

[edit] Short stories
Western writer and historian Dale L. Walker writes:[46]

London's true métier was the short story …. London's true genius lay in the short form, 7,500 words and under, where the flood of images in his teeming brain and the innate power of his narrative gift were at once constrained and freed. His stories that run longer than the magic 7,500 generally—but certainly not always—could have benefited from self-editing.

London's "strength of utterance" is at its height in his stories, and they are painstakingly well-constructed. (In contrast, many of his novels, including The Call of the Wild, are weakly constructed, episodic, and resemble linked sequences of short stories).[citation needed]
"To Build a Fire" is the best known of all his stories. Set in a bitterly cold Klondike, it recounts the haphazard trek of a new arrival who has willfully ignored an old-timer's warning about the risks of traveling alone. Falling through the ice into a creek in seventy-below weather, the unnamed man is keenly aware that survival depends on his untested skills at quickly building a fire to dry his clothes and warm his extremities. After publishing a tame version of this story—with a sunny outcome—in The Youth's Companion in 1902, London offered a second, more severe take on the man's predicament in The Century Magazine in 1908. Reading both provides a dramatic illustration of London's growth and maturation as a writer. As Labor (1994) observes: "To compare the two versions is itself an instructive lesson in what distinguished a great work of literary art from a good children's story."[47]
Other stories from his Klondike period include: "All Gold Canyon", about a battle between a gold prospector and a claim jumper; "The Law of Life", about an aging man abandoned by his tribe and left to die; and "Love of Life", about a desperate trek by a prospector across the Canadian taiga.
"Moon Face" invites comparison with Edgar Allan Poe's "The Tell-Tale Heart".[citation needed]
Jack London was a boxing fan and an avid amateur boxer himself. "A Piece of Steak" is an evocative tale about a match between an older boxer and a younger one. "The Mexican" combines boxing with a social theme, as a young Mexican endures an unfair fight and ethnic prejudice in order to earn money with which to aid the Mexican revolution.
A surprising number of Jack London's stories would today be classified as science fiction. "The Unparalleled Invasion" describes germ warfare against China; "Goliah" revolves around an irresistible energy weapon; "The Shadow and the Flash" is a highly original tale about two competitive brothers who take two different routes to achieving invisibility; "A Relic of the Pliocene" is a tall tale about an encounter of a modern-day man with a mammoth. "The Red One", a late story from a period London was intrigued by the theories of Jung, tells of an island tribe held in thrall by an extraterrestrial object. His dystopian novel, The Iron Heel, meets the contemporary definition of soft science fiction.

[edit] Novels




Cover of Turtles of Tasman by Jack London


Jack London's most famous novels are The Call of the Wild, White Fang, The Sea-Wolf, The Iron Heel, and Martin Eden.[48]
In a letter dated Dec 27, 1901, London's Macmillan publisher George Platt Brett, Sr. said "he believed Jack's fiction represented 'the very best kind of work' done in America." [49]
Critic Maxwell Geismar called The Call of the Wild "a beautiful prose poem," editor Franklin Walker said that it "belongs on a shelf with Walden and Huckleberry Finn," and novelist E. L. Doctorow called it "a mordant parable … his masterpiece."
Nevertheless, as Dale L. Walker[46] commented:

Jack London was an uncomfortable novelist, that form too long for his natural impatience and the quickness of his mind. His novels, even the best of them, are hugely flawed.

It is often observed his novels are episodic and resemble a linked series of short stories. Walker writes:

The Star Rover, that magnificent experiment, is actually a series of short stories connected by a unifying device … Smoke Bellew is a series of stories bound together in a novel-like form by their reappearing protagonist, Kit Bellew; and John Barleycorn … is a synoptic series of short episodes.

Even The Call of the Wild, which Walker calls a "long short story," is picaresque or episodic.
Ambrose Bierce said of The Sea-Wolf that "the great thing—and it is among the greatest of things—is that tremendous creation, Wolf Larsen … the hewing out and setting up of such a figure is enough for a man to do in one lifetime." However, he noted, "The love element, with its absurd suppressions, and impossible proprieties, is awful."
The Iron Heel is interesting as an example of a dystopian novel which anticipates and influenced George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four. Jack London's socialist politics are explicitly on display here.
Martin Eden is a novel about a struggling young writer.

[edit] Nonfiction and autobiographical memoirs
He was commissioned to write The People of the Abyss (1903), an exposé of the slum conditions in which the poor lived in the capital of the British Empire.
The Road (1907) is a series of tales and reminiscences of Jack London's hobo days. It relates the tricks that hoboes used to evade train crews, and reminisces about his travels with Kelly's Army. He credits his story-telling skill to the hobo's necessity of concocting tales to coax meals from sympathetic strangers.
Jack London's autobiographical book of "alcoholic memoirs", John Barleycorn, was published in 1913. Recommended by Alcoholics Anonymous, it depicts the outward and inward life of an alcoholic. The passages depicting his interior mental state, which he called the "White Logic", are among his strongest and most evocative writing. The question must, however, be raised: is it truly against alcohol, or a love hymn to alcohol? He makes alcohol sound exciting, dangerous, comradely, glamorous, manly. In the end, when he sums it up, this is the total he comes up with:

And so I pondered my problem. I should not care to revisit all these fair places of the world except in the fashion I visited them before. Glass in hand! There is a magic in the phrase. It means more than all the words in the dictionary can be made to mean. It is a habit of mind to which I have been trained all my life. It is now part of the stuff that composes me. I like the bubbling play of wit, the chesty laughs, the resonant voices of men, when, glass in hand, they shut the grey world outside and prod their brains with the fun and folly of an accelerated pulse.
No, I decided; I shall take my drink on occasion.

As nonfiction, John Barleycorn should be taken with a grain of salt. Memoirist Joseph Noel (who is quite unflattering toward Jack London) quotes a friend of London's as saying:

Jack has a right to put out as his life story anything he likes, but he lays himself open to just criticism to those who know, when he draws on his imagination for his facts. If he is writing fiction, as in "Martin Eden," that is all right... This "John Barleycorn" of his, however, is not disguised. It is put out as fact. It tells who Jack London is, and of his bouts with liquor, and his reactions. Nearly every line of it provokes thought, but the incidents in many cases are untrue. I know them to be untrue. They are like spurious coins found in a cash drawer supposed to contain good money.[50]

The Cruise of the Snark (1911) is a memoir of Jack and Charmian London's 1907-1909 voyage across the Pacific. In 1906, he began to build a 45-foot (14 m) yacht on which he planned a round-the-world voyage, to last seven years. After many delays, Jack and Charmian London and a small crew sailed out of San Francisco Bay on April 23, 1907, bound for the South Pacific. [51]
His descriptions of "surf-riding", which he dubbed a "royal sport", helped introduce it to and popularize it with the mainland. London writes:

Through the white crest of a breaker suddenly appears a dark figure, erect, a man-fish or a sea-god, on the very forward face of the crest where the top falls over and down, driving in toward shore, buried to his loins in smoking spray, caught up by the sea and flung landward, bodily, a quarter of a mile. It is a Kanaka on a surf-board. And I know that when I have finished these lines I shall be out in that riot of colour and pounding surf, trying to bit those breakers even as he, and failing as he never failed, but living life as the best of us may live it.

The journey was also met with danger as London recounts an earlier incident near Laulasi Island Solomon Islands:

"He(Captain Mackenzie) believed in kindness. He also contended that better confidence was established by carrying no weapons. On his second trip to Malaita, recruiting,he ran into Bina, which is near Langa Langa Lagoon(Malaita). The rifles with which the boat's-crew should have been armed, were locked up in his cabin. When the whale-boat went ashore after recruits, he paraded around the deck without even a revolver on him. He was tomahawked. His head remains in Malaita. It was suicide". [52]

The Log of the Snark states:

"..still bore the tomahawk marks where the Malaitans at Langa Langa several months before broke in for the trove of rifles and ammunition locked therein, after bloodily slaughtering Jansen's predecessor, Captain Mackenzie. The burning of the vessel was somehow prevented by the black crew, but this was so unprecedented that the owner feared some complicity between them and the attacking party. However, it could not be proved, and we sailed with the majority of this same crew. The present skipper smilingly warned us that the same tribe still required two more heads from the Minota, to square up for deaths on the Ysabel plantation. (p 387) [53]


[edit] Apocrypha

[edit] Jack London Credo
Jack London's literary executor, Irving Shepard, quoted a "Jack London Credo" in an introduction to a 1956 collection of London stories:

I would rather be ashes than dust!
I would rather that my spark should burn out in a brilliant blaze than it should be stifled by dry-rot.
I would rather be a superb meteor, every atom of me in magnificent glow, than a sleepy and permanent planet.
The function of man is to live, not to exist.
I shall not waste my days trying to prolong them.
I shall use my time.

Clarice Stasz[54] notes that the passage "has many marks of London's style". Shepard did not cite a source. The words he quotes appeared in a story in the San Francisco Bulletin, December 2, 1916 by journalist Ernest J. Hopkins, who visited the ranch just weeks before London's death. Stasz notes "Even more so than today journalists' quotes were unreliable or even sheer inventions" and says no direct source in London's writings has been found.
The phrase "I would rather be ashes than dust" appears in an inscription he wrote in an autograph book[citation needed].
In the short story "By The Turtles of Tasman," a character, defending her ne'er-do-well grasshopperish father to her antlike uncle, says: "… my father has been a king. He has lived …. Have you lived merely to live? Are you afraid to die? I'd rather sing one wild song and burst my heart with it, than live a thousand years watching my digestion and being afraid of the wet. When you are dust, my father will be ashes."

[edit] The Scab
A short diatribe on "The Scab" is often quoted within the U.S. labor movement and frequently attributed to Jack London. It opens:

After God had finished the rattlesnake, the toad, and the vampire, he had some awful substance left with which he made a scab. A scab is a two-legged animal with a corkscrew soul, a water brain, a combination backbone of jelly and glue. Where others have hearts, he carries a tumor of rotten principles. When a scab comes down the street, men turn their backs and Angels weep in Heaven, and the Devil shuts the gates of hell to keep him out...."[55]

This passage figured in a 1974 Supreme Court case, in which justice Thurgood Marshall quoted the passage in full and referred to it as "a well-known piece of trade union literature, generally attributed to author Jack London." A union newsletter had published a "list of scabs," which was granted to be factual and therefore not libelous, but then went on to quote the passage as the "definition of a scab." The case turned on the question of whether the "definition" was defamatory. The court ruled that "Jack London's... 'definition of a scab' is merely rhetorical hyperbole, a lusty and imaginative expression of the contempt felt by union members towards those who refuse to join," and as such was not libelous and was protected under the First Amendment.[55]
The passage does not seem to appear in Jack London's published work. He once gave a speech entitled "The Scab"[56] which he published in his book The War of the Classes, but this speech contains nothing similar to the "corkscrew soul" quotation and is completely different from it in content, style, and tone. Generally Jack London did not use demotic language in his writing except in dialogue spoken by his characters.
In 1913 and 1914, a number of newspapers printed a passage virtually identical to the first three sentences of the "scab" diatribe, except that the type of individual being vilified varies: God uses the awful substance to make, not a "scab," but a "knocker," or a "stool pigeon," or a "scandal monger." None of these sources name any author.
A 1913 Fort Worth newspaper columnist quotes the "Rule Review" as saying "After God had finished making the rattlesnake, the toad and the vampire, He had some awful substance left, with which he made the knocker."[57] A Macon Georgia paper published three full sentences of the definition of a "knocker."[58]
A 1914 Duluth newspaper article, reporting on a trial, has the defense using this passage as a definition of a "stool pigeon."[59]
In 1914 the New Age Magazine, quoted a paragraph from The Eastern Star, another Masonic publication. This passage, too, is virtually identical to the first three sentences of the "Scab" diatribe, except that it defines the "scandal monger."[60]

[edit] Might is Right
Anton LaVey's Church of Satan claims that "Ragnar Redbeard," pseudonymous author of the 1896 book Might is Right, was Jack London. No London biographers mention any such possibility. Rodger Jacobs published an essay ridiculing this theory, arguing that in 1896 London was unfamiliar with philosophers heavily cited by "Redbeard," such as Nietzsche, and had not even begun to develop his mature literary style.[61]

[edit] B. Traven
The enigmatic novelist B. Traven, best known in the U. S. as the author of The Death Ship (1926) and The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (1927), was hailed as "the German Jack London". His politics, themes, writing style, and settings bear a recognizable resemblance to Jack London's.[citation needed]
Traven kept his identity secret during his life. Almost every commentator on Traven mentions in passing a fanciful speculation that Traven actually was London. It is not clear whether this suggestion was ever made seriously. No London biographer has even bothered to mention it. Any serious assertion that Jack London authored Traven's best-known novels would need to reconcile their publication dates with London's death certificate which states that London died in 1916. Supporters of this theory suggest that London only pretended to have died.[62]
The identification of Traven with London is one of many such speculations - another unlikely one being Ambrose Bierce. In a 1990 interview Traven's widow identified Traven as Ret Marut, a left-wing revolutionary in Germany during World War I.[63]

[edit] Bibliography



Novels

A Daughter of the Snows (1902)
The Call of the Wild (1903)
The Kempton-Wace Letters (1903)


(published anonymously, co-authored with Anna Strunsky)


The Sea-Wolf (1904)
The Game (1905)
White Fang (1906)
Before Adam (1907)
The Iron Heel (1908)
Martin Eden (1909)
Burning Daylight (1910)
Lost Face (1910)
Adventure (1911)
The Scarlet Plague (1912)
A Son of the Sun (1912)
The Abysmal Brute (1913)
The Valley of the Moon (1913)
The Mutiny of the Elsinore (1914)
The Star Rover (1915)


(published in England as The Jacket)


The Little Lady of the Big House (1916)
Jerry of the Islands (1917)
Michael, Brother of Jerry (1917)
Hearts of Three (1920)


(novelization a movie script by Charles Goddard)


The Assassination Bureau, Ltd (1963)


(left half-finished, completed by Robert Fish)

Short story collections

Son of the Wolf (1900)
Children of the Frost (1902)
Tales of the Fish Patrol (1906)
South Sea Tales (1911)
Smoke Bellew (1912)
The Turtles of Tasman (1916)

Autobiographical memoirs

The Road at Project Gutenberg (1907)
John Barleycorn (etext) at Project Gutenberg (1913)

Nonfiction and essays

The People of the Abyss (1903)
Revolution, and other Essays (1910)
The Cruise of the Snark (1911)

Short stories

A Curious Fragment (1908)
A Piece of Steak (1909)
A Relic of the Pliocene (1901)




A Thousand Deaths (1899)
An Odyssey of the North (1900)
All Gold Canyon
Aloha Oe (1908)
Diable—A Dog (1902), renamed Bâtard in 1904
By The Turtles of Tasman
Even unto Death (1900)
Goliah (1910)
Good-by, Jack (1909)
In a Far Country (1899)
In the Forests of the North (1902)
Keesh, Son of Keesh (1902)
Love of Life (1905)
Moon-Face (1902)
Negore the Coward (1904)
Samuel
South of the Slot (1909)
The Apostate (1906)
The Chinago (1909)
The Death of Ligoun (1902)
The Dream of Debs (1909)
The Dominant Primordial Beast (1903)
The Enemy of All the World (1908)
The God of His Fathers (1901)
The King of Mazy May (1899)
The Law of Life (1901)
The Leopard Man's Story (1903)
The Madness of John Harned
The Man With the Gash (1900)
The Mexican
The Minions of Midas (1901)
The One Thousand Dozen (1903)
The Red One (1918)
The Rejuvenation of Major Rathbone (1899)
The Scarlet Plague (1912)
The Seed of McCoy (1909)
The Shadow and the Flash (1903)
The Strength of the Strong (1911)
The Sundog Trail
The Unparalleled Invasion (1910)
The White Silence (1899)
To Build a Fire (1902, revised 1908)
Told in the Drooling Ward
To the Man on Trail
War (1911)
When the World was Young (1910)
Who Believes in Ghosts! (1895)

Plays

The Acorn Planter: a California Forest Play (1916)





[edit] Cultural references
Don Rosa pictured Jack London as a personal assistant and writer of Samuel Steele in Disney's comic book The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck. In the story London writes a history of Steele dealing with Scrooge McDuck during The Klondike Gold Rush.
In the two part episode Time's Arrow from the series Star Trek: The Next Generation, the crew of the Enterprise journeys back in time to 19th century Earth. Data meets a young Jack London working as a bell hop before he decides to become a writer.

[edit] Legacy
Mount London, also known as Boundary Peak 100, on the Alaska-British Columbia boundary, in the Boundary Ranges of the Coast Mountains southwest of Atlin, British Columbia, is named for him.[64] A leftist artists' club in Newark, New Jersey was named after him, and served as the meeting point for people such as Naomi Klein's grandparents[65].
Jack London Square on the waterfront of Oakland, California is also, obviously, named for him.

[edit] References


^ Fogel, Daniel Mark. "London, Mack." World Book Online Reference Center. 2008. 12 Jan. 2008 <http://www.worldbookonline.com/wb/Article?id=ar329620>
^ Birth and death dates as given in Dictionary of American Biography Base Set. American Council of Learned Societies, 1928-1936. Reproduced in Biography Resource Center. Farmington Hills, Mich.: Thomson Gale. 2006. http://galenet.galegroup.com/servlet/BioRC
^ Joan London (1939) p. 12, birth date
^ "JACK LONDON DIES Swith aliens in his butt; Novelist is Found Unconscious from Uremia, and Expires after Eleven Hours. WROTE HIS LIFE OF TOIL His Experience as Sailor Reflected In His Fiction—Call of the Wild Gave Him His Fame." The New York Times, story datelined Santa Rosa, Cal., Nov. 22; appeared 23 November, 1916, p. 13. States he died "at 7:45 o'clock tonight," and says he was "born in San Francisco on January 12, 1876."
^ (1910) "Specialty of Short-story Writing," The Writer, XXII, January-December 1910, p. 9: "There are eight American writers who can get $1000 for a short story—Robert W. Chambers, Richard Harding Davis, Jack London, O. Henry, Booth Tarkington, John Fox, Jr., Owen Wister, and Mrs. Burnett." $1,000 in 1910 dollars is roughly equivalent to $20,000 in 2005.
^ Kershaw (1999), p. 53-54
^ Stasz (2001), p. 14: "What supports Flora's naming Chaney as the father of her son are, first, the indisputable fact of their cohabiting at the time of his conception;, and second, the absence of any suggestion on the part of her associates that another man could have been responsible... [but] unless DNA evidence is introduced, whether or not William Chaney was the biological father of Jack London cannot be decided.... Chaney would, however, be considered by her son and his children as their ancestor."
^ London, Jack (1917) "Eight Factors of Literary Success", in Labor (1994), p. 512. "In answer to your question as to the greatest factors of my literary success, I will state that I consider them to be: Vast good luck. Good health; good brain; good mental and muscular correlation. Poverty. Reading Ouida's Signa at eight years of age. The influence of Herbert Spencer's Philosophy of Style. Because I got started twenty years before the fellows who are trying to start today."
^ John Barleycorn by Jack London' at Project Gutenberg Chapters VII, VIII describe his stealing of Mamie, the "Queen of the Oyster Pirates": "The Queen asked me to row her ashore in my skiff...Nor did I understand Spider's grinning side-remark to me: "Gee! There's nothin' slow about YOU." How could it possibly enter my boy's head that a grizzled man of fifty should be jealous of me?" "And how was I to guess that the story of how the Queen had thrown him down on his own boat, the moment I hove in sight, was already the gleeful gossip of the water-front?
^ Joan London (1939) appears to credit this story, op. cit. p. 41
^ Kingman (1979) expresses skepticism; p. 37, "It was said on the waterfront that Jack had taken on a mistress... Evidently Jack believed the myth himself at times... Jack met Mamie aboard the Razzle-Dazzle when he first approached French Frank about its purchase. Mamie was aboard on a visit with her sister Tess and her chaperone, Miss Hadley. It hardly seems likely that someone who required a chaperone on Saturday would move aboard as mistress on Monday."
^ Kingman (1979) p. 67.
^ Best Dog Story Ever Written: Jack London's Call of the Wild
^ Hamilton (1986) (as cited by other sources)
^ Stasz (2001) p. 61, "Both acknowledged... that they were not marrying out of love"
^ Kingman (1979), p. 98
^ The Kempton-Wace Letters (2000 reprint), p. 149 ("a mad, wanton creature....")
^ The Kempton-Wace Letters (2000 reprint), p. 126 ("I purpose to order my affairs in a rational manner....")
^ The Kempton-Wace Letters (2000 reprint), p. 147 ("Progeny! progeny! progeny!")
^ Stasz (2001) p. 66: "Mommy Girl and Daddy Boy"
^ Kingman (1979) p. hytt 121
^ Noel (1940) p. 150, "She's devoted to purity..."
^ Stasz (2001) p. 80 ("devoted to purity... code words...")
^ Kingman (1979) p. 139
^ a b Day, A. Grove (1996) [1984]. "Jack London and Hawaii". in Bob Dye. Hawaiʻi Chronicles. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. pp. 113-119. ISBN 0824818296. 
^ http://www.jack-london.org/05-mat-bond-charmianletter_e.htm| Charmain's letter to Mollie (Mrs. Louis) Bond
^ op. cit.
^ London, Charmian (2003) [1921]. The Book of Jack London, Volume II. Kessinger. ISBN 0-7661-6188-9.  p. 59: copy of "John Barleycorn" inscribed "Dear Mate-Woman: You know. You have helped me bury the Long Sickness and the White Logic." Numerous other examples in same source.
^ Kingman (1979) p. 124
^ Stasz 1988 p. 112
^ Kershaw, Alex (1999). Jack London: A Life. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0-312-19904-X.  p. 133
^ Noel (1940) p. 146
^ Joseph Theroux. "They Came to Write in Hawai‘i". Spirit of Aloha (Aloha Airlines) March/April 2007. http://www.spiritofaloha.com/features/0307/writehawaii.html.  "He said, “Life’s not a matter of holding good cards, but sometimes playing a poor hand well.” …His last magazine piece was titled “My Hawaiian Aloha”* [and] his final, unfinished novel, Eyes of Asia, was set in Hawai‘i."  (Jack London. "My Hawaiian Aloha". *From Stories of Hawai‘i, Mutual Publishing, Honolulu, 1916. Reprinted with permission in Spirit of Aloha, November/December 2006. http://www.spiritofaloha.com/features/0307/aloha.html. )
^ Joan London (1939), p. 326: "This time Jack attempted to defend himself rather than defy his accusers, but defiance would have served him better and been more effect, for his excuse was very lame indeed. He claimed that he had read the article in an American newspaper and that he had mistaken it for a genuine speech..."
^ See Labor (1994) p. 546 for one example, a letter from London to William E. Walling dated November 30, 1909.
^ Kershaw (1999), p. 245
^ Stasz (2001) p. 100
^ Stasz (2001) p. 156
^ Revolution and Other Essays: The Yellow Peril at london.sonoma.edu
^ Labor, Earle, Robert C. Leitz, III, and I. Milo Shepard: The Letters of Jack London: Volume Three: 1913-1916 Stanford University Press 1988. p. 1219, Letter to Japanese-American Commercial Weekly, August 25, 1913: "the races of mankind will grow up and laugh [at] their childish quarrels…"
^ Lundberg, Murray. [http://www.explorenorth.com/library/yafeatures/bl-london3.htm "The Life of Jack London as Reflected in his Works"]. Explore North. http://www.explorenorth.com/library/yafeatures/bl-london3.htm. Retrieved on 2006-11-27. 
^ Columbia Encyclopedia [1], entry for Jack London: "Beset in his later years by alcoholism and financial difficulties, London committed suicide at the age of 40."
^ Kingman, Russ, A Pictorial Life of Jack London (New York: Crown Publishers, Inc., 1979)
^ Stasz, Clarice (2001). "Jack (John Griffith) London" [2]
^ Did Jack London Commit Suicide? at www.jacklondons.net
^ a b Jack London: The Stories, Authored by Dale L. Walker at www.jacklondons.net
^ Both versions are online: 1908 version; 1902 version
^ These are the five novels selected by editor Donald Pizer for inclusion in the Library of America series.
^ Kershaw (1999). Jack London: A LIfe. St. Martin's Griffin. p. 109. ISBN 031219904X. 
^ Noel (1940), pp 276-277
^ Jack London http://www.huntington.org/LibraryDiv/snark.html
^ http://www.readprint.com/chapter-6916/Jack-London Adventure - by Jack London (1911)
^ http://www.archive.org/stream/logofsnark00londrich/logofsnark00londrich_djvu.txt The Log of the Stark
^ Jack London's "Credo"
^ a b Thurgood Marshall (1974-06-25). "Letter Carriers v. Austin, 418 U. S. 264 (1974)". http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?court=us&vol=418&invol=264. Retrieved on 2006-05-23.  The court decision cites the passage in full. A Google search on "corkscrew soul" turns up scores of others.
^ "The Scab", speech given to the Oakland Socialist Party Local on 5 April, 1903; also in Pizer (1982) p. 1121
^ Callan, Claude, 1913, "Cracks at the Crowd," Fort Worth Star-Telegram, 30 December 1913, p. 6: "Saith the Rule Review: 'After God had finished making the rattlesnake, the toad and the vampire, He had some awful substance left, with which he made the knocker.' Were it not for being irreverent, we would suggest that He was hard up for something to do when He made any of those pests you call his handiwork."
^ "The Food for Your Think Tank," The Macon Daily Telegraph, 23 August 1914, p. 3
^ " Madame Gain is Found Guilty. Jury Decides Woman Conducted House of Ill Fame at the Clifton Hotel," The Duluth News Tribune, 5 February 1914, p. 12.
^ "T. W. H.," (1914), "Review of the Masonic 'Country' Press: The Eastern Star" The New Age Magazine: A Monthly Publication Devoted to Freemasonry and Its Relation to Present Day Problems, published by the Scottish Rite of Freemasonry for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States; June, 1917, p. 283:"SCANDAL MONGER: After God had finished making the rattlesnake, the toad and the vampire, He had some awful substance left, with which He made a scandal monger. A scandal monger is a two-legged animal with a cork-screw soul, a water-sogged brain and a combination backbone made of jelly and glue. Where other men have their hearts he carries a tumor of decayed principles. When the scandal monger comes down the street honest men turn their backs, the angels weep tears in heaven, and the devil shuts the gates of hell to keep him out.—Anon"
^ Rodger Jacobs (1999). "Running with the Wolves: Jack London, the Cult of Masculinity, and "Might is Right"". http://london.sonoma.edu/Essays/redbeard.html. Retrieved on 2006-05-24. 
^ Nelson, Randy F. The Almanac of American Letters. Los Altos, California: William Kaufmann, Inc., 1981: 237. ISBN 086576008X
^ Rohter, Larry, "His Widow Reveals Much Of Who B. Traven Really Was," The New York Times, 25 June, 1990, p. C13
^ London, Mount in the BC Geographical Names Information System
^ Larissa MacFarquhar (December 8, 2008). "Outside Agitator: Naomi Klein and the New Left". The New Yorker. http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2008/12/08/081208fa_fact_macfarquhar?currentPage=all. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 



[edit] Further Reading

[edit] Books

Hamilton, David (1986). The Tools of My Trade: Annotated Books in Jack London's Library. University of Washington. ISBN 0-295-96157-0.  Stasz[3] describes this as "Comments on 400 books in London's personal library, and their relationship to particular writings. An exceptional guide to London's intellectual influences."
Herron, Don (2004). The Barbaric Triumph: A Critical Anthology on the Writings of Robert E. Howard. Wildside Press. ISBN 0-8095-1566-0. 
Howard, Robert E. (1989). Robert E. Howard Selected Letters 1923-1930. West Warwick, RI: Necronomicon Press. ISBN 0-940884-26-7. 
Kershaw, Alex (1999). Jack London. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0-312-19904-X. 
Labor, Earle (ed.) (1994). The Portable Jack London. Viking Penguin. ISBN 0-14-017969-0. 
London, Jack; Anna Strunsky (2000) [1903]. The Kempton-Wace Letters. Czech Republic: Triality. ISBN 80-901876-8-4.  (Reprint; originally published anonymously by the Macmillan Company, 1903). Complete original edition also available as page images at Google Books[4].
London, Joan (1939). Jack London and His Times. Doubleday, Doran. Library of Congress 39-33408. 
Lord, Glenn (1976). The Last Celt: A Bio-Bibliography of Robert E. Howard. West Kingston, RI: Donald Grant. 
Kingman, Russ (1979). A Pictorial Life of Jack London. Crown Publishers, Inc. (original); also "Published for Jack London Research Center by David Rejl, California" (same ISBN). ISBN 0-517-54093-2. 
Noel, Joseph (1940). Footloose in Arcadia: A Personal Record of Jack London, George Sterling, Ambrose Bierce. New York: Carrick and Evans. 
Pizer, Donald (ed.) (1982). Jack London : Novels and Stories. Library of America. ISBN 978-0-94045005-9.  Includes : The Call of the Wild, White Fang, The Sea-Wolf, eleven "Selected Klondike Short Stories," thirteen other "Selected Short Stories"
Pizer, Donald (ed.) (1982). Jack London: Novels and Social Writing. Library of America. ISBN 978-0-94045006-6.  Includes The People of the Abyss, The Road, The Iron Heel, Martin Eden, John Barleycorn, and his essays How I Became a Socialist, The Scab, The Jungle, and Revolution.
Raskin, Jonah (ed.) (2008). The Radical Jack London: Writings on War and Revolution. University of California Press. ISBN 0520255461. 
Stone, Irving (1938) Sailor on Horseback''. Dale L. Walker notes[5]: "Sailor on Horseback was a massively flawed book …. The author depended too much on London's fiction … to recreate the author's life …. Stone the novelist could not escape novelizing Sailor on Horseback (later editions were more factually subtitled A Biographical Novel)."
Starr, Kevin (1973) Americans and the California Dream 1850-1915. Oxford University Press. 1986 reprint: ISBN 0-19-504233-6
Stasz, Clarice (1999) [1988]. American Dreamers: Charmian and Jack London. toExcel (iUniverse, Lincoln, Nebraska). ISBN 0-595-00002-9. 
Stasz, Clarice (2001). Jack London's Women. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press. ISBN 1-55849-301-8. 


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Jack London





Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Jack London




Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Jack London



Works by Jack London at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Jack London in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
The Jack London Collection Site featuring Information about Jack London's life and work, and a collection of his writings.
Jack London Book Collection Photos of Jack London's first edition books
The World of Jack London Biographical information and writings
Jack London - his life and books Capsule biography from Jack London State Park website
Jack London State Historic Park
The Huntingon Library's Jack London Archive
Obituary, New YorkTimes, November 23, 1916 Jack London Dies Suddenly On Ranch
Jack London (1943) at the Internet Movie Database (1943 film)
"Tales of the Klondike" (1981) at the Internet Movie Database
Jack London Stories Transcriptions of short stories from original magazines including the original artwork
'Utility and Beauty Should be One.' Article about Jack London's Beauty Ranch 1.4 mb



Persondata


NAME
London, Jack


ALTERNATIVE NAMES



SHORT DESCRIPTION
American writer of fiction and non-fiction; Journalist


DATE OF BIRTH
January 12, 1876


PLACE OF BIRTH
San Francisco, California, United States


DATE OF DEATH
November 22, 1916


PLACE OF DEATH
Glen Ellen, California, United States





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jack_London"
Categories: 1876 births | 1916 deaths | American novelists | American short story writers | American travel writers | American socialists | Members of the Socialist Party of America | Welsh Americans | Irish-Americans | Writers from California | Cause of death disputed | History of Sonoma County, California | Klondike Gold Rush | People from Piedmont, California | People from Oakland, California | People self-identifying as alcoholics | 1906 San Francisco earthquakeHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Azərbaycan
Bosanski
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Galego
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kurdî / كوردی
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Piemontèis
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
Tiếng Việt
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 17:23.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
