











Founding Fathers of the United States - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Founding_Fathers_of_the_United_States";
		var wgTitle = "Founding Fathers of the United States";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "540802";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281495365;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["autoconfirmed"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Founding Fathers of the United States

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







Scene at the Signing of the Constitution of the United States, by Howard Chandler Christy.






John Trumbull's famous painting is usually incorrectly identified as a depiction of the signing of the Declaration. The painting actually depicts the five-man drafting committee presenting their work to Congress. Trumbull's painting can also be found on the back of the U.S. $2 bill[1]


The Founding Fathers of the United States were the political leaders who signed the Declaration of Independence or otherwise participated in the American Revolution as leaders of the Patriots, or who participated in drafting the United States Constitution eleven years later. The Founders were opposed by the Loyalists who supported the British monarchy and opposed independence (though most Loyalists remained in the U.S. after 1783 and supported the new government).[2] Some authors draw a distinction between the Founders, who signed the Declaration of Independence in 1776 or participated in the Revolution, and the Framers, who drafted the United States Constitution to replace the Articles of Confederation, in 1787.[3] That distinction is not made in this article.
Warren G. Harding is credited with coining the phrase "Founding Fathers" in his keynote address to the 1916 Republican National Convention when he was still a Senator.




Contents


1 Collective biography of the Framers of the Constitution

1.1 Political experience
1.2 Family and finances
1.3 Demographics
1.4 Family Origins
1.5 Longevity and family life
1.6 Religion
1.7 Post-convention careers


2 Legacy
3 Signatories of the Declaration of Independence
4 Constitutional Convention delegates

4.1 Delegates who signed
4.2 Delegates who had left the Convention earlier and did not sign
4.3 Delegates who refused to sign


5 Other Founders
6 Colonial predecessors
7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Collective biography of the Framers of the Constitution
(Rhode Island did not send delegates. No more than 55 delegates showed up at one time.) They represented a cross-section of 18th century American leadership. Almost all of them were well-educated men of means who were leaders in their communities. Many were also prominent in national affairs. Virtually every one had taken part in the American Revolution; at least 29 had served in the Continental Army, most of them in positions of command. Scholars have examined the collective biography of them as well as the signers of the Declaration and the Constitution.[4]

Political experience
The signers of the Constitution had extensive political experience. By 1787, four-fifths (41 individuals), were or had been members of the Continental Congress. Nearly all of the 55 delegates had experience in colonial and state government, and the majority had held county and local offices.[5].....

Thomas Mifflin, Nathaniel Gorham had served as President of the Continental Congress.
The ones who lacked congressional experience were Bassett, Blair, Brearly, Broom, Davie, Dayton, Alexander Martin, Luther Martin, Mason, McClurg, Paterson, Charles Pinckney, Strong, Washington and Yates.
Eight men (Clymer, Franklin, Gerry, Robert Morris, Read, Sherman, Wilson, and Wythe) had signed the Declaration of Independence.
Six (Carroll, Dickinson, Gerry, Gouverneur Morris, Robert Morris, and Sherman) had affixed their signatures to the Articles of Confederation.
Two, Sherman and Robert Morris, underwrote all three of the nation's basic documents.
Dickinson, Franklin, Langdon, and Rutledge had been governors.

The 1787 delegates practiced a wide range of high and middle-status occupations, and many pursued more than one career simultaneously. They did not differ dramatically from the Loyalists, except they were generally younger and less senior in their professions.[6] Thirty-five were lawyers or had benefited from legal education, though not all of them relied on the profession for a livelihood. Some had also become judges.[7]

At the time of the convention, 13 men were merchants: Blount, Broom, Clymer, Dayton, Fitzsimons, Shields, Gilman, Gorham, Langdon, Robert Morris, Pierce, Sherman, and Wilson.
Six were major land speculators: Blount, Dayton, Fitzsimons, Gorham, Robert Morris, and Wilson.
Eleven speculated in securities on a large scale: Bedford, Blair, Clymer, Dayton, Fitzsimons, Franklin, King, Langdon, Robert Morris, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, and Sherman.
Twelve owned or managed slave-operated plantations or large farms: Bassett, Blair, Blount, Butler, Carroll, Jenifer, Jefferson, Mason, Charles Pinckney, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, Rutledge, Spaight, and Washington. Madison also owned slaves, as did Franklin, who later freed his slaves and became an abolitionist.
Broom and Few were small farmers.
Eight of the men received a substantial part of their income from public office: Baldwin, Blair, Brearly, Gilman, Livingston, Madison, and Rutledge.
Three had retired from active economic endeavors: Franklin, McHenry, and Mifflin.
Franklin and Williamson were scientists, in addition to their other activities.
McClurg, McHenry, and Williamson were physicians, and Johnson was a college president.


Family and finances
A few of the 1787 delegates were wealthy, but many of the country's top wealth-holders were Loyalists who went to Britain. Most of the others had financial resources that ranged from good to excellent, but there are other founders who were less than wealthy. On the whole they were less wealthy than the Loyalists.[8]

Demographics
Brown (1976) and Harris (1969) provide detailed demographic information on each man.

Most of the 1787 delegates were natives of the Thirteen Colonies. Only 9 were born elsewhere: four (Butler, Fitzsimons, McHenry, and Paterson) in Ireland, two (Davie and Robert Morris) in England, two (Wilson and Witherspoon) in Scotland, and one (Hamilton) in the West Indies.
Many of them had moved from one state to another. Seventeen individuals had already lived or worked in more than one state or colony: Baldwin, Bassett, Bedford, Dickinson, Few, Franklin, Ingersoll, Hamilton, Livingston, Alexander Martieno, Luther Martin, Mercer, Gouverneur Morris, Robert Morris, Read, Sherman, and Williamson.
Several others had studied or traveled abroad.

The Founding Fathers had strong educational backgrounds.[9] Some, like Franklin, were largely self-taught or learned through apprenticeship. Others had obtained instruction from private tutors or at academies. About half of the men had attended or graduated from college in the colonies or Britain. Some men held medical degrees or advanced training in theology. For the most part, the delegates were a well-educated group. A few lawyers had been trained at the Inns of Court in London, but most had apprenticed to an American lawyer.

Family Origins

Longevity and family life




Death age of the Founding Fathers.


For their era, the 1787 delegates (like the 1776 signers) were average in terms of life spans.[7] Their average age at death was about 67. The first to die was Houston in 1788; the last was Madison in 1836.
The one who reached the oldest age was Johnson, who died at 92. John Adams lived to the age of 90. A few—Franklin, Jefferson, Madison, Williamson, and Wythe—lived into their eighties. Either 15 or 16 (depending on Fitzsimons's exact age) died in their seventies, 20 or 21 in their sixties, eight in their fifties, and five only in their forties. Three (Alexander Hamilton, Richard Dobbs Spaight and Button Gwinnett) were killed in duels.
Most of the delegates married and raised children. Sherman fathered the largest family: 15 children by two wives. At least nine (Bassett, Brearly, Johnson, Mason, Paterson, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, Sherman, Wilson, and Wythe) married more than once. Four (Baldwin, Gilman, Jenifer, and Alexander Martin) were lifelong bachelors.

Religion
Lambert (2003) has examined the religious affiliations and beliefs of the Founders. Some of the 1787 delegates had no affiliation. The others were Protestants except for three Roman Catholics: C. Carroll, D. Carroll, and Fitzsimons. Among the Protestant delegates to the Constitutional Convention, 28 were Church of England (Episcopalian, after the Revolutionary War was won), eight were Presbyterians, seven were Congregationalists, two were Lutherans, two were Dutch Reformed, and two were Methodists, the total number being 49. Some of the more prominent Founding Fathers were anti-clerical or vocal about their opposition to organized religion, such as Thomas Jefferson[10][11] (who created the "Jefferson Bible"), and Benjamin Franklin[12]. However, other notable founders, such as Patrick Henry, were strong proponents of traditional religion. Several of the Founding Fathers considered themselves to be deists or held beliefs very similar to that of deists.[13]

Post-convention careers
The 1787 delegates' subsequent careers reflected their abilities as well as the vagaries of fate.[14] Most were successful, although seven (Fitzsimons, Gorham, Luther Martin, Mifflin, Robert Morris, Pierce, and Wilson) suffered serious financial reverses that left them in or near bankruptcy. Two, Blount and Dayton, were involved in possibly treasonous activities. Yet, as they had done before the convention, most of the group continued to render public service, particularly to the new government they had helped to create.

Legacy
According to Joseph J. Ellis, the concept of the Founding Fathers of the U.S. emerged in the 1820s as the last survivors died out. Ellis says the "the founders," or "the fathers," comprised an aggregate of semi-sacred figures whose particular accomplishments and singular achievements were decidedly less important than their sheer presence as a powerful but faceless symbol of past greatness. For the generation of national leaders coming of age in the 1820s and 1830s — men like Andrew Jackson, Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, and John C. Calhoun — "the founders" represented a heroic but anonymous abstraction whose long shadow fell across all followers and whose legendary accomplishments defied comparison. "We can win no laurels in a war for independence," Webster acknowledged in 1825. "Earlier and worthier hands have gathered them all. Nor are there places for us ... [as] the founders of states. Our fathers have filled them. But there remains to us a great duty of defence and preservation."[15]

Signatories of the Declaration of Independence




John Adams
Samuel Adams
Josiah Bartlett
Carter Braxton
Charles Carroll
Samuel Chase
Abraham Clark
George Clymer
William Ellery
William Floyd
Benjamin Franklin
Elbridge Gerry
Button Gwinnett
Lyman Hall
John Hancock
Benjamin Harrison
John Hart
Joseph Hewes
Thomas Heyward, Jr.




William Hooper
Stephen Hopkins
Francis Hopkinson
Samuel Huntington
Thomas Jefferson
Francis Lightfoot Lee
Richard Henry Lee
Francis Lewis
Philip Livingston
Thomas Lynch, Jr.
Thomas McKean
Arthur Middleton
Lewis Morris
Robert Morris
John Morton
Thomas Nelson, Jr.
William Paca
Robert Treat Paine
John Penn




George Read
Caesar Rodney
George Ross
Benjamin Rush
Edward Rutledge
Roger Sherman
James Smith
Richard Stockton
Thomas Stone
George Taylor
Matthew Thornton
George Walton
William Whipple
William Williams
James Wilson
John Witherspoon
Oliver Wolcott
George Wythe
Charles Thomson - Secretary of Continental Congress (only John Hancock signed and Thomson attested on July 4)





Constitutional Convention delegates

Delegates who signed




Abraham Baldwin
Richard Bassett
Gunning Bedford, Jr.
John Blair
William Blount
David Brearly
Jacob Broom
Pierce Butler
Daniel Carroll
George Clymer
Jonathan Dayton
John Dickinson
William Few
Thomas Fitzsimons
Benjamin Franklin
Nicholas Gilman
Nathaniel Gorham
Alexander Hamilton
Jared Ingersoll
Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer
William Samuel Johnson




Rufus King
John Langdon
William Livingston
James Madison
James McHenry
Thomas Mifflin
Gouverneur Morris
Robert Morris
William Paterson
Charles Cotesworth Pinckney
Charles Pinckney
George Read
John Rutledge
Roger Sherman
Richard Dobbs Spaight
George Washington (president of the Convention)
William Cotter
Hugh Williamson
James Wilson
William Jackson (Secretary)






Delegates who had left the Convention earlier and did not sign




William Richardson Davie
Oliver Ellsworth
William Houston
William Houstoun
John Lansing, Jr.
Alexander Martin
Luther Martin




James McClurg
John Francis Mercer
William Pierce
Caleb Strong
George Wythe
Robert Yates






Delegates who refused to sign




George Mason
Edmund Randolph
Elbridge Gerry






Other Founders




Ethan Allen
Egbert Benson
Richard Bland
Aaron Burr
George Clinton
Patrick Henry
John Jay
Henry Knox
Henry Lee III
Thomas Sim Lee
Robert R. Livingston
John Marshall, the fourth Chief Justice of the United States.
Philip Mazzei
James Monroe, Continental Congressman and fifth President of the United States, the last of the "Republican Generation"
James Otis, Jr.
Thomas Paine, who went on to champion the French Revolution in his Rights of Man. He was elected to the National Convention and helped to write the constitution of France.
Peyton Randolph, President of the First Continental Congress
Dr.William Rickman, first Director of Hospitals of the Continental Army.
Gilbert du Motier, marquis de La Fayette French Major General, originally a volunteer, who was vital for the correspondence to and persuasion of France to support the Revolution.
Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben, the German-Prussian General who reorganized the Continental Army and guided it to victory.


Colonial predecessors

Walter Raleigh (City of Raleigh, Virginia)
Francis Drake (New Albion, name and location later changed to New England)
George Calvert, Lord Baltimore (Maryland)
Prince James, Duke of York (New York)


See also



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Founding Fathers of the United States



List of national founders (worldwide)
List of delegates to the Continental Congress
History of the United States Constitution
Rights of Englishmen


Notes


^ americanrevolution.org Key to Trumbull's picture
^ A Short History of the United Empire Loyalists
^ Land and Liberty II: The Basics of Traditional American History, by David Warren Saxe, p.204
^ See Brown (19764); Martin (19739); "Data on the Framers of the Constitution," at [1]
^ Martin (1973); Greene (1973)
^ Greene (1973)
^ a b Brown (1976)
^ Greene (1973).
^ Brown (1976); Harris (1969)
^ Letter to Alexander von Humboldt, December 6, 1813 "History, I believe, furnishes no example of a priest-ridden people maintaining a free civil government,"
^ Letter to Horatio G. Spafford, March 17, 1814 "In every country and in every age, the priest has been hostile to liberty. He is always in alliance with the despot, abetting his abuses in return for protection to his own."
^ Qouted in The New England Currant (July 23, 1722), "Silence Dogood, No. 9; Corruptio optimi est pessima." "And it is a sad Observation, that when the People too late see their Error, yet the Clergy still persist in their Encomiums on the Hypocrite; and when he happens to die for the Good of his Country, without leaving behind him the Memory of one good Action, he shall be sure to have his Funeral Sermon stuff'd with Pious Expressions which he dropt at such a Time, and at such a Place, and on such an Occasion; than which nothing can be more prejudicial to the Interest of Religion, nor indeed to the Memory of the Person deceas'd. The Reason of this Blindness in the Clergy is, because they are honourably supported (as they ought to be) by their People, and see nor feel nothing of the Oppression which is obvious and burdensome to every one else."
^ See, e.g., Religioustolerance.org/Deism, ja kusipää.ng_fathers.htm Jim Peterson (2007) "The Revolution of Belief: Founding Fathers, Deists, Orthodox Christians, and the Spiritual Context of 18th Century America Robert L. Johnson, "The Deist Roots of the United States of America"
^ Martin (1973)
^ Joseph J. Ellis; Passionate Sage: The Character and Legacy of John Adams. (2001) p. 214.



References


American National Biography Online, (2000).
Richard D. Brown. "The Founding Fathers of 1776 and 1787: A Collective View," The William and Mary Quarterly, 3rd Ser., Vol. 33, No. 3 (Jul., 1976), pp. 465-480 online at JSTOR
Joseph J. Ellis. Founding Brothers: The Revolutionary Generation (2002), Pulitzer Prize
Jack P. Greene. "The Social Origins of the American Revolution: An Evaluation and an Interpretation," Political Science Quarterly, Vol. 88, No. 1 (Mar., 1973), pp. 1-22 online in JSTOR
P.M.G. Harris, "The Social Origins of American Leaders: The Demographic Foundations, " Perspectives in American History 3 (1969): 159-364.
Mark E. Kann; The Gendering of American Politics: Founding Mothers, Founding Fathers, and Political Patriarchy Praeger, 1999
Adrienne Koch; Power, Morals, and the Founding Fathers: Essays in the Interpretation of the American Enlightenment 1961
Frank Lambert. The Founding Fathers and the Place of Religion in America. 2003.
Martin, James Kirby. Men in rebellion: Higher governmental leaders and the coming of the American Revolution, (1973)
Robert Previdi; "Vindicating the Founders: Race, Sex, Class, and Justice in the Origins of America," Presidential Studies Quarterly, Vol. 29, 1999
Cokie Roberts. Founding Mothers: The Women Who Raised Our Nation (2005)
Gordon S. Wood. Revolutionary Characters: What Made the Founders Different (2006)



External links

NARA - America's founding fathers
Encyclopaedia Britannica, The Founding Fathers and Slavery
What Happened to the Signers of the Declaration of Independence?
Britannica blog - a scholar blog forum on Founding Fathers and their Faith







Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Founding_Fathers_of_the_United_States"
Categories: American Revolution | Patriots in the American Revolution | Political leaders of the American Revolution | The EnlightenmentHidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism | Wikipedia protected pages without expiry 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Deutsch
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Italiano
עברית
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Slovenščina
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Svenska
ไทย
Tagalog
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 13:20.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
