













Social justice - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Social_justice";
		var wgTitle = "Social justice";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "48990";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281813987;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Social justice

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For the Israeli political party, see Social Justice (political party).
Social justice, sometimes called civil justice, refers to the concept of a society in which justice is achieved in every aspect of society, rather than merely the administration of law. It is generally thought of as a world which affords individuals and groups fair treatment and an impartial share of the benefits of society. (Different proponents of social justice have developed different interpretations of what constitutes fair treatment and an impartial share.) It can also refer to the distribution of advantages and disadvantages within a society.
Social justice is both a philosophical problem and an important issue in politics, religion and civil society. Most individuals wish to live in a just society, but different political ideologies have different conceptions of what a 'just society' actually is. The term "social justice" is often employed by the political left to describe a society with a greater degree of economic egalitarianism, which may be achieved through progressive taxation, income redistribution, or even property redistribution, policies aimed toward achieving that which developmental economists refer to as equality of opportunity and equality of outcome.
Social Justice features as an apolitical philosophical concept (insofar as any philosophical analysis of politics can be free from bias) in much of John Rawls' writing. It is a part of Catholic social teaching and is one of the Four Pillars of the Green Party upheld by the worldwide green parties. Some of the tenets of social justice have been adopted by those who lie on the left or center-left of the political spectrum (e.g. socialists, social democrats, etc). Social justice is also a concept that some use to describe the movement towards a socially just world. In this context, social justice is based on the concepts of human rights and equality.




Contents


1 Theories of Social Justice

1.1 Rawls
1.2 Criticism


2 Social Justice from Religious Traditions

2.1 Jewish social teaching
2.2 Democracy & Political Movements

2.2.1 The Green Party




3 Social Justice Movements

3.1 Corporate Power & Enviromental Movement
3.2 Catholic social teaching
3.3 Economic Inequality
3.4 Racial Inequality
3.5 Gender Inequality
3.6 Health Inequality
3.7 Aboriginal Issues
3.8 Peace Activists
3.9 Human Rights


4 Periodicals or Publications
5 See also
6 External links
7 References
8 Further reading





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Theories of Social Justice

[edit] Rawls
Main article: John Rawls
The political philosopher John Rawls (1921-2002) draws on the utilitarian insights of Bentham and Mill, the social contract ideas of Locke, and the categorical imperative ideas of Kant. His first statement of principle was made in A Theory of Justice (1971) where he proposed that, "Each person possesses an inviolability founded on justice that even the welfare of society as a whole cannot override. For this reason justice denies that the loss of freedom for some is made right by a greater good shared by others." (at p3). A deontological proposition that echoes Kant in framing the moral good of justice in absolutist terms. His views are definitively restated in Political Liberalism (1993), where society is seen, "as a fair system of co-operation over time, from one generation to the next." (at p14).
All societies have a basic structure of social, economic, and political institutions, both formal and informal. In testing how well these elements fit and work together, Rawls based a key test of legitimacy on the theories of social contract. To determine whether any particular system of collectively enforced social arrangements is legitimate, he argued that one must look for agreement by the people who are subject to it. Obviously, not every citizen can be asked to participate in a poll to determine his or her consent to every proposal in which some degree of coercion is involved, so one has to assume that all citizens are reasonable. Rawls constructed an argument for a two-stage process to determine a citizen's hypothetical agreement:

the citizen agrees to be represented by X for certain purposes; to that extent, X holds these powers as a trustee for the citizen;
X agrees that a use of enforcement in a particular social context is legitimate; the citizen, therefore, is bound by this decision because it is the function of the trustee to represent the citizen in this way.

This applies to one person representing a small group (e.g. to the organiser of a social event setting a dress code) as equally as it does to national governments which are the ultimate trustees, holding representative powers for the benefit of all citizens within their territorial boundaries, and if those governments fail to provide for the welfare of their citizens according to the principles of justice, they are not legitimate. To emphasise the general principle that justice should rise from the people and not be dictated by the law-making powers of governments, Rawls asserted that, "There is . . . a general presumption against imposing legal and other restrictions on conduct without sufficient reason. But this presumption creates no special priority for any particular liberty." (at pp291-292) This is support for an unranked set of liberties that reasonable citizens in all states should respect and uphold — to some extent, the list proposed by Rawls matches the normative human rights that have international recognition and direct enforcement in some nation states where the citizens need encouragement to act in a more objectively just way.
The basic liberties according to Rawls

freedom of thought;
liberty of conscience as it affects social relationships on the grounds of religion, philosophy, and morality;
political liberties (e.g. representative democratic institutions, freedom of speech and the press, and freedom of assembly);
freedom of association;
freedoms necessary for the liberty and integrity of the person (viz: freedom from slavery, freedom of movement and a reasonable degree of freedom to choose one's occupation); and
rights and liberties covered by the rule of law.


[edit] Criticism
Many authors criticize the idea that there exists an objective standard of social justice. Moral relativists deny that there is any kind of objective standard for justice in general. Non-cognitivists, moral skeptics, moral nihilists, and most logical positivists and analytic philosophers deny the epistemic possibility of objective notions of justice. Cynics (such as Niccolò Machiavelli) believe that any ideal of social justice is ultimately a mere justification for the status quo. Supporters of social darwinism believe that social justice assists the least fit to reproduce, sometimes labeled as dysgenics, and hence should be opposed. [1]
Many other people accept some of the basic principles of social justice, such as the idea that all human beings have a basic level of value, but disagree with the elaborate conclusions that may or may not follow from this. One example is the statement by H. G. Wells that all people are "equally entitled to the respect of their fellow-men."[cite this quote]
On the other hand, some scholars reject the very idea of social justice as meaningless, religious, self-contradictory, and ideological, believing that to realize any degree of social justice is unfeasible, and that the attempt to do so must destroy all liberty. The most complete rejection of the concept of social justice comes from Friedrich Hayek of the Austrian School of economics: "The phrase 'social justice' is ... simply 'a semantic fraud from the same stable as People's Democracy'."[1]

[edit] Social Justice from Religious Traditions

[edit] Jewish social teaching
Main article: Tikkun olam
In To Heal a Fractured World: The Ethics of Responsibility, Rabbi Jonathan Sacks describes how social justice has a central place in Judaism. One of Judaism’s most distinctive and challenging ideas is its ethics of responsibility reflected in the concepts of simcha ("gladness" or "joy"), tzedakah ("the religious obligation to perform charity and philanthropic acts"), chesed ("deeds of kindness"), and tikkun olam ("repairing the world").

[edit] Democracy & Political Movements
(United Nations, Socialists, Green Party, Separatist movements, etc.) Above all, it is the Socialist Parties of the world that have achieved major successes in social/economic justice. Michael Harrington states in his book on "Socialism" that people have done better under Democratic Socialism (along with social democrats) in Europe, that it maintained capitalism because people had more spending power. In Reality, even before The Greens, The Socialist have been champions and pioneers of Economic Justice, in labor (A Living Wage) and Personal Productivity. (Universal Income or Basic Income Grant) The Income must be more than basic, but livable. The socialist have always been champions of Human Rights and Humane policies. The Policy of Socialists embrace Livable Communities and Sustainability. This has been the case before the early 1900s.

[edit] The Green Party
Main article: Green party
Social Justice is one of the Four Pillars of the Green Party. Social Justice (sometimes "Social and Global Equality and Economic Justice") reflects the general rejection of discrimination based on distinctions between class, gender, ethnicity, or culture. Green Parties are almost universally egalitarian in their outlook, seeing that great disparities in wealth or influence are caused by the perversion of or total lack of social institutions that prevent the strong from plundering the weak.[2]
Several local branches of the worldwide green parties define social justice as the principle that all persons are entitled to "basic human needs", regardless of "superficial differences such as economic disparity, class, gender, race, ethnicity, citizenship, religion, age, sexual orientation, disability, or health". This includes "the eradication of poverty and illiteracy, the establishment of sound environmental policy, and equality of opportunity for healthy personal and social development."

[edit] Social Justice Movements
Social justice is also a concept that is used to describe the movement towards a socially just world. In this context, social justice is based on the concepts of human rights and equality, and can be defined as "the way in which human rights are manifested in the everyday lives of people at every level of society".[3].
There are a number of movements that are working to achieve social justice in society.[4][5] These movements are working towards the realization of a world where all members of a society, regardless of background, have basic human rights and an equal opportunity to access the benefits of their society.

[edit] Corporate Power & Enviromental Movement
(Social responsibility, Corporate watchdogs, Greenpeace, etc.)

[edit] Catholic social teaching
Main article: Catholic social teaching
Catholic social teaching comprises those aspects of Roman Catholic doctrine which relate to matters dealing with the collective aspect of humanity. A distinctive feature of Catholic social teaching is its concern for the poorest members of society. Two of the seven key areas[6] of Catholic social teaching are pertinent to social justice:

Life and dignity of the human person: The foundational principle of all Catholic Social Teaching is the sanctity of all human life and the inherent dignity of every human person. Human life must be valued above all material possessions.
Preferential option for the poor and vulnerable: Jesus taught that on the Day of Judgement God will ask what each person did to help the poor and needy: "Amen, I say to you, whatever you did for one of these least brothers of mine, you did for me."[7] The Catholic Church teaches that through words, prayers and deeds one must show solidarity with, and compassion for, the poor. When instituting public policy the "preferential option for the poor" should always be kept at the forefront. The moral test of any society is "how it treats its most vulnerable members. The poor have the most urgent moral claim on the conscience of the nation. People are called to look at public policy decisions in terms of how they affect the poor."[8]

Even before it was propounded in the Catholic social teachings, Social Justice appeared regularly in the history of the Catholic Church:

The term "social justice" was coined by the Jesuit Luigi Taparelli in the 1840s, based on the teachings of Thomas Aquinas. He wrote extensively in his journal Civiltà Cattolica, engaging both capitalist and socialist theories from a natural law viewpoint. His basic premise was that the rival economic theories, based on subjective Cartesian thinking, undermined the unity of society present in Thomistic metaphysics; neither the liberal capitalists nor the communists concerned themselves with public moral philosophy.
Pope Leo XIII, who studied under Taparelli, published in 1891 the encyclical, Rerum Novarum (On the Condition of the Working Classes), rejecting both socialism and capitalism, while defending labor unions and private property. He stated that society should be based on cooperation and not class conflict and competition. In this document, Leo set out the Catholic Church's response to the social instability and labor conflict that had arisen in the wake of industrialization and had led to the rise of socialism. The Pope taught that the role of the State is to promote social justice through the protection of rights, while the Church must speak out on social issues in order to teach correct social principles and ensure class harmony.
The encyclical Quadragesimo Anno (On Reconstruction of the Social Order, literally "in the fortieth year") of 1931 by Pope Pius XI, encourages a living wage, subsidiarity, and teaches that social justice is a personal virtue as well as an attribute of the social order: society can be just only if individuals and institutions are just.
Pope Benedict XVI's encyclical Deus Caritas Est ("God is Love") of 2006 teaches that justice is the defining concern of the state and the central concern of politics, and not of the church, which has charity as its central social concern. The laity has the specific responsibility of pursuing social justice in civil society. The church's active role in social justice should be to inform the debate, using reason and natural law, and also by providing moral and spiritual formation for those involved in politics.
The official Catholic doctrine on social justice can be found in the book Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church, published in 2004 and updated in 2006, by the Pontifical Council Iustitia et Pax.


[edit] Economic Inequality
(Labour movement, Unions, etc.)

[edit] Racial Inequality
Racial inequality can be seen throughout society where certain parties are given advantages or disadvantages due to their color, origin or religious background

[edit] Gender Inequality
(Women's rights, Equal pay rights, etc.)

[edit] Health Inequality
(Universal medical care, Poverty, etc.)

[edit] Aboriginal Issues
(Land claims, Fishing & Hunting rights, etc.)

[edit] Peace Activists
(Action networks, Disarmament, etc.)

[edit] Human Rights
(Capital punishment, Corporal punishment, Prisoners rights, Euthanasia, Reproductive rights, Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender rights, etc.)
Restorative Justice (Individuals affected by crime and social injustice allowed a voice in justice system)

[edit] Periodicals or Publications
Social Justice was also the name of a periodical published by Father Coughlin in the 1930s and early 1940s.[9] Coughlin's organization was known as the National Union for Social Justice and he frequently used the term social justice in his radio broadcasts. In 1935 Coughlin made a series of broadcasts in which he outlined what he termed "the Christian principles of social justice" as an alternative to both capitalism and communism.

[edit] See also






Altruism
Black theology
Centre for Social Justice
Counselors for Social Justice
Equality of outcome
Equal opportunity
Equity (economics)
Favoritism
Global Greens Charter
Global justice
Grassroots






Justice
Justice (economics)
Liberation theology
Parity
Progressivism
Rule of law
Social action
Social criticism
Social engineering
Social injustice
Teaching for social justice
Virtue







[edit] External links

Social Justice Fund that allows for social justice work within communities
Access to Catholic Social Justice Teachings
Anti-Capitalism and the Terrain of Social Justice by Sam Gindin
American Social Justice Party (new U.S. political movement)
Defining Social Justice by Michael Novak
Centre for Social Justice (UK)
Global Justice Movement net
The Global Green Charter
Facing History and Ourselves- Social Justice Organization
Human Nature: Justice versus Power Noam Chomsky debates with Michel Foucault
Social Justice in Context (pdf)
Social Justice Wiki
Social Justice Review
Social Justice: Voices from the South
Social Justice' Isn't Any Kind of Justice', Professor Antony Flew, London, Libertarian Alliance, 1993. A brief critique of the concept from a libertarian/free-market perspective
A Dangerous Obsession by Thomas Sowell
Institute for public policy research - Commission on Social Justice
The Struggle to Subdue Luck, by Anthony de Jasay, Foundation for Economic Freedom, Jan. 8th, 2007
The Foundation for Law, Justice and Society
Voice for Our Children


[edit] References


^ "The Fatal Conceit - The Errors of Socialism", 1988, University of Chicago Press, quoting Charles Curran.
^ Green Party of Canada | Social Justice | www.greenparty.ca
^ Just Comment - Volume 3 Number 1, 2000
^ Main Page - Social Justice Wiki
^ Social Justice and Social Justice Movements
^ Seven Key Themes of Catholic Social Teaching
^ Matthew 25:40.
^ Option for the Poor, Major themes from Catholic Social Teaching, Office for Social Justice, Archdiocese of St. Paul and Minneapolis.
^ Crackdown on Coughlin



[edit] Further reading

Atkinson, A.B. (1982). Social Justice and Public Policy. Contents & chapter previews.
Carver, Thomas Nixon (1915). Essays in Social Justice. Chapter links.
Quigley, Carroll. (1961). The Evolution Of Civilizations: An Introduction to Historical Analysis. Second edition 1979. Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund. ISBN 0-913966-56-8
Rawls, John. (1971). A Theory of Justice, Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-88010-2
Rawls, John. (1993). Political Liberalism. New York: Columbia University Press (The John Dewey Essays in Philosophy, 4). ISBN 0-231-05248-0
For an analysis of justice for non-ruling communities, see: Gad Barzilai, Communities and Law: Politics and Cultures of Legal Identities. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
For perspectives from Christian-informed contexts, see Philomena Cullen, Bernard Hoose & Gerard Mannion (eds.), Catholic Social Justice: Theological and Practical Explorations, (T. &. T Clark/Continuum, 2007) and J. Franklin (ed.), Life to the Full: Rights and Social Justice in Australia (Connor Court, 2007).








v • d • e

Social Work and related concepts





Primary concepts



Social work · Qualifications for professional social work ·
Role of the professional social worker · Social work knowledge building








Education



Bachelor of Social Work (BA, BSc or BSW) degree · Master of Social Work degree (MA, MSc or MSW) · Doctor of Social Work degree (Ph.D or DSW) · International Association of Schools of Social Work · Council on Social Work Education · Schools of social work








Articles on social workers



American social workers · British social workers · Canadian social work academics · Unclassified social workers








Professional social work associations



International Federation of Social Workers (IFSW) · National Association of Social Workers · British Association of Social Workers · Australian Association of Social Workers · Professional Social Workers' Association








Types of social work



Medical social work · Social work with groups · Social planning · School social worker · Barefoot social work · Forensic Social Work · Caseworker · Child Welfare · Social Work in the Military








Other terms of interest



Community practice · Community organizing · Settlement movement · Charity Organization Society · Jane Addams · Social justice








These articles are supported by the Social Work WikiProject








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_justice"
Categories: Justice | Political philosophy | Social ethics | Social workHidden categories: Articles with unsourced quotes 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Français
Bahasa Indonesia
עברית
Nederlands
Português
Русский
Српски / Srpski
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 01:37.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
