













George Galloway - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "George_Galloway";
		var wgTitle = "George Galloway";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "18247133";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281492780;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); George Galloway

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article's introduction may be too long. Please help by moving some material from it into the body of the article. Read the layout guide and Wikipedia's lead section guidelines for more information. Discuss this issue on the talk page.





George Galloway MP




Galloway in 2007





Member of Parliament
for Bethnal Green and Bow



Incumbent


Assumed office 
5 May 2005


Preceded by
Oona King


Majority
823 (1.9%)




Member of Parliament
for Glasgow Kelvin



In office
1 May 1997 – 5 May 2005


Preceded by
New constituency


Succeeded by
Constituency Abolished


Majority
7,260 (27.1%)




Member of Parliament
for Glasgow Hillhead



In office
11 June 1987 – 1 May 1997


Preceded by
Roy Jenkins


Succeeded by
Constituency abolished


Majority
4,826 (12.3%)






Born
16 August 1954 (1954-08-16) (age 54)
Dundee, Scotland


Political party
Labour (1967-2003)
RESPECT (2004-present)


Residence
London, England, UK


Religion
Roman Catholic


Website
www.georgegalloway.com


George Galloway (born 16 August 1954) is a British politician, author, and broadcaster, who has been a Member of Parliament (MP) since 1987 and is known for his outspoken socialist and anti-Zionist views. He was a Labour Party MP for Glasgow Hillhead, and for Glasgow Kelvin, before his expulsion from the party in October 2003,[1] and his subsequently becoming a a founding member of Respect. He currently represents the Bethnal Green and Bow constituency, having been most recently elected to that seat in 2007.
Galloway is perhaps best known for his vigorous campaign to both overturn economic sanctions against Iraq in the 1990s and early 2000s, and to avert the 2003 invasion of that country, as well as for his speech before the then President of Iraq, Saddam Hussein, in which he appeared to praise the Iraqi dictator,[2] although Galloway actively opposed the regime until the United States-led Gulf War in 1991 and has always stated that he was addressing the Iraqi people.[3][4] These ties to Iraq also led Galloway to be accused by a US Senate Committee of profiting from abuses of UN Oil-for-Food programme, although nothing was proven, and his activities in Gaza – in relation to Hamas, in particular – have resulted in a ban on Galloway entering Canada.[5][6]
The House of Commons has also censured and suspended Galloway for insubordination[7] – he was last asked to leave the lower chamber on 23 July 2007[8] – though the MP claimed that the officers of the house were simply upset by Galloway defending himself.[9]




Contents


1 Early and personal life

1.1 Labour Party organiser


2 Parliamentary career and public profile

2.1 War on Want
2.2 Member of Parliament, Glasgow
2.3 Troubles within the Labour Party
2.4 Expulsion from the Labour Party
2.5 2005 election
2.6 Parliamentary participation statistics
2.7 Suspension from the House of Commons
2.8 The next General Election


3 'Stress ball' incident
4 Political views

4.1 Iraq and Saddam Hussein
4.2 Israel and the Palestinians
4.3 Blair and Bush
4.4 The July 2005 London bombings
4.5 Pakistan coup of 1999
4.6 Record on LGBT issues


5 Humanitarian work

5.1 Mariam Appeal
5.2 Viva Palestina aid convoy


6 Corruption allegations and other controversies

6.1 Oil for Food

6.1.1 Daily Telegraph libel case
6.1.2 Others
6.1.3 U.S. Senate

6.1.3.1 Allegations
6.1.3.2 Galloway's response
6.1.3.3 Alleged false or misleading testimony




6.2 Controversies at university debating societies
6.3 Sectarian attack at airport
6.4 Support for Soviet Union
6.5 Persona non grata in Canada


7 Publishing/media activities

7.1 Asian Voice
7.2 Autobiography
7.3 Celebrity Big Brother
7.4 talkSPORT
7.5 The Real Deal
7.6 Comment
7.7 Mazher Mahmood
7.8 Fidel Castro Handbook
7.9 Friction Books
7.10 Big Brother's Big Mouth
7.11 TV and film appearances
7.12 Daily Record column


8 As an orator
9 See also
10 References
11 External links

11.1 Video
11.2 General
11.3 Articles and news reports
11.4 US Congressional testimony & related







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early and personal life
Galloway was born in Dundee, Scotland, grew up in a Irish Catholic household, and was a keen amateur boxer. He attended Charleston Primary and Harris Academy, a non-denominational school. Galloway is opposed to abortion, although he supports Respect's pro-choice stance.
From 1979 to 1999, he was married to Elaine Fyffe, with whom he has a daughter, Lucy. In 2000, he married Amineh Abu-Zayyad. Zayyad filed for divorce in 2005. He married Rima Husseini, a Lebanese woman and former researcher, who In May 2007 gave birth to a son, Zein.
Galloway states that he is a non-drinker from a non-drinking family. "My father didn’t drink alcohol and his father didn’t and my daughter doesn’t. I think it has a very deleterious effect on people".[10]

[edit] Labour Party organiser
Galloway joined the Labour Party at 13 years old and within five years was secretary of the Dundee West constituency party. His enthusiasm led him to become vice-chairman of the Labour Party in the city of Dundee and a member of the Scottish Executive Committee in 1975. On 5 May 1977, he contested his first election campaign in the Scottish district elections but failed to hold the safe Labour seat at Gillburn, Dundee. He was beaten by the Independent candidate Bunty Turley, who was a trade unionist running on the campaign slogan "enough is enough" after allegations were made about Galloway's personal and financial behaviour.[11] Galloway became the secretary organiser of Dundee Labour Party—the youngest ever Scottish chairman—in March 1981 at 26 years old.[12]
His support for the Palestinian cause began in 1974 when he met a Palestinian activist in Dundee; he supported the actions of Dundee City council which flew the Palestinian flag inside the City Chambers. He was involved in the twinning of Dundee with Nablus in 1980,[13] although he did not take part in the visit of Lord Provost Gowans, Ernie Ross MP and three city councillors to Nablus and Kuwait in April 1981.[12]
In 1981, Galloway wrote an article in Scottish Marxist supporting Communist Party affiliation with the Labour Party. In response, Denis Healey, deputy leader of the Labour Party, tried and failed to remove Galloway from the list of Prospective Parliamentary Candidates. Galloway successfully argued that this was his own personal viewpoint, not that of the Labour Party. Healey lost his motion by 13 votes to 5. He once quipped that, in order to overcome a £1.5 million deficit which had arisen in the city budget, he, Ernie Ross and leading councillors should be placed in the stocks in the city square: "we would allow people to throw buckets of water over us at 20p a time."[14]

[edit] Parliamentary career and public profile

[edit] War on Want
From November 1983 to 1987, Galloway was General Secretary of War On Want, a British charity that campaigns against poverty worldwide. In this post he was much travelled, especially to areas suffering famine; he wrote eye-witness accounts of the famine in Eritrea in 1985 which were published in the Sunday Times and the Spectator.[15]
The Daily Mirror accused him of living luxuriously at the charity's expense.[16] An independent auditor cleared him of misuse of funds,[17] though he did repay £1,720 in contested expenses.[18] He later reportedly won £155,000 from the Mirror in an unrelated libel lawsuit.[19]
More than two years after Galloway stepped down as General Secretary to serve as a Labour MP, the UK government's Charity Commission investigated War on Want. It found accounting irregularities from 1985 to 1989, but little evidence that money was used for non-charitable purposes. Galloway had been General Secretary for the first three of those years. The commission said responsibility lay largely with auditors, and did not single out individuals for blame.[17]

[edit] Member of Parliament, Glasgow
Galloway was selected as Labour candidate for the Glasgow Hillhead seat, then held by Roy Jenkins of the Social Democratic Party. He fought for a place on the Labour Party National Executive Committee in 1986; in a large field of candidates he finished second from the bottom. At the 1986 Labour Party Conference, he made a strong attack on the Labour Party's Deputy Leader and Shadow Chancellor Roy Hattersley for not favouring exchange controls.
In the 1987 election, Galloway won Glasgow Hillhead from Jenkins with a majority of 3,251. Although known for his left-wing views, Galloway was never a member of Labour's main leftist grouping of MPs, the Campaign Group.

[edit] Troubles within the Labour Party
Asked about a War on Want conference on Mykonos, Greece during his previous job, the new MP Galloway notoriously replied "I travelled to and spent lots of time with people in Greece, many of whom were women, some of whom were known carnally to me. I actually had sexual intercourse with some of the people in Greece."[20] The statement put Galloway on the front pages of the tabloid press and in February 1988 the Executive Committee of his Constituency Labour Party passed a vote of no confidence in him.[20]
He went on to win re-selection over Trish Godman (wife of fellow MP Norman Godman) in June 1989, but failed to get a majority of the electoral college on the first ballot. This was the worst result for any sitting Labour MP who was reselected; 13 of the 26 members of the Constituency Party's Executive Committee resigned that August, indicating their dissatisfaction with the result.[21]
In 1990, a classified advertisement appeared in the Labour left weekly Tribune headed "Lost: MP who answers to the name of George", "balding and has been nicknamed gorgeous", claiming that the lost MP had been seen in Romania but had not been to a constituency meeting for a year. A telephone number was given which turned out to be for the Groucho Club in London, from which Galloway had recently been excluded (he has since been readmitted). Galloway threatened legal action and pointed out that he had been to five constituency meetings. He eventually settled for an out-of-court payment by Tribune.
The leadership election of the Labour Party in 1992 saw Galloway voting for fellow Scot John Smith for Leader and Margaret Beckett as Deputy Leader. In 1994, after Smith's death, Galloway declined to cast a vote in the leadership election (one of only three MPs to do so). In a debate with the leader of the Scottish National Party Alex Salmond, Galloway responded to one of Salmond's jibes against the Labour Party by declaring "I don't give a fuck what Tony Blair thinks."[21]
Although facing a challenge for the Labour nomination for the seat of Glasgow Kelvin in 1997, Galloway successfully defeated Shiona Waldron. He was unchallenged for the nomination in 2001.
In the 1997 and 2001 elections Galloway was the Labour candidate for the seat of Glasgow Kelvin, winning with majorities of over 16,000 and 12,000 respectively. During the 2001 Parliament, he voted against the Whip 27 times. During the 2001-02 session he was the 9th most rebellious Labour MP.

[edit] Expulsion from the Labour Party
Galloway became Vice-President of the Stop the War Coalition (StWC). He is actively involved, often speaking on StWC platforms at anti-war demonstrations. From this position Galloway made many aggressive and controversial statements in opposition to the 2003 invasion of Iraq. These were the formal reasons for his expulsion from the Labour party. He reportedly said in a 28 March 2003 interview with Abu Dhabi TV that Tony Blair and George W. Bush had "lied to the British Air Force and Navy, when they said the battle of Iraq would be very quick and easy. They attacked Iraq like wolves...." and added, "... the best thing British troops can do is to refuse to obey illegal orders."[22] He called the Labour government "Tony Blair's lie machine."[23] His most controversial statement from the interview may have been "Iraq is fighting for all the Arabs. Where are the Arab armies?".[24] The Observer reported in 2003 that the Director for Public Prosecutions was considering a request to pursue Galloway under the Incitement to Disaffection Act, 1934,[25] though no prosecution occurred.
On 18 April, The Sun published an interview with Tony Blair who said: "His comments were disgraceful and wrong. The National Executive will deal with it." The General Secretary of the Labour Party, citing Galloway's outspoken opinion of Blair and Bush in their pursuit of the Iraq war, suspended him from holding office in the party on 6 May 2003, pending a hearing on charges that he had violated the party's constitution by "bringing the Labour Party into disrepute through behaviour that is prejudicial or grossly detrimental to the Party". The National Constitutional Committee held a hearing on 22 October 2003, to consider the charges, taking evidence from Galloway himself, from other party witnesses, viewing media interviews, and hearing character testimony from Tony Benn, among others. The following day, the committee found the charge of bringing the party into disrepute proved, and so expelled Galloway from the Labour Party. Galloway called the Committee's hearing "a show trial" and "a kangaroo court".[26]

[edit] 2005 election



Wikinews has related news: Surprise win for RESPECT Party in UK 2005 General Election


In January 2004, Galloway announced he would be working with members of the Socialist Alliance in England and Wales, and others, under the name Respect - The Unity Coalition, generally referred to simply as Respect. This was despite Galloway having a track record of antipathy toward Trotskyists, and the largest component of Respect was the Socialist Workers Party, which broadly identifies itself as part of the Trotskyist political tradition.
Some former members of the Socialist Alliance, including the Workers Liberty and Workers Power groups, objected to forming a coalition with Galloway, citing his political record, and his refusal to accept an average worker's wage, with Galloway claiming "I couldn’t live on three workers’ wages."[27]
He stood as the Respect candidate in London in the 2004 European Parliament elections, but failed to win a seat after receiving 91,175 of the 115,000 votes he needed.
After his expulsion, he had initially fuelled speculation that he might call a snap by-election before then, by resigning his parliamentary seat, saying:


“
If I were to resign this constituency and there was a by-election I can't guarantee that I would win, but I would guarantee that Tony Blair's candidate would surely lose.
”


Galloway later announced that he would not force a by-election and intended not to contest the next general election in Glasgow. Galloway's Glasgow Kelvin seat was split between three neighbouring constituencies for the May 2005 general election. One of these, the redrawn Glasgow Central constituency, might have been his best chance to win, but had his long-time friend Mohammad Sarwar, the first Muslim Labour MP and a strong opponent of the Iraq War in place; Galloway did not wish to challenge him. After the European election results became known, Galloway announced that he would stand in Bethnal Green and Bow, the area where Respect had its strongest election results and where the sitting Labour MP, Oona King, supported the Iraq War. On 2 December, despite speculation that he might stand in Newham, he confirmed that he would be the candidate for Bethnal Green and Bow.
The ensuing electoral campaign in the seat proved to be a difficult one with heated rhetoric. The BBC reported that Galloway had himself been threatened with death by extreme Islamists from the banned organisation al-Ghurabaa. All the major candidates united in condemning the threats and violence.[28]
On 5 May, Galloway won the seat by 823 votes and made a fiery acceptance speech, saying that Tony Blair had the blood of 100,000 people on his hands and denouncing the returning officer over alleged discrepancies in the electoral process. When challenged in a subsequent televised interview by Jeremy Paxman as to whether he was happy to have removed one of the few black women in Parliament, Galloway replied "I don't believe that people get elected because of the colour of their skin. I believe people get elected because of their record and because of their policies."[29][30]
Oona King later told the Today programme that she found Paxman's line of question inappropriate. "He shouldn't be barred from running against me because I'm a black woman ... I was not defined, or did not wish to be defined, by either my ethnicity or religious background."[31]
Constitutional Affairs minister David Lammy later criticised Galloway for the "manner in which he won that seat, whipping up racial tensions, dividing some of the poorest people in this country, I think was obscene." Lammy further called him a "carpetbagger."[32]
"It's good to be back", Galloway said on being sworn in as MP for Bethnal Green after the May election. He pledged to represent "the people that New Labour has abandoned" and to "speak for those who have nobody else to speak for them."

[edit] Parliamentary participation statistics
After he was suspended and later expelled from the Labour Party, Galloway's participation in Parliamentary activity fell to minimal levels. After speaking in a debate on Iraq on 25 March 2003, Galloway did not intervene in any way in Parliamentary debates or ask any oral questions for the remainder of the Parliament and his participation in House of Commons Divisions was among the lowest of any MP (the website "They Work For You.com"[33] has more details).
Since the 2005 election, his participation rate has remained low, at the end of the year he had participated in only 15% of Divisions in the House of Commons since the general election, placing him 634th of 645 MPs - of the MPs below him in the rankings, one is the former Prime Minister Tony Blair, five are Sinn Féin members who have an abstentionist policy toward taking their seats, three are the speaker and deputy speakers and therefore ineligible to vote, and two have died since the election. Galloway claims a record of unusual activity at a "grass roots" level. His own estimate is that he has made 1,100 public speeches between September 2001 and May 2005.[34]
In November 2005, Galloway's commitment to Parliamentary activity was again called into question when he failed to attend the Report Stage of the Prevention of Terrorism Bill in the House of Commons, despite Respect having urged its members to put pressure on MPs to attend.[35] It was later confirmed that Galloway had been carrying out a speaking engagement in Cork, Ireland on the night (Galloway's spokesman asserted the performance was "uncancellable"[36]).
Although that stage of the bill failed by two votes, it initially appeared that the government won by a majority of only one, in which Galloway's attendance would have tied the vote. However, even in the case of a tie the vote would not have resulted in defeat for the government, because the vote was on an amendment (tightening the standard on what constitutes incitement to terrorism) and the amendment would not have passed. It would have taken three more "aye" votes to pass the amendment. All the same, Respect later put out a statement stating that it regretted the vote had been missed. The statement further claimed that Galloway had cleared his diary for all the subsequent votes on the bill.[37] Galloway did attend a subsequent debate on the Bill, and voted against the final reading of the bill, which passed.[38]
Questioned about this in a Guardian interview, Galloway responded: "I am in the Commons every day, apart from when I was banned. What I don't do is vote in the Commons and the reason for that is really quite banal. Almost every vote there is a yes or no vote, for either the prime minister's motion or the opposition leader's amendment. I almost never wish to vote for either, and there is no provision for abstention."[39]
Galloway voted in support of the government's original draft of the religious hatred bill in 2006, which many people had feared would restrict artistic freedom and free speech.[40]
The only time he has voted so far in 2009 was on 11 February 2009 against a motion for rapid partial privatisation of Royal Mail Plc[41] and the last time he spoke in the House was 15 January 2009[42]

[edit] Suspension from the House of Commons
On 17 July 2007, following a four-year inquiry, the House of Commons Select Committee on Standards and Privileges published its sixth report. The committee concluded that there was "no evidence" that Galloway gained any personal benefit from either the former Iraqi regime, or from the Oil-for-Food Programme. It did not examine the bank account of Galloway's former wife or their joint account.


“
I have not found evidence that Mr Galloway has, directly and personally, unlawfully received moneys from the former Iraqi regime. I have been given evidence by Dr Al-Chalabi of a payment by him of $120,000 to Mr Galloway's former wife, Dr Abu-Zayyad, which derived from a commission payment Dr Al-Chalabi received under the programme. As I do not have access to the bank accounts in question, I do not know whether Mr Galloway benefited in any way from this payment. Nor do I know whether Mr Galloway benefited from a payment of $150,000 to Dr Abu-Zayyad which the US Senate Permanent Sub-Committee on Investigations found to have been made by Mr Fawaz Zureikat out of oil contract commission[43]
”


However, it found that Galloway's use of parliamentary resources to support his work on the Mariam Appeal "went beyond what was reasonable" and recommended he be suspended from the House.


“
Had these been the only matters before us, we would have confined ourselves to seeking an apology to the House. However, Mr Galloway's conduct aimed at concealing the true source of Iraqi funding of the Mariam Appeal, his conduct towards Mr David Blair and others involved in this inquiry, his unwillingness to cooperate fully with the Commissioner, and his calling into question of the Commissioner's and our own integrity have in our view damaged the reputation of the House. In accordance with precedent, we recommend that he apologise to the House, and be suspended from its service for a period of eighteen actual sitting days. As the House is shortly to go into its Summer Recess, we further recommend that Mr Galloway's period of suspension should begin on 8 October, the day it resumes.[7]
”


In response, Galloway stated


“
The Committee appear utterly oblivious to the grotesque irony of a pro-sanctions and pro-war Committee of a pro-sanctions and pro-war Parliament passing judgement on the work of their opponents, especially in the light of the bloody march of events in Iraq since this inquiry began four years ago. They describe that as questioning their integrity and bringing Parliament into disrepute. The House would do well to honestly calibrate exactly how its reputation on all matters concerning the war in Iraq stands with the public before deciding who precisely has brought it into disrepute.[44]
”


At a press conference following publication of the report, Galloway stated "To be deprived of the company for 18 days of the honourable ladies and gentleman behind me [in parliament] will be painful ... but I'm intending to struggle on regardless... What really upset them [the committee] is that I always defend myself... I am not a punchbag. If you aim low blows at me, I'll fight back".[9]

[edit] The next General Election
On 10 August 2007, Galloway confirmed he would stand in Poplar and Limehouse[45][46] where the Labour Party has a notional majority of 3,942.[47] The Labour candidate will be the current Poplar and Canning Town MP Jim Fitzpatrick. Galloway said he had planned to stand down from Parliament at the next election, but was prompted to stay on and fight to win the neighbouring East London constituency after he felt he was unfairly suspended from Parliament for 18 days in October 2007.
On 3 November 2007, the Socialist Workers Party claimed that Galloway had announced he was splitting from Respect after an internal dispute.[48] Galloway denied this, and together with Respect chair Linda Smith, Vice Chair Salma Yaqoob and 16 other members of the National Council, issued an invitation to a Respect Renewal conference, organised on the same day and time as the scheduled Respect conference.[49]

[edit] 'Stress ball' incident
On 22 April 2008, Galloway was campaigning in London from an open-top bus. While touring central London ahead of the next week's elections the MP was knocked unconscious by a rubber stress ball which was thrown at him from a first floor window of a nearby office building by an office worker. The ball, around the size of a tennis ball, hit Galloway on the side of the head which caused him to become dazed and, due to the force of the throw, lose his balance and hit the other side of his head on a part of the bus. After receiving medical treatment, Galloway began campaigning again, and the person who threw the ball was charged with assault.[50]

[edit] Political views



This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards.


Galloway has a reputation as a left-winger and advocates redistribution of wealth, greater spending on welfare benefits, and extensive nationalisation of large industries. He opposes Scottish independence and supports the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. He also supports Irish unification.[citation needed] In the 2007 Scottish Parliament election, George Galloway supported Solidarity,[51] despite not supporting all their policies, such as Scottish independence. Galloway has attracted most attention for his comments on foreign policy, taking a special interest in Libya, Pakistan, Iraq, and the Arab-Israeli conflict.

[edit] Iraq and Saddam Hussein
Galloway opposed the 1991 Gulf War and was critical of the effect the subsequent sanctions had on the people of Iraq. He visited Iraq twice and met senior government figures. His involvement caused some critics to deride him as the "member for Baghdad North". In 1994, Galloway faced some of his strongest criticism on his return from a Middle-Eastern visit during which he had met Saddam Hussein "to try and bring about an end to sanctions, suffering and war". At the meeting, he reported the support given to Saddam by the people of the Gaza Strip and ended his speech with the phrase "Sir, I salute your courage, your strength, your indefatigability,"[52] although Galloway maintains that he was misinterpreted. Galloway's most recent public statement on the matter was in a January 2007 edition of the BBC's Hardtalk in which he states that he was saluting the "Iraqi people".[3] Galloway's speech was translated for Hussein, and Anasal-Tikriti, a friend of Galloways and a Respect candidate, spokesman for the Muslim Association of Britain said: "I understand Arabic and it [Galloway's salutation] was taken completely out of context. When he said "you" he meant the Iraqi people, he was saluting their indefatigability, their resolve against sanctions. Even the interpreter got it right and, in Arabic, says salutes the stand of the Iraqi people'."[53]
In 1999, Galloway was criticised for spending Christmas in Iraq with Tariq Aziz, then Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister. In the 17 May 2005, hearing of the United States Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, Galloway stated that he had had many meetings with Aziz, and characterised their relationship as friendly.[54] After the fall of Saddam, he continued to praise Aziz, calling him "an eminent diplomatic and intellectual person". In 2006 a video surfaced showing Galloway enthusiastically greeting Uday Hussein, Saddam's eldest son, with the title of "Excellency" at Uday's palace in 1999.[55] "The two men also made unflattering comments about the United States and joked about losing weight, going bald and how difficult it is to give up smoking cigars," according to The Scotsman.[56]
In a House of Commons debate on 6 March 2002, Foreign Office Minister Ben Bradshaw said of Galloway that he was "not just an apologist, but a mouthpiece, for the Iraqi regime over many years." Galloway called the Minister a liar and refused to withdraw: "[Bradshaw's] imputation that I am a mouthpiece for a dictator is a clear imputation of dishonour" he said, and the sitting was suspended due to the dispute.[57] Bradshaw later withdrew his allegation, and Galloway apologised for using unparliamentary language. In August 2002, Galloway returned to Iraq and met Saddam Hussein for a second time. According to Galloway, the intention of the trip was to persuade Hussein to re-admit Hans Blix, and the United Nations weapons inspectors into the country.[58]




Galloway signing an asylum seekers petition, sitting on the edge of the StWC stage at the 2005 Make Poverty History rally.


Giving evidence in his libel case against the Daily Telegraph newspaper in 2004, Galloway testified that he regarded Saddam as a "bestial dictator" and would have welcomed his removal from power, but not by means of a military attack on Iraq. Galloway also pointed that he was a prominent critic of Saddam Hussein's regime in the 1980s, as well as of the role of Margaret Thatcher's government in supporting arms sales to Iraq during the Iran/Iraq war. durinLabour MP Tam Dalyell said g the controversy over whether Galloway should be expelled from the Labour Party that "in the mid-1980s there was only one MP that I can recollect making speeches about human rights in Iraq and this was George Galloway."[59] When the issue of Galloway's meetings with Saddam Hussein is raised, including before the U.S. Senate, Galloway has argued that he had met Saddam "exactly the same number of times as U.S. Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld met him. The difference is Donald Rumsfeld met him to sell him guns and to give him maps the better to target those guns."[60] He continued "I met him to try to bring about an end to sanctions, suffering and war".
During a 9 March 2005, interview at the University of Dhaka campus Galloway called for a global alliance between Muslims and progressives: "Not only do I think it’s possible but I think it is vitally necessary and I think it is happening already. It is possible because the progressive movement around the world and the Muslims have the same enemies. Their enemies are the Zionist occupation, American occupation, British occupation of poor countries mainly Muslim countries."[61]

[edit] Israel and the Palestinians
At a 22 July 2006 demonstration (and later in a Socialist Worker op-ed),[62] Galloway stated "Hezbollah has never been a terrorist organisation!"; to which the National Union of Students of the United Kingdom passed a motion condemning Galloway for this. The NUS motion said Galloway is "clearly not ignorant of Hezbollah’s history of violence and the killing of innocents..."[63] The NUS sent two letters to Galloway, explaining their condemnation for his praise of Nasrallah who "has called for the killing of Zionists" and "Hezbollah is an organisation with a history of terrorism." The NUS also noted they are not "accusing [him] of being antisemitic or being a Holocaust denier. What we do condemn is your open support for a leader and an organisation that is antisemitic, terrorist and denies the holocaust."[64]
In an interview with the American paleoconservative radio host Alex Jones, Galloway blamed Israel for creating "conditions in the Arab countries and in some European countries to stampede Jewish people ... into the Zionist state". Jones then alleged that the "Zionists" funded Hitler, to which Galloway replied that Zionists used the Jewish people "to create this little settler state on the Mediterranean," whose purpose was "to act as an advance guard for their own interests in the Arab world..."[65] Engage included commentary on the interview that included: "Critically, however, this 21st century Protocols claims to be pro-Jewish; and has studiously replaced 'The Jews' with new bogeymen, 'The Zionists'," and that the interview is a "perversion of past and present Jewish Zionist life".[66] Labour Liverpool Riverside MP Louise Ellman, who has been derided by Galloway as “Israel’s MP on Merseyside,” said: “I think this is just another demonstration of George Galloway’s total hostility toward Jewish national identity and self-determination”. Eric Moonman, former Labour MP and president of the Zionist Federation of Great Britain and Ireland, characterised Galloway's comments as "manipulating many of the facts," and warned that "we must not underestimate the way in which he can influence groups of people who are somewhat naive about the Middle East and Zionism”. Stan Urman, Director of Justice for Jews from Arab Countries, a group which represents 856,000 Jewish refugees from Arab countries, said: “How does one explain pogroms in 1912 and 1932 well before the establishment of the State of Israel?... His comments do not stand the test of historical fact”. Galloway told the UK's Jewish News that he "[stands] by all those comments," and that Zionism "has turned the people of Einstein and Epstein into one apparently represented by Sharon and Netanyahu.”[67]
In a series of speeches broadcast on Arab television, Galloway described Jerusalem and Baghdad as being "raped" by "foreigners". Ronnie Fraser of the Academic Friends of Israel said his speech was an example of destructive incitement and proves Galloway does not understand history.[68]
Galloway was introduced as “a former member of the British Houses of Parliament” during a live interview with Qatari Al-Jazeera television, to which he responded: “I am still a member of parliament and was re-elected five times. On the last occasion I was re-elected despite all the efforts made by the British government, the Zionist movement and the newspapers and news media which are controlled by Zionism.” Mark Gardner, Director of Communications at the Community Security Trust, said, “This is despicable language for a Member of Parliament to use. Suggestions of Jewish media control can only give encouragement to anti-semites of every type". Ben Novick, Director of Media Relations at BICOM, dismissed Galloway’s allegations about "Zionist control" of the media, adding: “We hope that Al-Jazeera’s premonition of Galloway as a former MP will soon become a reality.”[69]
Galloway expressed support for the Syrian presence of Lebanon 5 months before it ended, telling the Daily Star of Lebanon "Syrian troops in Lebanon maintain stability and protect the country from Israel". In the same article he expressed his opposition to UN resolution 1559 which urged the Lebanese Government to establish control over all its territory.[70]

[edit] Blair and Bush
At the national conference of the National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers, on 30 June 2003, he apologised for describing George W. Bush as a "wolf", saying that to do so defamed wolves:


“
No wolf would commit the sort of crimes against humanity that George Bush committed against the people of Iraq.
”


On 20 November 2004, George Galloway gave an interview on Abu Dhabi TV in which he said:[71]


“
The people who invaded and destroyed Iraq and have murdered more than a million Iraqi people by sanctions and war will burn in Hell in the hell-fires, and their name in history will be branded as killers and war criminals for all time. Fallujah is a Guernica, Falluaja is a Stalingrad, and Iraq is in flames as a result of the actions of these criminals. Not the resistance, not anybody else but these criminals who invaded and fell like wolves upon the people of Iraq. And by the way, those Arab regimes which helped them to do it will burn in the same hell-fires.
”


On 20 June 2005, he appeared on Al Jazeera English to lambast these two leaders and others.[71]


“
Bush, and Blair, and the prime minister of Japan, and Silvio Berlusconi, these people are criminals, and they are responsible for mass murder in the world, for the war, and for the occupation, through their support for Israel, and through their support for a globalised capitalist economic system, which is the biggest killer the world has ever known. It has killed far more people than Adolf Hitler. It has killed far more people than George Bush. The economic system which these people support, which leaves most of the people in the world hungry, and without clean water to drink. So we're going to put them on trial, the leaders, when they come. They think they're coming for a holiday in a beautiful country called Scotland; in fact, they're coming to their trial....Ancient freedoms, which we had for hundreds of years, are being taken away from us under the name of the war on terror, when the real big terrorists are the governments of Britain and the United States. They are the real rogue states breaking international law, invading other people's countries, killing their children in the name of anti-terrorism, when in fact, all they're achieving is to make more terrorists in the world, not less, to make the world more dangerous, rather than less.
”


On 3 February 2006, Galloway was refused entry to Egypt at Cairo Airport and was detained "on grounds of national security", where he had been invited to 'give evidence' at a 'mock trial' of Bush and Blair. After being detained overnight, he said Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak "apologised on behalf of the Egyptian people", and he was allowed to enter the country. After initial derogatory comments from Galloway and a spokesman from his Respect party regarding Mubarak's pro-Western stance and ties to Bush and Blair, Galloway later commented: "It was a most gracious apology which I accept wholeheartedly. I consider the matter now closed."[72][73]
In an interview with Piers Morgan for GQ Magazine in May 2006, Galloway was asked whether a suicide bomb attack on Tony Blair with "no other casualties" would be morally justifiable "as revenge for the war on Iraq?". He answered "Yes it would be morally justified. I am not calling for it, but if it happened it would be of a wholly different moral order to the events of 7/7. It would be entirely logical and explicable, and morally equivalent to ordering the deaths of thousands of innocent people in Iraq as Blair did." He further stated that if he knew about such a plan that he would inform the relevant authorities, saying: "I would [tell the police], because such an operation would be counterproductive because it would just generate a new wave of anti-Muslim, anti-Arab sentiment whipped up by the press. It would lead to new draconian anti-terror laws, and would probably strengthen the resolve of the British and American services in Iraq rather than weaken it. So yes, I would inform the authorities."[74] Some news analysts, notably Christopher Hitchens, took this to be a call for an attack while appearing not to.[75]

[edit] The July 2005 London bombings
In the House of Commons, on the day of the 7 July 2005 London bombings that killed 52 people and injured hundreds, and following a visit to the Royal London Hospital in his constituency where many of the victims had been taken, Galloway condemned the attacks strongly, but argued that they could not be separated from the hatred and bitterness felt among Muslims because of injustices in Palestine, Iraq, and Afghanistan, including injustices, he said, suffered as a result of British foreign policy:


“
I condemn the act that was committed this morning. I have no need to speculate about its authorship. It is absolutely clear that Islamist extremists, inspired by the al-Qaeda world outlook, are responsible. I condemn it utterly as a despicable act, committed against working people on their way to work, without warning, on tubes and buses. Let there be no equivocation: the primary responsibility for this morning's bloodshed lies with the perpetrators of those acts... The hon. Member for North Durham (Mr. Jones), in an otherwise fine speech, described today's events as "unpredictable". They were not remotely unpredictable. Our own security services predicted them and warned the Government that if we [invaded Iraq] we would be at greater risk from terrorist attacks such as the one that we have suffered this morning... Despicable, yes; but not unpredictable. It was entirely predictable and, I predict, it will not be the last.[76][77]
”


(See full text of Galloway's speech in Parliament.)
Winding up the debate for the government in the last moments allotted, Armed Forces Minister Adam Ingram described Galloway's remarks as "disgraceful" and accused Galloway of "dipping his poisonous tongue in a pool of blood."[78] No time remained for Galloway to intervene and he ran afoul of the Deputy Speaker when trying to make a point of order about Ingram's attack. He later went on to describe Ingram as a "thug" who had committed a "foul-mouthed, deliberately timed, last-10-seconds smear."[79] The men had previously clashed over claims in Galloway's autobiography (see below).

[edit] Pakistan coup of 1999
At the time of the 1999 Musharraf coup in Pakistan, he wrote, "In poor third world countries like Pakistan, politics is too important to be left to petty squabbling politicians. Pakistan is always on the brink of breaking apart into its widely disparate components. Only the armed forces can really be counted on to hold such a country together... Democracy is a means, not an end in itself and it has a bad name on the streets of Karachi and Lahore."[80] Nonetheless, on his TalkSport talk radio show, Galloway has been outspoken in criticising the former Pakistani leader Pervez Musharraf.

[edit] Record on LGBT issues
In 1994, Galloway voted in support of the equalisation of the age of consent for homosexuality (which was then 21 years) with that for heterosexuality at 16 years.[81] He also voted against a reduction of the homosexual age of consent to 18.[82] He voted in favour of permitting unmarried and gay couples to adopt children.[83] Critics have claimed that his involvement in the leadership of Respect - which made no explicit mention of gay rights in its 2005 election manifesto[84] and accepted donations from certain homophobic sources[85] - raise questions about commitment to those issues, as does his rather poor voting record in parliamentary divisions, 80% of which he missed, during the 2001-5 parliament while still a Glasgow MP.[86] However, Respect's 2005 conference, in which Galloway took part, resolved that explicit defence of equal rights and calls for the end to all discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people would be made in all of its manifestos and principal election materials.[87]
Galloway's assertion on The Wright Stuff chat show (13 March 2008) that the executed boyfriend of gay Iranian asylum seeker Mehdi Kazemi was a sex offender rather than a homosexual[88] received criticism from Peter Tatchell, among others.[89] Galloway also stated on The Wright Stuff that the case of gay rights in Iran was being used by supporters of war with Iran.

[edit] Humanitarian work

[edit] Mariam Appeal
In 1998 Galloway founded the Mariam Appeal, intended "to campaign against sanctions on Iraq which are having disastrous effects on the ordinary people of Iraq". The campaign was named after Mariam Hamza, a child flown by the fund from Iraq to Britain to receive treatment for leukaemia. The intention was to raise awareness of the suffering and death of hundreds of thousands of other Iraqi children due to poor health conditions and lack of suitable medicines and facilities, and to campaign for the lifting of the Iraq sanctions that many maintained were responsible for that situation.
The fund received scrutiny during the 2003 invasion of Iraq, after a complaint that Galloway used some of the donation money to pay his travel expenses.[90] Galloway said that the expenses were incurred in his capacity as the Appeal's chairman. Although the Mariam Appeal was never a registered charity and never intended to be such, it was investigated by the Charity Commission. The report of this year-long inquiry, published in June 2004,[91] found that the Mariam Appeal was doing charitable work (and so ought to have registered with them), but did not substantiate allegations that any funds had been misused.
A further Charity Commission Report published on 7 June 2007 found that the Appeal had received funds from Fawaz Zureikat that originated from the Oil For Food programme, and concluded that: "Although Mr Galloway, Mr Halford and Mr Al-Mukhtar have confirmed that they were unaware of the source of Mr Zureikat’s donations, the Commission has concluded that the charity trustees should have made further enquiries when accepting such large single and cumulative donations to satisfy themselves as to their origin and legitimacy. The Commission’s conclusion is that the charity trustees did not properly discharge their duty of care as trustees to the Appeal in respect of these donations." They added: "The Commission is also concerned, having considered the totality of the evidence before it, that Mr Galloway may also have known of the connection between the Appeal and the Programme".[92] Galloway responded: "I've always disputed the Commission's retrospective view that a campaign to win a change in national and international policy—a political campaign—was, in fact, a charity."[93]

[edit] Viva Palestina aid convoy
Main article: Viva Palestina
In response to the 2008–2009 Israel–Gaza conflict, in January 2009 Galloway instigated the Viva Palestina aid convoy to the Gaza Strip. On 14 February 2009, after raising over £1 million-worth of humanitarian aid in four weeks, Galloway and hundreds of volunteers launched the convoy comprising approximately 120 vehicles intended for use in the Strip, including a fire engine donated by the Fire Brigades Union (FBU), 12 ambulances, a boat and trucks full of medicines, tools, clothes, blankets and gifts for children. The 5,000-mile route passed through Belgium, France, Spain, Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya and Egypt.[94]
On 20 February, Galloway condemned Lancashire Police after they arrested nine of the volunteers under the Terrorism Act a day before the convoy's launch. Galloway said: "The arrests were clearly deliberately timed for the eve of the departure of the convoy. Photographs of the high-profile snatch on the M65 were immediately fed to the press to maximise the newsworthiness of the smear that was being perpetrated on the convoy." Viva Palestina reported an 80% drop in donations following the broadcast of the arrests and the police allegations on the BBC.[95]
The convoy arrived in Gaza on 9 March,[96] accompanied by approximately 180 extra trucks of aid donated by Libya's Gaddafi Foundation. All the British aid was delivered with the exception of the fire engine and boat which were blocked by the Egyptian government. The boat is to be delivered later in a flotilla of craft which Viva Palestina! intends to take into Gaza harbour.[97]
The Charity Commission opened a statutory inquiry into Viva Palestinia! on 23rd March 2009, citing concerns over the finances, use of funds for non-charitable purposes, and the lack of "substantive response" to their repeated requests.[98] George Galloway admitted that the appeal had not responded to the requests, but argued that a substantive response was anyway due to be passed to the Charity Commission only hours after they launched the inquiry. He argued that the Charity Commission's actions were suspicious, hinting that they might be politically motivated.[99]

[edit] Corruption allegations and other controversies

[edit] Oil for Food

[edit] Daily Telegraph libel case
On 22 April 2003, the Daily Telegraph published an article describing documents found by its reporter David Blair in the ruins of the Iraqi Foreign Ministry. The documents purport to be records of meetings between Galloway and Iraqi intelligence agents, and state that he had received £375,000 per year from the proceeds of the Oil for Food programme. Galloway completely denied the story, and pointed to the nature of the discovery within an unguarded, bombed-out building as being questionable. He instigated legal action against the newspaper, which was heard in the High Court from 14 November 2004.[100]
On 2 December, Justice David Eady ruled that the story had been "seriously defamatory", and that the Telegraph was "obliged to compensate Mr Galloway ... and to make an award for the purposes of restoring his reputation". Galloway was awarded £150,000 damages plus costs estimated to total £1.2 million. The court did not grant leave to appeal; in order to appeal in the absence of leave, the defendants would have to petition the House of Lords.
The libel case was regarded by both sides as an important test of the Reynolds qualified-privilege defence.[101] The Daily Telegraph did not attempt to claim justification (a defence in which the defendant bears the onus of proving that the defamatory reports are true): "It has never been the Telegraph's case to suggest that the allegations contained in these documents are true".[102] Instead, the paper sought to argue that it acted responsibly because the allegations it reported were of sufficient public interest to outweigh the damage caused to Galloway's reputation. However, the court ruled that, "It was the defendants' primary case that their coverage was no more than 'neutral reportage' ... but the nature, content and tone of their coverage cannot be so described."
The issue of whether the documents were genuine was likewise not at issue at the trial. However, it later transpired that the expert hired by Galloway's lawyers, a forensic expert named Oliver Thorne, said "In my opinion the evidence found fully supports that the vast majority of the submitted documents are authentic."[103] He added "It should be noted that I am unable to comment on the veracity of the information within the disputed Telegraph documents, whether or not they are authentic."
The Telegraph lost their appeal on 25 January 2006, the same day as Galloway's Big Brother eviction, and on 15 February 2006, the newspaper announced it would not be seeking leave to appeal.[citation needed]

[edit] Others
The Christian Science Monitor also published a story on 25 April 2003, stating that they had documentary evidence that he had received "more than ten million dollars" from the Iraqi regime. However, on 20 June 2003, the Monitor reported[104] that their own investigation had concluded the documents were sophisticated forgeries, and apologised. Galloway rejected the newspaper's apology, asserted that the affair was a conspiracy against him, and continued a libel claim against the paper.
The Christian Science Monitor settled the claim, paying him an undisclosed sum in damages, on 19 March 2004.[105][106] It emerged that these documents had first been offered to the Daily Telegraph, but they had rejected them. The documents' origin remains obscure.
In January 2004, a further set of allegations were made in al-Mada, a newspaper in Iraq. The newspaper claimed to have found documents in the Iraqi national oil corporation showing that Galloway received (through an intermediary) some of the profits arising from the sale of 19.5 million barrels (3,100,000 m³) of oil. Galloway acknowledged that money had been paid into the Mariam Appeal by Iraqi businessmen who had profited from the UN-run programme, but denied benefiting personally, and maintained that, in any case, there was nothing illicit about this:


“
It is hard to see what is dishonourable, let alone "illicit", about Arab nationalist businessmen donating some of the profits they made from legitimate UN-controlled business with Iraq to anti-sanctions campaigns, as opposed to, say, keeping their profits for themselves.
”


The report of the Iraq Survey Group published in October 2004 claimed that Galloway was one of the recipients of a fund used by Iraq to buy influence among foreign politicians. Galloway denied receiving any money from Saddam Hussein's regime. The Parliamentary Commissioner for Standards had begun an investigation into George Galloway but suspended it when Galloway launched legal action. On 14 December, it was announced that this investigation would resume[citation needed].

[edit] U.S. Senate

[edit] Allegations



Wikinews has related news: U.S. Senate subcommittee accuses UK and French politicians of accepting Iraqi oil vouchers







Evidence presented to the Committee (contract M/9/23); George Galloway's name appears next to Fawaz Zureikat in a different font and at an angle to the rest of the text on that line (number 23 in the list).[107]


In May 2005, a U.S. Senate committee report[108] accused Galloway along with former French minister Charles Pasqua of receiving the right to buy oil under the UN's oil-for-food scheme. The report was issued by the US Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, chaired by Senator Norm Coleman, a Republican from Minnesota. The report cited further documents from the Iraqi oil ministry and interviews with Iraqi officials.
Coleman's committee said Pasqua had received allocations worth 11 million barrels (1,700,000 m3) from 1999 to 2000, and Galloway received allocations worth 20 million barrels (3,200,000 m3) from 2000 to 2003. The allegations against Pasqua and Galloway, both outspoken opponents of U.N. sanctions against Iraq in the 1990s, have been made before, including in an October report by U.S. arms inspector Charles Duelfer as well as in the various purported documents described earlier in this section. But Coleman's report provided several new details. It also included information from interrogations of former high-ranking officials in U.S. custody, including former Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz and former Vice President Taha Yassin Ramadan. Among the claims is that there is new evidence to suggest that the Mariam Appeal, a children's leukaemia charity founded by Galloway, was in fact used to conceal oil payments. The report cites Ramadan as saying under interrogation that Galloway was allocated oil "because of his opinions about Iraq."




Detail of contract M/12/14 (click on image for high-resolution version)


Socialist Worker[109] reported what they say is evidence that the key Iraqi oil ministry documents regarding oil allocations, in which Galloway's name appears six times (contracts M/08/35, M/09/23,[110] M/10/38, M/11/04,[111] M/12/14, M/13/48[112]) have been tampered with. They published a copy of contract M/09/23 and allege that George Galloway's name appears to have been added in a different font and at a different angle to the rest of the text on that line. In these documents (relating to oil allocations 8-13), Galloway is among just a few people whose nationality is never identified, whilst Zureikat is the only one whose nationality is identified in one instance but not in others.[113] Socialist Worker is a publication of the Socialist Workers Party, which at the time was in alliance with Galloway in RESPECT - the Unity Coalition.
Galloway combatively countered the charges by accusing Coleman and other pro-war politicians of covering up the "theft of billions of dollars of Iraq's wealth... on your watch" that had occurred under a post-invasion Coalition Provisional Authority, committed by "Halliburton and other American corporations... with the connivance of your own government."[114][115]

[edit] Galloway's response
On 17 May 2005, the committee held a hearing concerning specific allegations (of which Galloway was one part) relating to improprieties surrounding the Oil-for-Food programme.[116] Attending Galloway's oral testimony and enquiring of him were two of the thirteen committee members: the chair (Coleman) and the ranking Democrat (Carl Levin).[117]
Upon Galloway's arrival in the US, he told Reuters, "I have no expectation of justice from a group of Christian fundamentalist and Zionist activists under the chairmanship of a neo-con George Bush". Galloway described Coleman as a "pro-war, neo-con hawk and the lickspittle of George W. Bush", who, he said, sought revenge against anyone who did not support the invasion of Iraq.
In his testimony, Galloway made the following statements in response to the allegations against him:[118]


“
Senator, I am not now, nor have I ever been, an oil trader, and neither has anyone on my behalf. I have never seen a barrel of oil, owned one, bought one, sold one - and neither has anyone on my behalf. Now I know that standards have slipped in the last few years in Washington, but for a lawyer you are remarkably cavalier with any idea of justice. I am here today but last week you already found me guilty. You traduced my name around the world without ever having asked me a single question, without ever having contacted me, without ever written to me or telephoned me, without any attempt to contact me whatsoever. And you call that justice.
”


He questioned the reliability of evidence given by former Iraqi Vice President Taha Yassin Ramadan, stating that the circumstances of his captivity by American forces call into question the authenticity of the remarks. Galloway also pointed out an error in the report, where documents by The Daily Telegraph were said to have covered an earlier period from those held by the Senate. In fact the report's documents referred to the same period as those used by the The Daily Telegraph, though Galloway pointed out that the presumed forgeries pertaining to the Christian Science Monitor report did refer to an earlier period.
Galloway also denounced the invasion of Iraq as having been based on "a pack of lies" in his Senate testimony. The U.S. media, in reporting his appearance, emphasised his blunt remarks on the war. The British media gave generally more positive coverage; TV presenter Anne Robinson said Galloway "quite frankly put the pride back in British politics" when introducing him for a prime time talk show.[119][120]

[edit] Alleged false or misleading testimony
A report by the then-majority Republican Party staff of the United States Senate Committee on Investigations published in October 2005 asserted that Galloway had given false "or misleading"[121] testimony under oath when appearing before them. The report exhibits bank statements it claims show that £85,000 of proceeds from the Oil-for-Food Programme had been paid to Galloway's then-wife Amineh Abu-Zayyad. Galloway reiterated his denial of the charges and challenged the U.S. Senate committee to charge him with perjury. He claimed Coleman's motive was revenge over the embarrassment of his appearance before the committee in May.[122][123][124]

[edit] Controversies at university debating societies
On 2 November 2006, The Times reported that Galloway was in a fracas at the Oxford Union. He was there to discuss his book (Galloway, George (2006). Fidel Castro Handbook. MQ Publications. ISBN 1-84072-688-1. ). In his speech to the Union, Galloway claimed "that democracy in Cuba is more “free” than in the UK", and when questioned on this, he mentioned "that Oxford students are too privileged to understand what he was talking about".[125] Three former state school students who met him afterwards and disputed this description, allege that Galloway said: "I don’t represent anyone’s views. I represent me. I don’t give a fuck what anyone else thinks."[125] and: "You are confusing me with someone who gives a fuck". When the students tried to get Galloway to apologise, he asked for them to be removed from the room, but they left of their own accord. His assistant, Kevin Ovenden, alleged that the students Galloway swore at carried offensive placards, which was the cause of his behaviour, although the students denied this.[125] His comments have been criticised by several MPs, including Boris Johnson, who said: "there’s no need to swear"; and journalist Steven Pound said: "If he wishes to be respected by anyone other than Fidel Castro he should apologise". A response to the incident on the Oxford Student website can be found.[126]
On 6 November 2006, in a debate at the University College Cork, Ireland, Philosophical Society, speaking in proposition of the motion "That this house believes the US foreign policy is the greatest crime since World War II", Galloway controversially stormed out after being accused of collusion with dictators by the opposition speaker; Irish film and television producer Gerry Gregg. Galloway confronted Gregg directly and insisted that he withdraw the allegations. After Gregg, a former member of Sinn Féin and the Workers' Party, refused to withdraw the comments, Galloway left the auditorium and abandoned the debate. Many of the audience of 500 walked out in sympathy with the MP. Galloway threatened legal action and informed Gregg that his solicitor would contact him the following morning. He also remarked that Gregg would probably be able to afford the lawsuit with an abundance of counterfeited money. The debate continued and the motion was defeated by those present by a clear margin.[127]

[edit] Sectarian attack at airport
On 10 June 2007, Galloway claimed that he was the victim of a sectarian attack at Glasgow Airport.[128][129] He believes that his attackers were on the way home from attending an Orange Order parade in London and that they attacked him because he is a Celtic fan.[130] However, no arrest was made in connection with this.

[edit] Support for Soviet Union
Galloway once stated "I am on the anti-imperialist left... If you are asking did I support the Soviet Union, yes I did. Yes, I did support the Soviet Union, and I think the disappearance of the Soviet Union is the biggest catastrophe of my life. If there was a Soviet Union today, we would not be having this conversation about plunging into a new war in the Middle East, and the US would not be rampaging around the globe."[131] 
[edit] Persona non grata in Canada
On March 20, 2009, Galloway was declared persona non grata by the Canada Border Services Agency on "security grounds" due to his involvement in the Viva Palestina aid convoy to the Gaza Strip following the 2008–2009 Israel–Gaza conflict.[132] The Gaza Strip is governed by Hamas, which is on Canada's list of terrorist organisations. After the convoy arrived on 10 March 2009, Galloway announced at a press conference in Gaza City attended by several senior Hamas officials: "We are giving you now 100 vehicles and all of their contents, and we make no apology for what I am about to say. We are giving them to the elected government of Palestine," adding he would personally donate three cars and 25,000 pounds to Hamas Prime Minister Ismail Haniya.[133] Ten days following, Galloway was on a lecture tour of North America, and was due to speak on war prevention and Gaza at events in Mississauga, Toronto, Ottawa, and Montreal. Galloway was described as an "infandous street-corner Cromwell" by Alykhan Velshi, communications director for Jason Kenney, Minister of Citizenship, Immigration and Multiculturalism, and a former Washington D.C.-based neoconservative lobbyist.[134][135] Galloway described the ban as "idiotic,"[136] and Kenney was accused by Jack Layton, leader of Canada's New Democratic Party (NDP), of being "a minister of censorship."[137]
Toronto Coalition to Stop the War, the group who invited Galloway to Canada, sought an injunction to allow for his entry into Canada for the first speech in Toronto citing their rights to freedom of association and freedom of expression.[132] On March 30, 2009, the Federal Court of Canada upheld the decision of the Canada Border Services Agency.[138] Justice Luc Martineau cited non-citizens "do not have an unqualified right to enter in Canada. The admission of a foreign national to this country is a privilege determined by statute, regulation or otherwise, and not as a matter of right." The judge also noted "a proper factual record and the benefit of full legal argument...are lacking at the present time."[132] The day after the ban was upheld Galloway addressed over 40 Canadian audiences via a web broadcast from New York. [www.http://www.rabble.ca/podcasts/shows/needs-no-introduction/galloway-gaza]

[edit] Publishing/media activities

[edit] Asian Voice
Galloway has been involved in several publishing companies. He owned Asian Voice, which published a newspaper called East from 1996. It later transpired that the Pakistan Government was funding Galloway's company Asian Voice with several hundred-thousand-pounds. "Documents show that the Pakistan government agreed an initial budget for the weekly newspaper of £547,000. According to a memorandum dated 2 January 1996, the Pakistan government proposed to "covertly sponsor" the publication, with money allocated to "the Secret Fund of the High Commissioner for Pakistan in the UK as a special grant for the project".[139] The Commons Committee cleared Galloway of any wrongdoing in this matter.[140]

[edit] Autobiography
His autobiography, I'm Not The Only One, was published on 28 April 2004. The book's title is a quotation from the song "Imagine" by John Lennon. Armed Forces Minister Adam Ingram applied for an interim interdict to prevent the book's publication. Ingram asserted that Galloway's text, which stated that Ingram "played the flute in a sectarian, anti-Catholic, Protestant-supremacist Orange Order band", was in bad faith and defamatory, although Ingram's lawyers conceded that for a year as a teenager he had been a member of a junior Orange Lodge in Barlanark, Glasgow, and had attended three parades. The Judge, Lord Kingarth, decided to refuse an interim interdict, that the balance of the arguments favoured Galloway's publisher, and that the phrase "sectarian, anti-Catholic, Protestant-supremacist" was fair comment on that organisation. Although Ingram was not and never had been a flute-player, the defending advocate observed that "playing the flute carries no obvious defamatory imputation ... it is not to the discredit of anyone that he plays the flute." The judge ruled that Ingram should pay the full court costs of the hearing.[141]

[edit] Celebrity Big Brother
In January 2006 Galloway appeared on the fourth series of the reality show for three weeks. He was seen dancing in a leotard[142] and imitating a cat drinking milk.[143]

[edit] talkSPORT

The Mother of All Talk Shows

Genre
Political discussion


Running time
Friday & Saturday 10.00PM-01.00AM


Country
UK


Languages
English


Home station
talkSPORT


Syndicates
Talk 107


Recording studio
Central London


Opening theme
The theme from Top Cat


On 11 March 2006, Galloway started broadcasting on Britain's biggest commercial radio station, the UTV-owned talkSPORT, and two weeks later started a simultaneous broadcast on Talk 107, TalkSPORT's Edinburgh-based sister station.
Billed as "The Mother Of All Talk Shows", Galloway starts every broadcast by playing the theme from the Top Cat cartoon series. UTV said that Galloway was pulling in record call numbers and the highest ever ratings for its weekend slots, even pulling in more than the station's Football First programme.
On 3 January 2009, a controversy erupted when Galloway was abruptly replaced by the "more balanced" Ian Collins after Galloway was manhandled by riot police at the London protest against the Israel's air bombardment of the Gaza Strip and on the evening of Israel's ground invasion of the territory.[144]

[edit] The Real Deal
On 21 May 2007, Galloway started presenting a television programme known as The Real Deal on Raj TV, a channel aimed at the Asian community in Britain available on Sky channel 171. After 10 Feb 2008, this show is back again and is hosted on the Press TV, a Tehran-based independent channel founded by the government of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

[edit] Comment
A 45 minute weekly show that invites the viewers to engage in lively debate with Galloway, on the most contemporary controversial issues focusing on the world today.[145] It is based from the London-bureau of (the Iranian Government funded) Press TV.

[edit] Mazher Mahmood
In March 2006 Galloway claimed in a statement that Mazher Mahmood, an undercover reporter for the News of the World who uses a disguise as a sheikh to frame celebrities, targeted him in an alleged sting operation. Galloway claims that Mahmood and an accomplice tried but failed to implicate him in illegal party funding, and to agree with anti-Semitic statements. Galloway wrote to the Metropolitan police commissioner and the Speaker of the House of Commons about the incident. He also released photographs of Mahmood and revealed other aspects of his activities.[146][147] The News of the World lost a High Court action to prevent publication of photographs of Mahmood.[148]

[edit] Fidel Castro Handbook
Galloway also published the Fidel Castro Handbook, a biography of the former Cuban President in 2006 (MQ Publications. ISBN 1-84072-688-1).

[edit] Friction Books
In 2005 Galloway established Friction Books, an imprint for fiction and non-fiction, with longstanding associate Ron McKay.[149] Friction claimed its purpose was to publish "books that burn, books that cause controversy and get people talking". So far it has released one book: Paco Ignacio Taibo II novel An Easy Thing.[150]

[edit] Big Brother's Big Mouth
Galloway acted as the guest presenter for the E4 companion programme to the 2007 edition of Big Brother, Big Brother's Big Mouth, from 5 June to 8 June 2007.

[edit] TV and film appearances

Question Time (numerous appearances) - Panelist answering questions
As a policeman, in Ugly Rumours "War", 25 February 2007[151]
Our Story Our Voice (2007)
The Friday Night Project (2007)
30 Greatest Political Comedies (2006) (TV)
The Wright Stuff - Panelist
The Late Late Show (1 programmes, 2006)
Richard & Judy (2 programmes, 2006)
Tubridy Tonight (2006)
Celebrity Big Brother (23 episodes, 2006)
Have I Got News For You - Panelist (2003)


[edit] Daily Record column
From 25 June 2007 Galloway has a column in the Daily Record giving his views on Scottish politics.

[edit] As an orator



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: George Galloway


Galloway is widely viewed as an adept wordsmith and debater. For example, according to the Boston Globe he is "known, even in the highly articulate world of British politics, for his memorable turns of phrase",[152] whereas The Times finds that he has "the gift of the Glasgow gab, a love of the stage and an inexhaustible fund of self-belief."[153] The Guardian finds him "renowned for his colourful rhetoric and combative debating style"[154] and the Spectator once awarded him Debater of the Year. Sometimes this general acknowledgement of Galloway's rhetorical capacity is accompanied by criticism that he is evasive (Scotsman, "ducked the question"[155]).

[edit] See also

Oil-for-Food Program Hearings


[edit] References


^ "Galloway expelled by Labour". BBC. 2003-10-24. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/3205889.stm. 
^ "Profile of George Galloway", BBC News, 22 April 2003. Retrieved on 8 September 2007.
^ a b Sackur, Stephen (2007-01-26). "Hardtalk: George Galloway". BBC NEWS. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/programmes/hardtalk/6302175.stm. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ George Galloway VS the Media at YouTube
^ "Galloway vows to fight Canada ban". Press Association. 2009-03-20. http://www.google.com/hostednews/ukpress/article/ALeqM5i7mjH5DqRUPtglyx80I-rwwNuZkA. 
^ "Canada bans outspoken British MP". Canadian Press. 2009-03-20. http://www.google.com/hostednews/canadianpress/article/ALeqM5hX38vJfOPChjr1BQrZaWgO0jx43Q. 
^ a b Select Committee on Standards and Privileges Sixth Report
^ BBC: Galloway ordered out of Commons; House of Commons debates (Monday, 23 July 2007): Point of Order: Standards and Privileges
^ a b Tempest, Matthew (2007-07-17). "Galloway facing suspension from Commons". Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2007/jul/17/houseofcommons.voluntarysector. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ Ross, Peter (2005-08-07). "I’d like a peaceful life like anyone else, but undoubtedly I rise to the occasion". Sunday Herald. http://www.findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qn4156/is_20050807/ai_n14858456/pg_1. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "THE BISTO KIDS LIVE ON". Scots Independent. 2001-12-14. http://www.scotsindependent.org/2001/011214/index.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ a b "George Galloway". Dundee Courier and Advertiser. 1981-04-24. 
^ Scott, Kirsty; MacAskill, Ewen. "Special Reports: Two views of George: all heart or a pain in the neck". Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2003/apr/23/uk.iraq4. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "Remarkable idea to raise funds for city". Dundee Courier and Advertiser: pp. 3. 1981-08-19. 
^ 'Glasgow Hillhead' (PA number 263) in "General Election Constituency Guide", BBC Data, 1987.
^ Jamie Wilson, Owen Bowcott and Vikram Dodd (2003-04-23). "Charity, fundraiser or political campaign?". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2003/apr/24/uk.labour1. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ a b Michael Paterson (2003-04-23). "Leadership of War on Want marked by turbulence and tension". Daily Telegraph. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/iraq/1428223/Leadership-of-War-on-Want-marked-by-turbulence-and-tension.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ Simon Hattenstone (2002-09-16). "Saddam and me". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2002/sep/16/iraq.interviews. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ Karen McVeigh (2004-12-03). "The rise and fall and rise again of 'Gorgeous' George". Scotsman. http://news.scotsman.com/georgegalloway/The-rise-and-fall-and.2585112.jp. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ a b "A maverick's life". Channel 4. 2006-12-02. http://www.channel4.com/news/2004/12/week_1/02_galloway2.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ a b The Almanac of British Politics by Robert Waller and Byron Criddle (Routledge, London, Fourth Edition 1991 and Fifth Edition 1996) ISBN 0-415-00508-6 and ISBN 0-415-11805-0
^ "Galloway: I'll fight expulsion". BBC News. 2003-04-07. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/2923849.stm. Retrieved on 2006-09-18. 
^ "Galloway accuses prime minister of "lying"". Indie West. 2003-04-01. http://praxsys.net/indiewest/news_page.php?story=1. Retrieved on 2006-09-18. 
^ "Galloway pours petrol on the flames". Telegraph. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/main.jhtml?xml=/news/2005/08/05/wgall05.xml. Retrieved on 2006-12-16. 
^ "The Observer: Politics: MP may be tried as traitor". The Guardian. http://observer.guardian.co.uk/politics/story/0,6903,944392,00.html. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ Galloway, George, The Trial: How New Labour Purged George Galloway, Bookmarks. ISBN 1-898876-47-9.
^ "Indefatigably yours". The Scotsman. http://thescotsman.scotsman.com/features/Indefatigably-yours.2428680.jp. Retrieved on 2008-05-10. 
^ "Politics: Election 2005: Galloway told to avoid his home". BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/vote_2005/frontpage/4467147.stm. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "ELECTION 2005 - WEBLOG - Paxman v Galloway". BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/vote_2005/blog/4519553.stm. Retrieved on 2006-10-25. 
^ Murphy, Joe (2005-04-22). "Racial tension could set East End alight, says MP". Evening Standard (London). 
^ Oona King - BBC Radio 4 Interview (RAM file)
^ "Sour taste as Oona ousted in battle of Bethnal Green". Black Information Link. 2005-05-06. http://www.blink.org.uk/pdescription.asp?key=6994&grp=66. Retrieved on 2007-05-29. 
^ ""They Work For You.com"". http://www.theyworkforyou.com. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ BBC Radio 4, Broadcasting House, 22 May 2005, interview with George Galloway.
^ "put pressure on MPs to attend". http://www.respectcoalition.org/index.php?ite=912. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "Special Reports: Lib Dems and Galloway defend absences". The Guardian. http://politics.guardian.co.uk/terrorism/story/0,15935,1614944,00.html. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "RESPECT - The Unity Coalition - News". http://www.respectcoalition.org/?ite=917. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "Voting Record: George Galloway MP, Bethnal Green & Bow (10218)". Public Whip. http://www.publicwhip.org.uk/division.php?date=2005-03-10&number=141&display=allvotes. Retrieved on 2005-10-07. 
^ Question Time, interview by Hannah Pool, The Guardian 6 September 2007
^ Tempest, Matthew (2006-01-31). "Religious hatred bill 'will not harm free speech'". Guardian. http://politics.guardian.co.uk/homeaffairs/story/0,,1698850,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ url=http://www.publicwhip.org.uk/mp.php?mpn=George_Galloway&mpc=Bethnal_Green_%26amp%3B_Bow&display=allvotes
^ "House of Commons debates: Gaza (Point of Order)". TheyWorkForYou.com. 2009-01-15. http://www.theyworkforyou.com/debates/?id=2009-01-15d.396.0&s=George+Galloway#g445.0. Retrieved on 2009-03-21. 
^ House of Commons - Standards and Privileges - Sixth Report
^ Galloway response to 18-day suspension Respect, 17 July 2007]
^ "George Galloway challenges Jim Fitzpatrick, Labour MP for Poplar & Canning Town, to a public debate on their visions for the future". George Galloway MP’s official website. 2007-08-10. http://www.georgegalloway.com. 
^ "Galloway to contest next election". BBC News. 2007-08-10. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/6940517.stm. 
^ "Poplar and Limehouse". UK Polling Report. 2007-08-12. http://ukpollingreport.co.uk/guide/seat-profiles/poplarandlimehouse. 
^ Respect
^ Respect Renewal - Home
^ "George Galloway dazed and bruised by stress ball". https://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/politics/article3798875.ece. 
^ "Galloway on Scots campaign trail". BBC News. 2007-04-25. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/scotland/6592201.stm. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/George_Galloway". http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/George_Galloway. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. [unreliable source?]
^ Morley, David (2007-09-30). "George And His Dragons". Sunday Herald. http://www.sundayherald.com/life/people/display.var.1724203.0.george_and_his_dragons.php. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs". http://www.senate.gov/~gov_affairs/index.cfm?Fuseaction=Hearings.Detail&HearingID=232. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "Video Shows British MP Met With Hussein's Son". Fox News. http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,182797,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-16. 
^ "Ugly times on way for Gorgeous George". The Scotsman. http://news.scotsman.com/index.cfm?id=127252006. Retrieved on 2007-05-16. [dead link]
^ Kallenbach, Michael (2002-03-07). "Yesterday in Parliament". Telegraph. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1386986/Yesterday-in-Parliament.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "Free Speech Radio News lineup - Friday, 9 August 2002". http://www.fsrn.org/news/20020809_news.html. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "Two views of George: all heart or a pain in the neck". The Guardian. 2003-04-23. http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2003/apr/23/uk.iraq4. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "Times Online". The Times. 2005-03-18. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/world/article523583.ece. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "Galloway calls for global unity between Islamic and Left forces". Iraq News Network. http://www.iraq-news.de/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=461&Itemid=113. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ George Galloway: Hizbollah is right to fight Zionist terror|29Jul06|Socialist Worker
^ Motions and amendments submitted to NUS NEC (03-08-06)
^ "NUS NEC". officeronline.co.uk. 2006-08-23. http://www.officeronline.co.uk/blogs/samlebens/272845.aspx. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. [unreliable source?]
^ George Galloway MP: Elements Within Government Using Terror Provocation tactics
^ ENGAGE - The Zionists are Our Misfortune - Mark Gardner on George Galloway
^ Kahtan, Daniel (2005-09-30). "Galloway Blasts Israel". TotallyJewish.com. http://www.totallyjewish.com/news/national/?content_id=1655. 
^ Lappin, Yaakov. "'Jerusalem raped by foreigners'". Ynetnews. http://www.ynetnews.com/articles/0,7340,L-3122173,00.html. 
^ Sholem, Alex (1 December 2005). "Galloway Under Fire After TV Slur". TotallyJewish.com. http://www.totallyjewish.com/news/national/?content_id=2144. 
^ Glackin, Michael; Rasmussen, Will (2004-12-07). "Galloway declares support for Barghouti in PA election". Lebanon Daily Star. http://www.dailystar.com.lb/article.asp?categ_id=2&article_id=10758. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ a b "British MP George Galloway on Al-Jazeera: Calls for Bush, Blair, Koizumi, and Berlusconi to Stand Trial". Special Dispatch (MEMRI) 918. 2005-06-08. http://www.memri.org/bin/articles.cgi?Page=archives&Area=sd&ID=SP91805. Retrieved on 2008-08-22. 
^ "Mubarak issues an apology to George Galloway". RESPECT. 2006-02-05. http://www.respectcoalition.org/?ite=981. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "Galloway 'receives Egypt apology'". BBC News. 2006-02-05. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/4683522.stm. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "Blair attack 'morally justified'". BBC News. 2006-05-29. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/5020222.stm. Retrieved on 2006-11-26. 
^ Christopher Hitchens (2006-05-30). "Furious George". Slate.com. http://www.slate.com/id/2142635. Retrieved on 2006-11-26. 
^ RESPECT Website press release
^ "House of Commons Hansard Debates for 7 July 2005 (pt 26)". http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200506/cmhansrd/cm050707/debtext/50707-26.htm. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "House of Commons Hansard Debates for 7 July 2005 (pt 30)". http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200506/cmhansrd/cm050707/debtext/50707-30.htm#stpa_398. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "House of Commons Hansard Debates for 7 July 2005 (pt 31)". http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200506/cmhansrd/cm050707/debtext/50707-31.htm. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ Mail on Sunday, 10 November 1999
^ Hansard 21 February 1994 Division 136
^ Hansard 21 February 1994l [Division 137]
^ "Galloway, George". Guardian. http://politics.guardian.co.uk/person/howtheyvoted/0,9310,-1864,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "Galloway’s Party in Gay Rights Row". http://www.ukgaynews.org.uk/Archive/2005nov/2202.htm. Retrieved on 2006-01-07. 
^ "Gay group tells Galloway to cut ties with donor". http://politics.guardian.co.uk/otherparties/story/0,9061,1650526,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-01-07. 
^ "Policy report — 'Equal gay rights' compared to George Galloway MP, Glasgow, Kelvin"
^ "Respect National Conference 2005". Left Alternative. 2005-11-21. http://www.respectcoalition.org/?ite=932. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ Grew, Tony (2008-03-14). "Galloway claims Iran executes sex offenders, not gays". Pink News. http://www.pinknews.co.uk/news/articles/2005-7132.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ Tatchell, Peter (2008-03-26). "Galloway's Iranian propaganda?". Guardian: p. Comment is free. http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2008/mar/26/gallowaysiranianpropaganda. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "Galloway cleared on appeals fund". BBC News. 2004-06-28. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/politics/3847287.stm. Retrieved on 2006-10-12. 
^ "The Mariam Appeal". http://www.charity-commission.gov.uk/investigations/inquiryreports/mariam2.asp. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ Kennedy, Dominic; Bone,James (2007-06-08). "Galloway ‘may have known Saddam was funding Iraq appeal’". Times Online. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/politics/article1901474.ece. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "Galloway reaction to Charity Commission report into Mariam Appeal". Left Alternative. 2007-06-08. http://www.respectcoalition.org/?ite=1469. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "Gaza-bound aid convoy leaving UK". BBC. 2009-02-14. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/7889948.stm. Retrieved on 2009-02-16. 
^ "Galloway Condemns Lancashire Police Action Over Gaza Aid Convoy". OfficialWire. 2009-02-20. http://www.officialwire.com/main.php?action=posted_news&rid=87166&catid=2. Retrieved on 2009-02-20. 
^ "UK aid convoy crosses into Gaza". BBC. 2009-03-09. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/7932764.stm. Retrieved on 2009-03-20. 
^ "Viva Palestina! news". http://www.vivapalestina.org/. Retrieved on 2009-03-24. 
^ http://www.charity-commission.gov.uk/news/gazapr.asp
^ http://www.charity-commission.gov.uk/news/gazapr.asp
^ HQ03X0206, George Galloway MP vs. Telegraph Group Ltd.
^ "Reynolds v. Times Newspapers Ltd and Others [1999 UKHL 45; [1999] 4 All ER 609; [1999] 3 WLR 1010 (28 October 1999)"]. http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKHL/1999/45.html. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "UK: Politics: Galloway wins Saddam libel case". BBC News. 2004-12-02. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/politics/4061165.stm. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ The Committee Office (2007-01-19). "Report by Mr Oliver Thorne on the Daily Telegraph documents". written at Westminster. House of Commons. http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/cm200607/cmselect/cmstnprv/909/909we35.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ Bowers, Faye; Prusher, Ilene R (2003-06-20). "Galloway papers deemed forgeries". Christian Science Monitor. http://www.csmonitor.com/2003/0620/p01s03-woiq.html. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "Galloway accepts libel damages". BBC News. 2004-03-19. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/politics/3549679.stm. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "Galloway wins damages for Iraq libel". Guardian. 2004-03-20. http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2004/mar/20/uk.iraq. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ Simon Assaf and Charlie Kimber, assisted by Ann Ashford (2005-05-21). "How they forged case against Galloway". Socialist Worker. http://www.socialistworker.co.uk/art.php?id=6511. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/shared/bsp/hi/pdfs/11_05_05_psi_report.pdf" (PDF). BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/shared/bsp/hi/pdfs/11_05_05_psi_report.pdf. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "How they forged case against Galloway". Socialist Worker. 2005-05-21. http://www.socialistworker.co.uk/article.php4?article_id=6511. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:Galloway_Evidence.jpg". http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:Galloway_Evidence.jpg. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:Galloway_Evidence_2.jpg". http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:Galloway_Evidence_2.jpg. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:Galloway_Evidence_4.jpg". http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:Galloway_Evidence_4.jpg. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ See Duelfer Report Annex B for the original and full version of the oil voucher accounting forms.
^ "Galloway tongue-lashes Coleman; committee documents show Bush political friends and family paid Oil-for-Food kickbacks to Saddam Hussein" — Online Journal 5/21/05
^ Media react to blistering hearing — BBC News 5/17/05
^ http://hsgac.senate.gov/audio_video/051705video.ram video
^ Full Realvideo and Transcripts of SubCommittee 'Galloway' Hearing
^ "Galloway v the US Senate: transcript of statement". The Times. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/article/0,,3-1616578,00.html. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "Galloway and the mother of all invective". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk_news/story/0,,1486417,00.html. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ "UK ovation for U.S. showdown MP - 19 May 2005". CNN. http://edition.cnn.com/2005/WORLD/europe/05/19/galloway/. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ Report Concerning the Testimony of George Galloway before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations - MAJORITY STAFF OF THE PERMANENT SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS 10/25/05
^ "Galloway challenges US senators". BBC News. 2005-10-25. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/politics/4374534.stm. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "RESPECT - The Unity Coalition - News". http://www.respectcoalition.org/?ite=905. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ Bone, James; Charter, David (2005-10-25). "US Senate 'finds Iraq oil cash in Galloway's wife's bank account'". The Times. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/article/0,,11069-1841396,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ a b c Cherwell24 : 'I don't give a f**k'
^ "Gallo go away". Oxford Student. 2006-11-02. http://www.oxfordstudent.com/mt2006wk4/Editorial/gallo_go_away. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "157th Session (2006/2007)". UCC Philosophical Society Wiki. http://www.uccphilosoph.com/wiki/index.php/157th_Session_(2006/2007). Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "Galloway tells of mob attack". The Scotsman. 2007-06-11. http://news.scotsman.com/georgegalloway/Galloway-tells-of-mob-attack.3293958.jp. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "Probe into Galloway attack claims". BBC News. 2007-06-11. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/scotland/glasgow_and_west/6740775.stm. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "Galloway in sectarian belly attack". Metro. 2007-06-11. http://www.metro.co.uk/news/article.html?in_article_id=52505. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ Hattenstone, Simon (2002-09-16). "Saddam and me". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2002/sep/16/iraq.interviews. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ a b c Judgement for THE TORONTO COALITION TO STOP THE WAR et al vs. MINISTER OF PUBLIC SAFETY & EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS et al
^ http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5hVfkS_BAzf-CcTYE6baYi9PN5jwA
^ George Galloway banned from Canada
^ "Galloway vows to fight Canada ban". Press Association. 2009-03-20. http://www.google.com/hostednews/ukpress/article/ALeqM5i7mjH5DqRUPtglyx80I-rwwNuZkA. 
^ "Canada bans outspoken British MP". Canadian Press. 2009-03-20. http://www.google.com/hostednews/canadianpress/article/ALeqM5hX38vJfOPChjr1BQrZaWgO0jx43Q. 
^ "Banned British MP vows to get into Canada". The Vancouver Sun. 2009-03-23. http://www.vancouversun.com/news/British+banned+deeds+words+Canada/1419636/story.html. 
^ http://www.ctv.ca/servlet/ArticleNews/story/CTVNews/20090330/galloway_decision_090330/20090330?hub=TopStories
^ Watson, Richard (2003-04-26). "Why the MP went begging to Pakistan". Telegraph. Archived from the original on 2007-05-14. http://goliath.ecnext.com/coms2/summary_0199-2715607_ITM. 
^ Jamie Wilson, Owen Bowcott and Vikram Dodd (2008-08-21). "Charity, fundraiser or political campaign?". Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2003/apr/24/uk.labour1. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "George Galloway - Minister fails to stop Galloway sectarian claim". The Scotsman. http://news.scotsman.com/topics.cfm?tid=818&id=476962004. Retrieved on 2006-12-14. 
^ Galloway 'not ashamed' by antics. BBC News. 27 January 2006.
^ Galloway: I was promised soapbox. BBC News. 27 January 2006.
^ Cohen, Tamara (2009-01-04). "George Galloway axed from TalkSPORT after scuffle with police at pro-Palestinian rally". Daily Mail. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1105103/George-Galloway-axed-TalkSPORT-scuffle-police-pro-Palestinian-rally.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-06. 
^ "Press TV - Programs". Press TV. http://www.presstv.com/Programs/. Retrieved on 2008-09-18. 
^ Galloway threatens to expose 'fake sheikh' | Media | MediaGuardian
^ RESPECT - The Unity Coalition - News
^ Gibson, Owen (2006-04-07). "Paper drops appeal to keep anonymity of undercover reporter". Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2006/apr/07/pressandpublishing.otherparties. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ Campbell, Duncan (2004-12-23). "Galloway brings Zapatista to book". Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2004/dec/23/books.media. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ 3am Literature: MEXICAN NEW WAVE
^
‹ The template below (YouTube) is being considered for deletion. See templates for deletion to help reach a consensus. ›
Tony Blair's Peace Video at YouTube
^ "Britain's Galloway turns into media hero". Boston Globe. http://www.boston.com/news/world/europe/articles/2005/05/19/britains_galloway_turns_into_media_hero/. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ Macintyre, Ben. "The Day Garrulous George fired at the Senate with both barrels". Times Online. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/world/article523692.ece. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ Happold, Tom. "Bagdhad, Washington, South Shields". Guardian. http://politics.guardian.co.uk/otherparties/story/0,9061,1501189,00.html. Retrieved on 2005-12-15. 
^ Chamberlain, Gethin (2005-05-18). "Galloway bluster fails to convince Senate". Scotsman. http://news.scotsman.com/georgegalloway/Galloway-bluster-fails-to-convince.2627434.jp. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: George Galloway



[edit] Video

George Galloway interviews David Strahan author of “The Last Oil Shock – A Survival Gide to the Imminent Extinction of Petroleum Man”
Galloway speaks at Manchester Town Hall, UK, 29 February 2004 about launch of Respect. Video, Chris Edwards
Galloway speaks in Manchester, UK, 22 November 2003 on future of anti-war movement. Video, Chris Edwards
Galloway speaks in Manchester, UK, 8 November 2003 about next steps for the anti-war movement. Video, Chris Edwards
George Galloway speaks in Manchester, UK, 9 May 2003 about media witch hunt. Video, Chris Edwards
The Fruitceller - Huge Video archive for the Anti-War Movement
Galloway talking about war with Iran
Video of Galloway Vs. Hitchens Debate September 2005
Galloway speaks at Manchester University, UK, 26 November 2006 about British politics after Blair. Video, Chris Edwards
Galloway speaks in Manchester, UK, 21 February 2006 about local elections. Video, Chris Edwards
Galloways speaks in Manchester, UK, 6 October 2004 about European Social Forum. Video, Chris Edwards


[edit] General

GeorgeGalloway.com Official website.
RESPECT RENEWAL Official party website
RESPECT - The Unity Coalition The previous Official party website.
Official George Galloway MySpace page
CouchTripper Unofficial forum, high quality downloads & large archive of Galloway on radio and TV, where other sites come to stock up.
George Galloway's talkSPORT page
Galloway downloads on SpideredNews.com. George Galloway media downloads (including talkSPORT shows).
Guardian Unlimited Politics - Ask Aristotle: George Galloway MP
TheyWorkForYou.com - George Galloway MP
The Public Whip - George Galloway MP voting record
George Galloway interviewed by eyebrow magazine September 2007
mp3s of Galloway speaking at London International Peace Conference, 10 December 2005
Galloway's participation at the International Peace Conference December 2005
IMDB Profile
Christopher Hitchens' attack leaflet of selected Galloway statements, including quotes admiring unelected dictators.
George Galloway Is Gruesome, Not Gorgeous by Christopher Hitchens, Slate.com, 13 September 2005.


"MP George Galloway and Christopher Hitchens Debate the Iraq War". Baruch Performing Arts Center. 2005-09-14. http://www.baruch.cuny.edu/bpac/calendar/event.php?id=142. Retrieved on 2008-08-21.  (Prequel to Galloway vs Hitchens debate held at CUNY)


Hitchens, Christopher (2007-07-23). "Parliament's damning report about Saddam apologist George Galloway". Slate.com. http://www.slate.com/id/2170981/. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 


[edit] Articles and news reports

Galloway, George Respect at the Crossroads
Channel 4 News - Galloway:"I'm no punchbag" - July 2007
FactCheck - "That's a fact." With all due respect, George... - April 2005
Al-Jiran. Iraqi author Fadhil Rashad: George Galloway, You Will Be Tried Just Like Your Friend and Benefactor Saddam Hussein. 30 November 2005.
The Independent George Galloway vs. Christopher Hitchens, 16 September 2005.
Zirin, Dave. Mr. Galloway Goes to Washington. Znet 13 September 2005
Sunday Herald George Galloway - personal interview 7 August 2005.
BBC. George Galloway interview on "What's the problem?". 10 June 2005.
McKay, Ron. Galloway Beats New Labour and the Ghost Voters. Sunday Herald. 8 May 2005.
Greenslade, Roy. No need for balance. The Guardian. 13 May 2005.
Waraich, Omar The Galloway Saga: Smearing an Antiwar Politician. CounterPunch. 24 February 2005.
BBC. Galloway Wins Saddam Libel Case. 2 December 2004.
Abu Dhabi TV. British MP Galloway: US and British Governments Will Burn in "Hell-Fires". 20 November 2004.
The Scotsman. Galloway Iraq appeal cleared of impropriety over funds. 29 June 2004.
The Guardian. Special Report: George Galloway Expulsion from the Labour Party. 25 April 2004.
Al Jazeera. So what do I believe in? transcript of speech. 30 October 2003.
Watson, Richard. Why the MP went begging to Pakistan. The Daily Telegraph, 26 April 2003.
The Scotsman. Indefatigably yours. Personal interview, 19 May 2003.
New Worker. End the blockade on Iraq 1998 interview
Alliance for Workers Liberty. Would You Vote For This Man?: "Respect" and George Galloway. Solidarity 3/70. 31 March 2005.
Tatchell, Peter. Galloway's Iranian propaganda? The Guardian, 26 March 2008.


[edit] US Congressional testimony & related

mp3s of Galloway's speeches made during his tour of US, 13-24 December 2005
Unspinning the US’s web of lies against Galloway, Socialist Worker, 5 November 2005
mp3 of George Galloway vs. Christopher Hitchens, 14 September 2005
Galloway lied over Iraqi oil payments, says Congress report, Rupert Cornwell, The Independent, 25 October 2005
Christopher Hitchens' documentation of the Oil for Food issue, September 2005
Unmitigated Galloway, Christopher Hitchens, Weekly Standard, 30 May 2005
"Galloway and the mother of all invective", The Guardian newspaper, 18 May 2005
Link to full video recording of hearing in this BBC News report:Galloway takes on US oil accusers, BBC, 17 May 2005
UK's Galloway blisters US policy on Iraq on MSNBC Crooks & Liars: audio and video
Two Fox News reports: one short and sceptical; the other is a longer recording of Galloway's testimony, Fox News, 18 May 2005
Transcript of Galloway's comments, CNN
Full Text of Galloway's statements, Times online
Galloway's statements including senators questions
US Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, 12 May 2005, "Report on oil allocations granted to Charles Pasqua & George Galloway"



Parliament of the United Kingdom


Preceded by
Roy Jenkins
Member of Parliament for Glasgow Hillhead
1987 – 1997
Constituency abolished


New constituency
Member of Parliament for Glasgow Kelvin
1997 – 2005


Preceded by
Oona King
Member of Parliament for Bethnal Green and Bow
2005–present
Incumbent









v • d • e

talkSPORT





Breakfast

Alan Brazil · Ronnie Irani






Morning

Andy Townsend · Mike Parry






Afternoon

Hawksbee & Jacobs






Drive

Adrian Durham  · Ian Wright






Evening

Danny Kelly · Stan Collymore · Jim Proudfoot  · Nigel Pearson · Alvin Martin  · Ray Houghton






Talk

George Galloway · Ian Collins · Adrian Goldberg · Mike Graham  · David Prever






Matchday Live

Adrian Durham · Stan Collymore · Nigel Pearson · Alvin Martin






Weekend

Alvin Martin · Jason Cundy · Ray Houghton · Ian Danter · Andy Goldstein · Jeremy Kyle






Football

Ray Houghton · Alvin Martin · Jason Cundy · Alan Brazil · Ian Wright · Andy Townsend · Micky Quinn ·






Fishing

Keith Arthur · Nigel Botherway






Rugby

Russell Hargreaves · Will Carling · Jeff Probyn · Simon Ward · Chris Sheasby






Golf

Rupert Bell · Bob Bubka · Rob Lee · Richard Boxall






Cricket

Jack Bannister · Jon Norman · Ronnie Irani · Andrew McKenna · Andy Jacobs






Horse Racing

Derek Thompson









Persondata


NAME
George Galloway


ALTERNATIVE NAMES



SHORT DESCRIPTION
politician


DATE OF BIRTH
16 August 1954


PLACE OF BIRTH
Dundee, Scotland


DATE OF DEATH



PLACE OF DEATH






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Galloway"
Categories: 1954 births | Living people | Anti-apartheid activists | Anti-Iraq War activists | Anti-poverty advocates | Big Brother UK contestants | British anti-war activists | British radio personalities | British republicans | Labour Party politicians (UK) | Labour MPs (UK) | Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for English constituencies | Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for Scottish constituencies | People from Dundee | People from Glasgow | Personae non gratae | Respect – The Unity Coalition politicians | Scots of Irish descent | Scottish Christian socialists | Scottish columnists | Scottish political writers | Scottish Roman Catholics | Sex scandal figures | UK MPs 1987-1992 | UK MPs 1992-1997 | UK MPs 1997-2001 | UK MPs 2001-2005 | UK MPs 2005- | United Nations Oil-for-Food scandalHidden categories: All pages needing cleanup | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2008 | All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead external links since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 | Wikipedia introduction cleanup | Cleanup from May 2007 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Deutsch
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
עברית
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Suomi
Svenska
Українська









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 13:00.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
