













24 Hour Party People - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "24_Hour_Party_People";
		var wgTitle = "24 Hour Party People";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "360138";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 279946064;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); 24 Hour Party People

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





Please help improve this article or section by expanding it. Further information might be found on the talk page. (February 2007)







This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2007)




24 Hour Party People



The US theatrical poster.


Directed by
Michael Winterbottom


Produced by
Andrew Eaton


Written by
Frank Cottrell Boyce


Starring
Steve Coogan
Paddy Considine
Danny Cunningham
Shirley Henderson
Lennie James
Sean Harris
Peter Kay


Cinematography
Robby Müller


Editing by
Trevor Waite


Distributed by
Pathé (UK)
United Artists (USA)


Release date(s)
 5 April 2002
 9 August 2002


Running time
117 min.


Country
UK


Language
English


24 Hour Party People is a 2002 film about Manchester's popular music community from 1976 to 1992, and specifically about Factory Records. It was written by Frank Cottrell Boyce and directed by Michael Winterbottom.
It begins with the punk rock era, and moves through the 1980s into the "Madchester" scene of the late 1980s and early 1990s. The main character is Tony Wilson, a news reporter for Granada Television and the head of Factory Records (played by comedian Steve Coogan), and the narrative largely follows his career, while also covering the major Factory artists, especially Joy Division and New Order, A Certain Ratio, The Durutti Column, and the Happy Mondays.
The movie is a dramatisation based on a combination of real events, rumours, urban legends and the imaginations of the scriptwriter - as the movie makes clear. In one scene featuring Howard Devoto (played by Martin Hancock) having sex with Wilson's first wife, the real Devoto, an extra in the scene, turns to the camera and says "I definitely don't remember this happening". The fourth wall is frequently broken, with Wilson (who also acts as the narrator of the movie) frequently commenting on events as they occur directly to camera, at one point declaring that he's "being postmodern, before it's fashionable".
The actors are often intercut with real contemporary concert footage, including the famous Sex Pistols gig at the Lesser Free Trade Hall.




Contents


1 Plot
2 Cast

2.1 Cameos


3 Soundtrack

3.1 Track list
3.2 Other songs in film


4 Details
5 See also
6 References
7 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Plot
The story opens in the late 1970s in the Pennines, where Tony Wilson, reporting for Granada Television embarks on a hang gliding adventure, despite not having any training. After crashing several times and receiving a "rather unfortunate" injury to his coccyx, he walks away, then turns to the camera, breaking the fourth wall, saying the scene was symbolic of what is to come on many levels. "I don't want to say too much, don't want to spoil it. I'll just say one word: 'Icarus'. If you get it, great. If you don't, that's fine too. But you should probably read more."
Wilson is dissatisfied with his job as a television news reporter, finding stories like the hang-gliding stunt unfulfilling, telling his producer, Charles, "I'm a serious fucking journalist ... I went to Cambridge."
Wilson then attends a concert in June 1976 at Manchester Lesser Free Trade Hall by the Sex Pistols (the Buzzcocks were also to perform but weren't ready). Despite only being attended by 42 people, Wilson cites the concert as a great historical event that would inspire attendees to "go out and perform wondrous deeds".
For his part, Wilson, the host of a music show, So It Goes, decides to move beyond just putting bands on television and get into promoting concerts. With some friends, actor Alan Erasmus and Rob Gretton, Wilson starts a weekly series of punk rock shows at a Manchester club. It is during the opening night, and a performance by a band Gretton manages called Joy Division, that Wilson is caught by his wife, Lindsay, getting fellatio from a woman in the back of the club owner Don Tonay's "nosh van". She then retaliates by having sexual intercourse in a toilet cubicle with the Buzzcocks' Howard Devoto, and is caught by Tony. The real Devoto, portraying a janitor cleaning the bathroom sink, then turns to the camera and says "I definitely don't remember this happening."
Wilson continues in the music business, and with his friends, starts Factory Records, signing Joy Division, led by erratic, brooding lead singer Ian Curtis, as the first band. Showing his dedication, Wilson prepares a record contract for the band, written in his own blood, giving the artists full control over their music.
Irascible producer Martin Hannett is hired to record Joy Division, and though he is difficult to work with – he orders the Joy Division drummer to dismantle his drum kit and reassemble it on the roof of the studio – the results are the work of genius, and soon Joy Division has a hit record.
The success is short-lived, however, when, just before Joy Division is to tour the United States, Ian Curtis (Sean Harris) commits suicide by hanging himself. The news is broken to Wilson as he's preparing to do a news report about a town crier, and the distraught Wilson asks the crier to report on Curtis' death.
Joy Division, however, beats the odds and survives the death of its lead singer, and goes on to rename itself New Order, and record the hit song "Blue Monday".
Factory Records continues with the building of its nightclub, The Haçienda.
Another hit band, the Happy Mondays, are signed, and the beginning of the ecstacy-fuelled rave culture is witnessed.




Steve Coogan as Tony Wilson.


Despite all the success, Factory Records is losing vast amounts of money, both on The Haçienda and on recording its bands. In one scene, Erasmus points out that the label is actually losing 5 pence for every copy of the 12-inch single for "Blue Monday" that is sold because the intricately designed packaging by Peter Saville costs more than what the records are being sold for. Saville is additionally portrayed for having a reputation for missing deadlines, turning in posters and tickets for club dates after the events have already occurred. The Factory partners try to save the label by selling it to London Records, but when it is revealed that Factory doesn't actually hold valid contracts with any of its artists, the deal falls through.
Other troubles include the drug use by the Happy Mondays' Shaun Ryder, who holds the master tapes for the band's troubled fourth studio album hostage until Wilson gives him some money, and tries to shoot Wilson with a pistol. When the master tape is played, it turns out that Ryder, despite being hailed by Wilson as "the greatest poet since Yeats", was unable to write any lyrics, so all the tracks to album, expensively recorded in Barbados, are instrumentals.
Hannett has also become unpredictable, attempting at one time to shoot Wilson with a pistol. He has a falling out with Factory Records over finances, and spirals into decline due to alcohol and drug abuse and massive weight gain, and dies at age 42.
Meanwhile, various aspects of Wilson's life are glossed over, and Wilson takes a moment to acknowledge this, quickly skimming over his divorce from his first wife, Lindsay, his second marriage and children, and his relationship with beauty queen Yvette Livesey. His own drug problems and professional difficulties are also glossed over. "I'm a minor character in my own story," Wilson explains, saying that the stories about the music, as well as Manchester itself, are more important.

[edit] Cast




Steve Coogan as Tony Wilson
Conrad Murray as Bailey Brother
John Thomson as Charles (Granada TV producer)
Shirley Henderson as Lindsay Wilson (Tony's first wife)
Paddy Considine as Rob Gretton (Joy Division/New Order manager)
Lennie James as Alan Erasmus (co-founder of Factory)
Andy Serkis as Martin Hannett (producer)
Sean Harris as Ian Curtis (Joy Division singer)
John Simm as Bernard Sumner (Joy Division/New Order guitarist)
Ralf Little as Peter Hook (Joy Division/New Order bassist)
Danny Cunningham as Shaun Ryder (Happy Mondays singer)
Chris Coghill as Bez (Happy Mondays dancer and percussionist)
Paul Popplewell as Paul Ryder (Happy Mondays bassist, brother of Shaun)
Ron Cook as Derek Ryder (the Ryder brothers' father)
Raymond Waring as Vini Reilly (singer-guitarist of The Durutti Column)
Dave Gorman as John the Postman (postman/punk singer)
Peter Kay as Don Tonay
Enzo Cilenti as Peter Saville (Factory graphic designer)
Rob Brydon as Ryan Letts (journalist)
Simon Pegg as Paul Morley
Kenny Baker as Zookeeper
Christopher Eccleston as Boethius
John Stammers as Marc Riley (scene deleted)



[edit] Cameos
Several notable people make cameo appearances in the film, including:

Tony Wilson as "Wheel of Fortune" director
Nigel Pivaro (best known as Terry Duckworth in Coronation Street) as Actor at Granada
Howard Devoto as cleaner/himself
Trevor Johnson (Designer) as Ben Kelly
Rowetta as herself
Terri Seymour as herself
Paul Ryder as head Hacienda doorman
Smug Roberts
Clint Boon
Shaun Goater
Elizabeth Dawn (best known as Vera Duckworth in Coronation Street)
Martin Coogan
Jon DaSilva
Mark E. Smith
Mike Pickering
Dave Haslam
Vini Reilly
Keith Allen
Gary Mounfield (a.k.a. Mani)
Fiona Allen (as cloakroom girl at the Hacienda, where she actually once worked on the door)





[edit] Soundtrack


24 Hour Party People





Soundtrack by various artists


Released
 April 9, 2002
 August 20, 2002


Recorded
1976—2002


Genre
Punk rock
Post-punk
Madchester
Electronica


Label
FFRR (UK)
WEA (US)


Producer
Pete Tong


Professional reviews




Allmusic  link
Metacritic (86/100) link
NME (8/10) link
Pitchfork (7/10) link
PopMatters (no rating) link
Rolling Stone  link
Yahoo! Music (no rating) link




Alternate cover



US album cover.



The soundtrack to 24 Hour Party People features songs by artists closely associated with Factory Records who were depicted in the film. These include Happy Mondays, Joy Division (later to become New Order) and The Durutti Column. Manchester band the Buzzcocks are featured, as is The Clash. The album begins with "Anarchy in the U.K." by the Sex Pistols, the band credited in the film with inspiring Factory Records co-founder Tony Wilson to devote himself to promoting music.
New tracks recorded for the album include Joy Division's "New Dawn Fades", from a concert performance by New Order with Moby and Billy Corgan.

[edit] Track list

"Anarchy in the U.K." (Sex Pistols) – 3:33
"24 Hour Party People (Jon Carter Mix)" (Happy Mondays) – 4:30
"Transmission" (Joy Division) – 3:36
"Ever Fallen in Love (With Someone You Shouldn't've)?" (Buzzcocks) – 2:42
"Janie Jones" (The Clash) – 2:06
"New Dawn Fades" (Moby and Billy Corgan with New Order) – 4:52
"Atmosphere" (Joy Division) – 4:09
"Otis" (The Durutti Column) – 4:16
"Voodoo Ray" (A Guy Called Gerald) – 2:43
"Temptation" (New Order) – 5:44
"Loose Fit" (Happy Mondays) – 4:17
"Pacific State" (808 State) – 3:53
"Blue Monday" (New Order) – 7:30
"Move Your Body" (Marshall Jefferson) – 5:15
"She's Lost Control" (Joy Division) – 4:44
"Hallelujah (Club Mix)" (Happy Mondays) – 5:40
"Here To Stay" (New Order) – 4:58
"Love Will Tear Us Apart" (Joy Division) – 3:24


[edit] Other songs in film
Several songs appear in the film but are not on the soundtrack album, including:

"No Fun", performed by the Sex Pistols (archival video footage)
"Money's Too Tight to Mention", performed by Simply Red (archival video footage)
"Make Up to Break Up", performed by Siouxsie & the Banshees (archival video footage)
"The Passenger", performed by Iggy Pop (archival video footage)
"In The City", performed by The Jam (archival video footage)
"No More Heroes", performed by The Stranglers (archival video footage)
"Wimoweh", performed by Karl Denver (archival video footage)
"Lazyitis", performed by Happy Mondays (archival video footage)
"Whoopin' the Blues", performed by Sonny Terry (from the film Stroszek, during Ian Curtis suicide scene)
"World in Motion", performed by New Order
"Dream of a Child", performed by The Durutti Column
"Digital", performed by Joy Division
"Flight", performed by A Certain Ratio
"Skipscada", performed by A Certain Ratio
"Tart Tart", performed by Happy Mondays
"Wrote for Luck", performed by Happy Mondays
"Kinky Afro", performed by Happy Mondays
"Sunshine and Love", performed by Happy Mondays
"Satan", performed by Orbital
"Go", performed by Moby
"Louie Louie", performed by Factory All-Stars
"King of the Beats", performed by Mantronix


[edit] Details





Lists of miscellaneous information should be avoided. Please relocate any relevant information into appropriate sections or articles. (August 2008)



A novelization, 24 Hour Party People, based on the screenplay for the film, was written by Tony Wilson and released in 2003 - it is by no means the first example of someone writing a biography of themselves that is not, technically, an autobiography.


The title (and opening theme) for the film comes from the song "Twenty Four Hour Party People" by the Happy Mondays, from their album Squirrel and G-Man Twenty Four Hour Party People Plastic Face Carnt Smile (White Out).


As a nod from Tony Wilson and Factory Records, the film was given its own Factory catalogue number (FAC 401). The film website is tagged as FAC 433.


Tony Wilson states on the commentary on the DVD that he attempted to get some scenes removed from the film (his portrayal as a bad father and cheating on his wife) and he also wanted the gold discs removed from the Factory headquarters set as they never had any on the walls. Wilson also takes strong issue with the scene showing neo-fascists attending a Joy Division concert, as there is no record of neo-fascists ever attending a Joy Division concert nor any record of them causing a riot, as implied by the film.


Tony Wilson also had to apologise to Mick Hucknall for the comments made in the film about him ("ginger nut ... Mick Hucknall", and towards the end, "his music's rubbish, and he's a ginger.")


In an interview with Q magazine in the April 2003 issue, a reader asked Hucknall his view to the comment about the insult on him at the end. Hucknall retorted that Coogan plays Alan Partridge well because he is Alan Partridge in real life.


The Haçienda shown in the film was not the real club. It was a replica built in a Manchester factory space; the original club was closed in 1997 and demolished shortly after, replaced by luxury apartments. [1]


The scenes based in the Russell Club were actually filmed in Jilly's Rockworld, a rock nightclub in Manchester, as the original venue had long since been demolished.


The opening hang gliding sequence incorporates footage of Coogan with actual footage of the real Wilson's hang gliding story from Granada Television.


[edit] See also

So It Goes (TV series)
Control (2007 film)


[edit] References


[edit] External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: 24 Hour Party People



Official site
24 Hour Party People at the Internet Movie Database
24 Hour Party People at Allmovie
24 Hour Party People at Rotten Tomatoes
24 Hour Party People at Metacritic
24 Hour Party People at the Movie Review Query Engine
Unofficial site at Joy Division Central
Unofficial fan site of the Happy Mondays








v • d • e

Joy Division





Ian Curtis • Peter Hook • Stephen Morris • Bernard Sumner
Steve Brotherdale • Terry Mason • Tony Tabac





Albums

Unknown Pleasures • Closer






Compilations

Still • Substance • Warsaw • Permanent • Heart and Soul • Martin Hannett's Personal Mixes • The Best of Joy Division






Live albums

Preston Warehouse • Les Bains Douches  • The Peel Sessions • Joy Division The Complete BBC Recordings • Let The Movie Begin






Singles and EPs

An Ideal for Living • "Transmission" • Licht und Blindheit • "Komakino" • "Love Will Tear Us Apart" • "Atmosphere/She's Lost Control"






Related

Discography • New Order • Factory Records • 24 Hour Party People • Martin Hannett • Peter Saville • Tony Wilson • Rob Gretton • Alan Erasmus • Control • Joy Division (2007 film)













v • d • e

Films directed by Michael Winterbottom





1980s

Rosie the Great (1989)






1990s

Forget About Me (1990) · Love Lies Bleeding (1993) · Under the Sun (1994) · Butterfly Kiss (1995)  · Go Now (1995)  · Jude (1996)  · Welcome to Sarajevo (1997)  · I Want You (1998)  · With or Without You (1999)  · Wonderland (1999)






2000s

The Claim (2000)  · 24 Hour Party People (2002)  · In This World (2003)  · Code 46 (2003)  · 9 Songs (2004)  · A Cock and Bull Story (2006)  · The Road to Guantanamo (2006)  · A Mighty Heart (2007)  · Genova (2008)  · The Shock Doctrine (2009)  · The Killer Inside Me (2010)









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/24_Hour_Party_People"
Categories: 2002 films | Biographical films | British films | Camcorder films | Comedy-drama films | English-language films | Film4 films | Films about music and musicians | Films directed by Michael Winterbottom | Music from Manchester | Punk film | Joy Division | Madchester | Rock films | Films set in the 1970s | Films set in the 1980s | Screenplays by Frank Cottrell BoyceHidden categories: Articles to be expanded since February 2007 | All articles to be expanded | Articles lacking sources from April 2007 | All articles lacking sources | Articles with trivia sections from August 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
Español
Français
Galego
Italiano
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Português
Русский
Suomi
Svenska









 This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 04:35.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
