













Medieval technology - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Medieval_technology";
		var wgTitle = "Medieval technology";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "1390149";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280923384;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Medieval technology

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 




Medieval treadwheel crane






Reading Saint Peter with eyeglasses (1466)


Medieval technology refers to the technology used in medieval Europe under Christian rule. After the Renaissance of the 12th century, medieval Europe saw a radical change in the rate of new inventions, innovations in the ways of managing traditional means of production, and economic growth.[1] The period saw major technological advances, including the adoption of gunpowder and the astrolabe, the invention of spectacles, and greatly improved water mills, building techniques, agriculture in general, clocks, and ships. The latter advances made possible the dawn of the Age of Exploration. The development of water mills was impressive, and extended from agriculture to sawmills both for timber and stone, probably derived from Roman technology. By the time of the Domesday Book, most large villages in Britain had mills. They also were widely used in mining, as described by Georg Agricola in De Re Metallica for raising ore from shafts, crushing ore, and even powering bellows.
European technical advancements in the 12th to 14th centuries were either native to Europe, usually from Roman antecedents, or adapted from cross-cultural exchanges through trading networks with the Islamic world, China, and India. Often, the revolutionary aspect lay not in the inventions themselves, but in their application to political and economic power. Though gunpowder had long been known to the Chinese, it was the Europeans who fully perfected its military potential, precipitating European expansion and eventual imperialism in the Modern Era.
Also significant in this respect were advances within the fields of navigation. The compass and astrolabe along with advances in shipbuilding, enabled the navigation of the World Oceans and thus domination of the worlds economic trade. Gutenberg’s printing press made possible a dissemination of knowledge to a wider population, that would not only lead to a gradually more egalitarian society, but one more able to dominate other cultures, drawing from a vast reserve of knowledge and experience.
The technical drawings of Guido da Vigevano and Villard de Honnecourt can be viewed as medieval forerunners of later Renaissance works by artist-engineers such as Taccola or da Vinci.




Contents


1 Medieval technologies

1.1 Civil technologies
1.2 Military technologies


2 Renaissance technology
3 Footnotes
4 See also
5 References
6 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Medieval technologies
A list of some important medieval technology. Circa is the approximate date or first mention of a technology in Medieval Europe. Technologies were often a matter of cultural exchange and date and place of first inventions are not listed here (see main links for a more complete history of each).

[edit] Civil technologies


Technology
Circa
Notes


Arabic Numerals
13th
First recorded mention in Europe 976, first widely published in 1202 by Fibonacci with his Liber Abaci.


Artesian well
1126
A thin rod with a hard iron cutting edge is placed in the bore hole and repeatedly struck with a hammer, underground water pressure forces the water up the hole without pumping. Artesian wells are named after the town of Artois in France, where the first one was drilled by Carthusian monks in 1126.


Blast furnace
1150-1350
European cast iron first appears in Middle Europe (for instance Lapphyttan in Sweden, Dürstel in Switzerland and the Märkische Sauerland in Germany) around 1150,[2] in some places according to recent research even before 1100.[3] Technique considered to be an independent European development.[4]


Compass
12th
The first mention of the directional compass is in Alexander Neckam's On the Natures of Things, written in Paris around 1190.[5] Either transmitted from China or the Arabs or an independent European innovation. Dry compass invented in the Mediterranean around 1300.[6]


Functional button
13th
Buttons with buttonholes used to fasten or close garment, being the most convenient method before the introduction of the zipper, appear in the 13th century Germany as indigenous innovation.[7] Became soon widespread with the rise of snug-fitting clothing.


Grindstones
834
Rough stone, usually sandstone, used to sharpen Iron. A long and difficult process, the first rotary grindstone (turned with a leveraged handle) in Medieval Europe occurs in the Utrecht Psalter.


Heavy plough
5th->8th
The heavy wheeled plow with a moldboard first appears in the 5th century in Slavic lands, is then introduced into Northern Italy (the Po Valley) and by the 8th century it was used in the Rhineland. Essential in the efficient use of the rich, heavy, often wet soils of Northern Europe, its use allowed the area's forests and swamps to be brought under cultivation.


Hops
11th
Added to beer, importance lay primarily in its ability to preserve beer and improve transportability for trade.


Horizontal loom
11th
Horizontal and operated by foot-treadles, faster and more efficient.


Horse collar
6th->9th
Multiple evolutions from Classical Harness (Antiquity), to Breast Strap Harness (6th) to Horse collar (9th). Allowed more horse pulling power, such as with heavy ploughs.


Horseshoes
9th
Allowed horse to adapt to non-grassland terrains in Europe (rocky terrain, mountains) and carry heavier loads. Possibly known to the Romans and Celts as early as 50 BC.


Hourglass
1338
Reasonably dependable, affordable and accurate measure of time. Unlike water in a clepsydra, the rate of flow of sand is independent of the depth in the upper reservoir, and the instrument is not liable to freeze. Hourglasses are a medieval innovation (first documented in Siena, Italy).


Liquor
12th
Alcohol distillation by way of Islamic alchemists, initially used as medicinal elixir. Popular remedy for the Black Death during the 14th century; "national" drinks like vodka, gin, brandy come into form.


Magnets
12th
First reference in the Roman d'Enéas, composed between 1155 and 1160.


Mechanical clocks
13th->14th
Weight-driven clock a European innovation. Used in clock towers.


Mirrors
1180
First mention of "glass" mirror in 1180 by Alexander Neckham who said "Take away the lead which is behind the glass and there will be no image of the one looking in."


Movable type printing press
1453
Invented by Johannes Gutenberg. His great innovation was not the printing itself, but instead of using readily-carved plates as before, he used separate letters (types) from which the printing plates for pages were made up. This meant the types were recyclable and a page cast could be made up far faster than with readily-carved plates.


Oil paint
ca. 1410
As early as the 13th century, oil was used to add details to tempera paintings. Major breakthrough by Flemish painter Jan van Eyck around 1410 who is credited with introducing a stable oil mixture.


Paper
13th
Invented in China, transmitted through Islamic Spain to Europe in the 13th century. Practically from the start processed by water-powered mills.


Quarantine
1377
Initially a 40-day-period, the Quarantine was introduced by the Republic of Ragusa as measure of disease prevention related to the Black Death. Later adopted by Venice from where the practice spread all around in Europe.


Rat traps
1170s
First mention of a rat trap in the medieval romance Yvain, the Knight of the Lion by Chrétien de Troyes.


Rib vault
12th
Essential element for the rise of Gothic architecture. Allowed vaults to be built for the first time over rectangles of unequal lengthes. Also greatly facilitated scaffolding. Largely replaced older groin vault.


Rolling mill
15th
Used on producing metal sheet of even thickness. First used on soft, malleable metals, such as lead, gold and tin. Leonardo da Vinci described rolling mill for wrought iron.


Stern-mounted rudders
1180s
First depiction of a pintle-and gudgeon rudder on church carvings dating to around 1180. First appeared with cogs in the North and Baltic Sea, quickly spread to Mediterranean.[8]


Segmental arch bridge
1345
The Ponte Vecchio in Florence is considered medieval Europe's first stone segmental arch bridge.


Silk
6th
Manufacture of silk began in Eastern Europe in the 6th, in Western Europe in the 11th or 12th centuries. Imported over the Silk Road since Antiquity. Technnology of "silk throwing" mastered in Tuscany in the 13th century. The silk works used waterpower and some regard these as the first mechanized textile mills.


Soap
9th
Soap came into widespread European use in the 9th century in semi-liquid form, with hard soap perfected by Arabs in the 12th century.


Spectacles
1280s
European innovation. Florence, Italy. Convex lenses, of help only to the far-sighted. Concave lenses were not developed prior to the 15th century.


Spinning wheel
13th
Brought to Europe probably from India.


Tidal Mills
7th
Medieval invention, harnessed power of tides to turn grain mills.[9] [10]


Treadwheel crane
1220s
Earliest reference to a treadwheel (magna rota) in archival literature in France about 1225,[11] followed by an illuminated depiction in a manuscript of probably also French origin dating to 1240.[12] Earliest uses of harbor cranes are documented for Utrecht in 1244.[13]


Watermark
1282
Medieval innovation to mark paper products and to discourage counterfeiting. First introduced in Bologna, Italy.


Water hammer
1100s (latest)
Used in metallurgy on forging the metal blooms from bloomeries and Catalan forges. Replaced manual hammerwork. Eventually superseded by steam hammers. in 1800s.


Wine press
1100s
First practical means of applying pressure on a plane surface. The principle later used for printing press.


Vertical windmills
1180s
Invented in Europe as pivotable post mill, first surviving mention of one comes from Yorkshire in England in 1185. Efficient at grinding grain or draining water. Later also as stationary tower mill.


Wheelbarrow
1170s
Proved useful in building construction, mining operations, and agriculture. Literary evidence for the use of wheelbarrows appeared between 1170 and 1250 in North-western Europe. First depiction in a drawing by Matthew Paris in the middle of the 13th century.



[edit] Military technologies


Technology
Circa
Notes


Arched saddle
1050s
Enabled mounted knights to wield lance underarm and preventing the charge turning into an unintentional pole-vault. This innovation gave birth to true shock cavalry, enabling the knights to charge on full gallop, thus exceeding the shock value of the cataphracts.


Cannon
1324
Introduced via the Arabs or Mongols, cannons are first recorded in Europe at the siege of Metz in 1324. In 1350 Petrarch wrote "these instruments which discharge balls of metal with most tremendous noise and flashes of fire...were a few years ago very rare and were viewed with greatest astonishment and admiration, but now they are become as common and familiar as any other kinds of arms."


Combined arms tactics
1333
The battle of Halidon Hill 1333 was the first battle where intentional and disciplined combined arms infantry tactics were employed. The English men-at-arms dismounted aside the archers, combining thus the staying power of super-heavy infantry and striking power of their two-handed weapons with the missiles and mobility of the archers. Combining dismounted knights and men-at-arms with archers was the archetypal Western Medieval battle tactics until the battle of Flodden 1513 and final emergence of firearms.


Corned gunpowder
14th, late
First practiced in Western Europe, corning the black powder allowed for more powerful and faster ignition of cannon. Also facilitated storage and transportation to operational area, thus constituting a crucial step in the evolution of gunpowder warfare.


Counterweight trebuchet
12th
Powered solely by the force of gravity, these catapults revolutionized medieval siege warfare and construction of fortifications by hurling huge stones unprecedented distances. Originating somewhere in the eastern Mediterranean basin, counterweight trebuchets were introduced in the Crusader states by the 1120s, Byzantium by the 1130s and in the Latin West by the second half of the century.[14]


Longbow with massed, disciplined archery
13th
Having a high rate of fire and penetration power, the longbow contributed to the eventual demise of the medieval knight class. Used particularly by the English to great effect against the French cavalry during the Hundred Years' War (1337-1453).


Plate armour
14th, late
Apex of pre-industrial personal armour in terms of body protection and metallurgical skills involved. Large and complete full plates of armour appear by the end of the 14th century.


Steel crossbow
14th, late
European innovation. Came with several different cocking aids to enhance draw power, making the weapons also the first hand-held mechanical crossbows.


Spurs
11th
Invented by the Normans, appearing at the same time as cantled saddle. Enabled the knight to control his horse with his feet instead of hands, replacing the whip and leaving his arms free. Rowel spurs familiar from cowboy films were already known in the 13th century. Gilded spurs were the ultimate symbol of the knighthood - even today someone is said to "earn his spurs" by proving his or her worthiness.


Stirrup
6th
Invented by the steppe nomads in what is today Mongolia and northern China in the 4th century and transmitted west. Appeared in Byzantium in the 6th, in the Carolingian Empire in the 8th century. Allowed mounted knight to wield sword and strike from a distance leading to a great advantage for mounted cavalry.



[edit] Renaissance technology
Main article: Renaissance technology
In the 15th century, the pace of technical advancements quickens with such diverse innovations like the printing press, linear perspectivity, patent law, double shell domes or bastions.

[edit] Footnotes


^ Alfred Crosby described some of this technological revolution in his The Measure of Reality : Quantification in Western Europe, 1250-1600 and other major historians of technology have also noted it.
^ Archaeological Investigations on the Beginning of Blast Furnace-Technology in Central Europe
^ Radomir Pleiner: Vom Rennfeuer zum Hochofen. "Die Entwicklung der Eisenverhüttung", 9.-14. Jh., in: Uta Lindgren (ed.): Europäische Technik im Mittelalter. 800-1400, Berlin 2001 (4th ed.), pp. 249-256 (255) ISBN 3-7861-1748-9
^ Karl-Heinz Ludwig, Volker Schmidtchen: Propyläen Technikgeschichte. Metalle und Macht 1000-1600, Berlin 1997, p.389f. ISBN 3-549-05633-8
^ Barbara M. Kreutz, “Mediterranean Contributions to the Medieval Mariner's Compass,” Technology and Culture, Vol. 14, No. 3. (Jul., 1973), p.368
^ Frederic C. Lane, “The Economic Meaning of the Invention of the Compass,” The American Historical Review, Vol. 68, No. 3. (Apr., 1963), p.615ff.
^ Lynn White: "The Act of Invention: Causes, Contexts, Continuities and Consequences", Technology and Culture, Vol. 3, No. 4 (Autumn, 1962), pp. 486-500 (497f. & 500)
^ * Lawrence V. Mott, The Development of the Rudder, A.D. 100-1600: A Technological Tale, Thesis May 1991, Texas A&M University
^ Colin Rynne: Milling in the 7th Century – Europe’s earliest tide mills, in: Archaeology Ireland 6, 1992
^ Tide Mill from 787 AD. found at the Nendrum Monastic Site, Northern Ireland
^ Andrea Matthies: Medieval Treadwheels. Artists' Views of Building Construction, Technology and Culture, Vol. 33, No. 3 (Jul., 1992), p.515
^ Andrea Matthies: Medieval Treadwheels. Artists' Views of Building Construction, Technology and Culture, Vol. 33, No. 3 (Jul., 1992), p.526
^ Michael Matheus: "Mittelalterliche Hafenkräne," in: Uta Lindgren (ed.): Europäische Technik im Mittelalter. 800-1400, Berlin 2001 (4th ed.), pp. 345 ISBN 3-7861-1748-9
^ Paul E. Chevedden, "The Invention of the Counterweight Trebuchet: A Study in Cultural Diffusion", Dumbarton Oaks Papers, No. 54 (2000), pp.71-116 (104f.)



[edit] See also

Renaissance of the 12th century
Latin translations of the 12th century
History of technology
Medieval transport


[edit] References

Andrews, Francis B. The Medieval Builder and His Methods. New York: Barnes & Noble, 1973. Medieval construction technique, with a brief chapter on tools.
Blair, John, and Nigel Ramsay, editors. English Medieval Industries: Craftsmen, Techniques, Products London: Hambledon Press. 1991. ISBN 1-85285-326-3
Crosby, Alfred. The Measure of Reality : Quantification in Western Europe, 1250-1600. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Gies, Frances and Joseph. Cathedral, Forge, and Waterwheel: Technology and Invention in the Middle Ages. New York: Harper Collins, 1994. ISBN 0-06-092581-7
Gimpel, Jean. The Medieval Machine: The Industrial Revolution of the Middle Ages. London: Pimlico, (2nd ed. 1992) ISBN 0-14-004514-7
Long, Pamela O.,editor. Science and Technology in Medieval Society. in Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, vol 441 New York: New York Academy of Sciences, 1985 ISBN 0-89766-277-6 A series of papers on highly specific topics.
Singer, Charles, editor. History of Technology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1954. Volumes II and III cover the Middle Ages with great scope and detail. This is the standard work.
White, Lynn, Jr. Medieval technology and social change. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1962.
White, Lynn, Jr., "The Study of Medieval Technology, 1924-1974: Personal Reflections" Technology and Culture 16.4 (October 1975), pp. 519-530. A chronology and basic bibliography of landmark studies.


[edit] External links

The Medieval Technology Pages
Technology in the Medieval Age








v • d • e

Middle Ages






Architecture · Art · Cuisine · Demography · Literature · Poetry · Medicine · Music · Philosophy · Science · Technology · Warfare · Household · Slavery









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medieval_technology"
Categories: Middle Ages | History of technology | Science in the Middle Ages 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Français
Português









 This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 19:36 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
