













John Updike - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "John_Updike";
		var wgTitle = "John Updike";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "15824";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282407375;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); John Updike

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


John Updike



John Updike receiving the National Medal of Arts in 1989.


Born
March 18, 1932(1932-03-18)
Reading, Pennsylvania, U.S.A.


Died
January 27, 2009 (aged 76)
Danvers, Massachusetts, U.S.A.


Occupation
novelist, short story writer, literary critic


Genres
Modernism


Notable work(s)
Rabbit Angstrom







Influences






Ernest Hemingway, Henry Green, James Joyce, Søren Kierkegaard, Franz Kafka, Marcel Proust, Truman Capote, Vladimir Nabokov, J. D. Salinger, John Cheever, Karl Barth, William Shakespeare, James Thurber[1]















Influenced






Ann Beattie, George Saunders, Nicholson Baker, Ian McEwan, Rick Moody, Joseph O'Neill, Martin Amis, Lloyd Kropp, Ceridwen Dovey, David Baddiel, Jonathan Lethem, Richard Ford, T. Coraghessan Boyle[2]










John Hoyer Updike (March 18, 1932 – January 27, 2009) was an American novelist, poet, short story writer, art critic, and literary critic. Updike's most famous work is his Rabbit series (Rabbit, Run; Rabbit Redux; Rabbit Is Rich; Rabbit At Rest; and Rabbit Remembered). Both Rabbit is Rich and Rabbit at Rest received the Pulitzer Prize. Describing his subject as "the American small town, Protestant middle class," Updike was widely recognized for his careful craftsmanship, his unique prose style, and his prolific output, having published more than twenty novels and more than a dozen short story collections, as well as poetry, art criticism, literary criticism and children's books. Hundreds of his stories, reviews, and poems appeared in The New Yorker, starting in 1954. He also wrote regularly for The New York Review of Books. He populated his fiction with characters who "frequently experience personal turmoil and must respond to crises relating to religion, family obligations, and marital infidelity."[3] His work has attracted a significant amount of critical attention and praise, and he is widely considered to be one of the great American writers of his time[4] as well as a major stylist of language. Updike died of lung cancer in 2009.[5]




Contents


1 Early life, education, and early writing
2 Career, novels, and stories
3 Poetry
4 Literary criticism and art criticism
5 Critical evaluation and style
6 Themes
7 Cultural references
8 Bibliography
9 Awards
10 References
11 Further reading and literary criticism
12 External links

12.1 Obituaries
12.2 Pictures







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early life, education, and early writing
John Hoyer Updike was born in Reading, Pennsylvania, to author Linda Grace Hoyer Updike and Wesley Russell Updike, a high school science teacher.[6] John Updike was raised at 117 Philadelphia Avenue (now part of Route 724) in Shillington, Pennsylvania, until he was 13[7], when his family moved to a sandstone farmhouse in Plowville, Berks County, Pennsylvania, where he became interested in reading and writing. Shillington retained its importance for him; in his memoir Self Consciousness, he wrote "The first mystery that confronts is 'Why me?' The next is 'Why here?' Shillington was my here."[8] More isolated in the country, Updike "commenced an adolescence marked by solitude and familial tension"; his mother "inculcated in him a conviction that he was marked for greatness. Perhaps just as important, she also introduced him to the New Yorker magazine, which quickly became for young Updike the symbol of all his most fervent aspirations."[9] Like his mother, Updike suffered from psoriasis, and connected it to his abilities as a writer. In Self Consciousness, he links his "skin's embarrassing overproduction" to his creativity.[10]
Updike later recalled seeing his mother writing at her desk and feeling inspired. "One of my earliest memories is of seeing her at her desk," her son later said. "I admired the writer's equipment, the typewriter eraser, the boxes of clean paper. And I remember the brown envelopes that stories would go off in -- and come back in."[11]
These early years in Berks County would shape the environment of the Rabbit tetralogy, as well as many of his early novels and short stories. He graduated from Shillington High School as co-valedictorian and class president in 1950. Updike later attended Harvard after receiving a full scholarship. At Harvard, he "immediately established himself as a major talent of indefatigable energy, submitting a steady stream of articles and drawings for the Harvard Lampoon,"[9] which he served as president, before graduating summa cum laude in 1954 with a degree in English. After graduation, he decided to pursue a career in graphic arts and attended The Ruskin School of Drawing and Fine Art at the University of Oxford. His early ambition was to be a cartoonist.[12] To Oxford he brought his wife, Mary E. Pennington, an art student from Radcliffe College. Updike, his wife, and their first daughter Elizabeth moved to New York City; Updike became a regular contributor to The New Yorker, but stayed only two years, writing "Talk of the Town" columns and submitting poetry and short stories. In New York, Updike "[composed] the remarkable poems and stories that filled such early books as The Carpentered Hen and Other Tame Creatures (1958) and The Same Door: Short Stories (1959). Stylistically, his early stories were directly influenced by the New Yorker itself."[9] This early work reflected the influence of JD Salinger ("A&P"), John Cheever ("Snowing in Greenwich Village"), and the Modernists Marcel Proust, Henry Green, James Joyce, and Vladimir Nabokov.[9]
At this time, Updike also underwent a spiritual crisis. Suffering from a loss of faith, he "turned to the work of the Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard and the German Christian theologian Karl Barth, both of whom decisively shaped both his spiritual beliefs and his artistic vision, which, in Updike’s case, are intricately linked."[9] Updike more or less remained a believing Christian for the rest of his life.[13]
Later, Updike moved to Ipswich, Massachusetts. It was alleged by many, including a columnist in the local Ipswich Chronicle, that the fictional town of Tarbox in Couples was, in fact, Ipswich. Updike denied the suggestion in a letter to the paper.[14] Impressions of Updike's day-to-day life in Ipswich in the 1960s and 1970s are contained in a letter to the same paper published shortly following Updike's death and written by a friend and contemporary.[15] In Ipswich, Updike wrote Rabbit, Run (1960), on a Guggenheim Fellowship, and The Centaur (1963), two of his most acclaimed and famous works; the latter won the National Book Award. Rabbit, Run featured Rabbit Angstrom, a former high school basketball star and middle-class paragon who would become Updike's most enduring and critically examined character. Rabbit, Run was featured in Time's All-TIME 100 Greatest Novels.[16]

[edit] Career, novels, and stories




The Rabbit Angstrom omnibus from Everyman's Library (1995).


Updike wrote a sequel to Rabbit, Run in 1971 called Rabbit Redux, his response to the 1960s; Rabbit reflected much of Updike's confusion and ambivalence towards the social and political upheaval that beset the United States at that time.[17] 1980 saw another sequel, Rabbit is Rich, which won the National Book Award, the National Book Critics Circle Award, and the Pulitzer Prize, all three major American literary prizes. The novel found "Rabbit the fat and happy owner of a Toyota dealership"[9]; Updike found it difficult to close the book, because he was "having so much fun" in the imaginary county Rabbit and his family inhabited.[17] In 1990, Updike published the last Rabbit novel, Rabbit at Rest, which saw the death of the poignant character. The novel won the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction and the National Book Critics Circle Award. Over 500 pages long, the novel is among Updike's most celebrated. In 2000, Updike included the novella Rabbit Remembered in his collection Licks of Love, drawing a final close to the Rabbit saga. In 1995, Everyman's Library collected and canonized the four novels as the omnibus Rabbit Angstrom, for which Updike wrote an introduction in which he described Rabbit as "a ticket to the America all around me. What I saw through Rabbit’s eyes was more worth telling than what I saw through my own, though the difference was often slight."[18] Updike later called Rabbit "a brother to me, and a good friend. He opened me up as a writer."[19]
After his early "Olinger" period, set in the Pennsylvania of his youth, ended around 1965 with the highly lyrical Of the Farm, Updike became most famous as a "chronicler of suburban adultery."[20] He once wrote that it was "a subject which, if I have not exhausted, has exhausted me." The most prominent of Updike's novel of this vein is Couples (1968), a famous and notorious novel about adultery in a small Massachusetts town which garnered Updike an appearance on the cover of Time with the headline "The Adulterous Society." Updike himself was divorced in 1974; his four children, including the future fiction writer David Updike, stayed with his ex-wife.[9] The Maple short stories, collected in Too Far To Go (1979), reflect the ebb and flow of Updike's first marriage -- "Separating" (1974) and "Here Come the Maples" (1976) related to Updike's divorce. Those stories became the basis for the television movie Too Far To Go which was broadcast on NBC. Two other novels from this period, A Month of Sundays (1975), the first in Updike's so-called Scarlet Letter trilogy, and Marry Me: A Romance (1976), are also meditations on suburban adultery.
He strayed from his typical settings in 1978, shortly after his second marriage to Martha Bernhard (1977) to whom he stayed married until his death in 2009, with The Coup, a lauded novel about an African dictatorship inspired by a trip he made to Africa some years earlier. After writing Rabbit is Rich, Updike published The Witches of Eastwick (1984), a playful novel about witches living in Rhode Island, which he described as an attempt "make things right with my, what shall we call them, feminist detractors."[21] One of Updike's most popular novels, it became a famous film and was included in The Western Canon (1994) of Harold Bloom.[22] Updike in 2008 published The Widows of Eastwick, a return to the witches in their old age. It was his last published novel. Another unconventional novel came in 1986, called Roger's Version, the second volume of the Scarlet Letter trilogy, about an attempt to prove God's existence using a computer program; Martin Amis called it a "near-masterpiece."[23] The novel S. (1989), focused uncharacteristically on a female protagonist, concluded the retelling of Hawthorne's Scarlet Letter.
Updike enjoyed working in series; in addition to the Rabbit Angstrom novels and the Maples stories, a recurrent Updike alter-ego is the moderately well-known, unprolific Jewish novelist and eventual Nobel laureate Henry Bech, chronicled in three comic short-story cycles: Bech, a Book (1970), Bech Is Back (1981) and Bech At Bay: A Quasi-Novel (1998). These stories were compiled into The Complete Henry Bech (2001) by Everyman's Library. Bech is seen as a comical and self-conscious antithesis of Updike's own literary persona: Jewish, a World War II veteran, reclusive, and unprolific to a fault.[24]
After the publication of the Pulitzer-winning Rabbit at Rest, Updike spent the rest of the 1990s and early 2000s publishing novels more experimental in "style and approach."[9] These styles included the historical fiction of Memories of the Ford Administration (1992), the magical realism of Brazil (1994), the science fiction of Toward the End of Time (1997), the postmodernism of Gertrude and Claudius (2000), and the art-tinged experimentalism of Seek My Face (2002). In the midst of these, he wrote a more conventional novel, called In the Beauty of the Lilies (1996), an historical saga spanning many generations and exploring themes of religion and cinema in America. It is seen as the most successful novel of Updike's late career[9] and it has been predicted that the novel "may well emerge as the sort of late masterpiece overlooked or praised by rote in its day, only to be rediscovered by another generation."[25] In Villages (2004), Updike returned to the familiar territory of infidelities in New England. His twenty-second novel, Terrorist (2006), the story of a fervent, eighteen-year-old extremist Muslim in New Jersey, garnered media attention.
In 2003, Updike published The Early Stories, a large collection of his short fiction spanning the mid-1950s to the mid-1970s. At over 800 pages long with over one hundred stories, it has been called "perhaps Updike’s most important achievement," functioning "as a richly episodic and lyrical Bildungsroman – that is, a novel of education and development – in which Updike traces the trajectory from adolescence, college, married life, fatherhood, separation and divorce."[9] It won the prestigious PEN/Faulkner Award for Fiction in 2004. Even this volume excluded several others of his short-story collections.
Updike worked in a wide array of genres, including fiction, poetry (most but not all of which is compiled in Collected Poems: 1953-1993, 1993), essays (collected in about nine separate collections), a play (Buchanan Dying, 1974), and memoir (Self Consciousness, 1989).
Updike won a wide array of awards, including two Pulitzer Prizes for Fiction, two National Book Awards, three National Book Critics Circle awards, the 1989 National Medal of Arts and 2003 National Humanities Medal, and the Rea Award for the Short Story for outstanding achievement; the National Endowment for the Humanities selected Updike to present the 2008 Jefferson Lecture, the US government's highest humanities honor; Updike's lecture was entitled "The Clarity of Things: What is American about American Art."[26][27] See below, for a full list of Updike's awards.
He lived with his wife Martha in Beverly Farms, Massachusetts. He died at a hospice in Danvers, Massachusetts, on January 27, 2009, at the age of 76.

[edit] Poetry
Updike published around eight volumes of poetry over his career, including his very first book The Carpentered Hen (1958), and one of his last, the posthumous Endpoint (2009). The New Yorker published excerpts of Endpoint in their March 16, 2009 issue. Many of Updike's poems up until the mid-1990s were compiled by Knopf's Collected Poems (1993). He wrote that "I began as a writer of light verse, and have tried to carry over into my serious or lyric verse something of the strictness and liveliness of the lesser form."[28] The poet Thomas M. Disch wrote that because Updike "enjoys such pre-eminence as a novelist...his poetry could be mistaken as a hobby or a foible"; instead it "is a poetry of civility—in its epigrammatical lucidity...and in its tone of vulgar bonhomie and good appetite."[29] His poetry "encompasses a variety of forms and topics. He has been praised for his wit and precision, and for his ability to focus on common subjects and on places near and distant."[28] The British poet Gavin Ewart praised Updike for his "ability to make the ordinary seem strange, as all metaphysical poets have always done" and calls Updike one of the few modern novelists capable of writing good poetry.[30] Reading Endpoint aloud, the critic Charles McGrath claimed that he found "another, deeper music" in Updike's poetry. He finds that Updike's wordplay "smooths and elides itself", and is full of subtle "sound effects."[31] The critic John Keenan, who praised the "beautiful and poignant" Endpoint, writes:

I find it odd that Updike's reputation as a poet is slight at best. The fact that he wrote about the everyday world in a technically accomplished manner seems to count against him. His poetry is dismissed as light verse, as if obscurity is an achievement and transparency a vice. It is the same snobbery which dismisses Larkin and Betjeman and fails to see their fundamental importance – what Clive James called, in another context, "playful seriousness."[32]


[edit] Literary criticism and art criticism
In addition to his novels, poetry, and short stories, Updike was also a prominent critic of literature and art, frequently cited as one of the best American critics of his generation.[33] He once laid out his personal rules for literary criticism, in the introduction to Picked-Up Pieces, his 1975 collection of prose:




Updike delivering the 2008 Jefferson Lecture.



1. Try to understand what the author wished to do, and do not blame him for not achieving what he did not attempt.


2. Give enough direct quotation—at least one extended passage—of the book's prose so the review's reader can form his own impression, can get his own taste.


3. Confirm your description of the book with quotation from the book, if only phrase-long, rather than proceeding by fuzzy précis.


4. Go easy on plot summary, and do not give away the ending.…


5. If the book is judged deficient, cite a successful example along the same lines, from the author's oeuvre or elsewhere. Try to understand the failure. Sure it’s his and not yours?


To these concrete five might be added a vaguer sixth, having to do with maintaining a chemical purity in the reaction between product and appraiser. Do not accept for review a book you are predisposed to dislike, or committed by friendship to like. Do not imagine yourself a caretaker of any tradition, an enforcer of any party standards, a warrior in any ideological battle, a corrections officer of any kind. Never, never...try to put the author “in his place,” making of him a pawn in a contest with other reviewers. Review the book, not the reputation. Submit to whatever spell, weak or strong, is being cast. Better to praise and share than blame and ban. The communion between reviewer and his public is based upon the presumption of certain possible joys of reading, and all our discriminations should curve toward that end.[34]

He reviewed "nearly every major writer of the 20th century and some 19th century authors," typically in The New Yorker, always with an eye to make his reviews "animated."[35] He was also a champion for young writers, often making generous comparisons to his own literary heroes including Vladimir Nabokov and Marcel Proust.[36] Good reviews from Updike often "meant something" in terms of literary reputation and even sales; some of his positive reviews gave "huge boosts to the careers, for example, of Erica Jong, Thomas Mallon and Jonathan Safran Foer."[37] Bad reviews by Updike sometimes caused controversy too,[38] as when in late 2008 he gave a "damning" review to Toni Morrison's novel A Mercy.[39][40]
His literary criticism has been praised for its conventional simplicity and profundity:

Updike is what those in academe would, with no small disdain, call an old-fashioned appreciative critic, an aestheticist, a subjectivist. Shorn of the withering tone, this is a very fair assessment of Updike the critic, one that is pejorative only if we disallow that this kind of criticism holds an interest for the intelligent reader. Updike’s best work is informed less by fiat and declaration than by demonstration. Rather than worrying out loud over the state of literary criticism, he shows a commitment to it through practice.[41]

Updike's art criticism often appeared in The New York Review of Books, where he frequently wrote about American art.[42] Updike's 2008 Jefferson Lecture, "The Clarity of Things: What's American About American Art?," dealt with the uniqueness of American art from the 18th century to the 20th century.[43] In the lecture he argued that American art, until the expressionist movement of the 20th century in which America declared its artistic "independence," is characterized by insecurity as compared with the artistic tradition of Europe."[26] In Updike's own words:

Two centuries after Jonathan Edwards sought a link with the divine in the beautiful clarity of things, William Carlos Williams wrote in introducing his long poem Paterson that “for the poet there are no ideas but in things.” No ideas but in things. The American artist, first born into a continent without museums and art schools, took Nature as his only instructor, and things as his principle study. A bias toward the empirical, toward the evidential object in the numinous fullness of its being, leads to a certain lininess, as the artist intently maps the visible in a New World that feels surrounded by chaos and emptiness.[43]


[edit] Critical evaluation and style



He is certainly one of the great American novelists of the 20th century.
—Martin Amis[44]



Updike is considered one of the greatest American fiction writers of his generation.[45] Along with Toni Morrison, he was the most written about living American novelist of his time.[4] He was widely praised as America's "last true man of letters," with an immense and far-reaching influence on many writers.[37] The excellence of his prose style is near-universally acknowledged, even by those critics who are skeptical of Updike's significance as a novelist and of his larger artistic vision.[46][47] Critics emphasize "his inimitable prose style" and "rich description and language, drawing comparisons to the prose of Marcel Proust and Vladimir Nabokov."[46] Some critics consider him "fluent to a fault," others "question the depth and seriousness of his concerns" due to the supposed floweriness of his language, and some "[object] to Updike's portrayal of women, viewed by some as specious and misogynistic." Others more positively "suggest that Updike's employment of a dense vocabulary and syntax functions as a distancing technique to mediate the intellectual and emotional involvement of the reader."[46] Ultimately John Updike "remains highly esteemed as a foremost man of letters whose prodigious intelligence, verbal prowess, and shrewd insight into the sorrows, frustrations, and banality of American life separate him from the ranks of his contemporaries."[46]
His character Rabbit Angstrom, widely considered his magnum opus, has been said to have "entered the pantheon of signal American literary figures, joining Huck Finn, Jay Gatsby, Holden Caulfield and the like."[48] A 2002 list by Book magazine of the 100 Best Fictional Characters Since 1900 listed Rabbit in the top five.[49] The Rabbit novels, the Henry Bech stories, and the Maple stories have been canonized by Everyman's Library.[50]
Eulogizing Updike in January 2009, the British novelist Ian McEwan wrote that Updike's "literary schemes and pretty conceits touched at points on the Shakespearean," and that Updike's death marked the "the end of the golden age of the American novel in the 20th century's second half." McEwan concluded that the Rabbit series is Updike's "masterpiece and will surely be his monument," and describing it, concluded:

Updike is a master of effortless motion - between third and first person, from the metaphorical density of literary prose to the demotic, from specific detail to wide generalisation, from the actual to the numinous, from the scary to the comic. For his own particular purposes, Updike devised for himself a style of narration, an intense, present tense, free indirect style, that can leap up, whenever it wants, to a God's-eye view of Harry, or the view of his put-upon wife, Janice, or victimised son, Nelson. This carefully crafted artifice permits here assumptions about evolutionary theory, which are more Updike than Harry, and comically sweeping notions of Jewry, which are more Harry than Updike. This is at the heart of the tetralogy's achievement. Updike once said of the Rabbit books that they were an exercise in point of view. This was typically self-deprecating, but contains an important grain of truth. Harry's education extends no further than high school, and his view is further limited by a range of prejudices and a stubborn, combative spirit, yet he is the vehicle for a half-million-word meditation on postwar American anxiety, failure and prosperity. A mode had to be devised to make this possible, and that involved pushing beyond the bounds of realism. In a novel like this, Updike insisted, you have to be generous and allow your characters eloquence, "and not chop them down to what you think is the right size".[51]

Jonathan Raban, highlighting many of the virtues that have been ascribed to Updike's prose, called Rabbit at Rest (1990) "one of the very few modern novels in English (Bellow's Herzog is another) that one can set beside the work of Dickens, Thackeray, George Eliot, Joyce, and not feel the draft...It is a book that works by a steady accumulation of a mass of brilliant details, of shades and nuances, of the byplay between one sentence and the next, and no short review can properly honor its intricacy and richness."[52]
In a widely-read essay[53], David Foster Wallace called Updike "both chronicler and voice of probably the single most self-absorbed generation since Louis XIV." Wallace claimed "to admire the sheer gorgeousness of [Updike's] descriptive prose" and called The Poorhouse Fair (1959), The Centaur (1963) and Of the Farm (1965) "all great books, maybe classics." But he criticized Updike's "protagonists who are basically all the same guy" and the "Great Male Narcissism" of his writing. Wallace ultimately concluded that Updike's fiction falls prey to a "radical self-absorption," as evidenced by the Updikean protagonists:

The very world around them, as beautifully as they see and describe it, seems to exist for them only insofar as it evokes impressions and associations and emotions inside the self. [54]

The novelist Philip Roth, considered one of Updike's chief literary rivals[55], wrote that "John Updike is our time’s greatest man of letters, as brilliant a literary critic and essayist as he was a novelist and short story writer. He is and always will be no less a national treasure than his 19th-century precursor, Nathaniel Hawthorne."[48]
The noted critic James Wood called Updike "a prose writer of great beauty, but that prose confronts one with the question of whether beauty is enough, and whether beauty always conveys all that a novelist must convey."[56] In a review of Updike's Licks of Love (2001), Wood concluded that Updike's "prose trusses things in very pretty ribbons," but there often exists in his work a "hard, coarse, primitive, misogynistic worldview." Wood both praises and criticizes Updike's language for having "an essayistic saunter; the language lifts itself up on pretty hydraulics, and hovers slightly above its subjects, generally a little too accomplished and a little too abstract." He writes that Updike is capable of writing "the perfect sentence" and notes that Updike's unique style is characterized by a "delicate deferral" of the sentence's subject. The beauty of Updike's language and his faith in the power of that language floats above reality, according to Wood:

For some time now Updike’s language has seemed to encode an almost theological optimism about its capacity to refer. Updike is notably unmodern in his impermeability to silence and the interruptions of the abyss. For all his fabled Protestantism, both American Puritan and Lutheran-Barthian, with its cold glitter, its insistence on the aching gap between God and His creatures, Updike seems less like Hawthorne than Balzac, in his unstopping and limitless energy, and his cheerfully professional belief that stories can be continued; the very form of the Rabbit books – here extended a further instance – suggests continuance. Updike does not appear to believe that words ever fail us – ‘life’s gallant, battered ongoingness’, indeed – and part of the difficulty he has run into, late in his career, is that he shows no willingness, verbally, to acknowledge silence, failure, interruption, loss of faith, despair and so on. Supremely, better than almost any other contemporary writer, he can always describe these feelings and states; but they are not inscribed in the language itself. Updike’s language, for all that it gestures towards the usual range of human disappointment and collapse, testifies instead to its own uncanny success: to a belief that the world can always be brought out of its cloudiness and made clear in a fair season.[57]

In direct contrast to Wood's evaluation, the Oxford critic Thomas Karshan notes that Updike is "intensely intellectual," with a style that constitutes his "manner of thought" not merely "a set of dainty curlicues." Karshan calls Updike an inheritor of the "traditional role of the epic writer." According to Karshan, "Updike's writing picks up one voice, joins its cadence, and moves on to another, like Rabbit himself, driving south through radio zones on his flight away from his wife and child." Disagreeing with Wood's critique of Updike's alleged over-stylization, Karshan evaluates Updike's language as convincingly naturalistic:

Updike’s sentences at their frequent best are not a complacent expression of faith. Rather, like Proust’s sentences in Updike’s description, they "seek out an essence so fine the search itself is an act of faith." Updike aspires to "this sense of self-qualification, the kind of timid reverence towards what exists that Cézanne shows when he grapples for the shape and shade of a fruit through a mist of delicate stabs." Their hesitancy and self-qualification arise as they meet obstacles, readjust and pass on. If life is bountiful in New England, it is also evasive and easily missed. In the stories Updike tells, marriages and homes are made only to be broken. His descriptiveness embodies a promiscuous love for everything in the world. But love is precarious, Updike is always saying, since it thrives on obstructions and makes them if it cannot find them.[47]

Harold Bloom, the famous critic, once called Updike "a minor novelist with a major style. A quite beautiful and very considerable stylist...He specializes in the easier pleasures."[58] Bloom also edited an important collection of critical essays on Updike in 1987.[59]
On The Dick Cavett Show in 1981, the novelist and short story writer John Cheever was asked why he did not write book reviews and what he would say if he were given the chance to review Updike's Rabbit is Rich (1981). He replied:

The reason I didn't review the book is that it perhaps would have taken me three weeks. My appreciation of it is that diverse and that complicated...John is perhaps the only contemporary writer who I know now who gives me the sense of the fact that life is -- the life that we perform is in an environment that enjoys a grandeur that escapes us. Rabbit is very much possessed of a paradise lost, of a paradise known fleetingly perhaps through erotic love and a paradise that he pursues through his children. It's the vastness of John's scope that I would have described if I could through a review.[60]

The Fiction Circus, an online and multimedia literary magazine, called Updike one of the "four Great American Novelists" of his time along with Philip Roth, Cormac McCarthy, and Don DeLillo, each one jokingly representing signs of the Zodiac. Furthermore, Updike was seen as the "best prose writer in the world," like Nabokov before him. But, in contrast to many literati and establishment obituaries, there is a caveat to Updike's place in the "literary pantheon":

But...I don't know anyone personally who thought of Updike as a vital writer. I don't mean that to say that Updike is somehow stiff, stultifying; he's the opposite to an unwholesome degree. What I mean is that I know several people who swear by Blood Meridian, Gravity's Rainbow, Goodbye, Columbus, even my personal pet peeve White Noise. These books cracked open lives, made people into readers. With the exception of our own Goodman Carter, who spent his pubescent years reading the Rabbit books obsessively, I don't know of anyone who says the same thing about Updike, or who even recommends his books beyond the Rabbit stuff.[61]

Adam Gopnik of The New Yorker evaluated Updike as "the first American writer since Henry James to get himself fully expressed, the man who broke the curse of incompleteness that had haunted American writing." He praises Updike's style, his significance as an American writer, and the integrity of his vision:

A virtuoso, he was never content with virtuosity. He sang like Henry James, but he saw like Sinclair Lewis. The two sides of American fiction—the precise, realist, encyclopedic appetite to get it all in, and the exquisitist urge to make writing out of sensation rendered exactly—were both alive in him. He was at once conjurer and chronicler, and it is this that makes the great Updike novels masterpieces properly so called: they get it all in and they get it all right. Updike’s great subject was the American attempt to fill the gap left by faith with the materials produced by mass culture. He documented how the death of a credible religious belief has been offset by sex and adultery and movies and sports and Toyotas and family love and family obligation. For Updike, this effort was blessed, and very nearly successful. Unlike his European contemporaries, who saw the same space and the attempted filling as mere aridity and deprivation, Updike was close enough to, and fond enough of, the source of postwar material abundance to love it fully, and for itself. (And he knew enough of the decade of deprivation that preceded the big blossoming never to be jaded about plenty.) He viewed the material culture of American life with a benign, appreciative ironic eye. But he had no illusions, either, about its ability to cover the failure or wish away mortality.[25]

Gore Vidal professed to have "never taken Updike seriously as a writer." He criticizes his political and aesthetic worldview for its "blandness and acceptance of authority in any form." He concludes that Updike "describes to no purpose." Vidal mockingly refers to Updike as "our good child," in reference to his wide establishment acclaim, and excoriates his alleged political conservatism. Vidal's ultimate conclusion is that

Updike's work is more and more representative of that polarizing within a state where Authority grows ever more brutal and malign while its hired hands in the media grow ever more excited as the holy war of the few against the many heats up. In this most delicate of times, Updike has "builded" his own small, crude altar in order to propitiate or to invoke "the fateful lightning of His terrible swift sword."[62]

Lorrie Moore, who once described Updike as "American literature's greatest short story writer...and arguably our greatest writer"[35], reviewed Updike's body of short stories in The New York Review of Books, praising their intricate detail and rich imagery :

The elegant and penetrating descriptions, however, composed from the chasm's edge—both the wisdom and the wise unknowingness—are among the main reasons one reads Updike. "Her gesture as she tips the dregs of white wine into a potted geranium seems infinite, like one of Vermeer's moments frozen in an eternal light from the left." His eye and his prose never falter, even when the world fails to send its more socially complicated revelations directly his story's way.[63]

In November 2008 the editors of the UK's Literary Review magazine awarded Updike their Bad Sex in Fiction Lifetime Achievement Award, which celebrates "crude, tasteless or ridiculous sexual passages in modern literature." [27]

[edit] Themes



All in all this is the happiest fucking country the world has ever seen.
—Rabbit Angstrom[64]



The principal themes seen in Updike's work are religion, sex, and America[65] as well as death.[66] Often he would weave them together. For example, the decline of religion in America is chronicled in In the Beauty of the Lilies (1996) alongside the history of cinema, and Rabbit Angstrom contemplates the merits of sex with the wife of his friend Reverend Jack Eccles while the latter is giving his sermon in Rabbit, Run (1960). Critics have often noted that Updike imbued language itself with a kind of faith in its efficacy, and that his tendency to construct narratives spanning many years and books -- the Rabbit series, the Henry Bech series, Eastwick, the Maples stories -- demonstrates a similar faith in the transcendent power of fiction and language.[57] Updike's novels often act as dialectical theological debates between the book itself and the reader, the novel endowed with theological beliefs meant to challenge the reader as the plot runs its course.[4] Rabbit Angstrom himself is a kind of "Kierkegaardian 'Knight of Faith.'"[9]
Sex in Updike's work is noted for its ubiquity and the reverence with which he described it:

His contemporaries invade the ground with wild Dionysian yelps, mocking both the taboos that would make it forbidden and the lust that drives men to it. Updike can be honest about it, and his descriptions of the sight, taste and texture of women's bodies can be perfect little madrigals.[67]

Another sexual theme commonly addressed in Updike is adultery, especially in a suburban, middle class setting, most famously in Couples (1968). The Updikean narrator is often "a man guilty of infidelity and abandonment of his family."[68]
Similarly, Updike wrote about America with a certain nostalgia, reverence, and recognition and celebration of America's broad diversity as ZZ Packer elucidates:

There seemed to me not many American novelists who were working so steadfastly in such riveting contradictions; both the patrician and the suburban, both sexual dynamism and sexual dysfunction, the commercial and the divine. There seemed a strange ability to harken both America the Beautiful as well as America the Plain Jane, and the lovely Protestant backbone in his fiction and essays, when he decided to show it off, was as progressive and enlightened as it was unapologetic.[69]

The Rabbit novels in particular can be viewed as, according to Julian Barnes, "a distraction from, and a glittering confirmation of, the vast bustling ordinariness of American life."[70] But as Updike saw a certain gorgeousness in everyday America, he also saw its decline: at times, he was "so clearly disturbed by the downward spin of America."[71] The critic James Wolcott, in a review of Updike's last novel The Widows of Eastwick (2008), notes that Updike's penchant for observing America's decline is coupled with an affirmation of America's ultimate merits:

Heavy on mortality, light on morbidity, Updike elegises entropy American-style with a resigned, paternal, disappointed affection that distinguishes his fiction from that of grimmer declinists: Don DeLillo, Gore Vidal, Philip Roth. America may have lost its looks and stature, but it was a beauty once, and worth every golden dab of sperm.[72]





A caricature of John Updike from New York Review of Books cartoonist David Levine.


Updike also commonly wrote about death, his characters providing a "mosaic of reactions" to mortality, ranging from terror to attempts at insulation.[66] In The Poorhouse Fair (1959), the elderly John Hook intones, "There is no goodness without belief...And if you have not believed, at the end of your life you shall know you have buried your talent in the ground of this world and have nothing saved, to take into the next," demonstrating a religious, metaphysical faith present in much of Updike's work. For Rabbit Angstrom, with his constant musings on mortality, his near-witnessing of his daughter's death, and his often shaky faith, death is more frightening and less obvious in its ramifications. At the end of Rabbit at Rest (1990), though, Rabbit demonstrates a kind of certainty, telling his son Nelson on his deathbed, "...But enough. Maybe. Enough." In The Centaur (1963), George Caldwell is afraid of his cancer and has no faith.[66] Death can also be a sort of unseen terror; it "occurs offstage but reverberates for survivors as an absent presence."[66] Updike himself also experienced a "crisis over the afterlife," and indeed "many of his heroes shared the same sort of existential fears the author acknowledged he had suffered as a young man: Henry Bech’s concern that he was 'a fleck of dust condemned to know it is a fleck of dust,' or Colonel Ellelloû’s lament that 'we will be forgotten, all of us forgotten.' Their fear of death threatens to make everything they do feel meaningless, and it also sends them running after God — looking for some reassurance that there is something beyond the familiar, everyday world with 'its signals and buildings and cars and bricks.'"[73] Updike demonstrated his own fear in some of his more personal writings, including the poem "Perfection Wasted" (1990):

And another regrettable thing about death
is the ceasing of your own brand of magic,
which took a whole life to develop and market -
the quips, the witticisms, the slant
adjusted to a few, those loved ones nearest
the lip of the stage, their soft faces blanched
in the footlight glow, their laughter close to tears,
their warm pooled breath in and out with your heartbeat,
their response and your performance twinned.
The jokes over the phone. The memories packed
in the rapid-access file. The whole act.
Who will do it again? That's it; no one;
imitators and descendants aren't the same.[74]

Some have suggested[47] that the "best statement of Updike’s aesthetic comes in his early memoir 'The Dogwood Tree'" (1962):

I reasoned thus: just as the paper is the basis for the marks upon it, might not events be contingent upon a never expressed (because featureless) ground? Is the true marvel of Sunday skaters the pattern of their pirouettes or the fact that they are silently upheld? Blankness is not emptiness; we may skate upon an intense radiance we do not see because we see nothing else. And in fact there is a colour, a quiet but tireless goodness that things at rest, like a brick wall or a small stone, seem to affirm.[75]

In the introduction to his Early Stories: 1953-1975 (2004), Updike described his purpose in writing prose:

Not only were the boxes useful for storing little things like foreign coins and cufflinks, but the caustic aura of cigars discouraged visitors. I felt that I was packaging something as delicately pervasive as smoke, one box after another, in that room, where my only duty was to describe reality as it had become to me -- to give the mundane its beautiful due.[76]


[edit] Cultural references




John Updike depicted on The Simpsons.



Updike was the subject of a "closed book examination" by Nicholson Baker, entitled U and I (1991). Baker discusses his wish to meet Updike and become his golf partner.
In a season 12 episode of the animated series The Simpsons, "Insane Clown Poppy" (2000), John Updike is the ghost writer of a book that Krusty the Clown is promoting. The book's title is Your Shoe's Too Big To Kickbox God, a 20-page book written entirely by John Updike as a money-making scam.
Updike was featured on the cover of Time twice, on 26 April 1968 and again on 18 October 1982[77].
The main character in the Eminem film 8 Mile (2002) is nicknamed "Rabbit" and has some similarities to Rabbit Angstrom.[78] The film's soundtrack has a song titled "Rabbit Run."
In an episode of the television series Gilmore Girls, "In the Clamor and the Clangor", the main characters are attending a funeral and jocularly try to guess which members of the town will be the next to die, but they quickly realize the morbidity of their conversation and regret it, especially when ominous things begin to happen to the people they speculated dying, prompting Lorelai to say, "We are The Witches of Eastwick."


[edit] Bibliography



Rabbit novels

(1960) Rabbit, Run
(1971) Rabbit Redux
(1981) Rabbit Is Rich
(1990) Rabbit At Rest
(1995) Rabbit Angstrom: The Four Novels
(2001) Rabbit Remembered (a novella within the collection Licks of Love)

Bech books

(1970) Bech, a Book
(1982) Bech Is Back
(1998) Bech at Bay
(2001) The Complete Henry Bech

Buchanan books

(1974) Buchanan Dying (a play)
(1992) Memories of the Ford Administration (a novel)

Eastwick books

(1984) The Witches of Eastwick
(2008) The Widows of Eastwick

Other novels

(1959) The Poorhouse Fair
(1963) The Centaur
(1965) Of the Farm
(1968) Couples
(1977) Marry Me
(1978) The Coup
(1994) Brazil
(1996) In the Beauty of the Lilies
(1997) Toward the End of Time
(2000) Gertrude and Claudius
(2002) Seek My Face
(2004) Villages
(2006) Terrorist

The Scarlet Letter Trilogy

(1975) A Month of Sundays
(1986) Roger's Version
(1988) S.



Short Story Collections

(1959) The Same Door
(1962) Pigeon Feathers
(1964) Olinger Stories (a selection)
(1966) The Music School
(1972) Museums And Women
(1979) Problems
(1979) Too Far To Go (the Maples stories)
(1987) Trust Me
(1994) The Afterlife
(2000) The Best American Short Stories of the Century (editor)
(2001) Licks of Love
(2003) The Early Stories: 1953–1975
(2009) My Father's Tears and Other Stories

Poetry

(1958) The Carpentered Hen
(1963) Telephone Poles
(1969) Midpoint
(1969) Dance of the Solids
(1974) Cunts: Upon Receiving The Swingers Life Club Membership Solicitation (limited edition)
(1977) Tossing and Turning
(1985) Facing Nature
(1993) Collected Poems 1953–1993
(2001) Americana: and Other Poems
(2009) Endpoint and Other Poems

Non-fiction, essays and criticism

(1965) Assorted Prose
(1975) Picked-Up Pieces
(1983) Hugging The Shore
(1989) Self-Consciousness: Memoirs
(1989) Just Looking
(1991) Odd Jobs
(1996) Golf Dreams: Writings on Golf
(1999) More Matter
(2005) Still Looking: Essays on American Art
(2007) Due Considerations: Essays and Criticism





[edit] Awards

1959 Guggenheim Fellow
1959 National Institute of Arts and Letters Rosenthal Award
1964 National Book Award for Fiction
1965 Prix du Meilleur Livre Étranger
1966 O. Henry Prize
1981 National Book Critics Circle Award for Fiction
1982 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction
1982 National Book Award for Fiction
1982 Union League Club Abraham Lincoln Award
1983 National Book Critics Circle Award for Criticism
1984 National Arts Club Medal of Honor
1987 St. Louis Literary Award
1987 Ambassador Book Award
1988 PEN/Malamud Award
1989 National Medal of Arts
1990 National Book Critics Circle Award for Fiction
1991 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction
1991 O. Henry Prize
1992 Honorary Doctor of Letters from Harvard University
1995 William Dean Howells Medal of the American Academy of Arts and Letters
1995 Commandeur de l'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres
1997 Ambassador Book Award
1998 National Book Award Medal of Distinguished Contribution to American Letters
2003 National Humanities Medal
2004 PEN/Faulkner Award for Fiction
2006 Rea Award for the Short Story
2007 American Academy of Arts and Letters Gold Medal for Fiction
2008 Jefferson Lecture


[edit] References


^ Osen, Diane (2007). "Interview with John Updike". The National Book Foundation. http://www.nationalbook.org/authorsguide_jupdike.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-10. 
^ See the "Remembering Updike" (2009) New Yorker index to see a list of writers acknowledging Updike's influence.
^ MSN Encarta, "John Updike," 2008, Link
^ a b c Schiff, James (Autumn 2001). "Review: "John Updike's Rabbit Tetralogy: Mastered Irony in Motion". Christianity and Literature. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_hb049/is_1_51/ai_n28886937. Retrieved on 2008-01-09. 
^ "US novelist Updike dies of cancer". BBC News. 2009-01-27. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/americas/7854554.stm. Retrieved on 2009-01-28. 
^ Wesley Russell Updike descended in two ways from Louris Jansen Opdyck who was possibly born at Elburg, Holland about 1610 and died in Gravesend, Kings County, New York (now part of Brooklyn) in 1659; Louris was one of the earliest settlers of New Amsterdam, today's New York City. His descendants moved to New Jersey, and thence to Pennsylvania. Lee, Francis Bazley (1907). Genealogical and Personal Memorial of Mercer County, New Jersey. Lewis Publishing Company. p. 370. http://books.google.com/books?id=6tcMAAAAYAAJ&dq=opdyck+new+amsterdam&ei=EOl_SbzcAofEkATeo_zkBg&pgis=1. 
^ "A portrait of Updike's hometown". The Philadelphia Inquirer. 2008-01-28. http://www.philly.com/inquirer/front_page/20090128_A_portrait_of_Updike_s_hometown.html. 
^ John Updike, Self Consciousness (1990), Fawcett, pg. 4
^ a b c d e f g h i j k Marshall Boswell, "John Updike," Literary Encyclopedia, Link
^ "Celebrities With Psoriasis". Parade.com. http://www.parade.com/health/healthyskin/psoriasis-medical-breakthroughs.html. 
^ "Nibbled at By Neighbors". The New York Times. 1990-01-14. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9C0CE6D91E39F937A25752C0A966958260&sec=&spon=&pagewanted=all. 
^ Jeet Heer, "John Updike's animated ambitions," The Guardian, 20 March 2004 Link
^ "Religion and Ethics NewsWeekly: John Updike" 19 November 2004, PBS.org, Episode 812.
^ The Ipswich Chronicle. 25 April 1968 Letter: "Updike 'flatly denies' That Tarbox is Ipswich."
^ "John Updike: The Ipswich Connection". The Ipswich Chronicle. 2009-02-09. http://www.wickedlocal.com/ipswich/news/opinions/letters/x545177024/LETTER-John-Updike-the-Ipswich-Connection. 
^ All-Time 100 Novels
^ a b Charlie Rose interview, 24 October 1995, Link
^ John Updike, "Introduction," Rabbit Angstrom (1995), Everyman's Library.
^ Charlie Rose interview, 1996, Link
^ "Farwell, King John of Suburbia," New Statesman, 29 January 2009, Link
^ Michiko Kakutani, "Books of the Times: 'The Widows of Eastwick'", New York Times, 19 October 2008, Link
^ Harold Bloom, The Western Canon: The Books and Schools of the Ages (1994), Riverhead Trade, "The Chaotic Age: The United States."
^ Martin Amis, "When Amis met Updike...," The Guardian, 1 February 2009, Link
^ Jack De Bellis (ed.), The John Updike Encyclopedia (2000), "Bech, Henry," pgs. 52-53.
^ a b Adam Gopnik, "Postscript: John Updike," The New Yorker, 9 February 2009, Link
^ a b Howard, Jennifer (2008-05-23). "In Jefferson Lecture, Updike Says American Art Is Known by Its Insecurity". Chronicle of Higher Education. http://chronicle.com/news/article/4541/in-jefferson-lecture-updike-says-american-art-is-known-by-its-insecurity. 
^ a b Tolson, Jay (2008-05-23). ""John Updike on American Art". U.S. News & World Report. http://www.usnews.com/articles/news/national/2008/05/23/john-updike-on-american-art.html. 
^ a b John Updike: The Poetry Foundation, archive
^ Poets.org: John Updike
^ Gavin Ewart, "Making it strange," New York Times, 28 April 1985 Link
^ Charles McGrath, "Reading Updike's Last Words, Aloud," New York Times, 3 April 2009, Link
^ John Keenan, "The clarity of Updike's poetry should not obscure its class," The Guardian, 12 March 2009, Link
^ James Atlas, "Towards the Transhuman," London Review of Books, 2 February 1984, Link
^ "Remembering Updike: The Gospel According to John," New Yorker online, Link
^ a b Mary Rourke, "John Updike dies at 76; Pulitzer-winning author," Los Angeles Times, 28 January 2009, Link
^ ZZ Packer, "Remembering Updike," New Yorker online, Link
^ a b Charles McGrath, "John Updike's Mighty Pen," New York Times, 31 January 2009, Link
^ Alex Carnevale, "Literary Feuds: Toni Morrison is John Updike's Latest Lit-Fit Victim," October 2008, Gawker.com, Link
^ "Updike takes a swipe at Toni Morrison," The First Post, 29 October 2008, Link
^ John Updike, "Dreamy Wilderness," New Yorker, 3 November 2008, Link
^ Wyatt Mason, "Among the reviewers: John Updike and the book-review bugaboo," Harper's, December 2007, Link
^ John Updike Archive, New York Review of Books, Link
^ a b John Updike, "The Clarity of Things," National Endowment for the Humanities, Link
^ Martin Amis, "He took the novel onto another plane of intimacy," Guardian, 28 January 2009, Link
^ "What Is the Best Work of American Fiction of the Last 25 Years?" New York Times, 21 May 2006, Link A survey of "a couple of hundred prominent writers, critics, editors and other literary sages" listed the Rabbit series as one of the few greatest works of modern American fiction.
^ a b c d Contemporary Literary Criticism, "John Updike Criticism (Vol. 139)" (2001)
^ a b c Thomas Karshan, "Batsy," London Review of Books, 31 March 2005, Link
^ a b Christopher Lehmann-Haupt, "John Updike, a Lyrical Writer of the Middle Class, Dies at 76," New York Times, 28 January 2009, Link
^ Book magazine, March/April 2002, "100 Best Fictional Characters since 1900," via NPR, Link
^ Everyman's Library: Authors
^ Ian McEwan, "Beyond the Bounds of Realism," The Guardian, 31 January 2009, Link
^ Jonathan Raban, The Oxford Book of the Sea (1993), Oxford University Press, pgs. 509-517.
^ Google search for "Champion Literary Phallocrat", Google Scholar search
^ David Foster Wallace, "John Updike, Champion Literary Phallocrat, Drops One; Is This Finally the End for Magnificent Narcissists?," New York Observer, 12 October 1997 Link
^ "John Updike: 2008 Jefferson Lecture," National Endowment for the Humanities, Link
^ James Wood, The Broken Estate: Essays on Literature and Belief (2000), "John Updike's Complacent God," Modern Library, pg 192.
^ a b James Wood, "Gossip in Gilt," London Review of Books, 19 April 2001, Link
^ Richard Eder, "The Paris Interviews," New York Times, 25 December 2007.
^ Harold Bloom, ed., Modern Critical Views of John Updike, Chelsea House, New York, 1987.
^ Dick Cavett, "Writers Bloc: When Updike and Cheever Came to Visit," New York Times, 13 February 2009. Video 14 October 1981 Link
^ S. Future, "Updike," The Fiction Circus, 27 January 2009, Link
^ Gore Vidal, "Rabbit's own burrow," Times Literary Supplement, 26 April 1996, the longest essay ever to appear in the TLS, Link
^ Lorrie Moore, "Home Truths," New York Review of Books, 20 November 2003, Link
^ John Updike, Rabbit at Rest (1990), Knopf, pg. 308
^ The Economist, "An American subversive," 29 January 2009, Link
^ a b c d Jack De Bellis (ed.), "Mortality and Immortality," The John Updike Encyclopedia (2000), pg. 286. See here for many subsequent quotes and citations on death.
^ Time, "View from the Catacombs," 26 April 1968, pg. 6, Link
^ Antonya Nelson, "Remembering Updike," New Yorker online, Link
^ ZZ Packer, "Remembering Updike," New Yorker online, Link
^ Julian Barnes, "Remembering Updike," New Yorker online, Link
^ Jack De Bellis (ed.), "More Matter," The John Updike Encyclopedia (2000), pg. 281.
^ James Wolcott, "Caretaker/Pallbearer," London Review of Books, 1 January 2009, Link
^ Michiko Kakutani, "An Appraisal," New York Times, 27 January 2009, Link
^ John Updike, "Perfection Wasted," Collected Poems: 1953-1993 (1995), Knopf.
^ John Updike, "The Dogwood Tree," Assorted Prose (1965), Knopf.
^ John Updike, The Early Stories: 1953-1975 (2004), Ballantine Books.
^ 26 April 1968 Time cover, 18 October 1982 Time cover
^ ECHO Journal IV/2, Kajikawa, "Review: 8 Mile, "Rap, Rabbit, Rap," Link



[edit] Further reading and literary criticism


Bailey, Peter J., Rabbit (Un)Redeemed: The Drama of Belief in John Updike's Fiction, Farleigh Dickinson University Press, Madison, New Jersey, 2006.
Baker, Nicholas, U & I: A True Story, Random House, New York, 1991.
Bloom, Harold, ed., Modern Critical Views of John Updike, Chelsea House, New York, 1987.
Boswell, Marshall, "John Updike", The Literary Encyclopedia, 18 March 2004.
Boswell, Marshall, John Updike's Rabbit Tetralogy: Mastered Irony in Motion, University of Missouri Press, Columbia, Missouri, 2001.
Broer, Lawrence, Rabbit Tales: Poetry and Politics in John Updike's Rabbit Novels, University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, 2000.
Burchard, Rachel C., John Updike: Yea Sayings, Southern Illinois University Press, Carbondale, Illinois, 1971.
Campbell, Jeff H., Updike's Novels: Thorns Spell A Word, Midwestern State University Press, Wichita Falls, Texas, 1988.
Clarke Taylor, C., John Updike: A Bibliography, Kent State Univeristy, Kent, Ohio, 1968.
De Bellis, Jack, John Updike: A Bibliography, 1968-1993, Greenwood Publishing Group, Westport, Connecticut, 1994.
De Bellis, Jack, John Updike: The Critical Responses to the Rabbit Saga, Greenwood Publishing Group, Westport, Connecticut, 2005.
De Bellis, Jack, ed., The John Updike Encyclopedia, Greenwood Press, Santa Barbara, California, 2001.
Detwiler, Robert, John Updike, Twayne, Boston, 1984.
Greiner, Donald, "Don DeLillo, John Updike, and the Sustaining Power of Myth", UnderWords: Perspectives on Don DeLillo's Underworld, University of Delaware Press, Newark, Delaware, 2002.
Greiner, Donald, John Updike's Novels, Ohio University Press, Athens, Ohio, 1984.
Greiner, Donald, The Other John Updike: Poems, Short Stories, Prose, Play, Ohio University Press, Athens, Ohio, 1981.
Gullette, Margaret Morganroth, "John Updike: Rabbit Angstrom Grows Up," Safe at Last in the Middle Years : The Invention of the Midlife Progress Novel, Backinprint.com, New York, 2001.
Hamilton, Alice and Kenneth, The Elements of John Updike, William B. Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, Michigan, 1970.
Hunt, George W., John Updike and the Three Great Secret Things: Sex, Religion, and Art, William B. Eerdmans Pub. Co., Grand Rapids, Michigan, 1985.
Karshan, Thomas, "Batsy", London Review of Books, 31 March 2005.
Luscher, Robert M., John Updike: A Study of the Short Fiction, Twayne, New York, 1993.
McNaughton, William R., ed., Critical Essays on John Updike, GK Hall, Boston, 1982.
Markle, Joyce B., Fighters and Lovers: Themes in the Novels of John Updike, New York University Press, 1973.
Miller, D. Quentin, John Updike and the Cold War: Drawing the Iron Curtain, University of Missouri Press, Columbia, Missouri, 2001.
Morley, Catherine, "The Bard of Everyday Domesticity: John Updike's Song for America," The Quest for Epic in Contemporary American Literature, Routledge, New York, 2008.
Newman, Judie, John Updike, Macmillan, London, 1988.
O'Connell, Mary, Updike and the Patriarchal Dilemma: Masculinity in the Rabbit Novels, Southern Illinois University Press, Carbondale, Illinois, 1996.
Olster, Stanley, The Cambridge Companion to John Updike, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2006.
Plath, James, ed., Conversations with John Updike, University Press of Mississippi Press, Jackson, Mississippi, 1994.
Porter, M. Gilbert, "John Updike's 'A&P': The Establishment and an Emersonian Cashier," English Journal 61 (8), pgs. 1155-1158, November 1972.
Pritchard, William, Updike: America's Man of Letters, University of Massachusetts Press, Amherst, Massachusetts, 2005.
Ristoff, Dilvo I., John Updike's Rabbit at Rest: Appropriating History, Peter Lang, New York, 1998.'
Roiphe, Anne, For Rabbit, with Love and Squalor, Free Press, Washington, DC, 2000.
Searles, George J., The Fiction of Philip Roth and John Updike, Southern Illinois University Press, Carbondale, Illinois, 1984.
Schiff, James A., Updike's Version: Rewriting The Scarlet Letter, University of Missouri Press, Columbia, Missouri, 1992.
Schiff, James A., United States Author Series: John Updike Revisited, Twayne Publishers, Woodbridge, Connecticut, 1998.
Tallent, Elizabeth, Married Men and Magic Tricks: John Updike's Erotic Heroes, Creative Arts Book Company, Berkeley, California, 1982.
Tanner, Tony, "A Compromised Environment," City of Words: American Fiction, 1950-1970, Jonathan Cape, London, 1971.
Thorburn, David and Eiland, Howard, eds., John Updike: A Collection of Critical Essays, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1979.
Trachtenberg, Stanley, ed., New Essays on Rabbit, Run, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993.
Uphaus, Suzanne H., John Updike, Ungar, New York, 1980.
Vidal, Gore, "Rabbit's own burrow", Times Literary Supplement, 26 April 1996.
Wallace, David Foster, "John Updike, Champion Literary Phallocrat, Drops One", New York Observer, 12 October 1997.
Wood, James, "Gossip in Gilt", London Review of Books, 19 April 2001.
Wood, James, "John Updike's Complacent God," The Broken Estate: Essays on Literature and Belief, Modern Library, New York, 2000.
Yerkes, James, John Updike and Religion: The Sense of the Sacred and the Motions of Grace, William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, Grand Rapids, Missouri, 1999.



[edit] External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: John Updike





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: John Updike



Literary Encyclopedia biography
Books and Writers biography
LION author page for John Updike, includes full bibliography, biography, references, and access to more than 1000 pieces of Updike criticism.
New York Times: John Updike Life & Times
Updike archive from The New York Review of Books
John Updike at the Internet Movie Database
Charlie Rose archive
The Centaurian: Updike Home Page
Times Literary Supplement Archive
Contemporary Literary Criticism: John Updike Criticism
In Depth with John Updike, CSPAN, December 2005
New Yorker archive
JCO on John Updike Updike essays by Joyce Carol Oates


[edit] Obituaries

Remembering Updike, New Yorker
He took the novel onto another plane of intimacy, Martin Amis, The Guardian, 28 January 2009.
A Relentless Updike Mapped America's Mysteries, Michiko Kakutani, New York Times, January 27, 2009
John Updike, a Lyrical Writer of the Middle-Class Man, Dies at 76, Christopher Lehmann-Haupt, New York Times, January 28, 2009
Postcript, Adam Gopnik, New Yorker, 9 February 2009
The Realist: John Updike's Lyricism Exalted the Everyday and the Unglamorous, Henry Allen, Washington Post, 28 January 2009
John Updike 1932-2009, Eric Homberger, The Guardian, Tuesday 27 January 2009.
On John Updike, Ian McEwan, New York Review of Books, 12 March 2009
John Updike: A Self Forever, Jonathan Gharraie, The Oxonian Review, February 9, 2009
John Updike dies at 76, Mary Rourke, Los Angeles Time, 28 January 2009


[edit] Pictures

John Updike, RIP : photographs by Magnum Photos
A Life in Pictures (15 pictures), The Guardian, January 2009.
New York Social Diary: Jill Krementz Photo Journal - John Updike









v • d • e

Select works of John Updike





Rabbit Novels

Rabbit, Run (1960) • Rabbit Redux (1971) • Rabbit Is Rich (1981) • Rabbit At Rest (1990) • Rabbit Remembered (2001)






Bech books

Bech, a Book (1970) • Bech Is Back (1982) • Bech at Bay (1998)






Buchanan books

Buchanan Dying (1974) • Memories of the Ford Administration (1992)






Eastwick books

The Witches of Eastwick (1984) • The Widows of Eastwick (2008)






The Scarlet Letter trilogy

A Month of Sundays (1975) • Roger's Version (1986) • S. (1988)






Other novels

The Poorhouse Fair (1959) • The Centaur (1963) • Of the Farm (1965) • Couples (1968) • Marry Me: A Romance (1977) • The Coup (1978) •Brazil (1994) • In the Beauty of the Lilies (1996) • Toward the End of Time (1997) • Gertrude and Claudius (2000) • Seek My Face (2002) • Villages (2004) • Terrorist (2006) •






Poems and short stories

The Carpentered Hen (1958) • "A&P" • "A Trillion Feet of Gas" • "Who Made Yellow Roses Yellow?"• The Same Door (1959) • Pigeon Feathers (1962) • Olinger Stories (1964) • Too Far to Go (1979) • Trust Me (1984) • My Father's Tears and Other Stories (2009)






Settings and characters

Rabbit Angstrom • Henry Bech • Ruth Leonard • Olinger, Pennsylvania • Eastwick, Rhode Island • Brewer, Pennsylvania • Tarbox, Massachusetts









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Updike"
Categories: 1932 births | 2009 deaths | Dutch Americans | American Episcopalians | Converts to Anglicanism | Cancer deaths in Massachusetts | Deaths from lung cancer | American novelists | American short story writers | American essayists | American children's writers | American poets | American literary critics | O. Henry Award winners | National Book Award winners | Pulitzer Prize for Fiction winners | Members of The American Academy of Arts and Letters | United States National Medal of Arts recipients | Harvard University alumni | Harvard Lampoon members | Writers from Pennsylvania | Writers from Massachusetts | People from Berks County, Pennsylvania 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
বাংলা
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latina
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
Plattdüütsch
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Piemontèis
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 19:59.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
