













Santiago de Compostela - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Santiago_de_Compostela";
		var wgTitle = "Santiago de Compostela";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "27670";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282165467;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Santiago de Compostela

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please improve this article if you can. (July 2008)




Santiago de Compostela









Flag
Coat of Arms





Location



Location of Santiago de Compostela within Galicia


Coordinates : 42°52′57″N 008°32′28″W﻿ / ﻿42.8825°N 8.54111°W﻿ / 42.8825; -8.54111Coordinates: 42°52′57″N 008°32′28″W﻿ / ﻿42.8825°N 8.54111°W﻿ / 42.8825; -8.54111
Time zone : CET (GMT +1)
- summer : CEST (GMT +2)


General information


Native name
Santiago de Compostela (Galician)


Spanish name
Santiago de Compostela


Nickname
Santiago


Postal code
15700


Area code
+34 (Spain) + hud6f79 (A Coruña)


Website
santiagodecompostela.org


Administration


Country
Spain


Autonomous Community
Galicia


Province
A Coruña


Comarca
Santiago


Mayor
Xosé Antonio Sánchez (PSOE)


Geography


Land Area
223 km²


Altitude
260 m AMSL


Population


Population
92.919 (2007)


Density
416,68 hab./km² (2007)


Santiago de Compostela (also Saint James of Compostela) is the capital of the autonomous community of Galicia and a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Located in the north west of Spain in the Province of A Coruña, it was the "European City of Culture" for the year 2000. The city's Cathedral is the destination today, as it has been throughout history, of the important 9th century medieval pilgrimage route, the Way of St. James (Galician: Camiño de Santiago, Spanish: Camino de Santiago).




Contents


1 Name
2 Transportation
3 The city
4 Demography
5 History

5.1 History of the Way of St. James Pilgrimage

5.1.1 The establishment of the shrine
5.1.2 Pre-Christian legends
5.1.3 Alchemical metaphor




6 Main sights
7 Sister Cities
8 See also
9 References
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Name
One etymology for the name "Compostela" is that it comes from the Latin phrase campus stellae, i.e. "field of the star", making Santiago de Compostela "St. James of the Field of the Star". This would reflect the belief that the bones of St. James the Greater were taken from the Middle East, to Spain and then buried where a shepherd had spotted a star. A church was eventually built over the bones, and later replaced with the Cathedral de Santiago de Compostela.
Other etymologies derive from the Latin word Compositum, i.e. "The well founded", or Composita Tella, meaning "burial ground". Yet another etymology derives it from "San Jacome Apostol".

[edit] Transportation
Santiago de Compostela is served by an airport[1] and rail service. There are also plans to provide access to Santigo de Compostela by the Spanish High Speed Railway Network, a project under construction.

[edit] The city




Santiago's old Town UNESCO World Heritage Site


The cathedral borders the main plaza of the old and well-preserved city. Across the square is the Pazo de Raxoi (Raxoi's Palace), the town hall and seat of the Galician Xunta, and on the right from the cathedral steps is the Hostal dos Reis Católicos, founded in 1492 by the Catholic Monarchs, Isabella of Castille and Ferdinand of Aragon, as a pilgrim's hospice (now a parador). The Obradoiro façade of the cathedral, the best known, is depicted on the Spanish euro coins of 1 cent, 2 cents, and 5 cents (€0.01, €0.02, and €0.05).
Santiago is the site of the University of Santiago de Compostela, established in the early 16th century. The main campus can be seen best from an alcove in the large municipal park in the centre of the city.
Within the old town there are many narrow winding streets full of historic buildings. The new town all around it has less character though some of the older parts of the new town have some big apartments in them.
Santiago de Compostela has a substantial nightlife. Divided between the new town (la zona nueva or ensanche) and the old town (la zona vieja or a zona vella), one can often find a mix of middle-aged residents and younger students running throughout the city until the early hours of the morning. Radiating from the center of the city, the historic cathedral is surrounded by paved granite streets, tucked away in the old town, and separated from the newer part of the city by the largest of many parks throughout the city, Parque da Alameda. Whether in the old town or the new town, party-goers will often find themselves following their tapas by dancing the night away.
Santiago gives its name to one of the four military orders of Spain: Santiago, Calatrava, Alcantara and Montesa.
The prevailing wind from the Atlantic and the surrounding mountains combine to give Santiago some of Europe's highest rainfall: about 1,900 mm (75 inches) annually.

[edit] Demography


Santiago de Compostela (Old Town)*


UNESCO World Heritage Site







State Party
 Spain


Type
Cultural


Criteria
i, ii, vi


Reference
347


Region**
Continental Europe


Inscription history


Inscription
1985  (9th Session)


* Name as inscribed on World Heritage List.
** Region as classified by UNESCO.




Demographic evolution of Santiago de Compostela between 1900 and 2006

1900
1930
1950
1981
2004
2006


24,120
38,270
55,553
82,404
92,298
93,458




A Coruña Province Population c. 1787


District
population


City of Coruña
13,575


City of Ferrol (Civilian Pop. Only)
24,993


Santiago de Compostela
15,584


Towns, Villages and Hamlets
c.229,123


All the Province (Total):
283,275


(Ferrol - Urban History, 2004) [1]




A Coruña Province Population c. 1833


District
population


City of Coruña
23,000


City of Ferrol (Civilian Pop. Only)
13,000


Santiago de Compostela
28,000


Towns, Villages and Hamlets
c.233,000


All the Province (Total):
c.297,000


(U. P. Gazetteer By Th.Baldwin, 1847) [2]




A Coruña Province Population c. 1900


District
population


City of Coruña
43,971


City of Ferrol (Civilian Pop. Only)
25,281


Santiago de Compostela
24,120


Towns, Villages and Hamlets
580,184


All the Province (Total):
653,556


(Encyclopædia Britannica, 1911) [3]




[edit] History



This section requires expansion.


Santiago de Compostela was originally founded by the Suebi people at the end of the 4th century or the beginning of the 5th century just after the collapse of the Roman Empire. Then, in 584 the whole settlement together with the rest of Galicia and northern Portugal was incorporated by Leovigild into the Visigothic kingdom of Spain. Raided from 711 to 739 by the Arabs, Santiago de Compostela was finally recaptured by the Visigothic king of Asturias in 754, about 60 years before the discovery of the remains of Saint James the Great. So, from the 9th century onwards, with the recognition of the Pope and Charlemagne, during the reign of Alfonso II of Asturias, this settlement was not just a city, but a holy city, and one of the main centers of Christian pilgrimage, rivaled only by Rome itself and the Holy Land. Still, there are some who claim that the remains found here were not those of the apostle James but those of Priscillian. They are also thought by many to be someone else altogether.
Santiago de Compostela was captured by the French during the Napoleonic War and its capture broke the spirits of the many Spanish guerillas who were fighting the mighty invading armies of Marshals' Soult, Victor, Massena and Napoleon's brother, the new King of Spain, Joseph Bonaparte. During the war, many attempts were made to recapture it by Spanish partisans, who believed St James would come down on the field and destroy the French if they earned his favour by beating the French out of the holy city, which was St James's city. Many of the attempts to return the holy city to the Spanish failed, and the only one that didn't fail was unsuccessful in retaining its hold on the city, and the combined British and Spanish forces were beaten back, where they retreated with the British, and the city was back in French hands by 48 hours.

[edit] History of the Way of St. James Pilgrimage




Way of St. James.


The legend that St James found his way to the Iberian peninsula, and had preached there is one of a number of early traditions concerning the missionary activities and final resting places of the apostles of Jesus. Although the 1884 Bull of Pope Leo XIII Omnipotens Deus accepted the authenticity of the relics at Compostela, the Vatican remains uncommitted as to whether the relics are those of Saint James the Great, while continuing to promote the more general benefits of pilgrimage to the site.
According to a tradition that cannot be traced before the 12th century, the relics were said to have been discovered in 814 by Theodomir, bishop of Iria Flavia in the west of Galicia. Theodomir was guided to the spot by a star, the legend affirmed, drawing upon a familiar myth-element, hence "Compostela" was given an etymology as a corruption of Campus Stellae, "Plain of Stars."

[edit] The establishment of the shrine




St. James' shell


As suggested already, it is probably impossible to know whose bones were actually found, and precisely when and how. Perhaps it does not matter. What the history of the pilgrimage requires, but what the meagre sources fail to reveal, is how the local Galician cult associated with the saint was transformed into an international cult drawing pilgrims from distant parts of the world.
The 1000 year old pilgrimage to the shrine of St. James in the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela is known in English as the Way of St. James and in Galician as the Camiño de Santiago. Over 100,000 pilgrims travel to the city each year from points all over Europe, and other parts of the world. The pilgrimage has been the subject of many books and television programmes notably Brian Sewell's The Naked Pilgrim produced for UK's Five.

[edit] Pre-Christian legends
As the lowest-lying land on that stretch of coast, the city's site took on added significance. Legends supposed of Celtic origin made it the place where the souls of the dead gathered to follow the Sun across the sea. Those unworthy of going to the Land of the Dead haunted Galicia as the Santa Compaña.

[edit] Alchemical metaphor
In Fulcanelli's Mystery of the Cathedrals the pilgrimage to Compo-stella is decoded as a metaphor for one of the processes for making the Philosopher's Stone, namely the method using antimony. This method will produce stellated crystals in the arm of the retort, which are then further worked upon. A common misunderstanding which mislead many, including Newton, is that the "stellate regulus" of antimony is the matter to be used.
The pilgrim's shell was a motif used by the alchemist Jacques Coeur on the many buildings he erected, and was his personal motif; it is also the shell upon which Venus rides as she rises from the sea (morning star = stellated matter); this ocean is green, the color of many Venusian minerals, but it's meaning is deeper. Basil Valentine said that the alchemists called their first matter by the name of anything green to confuse the ignorant, but in truth there is such a first matter that is a green esculent water. Venus represents the generative force, the power of attraction/repulsion which brings forth the cosmos. Her water is that of the Fire of Desire which motivates this push and pull. The shape of the calabash carried by the pilgrims is another clue to the source of this green water.
It was also common for churches to place holy water in a container shaped like this shell, although it is unlikely most clerics would know why. This holy water (imbued with the Spirit) was another metaphor for the Mercury of the Philosophers.

[edit] Main sights

Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela
University of Santiago de Compostela


[edit] Sister Cities
These are the official sister cities of Santiago de Compostela:
 Santiago do Cacém, Portugal (1980s)
 Mashhad, Iran (2000s)
 Buenos Aires, Argentina (1980s)
 Qom, Iran (2000s)
 Santiago de Querétaro, México (2005)
 Santiago de los Caballeros, República Dominicana (2004)
 Assisi, Italy (2008)

[edit] See also

Archdiocese of Santiago de Compostela
Order of Santiago or Order of Saint James of Compostela founded in 12th century Spain.

Saunders, Tracy, Pilgrimage to Heresy: Don't Believe Everything They Tell You (iUniverse 2007), for a somewhat different slant on the occupant of the tomb in Compostela. Though a fictionalised history, it looks at what we know of Bishop Priscillian of Avila, arrested on charges of "heresy and witchcraft" along with eight of his followers, including a noblewoman, Euchrotia, and subsequently decapitated in 385 CE by the Romans with the full knowledge of the newly formed Catholic Church, and whose remains have been suggested (by Prof. Henry Chadwick and others)may be entombed in the sepulchre which is said to contain the remains of St. James. See also: Priscillian, and Priscillianism, and The Way of St. James

[edit] References
This article incorporates text from the Encyclopædia Britannica, Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.

^ The airport code for Santiago de Compostela’s Metropolitan Airport is (IATA: SCQ, ICAO: LEST).


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Santiago de Compostela



Santiago's Football Team
Santiago's Basketball Team
Concello de Santiago de Compostela
Pilgrim community on the Camino de Santiago
Walking the Camino de Santiago, A Guide
Photographs of Santiago de Compostela Cathedral and Monasteries of Galicia
Webcam of Santiago cathedral square, where the pilgrims arrive at all times of the day.
Photos of Santiago de Compostella
Video of Santiago de Compostela on YouTube
Santiago Tourism









v • d • e

Cities in Galicia






Santiago de Compostela · A Coruña · Vigo · Pontevedra · Ferrol · Lugo · Ourense














v • d • e

A Coruña Province






Abegondo · Ames · Aranga · Ares · Arteixo · Arzúa · A Baña · Bergondo · Betanzos · Boimorto · Boiro · Boqueixón · Brión · Cabana de Bergantiños · Cabanas · Camariñas · Cambre · A Capela · Carballo · Cariño · Carnota · Carral · Cedeira · Cee · Cerceda · Cerdido · Cesuras · Coirós · Corcubión · Coristanco · A Coruña · Culleredo · Curtis · Dodro · Dumbría · Fene · Ferrol · Fisterra · Frades · Irixoa · A Laracha · Laxe · Lousame · Malpica de Bergantiños · Mañón · Mazaricos · Melide · Mesía · Miño · Moeche · Monfero · Mugardos · Muros · Muxia · Narón · Neda · Negreira · Noia · Oleiros · Ordes · Oroso · Ortigueira · Outes · Oza dos Ríos · Paderne · Padrón · O Pino · A Pobra do Caramiñal · Ponteceso · Pontedeume · As Pontes de García Rodríguez · Porto do Son · Rianxo · Ribeira · Rois · Sada · San Sadurniño · Santa Comba · Santiago de Compostela · Santiso · Sobrado · As Somozas · Teo · Toques · Tordoia · Touro · Trazo · Val do Dubra · Valdoviño · Vedra · Vilarmaior · Vilasantar · Vimianzo · Zas














v • d • e

World Heritage Sites in Spain







Alhambra, Generalife and Albayzín · Aranjuez Cultural Landscape · Archaeological Ensemble of Mérida · Archaeological Ensemble of Tárraco (Tarragona) · Archaeological Site of Atapuerca · Ávila with its Extra-mural Churches · Burgos Cathedral · Cáceres · Catalan Romanesque Churches of the Vall de Boí · Cathedral, Alcázar and Archivo de Indias, Seville · Caves of Altamira and Paleolithic Cave Art of Northern Spain · Cordoba · Cuenca · Doñana · El Escorial · Garajonay · Ibiza (Biodiversity and Culture) · Las Médulas · Mudéjar Architecture of Aragon · Monuments of Oviedo and the Kingdom of the Asturias · Palau de la Música Catalana and Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona · Palmeral of Elche · Poblet Monastery · Pyrénées - Mont Perdu (with France) · Renaissance Monuments of Úbeda and Baeza · Rock-Art on the Iberian Peninsula · Roman Walls of Lugo · Route of Santiago de Compostela · Salamanca · San Cristóbal de La Laguna · San Millán Yuso and Suso Monasteries · Santa María de Guadalupe · Santiago de Compostela · Segovia and its Aqueduct · Silk Exchange in Valencia · Teide National Park · Toledo · University and Historic Precinct of Alcalá de Henares · Vizcaya Bridge · Works of Antoni Gaudí

















v • d • e

Capitals of European states and territories





Capitals of non-sovereign territories or constituent nations shown in bold italics









Central
Southern
Western
Northern








Berlin, Germany
Bratislava, Slovakia
Budapest, Hungary
Ljubljana, Slovenia
Prague, Czech Republic
Vienna, Austria
Warsaw, Poland
Vaduz, Liechtenstein
Eastern
Astana, Kazakhstan 1
Baku, Azerbaijan 1
Bucharest, Romania
Chişinău, Moldova
Kiev, Ukraine
Minsk, Belarus
Moscow, Russia 1
Sukhumi, Abkhazia 3
Tbilisi, Georgia 1
Tskhinvali, South Ossetia 3
Yerevan, Armenia 2





Ankara, Turkey 1
Athens, Greece
Belgrade, Serbia
Gibraltar, Gibraltar4
Nicosia, Cyprus 2
Nicosia, Northern Cyprus 2, 3
Podgorica, Montenegro
Pristina, Kosovo 3
Rome, Italy
San Marino, San Marino
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
Skopje, Republic of Macedonia
Sofia, Bulgaria
Tirana, Albania
Valletta, Malta
Vatican City, Vatican City
Zagreb, Croatia




Amsterdam, Netherlands
Andorra la Vella, Andorra
Berne, Switzerland
Brussels, Belgium 6
Douglas, Isle of Man4
Dublin, Ireland
Lisbon, Portugal
London, United Kingdom
Luxembourg, Luxembourg
Madrid, Spain
Monaco, Monaco
Paris, France
St. Helier, Jersey4
St. Peter Port, Guernsey4




Copenhagen, Denmark
Helsinki, Finland
Longyearbyen, Svalbard
Mariehamn, Åland Islands
Oslo, Norway
Reykjavík, Iceland
Riga, Latvia
Stockholm, Sweden
Tallinn, Estonia
Tórshavn, Faroe Islands
Vilnius, Lithuania











1 Transcontinental country.  2 Entirely in Southwest Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe.  3 Partially recognised country.  4 Crown Dependency or Overseas Territory of the United Kingdom.  5 Part of Spain.  6 Also the seat of the European Union, see Location of European Union institutions and Brussels and the European Union.












v • d • e

European Capitals of Culture








1985 Athens · 1986 Florence · 1987 Amsterdam · 1988 West Berlin · 1989 Paris · 1990 Glasgow · 1991 Dublin · 1992 Madrid · 1993 Antwerp · 1994 Lisbon · 1995 Luxembourg City · 1996 Copenhagen · 1997 Thessaloniki · 1998 Stockholm · 1999 Weimar · 2000 Reykjavík · Bergen · Helsinki · Brussels · Prague · Kraków · Santiago de Compostela · Avignon · Bologna · 2001 Rotterdam · Porto · 2002 Bruges · Salamanca · 2003 Graz · 2004 Genoa · Lille · 2005 Cork · 2006 Patras · 2007 Luxembourg City and Greater Region · Sibiu · 2008 Liverpool · Stavanger · 2009 Linz · Vilnius · 2010 Essen · Pécs · Istanbul · 2011 Turku · Tallinn · 2012 Maribor · Guimarães











Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Santiago_de_Compostela"
Categories: Catholic pilgrimage sites | Way of St. James | Holy cities | Municipalities in A Coruña | World Heritage Sites in SpainHidden categories: Cleanup from July 2008 | All pages needing cleanup | Articles to be expanded since June 2008 | All articles to be expanded | Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
Asturianu
Bamanankan
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bislama
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Kaszëbsczi
Kernewek
Kreyòl ayisyen
Ladino
Latina
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Magyar
Māori
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
Tiếng Việt
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 18:51 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
