













Guyana - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Guyana";
		var wgTitle = "Guyana";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "17238691";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281524098;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Guyana

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Guyana (disambiguation).


Co-operative Republic of Guyana









Flag
Coat of arms





Motto: "One people, one nation, one destiny"


Anthem: "Dear Land of Guyana, of Rivers and Plains"










Capital
(and largest city)
Georgetown
6°46′N 58°10′W﻿ / ﻿6.767°N 58.167°W﻿ / 6.767; -58.167


Official languages
English


Recognised regional languages
Guyanese Creole, Portuguese, Spanish, Dutch, Akawaio, Macushi, Wai-Wai, Arawak, Cariban


Ethnic groups 
43.5% East Indian, 30% Black African, 17% Mixed, 9% Amerindian


Demonym
Guyanese


Government
Semi-presidential republic


 - 
President
Bharrat Jagdeo


 - 
Prime Minister
Sam Hinds


Independence


 - 
from the United Kingdom
26 May 1966 


Area


 - 
Total
214,999 km2 (84th)
83,000 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
8.4


Population


 - 
March 2008 estimate
858,8631 (154th)


 - 
2007 census
769,095 


 - 
Density
3.5/km2 (217th)
9.1/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$2.924 billion[1] 


 - 
Per capita
$3,841[1] 


GDP (nominal)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$1.074 billion[1] 


 - 
Per capita
$1,410[1] 


HDI (2007)
▲ 0.750 (medium) (97th)


Currency
Guyanese dollar (GYD)


Time zone
(UTC-4)


Drives on the
left


Internet TLD
.gy


Calling code
592


1
Around one-third of the population (230,000) live in the capital, Georgetown.


Guyana (pronounced /ɡaɪˈænə/ or /ɡiːˈɑːnə/), officially the Co-operative Republic of Guyana and previously known as British Guiana, is the only state of the Commonwealth of Nations on mainland South America. On the northern coast of the continent, it is bordered to the east by Suriname, to the south and southwest by Brazil, to the west by Venezuela, and on the north by the Atlantic Ocean. At 215,000 km2, it is the third smallest state on the mainland of South America (after Suriname and French Guiana). Its population is approximately 860,000. It is one of the five non-Spanish-speaking territories on the continent, along with the states of Brazil (Portuguese) and Suriname (Dutch), the French overseas region of French Guiana (French) and the British Overseas Territory of the Falkland Islands (English). Guyana is culturally associated with the English-speaking Caribbean states, commonly referred to as the Anglophone Caribbean.




Contents


1 Geography
2 Regions and neighborhood councils
3 Boundary disputes
4 Environment and biodiversity
5 World Heritage Site status
6 Landmarks
7 History
8 Economy

8.1 Summary


9 Demographics

9.1 Language
9.2 Religion


10 Government and politics

10.1 Military
10.2 Transport
10.3 Electricity
10.4 Water supply and sanitation


11 Education
12 Public health

12.1 Service delivery
12.2 Health conditions


13 Culture
14 See also
15 Notes
16 Further reading
17 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Geography




Map of Guyana






Kaieteur Falls in central Guyana


Main article: Geography of Guyana
Guyana can be divided into five natural regions: a narrow and fertile marshy plain along the Atlantic coast (low coastal plain) most of the population lives; a white sand belt more inland (hilly sand and clay region), containing most of Guyana's mineral deposits; the dense rainforests (Forested Highland Region) between the middle of the country; the grassy flat savannah in the south; and the larger interior highlands (interior savannah) consisting mostly of mountains that gradually rise to the Brazilian border. Guyana's main mountains are Mount Ayanganna (6,699 ft (2,042 m), Monte Caburai (4,806 ft (1,465 m) and Monte Roraima (9,301 ft (2,835 m) — the highest mountain in Guyana) on the Brazil-Guyana-Venezuela tripoint, part of the Pakaraima range. Roraima and Guyana's table-top mountains (tepuis) are said to have been the inspiration for Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's 1912 novel The Lost World. There are also many steep escarpments and waterfalls, including Kaieteur Falls. Between the Rupununi River and the border with Brazil lies the Rupununi savannah, south of which lie the Kanuku Mountains.




Rupununi savannah


The three main rivers are the Essequibo, the Demerara, and the Berbice. The Corentyne River forms the border with Suriname. At the mouth of the Essequibo are several large islands. The 90-mile (145 km) Shell Beach lies along the northwest coast. Guyana is a major breeding area for sea turtles (mainly Leatherbacks) and other wildlife.
The local climate is tropical and generally hot and humid, though moderated by northeast trade winds along the coast. There are two rainy seasons, the first from May to mid-August, the second from mid-November to mid-January.
It has one of the largest unspoiled rainforests in South America, some parts of which are almost inaccessible by humans. In 2008, the BBC ran a three-part programme called Lost Land of the Jaguar which highlighted the huge diversity of wildlife, including undiscovered species and rare species such as the giant otter and harpy eagle.


[edit] Regions and neighborhood councils
Main articles: Regions of Guyana and Neighborhood Councils of Guyana




Regions of Guyana


Guyana is divided into 10 regions:[2][3]


No
Region
Area km²
Population
Population
per km²


1
Barima-Waini
20 339
24 275
1.2


2
Pomeroon-Supenaam
6 195
49 253
8.0


3
Essequibo Islands-West Demerara
2 232
103 061
46.2


4
Demerara-Mahaica
3 755
310 320
82.6


5
Mahaica-Berbice
36 234
123 695
3.4


6
East Berbice-Corentyne
52 428
161 412
3.1


7
Cuyuni-Mazaruni
47 213
16 253
0.3


8
Potaro-Siparuni
20 051
10 095
0.5


9
Upper Takutu-Upper Essequibo
57 750
19 387
0.3


10
Upper Demerara-Berbice
19 387
41 112
2.1



Guyana
214 999
858 863
4.0


The regions are divided into 27 neighborhood councils.

[edit] Boundary disputes
See also: Schomburgk Line
Guyana was in border disputes with both Suriname, which claimed the land east of the Corentyne River in southeastern Guyana, and Venezuela which claims the land west of the Essequibo River as part of Guayana Esequiba. [4][5][6] A part of the territorial dispute with Suriname was arbitrated by the United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea, and a ruling was announced in September 21, 2007. The ruling concerning the Caribbean Sea north of both nations found both parties violated treaty obligations and declined to order any compensation to either party. [7]
When the British surveyed British Guiana in 1840, they included the entire Cuyuni River basin within the colony. Venezuela did not agree with this as it claimed all lands west of the Essequibo River. In 1898, at Venezuela's request, an international arbitration tribunal was convened, and in 1899 they issued an award giving about 94% of the disputed territory to British Guiana. Venezuela and Great Britain accepted the award by treaty in 1905, but Venezuela raised the issue again at the time of Guyana's independence and continues to claim Guayana Esequiba.[8] Venezuela calls this region "Zona de Reclamación" (Reclamation Zone), and Venezuelan maps of the national territory routinely include it, drawing it in with dashed lines. [9]
Specific small disputed areas involving Guyana are Ankoko Island with Venezuela; Corentyne River[10] with Suriname; and New River Triangle[11] with Suriname.

[edit] Environment and biodiversity
See also: Category:Flora of Guyana and Category:Fauna of Guyana




Satellite image of Guyana 2004.






Scarlet Macaw.


The following habitats have been categorized for Guyana: coastal, marine, littoral, estuarine palustrine, mangrove, riverine, lacustrine, swamp, savannah, white sand forest, brown sand forest, montane, cloud forest, moist lowland and dry evergreen scrub forests (NBAP, 1999). About 14 areas of biological interest have been identified as possible hotspots for a National Protected Area System.
More than 80% of Guyana is still covered by forests, ranging from dry evergreen and seasonal forests to montane and lowland evergreen rain forests. These forests are home to more than a thousand species of trees. Guyana's tropical climate, unique geology, and relatively pristine ecosystems support extensive areas of species-rich rain forests and natural habitats with high levels of endemism. Approximately eight thousand species of plants occur in Guyana, half of which are found nowhere else.
Guyana is one of the countries with the highest biodiversity in the world. Guyana, with 1,168 vertebrate species, 1,600 bird species, boasts one of the richest mammalian fauna assemblages of any comparably sized area in the world. The Guiana Shield region is little known and extremely rich biologically. Unlike other areas of South America, over 70% of the natural habitat remains pristine. The rich natural history of British Guiana was described by early explorers Sir Walter Raleigh and Charles Waterton and later by naturalists Sir David Attenborough and Gerald Durrell.

[edit] World Heritage Site status
Countries interested in the conservation and protection of natural and cultural heritage sites of the world accede to the Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage that was adopted by UNESCO in 1972. Guyana signed the treaty in 1977. In fact, Guyana was the first Caribbean State Party to sign the treaty. In the mid-1990s, Guyana seriously began the process of selecting sites for World Heritage nomination, and three sites were considered: Kaieteur National Park, Shell Beach and Historic Georgetown. By 1997, work on Kaieteur National Park was started, and in 1998 work on Historic Georgetown was begun. To date, however, Guyana has not made a successful nomination.




Among many other mammals, Guyanese jungles are home to the jaguar.


Guyana submitted the Kaieteur National Park, including the Kaieteur Falls, to UNESCO as its first World Heritage Site nomination. The proposed area and surrounds have some of Guyana's most diversified life zones with one of the highest levels of endemic species found anywhere in South America. The Kaieteur Falls is the most spectacular feature of the park, falling a distance of 226 metres. The nomination of Kaieteur Park as a World Heritage Site was not successful, primarily because the area was seen by the evaluators as being too small, especially when compared with the Central Suriname Nature Reserve that had just been nominated as a World Heritage Site (2000). The dossier was thus returned to Guyana for revision.
Guyana continues in its bid for a World Heritage Site. Work continues, after a period of hiatus, on the nomination dossier for Historic Georgetown. A Tentative List indicating an intention to nominate Historic Georgetown was submitted to UNESCO in December 2004. There is now a small committee put together by the Guyana National Commission for UNESCO to complete the nomination dossier and the management plan for the site. In April 2005, two Dutch experts in conservation spent two weeks in Georgetown supervising architecture staff and students of the University of Guyana in a historic building survey of the selected area. This is part of the data collection for the nomination dossier.
Meanwhile, as a result of the Kaieteur National Park being considered too small, there is a proposal to prepare a nomination for a Cluster Site that will include the Kaieteur National Park, the Iwokrama Forest and the Kanuku Mountains. The Iwokrama Rain Forest, an area rich in biological diversity, has been described by Major General (Retired) Joseph Singh as “a flagship project for conservation.” The Kanuku Mountains area is in a pristine state and is home to more than four hundred species of birds and other animals.
There is much work to be done for the successful nomination of these sites to the World Heritage List. The state, the private sector and the ordinary Guyanese citizens each have a role to play in this process and in the later protection of the sites. Inscription on the UNESCO World Heritage will open Guyana to more serious tourists thereby assisting in its economic development.
Guyana exhibits two of the World Wildlife Fund's Global 200 eco-regions most crucial to the conservation of global biodiversity, Guianan moist forests and Guiana Highlands moist forests and is home to several endemic species including the tropical hardwood Greenheart (Chlorocardium rodiei).

[edit] Landmarks




St. George's Anglican Cathedral



St. George's Anglican Cathedral 
One of the tallest wooden structures in the world and the second tallest wooden house of worship after the Todaiji Temple in Japan.
Demerara Harbour Bridge 
The world's fourth-longest floating bridge.
Kaieteur Falls.
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Building
Houses the largest and most powerful economic union in the Caribbean.
Providence Stadium 
Situated in Providence on the east bank of the Demerara River and built in time for the ICC World Cup 2007, it is the largest sports stadium in the country. It is also near the Providence Mall, forming a major spot for leisure in Guyana.
Guyana International Conference Centre
Presented as a gift from the People's Republic of China to the Government of Guyana. It is the only one of its kind in the country.
Stabroek Market
A large cast-iron colonial structure that looked like a statue was located next to the Demerara River.
The City Hall
A beautiful wooden structure also from the colonial era.
Queen's College
Top educational institution in Guyana


[edit] History
Main article: History of Guyana
Guyana was inhabited by the Arawak and Carib tribes of Amerindians. Although Christopher Columbus sighted Guyana during his third voyage (in 1498), the Dutch were first to establish colonies: Essequibo (1616), Berbice (1627), and Demerara (1752). The British assumed control in the late 18th century, and the Dutch formally ceded the area in 1814. In 1831 the three separate colonies became a single British colony known as British Guiana.
Escaped slaves formed their own settlements known as Maroon communities. With the abolition of slavery in 1834 many of the former enslaved people began to settle in urban areas. Indentured labourers from modern day Portugal (1834), Germany (first in 1835), Ireland (1836), Scotland (1837), Malta (1839), China and India (beginning in 1838) were imported to work on the sugar plantations.
In 1889 Venezuela claimed the land up to the Essequibo. Ten years later an international tribunal ruled the land belonged to British Guyana.
Guyana achieved independence from the United Kingdom on 26 May 1966 and became a republic on 23 February 1970, remaining a member of the Commonwealth. The United States State Department and the United States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), along with the British government, played a strong role in influencing who would politically control Guyana during this time.[12] They provided secret financial support and political campaign advice to Guyanese of African descent, especially Forbes Burnham's People's National Congress to the detriment of the Cheddi Jagan-led People's Progressive Party, mostly supported by Guyanese of Indian descent. In 1978, Guyana received considerable international attention when 918 almost entirely American members of the Jim Jones-led Peoples Temple died in Jonestown — a settlement created by the Peoples Temple. An attack by Jim Jones' body guards at a small remote airstrip close to Jonestown resulted in the murder of five people, including Leo Ryan, the only Congressman murdered in the line of duty in U.S. history.

[edit] Economy
Main articles: Economy of Guyana and Agriculture in Guyana
See also: List of Guyanese companies




Tractor in a rice field on Guyana's coastal plain.


Guyana's economy depends on agriculture. Chronic problems include a shortage of skilled labour and a deficient infrastructure. In 2008 the economy witnessed a 3% increase in growth amid the global economic crisis and is expected to grow further in 2009. Until recently, the government was juggling a sizable external debt against the urgent need for expanded public investment. Low prices for key mining and agricultural commodities combined with troubles in the bauxite and sugar industries had threatened the government's tenuous fiscal position and dimmed prospects for the future. However, the Guyanese economy has rebounded slightly and exhibited moderate economic growth since 1999, based on an expansion in the agricultural and mining sectors, a more favorable atmosphere for business initiatives, a more realistic exchange rate, fairly low inflation, and the continued support of international organizations.
The main economic activities in Guyana are agriculture (producing rice and Demerara sugar), bauxite mining, gold mining, timber, shrimp fishing and minerals. The sugar industry, which accounts for 28% of all export earnings, is largely run by Guysuco, which employs more people than any other industry. Many industries have a large foreign investment. The mineral industry, for example, is heavily invested in by the American company Reynolds Metals and the Canadian Rio Tinto Alcan; the Korean/Malaysian Barama Company has a large stake in the logging industry.




A section of Bourda Market.


The production of balatá (natural latex) was once big business in Guyana. Most of the balata bleeding in Guyana took place in the foothills of the Kanuku Mountains in the Rupununi. Early exploitation also took place in the North West District, but most of the trees in the area were destroyed by illicit bleeding methods that involved cutting down the trees rather than making incisions in them. Folk uses of balatá included the making of cricket balls, the temporary filling of troublesome tooth cavities, and the crafting of figurines and other decorative items (particularly by the Macushi people of the Kanuku mountains).
Major private sector organizations include the Private Sector Commission (PSC)[13] and the Georgetown Chamber of Commerce & Industry (GCCI);[14]
The government initiated a major overhaul of the tax code with the start of 2007. The Value Added Tax (VAT) was brought into effect, replacing six different taxes. Prior to the implementation of the VAT it had been relatively easy to evade sales tax, and many businesses were in violation of tax code. Many businesses were very opposed to VAT introduction because of the extra paperwork required; however, the Government has remained firm on the VAT. By replacing several taxes with one flat tax rate, it will also be easier for government auditors to spot embezzlement. While the adjustment to VAT has been a tough one, it may improve day-to-day life because of the significant additional funds the government will have available for public spending.
President Bharrat Jagdeo has made debt relief a foremost priority of his administration. He has been quite successful, getting US$800 million of debt written off by the IMF, the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), in addition to millions more from other industrial nations. Mr. Jagdeo was lauded by IDB President Moreno for his strong leadership and negotiating skills in pursuing debt relief for Guyana and several other regional countries.

[edit] Summary




GDP/PPP (2007 estimate) 
US$2.819 billion (US$3,700 per capita)
Real growth rate  
5.4%
Inflation  
12.3%
Unemployment  
9.1% (2000, understated[citation needed])
Arable land  
2%
Labour force  
418,000 (2001 estimate)
Agricultural produce
sugar, rice, wheat, vegetable oils, beef, pork, poultry, dairy products, fish, shrimps
Industrial produce  
bauxite, sugar, rice milling, timber, textiles, gold mining





Natural resources  
bauxite, gold, diamonds, hardwood timber, shrimp, fish
Exports  
US$621.6 million (2006 estimate)
sugar, gold, bauxite/alumina, rice, shrimps, molasses, rum, timber.
Imports  
US$706.9 million (2006 estimate)
manufactured items, machinery, petroleum, food.
Major trading partners
Canada, U.S., UK, Portugal, Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, China, Cuba (2005)










Summary
GDP/PPP (2007 estimate) US$2.819 billion (US$3,700 per capita) Real growth rate 5.3% Inflation 12.3% Unemployment 9.1% (2000, understated[citation needed]) Arable land 2% Labour force 418,000 (2001 estimate) Agricultural produce sugar, rice, wheat, vegetable oils, beef, pork, poultry, dairy products, fish, shrimps Industrial produce bauxite, sugar, rice milling, timber, textiles, gold mining

[edit] Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Guyana
Main article: Guyanese people
The population of Guyana is approximately 750,000, of which 90% reside on the narrow coastal strip (approximately 10% of the total land area of Guyana). Guyana's coastal strip ranges from between 10 to 40 miles in width.[15]
The present population of Guyana is racially and ethnically heterogeneous, composed chiefly of the descendants of immigrants who came to the country either as enslaved people or as indentured labourers. The population therefore comprises groups of persons with nationality backgrounds from India, Africa, China, Europe (especially the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and Portugal) and the Middle East, with several Aboriginal groups as the indigenous population. These groups of diverse nationality backgrounds have been fused together by a common language, i.e., English and Creole.
The largest ethnic sub-group is that of the descendants of India, also known as East Indians (Indo-Guyanese), comprising 43.5% of the population in 2002. They are followed by people of African heritage (Afro-Guyanese) (30.2%). The third in number are those of mixed heritage (16.7%), while Aboriginals (Arawak, Wai Wai, Carib, Akawaio, Arecuna, Patamona, Wapixana, Macushi and Warao) are fourth making up 24,500 of the population. The smallest groups are European, including Portuguese who make up 1,500 of the population and the Chinese (0.19% or 1,400 persons). A small group (0.01% or 112 persons) did not identify their race/ethnic background.[16]
The population distribution in 2002 was determined by nationality background. The distribution pattern has been similar to those of the 1980 and 1991 censuses, but the share of the two main groups has declined. The East Indians were 51.9% of the total population in 1980, but by 1991 this had fallen to 48.6%, and then to 43.5% in the 2002 census. Those of African descent increased slightly from 30.8% to 32.3% during the first period (1980 and 1991) before falling to 30.2% in the 2002 census. With small growth in the population, the decline in the shares of the two larger groups has resulted in the relative shares of the ‘Mixed’ and Amerindian groups. The Amerindian population rose by 22,097 persons between 1991 and 2002. This represents an increase of 47.3% or annual growth of 3.5%. Similarly, the ‘Mixed’ population increased by 37,788 persons, representing a 43.0% increase or annual growth rate of 3.2% from the base period of 1991 census. The whites and Chinese populations which declined between 1980 and 1991 regained in numbers by the 2002 census by 54.4% (168 persons) and 8.1% (105 persons) respectively. However, because of their relatively small sizes, the increase has little effect on the overall change. The Portuguese group has declined constantly over the decades.
Most Indo-Guyanese are descended from Bhojpuri-speaking Bihari migrants.[17]

[edit] Language
English is the official language of Guyana and used, for example, in its schools. In addition, Cariban languages (Akawaio, Wai-Wai, Arawak and Macushi) are spoken by a small minority, while Guyanese Creole (an English-based creole with African and Indian syntax whose grammar is not standardized.[18]) is widely spoken.

[edit] Religion
Main article: Religion in Guyana
According to the 2002 Census, Guyana's religions breakdown is 57% Christian (of which 16.9% Pentecostal, 8.1% Roman Catholic, 6.9% Anglican, 5% Seventh-day Adventist and 20% other Christian denominations), 23.4% Hindu, 11.3% Muslim, 0.5% Rastafarian, 0.1% Bahá'í, 2.2% other faiths, and 4.3% no religion.[19] Most Guyanese Christians are either Protestants or Roman Catholics and include a mix of all races. Hinduism is dominated by the Indians who came to the country in the early 19th century, while Islam varies between the Afro-Guyanese, and Indian-Guyanese.

[edit] Government and politics





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2008)






The State House, Guyana's Presidential Residence.


Politics of Guyana takes place in a framework of a semi-presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Guyana is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the National Assembly of Guyana.
Historically, politics is a source of tension in the country, and violent riots have often broken out during elections. During the 1970s and 1980s, the political landscape was dominated by the People's National Congress. In 1992, the first "free and fair" elections were overseen by former United States President Jimmy Carter, and the People's Progressive Party has led the country since. The two parties are principally organized along ethnic lines and as a result often clash on issues related to the allocation of resources.[citation needed]


[edit] Military




Guyana Defence Forces


The military of Guyana consists of the Guyana Defence Force (GDF), which includes Ground Forces, Coast Guard, and Air Corps. 155,058 males are fit for service (2002 estimates) The Guyana People's Militia and the Guyana National Service are defunct.

[edit] Transport




Cross-border bridge from Guyana to Brazil under construction near Lethem.


Main article: Transport in Guyana
There are a total of 116 miles (187 km) of railway, all dedicated to ore transport. There are 4,952 miles (7,970 km) of highway, of which 367 miles (590 km) is paved. Navigable waterways include 669 miles (1,077 km), including the Berbice, Demerara, and Essequibo rivers.
There are ports at Georgetown, Port Kaituma, and New Amsterdam. There is 1 international airport (Cheddi Jagan International Airport, Timehri); 1 regional airport (Ogle Airport); and about 90 airstrips, 9 of which have paved runways.

[edit] Electricity
Main article: Electricity sector in Guyana
The electricity sector in Guyana is dominated by Guyana Power and Light, a state-owned vertically integrated public utility. Although the country has a large potential for hydroelectric and bagasse-fueled power generation, most of its 226 MW of installed capacity correspond to inefficient thermoelectric diesel-engine driven generators.
Reliability of electricity supply is very low, linked both to technical and institutional deficiencies, with total losses close to 40% and commercial losses of about 30%. This low reliability has led most firms to install their own diesel generators, which in turn leads to higher than average electricity costs.

[edit] Water supply and sanitation
Main article: Water supply and sanitation in Guyana
Key issues in the water and sanitation sector in Guyana are poor service quality, a low level of cost recovery and low levels of access. A high-profile management contract with the British company Severn Trent was cancelled by the government in February 2007. In 2008 the public utility Guyana Water Inc implemented a Turnaround Plan (TAP) to reduce non-revenue water and to financially consolidate the utility. NRW reduction is expected to be 5% per annum for the three-year period of the plan, A mid term review is now due to examine the success of the TAP.

[edit] Education




Bishops' High School


Guyana's educational system was at one time considered to be among the best in the Caribbean, but it significantly deteriorated in the 1980s because of the emigration of highly educated citizens and the lack of appropriate funding. Although the education system has recovered somewhat in the 1990s, it still does not produce the quality of educated students necessary for Guyana to modernize its workforce. The country lacks a critical mass of expertise in many of the disciplines and activities on which it depends.
The educational system does not sufficiently focus on the training of Guyanese in science and technology, technical and vocational subjects, business management, nor computer sciences. The Guyanese education system is modeled after the former British education system. Students are expected to write SSEE (secondary school entrance exam) by grade 6 for entrance into High School in grade 7. They write CXC at the end of high school. Recently they have introduced the CAPE exams which all other Caribbean countries have introduced. The A-level system left over from the British era has all but disappeared and is offered only in a few schools.
Further adding to the problems of the educational system, many of the better-educated professional teachers have emigrated to other countries over the past two decades, mainly because of low pay, lack of opportunities and crime. As a result, there is a lack of trained teachers at every level of Guyana's educational system. There are however several very good Private schools that have sprung up over the last fifteen years. Those schools offer a varied and balanced curriculum.

[edit] Public health

[edit] Service delivery
The delivery of health services is provided at five different levels in the public sector:

Level I: Local Health Posts (166 in total) that provide preventive and simple curative care for common diseases and attempt to promote proper health practices. Community health workers staff them.
Level II: Health Centres (109 in total) that provide preventive and rehabilitative care and promotion activities. These are ideally staffed with a medical extension worker or public health nurse, along with a nursing assistant, a dental nurse and a midwife.
Level III: Nineteen District Hospitals (with 473 beds) that provide basic in-patient and outpatient care (although more the latter than the former) and selected diagnostic services. They are also meant to be equipped to provide simple radiological and laboratory services, and to be capable of gynecology, providing preventive and curative dental care. They are designed to serve geographical areas with populations of 10,000 or more.
Level IV: Four Regional Hospitals (with 620 beds) that provide emergency services, routine surgery and obstetrical and gynecological care, dental services, diagnostic services and specialist services in general medicine and pediatrics. They are designed to include the necessary support for this level of medical service in terms of laboratory and X-ray facilities, pharmacies and dietetic expertise. These hospitals are located in Regions 2, 3, 6 and 10.
Level V: The National Referral Hospital (937 beds) in Georgetown that provides a wider range of diagnostic and specialist services, on both an in-patient and out-patient basis; the Psychiatric Hospital in Canje; and the Geriatric Hospital in Georgetown. There is also one children’s rehabilitation centre.

This system is structured so that its proper functioning depends intimately on a process of referrals. Except for serious emergencies, patients are to be seen first at the lower levels, and those with problems that cannot be treated at those levels are referred to higher levels in the system. However, in practice, many patients by-pass the lower levels.
The health sector is currently unable to offer certain sophisticated tertiary services and specialized medical services, the technology for which is unaffordable in Guyana, or for which the required medical specialists are not available. Even with substantial improvements in the health sector, the need for overseas treatment for some services might remain. The Ministry of Health provides financial assistance to patients requiring such treatment, priority being given to children whose condition can be rehabilitated with significant improvements to their quality of life.
There are 10 hospitals belonging to the private sector and to public corporations, plus diagnostic facilities, clinics and dispensaries in those sectors. These ten hospitals provide for 548 beds. Eighteen clinics and dispensaries are owned by GUYSUCO.
The Ministry of Health and Labour is responsible for the funding of the National Referral Hospital in Georgetown, which has recently been made a public corporation managed by an independent Board. Region 6 is responsible for the management of the National Psychiatric Hospital. The Geriatric Hospital, previously administered by the Ministry of Labour, became the responsibility of the Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security in December 1997.

[edit] Health conditions
One of the most unfortunate consequences of Guyana's economic decline in the 1970s and 1980s was that it led to very poor health conditions for a large part of the population. Basic health services in the interior are primitive to non-existent, and some procedures are not available at all. The U.S. State Department Consular Information Sheet warns "Medical care is available for minor medical conditions. Emergency care and hospitalization for major medical illnesses or surgery is limited, because of a lack of appropriately trained specialists, below standard in-hospital care, and poor sanitation. Ambulance service is substandard and may not routinely be available for emergencies." Many Guyanese seek medical care in the United States, Trinidad or Cuba.
Compared with other neighboring countries, Guyana ranks poorly in regard to basic health indicators. In 1998, life expectancy at birth was estimated at 66.0 years for Guyana, which is much less than surrounding countries. The infant mortality rate in 1998 was 24.2. Maternal mortality rates in Guyana are also relatively high, being estimated at 124.6/1000 for 1998. Although Guyana's health profile falls short in comparison with many of its Caribbean neighbours, there has been remarkable progress since 1988, and the Ministry of Health is working to upgrade conditions, procedures, and facilities.
The leading causes of mortality for all age groups are cerebrovascular diseases (11.6%); ischemic heart disease (9.9%); immunity disorders (7.1%); diseases of the respiratory system (6.8%); diseases of pulmonary circulation and other forms of heart disease (6.6%); endocrine and metabolic diseases (5.5%); diseases of other parts of the Digestive System (5.2%); violence (5.1%); certain condition originating in the prenatal period (4.3%); and hypertensive diseases (3.9%). The ten leading causes of morbidity for all age groups are, in decreasing order: malaria; acute respiratory infections; symptoms, signs and ill defined or unknown conditions; hypertension; accident and injuries; acute diarrhoeal disease; diabetes mellitus; worm infestation; rheumatic arthritis; and mental and nervous disorders.
This morbidity profile indicates that it can be improved substantially through enhanced preventive health care, better education on health issues, more widespread access to potable water and sanitation services, and increased access to basic health care of good quality.
Guyana has experienced an upswing in violent crime and homicide in 2008 while the numbers of murders reported actually dropped in 2007 over the previous few years, with a murder rate of 15.1 people for each 100,000, in contrast to 2008 (up to the end of July) that number has risen to 26 per 100,000 [20] similar to the rate experienced in 2003. Guyana suffers from the highest suicide rate of any South American country. Guyana Health Minister Leslie Ramsammy estimates that at least 200 people commit suicide each year in Guyana, or 27.2 people for each 100,000 people each year.[21]

[edit] Culture

Holidays

Date
Name


1 January
New Year's Day


15 February
Hangslap Day (Regional)


23 February
Mashramani-Republic Day


variable
Phagwah


variable
Eid-ul-Fitr


variable
Youm Un Nabi


variable
Good Friday


variable
Easter Monday


1 May
Labour Day


5 May
Indian Arrival Day


26 May
Independence Day


First Monday in July
CARICOM Day


1 August
Emancipation Day


31 August
Carifest


variable
Diwali


25 December
Christmas


26 December or 27
Boxing Day


Main article: Culture of Guyana
See also: Literature of Guyana and Music of Guyana
Guyana, along with Suriname, French Guiana, and Brazil, is one of the four non-Hispanic nations in South America. Guyana's culture is very similar to that of the English-speaking Caribbean, to the extent that Guyana is included and accepted as a Caribbean nation and is a founding member of the Caricom (Caribbean Community) economic bloc and also the home of the Bloc's Headquarters, the CARICOM Secretariat. Its geographical location, its sparsely populated rain forest regions, and its substantial Amerindian population differentiate it from English-speaking Caribbean countries. Its blend of Indo-Guyanese (East Indian) and Afro-Guyanese (African) cultures gives it similarities to Trinidad and distinguishes it from other parts of the Americas. Guyana shares similar interests with the islands in the West Indies, such as food, festive events, music, sports, etc.
Guyana plays international cricket as a part of the West Indies cricket team, and the Guyana team plays first class cricket against other nations of the Caribbean. In March and April 2007 Guyana co-hosted the Cricket World Cup. In addition to its CARICOM membership, Guyana is a member of CONCACAF, the international football federation for North and Central America and the Caribbean. Andrew "Six-Heads" Lewis was the first man from Guyana to win a world boxing championship, when he beat James Page to claim the WBA Welterweight Championship of the World. He now runs a boxing gym in a district of Georgetown called Allboystown, where he trains Guyanese youth, many affectionately call him "Rasta Six-Heads"
Events include Mashramani (Mash), Phagwah (Holi), and Deepavali (Diwali).


[edit] See also




Caribbean portal







Latin America portal







English language edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Commonwealth of Nations
List of Guyana-related articles
List of Guyana-related topics
List of international rankings
Outline of geography
Outline of Guyana
Outline of South America
United Nations



[edit] Notes


^ a b c d "Guyana". International Monetary Fund. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2004&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=336&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&grp=0&a=&pr.x=30&pr.y=9. Retrieved on 2008-10-09. 
^ Bureau of Statistics - Guyana, CHAPTER III: POPULATION REDISTRIBUTION AND INTERNAL MIGRATION, Table 3.4: Population Density, Guyana: 1980 - 2002
^ Guyana - Government Information Agency, National Profile
^ guyanachronicle.com - "Tribunal decision tentatively set for August"
^ Guyana to experience ‘massive' oil exploration this year
^ News in the Caribbean - Caribbean360.com
^ official site of the Permanent Court of Arbitration
^ Ishmael, Odeen (1998, rev. 2006) "The Trail Of Diplomacy: A Documentary History of the Guyana-Venezuela Border Issue" Dr. Ishmael was Ambassador of Guyana to Venezuela when this was written.
^ http://www.a-venezuela.com/mapas/map/html/politico.html
^ Ramjeet, Oscar (2008-10-28). "Guyana and Suriname border dispute continues despite UN findings" (in English). Caribbean Net News. 
^ Rodrigues-Birkett, Carolyn (2008-10-24). "There is no agreement recognizing Suriname’s sovereignty over the Corentyne River" (in English). Stabroek Newspaper. 
^ "US Declassifed Documents (1964–1968)". http://www.guyana.org/govt/US-declassifed-documents-1964-1968.html. 
^ Private Sector Commission
^ Georgetown Chamber of Commerce & Industry (GCCI)
^ Geographia: Guyana General Information
^ http://www.joshuaproject.net/peopctry.php
^ Helen Myers. Music of Hindu Trinidad. http://books.google.com/books?id=RCF6NnEv9oAC&pg=PA30&d. 
^ Damoiseau, Robert (2003) Eléments de grammaire comparée français-créole guyanais Ibis rouge, Guyana, ISBN 2844501923
^ International Religious Freedom Report 2007
^ Guyana’s murder rate is up this year
^ BBCCaribbean.com



[edit] Further reading

Stanley E. Brock, All the Cowboys Were Indians and Jungle Cowboy
Donald Haack, Bush Pilot In Diamond Country
Hamish McInnes, Climb To The Lost World (1974)
Andrew Salkey, Georgetown Journal (1970)
Marion Morrison, Guyana (Enchantment of the World Series)
Bob Temple, Guyana
Noel C. Bacchus, Guyana Farewell: A Recollection of Childhood in a Faraway Place
Marcus Colchester, Guyana: Fragile Frontier
Matthew French Young, Guyana: My Fifty Years in the Guyanese Wilds
Margaret Bacon, Journey to Guyana
Father Andrew Morrison SJ, Justice: The Struggle For Democracy in Guyana 1952-1992
Vere T. Daly, The Making of Guyana
D. Graham Burnett, Masters of All They Surveyed: Exploration, Geography and a British El Dorado
Ovid Abrams, Metegee: The History and Culture of Guyana
Evelyn Waugh, Ninety-Two Days
Gerald Durrell, Three Singles To Adventure
Colin Henfrey, Through Indian Eyes: A Journey Among the Indian Tribes of Guiana
Stephen G. Rabe, U.S. Intervention in British Guiana: A Cold War Story
Charles Waterton, Wanderings in South America
David Attenborough, Zoo Quest to Guiana (Lutterworth Press, London: 1956)
Michael Jordan, "Biography of Michael Jordan"


[edit] External links

Famous People


Eddy Grant Music artist
Rihanna Music artist, Guyanese mother, Barbadian father
Kennard Copeland International artist, born and raised in Guyana
Sean Thomas Actor
Clive Lloyd former professional cricketer


Travel Guides


Find more about Guyana on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Wikimedia Atlas of Guyana
Guyana travel guide from Wikitravel


Government


President of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana - Official Website
National Assembly
Guyana entry at The World Factbook
Official Website of the Guyana Tourism Authority (GTA)
Declassified US State Department documents detailing covert action from the start of postwar independence


General


Country Profile from the BBC News
Guyana from the Encyclopaedia Britannica
Guyana at UCB Libraries GovPubs
Guyana at the Open Directory Project
SDNP Guyana - Guyanese directory and host to ministerial sites
Guyana at travel.state.gov - U.S. State Department Consular Information Sheet for Guyana with entry requirements and travel information and warnings


News media


Guyana Portal
Guyana and the Caribbean News and Information
Jobs Guyana - Guyana Jobs Search & Recruitment Website
The Guyana Chronicle - Local daily government run newspaper.
Kaieteur news - Local daily independent newspaper.
Stabroek News - Local daily independent newspaper. Updated daily and maintains archives for 7 days.
Voice of Guyana International - independent owned Internet radio
BBC Caribbean News Guyana Suicide rates.
Canadian World Traveller Guyana Land of Many Waters.


Map


Guyana on Google Maps.








 
Geographic locale














v • d • e

Countries of South America





Countries and territories also in or commonly reckoned to be elsewhere in the Americas shown in italics







Sovereign states
Argentina · Bolivia · Brazil · Chile · Colombia · Ecuador · Guyana · Panama · Paraguay · Peru · Suriname · Uruguay · Venezuela

Dependencies
Falkland Islands / South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands (UK) · Aruba / Netherlands Antilles (Netherlands)

Overseas department
French Guiana (France)



















 
International membership














v • d • e

Members of the Commonwealth of Nations





Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda · Australia · Bahamas · Bangladesh · Barbados · Belize · Botswana · Brunei · Cameroon · Canada · Cyprus · Dominica · Fiji · The Gambia · Ghana · Grenada · Guyana · India · Jamaica · Kenya · Kiribati · Lesotho · Malawi · Malaysia · Maldives · Malta · Mauritius · Mozambique · Namibia · Nauru · New Zealand · Nigeria · Pakistan · Papua New Guinea · St. Kitts and Nevis · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · Samoa · Seychelles · Sierra Leone · Singapore · Solomon Islands · South Africa · Sri Lanka · Swaziland · Tanzania · Tonga · Trinidad and Tobago · Tuvalu · Uganda · United Kingdom · Vanuatu · Zambia











Dependencies





Australia




Ashmore and Cartier Islands · Australian Antarctic Territory · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands · Coral Sea Islands · Heard Island and McDonald Islands · Norfolk Island









New Zealand




Cook Islands · Niue · Ross Dependency · Tokelau









United Kingdom




Akrotiri and Dhekelia · Anguilla · Bermuda · British Antarctic Territory · British Indian Ocean Territory · British Virgin Islands · Cayman Islands · Falkland Islands · Gibraltar · Guernsey · Isle of Man · Jersey · Montserrat · Pitcairn Islands · St. Helena (including Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha) · South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands · Turks and Caicos Islands


















v • d • e

Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC)





Members

Afghanistan · Albania · Algeria · Azerbaijan · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Benin · Burkina Faso · Brunei · Cameroon · Chad · Comoros · Côte d'Ivoire · Djibouti · Egypt · Gabon · Gambia · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Guyana · Indonesia · Iran · Iraq · Jordan · Kuwait · Kazakhstan · Kyrgyzstan · Lebanon · Libya · Maldives · Malaysia · Mali · Mauritania · Morocco · Mozambique · Niger · Nigeria · Oman · Pakistan · Palestine · Qatar · Saudi Arabia · Senegal · Sierra Leone · Somalia · Sudan · Suriname · Syria · Tajikistan · Turkey · Tunisia · Togo · Turkmenistan · Uganda · Uzbekistan · United Arab Emirates · Yemen









Observers





Countries and territories


Bosnia and Herzegovina · Central African Republic · Russia · Thailand · Northern Cyprus (as Turkish Cypriot State)







Muslim communities


Moro National Liberation Front







International organizations


Economic Cooperation Organization · African Union · Arab League · Non-Aligned Movement · United Nations
















v • d • e

 Union of South American Nations





Members

Argentina · Bolivia · Brazil · Chile · Colombia · Ecuador · Guyana · Paraguay · Peru · Suriname · Uruguay · Venezuela






Topics

Bank of the South · South American Parliament · Mercosur · Andean Community · Cuzco Declaration · 2004 South American Summit · South American Energy Summit · Initiative for Infrastructure Integration of South America · Arab League













v • d • e

Caribbean Community (CARICOM)





Members

Antigua and Barbuda · Bahamas1 · Barbados · Belize · Dominica · Grenada · Guyana · Haiti1 · Jamaica · Montserrat2 · St. Kitts and Nevis · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · Suriname · Trinidad and Tobago







Associate members

Anguilla · Bermuda · Cayman Islands · British Virgin Islands · Turks and Caicos Islands






Observers

Aruba · Colombia · Dominican Republic · Mexico · Netherlands Antilles · Puerto Rico · Venezuela






1 Member of the Community but not of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME).   2 British overseas territory awaiting entrustment to join the CSME.












v • d • e

Organization of American States (OAS)






Antigua and Barbuda · Argentina · Barbados • Belize • Bahamas · Bolivia · Costa Rica · Cuba · Canada • Dominica · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · El Salvador · Grenada · Guatemala · Guyana · Haiti · Honduras · Jamaica · Mexico · Nicaragua · Panama · Paraguay · Peru · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · St. Kitts and Nevis · Suriname · Trinidad and Tobago · United States · Uruguay · Venezuela
















v • d • e

Indo-Aryan-speaking regions








 Afghanistan ·  Bangladesh ·  Fiji ·  Guyana ·  India ·  Maldives ·  Mauritius ·  Nepal ·  Pakistan ·  Singapore ·  Sri Lanka ·  Suriname ·  Trinidad and Tobago

Nations with Romani speakers
Republic of Macedonia ·  Serbia ·  Slovenia ·  Hungary ·  Germany ·  Romania ·  Russia ·  Norway ·  Sweden ·  Finland ·  Turkey
 Kosovo













v • d • e

Members of the Commonwealth of Nations





Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda · Australia · Bahamas · Bangladesh · Barbados · Belize · Botswana · Brunei · Cameroon · Canada · Cyprus · Dominica · Fiji · The Gambia · Ghana · Grenada · Guyana · India · Jamaica · Kenya · Kiribati · Lesotho · Malawi · Malaysia · Maldives · Malta · Mauritius · Mozambique · Namibia · Nauru · New Zealand · Nigeria · Pakistan · Papua New Guinea · St. Kitts and Nevis · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · Samoa · Seychelles · Sierra Leone · Singapore · Solomon Islands · South Africa · Sri Lanka · Swaziland · Tanzania · Tonga · Trinidad and Tobago · Tuvalu · Uganda · United Kingdom · Vanuatu · Zambia











Dependencies





Australia




Ashmore and Cartier Islands · Australian Antarctic Territory · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands · Coral Sea Islands · Heard Island and McDonald Islands · Norfolk Island









New Zealand




Cook Islands · Niue · Ross Dependency · Tokelau









United Kingdom




Akrotiri and Dhekelia · Anguilla · Bermuda · British Antarctic Territory · British Indian Ocean Territory · British Virgin Islands · Cayman Islands · Falkland Islands · Gibraltar · Guernsey · Isle of Man · Jersey · Montserrat · Pitcairn Islands · St. Helena (including Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha) · South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands · Turks and Caicos Islands

























v • d • e

States with an Anglophone majority – the English-speaking world





Europe

Guernsey • Ireland • Isle of Man • Jersey • United Kingdom • Malta






Americas

Antigua and Barbuda • The Bahamas • Barbados • Canada • Dominica • Guyana • Saint Kitts and Nevis • Saint Vincent and the Grenadines • Trinidad and Tobago • United States






Oceania

Australia • Marshall Islands • Federated States of Micronesia • Nauru • New Zealand • Palau






Asia

Singapore













v • d • e

The English-speaking world








Dark blue: Countries and territories where English is spoken natively by a significant population.
Light blue: Countries where English is an official language but not native. English is also one of the official languages of the European Union. Click on the coloured regions to view the related article.






































































Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guyana"
Categories: Guyana | CARICOM members | Republics | Liberal democracies | Former monarchies of South America | English-speaking countries and territories | Former British colonies | Former Dutch colonies | Members of the Commonwealth of NationsHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 | Articles needing additional references from December 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
አማርኛ
العربية
Aragonés
مصرى
Arpetan
Asturianu
Aymar aru
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Hrvatski
Ido
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kalaallisut
Kapampangan
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Occitan
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
O'zbek
پښتو
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Sámegiella
संस्कृत
Sardu
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Tetun
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
Volapük
Wolof
吴语
ייִדיש
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 16:22.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
