













Dred Scott v. Sandford - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Dred_Scott_v._Sandford";
		var wgTitle = "Dred Scott v. Sandford";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "105816";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282441211;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Dred Scott v. Sandford

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (February 2009)




Scott v. Sandford



Supreme Court of the United States



Argued February 11–14, 1856
Reargued February 15–18, 1857
Decided March 6, 1857


Full case name

Dred Scott v. John F. A. Sandford[1]



Citations
60 U.S. 393 (more)
60 U.S. (19 How.) 393; 15 L. Ed. 691; 1856 WL 8721; 1857 U.S. LEXIS 472


Prior history
Judgment for defendants, C.C. Mo.


Subsequent history
None


Holding


States do not have the right to claim an individual’s property that was fairly theirs in another state. Property cannot cease to exist as a result of changing jurisdiction. The majority decision held that Africans residing in America, whether free or slave, could not become United States citizens and the plaintiff therefore lacked the capacity to file a lawsuit. Furthermore, the parts of the Missouri Compromise creating free territories were unconstitutional because Congress had no authority to abolish slavery in federal territories. Judgment of Circuit Court for the District of Missouri reversed and dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.


Court membership






Chief Justice
Roger B. Taney







Associate Justices
John McLean · James M. Wayne
John Catron · Peter V. Daniel
Samuel Nelson · Robert C. Grier
Benjamin R. Curtis · John A. Campbell






Case opinions


Majority
Taney, joined by Wayne, Grier, Daniel, Campbell, Catron


Concurrence
Wayne


Concurrence
Grier


Concurrence
Daniel


Concurrence
Campbell


Concurrence
Catron


Concurrence
Nelson


Dissent
Curtis


Dissent
McLean


Laws applied


U.S. Const. amend. V; Missouri Compromise



Superseded by



U.S. Const. amends. XIII, XIV








This box: view • talk



Dred Scott v. Sandford,[1] 60 U.S. (How. 19) 393 (1857), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court that ruled that people of African descent imported into the United States and held as slaves, or their descendants[2]—whether or not they were slaves—were not legal persons and could never be citizens of the United States, and that the United States Congress had no authority to prohibit slavery in federal territories. The Court also ruled that slaves could not sue in court, and that slaves—as chattel or private property—could not be taken away from their owners without due process. The Court in the Dred Scott decision sided with border ruffians in the Bleeding Kansas dispute who were afraid a free Kansas would be a haven for runaway slaves from Missouri. The Supreme Court's decision was written by Chief Justice Roger B. Taney.
Dred Scott was indirectly overruled in the Slaughter-House Cases, which noted that Dred Scott's holding was superseded by the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1865, which abolished slavery, and the Fourteenth Amendment in 1868, which guaranteed full rights and citizenship regardless of race. Though it is sometimes said that Dred Scott was never officially overruled, the Slaughter-House Cases did note that the post-Civil War Fourteenth Amendment (and thus enacted after the Dred Scott case) had overruled it, although the Court was merely noting the fact that Dred Scott had already been overruled by the amendment; it was not the Court that overruled Dred Scott, but Congress and the states:

The first observation we have to make on this clause is, that it puts at rest both the questions which we stated to have been the subject of differences of opinion. It declares that persons may be citizens of the United States without regard to their citizenship of a particular State, and it overturns the Dred Scott decision by making all persons born within the United States and subject to its jurisdiction citizens of the United States.[3][4]





Contents


1 Background
2 Case

2.1 Missouri court history
2.2 Correspondence with President Buchanan


3 Decision
4 Consequences
5 Reaction
6 Scott's fate
7 Later references
8 See also
9 Notes
10 Further reading
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Background




Portrait of Dred Scott




Events leading to
the US Civil War


Northwest Ordinance


Missouri Compromise of 1820


Nullification Crisis


Nat Turner's slave rebellion


Mexican American War


Wilmot Proviso


Manifest Destiny


Compromise of 1850


Uncle Tom's Cabin


Kansas-Nebraska Act


Bleeding Kansas


Dred Scott Supreme Court Decision


John Brown's Raid on Harper's Ferry


Election of 1860


Seccesion of Southern States


Confederate attack on Fort Sumter


Amistad (1841)


Underground railroad



This box: view • talk • edit



Dred Scott traveled with his owner, Dr. John Emerson, who was in the army and was often transferred. Scott's extended stay with his master in Illinois, a free state, gave him the legal standing to make a claim for freedom, as did his extended stay at Fort Snelling, Wisconsin Territory (now Minnesota), where slavery was also prohibited. In October 1837, Emerson was moved to St. Louis, Missouri, but left Scott and Scott's wife behind in the Wisconsin Territory for several months, hiring them out. Hiring out Scott constituted slavery, which was illegal under the Missouri Compromise, the Wisconsin Enabling Act, and the Northwest Ordinance.
In November 1837, Emerson was transferred to Fort Jessup, Louisiana. The following February, he married Irene Marie Sanford and finally sent for Scott and his wife from Minnesota. The Scotts followed Emerson and his family, first to St. Louis and then to Fort Snelling, where they remained until May 1840. During the trip, in what were waters bordering free territories, Eliza Scott, the first child of Dred Scott, was born. In May 1840, Emerson was sent to fight in the Seminole War in Florida and left his wife and slaves behind in St. Louis. After his return, he moved to the free territory of Iowa, but left Scott and his wife behind in St. Louis, again hiring them out. In December 1843, Emerson died unexpectedly at the age of forty. Scott and his family worked as hired slaves for the next three years, with Irene Emerson taking in the rent. In February 1846, Scott tried to purchase his freedom from Irene Emerson, but she refused.
In April 1846, he sued for his freedom, arguing that since he had been in both a free state and a free territory he had become legally free, and could not have later reverted to being a slave.

[edit] Case

[edit] Missouri court history
In the first case that he brought, Scott lost on a technicality: Scott could not prove to the court that he was not a slave. A judge ordered a second trial in December 1847; Irene Emerson appealed the order for a second trial to the Supreme Court of Missouri, which ruled against her in June 1848. A new trial did not begin until January 1850, and the jury ruled Scott and his family were legally free. Emerson again appealed to the Supreme Court of Missouri.
At this point, Emerson turned the responsibility of the case over to her brother, John F. A. Sanford of New York, who acted on her behalf. The Missouri Supreme Court reversed the lower court's decision, holding that Scott was still a slave. This decision was inconsistent with the Court's own precedents. Missouri courts had consistently ruled that slaves taken into free states were automatically free. Missouri Chief Justice Hamilton Rowan Gamble, who owned slaves, wrote a dissenting opinion.
The Missouri cases were argued at the St. Louis State and Federal Courthouse (now called the Old Courthouse), part of the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial.

[edit] Correspondence with President Buchanan
After that November vote, the President-elect James Buchanan wrote to Justice John Catron, asking whether the case would be decided before his inauguration in March 1857. Buchanan hoped the decision would quell unrest in the country over the slavery issue by issuing a decision that put the future of slavery beyond the realm of political debate.
Buchanan later successfully pressured Justice Grier, a Northerner, to join the Southern majority to prevent the appearance that the decision was made along sectional lines. By present-day standards, any such correspondence would be considered improper ex parte contact with a court; but even under the more lenient standards of that century, political pressure applied on a member of a sitting court would have been seen as improper.

[edit] Decision
The ruling was handed down on March 6, 1857. Chief Justice Taney delivered the opinion of the Court, with each of the concurring and dissenting justices filing separate opinions. In total, six justices agreed with the ruling; Samuel Nelson concurred with the ruling but not its reasoning, and Benjamin R. Curtis and John McLean dissented. The court misspelled Sanford's name in the decision.[5]
The Court first had to decide whether it had jurisdiction. Article III, Section 2, Clause 1 of the U.S. Constitution provides that "the judicial Power shall extend... to Controversies... between Citizens of different States..." The Court first held that Scott was not a "citizen of a state" within the meaning of the United States Constitution, as that term was understood at the time the Constitution was adopted, and therefore not able to bring suit in federal court. Furthermore, whether a person is a citizen of a state, for Article III purposes, was strictly a federal question. This meant that although any state could confer state citizenship on an individual for purposes of state law, no state could confer state citizenship on an individual for purposes of Article III. In other words, the federal courts did not have to look to whom a state conferred citizenship when interpreting the words "citizen of... a state" in the federal Constitution. Rather, it was the federal courts who were to determine who was a citizen of a state for Article III purposes.


Part of a series on


Slavery


Early history



History of slavery
Antiquity · Aztec
Ancient Greece · Rome
Medieval Europe · Thrall
Kholop · Serfdom
Spanish New World colonies



Religion



The Bible and slavery
Judaism and slavery
Christianity and slavery
Islam and slavery



By country or region



Africa · Atlantic
Arab · Coastwise
Angola · Britain and Ireland
British Virgin Islands · Brazil
Canada · India
Iran · Japan
Libya · Mauritania
Romania · Sudan
Swedish · United States



Contemporary slavery



Modern Africa · Debt bondage
Penal labour · Sexual slavery
Unfree labour · Wage slavery



Opposition and resistance



Timeline
Abolitionism
Compensated emancipation
Opponents of slavery‎
Slave rebellion · Slave narrative




This box: view • talk • edit



Thus, whether Missouri recognized Scott as a citizen was irrelevant. Taney summed up,

"Consequently, no State, since the adoption of the Constitution, can by naturalizing an alien invest him with the rights and privileges secured to a citizen of a State under the Federal Government, although, so far as the State alone was concerned, he would undoubtedly be entitled to the rights of a citizen, and clothed with all the rights and immunities which the Constitution and laws of the State attached to that character."

This meant that

"no State can, by any act or law of its own, passed since the adoption of the Constitution, introduce a new member into the political community created by the Constitution of the United States."

The only relevant question, therefore, was whether, at the time the Constitution was ratified, Scott could have been considered a citizen of any state within the meaning of Article III. According to the Court, the drafters of the Constitution had viewed all African-Americans as

"beings of an inferior order, and altogether unfit to associate with the white race, either in social or political relations, and so far inferior that they had no rights which the white man was bound to respect."

The Court also presented an argument describing the feared results of granting Mr. Scott's petition:

"It would give to persons of the negro race, ...the right to enter every other State whenever they pleased, ...the full liberty of speech in public and in private upon all subjects upon which its own citizens might speak; to hold public meetings upon political affairs, and to keep and carry arms wherever they went."

Scott was not a citizen of Missouri, and the federal courts therefore lacked jurisdiction to hear the dispute.
Despite the conclusion that the Court lacked jurisdiction, however, it went on to hold that Scott was not a free man, even though he had resided for a time in Minnesota, because the provisions of the Missouri Compromise declaring it to be free territory were beyond Congress's power to enact. The Court rested its decision on the grounds that Congress's power to acquire territories and create governments within those territories was limited, and that the Fifth Amendment barred any law that would deprive a slaveholder of his property, such as his slaves, because he had brought them into a free territory. The Court went on to state — although the issue was not before the Court — that the territorial legislatures had no power to ban slavery.
This was only the second time that the Supreme Court had found an act of Congress to be unconstitutional. (The first time was 54 years earlier in Marbury v. Madison). Curtis, in dissent, attacked that part of the Court's decision as obiter dicta, on the ground that once the Court determined that it did not have jurisdiction to hear Scott's case its only recourse was to dismiss the action, not to pass judgment on the merits of his claims. The dissents by Curtis and McLean also attacked the Court's overturning of the Missouri Compromise on its merits, noting both that it was not necessary to decide the question, and also that none of the Framers of the Constitution had ever objected on constitutional grounds to the United States Congress' adoption of the antislavery provisions of the Northwest Ordinance passed by the Continental Congress, or the subsequent acts that barred slavery north of 36°30'. Nor, these justices argued, was there any Constitutional basis for the claim that African-Americans could not be citizens. At the time of the ratification of the Constitution, black men could vote in ten of the thirteen states. This made them citizens not only of their states but of the United States. However, it should be noted that at the time of the decision, five of the ten States that allowed black men to vote had either restricted this right in some way or completely withheld it[6].

[edit] Consequences
The decision was a culmination of what many at that time considered a push to expand slavery. The expansion of the territories and resulting admission of new states meant that the longstanding Missouri Compromise would cause the loss of political power in the North as many of the new states would be admitted as slave states. Thus, Democratic party politicians sought repeal of the Missouri Compromise and were finally successful in 1854 with the passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act, which naturally ended the "compromise." This act permitted each newly admitted state south of the 40th parallel to decide whether to be a slave state or free state. Now, with Dred Scott, the Supreme Court under Taney sought to permit the unhindered expansion of slavery into the territories.
Before the final decision, John Sanford was deemed insane, and was incarcerated.
Although Taney believed that the decision would settle the slavery question once and for all, it produced the opposite result. It strengthened the opposition to slavery in the North, divided the Democratic Party on sectional lines, encouraged secessionist elements among Southern supporters of slavery to make even bolder demands, and strengthened the Republican Party.

[edit] Reaction
The reaction to the decision from opponents of slavery was fierce. The Albany, New York, Evening Journal combined two themes in denouncing the decision as both an offense to the principles of liberty on which the nation was founded and a victory for slave states over the free states:[7]

"The three hundred and forty-seven thousand five hundred and twenty-five Slaveholders in the Republic, accomplished day before yesterday a great success — as shallow men estimate success. They converted the Supreme Court of Law and Equity of the United States of America into a propagandist of human Slavery. Fatal day for a judiciary made reputable throughout the world, and reliable to all in this nation, by the learning and the virtues of Jay, Rutledge, Ellsworth, Marshall and Story!"

"The conspiracy is nearly completed. The Legislation of the Republic is in the hands of this handful of Slaveholders. The United States Senate assures it to them. The Executive power of the Government is theirs. Buchanan took the oath of fealty to them on the steps of the Capitol last Wednesday. The body which gives the supreme law of the land, has just acceded to their demands, and dared to declare that under the charter of the Nation, men of African descent are not citizens of the United States and can not be — that the Ordinance of 1787 was void — that human Slavery is not a local thing, but pursues its victims to free soil, clings to them wherever they go, and returns with them — that the American Congress has no power to prevent the enslavement of men in the National Territories — that the inhabitants themselves of the Territories have no power to exclude human bondage from their midst — and that men of color can not be suitors for justice in the Courts of the United States!"

That editorial ended on a martial note:

"...All who love Republican institutions and who hate Aristocracy, compact yourselves together for the struggle which threatens your liberty and will test your manhood!"

Many abolitionists and some supporters of slavery believed that Taney was prepared to rule, as soon as the issue was presented in a subsequent case, that the states had no power to prohibit slavery within their borders and that state laws providing for the emancipation of slaves brought into their territory or forbidding the institution of slavery were likewise unconstitutional. Abraham Lincoln stressed this danger during his famous "House Divided" speech at Springfield, Illinois, on June 16, 1858:

"Put this and that together, and we have another nice little niche, which we may, ere long, see filled with another Supreme Court decision, declaring that the Constitution of the United States does not permit a State to exclude slavery from its limits. ...We shall lie down pleasantly dreaming that the people of Missouri are on the verge of making their State free, and we shall awake to the reality instead, that the Supreme Court has made Illinois a slave State."

That fear of the "next" Dred Scott decision shocked many in the North who had been content to accept slavery as long as it was confined within its present borders.
It also put the Northern Democrats, such as Stephen A. Douglas, in a difficult position. The Northern wing of the Democratic Party had supported the Kansas–Nebraska Act of 1854 under the banner of "popular sovereignty," arguing that even if Congress did not bar the expansion of slavery into those territories, the residents of those territories could prohibit it by territorial legislation. The Dred Scott decision squarely stated that they could not — even though, strictly speaking, that issue was not before the Court.
Douglas attempted to overcome that obstacle, without challenging the Court's decision directly, by his Freeport Doctrine. Douglas insisted that, even if a territory could not bar slavery outright, the institution could not take root without local police regulations to protect it.
While this doctrine may have allayed Northern Democrats' fears, it was wholly unacceptable to Southern Democrats, who reached a different conclusion from the same premise. As they argued, if hostile territorial governments could obstruct their right to bring their slaves into a territory by refusing to protect that right, then Congress must intervene to pass a federal slave code for all the territories. They often coupled this with threats to secede if Congress did not comply.
At the same time, Democrats characterized Republicans as lawless rebels, provoking disunion by their unwillingness to accept the Supreme Court's decision as the law of the land. Many Northern opponents of slavery had offered a legalistic argument for refusing to recognize the Dred Scott decision as binding. As they noted, the Court's decision began with the proposition that the federal courts did not have jurisdiction to hear Scott's case because he was not a citizen of the State of Missouri. Therefore, so the opponents argued, the remainder of the decision concerning the Missouri Compromise was unnecessary (i.e., beyond the Court's power to decide) and invalid (i.e., obiter dictum). Douglas attacked this position in the Lincoln–Douglas debates:

"Mr. Lincoln goes for a warfare upon the Supreme Court of the United States, because of their judicial decision in the Dred Scott case. I yield obedience to the decisions in that court—to the final determination of the highest judicial tribunal known to our constitution."

Southern supporters of slavery went further, claiming that the decision was essential to the preservation of the union. As the Richmond Enquirer stated:

"Thus has a politico-legal question, involving others of deep import, been decided emphatically in favor of the advocates and supporters of the Constitution and the Union, the equality of the States and the rights of the South, in contradistinction to and in repudiation of the diabolical doctrines inculcated by factionists and fanatics; and that too by a tribunal of jurists, as learned, impartial and unprejudiced as perhaps the world has ever seen. A prize, for which the athletes of the nation have often wrestled in the halls of Congress, has been awarded at last, by the proper umpire, to those who have justly won it. The "nation" has achieved a triumph, "sectionalism" has been rebuked, and abolitionism has been staggered and stunned. Another supporting pillar has been added to our institutions; the assailants of the South and enemies of the Union have been driven from their "point d'appui"; a patriotic principle has been pronounced; a great, national, conservative, union saving sentiment has been proclaimed."

But while some supporters of slavery treated the decision as a vindication of their rights within the union, others treated it as merely a step to spreading slavery throughout the nation, as the Republicans claimed. Convinced that any restrictions on their right to own slaves and to take them anywhere they chose were unlawful, they boasted that the coming decade would see slave auctions on Boston Common. These Southern radicals were ready to split the Democratic Party and — as events showed — the nation on that principle.
Frederick Douglass, a prominent African-American abolitionist who thought the decision unconstitutional and the Chief Justice's reasoning inapposite to the founders' vision, recognized that political conflict could not be avoided. "The highest authority has spoken. The voice of the Supreme Court has gone out over the troubled waves of the National Conscience. But my hopes were never brighter than now. I have no fear that the National Conscience will be put to sleep by such an open, glaring, and scandalous issue of lies."

[edit] Scott's fate
The sons of Peter Blow, Scott's first owner, purchased emancipation for Scott and his family on May 26 1857. Scott died eighteen months later of tuberculosis on November 7, 1858.

[edit] Later references
Justice John Marshall Harlan was the lone dissenting vote in the 1896 Supreme Court Plessy v. Ferguson which legalized racial segregation and created the concept of “separate but equal.” In his dissent Harlan wrote that the majority’s opinion would “prove to be quite as pernicious as the decision made by this tribunal in the Dred Scott case.”[8]
It was noted by William Rehnquist that the decision in Scott, written and championed by Taney, destroyed Taney's reputation and made him bitterly hated. Taney had hoped that his decision would put an end to the vicious fighting over slavery, by settling the question once and for all. Instead, it became one of the many causes of the American Civil War.[clarification needed][9]
Charles Evans Hughes, writing on the history of the Supreme Court in 1927 before his appointment as Chief Justice, described the Dred Scott case as a "self-inflicted wound" from which it took the Court at least a generation to recover.[10][11]
In Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992)—which upheld Roe's central holding that abortion is constitutionally protected—Justice Scalia, joined by three other justices who wanted to reverse Roe, made this comparison to Dred Scott:

[D]red Scott...rested upon the concept of "substantive due process" that the Court praises and employs today. Indeed, Dred Scott was very possibly the first application of substantive due process in the Supreme Court, the original precedent for...Roe v. Wade. [12]


[edit] See also

List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 60
Origins of the American Civil War
Timeline of the American Civil Rights Movement


[edit] Notes


^ a b While the name of the case is "Scott vs. Sandford", the respondent's surname was actually "Sanford". A clerk had misspelled the name, and the court never corrected the error. Vishneski, John (1988). "What the Court Decided in Dred Scott v. Sandford". The American Journal of Legal History 32 (4): 373–390. doi:10.2307/845743. 
^ Scott v. Sandford
^ FindLaw for Legal Professionals - Case Law, Federal and State Resources, Forms, and Code
^ 83 U.S. 36
^ Fehrenbacher, D. E. (1978). The Dred Scott case. Pg. 2. New York: Oxford University Press.
^ Abraham Lincoln's Speech on the Dred Scott Decision, June 26, 1857
^ "The Issue Forced Upon Us.". Albany, New York, Evening Journal. March 9, 1857. http://history.furman.edu/benson/docs/nyajds57309a.htm. Retrieved on 2008-06-17. 
^ Fehrenbacher p. 580
^ http://muse.jhu.edu/login?uri=/journals/catholic_historical_review/v088/88.2carey.html (requires subscription)
^ Introduction to the court opinion on the Dredd Scott case, U.S. Department of State, http://usinfo.state.gov/infousa/government/overview/21.html, retrieved on 2007-11.22 
^ Remarks of the Chief Justice, Supreme Court of the United States, March 21, 2003, http://www.supremecourtus.gov/publicinfo/speeches/sp_03-21-03.html, retrieved on 2007-11-22 
^ Planned Parenthood of Southeastern PA. v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833 (1992). FindLaw.



[edit] Further reading

Tushnet, Mark (2008). I dissent: Great Opposing Opinions in Landmark Supreme Court Cases. Boston: Beacon Press. pp. 31–44. ISBN 9780807000366. 


[edit] External links

 Works related to Dred Scott v. Sandford at Wikisource
Text of Dred Scott v. Sandford, 60 U.S. 393 (1856) is available from:  · Enfacto · LII


Summary of the case from OYEZ
"Dred Scott decision." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2006. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 17 December 2006. www.yowebsite.com
Dred Scott Decision: The Lawsuit That Started The Civil War article by Gregory J. Wallance
Jefferson National Expansion Memorial, National Park Service
Infography about the Dred Scott Case
The Dred Scott Case Collection








v • d • e

Missouri in the American Civil War






Pre-War

History of slavery in Missouri · Missouri Compromise · Dred Scott Decision · Bleeding Kansas · Armed Neutrality







1861

Missouri Constitutional Convention · Liberty Arsenal · St. Louis Arsenal · Camp Jackson Affair · Missouri State Guard · Price-Harney Truce · Grant's First Command · Governor on the Run · Battle of Boonville · Battle of Cole Camp · Battle of Carthage · Gamble's Provisional Government · Battle of Athens · Battle of Wilson's Creek · Frémont Martial Law · Battle of Dry Wood Creek · Platte Bridge Railroad Tragedy · Sacking of Osceola · Battle of Liberty · Battle of Lexington I · Battle of Fredericktown · Missouri secession · Battle of Springfield I · Department of the Missouri · Battle of Belmont · Gratiot Street Prison · Burning of Platte City · Blackwater/Milford · Battle of Mount Zion Church






1862

Army of the West · Battle of Roan's Tan Yard · Battle of Island Number Ten · Battle of Moore's Mill · Battle of Kirksville · First Battle of Independence · Battle of Lone Jack · First Battle of Newtonia · Palmyra Massacre · Skirmish at Island Mound · Battle of Clark's Mill






1863

Battle of Springfield II · Battle of Hartville · Battle of Cape Girardeau · Battle of Chalk Bluff · General Order № 11 · Shelby's Raid






1864

Centralia Massacre · Army of Missouri · Price's Raid · Battle of Fort Davidson · Battle of Glasgow · Battle of Lexington II · Battle of Little Blue River · Battle of Byram's Ford · Second Battle of Independence · Battle of Westport · Battle of Marmiton River · Battle of Newtonia II






1865

Lincoln's Vaughn Pardon






Reconstruction

James-Younger Gang · Bald Knobbers










Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dred_Scott_v._Sandford"
Categories: Missouri in the American Civil War | Slavery in the United States | United States Fifth Amendment case law | United States Supreme Court cases | History of the United States (1849–1865) | 1857 in law | History of St. Louis, Missouri | Presidency of James BuchananHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2009 | All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
Español
Euskara
Français
한국어
Italiano
עברית
日本語









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 22:57 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
