













Zodiac - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Zodiac";
		var wgTitle = "Zodiac";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "34411";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282310870;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Zodiac

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Zodiac (disambiguation).




Wheel of the zodiac: This 6th century mosaic pavement in a synagogue incorporates Greek-Byzantine elements, Beit Alpha, Israel






The Earth in its orbit around the Sun causes the Sun to appear on the celestial sphere moving over the ecliptic (red), which is tilted on the equator (blue).


Zodiac denotes an annual cycle of twelve stations or "signs" along the ecliptic, the apparent path of the Sun across the heavens, dividing the ecliptic into twelve equal zones of celestial longitude. As such, the zodiac is a celestial coordinate system, more precisely an ecliptic coordinate system, taking the ecliptic as the origin of latitude, and the position of the sun at vernal equinox as the origin of longitude.
It was developed by Babylonian astronomers in the 1st millennium BC from an earlier system of lists of stars along the ecliptic.[1] The construction of the zodiac is described in Ptolemy's Almagest.
The term zodiac more loosely refers to the region of the celestial sphere encompassing the paths of the Moon and the naked eye planets (Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn), corresponding to the band of about eight arc degrees above and below the ecliptic.
The term zodiac derives from Latin zōdiacus, in turn from the Greek ζωδιακός κύκλος (zōdiakos kuklos), meaning "circle of animals", derived from ζώδιον (zōdion), the diminutive of ζῶον (zōon) "animal". The name is motivated by the many of the signs of the classical Greek zodiac being represented as animals (six out of twelve, plus two mythological hybrids).
Although the zodiac remains the basis of the ecliptic coordinate system in use in astronomy besides the equatorial one, the term and the names of the twelve signs are today mostly associated with horoscopic astrology.




Contents


1 History
2 The twelve signs
3 Zodiacal constellations
4 Table of dates
5 Precession of the equinoxes
6 In modern astronomy
7 Mnemonics for the zodiac
8 References
9 See also





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Further information: Babylonian zodiac, History of astronomy, and History of astrology
The division of the ecliptic into the zodiacal signs originates in Babylonian ("Chaldean") astronomy during the first half of the 1st millennium BC, likely during Median/"Neo-Babylonian" times (7th century BC)[2], continuing earlier (Bronze Age) systems of lists of stars. Babylonian astronomers at some point during the early 1st millennium BC divided the ecliptic into twelve equal zones of celestial longitude to create the first known celestial coordinate system: a coordinate system that boasts some advantages over modern systems (such as equatorial coordinate system or ecliptic coordinate system). The Babylonian calendar as it stood in the 7th century BC assigns each month a constellation, beginning with the position of the Sun at vernal equinox, which at the time was the Aries constellation ("Age of Aries"), for which reason first astrological sign is still called "Aries" even after vernal equinox has moved away from the Aries constellation.
The Babylonian zodiac also finds reflection in the Hebrew Bible. The name of the twelve signs are equivalent to the names in use today, except that the name of the Eagle seems to have been usually substituted for Scorpio. [3][4] The arrangement of the twelve tribes of Israel around the Tabernacle (Numbers 2) corresponded to the order of the Zodiac; and four of the tribes represented the middle signs of each quarter: Judah was the Lion, Reuben the Man, Ephraim the Bull, and Dan the Eagle. [5][6][7] Thomas Mann in Joseph and His Brothers takes the Blessing of Jacob as attributing characteristics of a sign of the zodiac to each tribe. The faces of the cherubim, in both Ezekiel and Revelation, are the middle signs of the four quarters of the Zodiac: the Lion is Leo; the Bull is Taurus; the Man is Aquarius; and the Eagle is Scorpio.[citation needed]




The 1st century BC Denderah Zodiac (19th-century engraving)


Hellenistic astrology was a syncretism of Babylonian and Egyptian astrology, and it was in Ptolemaic Egypt where horoscopic astrology first appeared. The Dendera zodiac, a relief dating to ca. 50 BC, is the first known depiction of the classical zodiac of twelve signs.
Babylonia or Chaldea in the Hellenistic world came to be so identified with astrology that "Chaldean wisdom" became among Greeks and Romans the synonym of divination through the planets and stars.
The Hindu zodiac is a direct loan of the Greek system, adopted during the period of intense Indo-Greek cultural contact during the Seleucid period (2nd to 1st centuries BC).
In Hindu astrology, the individual signs are called 'rāshi. The transmission of the zodiac system to Hindu astrology predated widespread awareness of the precession of the equinoxes, and the Hindu system ended up using a sidereal coordinate system, which resulted in the European and the Hindu zodiacs, even though sharing the same origin in Hellenistic astrology, gradually moving apart over two millennia that have passed since. The Sanskrit names of the signs are direct translations of the Greek names (dhanus meaning "bow" rather than "archer", and kumbha meaning "water-pitcher" rather than "water-carrier").
Particularly important in the development of horoscopic astrology was the astrologer and astronomer Ptolemy, whose work, the Tetrabiblos laid the basis of the Western astrological tradition. Under the Greeks and Ptolemy in particular, the planets, Houses, and signs of the zodiac were rationalized and their function set down in a way that has changed little to the present day.[8] Ptolemy lived in the 2nd century AD, three centuries after the discovery of the precession of the equinoxes by Hipparchus around 130 BC, but he ignored the problem, apparently by dropping the concept of a fixed celestial sphere and adopting what is referred to as a tropical coordinate system instead.




The zodiac signs as shown in a 16th century woodcut


The High Middle Ages saw a revival of Greco-Roman magic, first in Kabbalism and later continued in Renaissance magic. This included magical uses of the zodiac, as found e.g. in the Sefer Raziel HaMalakh.
The zodiacal signs remain in use as the basis of an ecliptic coordinate system, though modern astronomers tend to use an equatorial coordinate systems since Early Modern times. One can see the use of the sidereal coordinate remained in use throughout the medieval period, e.g. in Hermannus Contractus in his de mensura astrolabii liber who gives the locations of stars in stereographic projection for the construction of an astrolabe, There he gives the zodiac coordinate of Antares as 14. Scorpius, equalling a J2000.0 ecliptic longitude of 224° (the 14th degree from the beginning of Scorpius at 210°).

[edit] The twelve signs




The symbols used in Western astrology to represent the astrological signs


Main article: Astrological sign
What follows is a list of the twelve signs of the zodiac (with the ecliptic longitudes of their first points), where 0° Aries is understood as the vernal equinox, with their Latin, Greek, Sanskrit and Babylonian names (but note that the Sanskrit and the Babylonian name equivalents denote the constellations only, not the tropical zodiac signs):


no.
symbol
long.
Latin name
English translation
Greek name
Sanskrit name
Sumero-Babylonian name[9]


1
♈
0°
Aries
The Ram
Κριός
Meṣa
MUL LUḪUN.GA "The Agrarian Worker", Dumuzi


2
♉
30°
Taurus
The Bull
Ταύρος
Vṛṣabha
MULGU4.AN.NA "The Steer of Heaven"


3
♊
60°
Gemini
The Twins
Δίδυμοι
Mithuna
MULMAŠ.TAB.BA.GAL.GAL "The Great Twins" (Lugalgirra and Meslamta-ea)


4
♋
90°
Cancer
The Crab
Καρκίνος
Karka
MULAL.LUL "The Crayfish"


5
♌
120°
Leo
The Lion
Λέων
Siṃha
MULUR.GU.LA "The Lion"


6
♍
150°
Virgo
The Virgin
Παρθένος
Kanyā
MULAB.SIN "The Furrow"; "The Furrow, the goddess Shala's ear of corn"


7
♎
180°
Libra
The Scales
Ζυγός
Tula
zibanitum "The Scales"


8
♏
210°
Scorpio
The Scorpion
Σκoρπιός
Vṛścika
MULGIR.TAB "The Scorpion"


9
♐
240°
Sagittarius
The Archer
Τοξότης
Dhanus
MULPA.BIL.SAG, Nedu "soldier"


10
♑
270°
Capricornus
"Goat-horned" (The Sea-Goat)
Αἰγόκερως
Makara
MULSUḪUR.MAŠ "The Goat-Fish"


11
♒
300°
Aquarius
The Water Pourer
Ὑδροχόος
Kumbha
MULGU.LA "The Great One", later qâ "pitcher"


12
♓
330°
Pisces
The Fish
Ἰχθείς
Mīna
MULSIM.MAḪ "The Tail of the Swallow", later DU.NU.NU "fish-cord"


The zodiacal symbols are Early Modern simplifications of conventional pictorial representations of the signs, attested since Hellenistic times. The symbols are encoded in Unicode at positions U+2648 to U+2653.

[edit] Zodiacal constellations
It is important to distinguish the zodiacal signs from the constellations associated with them, not only because of their drifting apart due to the precession of equinoxes but also because the physical constellations by nature of their varying shapes and forms take up varying widths of the ecliptic. Thus, Virgo takes up fully five times as much ecliptic longitude as Scorpius. The zodiacal signs, on the other hand, are an abstraction from the physical signs designed to represent exactly one twelfth of the full circle each, or the longitude traversed by the Sun in about 30.4 days.[10]
There have always been a number of "parazodiacal" constellations which are also touched by the paths of the planets. The MUL.APIN lists Orion, Perseus, Auriga and Andromeda. Furthermore, there are a number of constellations mythologically associated with the zodiacal ones: Piscis Austrinus, The Southern Fish, is attached to Aquarius. In classical maps it swallows the stream poured out of Aquarius' pitcher, but perhaps it formerly just swam in it. Aquila, The Eagle, was possibly associated with the zodiac by virtue of it main star, Altair. Hydra in the Early Bronze Age marked the celestial equator and was associated with Leo, which is shown standing on the serpent on the Dendera zodiac. Corvus is the Crow or Raven mysteriously perched on the tail of Hydra. The MUL.APIN glosses Hydra as "the Snake Ningizzida, lord of the Netherworld". Ningizzida together with Dumuzi (Aries) and Pabilsag (Sagittarius) governed the household of the queen of the underworld.
Taking the current constellation boundaries as defined in 1930 by the International Astronomical Union, the ecliptic itself passes through an additional thirteenth constellation, Ophiuchus, situated between Scorpius and Sagittarius. This is already recognized in Ptolemy's Almagest.[citation needed]

[edit] Table of dates
The following table compares the Gregorian dates on which the Sun enters

a sign in the Ptolemaic tropical zodiac;
a sign in the Hindu sidereal system
the astronomical constellation of the same name as the sign, with constellation boundaries as defined in 1930 by the International Astronomical Union.

The theoretical beginning of Aries is the moment of vernal equinox, and all other dates shift accordingly. In the Gregorian calendar,[11] vernal equinox falls either on 20 or 21 of March in the recent past and the near future (in UTC): the last time it fell on 19 March was in 1796, the next time will be in 2044.[12] In the long term, if the Gregorian calendar isn't reformed, the equinox will move to earlier dates. It will fall on 18 March for the first time in AD 4092.


Sign
Constellation[13] [14]



tropical zodiac (2009, UTC)
sidereal zodiac (Jyotisha) (2009, UTC)[15]

IAU constellation boundaries (2009)
Solar stay
Brightest star


Aries 
20 March
– 19 April

14 April – 14 May
Aries
18
April – 14 May

25.5 days
Alpha Arietis


Taurus 
19 April
– 20 May

14 May – 13 June
Taurus
14
May – 21 June

38.2 days
Aldebaran


Gemini 
20 May
– 21 June

13 June – 14 July
Gemini
21
June – 20 July

29.3 days
Pollux


Cancer 
21 June
– 22 July

14 July – 13 August
Cancer
20
July – 10 August

21.1 days
Beta Cancri


Leo 
22 July
– 23 August

13 August – 13 September
Leo
10
August – 16 September

36.9 days
Regulus


Virgo 
23 August
– 22 September

13 September – 13 October
Virgo
16
September – 31 October

44.5 days
Spica


Libra 
22 September
– 23 October

13 October – 12 November
Libra
31
October – 21 November

21.1 days
Beta Librae


Scorpio 
23 October
– 22 November

13 November – 13 December
Scorpius
21
November – 29 November

8.4 days
Antares


n/a
n/a
n/a
Ophiuchus
29
November – 18 December

18.4 days
Alpha Ophiuchi


Sagittarius 
22 November
– 21 December

13 December – 12 January
Sagittarius
18
December – 20 January

33.6 days
Epsilon Sagittarii


Capricorn 
21 December
– 20 January

12 January – 12 February
Capricornus
20
January – 17 February

27.4 days
Delta Capricorni


Aquarius 
20 January
– 18 February

12 February – 14 March
Aquarius
17
February – 13 March

23.9 days
Beta Aquarii


Pisces 
18 February
– 20 March

14 March – 14 April
Pisces
13
March – 19 April

37.7 days
Eta Piscium



[edit] Precession of the equinoxes
Further information: Precession of the equinoxes, Epoch (astronomy), Sidereal astrology, Tropical astrology, Astrological age, and Ayanamsa




path taken by the point of vernal equinox along the ecliptic over the past 6000 years


The zodiac system was developed in Babylonia, some 2,500 years ago, during the "Age of Aries". At the time, the precession of the equinoxes was unknown, and the system made no allowance for it. Contemporary use of the coordinate system is presented with the choice of either interpreting the system as sidereal, with the signs fixed to the stellar background, or as tropical, with the signs fixed to the point of vernal equinox.
Western astrology takes the tropical approach, while Hindu astrology takes the sidereal one. This results in the originally unified zodiacal coordinate system drifting apart gradually, with an angular velocity of about 1.4 degrees per century.
For the tropical zodiac used in Western astronomy and astrology, this means that the tropical sign of Aries currently lies somewhere within the constellation Pisces ("Age of Pisces"). The choice of origin for the sidereal coordinate system is known as the ayanamsa in Sanskrit.
It is not entirely clear how the Hellenistic astronomers responded to this phenomenon of precession once it had been discovered by Hipparchus around 130 BC. Today, some read Ptolemy as dropping the concept of a fixed celestial sphere and adopting what is referred to as a tropical coordinate system instead: in other words, one fixed to the cycle of the Earth's seasonal cycle rather than its orbital cycle.
Some modern Western astrologers, such as Cyril Fagan, have advocated abandoning the tropical system in favour of a sidereal one.

[edit] In modern astronomy
Further information: Epoch (astronomy)
The zodiac is a spherical celestial coordinate system. It designates the ecliptic as its fundamental plane and the position of the Sun at Vernal equinox as its prime meridian.
In astronomy, the zodiacal constellations are a convenient way of marking the ecliptic (the Sun's path across the sky) and the path of the moon and planets along the ecliptic. Modern astronomy still uses tropical coordinates for predicting the positions the Sun, Moon, and planets, except longitude in the ecliptic coordinate system is numbered from 0° to 360°, not 0° to 30° within each sign. Longitude within individual signs was still being used as late as 1740 by Jacques Cassini in his Tables astronomiques.
Unlike the zodiac signs in astrology, which are all thirty degrees in length, the astronomical constellations vary widely in size. The boundaries of all the constellations in the sky were set by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) in 1930. This was essentially a mapping exercise to make the work of astronomers more efficient, and the boundaries of the constellations are not therefore in any meaningful sense an 'equivalent' to the zodiac signs. Along with the twelve original constellations, the boundaries of a thirteenth constellation, Ophiuchus (the serpent bearer), were set by astronomers within the bounds of the zodiac.

[edit] Mnemonics for the zodiac
A traditional mnemonic:[16]

The Ram, the Bull, the Heavenly Twins,
And next the Crab, the Lion shines,
The Virgin and the Scales.
The Scorpion, Archer, and the Goat,
The Man who holds the Watering Pot,
And Fish with glittering scales.

A less poetic, but succinct and perhaps more memorable, mnemonic is the following:[17]

The Ramble Twins Crab Liverish;
Scaly Scorpions Are Good Water Fish.

(Ram-Ble = Ram, Bull; Twins = Twins; Crab = Crab; Li-Ver(ish) = Lion, Virgin; Scaly = Scale; Scorpion = Scorpio; Are = Archer; Good = Goat; Water = Water Bearer; Fish = Fish)

[edit] References


^ see MUL.APIN. See also Lankford, John History of Astronomy Routledge 1996 ISBN 978-0815303220P.43 [1]
^ Powell 2004
^ Richard Hinckley Allen, Star Names: Their Lore and Meaning (New York: Dover Publications, [1899] 1963), Vol. 1, pp 213-15
^ David Chilton, 1987, 1990. Days of Vengeance: An Exposition of the Book of Revelation. Ft. Worth, TX: Dominion Press. ISBN 0-930462-09-2.
^ Ernest L. Martin, The Birth of Christ Recalculated (Pasadena, CA: Foundation for Biblical Research, second ed., 1980), pp. 167ff
^ J. A. Thompson, Numbers
^ D. Guthrie and J.A. Motyer, eds., The New Bible Commentary (Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., third ed., 1970) p. 173
^ Derek and Julia Parker, Ibid, p16, 1990
^ MUL.APIN; Peter Whitfield, History of Astrology (2001); W. Muss-Arnolt, The Names of the Assyro-Babylonian Months and Their Regents, Journal of Biblical Literature (1892).
^ 30.4368 SI days or 2629743 seconds in tropical astrology and 30.4380 SI days or 2629846 seconds in sidereal astrology on average (the time spent by the Sun in each sign varies slightly due to the eccentricity of the Earth's orbit).
^ The Gregorian calendar is built to satisfy the First Council of Nicaea, which placed vernal equinox is on 21 March, but it isn't possible to keep it on a single day within a reasonable system of leap days.
^ See Jean Meeus, Astronomical Tables of the Sun, Moon, and Planets, 1983 published by Willmann-Bell, Inc., Richmond, Virginia. The date in other time zones may vary.
^ Astronomical Almanac Online!(subscribers) U.S. Naval Observatory 2008
^ IAU concluded in 1977
^ assuming an ayanamsa of 23.86° as of 2000 according to N. C. Lahiri. The precise value used may vary, but is mostly set close to 24°.
^ Project Gutenberg ebook "An Alphabet Of Old Friends"; see Z for Zodiac.
^ Rey, H.A. (1952). The Stars, Houghton Mifflin.



B. L. van der Waerden, "History of the zodiac", Archiv für Orientforschung 16 (1953) 216–230.
Ptolemy, Claudius (1998), written at Princeton, NJ, The Almagest, Princeton University Press, ISBN 069100260 Translated and annotated by G.J. Toomer ; with a foreword by Owen Gingerich.
Powell, Robert, Influence of Babylonian Astronomy on the Subsequent Defining of the Zodiac (2004), PhD thesis.
Tropical v Sidereal debate, The Traditional Astrologer magazine, (Ascella), Issue 14, May 1997, pp.23–27
Peters, Christian Heinrich Friedrich and Edward Ball Knobel. Ptolemy's Catalogue of Stars: a revision of the Almagest. (1915). Publishers, Carnegie Institution of Washington.


[edit] See also



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Zodiac






Astrology portal




Ecliptic
Astrological sign
Astronomical symbols
Circle of stars
Cusp (astrology)
Elements of the zodiac
History of astrology
History of astronomy



Astronomy | Constellations and Signs of the Zodiac


Aries
Taurus
Gemini
Cancer
Leo
Virgo
Libra
Scorpius
Ophiuchus
Sagittarius
Capricornus
Aquarius
Pisces

























v • d • e

Greek astronomy





Astronomers



Acoreus · Aglaonike · Agrippa · Anaximander · Andronicus · Apollonius · Aratus · Aristarchus · Aristillus · Attalus · Autolycus · Bion · Callippus · Cleomedes · Cleostratus · Conon · Eratosthenes · Euctemon · Eudoxus · Geminus · Heraclides · Hicetas · Hipparchus · Hippocrates of Chios · Hypsicles · Menelaus · Meton · Oenopides · Philip of Opus · Philolaus · Posidonius · Ptolemy · Pytheas · Seleucus · Sosigenes of Alexandria · Sosigenes the Peripatetic · Strabo · Thales · Theodosius · Theon of Alexandria · Theon of Smyrna · Timocharis








Works



Almagest · On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) · On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) · On the Heavens (Aristotle)








Instruments



Antikythera mechanism · Armillary sphere · Astrolabe · Dioptra · Equatorial ring · Gnomon · Mural quadrant · Triquetrum








Concepts



Callippic cycle · Celestial spheres · Circle of latitude · Counter-Earth · Deferent and epicycle · Equant · Geocentrism · Heliocentrism · Hipparchic cycle · Metonic cycle · Octaeteris · Solstice · Spherical Earth · Sublunary sphere · Zodiac








Influences



Babylonian astronomy · Egyptian astronomy








Influenced



European astronomy · Indian astronomy · Islamic astronomy















v • d • e

Western Zodiac





Elements

Fire · Earth · Air · Water






Qualities

Cardinal · Fixed · Mutable






Nature

Positive · Negative






Signs

Aries · Taurus · Gemini · Cancer · Leo · Virgo · Libra · Scorpio · Sagittarius · Capricorn · Aquarius · Pisces









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zodiac"
Categories: Astrology | Celestial coordinate system | Ancient astronomy | History of astrology | Early scientific cosmologies | Astrological signs | ConstellationsHidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Alemannisch
العربية
Asturianu
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Galego
ગુજરાતી
한국어
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latina
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Malti
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
ไทย
lea faka-Tonga
Türkçe
Українська
Walon
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 10:18.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
