











Culture - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Culture";
		var wgTitle = "Culture";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "19159508";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281913828;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Culture

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Culture (disambiguation).







leaf painting by Ming artist Chen Hongshou






The Persian Hasht-Behesht Palace






Ancient Egyptian art






Petroglyphs, Gobustan, Azerbaijan


Culture (from the Latin cultura stemming from colere, meaning "to cultivate")[1] is difficult to define. For example, in 1952, Alfred Kroeber and Clyde Kluckhohn compiled a list of 164 definitions of "culture" in Culture: A Critical Review of Concepts and Definitions.[2] However, the word "culture" is most commonly used in three basic senses:

excellence of taste in the fine arts and humanities
an integrated pattern of human knowledge, belief, and behavior that depends upon the capacity for symbolic thought and social learning
the set of shared attitudes, values, goals, and practices that characterizes an institution, organization or group.

When the concept first emerged in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Europe, it connoted a process of cultivation or improvement, as in agriculture or horticulture. In the nineteenth century, it came to refer first to the betterment or refinement of the individual, especially through education, and then to the fulfillment of national aspirations or ideals. In the mid-nineteenth century, some scientists used the term "culture" to refer to a universal human capacity.
In the twentieth century, "culture" emerged as a concept central to anthropology, encompassing all human phenomena that are not purely results of human genetics. Specifically, the term "culture" in American anthropology had two meanings: (1) the evolved human capacity to classify and represent experiences with symbols, and to act imaginatively and creatively; and (2) the distinct ways that people living in different parts of the world classified and represented their experiences, and acted creatively. Following World War II, the term became important, albeit with different meanings, in other disciplines such as sociology, cultural studies, organizational psychology and management studies.




Contents


1 19th century discourses of culture

1.1 English Romanticism
1.2 German Romanticism


2 20th century discourses of culture

2.1 American Anthropology

2.1.1 Biological Anthropology: the Evolution of Culture
2.1.2 Linguistics
2.1.3 Cultural Anthropology

2.1.3.1 1899-1946: Universal versus Particular
2.1.3.2 The Structural-Functionalist Challenge: Society versus Culture
2.1.3.3 1946-1968: Symbolic versus Adaptive


2.1.4 Archeological Approaches to Culture: Matter and Meaning


2.2 Community Studies and Cultural Studies


3 Cultural change
4 See also
5 Notes
6 References
7 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


19th century discourses of culture

English Romanticism




British poet and critic Matthew Arnold viewed "culture" as the cultivation of the humanist ideal






British anthropologist Edward Tylor was one of the first English-speaking scholars to use the term culture in an inclusive and universal sense


In the nineteenth century, humanists such as English poet and essayist Matthew Arnold (1822-1888) used the word "culture" to refer to an ideal of individual human refinement, of "the best that has been thought and said in the world."[3] This concept of culture is comparable to the German concept of bildung: "...culture being a pursuit of our total perfection by means of getting to know, on all the matters which most concern us, the best which has been thought and said in the world."[3]
In practice, culture referred to an élite ideal and was associated with such activities as art, classical music, and haute cuisine.[4] As these forms were associated with urbane life, "culture" was identified with "civilization" (from lat. civitas, city). Another facet of the Romantic movement was an interest in folklore, which led to identifying a "culture" among non-elites. This distinction is often characterized as that between "high culture", namely that of the ruling social group, and "low culture." In other words, the idea of "culture" that developed in Europe during the 18th and early 19th centuries reflected inequalities within European societies.[5]
Matthew Arnold contrasted "culture" with "anarchy;" other Europeans, following philosophers Thomas Hobbes and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, contrasted "culture" with "the state of nature." According to Hobbes and Rousseau, the Native Americans who were being conquered by Europeans from the 16th centuries on were living in a state of nature; this opposition was expressed through the contrast between "civilized" and "uncivilized." According to this way of thinking, one could classify some countries and nations as more civilized than others and some people as more cultured than others. This contrast led to Herbert Spencer's theory of Social Darwinism and Lewis Henry Morgan's theory of cultural evolution. Just as some critics have argued that the distinction between high and low cultures is really an expression of the conflict between European elites and non-elites, some critics have argued that the distinction between civilized and uncivilized people is really an expression of the conflict between European colonial powers and their colonial subjects.
Other 19th century critics, following Rousseau, have accepted this differentiation between higher and lower culture, but have seen the refinement and sophistication of high culture as corrupting and unnatural developments that obscure and distort people's essential nature. These critics considered folk music (as produced by working-class people) to honestly express a natural way of life, while classical music seemed superficial and decadent. Equally, this view often portrayed indigenous peoples as "noble savages" living authentic and unblemished lives, uncomplicated and uncorrupted by the highly stratified capitalist systems of the West.
In 1870 Edward Tylor (1832-1917) applied these ideas of higher versus lower culture to propose a theory of the evolution of religion. According to this theory, religion evolves from more polytheistic to more monotheistic forms.[6] In the process, he redefined culture as a diverse set of activities characteristic of all human societies. This view paved the way for the modern understanding of culture.

German Romanticism




Johann Herder called attention to national cultures






Adolf Bastian developed a universal model of culture


The German philosopher Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) formulated an individualist definition of "enlightenment" similar to the concept of bildung: "Enlightenment is man’s emergence from his self-incurred immaturity."[7] He argued that this immaturity comes not from a lack of understanding, but from a lack of courage to think independently. Against this intellectual cowardice, Kant urged: Sapere aude, "Dare to be wise!" In reaction to Kant, German scholars such as Johann Gottfried Herder (1744-1803) argued that human creativity, which necessarily takes unpredictable and highly diverse forms, is as important as human rationality. Moreover, Herder proposed a collective form of bildung: "For Herder, Bildung was the totality of experiences that provide a coherent identity, and sense of common destiny, to a people."[8]
In 1795 the great linguist and philosopher Wilhelm von Humboldt (1767-1835) called for an anthropology that would synthesize Kant's and Herder's interests. During the Romantic era, scholars in Germany, especially those concerned with nationalist movements — such as the nationalist struggle to create a "Germany" out of diverse principalities, and the nationalist struggles by ethnic minorities against the Austro-Hungarian Empire — developed a more inclusive notion of culture as "worldview." According to this school of thought, each ethnic group has a distinct worldview that is incommensurable with the worldviews of other groups. Although more inclusive than earlier views, this approach to culture still allowed for distinctions between "civilized" and "primitive" or "tribal" cultures.
In 1860, Adolf Bastian (1826-1905) argued for "the psychic unity of mankind". He proposed that a scientific comparison of all human societies would reveal that distinct worldviews consisted of the same basic elements. According to Bastian, all human societies share a set of "elementary ideas" (Elementargedanken); different cultures, or different "folk ideas" (Volkergedanken), are local modifications of the elementary ideas.[9] This view paved the way for the modern understanding of culture. Franz Boas (1858-1942) was trained in this tradition, and he brought it with him when he left Germany for the United States.

20th century discourses of culture

American Anthropology
Although anthropologists worldwide refer to Tylor's definition of culture, in the 20th century "culture" emerged as the central and unifying concept of American anthropology, where it most commonly refers to the universal human capacity to classify and encode their experiences symbolically, and communicate symbolically encoded experiences socially. American anthropology is organized into four fields, each of which plays an important role in research on culture: biological anthropology, linguistics, cultural anthropology and archeology. Research in these fields have influenced anthropologists working in other countries to different degrees.

Biological Anthropology: the Evolution of Culture




The taxonomic relationships of Hominoidea


Discussion concerning culture among biological anthropologists centers around two debates. First, is culture uniquely human or shared by other species (most notably, other primates)? This is an important question, as the theory of evolution holds that humans are descended from (now extinct) non-human primates. Second, how did culture evolve among human beings?
Gerald Weiss noted that although Tylor’s classic definition of culture was restricted to humans, many anthropologists take this for granted and thus elide that important qualification from later definitions, merely equating culture with any learned behavior. This slippage is a problem because during the formative years of modern primatology, some primatologists were trained in anthropology (and understood that culture refers to learned behavior among humans), and others were not. Notable non-anthropologists, like Robert Yerkes and Jane Goodall thus argued that since chimpanzees have learned behaviors, they have culture.[10][11] Today, anthropological primatologists are divided, several arguing that non-human primates have culture, others arguing that they do not.[12][13][14][15]
This scientific debate is complicated by ethical concerns. The subjects of primatology are non-human primates, and whatever culture these primates have is threatened by human activity. After reviewing the research on primate culture, W.C. McGrew concluded, "[a] discipline requires subjects, and most species of nonhuman primates are endangered by their human cousins. Ultimately, whatever its merit, cultural primatology must be committed to cultural survival [i.e. to the survival of primate cultures]."[16]
McGrew suggests a definition of culture that he finds scientifically useful for studying primate culture. He points out that scientists do not have access to the subjective thoughts or knowledge of non-human primates. Thus, if culture is defined in terms of knowledge, then scientists are severely limited in their attempts to study primate culture. Instead of defining culture as a kind of knowledge, McGrew suggests that we view culture as a process. He lists six steps in the process:

A new pattern of behavior is invented, or an existing one is modified.
The innovator transmits this pattern to another.
The form of the pattern is consistent within and across performers, perhaps even in terms of recognizable stylistic features.
The one who acquires the pattern retains the ability to perform it long after having acquired it.
The pattern spreads across social units in a population. These social units may be families, clans, troops, or bands.
The pattern endures across generations.[17]

McGrew admits that all six criteria may be strict, given the difficulties in observing primate behavior in the wild. But he also insists on the need to be as inclusive as possible, on the need for a definition of culture that "casts the net widely":

Culture is considered to be group-specific behavior that is acquired, at least in part, from social influences. Here, group is considered to be the species-typical unit, whether it be a troop, lineage, subgroup, or so on. Prima facia evidence of culture comes from within-species but across-group variation in behavior, as when a pattern is persistent in one community of chimpanzees but is absent from another, or when different communities perform different versions of the same pattern. The suggestion of culture in action is stronger when the difference across the groups cannot be explained solely by ecological factors ....[18]

As Charles Frederick Voegelin pointed out, if “culture” is reduced to “learned behavior,” then all animals have culture.[19] Certainly all specialists agree that all primate species evidence common cognitive skills: knowledge of object-permanence, cognitive mapping, the ability to categorize objects, and creative problem solving.[20] Moreover, all primate species show evidence of shared social skills: they recognize members of their social group; they form direct relationships based on degrees of kinship and rank; they recognize third-party social relationships; they predict future behavior; and they cooperate in problem-solving.[21]




Cast of the skeleton of Lucy, an Australopithecus afarensis






One current view of the temporal and geographical distribution of hominid populations


Nevertheless, the term "culture" applies to non-human animals only if we define culture as any or all learned behavior. Within mainstream physical anthropology, scholars tend to think that a more restrictive definition is necessary. These researchers are concerned with how human beings evolved to be different from other species. A more precise definition of culture, which excludes non-human social behavior, would allow physical anthropologists to study how humans evolved their unique capacity for "culture".
Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes and Pan paniscus) are humans' (Homo sapiens) closest living relative; both are descended from a common ancestor which lived around five or six million years ago. This is the same amount of time it took for horses and zebras, lions and tigers, and rats and mice, to diverge from their respective common ancestors [22] The evolution of modern humans is relative rapid: Australopithicenes evolved four million years ago and modern humans in past several hundred thousand years. [23] During this time humanity evolved three distinctive features:

(a) the creation and use of conventional symbols, including linguistic symbols and their derivatives, such as written language and mathematical symbols and notations; (b) the creation and use of complex tools and other instrumental technologies; and (c) the creation and participation in complex social organization and institutions.[24]

According to developmental psychologist Michael Tomasello, “where these complex and species-unique behavioral practices, and the cognitive skills that underlie them, came from” is a fundamental anthropological question. Given that contemporary humans and chimpanzees are far more different than horses and zebras, or rats and mice, and that the evolution of this great difference occurred in such a short period of time, “our search must be for some small difference that made a big difference – some adaptation, or small set of adaptations, that changed the process of primate cognitive evolution in fundamental ways.” According to Tomasello, the answer to this question must form the basis of a scientific definition of “human culture.”[25]
In a recent review of the major research on human and primate tool-use, communication, and learning strategies, Tomasello argues that the key human advances over primates (language, complex technologies, complex social organization) are all the results of humans pooling cognitive resources. This is called “the ratchet effect:” innovations spread and are shared by a group, and mastered “by youngsters, which enables them to remain in their new and improved form within the group until something better comes along.” The key point is that children are born good at a particular kind of social learning; this creates a favored environment for social innovations, making them more likely to be maintained and transmitted to new generations than individual innovations. [26] For Tomasello, human social learning — the kind of learning that distinguishes humans from other primates and that played a decisive role in human evolution — is based on two elements: first, what he calls “imitative learning,” (as opposed to “emulative learning” characteristic of other primates) and second, the fact that humans represent their experiences symbolically (rather than iconically, as is characteristic of other primates). Together, these elements enable humans to be both inventive, and to preserve useful inventions. It is this combination that produces the ratchet effect.




Chimpanzee mother and baby






Chimpanzee extracting insects






The Japanese Macaques at Jigokudani hotspring in Nagano


The kind of learning found among other primates is “emuluation learning,” which “focuses on the environmental events involved – results or changes of state in the environment that the other produced – rather than on the actions that produced those results.”[27][28][29] Tomasello emphasizes that emulation learning is a highly adaptive strategy for apes because it focuses on the effects of an act. In laboratory experiments, chimpanzees were shown two different ways for using a rake-like tool to obtain an out-of-reach-object. Both methods were effective, but one was more efficient than the other. Chimpanzees consistently emulated the more efficient method.[30]
Examples of emulation learning are well-documented among primates. Notable examples include Japanese macaque potato washing, Chimpanzee tool use, and Chimpanzee gestural communication. In 1953, an 18-month-old female macaque monkey was observed taking sandy pieces of sweet potato (given to the monkeys by observers) to a stream (and later, to the ocean) to wash off the sand. After three months, the same behavior was observed in her mother and two playmates, and then the playmates’ mothers. Over the next two years seven other young macaques were observed washing their potatoes, and by the end of the third year 40% of the troop had adopted the practice.[31][32] Although this story is popularly represented as a straightforward example of human-like learning, evidence suggests that it is not. Many monkeys naturally brush sand off of food; this behavior had been observed in the macaque troop prior to the first observed washing. Moreover, potato washing was observed in four other separate macaque troops, suggesting that at least four other individual monkeys had learned to wash off sand on their own.[33] Other monkey species in captivity quickly learn to wash off their food.[34] Finally, the spread of learning among the Japanese macaques was fairly slow, and the rate at which new members of the troop learned did not keep pace with the growth of the troop. If the form of learning were imitation, the rate of learning should have been exponential. It is more likely that monkeys the washing behavior is based on the common behavior of cleaning off food, and that monkeys that spent time by the water independently learned to wash, rather than wipe their food. This explains both why those monkeys that kept company with the original washer, and who thus spent a good deal of time by the water, also figured out how to wash their potatoes. It also explains why the rate at which this behavior spread was relatively slow. [35]
Chimpanzees exhibit a variety of population-specific tool use: termite-fishing, ant-fishing, ant-dipping, nut-cracking, and leaf-sponging. Gombe chimpanzees fish for termites using small, thin sticks, but chimpanzees in Western Africa use large sticks to break holes in mounds and use their hands to scoop up termites. Some of this variation may be the result of “environmental shaping” (there is more rainfall in western Africa, softening termite mounds and making them easier to break apart, than in the Gombe reserve in eastern Africa. Nevertheless it is clear that chimpanzees are good at emulation learning. Chimpanzee children independently know how to roll over logs, and know how to eat insects. When children see their mothers rolling over logs in order to eat the insects beneath, they quickly learn to do the same. In other words, this form of learning builds on activities the children already know.[36][37]




Mother and child






Inuit Family






Girls in Xinjiang in northwestern China






Children in Jerusalem






Children in Namibia


The kind of learning characteristic of human children is “Imitative learning,” which “means reproducing an instrumental act understood intentionally.”[38] Human infants begin to display some evidence of this form of learning between the ages of nine and twelve months, when infants fix their attention not only on an object, but on the gaze of an adult which enables them to use adults as points of reference and thus “act on objects in the way adults are acting on them.” [39] This dynamic is well-documented and has also been termed “joint engagement” or “joint attention.”[40][41] Essential to this dynamic is the infants growing capacity to recognize others as “intentional agents:” people “with the power to control their spontaneous behavior” and who “have goals and make active choices among behavioral means for attaining those goals.”[42]
The development of skills in joint attention by the end of a human child’s first year of life provides the basis for the development of imitative learning in the second year. In one study 14-month old children imitated an adult’s overly-complex method of turning on a light, even when they could have used an easier and more natural motion to the same effect.[43] In another study, 16-month old children interacted with adults who alternated between a complex series of motions that appeared intentional and a comparable set of motions that appeared accidental; they imitated only those motions that appeared intentional.[44] Another study of 18-month old children revealed that children imitate actions that adults intend , yet in some way fail, to perform.[45] Tomasello emphasizes that this kind of imitative learning “relies fundamentally on infants’ tendency to identify with adults, and on their ability to distinguish in the actions of others the underlying goal and the different means that might be used to achieve it.”[46] He calls this kind of imitative learning “cultural learning because the child is not just learning about things from other persons, she is also learning things through them — in the sense that she must know something of the adult’s perspective on a situation to learn the active use of this same intentional act.” [47][48] He concludes that the key feature of cultural learning is that it occurs only when an individual “understands others as intentional agents, like the self, who have a perspective on the world that can be followed into, directed and shared”[49]
Emulation learning and imitative learning are two different adaptations that can only be assessed in their larger environmental and evolutionary contexts. In one experiment, chimpanzees and two-year-old children were separately presented with a rake-like-tool and an out-of-reach object. Adult humans then demonstrated two different ways to use the tool, one more efficient, one less efficient. Chimpanzees used the same efficient method following both demonstrations. Most of the human children, however, imitated whichever method the adult was demonstrating. Were chimps and humans to be compared on the basis of these results, one might think that Chimpanzees are more intelligent. From an evolutionary perspective they are equally intelligent, but with different kinds of intelligence adapted to different environments.[50] Chimpanzee learning strategies are well-suited to a relatively stable physical environment that requires relatively little social cooperation (compared to humans). Human learning strategies are well-suited to a complex social environment in which understanding the intentions of others may be more important than success at a specific task. Tomasello argues that this strategy has made possible the “ratchet effect” that enabled humans to evolve complex social systems that have enabled humans to adapt to virtually every physical environment on the surface of the earth.[51]
Tomasello further argues that cultural learning is essential for language-acquisition. Most children in any society, and all children in some, do not learn all words through the direct efforts of adults. “In general, for the vast majority of words in their language, children must find a way to learn in the ongoing flow of social interaction, sometimes from speech not even addressed to them.”[52]This finding has been confirmed by a variety of experiments in which children learned words even when the referent was not present, multiple referents were possible, and the adult was not directly trying to teach the word to the child.[53][54][55] Tomasello concludes that “a linguistic symbol is nothing other than a marker for an intersubjectively shared understanding of a situation.[56]
Tomasello’s 1999 review of the research contrasting human and non-human primate learning strategies confirms biological anthropologist Ralph Holloway’s 1969 argument that a specific kind of sociality linked to symbolic cognition were the keys to human evolution, and constitute the nature of culture. According to Holloway, the key issue in the evolution of H. sapiens, and the key to understanding “culture,” “is how man organizes his experience.” Culture is “the imposition of arbitrary form upon the environment.”[57] This fact, Holloway argued, is primary to and explains what is distinctive about human learning strategies, tool-use, and language. Human tool-making and language express “similar, if not identical, cognitive processes” and provide important evidence for how humankind evolved.[58]
In other words, whereas McGrew argues that anthropologists must focus on behaviors like communication and tool-use because they have no access to the mind, Holloway argues that human language and tool-use, including the earliest stone tools in the fossil record, are highly suggestive of cognitive differences between humans and non-humans, and that such cognitive differences in turn explain human evolution. For Holloway, the question is not whether other primates communicate, learn or make tools, but that the way they do these things. “Washing potatoes in the ocean … stripping branches of leaves to get termites,” and other examples of primate tool-use and learning “are iconic, and there is no feedback from the environment to the animal .”[59] Human tools, however, express an independence from natural form that manifests symbolic thinking. “In the preparation of the stick for termite-eating, the relation between product and raw material is iconic. In the making of a stone tool, in contrast, there is no necessary relation between the form of the final product and the original material.”[60]
In Holloway’s view, our non-human ancestors, like those of modern chimpanzees and other primates, shared motor and sensory skills, curiosity, memory, and intelligence, with perhaps differences in degree. “It is when these are integrated with the unique attributes of arbitrary production (symbolization) and imposition that man qua cultural man appears.” [61]

I have suggested above that whatever culture may be, it includes “the imposition of arbitrary forms upon the environment.” This phrase has two components. One is a recognition that the relationship between the coding process and the phenomenon (be it a tool, social network, or abstract principle) is non-iconic. The other is an idea of man as a creature who can make delusional systems work – who imposes his fantasies, his non-iconic constructs (and constructions) , upon the environment. The altered environment shapes his perceptions, and these are again forced back on the environment, are incorporated into the environment, and press for further adaptation.[62]

This is comparable to the “ratcheting” aspect suggested by Tomasselo and others that enabled human evolution to accelerate. Holloway concludes that the first instance of symbolic thought among humans provided a “kick-start” for brain development, tool complexity, social structure, and language to evolve through a constant dynamic of positive feedback. “This interaction between the propensity to structure the environment arbitrarily and the feedback from the environment to the organism is an emergent process, a process different in kind from anything that preceded it .”[63]




Arbitrariness






Magritte The Treachery of Images






Ancient stone tools






Simple-Edge Chopper






Chopping-tool






Unretouched biface


Linguists Charles Hockett and R. Ascher have identified thirten design-features of language, some shared by other forms of animal connunication. One feature that distinguishes human language is its tremendous productivity; in other words, competent speakers of a language are capable of producing an infinite number of original utterances. This productivity seems to be made possible by a few critical features unique to human language. One is “duality of patterning,” meaning that human language consists of the articulation of several distinct processes, each with its own set of rules: combining phonemes to produce morphemes, combining morphemes to produce words, and combining words to produce sentences. This means that a person can master a relatively limited number of signals and sets of rules, to create infinite combinations. Another crucial element is that human language is symbolic: the sound of words (or their shape, when written) bear no relation to what they represent.[64] In other words, their meaning is arbitrary. That words have meaning is a matter of convention. Since the meaning of words are arbitrary, any word may have several meanings, and any object may be referred to using a variety of words; the actual word used to describe a particular object depends on the context, the intention of the speaker, and the ability of the listener to judge these appropriately. As Tomasello notes,

An individual language user looks at a tree and, before drawing the attention of her interlocutor to that tree, must decide, based on her assessment of the listener’s current knowledge and expectations, whether to say “that tree over there,” “it,” “the oak,” “that hundred-year-oak,” “the tree,” “the bagswing tree,” “that thing in the front yard,” “the ornament,” “the embarrassment,” or any of a number of other expressions. … And these decisions are not made on the basis of the speaker’s direct goal with respect to the object or activity involved, but rather that they are made on the basis of her goal with respect to the listener’s interest and attention to that object or activity.

This is why symbolic cognition and communication and imitative learning go hand-in-hand.[65]
Holloway argues that the stone-tools associated with genus Homo have the same features of human language:

Returning to matter of syntax, rules, and concatenated activity mentioned above, almost any model which describes a language process can also be used to describe tool-making. This is hardly surprising. Both activities are concatenated, both have rigid rules about eh serialization of unit activities (the grammar, syntax), both are hierarchical systems of activity (as is any motor activity), and both produce arbitrary configurations which thence become part of the environment, either temporarily or permanently. [66]
…productivity can be seen in the facts that basic types were probably used for multiple purposes, that tool industries tend to expand with time, and that a slight variation on h basic pattern may be made to met some new functional requisite. Elements of a basic “vocabulary” of motor operations – flakes, detachment, rotation, preparation of striking platform, etc. – are used in different combinations to produce dissimilar tools, with different forms, and supposedly, different uses …. Taking each motor event alone, no one action is complete; each action depends on the prior one and requires a further one, and each is dependent in another ay on the original plan. In other words, at each point of the action except the last, the piece is not “satisfactory” in structure. Each unit action is meaningless by itself in the sense of the use of the tool; it is meaningful only in the context of the whole completed set of actions culminating in the final product. This exactly parallels language.[67]

As Tomasello has demonstrated, symbolic thought can operate only in a particular social environment:

Arbitrary symbols enforce consensus of perceptions, which not only allows members to communicate about the same objects in terms o space and time (as in hunting) but it also makes it possible for social relationships to be standardized and manipulated through symbols. It means that idiosyncracies are smoothed out and perceived within classes of behavior. By enforcing perceptual invariance, symbols also enforce social behavioral constancy, and enforcing social behavioral constancy is a prerequisite to differential task-role sectors in a differentiated social group adapting not only to the outside environment but to its own membership.[68]

Biological anthropologist Terrence Deacon, in a synthesis of over twenty years of research on human evolution, human neurology, and primatology, describes this "ratcheting effect" as a form of "Baldwinian Evolution." Named after psychologist James Baldwin, this describes a situation in which an animal's behavior has evolutionary consequences when it changes the natural environment and thus the selective forces acting on the animal.[69]

Once some useful behavior spreads within a population and becomes more important for subsistence, it will generate selection pressures on genetic traits that support its propagation ... Stone and tymbolic tools, which were initially acquired with the aid of flexible ape-learning abilities, ultimately turned the tables on their users and forced them to adapt to a new niche opened by these technologies. Rather than being just useful tricks, these behavioral proshteses for obtaining food and organizing social behaviors became indispensible elements in a new adaptive complex. The origin of "humanness" can be defined as that point in our evolution where these tools became the principle source of selection on our bodies and brains. It is the diagnostic of Homo symbolicus.[70]

According to Deacon, this occurred between 2 and 2.5 million years ago, when we have the first fossil evidence of stone tool use and the beginning of a trend in an increase in brain size. But it is the evolution of symbolic language which is the cause — and not the effect — of these trends.[71] More specifically, Deacon is suggesting that Australopithecines, like contemporary apes, used tools; it is possible that over the millions of years of Australopithecine history, many troops developed symbolic communication systems. All that was necessary was that one of these groups so altered their environment that "it introduced selection for very different learning abilities than affected prior species."[72] This troop or population kick-started the Baldwinian process (the "ratchet effect") that led to their evolution to genus Homo.
The question for Deacon is, what behavioral-environmental changes could have made the development of symbolic thinking adaptive? Here he emphasizes the importance of distinguishing hmans from all other species, not in order to privilege human intelligence but to problematize it. Given that the evolution of H. sapiens began with ancestors who did not yet have "culture," what led them to move away from cognitive, learning, communication, and tool-making strategies that were and continued to be adaptive for most other primates (and, some have suggested, most other species of animals)? Learning symbol systems is more time consuming than other forms of communication, so symbolic thought made possible a different communication strategy, but not a more efficient one than other primates. Nevertheless, it must have offered some selective advantage of H. sapiens to have evolved. Deacon starts by looking a two key determinents in evolutionary history: foraging behavior, and patterns of sexual relations. As he observes competition for sexual access limits the possibilities for social cooperation in many species. Yet, Deacon observes, there are three consistent patterns in human reproduction that distinguish them from other species:

Both males and females usually contribute effort towards the rearing of their offspring, though often to differing extents and in very different ways.
In all societies, the great majority if adult males and females are bound by long-term, exlusive secual access rights and pronibitions to particular individuals of the opposite sex.
They maintain these exclusive sexual relations while living in modest to large-sized, multi-male, multi-female, cooperative social groups.[73]

Moreover, there is one feature common to all known human foraging societies (all humans prior to ten or fifteen thousand years ago), and markedly different from other primates: "the use of meat ... The appearance of the first stone tools nearly 2.5 million years ago almost certainly correlates with a radical shift in foraging behavior in order to gain access to meat."[74] Deacon does not believe that symbolic thought was necessary for hunting or tool-making (although tool-making may be a reliable index of symbolic thought); rather, it was necessary for the success of distinctive social relations.
The key is that while men and women are equally effective foragers, mothers carrying dependent children are not effective hunters. They must thus depend on male hunters. This favors a system in which males have exclusive sexual access to females, and females can predict that their sexual partner will provide food for them and their children. In most mammalian species the result is a system of rank or sexual competition that results in polygyny, or life-long pair-bonding between two individuals who live relatively independent of other adults of their species; in both cases male aggression plays an important role in maintaining sexual access to mate(s). What is unique about humans?

Human reliance on resources that are relatively unavailable to females with infants selects not only for coopartion between a child's father and mother but also for the cooperation of other relatives and friends, including elderly individuals and juveniles, who can be relied upon for assistance. The special demands of acquiring meat and caring for infants in our own evolution together contribute to the underlying impetus for the third characteristic feature of human reproductive patterns: cooperative group living.[75]

What is uniquely characteristic about human societies is what required symbolic cognition, which consequently leads to the evolution of culture: "cooperative, mixed-sex social groups, with significant male care and provisioning of offspring, and relatively stable patterns of reproductive exclusion." This combination is relatively rare in other species because it is "highly susceptible to disintegration." Language and culture provide the glue that holds it together.[76]
Chimpanzees also, on occasion, hunt meat. In most cases however males consume the meat immediately, and only on occasion share with females who happen to be nearby. Among chimpanzees, hunting for meat increases when other sources of food become scarce, but under these conditions, sharing descreases. The first forms of symbolic thinking made stone-tools possible which made hunting for meat a more dependable source of food for our non-human ancestors, while also making possible forms of social communication that make sharing — between males and females but also among males, decreasing sexual competition:

So the socio-ecological problem posed by the transition to a meat-supplemented subsistence strategy is that it cannot be utilized without a social structure which guarantees unambiguous and exclusive mating and is sufficiently egalitarian to sustain cooperation via shared or parallel reproductive interests. This problem can be solved symbolically.[77]

For it is symbols and symbolic thinking that make possible a central feature of social relations in every human population, reciprocity. Evolutionary scientists have developed a model to explain reciprocal altruism among closely related individuals. Symbolic thought makes possible reciprocity between distantly related individuals.[78]

Linguistics

Cultural Anthropology

1899-1946: Universal versus Particular




Franz Boas established modern American anthropology as the study of the sum total of human phenomena






Ruth Benedict was instrumental in establishing the modern conception of distinct cultures being patterned


The modern anthropological understanding of culture has its origins in the 19th century with German anthropologist Adolf Bastian's theory of the "psychic unity of mankind," which, influenced by Herder and von Humboldt, challenged the identification of "culture" with the way of life of European elites, and British anthropologist Edward Burnett Tylor's attempt to define culture as inclusively as possible. Tylor in 1874 described culture in the following way: "Culture or civilization, taken in its wide ethnographic sense, is that complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, morals, law, custom, and any other capabilities and habits acquired by man as a member of society."[79] Although Tylor was not aiming to propose a general theory of culture (he explained his understanding of culture in the course of a larger argument about the nature of religion), American anthropologists have generally presented their various definitions of culture as refinements of Tylor's. Franz Boas's student Alfred Kroeber (1876-1970) identified culture with the "superorganic," that is, a domain with ordering principles and laws that could not be explained by or reduced to biology.[80] In 1973 Gerald Weiss reviewed various definitions of culture and debates as to their parsimony and power, and proposed as the most scientifically useful definition that "culture" be defined "as our generic term for all human nongenetic, or metabiological, phenomena" (italics in the original).[81]
Franz Boas, founded modern American anthropology with the establishment of the first graduate program in anthropology at Columbia University in 1896. At the time the dominant model of culture was that of cultural evolution, which posited that human societies progressed through stages of savagery to barbarism to civilization; thus, societies that for example are based on horticulture and Iroquois kinship terminology are less evolved that societies based on agriculture and Eskimo kinship terminology. One of Boas's greatest accomplishments was to demonstrate convincingly that this model is fundamentally flawed, empirically, methodologically, and theoretically. Moreover, he felt that our knowledge of different cultures was so incomplete, and often based on unsystematic or unscientific research, that it was impossible to develop any scientifically valid general model of human cultures. Instead, he established the principle of cultural relativism and trained students to conduct rigorous participant observation field research in different societies. Boas understood the capacity for culture to involve symbolic thought and social learning, and considered the evolution of a capacity for culture to coincide with the evolution of other, biological, features defining genus Homo. Nevertheless, he argued that culture could not be reduced to biology or other expressions of symbolic thought, such as language. Boas and his students understood culture inclusively and resisted developing a general definition of culture. Indeed, they resisted identifying "culture" as a thing, instead using culture as an adjective rather than a noun. Boas argued that cultural "types" or "forms" are always in a state of flux.[82][83] His student Alfred Kroeber argued that the "unlimited receptivity and assimilativeness of culture" made it practically impossible to think of cultures as discrete things.[84].




Wovoka – Paiute spiritual leader and creator of the Ghost Dance






Zuñi girl with jar, 1903






Edward Curtis photo of a Kwakwaka'wakw potlatch






Tu'i Manu'a Elisala






Hopi Basket Weaver


Boas's students dominated cultural anthropology through World War II, and continued to have great influence through the 1960s. They were especially interested in two phenomena: the great variety of forms culture took around the world,[85] and the many ways individuals were shaped by and acted creatively through their own cultures.[86][87] This led his students to focus on the history of cultural traits — how they spread from one society to another, and how their meanings changed over time[88][89] — and the life histories of members of other societies.[90][91][92][93][94][95][96][97] Others, such as Ruth Benedict (1887-1948) and Margaret Mead (1901-1978), produced monographs or comparative studies analyzing the forms of creativity possible to individuals within specific cultural configurations.[98][99][100] Essential to their research was the concept of "context": culture provided a context that made the behavior of individuals understandable; geography and history provided a context for understanding the differences between cultures. Thus, although Boasians were committed to the belief in the psychic unity of humankind and the universality of culture, their emphasis on local context and cultural diversity led them away from proposing cultural universals or universal theories of culture.
There is a tension in cultural anthropology between the claim that culture as a universal (the fact that all human societies have culture), and that it is also particular (culture takes a tremendous variety of forms around the world). Since Boas, two debates have dominated cultural anthropology. The first has to do with ways of modeling particular cultures. Specifically, anthropologists have argued as to whether "culture" can be thought of as a bounded and integrated thing, or as a quality of a diverse collection of things, the numbers and meanings of which are in constant flux. Boas's student Ruth Benedict suggested that in any given society cultural traits may be more or less "integrated," that is, constituting a pattern of action and thought that gives purpose to people’s lives, and provides them with a basis from which to evaluate new actions and thoughts, although she implies that there are various degrees of integration; indeed, she observes that some cultures fail to integrate. [101] Boas, however, argued that complete integration is rare and that a given culture only appears to be integrated because of observer bias.[102] For Boas, the appearance of such patterns — a national culture, for example — was the effect of a particular point of view.[103]
The first debate was effectively suspended in 1934 when Ruth Benedict published Patterns of Culture, which has continuously been in print. Although this book is well known for popularizing the Boasian principle of cultural relativism, among anthropologists it constituted both an important summary of the discoveries of Boasians, and a decisive break from Boas's emphasis on the mobility of diverse cultural traits. "Anthropological work has been overwhelmingly devoted to the analysis of cultural traits," she wrote "rather than to the study of cultures as articulated wholes."[104] Influenced by Polish-British social anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski, however, she argued that "The first essential, so it seems today, is to study the living culture, to know its habits of thought and the functions of its institutions" and that "the only way in which we can know the significance of the selected detail of behavior is against the background of the motives and emotions and values that are institutionalized in that culture."[105] Influenced by German historians Wilhelm Dilthey and Oswald Spengler, as well as by gestalt psychology, she argued that "the whole determines its parts, not only their relation but their very nature,"[106] and that "cultures, likewise, are more than the sum of their traits."[107] Just as each spoken language draws very selectively from an extensive, but finite, set of sounds any human mouth (free from defect) can make, she concluded that in each society people, over time and through both conscious and unconscious processes, selected from an extensive but finite set of cultural traits which then combine to form a unique and distinctive pattern."[108]

The significance of cultural behavior is not exhausted when we have clearly understood that it is local and man-made and hugely variable. It tends to be integrated. A culture, like an individual, is a more or less consistent pattern of thought and action. Within each culture there come into being characteristic purposes not necessarily shared by other types of society. In obedience to their purposes, each people further and further consolodates its experience, and in proportion to the urgency of these drives the heterogeneous items of behavior take more and more congruous shape. Taken up by a well-integrated culture, the most ill-assorted acts become characteristic of its particular goals, often by the most unlikely metamorphoses.[109]

Although Benedict felt that virtually all cultures are patterened, she argued that these patterns change over time as a consequence of human creativity, and therefore different societies around the world had distinct characters. Patterns of Culture contrasts Zuňi, Dobu and Kwakiutl cultures as a way of highlighting different ways of being human. Benedict observed that many Westerners felt that this view forced them to abandon their "dreams of permanence and ideality and with the individual's illusions of autonomy" and that for many, this made existence "empty."[110] She argued however that once people accepted the results of scientific research, people would "arrive then at a more realistic social faith, accepting as grounds of hope and as new bases for tolerance the coexisting and equally valid patterns of life which mankind has created for itself from the raw materials of existence."[111]
This view of culture has had a tremendous impact outside of anthropology, and dominated American anthropology until the Cold War, when anthropologists like Sidney Mintz and Eric Wolf rejected the validity and value of approaching "each culture" as "a world in itself" and "relatively stable.".[112] They felt that, too often, this approach ignored the impact of imperialism, colonialism, and the world capitalist economy on the peoples Benedict and her followers studied (and thus re-opened the debate on the relationship between the universal and the particular, in the form of the relationship between the global and the local). In the meantime, its emphasis on metamorphising patterns influenced French structuralism and made American anthropologists receptive to British structural-functionalism.




Turkish nomad clan with the nodes as marriages






Mexican village with the nodes as marriages






Iroqois Kinship Structure






Culinary triangle


The second debate has been over the ability to make universal claims about all cultures. Although Boas argued that anthropologists had yet to collect enough solid evidence from a diverse sample of societies to make any valid general or universal claims about culture, by the 1940s some felt ready. Whereas Kroeber and Benedict had argued that "culture" — which could refer to local, regional, or trans-regional scales — was in some way "patterned" or "configured," some anthropologists now felt that enough data had been collected to demonstrate that it often took highly structured forms. The question these anthropologists debated was, were these structures statistical artifacts, or where they expressions of mental models? This debate emerged full-fledged in 1949, with the publication of George Murdock's Social Structure, and Claude Lévi-Strauss's Les Structures Élémentaires de la Parenté.
Opposing Boas and his students, Yale anthropologist George Murdock, who compiled the Human Relations Area Files. These files code cultural variables found in different societies, so that anthropologists can use statistical methods to study correlations among different variables.[113][114][115] The ultimate aim of this project is to develop generalizations that apply to increasingly larger numbers of individual cultures. Later, Murdock and Douglas R. White developed the standard cross-cultural sample as a way to refine this method.
Jewish-French anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss's structuralist anthropology brought together ideas of Boas (especially Boas's belief in the mutability of cultural forms, and Bastian's belief in the psychic unity of humankind) and French sociologist's Émile Durkheim's focus on social structures (institutionalized relationships among persons and groups of persons). Instead of making generalizations that applied to large numbers of societies, Lévi-Strauss sought to derive from concrete cases increasingly abstract models of human nature. His method begins with the supposition that culture exists in two different forms: the many distinct structures that could be inferred from observing members of the same society interact (and of which members of a society are themselves aware), and abstract structures developed by analyzing shared ways (such as myths and rituals) members of a society represent their social life (and of which members of a society are not only not consciously aware, and which typically stand in opposition to, or negate, the social structures of which people are aware). He then sought to develop one universal mental structure that could only be inferred through the systematic comparison of particular social and cultural structures. He argued that just as there are laws through which a finite and relatively small number of chemical elements could be combined to create a seemingly infinite variety of things, there were a finite and relatively small number of cultural elements which people combine to create the great variety of cultures anthropologists observe. The systematic comparison of societies would enable an anthropologist to develop this cultural "table of elements," and once completed, this table of cultural elements would enable an anthropologist to analyze specific cultures and achieve insights hidden to the very people who produced and lived through these cultures.[116][117] Structuralism came to dominate French anthropology and, in the late 1960s and 1970s, came to have great influence on American and British anthropology.
Murdock's HRAF and Lévi-Strauss's structuralism provide two ambitous ways to seek the universal in the particular, and both approaches continue to appeal to different anthropologists. However, the differences between them reveal a tension implicit in the heritage of Tylor and Bastian. Is culture to be found in empirically observed behaviors that may form the basis of generalizations? Or does it consist of universal mental processes, which must be inferred and abstracted from observed behavior? This question has driven debates among biological anthropologists and archeologists as well.

The Structural-Functionalist Challenge: Society versus Culture
In the 1940s the Boasian understanding of culture was challenged by a new paradigm for anthropological and social science research called Structural functionalism. This paradigm developed independently but in parallel in both the United Kingdom and in the United States (In both cases it is sui generis: it has no direct relationship to "structuralism" except that both French structuralism and Anglo-American Structural-Functionalism were all influenced by Durkheim. It is also analogous, but unrelated to, other forms of "functionalism"). Whereas the Boasians viewed anthropology as that natural science dedicated to the study of humankind, structural functionalists viewed anthropology as one social science among many, dedicated to the study of one specific facet of humanity. This led structural-functionalists to redefine and minimize the scope of "culture."
In the United Kingdom, the creation of structural functionalism was anticipated by Raymond Firth's (1901-2002) We the Tikopia, published in 1936, and marked by the publication of African Political Systems, edited by Meyer Fortes (1906-1983) and E.E. Evans-Pritchard (1902-1973) in 1940.[118][119] In these works these anthropologists forwarded a synthesis of the ideas of their mentor, Bronislaw Malinowski (1884-1942), and his rival, A. R. Radcliffe-Brown (1881-1955). Both Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown viewed anthropology — what they call "social anthropology" — as that branch of sociology that studied so-called primitive societies. According to Malinowski's theory of functionalism, all human beings have certain biological needs, such as the need for food and shelter, and humankind has the biological need to reproduce. Every society develops its own institutions, which function to fulfill these needs. In order for these institutions to function, individuals take on particular social roles that regulate how they act and interact. Although members of any given society may not understand the ultimate functions of their roles and institutions, an ethnographer can develop a model of these functions through the careful observation of social life.[120] Radcliffe-Brown rejected Malinowski's notion of function, and believed that a general theory of primitive social life could only be built up through the careful comparison of different societies. Influenced by the work of French sociologist Émile Durkheim (1858-1917), who argued that primitive and modern societies are distinguished by distinct social structures, Radcliffe-Brown argued that anthropologists first had to map out the social structure of any given society before comparing the structures of different societies.[121] Firth, Fortes, and Evans-Pritchard found it easy to combine Malinowski's attention to social roles and institutions with Radcliffe-Brown's concern with social structures. They distinguished between "social organization" (observable social interactions) and "social structure" (rule-governed patterns of social interaction), and shifted their attention from biological functions to social functions (for example, how different institutions are functionally integrated, and the extent to, and ways in, which institutions function to promote social solidarity and stability. In short, instead of culture (understood as all human non-genetic or extra-somatic phenomena)they made "sociality" (interations and relationships among persons and groups of people) their object of study. (Indeed, Radcliffe-Brown once wrote "I should like to invoke a taboo on the word culture.")[122]
Coincidentally, in 1946 sociologist Talcott Parsons (1902-1979) founded the Department of Social Relations at Harvard University. Influenced by such European sociologists as Émile Durkheim and Max Weber, Parsons developed a theory of social action that was closer to British social anthropology than to Boas's American anthropology, and which he also called "structural functionalism." Parson's intention was to develop a total theory of social action (why people act as they do), and to develop at Harvard and inter-disciplinary program that would direct research according to this theory. His model explained human action as the result of four systems:

the "behavioral system" of biological needs
the "personality system" of an individual's characteristics affecting their functioning in the social world
the "social system" of patterns of units of social interaction, especially social status and role
the "cultural system" of norms and values that regulate social action symbolically

According to this theory, the second system was the proper object of study for psychologists; the third system for sociologists, and the fourth system for cultural anthropologists.[123][124] Whereas the Boasians considered all of these systems to be objects of study by anthropologists, and "personality" and "status and role" to be as much a part of "culture" as "norms and values," Parsons envisioned a much narrower role for anthropology and a much narrower definition of culture.
Although Boasian cultural anthropologists were interested in norms and values, among many other things, it was only with the rise of structural functionalism that people came to identify "culture" with "norms and values." Many American anthropologists rejected this view of culture (and by implication, anthropology). In 1980 noted anthropologist Eric Wolf wrote,

As the social sciences transformed themselves into "behavioral" science, explanations for behavior were no longer traced to culture: behavior was to be understood in terms of psychological encounters, strategies of economic choice, strivings for payoffs in games of power. Culture, once extended to all acts and ideas employed in social life, was now relegated to the margins as "world view" or "values."[125]

Nevertheless, several of Talcott Parsons' students emerged as leading American anthropologists. At the same time, many American anthropologists had a high regard for the research produced by social anthropologists in the 1940s and 1950s, and found structural-functionalism to provide a very useful model for conducting ethnographic research.
The combination of American cultural anthropology theory with British social anthropology methods has led to some confusion between the concepts of "society" and "culture." For most anthropologists, these are distinct concepts. Society refers to a group of people; culture refers to a pan-human capacity and the totality of non-genetic human phenomena. Societies are often clearly bounded; cultural traits are often mobile, and cultural boundaries, such as they are, are typically porous, permeable, and plural.[126] During the 1950s and 1960s anthropologists often worked in places where social and cultural boundaries coincided, thus obscuring the distinction. When disjunctures between these boundaries become highly salient, for example during the period of European de-colonization of Africa in the 1960s and 1970s, or during the post-Bretton Woods realignment of globalization, however, the difference often becomes central to anthropological debates.[127][128][129][130][131]

1946-1968: Symbolic versus Adaptive




American kinship






A cockfight in India






Huli Wigman from the Southern Highlands






In Hinduism, the cow is a symbol of wealth, strength, and selfless giving






Cleveley's depiction of Captain Cook






Vietcong troops pose with new AK-47 rifles


Parsons' students Clifford Geertz and David M. Schneider, and Schneider's student Roy Wagner, went on to important careers as cultural anthropologists and developed a school within American cultural anthropology called "symbolic anthropology," the study of the social construction and social effects of symbols.[132][133][134][135] Since symbolic anthropology easily complemented social anthropologists' studies of social life and social structure, many British structural-functionalists (who rejected or were uninterested in Boasian cultural anthropology) accepted the Parsonian definition of "culture" and "cultural anthropology." British anthropologist Victor Turner (who eventually left the United Kingdom to teach in the United States) was an important bridge between American and British symbolic anthropology.[136]
Attention to symbols, the meaning of which depended almost entirely on their historical and social context, appealed to many Boasians. Leslie White asked of cultural things, "What sort of objects are they? Are they physical objects? Mental objects? Both? Metaphors? Symbols? Reifications?" In Science of Culture (1949), he concluded that they are objects "sui generis"; that is, of their own kind. In trying to define that kind, he hit upon a previously unrealized aspect of symbolization, which he called "the symbolate"—an object created by the act of symbolization. He thus defined culture as "symbolates understood in an extra-somatic context."[137]
Nevertheless, by the 1930s White began turning away from the Boasian approach.[138] He wrote,

In order to live man, like all other species, must come to terms with the external world.... Man employs his sense organs, nerves, glands, and muscles in adjusting himself to the external world. But in addition to this he has another means of adjustment and control.... This mechanism is culture.[139]

Although this view echoes that of Malinowski, the key concept for White was not "function" but "adaptation." Whereas the Boasians were interested in the history of specific traits, White was interested in the cultural history of the human species, which he felt should be studied from an evolutionary perspective. Thus, the task of anthropology is to study "not only how culture evolves, but why as well.... In the case of man ... the power to invent and to discover, the ability to select and use the better of two tools or ways of doing something- these are the factors of cultural evolution."[140] Unlike 19th century evolutionists, who were concerned with how civilized societies rose above primitive societies, White was interested in documenting how, over time, humankind as a whole has through cultural means discovered more and more ways for capturing and harnessing energy from the environment, in the process transforming culture.
At the same time that White was developing his theory of cultural evolution, Kroeber's student Julian Steward was developing his theory of cultural ecology. In 1938 he published Basin-Plateau Aboriginal Socio-Political Groups in which he argued that diverse societies — for example the indigenous Shoshone or White farmers on the Great Plains — were not less or more evolved; rather, they had adapted differently to different environments.[141] Whereas Leslie White was interested in culture understood holistically as a property of the human species, Julian Steward was interested in culture as the property of distinct societies. Like White he viewed culture as a means of adapting to the environment, but he criticized Whites "unilineal" (one direction) theory of cultural evolution and instead proposed a model of "multilineal" evolution in which (in the Boasian tradition) each society has its own cultural history.[142]
When Julian Steward left a teaching position at the University of Michigan to work in Utah in 1930, Leslie White took his place; in 1946 Julian Steward was made Chair of the Columbia University Anthropology Department. In the 1940s and 1950s their students, most notably Marvin Harris, Sidney Mintz, Robert Murphy, Roy Rappaport, Marshall Sahlins, Elman Service, Andrew P. Vayda and Eric Wolf dominated American anthropology.[143][144][145][146][147][148][149][150][151] Most promoted materialist understandings of culture in opposition to the symbolic approaches of Geertz and Schneider. Harris, Rappaport, and Vayda were especially important for their contributions to cultural materialism and ecological anthropology, both of which argued that "culture" constituted an extra-somatic (or non-biological) means through which human beings could adapt to life in drastically differing physical environments.
The debate between symbolic and materialist approaches to culture dominated American Anthropologists in the 1960s and 1970s. The Vietnam War and the publication of Dell Hymes' Reinventing Anthropology, however, marked a growing dissatisfaction with the then dominant approaches to culture. Hymes argued that fundamental elements of the Boasian project such as holism and an interest in diversity were still worth pursuing: “interest in other peoples and their ways of life, and concern to explain them within a frame of reference that includes ourselves.”[152] Moreover, he argued that cultural anthropologists are singularly well-equipped to lead this study (with an indirect rebuke to sociologists like Parsons who sought to subsume anthropology to their own project):

In the practice there is a traditional place for openness to phenomena in ways not predefined by theory or design – attentiveness to complex phenomena, to phenomena of interest, perhaps aesthetic, for their own sake, to the sensory as well as intellectual, aspects of the subject. These comparative and practical perspectives, though not unique to formal anthropology, are specially husbanded there, and might well be impaired, if the study of man were to be united under the guidance of others who lose touch with experience in concern for methodology, who forget the ends of social knowledge in elaborating its means, or who are unwittingly or unconcernedly culture-bound..[153]

It is these elements, Hymes argued, that justify a “general study of man,” that is, “anthropology”.[154]
During this time notable anthropologists such as Mintz, Murphy, Sahlins, and Wolf eventually broke away, experimenting with structuralist and Marxist approaches to culture, they continued to promote cultural anthropology against structural functionalism.[155][156][157][158][159]

Archeological Approaches to Culture: Matter and Meaning




Excavated dwellings at Skara Brae, Europe's most complete Neolithic village.






The making of a Levallois Point






Bifacial points, engraved ochre and bone tools from the c. 75 -80 000 year old M1 & M2 phases at Blombos cave.






Monte Alban archaeological site






Excavations at the South Area of Çatal Höyük






Mural of an aurochs, a deer, and humans from Çatalhöyük, sixth millennium BC - Museum of Anatolian Civilizations, Ankara, Turkey.


In the 19th century archeology was often a supplement to history, and the goal of archeologists was to identify artifacts according to their typology and stratigraphy, thus marking their location in time and space. Franz Boas established that archeology be one of American anthropology's four fields, and debates among archeologists have often paralleled debates among cultural anthropologists. In the 1920s and 1930s, Australian-British archeologist V. Gordon Childe and American archeologist W. C. McKern independently began moving from asking about the date of an artifact, to asking about the people who produced it — when archeologists work alongside historians, historical materials generally help answer these questions, but when historical materials are unavailable, archeologists had to develop new methods. Childe and McKern focused on analyzing the relationships among objects found together; their work established the foundation for a three-tiered model:

an individual artifact, which has surface, shape, and technological attributes (e.g. an arrowhead)
a sub-assemblage, consisting of artifacts that are found, and were likely used, together (e.g. an arrowhead, bow and knife)
an assemblage of subasemblages that together constitute the archeological site (e.g. the arrowhead, bow and knife; a pot and the remains of a hearth; a shelter)

Childe argued that a "constantly recurring assemblage of artifacts" to be an "archaeological culture."[160][161] Childe and others viewed "each archeological culture ... the manifestation in material terms of a specific people."[162]
In 1948 Walter Taylor systematized the methods and concepts that archeologists had developed and proposed a general model for the archeological contribution to knoweldge of cultures. He began with the mainstream understanding of culture as the product of human cognitive activity, and the Boasian emphasis on the subjective meanings of objects as dependent on their cultural context. He defined culture as "a mental phenomenon, consisting of the contents of minds, not of material objects or observable behavior."[163] He then devised a three-tiered model linking cultural anthropology to archeology, which he called conjunctive archeology:

Culture, which is unobservable and nonmaterial
Behaviors resulting from culture, which are observable and nonmaterial
Objectifications, such as artifacts and architecture, which are the result of behavior and material

That is, material artifacts were the material residue of culture, but not culture itself.[164] Taylor's point was that the archeological record could contribute to anthropological knowledge, but only if archeologists reconceived their work not just as digging up artifacts and recording their location in time and space, but as inferring from material remains the behaviors through which they were produced and used, and inferring from these behaviors the mental activities of people. Although many archeologists agreed that their research was integral to anthropology, Taylor's program was never fully implemented. One reason was that his three-tier model of inferences required too much fieldwork and laboratory analysis to be practical.[165] Moreover, his view that material remains were not themselves cultural, and in fact twice-removed from culture, in fact left archeology marginal to cultural anthropology.[166]
In 1962 Leslie White's former student Lewis Binford proposed a new model for anthropological archeology, called "the New Archeology" or "Processual Archeology," based on White's definition of culture as "the extra-somatic means of adaptation for the human organism."[167] This definition allowed Binford to establish archeology as a crucial field for the pursuit of the methodology of Julian Steward's cultural ecology:

The comparative study of cultural systems with variable technologies in a similar environmental range or similar technologies in differing environments is a major methodology of what Steward (1955: 36-42) has called "cultural ecology," and certainly is a valuable means of increasing our understanding of cultural processes. Such a methodology is also useful in elucidating the structural relationships between major cultural sub-systems such as the social and ideological sub-systems.[168]

In other words, Binford proposed an archeology that would be central to the dominant project of cultural anthropologists at the time (culture as non-genetic adaptations to the environment); the "new archeology" was the cultural anthropology (in the form of cultural ecology or ecological anthropology) of the past.
In the 1980s, there was a movement in the United Kingdom and Europe against the view of archeology as a field of anthropology, echoing Radcliffe-Brown's earlier rejection of cultural anthropology.[169] During this same period, then-Cambridge archeologist Ian Hodder developed "post-processual archeology" as an alternative. Like Binford (and unlike Taylor) Hodder views artifacts not as objectifications of culture but as culture itself. Unlike Binford, however, Hodder does not view culture as an environmental adaptation. Instead, he "is committed to a fluid semiotic version of the traditional culture concept in which material items, artifacts, are full participants in the creation, deployment, alteration, and fading away of symbolic complexes."[170] His 1982 book, Symbols in Action, evokes the symbolic anthropology of Geertz, Schneider, with their focus on the context dependent meanings of cultural things, as an alternative to White and Steward's materialist view of culture.[171] In his 1991 textbook, Reading the Past: Current Approaches to Interpretation in Archaeology Hodder argued that archeology is more closely aligned to history than to anthropology.[172]

Community Studies and Cultural Studies
In the 1940s Robert Redfield and students of Julian Steward pioneered "community studies," namely, the study of distinct communities (whether identified by race, ethnicity, or economic class) in Western or "Westernized" societies, especially cities. They thus encountered the antagonisms 19th century critics described using the terms "high culture" and "low culture." These 20th century anthropologists struggled to describe people who were politically and economically inferior but not, they believed, culturally inferior. Oscar Lewis proposed the concept of a "culture of poverty" to describe the cultural mechanisms through which people adapted to a life of economic poverty. Other anthropologists and sociologists began using the term "sub-culture" to describe culturally distinct communities that were part of larger societies.
One important kind of subculture is that formed by an immigrant community. In dealing with immigrant groups and their cultures, there are various approaches:

Leitkultur (core culture): A model developed in Germany by Bassam Tibi. The idea is that minorities can have an identity of their own, but they should at least support the core concepts of the culture on which the society is based.
Melting Pot: In the United States, the traditional view has been one of a melting pot where all the immigrant cultures are mixed and amalgamated without state intervention.
Monoculturalism: In some European states, culture is very closely linked to nationalism, thus government policy is to assimilate immigrants, although recent increases in migration have led many European states to experiment with forms of multiculturalism.
Multiculturalism: A policy that immigrants and others should preserve their cultures with the different cultures interacting peacefully within one nation.

The way nation states treat immigrant cultures rarely falls neatly into one or another of the above approaches. The degree of difference with the host culture (i.e., "foreignness"), the number of immigrants, attitudes of the resident population, the type of government policies that are enacted, and the effectiveness of those policies all make it difficult to generalize about the effects. Similarly with other subcultures within a society, attitudes of the mainstream population and communications between various cultural groups play a major role in determining outcomes. The study of cultures within a society is complex and research must take into account a myriad of variables.
Independently, in the United Kingdom, sociologists and other scholars influenced by Marxism, such as Stuart Hall and Raymond Williams, developed "Cultural Studies." Following 19 century Romantics, they identified "culture" with consumption goods and leisure activities (such as art, music, film, food, sports, and clothing). Nevertheless, they understood patterns of consumption and leisure to be determined by relations of production, which led them to focus on class relations and the organization of production.[173][174] In the United States, "Cultural Studies" focuses largely on the study of popular culture, that is, the social meanings of mass-produced consumer and leisure goods.

Cultural change




A 19th century engraving showing Australian "natives" opposing the arrival of Captain James Cook in 1770.






Full-length profile portrait of Turkman woman, standing on a carpet at the entrance to a yurt, dressed in traditional clothing and jewelry.


Cultural invention has come to mean any innovation that is new and found to be useful to a group of people and expressed in their behavior but which does not exist as a physical object. Humanity is in a global "accelerating culture change period", driven by the expansion of international commerce, the mass media, and above all, the human population explosion, among other factors. (See The Third Wave.)
Cultures are internally affected by both forces encouraging change and forces resisting change. These forces are related to both social structures and natural events, and are involved in the perpetuation of cultural ideas and practices within current structures, which themselves are subject to change[175]. (See structuration.)
Social conflict and the development of technologies can produce changes within a society by altering social dynamics and promoting new cultural models, and spurring or enabling generative action. These social shifts may accompany ideological shifts and other types of cultural change. For example, the U.S. feminist movement involved new practices that produced a shift in gender relations, altering both gender and economic structures. Environmental conditions may also enter as factors. Changes include following for the film local hero. For example, after tropical forests returned at the end of the last ice age, plants suitable for domestication were available, leading to the invention of agriculture, which in turn brought about many cultural innovations and shifts in social dynamics[176].
Cultures are externally affected via contact between societies, which may also produce -- or inhibit -- social shifts and changes in cultural practices. War or competition over resources may impact technological development or social dynamics. Additionally, cultural ideas may transfer from one society to another, through diffusion or acculturation. In diffusion, the form of something (though not necessarily its meaning) moves from one culture to another. For example, hamburgers, mundane in the United States, seemed exotic when introduced into China. "Stimulus diffusion" (the sharing of ideas) refers to an element of one culture leading to an invention or propagation in another. "Direct Borrowing" on the other hand tends to refer to technological or tangible diffusion from one culture to another. Diffusion of innovations theory presents a research-based model of why and when individuals and cultures adopt new ideas, practices, and products.
Acculturation has different meanings, but in this context refers to replacement of the traits of one culture with those of another, such has happened to certain Native American tribes and to many indigenous peoples across the globe during the process of colonization. Related processes on an individual level include assimilation (adoption of a different culture by an individual) and transculturation.

See also




Culture portal




Counterculture
Cross-cultural communication - Intercultural competence
Cultural bias - Cultural imperialism - Ethnocentrism
Cultural dissonance
Cultural evolution
Cultural Institutions Studies
Cultural studies
Cultural universals
Culture theory
Culture war
Interculturality
Legal culture
List of basic culture topics
Online Etymology Dictionary
Urban culture


Notes


^ Harper, Douglas (2001). Online Etymology Dictionary
^ Kroeber, A. L. and C. Kluckhohn, 1952. Culture: A Critical Review of Concepts and Definitions.
^ a b Arnold, Matthew. 1869. Culture and Anarchy.
^ Williams (1983), p.90. Cited in Shuker, Roy (1994). Understanding Popular Music, p.5. ISBN 0-415-10723-7. argues that contemporary definitions of culture fall into three possibilities or mixture of the following three:

"a general process of intellectual, spiritual, and aesthetic development"
"a particular way of life, whether of a people, period, or a group"
"the works and practices of intellectual and especially artistic activity".


^ Bakhtin 1981, p.4
^ McClenon, p.528-529
^ Immanuel Kant 1974 "Answering the Question: What is Enlightenment?" (German: "Beantwortung der Frage: Was ist Aufklärung?") Berlinische Monatsschrift, December (Berlin Monthly)
^ Michael Eldridge, "The German Bildung Tradition" http://www.philosophy.uncc.edu/mleldrid/SAAP/USC/pbt1.html
^ "Adolf Bastian", Today in Science History; "Adolf Bastian", Encyclopædia Britannica
^ Robert Yerkes 1943 Chimpanzees: A Laboratory Colony. New Haven: Yale University Press. 51-52, 189, 193
^ Jane Goodall 1963 “My Life Among Wild Chimpanzees” National Geographic 124: 308
^ R. J. Andrew 1963 “Comment on The Essential Morphological Basis for Human Culture” Alan Bryan Current Anthropology 4: 301-303, p. 301
^ Alan Bryan 1963 “The Essential Morphological basis for Human Culture” Current Anthropology 4: 297
^ Keleman 1963 “Comment on The Essential Morphological Basis for Human Culture” Alan Bryan Current Anthropology 4: 301-303 p.304
^ W. C. McGrew 1998 “Culture in nonhuman primates?” Annual Review of Anthropology 27: 301-328
^ W.C. McGrew 1998 "Culture in Nonhuman Primates?" Annual Review of Anthropology 27: 323
^ W.C. McGrew 1998 "Culture in Nonhuman Primates?" Annual Review of Anthropology 27: 323
^ W.C. McGrew 1998 "Culture in Nonhuman Primates?" Annual Review of Anthropology 27: 305
^ C.F. Voegelin 1951 “Culture, Language and the Human Organism” Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 7: 370
^ Michael Tomasello 1999 “The Human Adaptation for Culture” in Annual Review of Anthropology vol. 28: 511
^ Michael Tomasello 1999 “The Human Adaptation for Culture” in Annual Review of Anthropology vol. 28: 511
^ M. King and A Wilson 1975 “Evolution at two levels: in humans and chimpanzees" Science 188: 107-116
^ Stringer and McKiew 1996 African Exodus: The origins of Modern Humanity. London: Cape
^ Michael Tomasello 1999 “The Human Adaptation for Culture” in Annual Review of Anthropology vol. 28: 510
^ Michael Tomasello 1999 “The Human Adaptation for Culture” in Annual Review of Anthropology vol. 28: 510
^ Michael Tomasello 1999 “The Human Adaptation for Culture” in Annual Review of Anthropology vol. 28: 512
^ Michael Tomasello 1999 “The Human Adaptation for Culture” in Annual Review of Anthropology vol. 28: 520
^ Michael Tomasello 1990 “Cultural Transmission in the Tool Use and Communicatory Signaling of Chimpanzees?” in ”Language” and Intelligence in Monkeys and Apes: Comparative Developmental Perspectives ed. S. Parker, K. Bibson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Pp: 274-311
^ Michael Tmoasello 1996 “Do Apes Ape?” in Social Learning in Animals: The Roots of Culture ed. C. Heyes and B. Galef. New York: Academic Press. pp: 319-346
^ Nagell, K., Olguin K. and Tomasello M. 1993 “Processes of social learning in the tool use of chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and human children (Homo sapiens)” in Journal of Comparative Psychology 107: 174-186
^ S. Kawamura 1959 “The process of subcultural propogation among Japanese macaques” Primates 2: 43-60
^ M. Kawai 1965 “Newly-acquired pre-cultural behairo of the natural troop of Japanese monkeys on Koshima Islet’’ Primates 6: 1-30
^ M. Kawai 1965 “Newly-acquired pre-cultural behairo of the natural troop of Japanese monkeys on Koshima Islet’’ Primates 6: 1-30
^ E. Visalberghi and D.M. Fragaszy 1990 “Food washing behavior in tufted Capuchin monkeys, Cebusapella, and crabeating macaques, Macaca fasciculais” Animal Behavior 40: 829-836
^ Michael Tomasello 1999 “The Human Adaptation for Culture” in Annual Review of Anthropology vol. 28: 519
^ Michael Tomasello 1990 “Cultural Transmission in the Tool Use and Communicatory Signaling of Chimpanzees?” in ”Language” and Intelligence in Monkeys and Apes: Comparative Developmental Perspectives ed. S. Parker, K. Bibson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Pp: 274-311
^ Michael Tomasello 1996 “Do Apes Ape?” in Social Learning in Animals: The Roots of Culture ed. C. Heyes and B. Galef. New York: Academic Press. pp: 319-346
^ Michael Tomasello 1999 “The Human Adaptation for Culture” in Annual Review of Anthropology vol. 28: 512
^ Michael Tomasello 1999 “The Human Adaptation for Culture” in Annual Review of Anthropology vol. 28: 513
^ R. Bakerman and L. Adamson 1984 “Coordinating attention to people and objects in mother-infant and peer-infant interaction” in Child Development 55: 1278-1289
^ C. Moore and P. Dunham 1995 Joint Attention: Its Origins and Role in Development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Press.
^ M. Tomasello 1995 “Joint attention as social cognition” in Joint Attention: Its Origins and Role in Development, ed. C. Moore and P. Dunham. Hillsdale NJ: Erlbaum Press pp 103-130
^ W. C. Meltzoff 1988 “Infant imitation after a one-week delay: long term memory for novel acts and multiple stimuli” in Developmental Psychology 24: 470-476
^ M. Carpenter, N. Akhtar, M. Tomasello 1998 “Sixteen-month old infants differentially imitate intentional and accidental actions” in Infant behavioral Development 21: 315-330
^ A. Meltzoff 1995 “Understanding the intentions of others: re-enactment of intended acts by 18-month-old children” in Developmental Psychology’’ 31: 838-850
^ Michael Tomasello 1999 “The Human Adaptation for Culture” in Annual Review of Anthropology vol. 28: 514
^ Michael Tomasello 1999 “The Human Adaptation for Culture” in Annual Review of Anthropology vol. 28: 515
^ Tomasello, M., Kruger, A. & Ratner, H. 1993 “Cultural learning” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 16, 495-552
^ Michael Tomasello 1999 “The Human Adaptation for Culture” in Annual Review of Anthropology vol. 28: 516
^ Nagell, K., Olguin K. and Tomasello M. 1993 “Processes of social learning in the tool use of chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and human children (Homo sapiens)” in Journal of Comparative Psychology 107: 174-186
^ Michael Tomasello 1999 “The Human Adaptation for Culture” in Annual Review of Anthropology vol. 28: 520-521
^ Brown 1999
^ M. Tomasello and M. Barton 1994 “Learning Words in non-Ostensive Contexts” Developmental Psychology 30:639-650
^ N. Akhtar and M. Tomasello 1996 “Twenty-four month old children learn words for absent objects and actions” in British Journal of Developmental Psychology 14: 79-93
^ M. Tomasello R. Strosberg, N. Akhtar 1996 “Eighteen-month old children learn words in non-ostensive contexts” in Journal of Child Language 23: 157-176
^ Michael Tomasello 1999 “The Human Adaptation for Culture” in Annual Review of Anthropology vol. 28: 516
^ Ralph L. Holloway Jr. 1969 “Culture: A Human domain” in Current Anthropology 10(4): 395
^ Ralph L. Holloway Jr. 1969 “Culture: A Human domain” in Current Anthropology 10(4): 396
^ Ralph L. Holloway Jr. 1969 “Culture: A Human domain” in Current Anthropology 10(4): 400
^ Ralph L. Holloway Jr. 1969 “Culture: A Human domain” in Current Anthropology 10(4): 401
^ Ralph L. Holloway Jr. 1969 “Culture: A Human domain” in Current Anthropology 10(4): 399
^ Ralph L. Holloway Jr. 1969 “Culture: A Human domain” in Current Anthropology 10(4): 395
^ Ralph L. Holloway Jr. 1969 “Culture: A Human domain” in Current Anthropology 10(4): 399
^ C.F. Hockett and R. Ascher 1964 “The Human Revolution” in Current Anthropology 4: 135-168.
^ Michael Tomasello 1999 “The Human Adaptation for Culture” in Annual Review of Anthropology vol. 28: 517
^ Ralph L. Holloway Jr. 1969 “Culture: A Human domain” in Current Anthropology 10(4): 401
^ Ralph L. Holloway Jr. 1969 “Culture: A Human domain” in Current Anthropology 10(4): 402
^ Ralph L. Holloway Jr. 1969 “Culture: A Human domain” in Current Anthropology 10(4): 406
^ Terrence Deacon 1997 The SYmbolic Species: The Coevolution of Language and the Brain New York and London: W.W. Norton, p. 322
^ Terrence Deacon 1997 The SYmbolic Species: The Coevolution of Language and the Brain New York and London: W.W. Norton, p. 344
^ Terrence Deacon 1997 The Symbolic Species: The Coevolution of Language and the Brain New York and London: W.W. Norton, p. 340
^ Terrence Deacon 1997 The Symbolic Species: The Coevolution of Language and the Brain New York and London: W.W. Norton, p. 347
^ Terrence Deacon 1997 The Symbolic Species: The Coevolution of Language and the Brain New York and London: W.W. Norton, p. 384-385
^ Terrence Deacon 1997 The Symbolic Species: The Coevolution of Language and the Brain New York and London: W.W. Norton, p. 386
^ Terrence Deacon 1997 The Symbolic Species: The Coevolution of Language and the Brain New York and London: W.W. Norton, p. 386-387
^ Terrence Deacon 1997 The Symbolic Species: The Coevolution of Language and the Brain New York and London: W.W. Norton, p. 388
^ Terrence Deacon 1997 The Symbolic Species: The Coevolution of Language and the Brain New York and London: W.W. Norton, p. 396-397
^ Terrence Deacon 1997 The Symbolic Species: The Coevolution of Language and the Brain New York and London: W.W. Norton, p. 397-401
^ Tylor, E.B. 1874. Primitive culture: researches into the development of mythology, philosophy, religion, art, and custom.
^ A. L. Kroeber 1917 "The Superorganic" American Anthropologist, New Series, Vol. 19, No. 2 pp. 163-213
^ Gerald Weiss 1973 "A Scientific Concept of Culture" in American Anthropologist 75(5): 1382
^ Franz Boas 1940 [1920] "The Methods of Ethnology", in Race, Language and Culture ed. George Stocking. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 284
^ Franz Boas 1940 [1932]	"The Aims of Anthropological Research", in Race, Language and Culture ed. George Stocking. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 253
^ Kroeber, Alfred L. 1948 Anthropology: Race, Language, Culture, Psychology, Prehistory revised edition. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World, Inc. p. 261
^ Franz Boas 1907 "Anthropology" in A Franz Boas Reader: The Shaping of American Anthropology 1883-1911 ed. George Stocking Jr. 267-382
^ Boas, Franz 1920 "The Methods of Ethnology" in Race, Language, and Culture. ed. George Stocking Jr. 1940 Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. pp. 281-289
^ Boas, Franz 1909 "Decorative Designs in Alaskan Needlecases: A Study in the History of Conventional designs Based on Materials in the U.S. National Museum" in Race, Language, and Culture. ed. George Stocking Jr. 1940 Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. pp. 564-592
^ Wissler, Clark (ed.) (1975) Societies of the Plains Indians AMS Press, New York, ISBN 0-404-11918-2 , Reprint of v. 11 of Anthropological papers of the American Museum of Natural History, published in 13 pts. from 1912 to 1916.
^ Kroeber, Alfred L. (1939) Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North America University of California Press, Berkeley, CA.
^ Dyk, Walter 1938 Left Handed, Son of Old Man Hat, by Walter Dyk. Lincoln: The University of Nebraska Press.
^ Lewis, Oscar 1961 The Children of Sanchez. New York: Vintage Books.
^ Lewis, Oscar 1964 Pedro Martinez. New York: Random House.
^ Mintz, Sidney 1960 Worker in the Cane: A Puerto Rican Life History. Yale Caribbean Series, vol. 2. New Haven: Yale University Press.
^ Radin, Paul 1913 "Personal Reminiscences of a Winnebago Indian," in Journal of American Folklore 26: 293-318
^ Radin, Paul 1963 The Autobiography of a Winnebago Indian. New York: Dover Publications
^ Sapir, Edward 1922 "Sayach'apis, a Nootka Trader" in Elsie Clews Parsons, American Indian Life. New York: B.W. Huebesh.
^ Simmons, Leo, ed. 1942 Sun Chief: The Autobiography of a Hopi Indian. New Haven: Yale University Press.
^ Benedict, Ruth. Patterns of Culture. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1934.
^ Benedict, Ruth. The Chrysanthemum and the Sword: Patterns of Japanese Culture. Rutland, VT and Tokyo, Japan: Charles E. Tuttle Co. 1954 orig. 1946.
^ Margaret Mead 1928 Coming of Age in Samoa
^ Ruth Benedict 1959 [1934] Patterns of Culture. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. 46-47
^ Franz Boas 1940 [1932] “The Aims of Anthropological Research,” in Race, Language and Culture ed. George Stocking. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 256
^ Bashkow, Ira 2004 "A Neo-Boasian Conception of Cultural Boundaries" American Anthropologist 106(3): 446
^ Ruth Benedict 1934 Patterns of Culture Boston: Houghton Miflin Company p. 48
^ Ruth Benedict 1934 Patterns of Culture Boston: Houghton Miflin Company p. 49
^ Ruth Benedict 1934 Patterns of Culture Boston: Houghton Miflin Company p. 52
^ Ruth Benedict 1934 Patterns of Culture Boston: Houghton Miflin Company p. 47
^ Ruth Benedict 1934 Patterns of Culture Boston: Houghton Miflin Company pp. 23-24
^ Ruth Benedict 1934 Patterns of Culture Boston: Houghton Miflin Company p.46
^ Ruth Benedict 1934 Patterns of Culture Boston: Houghton Miflin Company p.277
^ Ruth Benedict 1934 Patterns of Culture Boston: Houghton Miflin Company p.277
^ Ruth Benedict 1934 Patterns of Culture Boston: Houghton Miflin Company p.271
^ Murdock, George, 1949 Social Structure New York: The Macmillan Company
^ Murdock, G. P. 1967. Ethnographic Atlas: A Summary. Pittsburgh: The University of Pittsburgh Press
^ Murdock, G. P. 1981. Atlas of World Cultures. Pittsburgh: The University of Pittsburgh Press.
^ Lévi-Strauss, Claude 1955 Tristes Tropiques Atheneum press
^ Lévi-Strauss, Claude Mythologiques I-IV (trans. John Weightman and Doreen Weightman);Le Cru et le cuit (1964), The Raw and the Cooked (1969); Du miel aux cendres (1966), From Honey to Ashes (1973); L'Origine des manières de table (1968) The Origin of Table Manners 1978); 'L'Homme nu (1971) The Naked Man (1981)
^ Raymond Firth 1936 We the Tikopia: A Sociological Study of Kinship in Primitive Polynesia London Allen and Unwin
^ Meyer Fortes and E.E. Evans Pritchard 1940. African Political Systems. London and New York: International African Institute.
^ Bronislaw Malinowski 1944 The Scientific Theory of Culture
^ A.R. Radcliffe-Brown 1952 Structure and Function in Primitive Society
^ a.R. Radcliffe-Brown 1957 A Natural Science of Society Glencoe: The Free Press p. 53
^ Talcott Parsons 1937, The Structure of Social Action
^ Talcott Parsons 1951, The Social System
^ Eric Wolf 1980 "They Divide and Subdivide and Call it Anthropology." The New York Times November 30:E9
^ Ira Bashkow, 2004 "A Neo-Boasian Conception of Cultural Boundaries," American Anthropologist 106(3):445-446
^ Appadurai, Arjun 1986 The Social Life of Things. (Edited) New York: Cambridge University Press.
^ Appadurai, Arjun, 1996 Modernity at large: Cultural dimensions of globalization. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
^ Gupta, Akhil, and James Ferguson, 1992, "Beyond 'Culture': Space, Identity, and the Politics of Difference," Cultural Anthropology 7(1): 6-23
^ Marcus, George E. 1995 “Ethnography in/of the World System: The Emergence of Multi-Sited Ethnography.” In Annual Review of Anthropology 24: 95-117
^ Wolf, Eric 1982 Europe and the people without history. Berkeley: The University of California Press.
^ Clifford Geertz 1973 The Interpretaion of Cultures New York: Basic Books
^ David Schneider 1968 American Kinship: A Cultural Account Chicago: University of Chicago press
^ Roy Wagner 1980 American Kinship: A Cultural Account Chicago: University of Chicago Press
^ Janet Dolgin, David Kemnitzer, and David Schneider, eds. Symbolic Anthropology: a Reader in the Study of Symbols and Meanings
^ Victor Turner 1967 The Forest of Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu Ritual Ithaca:Cornell University Press
^ White, L. 1949. The Science of Culture: A study of man and civilization.
^ Richard A. Barrett 1989, "The Paradoxical Anthropology of Leslie White," American Anthropologist Vol. 91, No. 4 (Dec., 1989), pp. 986-999
^ Leslie White, 1949 "Ethnological Theory." In Philosophy for the Future: The Quest of Modern Materialism. R. W. Sellars, V.J. McGill, and M. Farber, eds. Pp. 357-384. New York: Macmillan.
^ Leslie White, 1943 "Energy and the Evolution of Culture." American Anthropologist 45: 339
^ Julian Steward 1938 Basin Plateau Aboriginal Socio-political Groups (Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin, No 20)
^ Julian Steward 1955 Theory of Culture Change: The Methodology of Multilinear Evolution University of Illinois Press
^ Marvin Harris 1979 Cultural Materialism: The Struggle for a Science of Culture New York: Random House
^ Marvin Harris 1977 Cannibals and Kings: Origins of Cultures New York: Vintage
^ Marvin Harris 1974 Cows, Pigs, Wars, and Witches: The Riddles of Culture New York: Vintage
^ Roy A. Rappaport 1967 Pigs for the Ancestors: Ritual in the Ecology of a New Guinea People
^ Julian Steward, ed. 1966 The people of Puerto Rico: a study in social anthropology Chicago: University of Chicago Press (includes doctoral dissertations of Mintz and Wolf)
^ Robert F. Murphy 1960 Headhunter's Heritage; Social and Economic Change Among the Mundurucu Indians
^ Marshall Sahlins and Elman Service, '
^ Elman R. Service 1962 Primitive social organization: an evolutionary perspective New York: Random House
^ Andrew Peter Vayda, ed. 1969 Environment and cultural behavior: ecological studies in cultural anthropology Garden City: Natural History Press
^ Dell Hymes 1969 Reinventing Anthropology p. 11
^ Dell Hymes 1969 Reinventing Anthropology p. 42
^ Dell Hymes 1969 Reinventing Anthropology p. 43
^ Sidney Mintz 1985 Sweetness and Power New York:Viking Press
^ Robert Murphy 1971 The Dialectics of Social Life New york: Basic Books
^ Marshall Sahlins 1976 Culture and Practical Reason Chicago: University of Chicago Press
^ Eric Wolf 1971 Peasant Wars of the Twentieth Century
^ Eric Wolf, 1982 Europe and the People Without History Berkeley: University of California Press
^ V. Gordon Childe 1929 The Danube in Prehistory Oxford: Clarendon Press
^ By R. Lee Lyman and Michael J. O'Brien, 2003 W.C. McKern and the Midwestern Taxonomic Method. University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa
^ Colin Renfrew and Paul Bahn, 2008 Archeology: Theories, Methods and Practice Fifth edition. New York: Thames and Hudson. p. 470
^ Walter Taylor 1948 A Study of Archeology Memoir 69, American Anthropological Association, reprinted, Carbondale Il: Southern Illinois University Press, 1967. p. 96
^ Walter Taylor 1948 A Study of Archeology Memoir 69, American Anthropological Association, reprinted, Carbondale Il: Southern Illinois University Press, 1967. p. 100
^ Patty Jo Watson 1995 "Archeology, Anthropology, and the Culture Concept" in American Anthropologist 97(4) p.685
^ Robert Dunnel 1986 "Five Decades of American Archeology" in American Archeology past and Future: A Celebration of the Society for American Archeology, 1935-1985. D. Meltzer and J. Sabloff, eds. Washington D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press. p.36
^ Lewish Binford 1962 "Archeology as Anthropology" in American Antiquity 28(2):218; see White 1959 The Evolution of Culture New York:McGraw Hill p.8
^ Lewish Binford 1962 "Archeology as Anthropology" in American Antiquity 28(2):218; see Steward 1955 Theory of Culture Change. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
^ Patty Jo Watson 1995 "Archeology, Anthropology, and the Culture Concept" in American Anthropologist 97(4) p.684
^ Patty Jo Watson 1995 "Archeology, Anthropology, and the Culture Concept" in American Anthropologist 97(4) p.687-6874
^ Ian Hodder 1982 Symbols in action: ethnoarchaeological studies of material culture Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
^ Ian Hodder 1986 Reading the past: current approaches to interpretation in archaeology Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
^ name="Williams">Raymond Williams (1976) Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society. Rev. Ed. (NewYork: Oxford UP, 1983), pp. 87-93 and 236-8.
^ John Berger, Peter Smith Pub. Inc., (1971) Ways of Seeing
^ O'Neil, D. 2006. "Processes of Change".
^ Pringle, H. 1998. The Slow Birth of Agriculture. Science 282: 1446.



References


"Adolf Bastian". Today in Science History. 27 Jan 2009 <http://www.todayinsci.com/B/Bastian_Adolf/Bastian_Adolf.htm>.
"Adolf Bastian". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2009. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 27 Jan 2009 <http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/55606/Adolf-Bastian>.
Ankerl, Guy (2000) [2000]. Global communication without universal civilization, vol.1: Coexisting contemporary civilizations: Arabo-Muslim, Bharati, Chinese, and Western. INU societal research. Geneva: INU Press. ISBN 2-88155-004-5. 
Arnold, Matthew. 1869. Culture and Anarchy. New York: Macmillan. Third edition, 1882, available online. Retrieved: 2006-06-28.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981) The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays. Ed. Michael Holquist. Trans. Caryl Press. ISBN 978-0-252-06445-6.
Barzilai, Gad. 2003. Communities and Law: Politics and Cultures of Legal Identities University of Michigan Press. ISBN 0-472-11315-1
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1977. Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-29164-4
Cohen, Anthony P. 1985. The Symbolic Construction of Community. Routledge: New York,
Dawkiins, R. 1982. The Extended Phenotype: The Long Reach of the Gene. Paperback ed., 1999. Oxford Paperbacks. ISBN 978-0-19-288051-2
Findley & Rothney. Twentieth-Century World (Houghton Mifflin, 1986)
Forsberg, A. Definitions of culture CCSF Cultural Geography course notes. Retrieved: 2006-06-29.
Geertz, Clifford. 1973. The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays. New York. ISBN 978-0-465-09719-7.
— 1957. "Ritual and Social Change: A Javanese Example", American Anthropologist, Vol. 59, No. 1.
Goodall, J. 1986. The Chimpanzees of Gombe: Patterns of Behavior. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-11649-8
Hoult, T. F., ed. 1969. Dictionary of Modern Sociology. Totowa, New Jersey, United States: Littlefield, Adams & Co.
Jary, D. and J. Jary. 1991. The HarperCollins Dictionary of Sociology. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 0-06-271543-7
Keiser, R. Lincoln 1969. The Vice Lords: Warriors of the Streets. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston. ISBN 978-0-03-080361-1.
Kroeber, A. L. and C. Kluckhohn, 1952. Culture: A Critical Review of Concepts and Definitions. Cambridge, MA: Peabody Museum
Kim, Uichol (2001). "Culture, science and indigenous psychologies: An integrated analysis." In D. Matsumoto (Ed.), Handbook of culture and psychology. Oxford: Oxford University Press
McClenon, James. "Tylor, Edward B(urnett)". Encyclopedia of Religion and Society. Ed. William Swatos and Peter Kivisto. Walnut Creek: AltaMira, 1998. 528-29.
Middleton, R. 1990. Studying Popular Music. Philadelphia: Open University Press. ISBN 978-0-335-15275-9.
O'Neil, D. 2006. Cultural Anthropology Tutorials, Behavioral Sciences Department, Palomar College, San Marco, California. Retrieved: 2006-07-10.
Reagan, Ronald. "Final Radio Address to the Nation", January 14, 1989. Retrieved June 3, 2006.
Reese, W.L. 1980. Dictionary of Philosophy and Religion: Eastern and Western Thought. New Jersey U.S., Sussex, U.K: Humanities Press.
Rhoads, Kelton. 2006. The Culture Variable in the Influence Equation.
Tylor, E.B. 1974. Primitive culture: researches into the development of mythology, philosophy, religion, art, and custom. New York: Gordon Press. First published in 1871. ISBN 978-0-87968-091-6
UNESCO. 2002. Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity, issued on International Mother Language Day, February 21, 2002. Retrieved: 2006-06-23.
White, L. 1949. The Science of Culture: A study of man and civilization. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Wilson, Edward O. (1998). Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge. Vintage: New York. ISBN 978-0-679-76867-8.
Wolfram, Stephen. 2002 A New Kind of Science. Wolfram Media, Inc. ISBN 978-1-57955-008-0



External links

Find more about Culture on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Define Culture A compilation of over 100+ user submitted definitions of culture from around the globe.
Centre for Intercultural Learning
Detailed article on defining culture
Dictionary of the History of Ideas "culture" and "civilization" in modern times
Global Culture Essays on global issues and their impact on culture
Reflections on the Politics of Culture by Michael Parenti
What is Culture? - Washington State University







 
Links to related articles














v • d • e

Human topics






Anatomy · Appearance · Art · Behavior · Biology · Body · Body shape · Civilization · Communication · Condition · Culture · Development · Evolution · Genetics · Health · Mind · Nature · Rights · Sexuality · Society (Types of Societies) · Technology













v • d • e

Articles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights










 
General principles








Article 1: Freedom, Egalitarianism, Dignity and Brotherhood
Article 2: Universality of rights
















 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights








Article 1 and 2: Right to freedom from discrimination · Article 3: Right to life, liberty and security of person · Article 4: Freedom from slavery · Article 5: Freedom from torture and cruel and unusual punishment · Article 6: Right to personhood · Article 7: Equality before the law · Article 8: Right to effective remedy from the law · Article 9: Freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention and exile · Article 10: Right to a fair trial · Article 11.1: Presumption of innocence · Article 11.2: Prohibition of retrospective law · Article 12: Right to privacy · Article 13: Freedom of movement · Article 14: Right of asylum · Article 15: Right to a nationality · Article 16: Right to marriage and family life · Article 17: Right to property · Article 18: Freedom of thought, conscience and religion · Article 19: Freedom of opinion and expression · Article 20.1: Freedom of assembly · Article 20.2: Freedom of association · Article 21.1: Right to participation in government · Article 21.2: Right of equal access to public office · Article 21.3: Right to universal suffrage
















 
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights








Article 1 and 2: Right to freedom from discrimination · Article 22: Right to social security · Article 23.1: Right to work · Article 23.2: Right to equal pay for equal work · Article 23.3: Right to just remuneration · Article 23.4: Right to join a trade union · Article 24: Right to rest and leisure · Article 25.1: Right to an adequate standard of living · Article 25.2: Right to special care and assistance for mothers and children · Article 26.1: Right to education · Article 26.2: Human rights education · Article 26.3: Right to choice of education · Article 27.1: Right to participate in culture · Article 27.2: Right to intellectual property
















 
Context, limitations and duties








Article 28: Social order · Article 29.1: Social responsibility  · Article 29.2: Limitations of human rights · Article 29.3: The supremacy of the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Article 30: Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as implying for any State, group or person any right to engage in any activity or to perform any act aimed at the destruction of any of the rights and freedoms set forth herein.











Category:Human rights · Human rights portal












v • d • e

Particular human rights





Civil and political

Freedom from discrimination · Right to life · Right to die · Security of person · Liberty · Freedom of movement · Freedom from slavery · Personhood · Right to bear arms · Equality before the law · Adequate remedy · Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention · Freedom from torture · Freedom from cruel and unusual punishment · Right to a fair trial · Presumption of innocence · Right of asylum · Nationality · Freedom from exile · Privacy · Freedom of thought and conscience · Freedom of religion · Freedom of expression (freedom of information) · Freedom of assembly · Freedom of association · Right to protest · Universal suffrage · Marriage · Family life






Economic, social
and cultural

Labor rights · Fair remuneration · Equal pay for equal work · Trade union membership · Right to social security · Leisure and rest · Right to work · Right to property (and intellectual) · Right to culture · Right to public participation · Right to education · Right to adequate standard of living · Right to housing · Right to development · Right to health · Right to healthcare · Right to water · Right to food · Right of return






Reproductive

Family planning · Reproductive health · Abortion · Genital integrity · Freedom from involuntary female genital cutting






War and conflict

Civilian · Combatant · Freedom from genocide · Prisoner of war






Note: What is considered a human right is controversial and not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights.
















Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Culture"
Categories: Culture | History of ideas | Anthropology | Sociology of cultureHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Aragonés
Asturianu
Aymar aru
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Boarisch
Bosanski
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Chamoru
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Galego
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ქართული
Kaszëbsczi
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Ladino
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Lojban
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Malti
مصرى
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
नेपाल भाषा
日本語
Nnapulitano
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Oshiwambo
O'zbek
Papiamentu
ភាសាខ្មែរ
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Scots
Seeltersk
Shqip
Sicilianu
සිංහල
Simple English
SiSwati
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Tatarça/Татарча
తెలుగు
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
Võro
Xitsonga
ייִדיש
粵語
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 16:05.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
