













Georgia (country) - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Georgia_(country)";
		var wgTitle = "Georgia (country)";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "48768";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281655010;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Georgia (country)

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 



საქართველო, Sakartvelo
Georgia1










Flag
Coat of arms





Motto: ძალა ერთობაშია
(English: "Strength is in Unity")


Anthem: თავისუფლება
(English: "Freedom")










Capital
(and largest city)
Tbilisi
41°43′N 44°47′E﻿ / ﻿41.717°N 44.783°E﻿ / 41.717; 44.783


Official languages
Georgian2


Demonym
Georgian


Government
Unitary semi-presidential republic


 - 
President
Mikheil Saakashvili


 - 
Prime Minister
Nikoloz Gilauri


Consolidation


 - 
Kingdom of Georgia
1008 


 - 
Democratic Republic of Georgia
May 26, 1918 


 - 
Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic
February 25, 1921 


 - 
Independence from the Soviet Union
Declared
Finalized


April 9, 1991
December 25, 1991 


Area


 - 
Total
69,700 km2 (120th)
26,916 sq mi 


Population


 - 
2008 estimate
4,730,8413 (112th)


 - 
Density
68/km2 (130)
176/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2008 estimate


 - 
Total
$21.702 billion[1] 


 - 
Per capita
$5,001[1] (IMF) 


GDP (nominal)
2008 estimate


 - 
Total
$13.283 billion[1] 


 - 
Per capita
$3,060[1] (IMF) 


HDI (2008)
▲ 0.763 (medium) (93th)


Currency
Lari (ლ) (GEL)


Time zone
UTC (UTC+4)


Drives on the
right


Internet TLD
.ge


Calling code
995


1
According to Article 1.3 of the Constitution of Georgia.


2
According to Article 8 of the Constitution of Georgia. In Abkhazia, also Abkhazian.


3
From CIA World Factbook.[2] Figure includes Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Otherwise, the population in 2008 is estimated at 4,382,100.[3]











Georgian Statehood




Kingdom of Iberia
Kingdom of Colchis
Kingdom of Lazica-Egrisi
Unified Georgian Kingdom
Partitions

Kingdom of Tao-Klarjeti
Kingdom of Abkhazia
Kingdom of Hereti
Kingdom of Kakheti
Kingdom of Kartli
Kingdom of Imereti


Democratic Republic of Georgia
Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic
Republic of Georgia
Georgia


This box: view • talk • edit




Georgia ( /ˈdʒɔrdʒə/ (help·info); Georgian: საქართველო, Sakartvelo) is a transcontinental country in the South Caucasus region, located at the dividing line between Europe and Asia.[2] It is bordered by the Russian Federation to the north, Azerbaijan to the east, Armenia to the south, and Turkey to the southwest.[2] Georgia covers a territory of 69,700 km²; its population, excluding Abkhazia and South Ossetia, is 4.4 million, of whom nearly 84% are ethnic Georgians.[4]
The history of Georgia can be traced back to the ancient kingdoms of Colchis and Iberia, and it was one of the first countries to adopt Christianity as an official religion early in the 4th century. At the beginning of the 19th century Georgia became a part of the Russian Empire. After a brief period of independence following the Russian Revolution of 1917, Georgia was forcibly incorporated into the Soviet Union in 1922.
Independence was restored in 1991. Like many post-communist countries Georgia suffered from the economic crisis and civil unrest during the 1990s. After the bloodless Rose Revolution, however, the new leadership has established efficient government institutions,[5] reformed the economy and guided the country through a period of the fastest economic growth in its history.
Georgia is a representative democracy, organized as a secular, unitary semi-presidential republic; however the idea to restore the constitutional monarchy is popular in certain circles, most notably in the Georgian Orthodox Church[6][7] It is currently a member of the United Nations, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization, the Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation, and GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development. The country seeks to join NATO and, in the longer term, accession to the European Union.[8]
In August 2008, Georgia engaged in an armed conflict with Russia and separatist groups from South Ossetia and Abkhazia. In the aftermath of the conflict Russia recognized the Georgian regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia as independent states, but almost no country followed suit, and the West insists that they are still part of Georgia.[9] On August 28, 2008, the Parliament of Georgia passed a resolution declaring Abkhazia and South Ossetia "Russian-occupied territories".[10][11]




Contents


1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Prehistory
2.2 Middle Ages
2.3 Georgia in the Russian Empire
2.4 Declaration of independence
2.5 Georgia in the Soviet Union
2.6 Georgia after restoration of independence
2.7 2008 military conflict with Russia

2.7.1 Post-war settlement




3 Geography and climate

3.1 Transcontinental location
3.2 Topography
3.3 Fauna
3.4 Climate


4 Regions

4.1 Autonomous republics


5 Government and politics
6 Foreign relations

6.1 Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)


7 Military
8 Economy
9 Demographics
10 Culture

10.1 Architecture and arts


11 Society

11.1 Cuisine
11.2 Education
11.3 Religion
11.4 Sports


12 See also
13 Gallery of Georgia
14 Notes
15 References
16 Further reading
17 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Etymology




St George slaying the Dragon. 15th century cloisonné enamel on gold. (National Art Museum of Georgia)


Georgians call themselves Kartvelebi (ქართველები), their land Sakartvelo (საქართველო), and their language Kartuli (ქართული). According to legend, the ancestor of the Kartvelian people was Kartlos, the great grandson of the Biblical Japheth.
The native Georgian name for the country is Sakartvelo (საქართველო). The word consists of two parts. Its root, kartvel-i (ქართველ-ი), specifies an inhabitant of the core central-eastern Georgian region of Kartli – Iberia of the Classical and Byzantine sources. By the early 9th century, the meaning of "Kartli" was expanded to other areas of medieval Georgia held together by religion, culture, and language. The Georgian circumfix sa-X-o is a standard geographic construction designating "the area where X dwell", where X is an ethnonym. (For another example, the Mingrelian minority in Georgia lives in Samegrelo.) The term Sakartvelo came to signify the all-Georgian cultural and political unity early in the 11th century and firmly entered regular official usage in the 13th century.[12]
Ancient Greeks (Strabo, Herodotus, Plutarch, Homer, etc.) and Romans (Titus Livius, Cornelius Tacitus, etc.) referred to early eastern Georgians as Iberians (Iberoi in some Greek sources) and western Georgians as Colchians.[13]
The origin of the name Georgia is still disputed and has been explained in the following ways:

Linking it semantically to Greek and Latin roots (Greek: γεωργία, transliterated geōrgía, "agriculture", γεωργός, geōrgós, "tiller of the land", and γεωργικός, geōrgikós, Latin: georgicus, "agricultural").[14]
The country took its name from that of Saint George, itself a derivative of the aforementioned Greek root. Or, at the very least, the popularity of the cult of Saint George in Georgia influenced the spread of the term.
Under various Persian empires (536 BC-AD 638), Georgians were called Gurjhān (Gurzhan/Gurjan), or "Gurj/Gurzh people." The early Islamic/Arabic sources spelled the name Kurz/Gurz and the country Gurjistan (see Baladhuri, Tabari, Jayhani, Istakhri, Ibn Hawqal, etc.). The contemporary Russian name for the country, "Gruziya," is similar. This also could evolve or at least contribute to the later name of Georgia.[15] The Russian name was brought into contemporary Hebrew as גרוזיה ("Gruziya"), and only recently changed in official Israeli usage to גיאורגיה ("Gheorghia" with two hard g's).

The terms Georgia and Georgians appeared in Western Europe in numerous medieval annals including that of Crusaders and later in the official documents and letters of the Florentine de’ Medici family.[16] The French chronicler Jacques de Vitry and the English traveler Sir John Mandeville wrote that Georgians are called Georgian because they especially revere and worship Saint George. Notably, in January 2004 the country adopted the five-cross flag, featuring the Saint George's Cross; it has been argued that the flag was used in Georgia from the 5th century throughout the Middle Ages.[17][18]
Modern Georgian states have used differing names in different periods. The first modern Georgian state proclaimed on May 26, 1918 adopted the name Democratic Republic of Georgia. As part of the USSR from February 25, 1921, the country was called the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic. When Georgia broke from the USSR on December 25, 1991, it adopted the name Republic of Georgia. Since it adopted its present constitution on August 24, 1995, the official name of the country is simply Georgia.[19]

[edit] History
Main article: History of Georgia (country)

[edit] Prehistory




Ancient Georgian Kingdoms of Colchis and Iberia






Tondo depicting Saint Mamas from the Gelati Monastery, 14th–15th centuries


The territory of modern-day Georgia has been continuously inhabited since the early Stone Age. The classic period saw the rise of the early Georgian states of Colchis and Iberia. The proto-Georgian tribes first appear in written history in the 12th century BC.[20] Archaeological finds and references in ancient sources reveal elements of early political and state formations characterized by advanced metallurgy and goldsmith techniques that date back to the 7th century BC and beyond.[21] In the 4th century BC a unified kingdom of Georgia - an early example of advanced state organization under one king and the hierarchy of aristocracy, was established.[22]
Christianity was declared the state religion as early as AD 337 proving a great stimulus to literature, arts and the unification of the country. As a crossroad between Christian and Islamic traditions, Georgia experienced the dynamic exchange between these two worlds which culminated in a true renaissance around 12-13th centuries CE.[23]
The two early Georgian kingdoms of late antiquity, known to ancient Greeks and Romans as Iberia (Georgian: იბერია) (in the east of the country) and Colchis (Georgian: კოლხეთი) (in the west), were among the first nations in the region to adopt Christianity (in AD 337, or in AD 319 as recent research suggests).
In Greek Mythology, Colchis was the location of the Golden Fleece sought by Jason and the Argonauts in Apollonius Rhodius' epic tale Argonautica. The incorporation of the Golden Fleece into the myth may have derived from the local practice of using fleeces to sift gold dust from rivers. In the last centuries of the pre-Christian era, the area, in the form of the kingdom of Kartli-Iberia, was strongly influenced by Greece to the west and Persia to the east.[24]
After the Roman Empire completed its conquest of the Caucasus region in 66 BC, the kingdom was a Roman client state and ally for nearly 400 years.[24] In AD 330, King Mirian III's acceptance of Christianity ultimately tied the kingdom to the neighboring Byzantine Empire, which exerted a strong cultural influence for several centuries.[24]
Known to its natives as Egrisi or Lazica, Colchis was often the battlefield and buffer-zone between the rival powers of Persia and Byzantine Empire, with the control of the region shifting hands back and forth several times. The early kingdoms disintegrated into various feudal regions by the early Middle Ages. This made it easy for Arabs to conquer Georgia in the 7th century. The rebellious regions were liberated and united into a unified Georgian Kingdom at the beginning of the 11th century. Starting in the 12th century CE, the rule of Georgia extended over a significant part of the Southern Caucasus, including the northeastern parts and almost the entire northern coast of what is now Turkey.
Although Arabs captured the capital city of Tbilisi in AD 645, Kartli-Iberia retained considerable independence under local Arab rulers.[24] In AD 813, the prince Ashot I also known as Ashot Kurapalat became the first of the Bagrationi family to rule the kingdom: Ashot's reign began a period of nearly 1,000 years during which the Bagrationi, as the house was known, ruled at least part of what is now the republic.
Western and eastern Georgia were united under Bagrat V (r. 1027-72). In the next century, David IV (called the Builder, r. 1099-1125) initiated the Georgian golden age by driving the Seljuk Turks from the country and expanding Georgian cultural and political influence southward into Armenia and eastward to the Caspian Sea.[24]




Iberian King Mirian III established Christianity in Georgia as the official state religion in AD 327.



[edit] Middle Ages




The Ushguli is dominated by typical Svan defensive towers, most dating back to the 9th-12th centuries[25]






Kingdom of Georgia at peak of its military dominance, 1184-1225


The Georgian Kingdom reached its zenith in the 12th to early 13th centuries. This period has been widely termed as Georgia's Golden Age or Georgian Renaissance during the reign of David the Builder and Queen Tamar. This early Georgian renaissance, which preceded its European analogue, was characterized by the flourishing of romantic- chivalric tradition, breakthroughs in philosophy, and an array of political innovations in society and state organization, including religious and ethnic tolerance. The Golden age of Georgia left a legacy of great cathedrals, romantic poetry and literature, and the epic poem "The Knight in the Panther's Skin". The struggle against the Seljuk invaders was led by David the Builder, who employed tens of thousands Kipchak soldiers and settled them, in 1118, in his kingdom.

The revival of the Georgian Kingdom was short-lived however, in 1226 Tblisi was captured by Mingburnu and the Kingdom was eventually subjugated by the Mongols in 1236 (see Mongol invasions of Georgia). Thereafter, different local rulers fought for their independence from central Georgian rule, until the total disintegration of the Kingdom in the 15th century. Georgia was subjected, between 1386 and 1404, to several disastrous invasions by Timur. Neighbouring kingdoms exploited the situation and from the 16th century, the Persian Empire and the Ottoman Empire subjugated the eastern and western regions of Georgia, respectively.
The rulers of regions which remained partly autonomous organized rebellions on various occasions. Subsequent Persian and Ottoman invasions further weakened local kingdoms and regions. As a result of wars the population of Georgia was reduced to 250,000 inhabitants at one point. Eastern Georgia, composed of the kingdoms of Kartli and Kakheti, had been under the Persian suzerainty since 1555. However, with the death of Nader Shah "The Persian Napoleon" in 1747, both kingdoms broke free of the Persian control and were reunified through a personal union under the energetic king Heraclius II in 1762.

[edit] Georgia in the Russian Empire
Main article: Georgia under the Russian Empire




Ilia Chavchavadze, leader of the 1860s national revival






King George XI


In 1783, Russia and the eastern Georgian Kingdom of Kartli-Kakheti signed the Treaty of Georgievsk, according to which Kartli-Kakheti received protection by Russia. Despite Russia's commitment to defend Georgia, it rendered no assistance when the Turks invaded in 1785 and again in 1795. This period culminated in the 1801 Russian annexation of remaining Georgian lands and the deposing of the Bagrationi dynasty.
On December 22, 1800, Tsar Paul I of Russia, at the alleged request of the Georgian King George XII, signed the proclamation on the incorporation of Georgia (Kartli-Kakheti) within the Russian Empire, which was finalized by a decree on January 8, 1801,[26][27] and confirmed by Tsar Alexander I on September 12, 1801.[28][29] The Georgian envoy in Saint Petersburg reacted with a note of protest that was presented to the Russian vice-chancellor Prince Kurakin.[30] In May 1801, Russian General Carl Heinrich Knorring dethroned the Georgian heir to the throne David Batonishvili and instituted a government headed by General Ivan Petrovich Lasarev.[31]
The Georgian nobility did not accept the decree until April 1802 when General Knorring compassed the nobility in Tbilisi's Sioni Cathedral and forced them to take an oath on the Imperial Crown of Russia. Those who disagreed were arrested temporarily.[32]
In the summer of 1805, Russian troops on the Askerani River near Zagam defeated the Persian army and saved Tbilisi from conquest.
Western Georgian principalities of Mingrelia and Guria assumed the Russian protection in 1800s. Finally in 1810, after a brief war,[33] the western Georgian kingdom of Imereti was annexed by Tsar Alexander I of Russia. The last Imeretian king and the last Georgian Bagrationi ruler Solomon II died in exile in 1815. From 1803 to 1878, as a result of numerous Russian wars against Turkey and Iran, several territories were annexed to Georgia. These areas (Batumi, Akhaltsikhe, Poti, and Abkhazia) now represent a large part of the territory of Georgia. The principality of Guria was abolished in 1828, and that of Samegrelo (Mingrelia) in 1857. The region of Svaneti was gradually annexed in 1857–59.

[edit] Declaration of independence
Main article: Democratic Republic of Georgia




Democratic Republic of Georgia, 1918-1921






Declaration of independence by the Georgian parliament, 1918


After the Russian Revolution of 1917, Georgia declared independence on May 26, 1918 in the midst of the Russian Civil War. The parliamentary election was won by the Georgian Social-Democratic Party, considered to be pro-Mensheviks, and its leader, Noe Zhordania, became prime minister. In 1918 a Georgian–Armenian war erupted over parts of Georgian provinces populated mostly by Armenians which ended due to British intervention. In 1918–19 Georgian general Giorgi Mazniashvili led a Georgian attack against the White Army led by Moiseev and Denikin in order to claim the Black Sea coastline from Tuapse to Sochi and Adler for independent Georgia. The country's independence did not last long, however. Georgia was under British protection from 1918-1920.


[edit] Georgia in the Soviet Union
Main article: Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic




The 11th Red Army of the Russian SFSR occupies Tbilisi, 25 February 1921.






Prince Kakutsa Cholokashvili, leader of the anti-Bolshevik uprising in August of 1924, venerated as national hero of Georgia


In February 1921 Georgia was attacked by the Red Army. The Georgian army was defeated and the Social-Democrat government fled the country. On February 25, 1921 the Red Army entered capital Tbilisi and installed a Moscow directed communist government, led by Georgian Bolshevik Filipp Makharadze. Nevertheless the Soviet rule was firmly established only after a 1924 revolt was brutally suppressed. Georgia was incorporated into the Transcaucasian SFSR uniting Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan. The TSFSR was disaggregated into its component elements in 1936 and Georgia became the Georgian SSR.
The Georgian-born Ioseb Jughashvili, better known by his nom de guerre Stalin (from the Russian word for steel: сталь) was prominent among the Russian Bolsheviks, who came to power in the Russian Empire after the October Revolution in 1917. Stalin was to rise to the highest position of the Soviet state.
From 1941 to 1945, during World War II, almost 700,000 Georgians fought in the Red Army against Nazi Germany. (A number also fought on the German side.) About 350,000 Georgians died in the battlefields of the Eastern Front.
The Dissidential movement for restoration of Georgian statehood started to gain popularity in the 1960s.[34] Among the Georgian dissidents, two of the most prominent activists were Merab Kostava and Zviad Gamsakhurdia. Dissidents were heavily persecuted by Soviet government, and their activities were harshly suppressed.
On April 9, 1989, a peaceful demonstration in the Georgian capital Tbilisi ended in a massacre in which several people were killed by Soviet troops. Before the October 1990 elections to the national assembly, the Umaghlesi Sabcho (Supreme Council) — the first polls in the USSR held on a formal multi-party basis — the political landscape was reshaped again. While the more radical groups boycotted the elections and convened an alternative forum with alleged support of Moscow[citation needed] (National Congress), another part of the anticommunist opposition united into the Round Table—Free Georgia (RT-FG) around the former dissidents like Merab Kostava and Zviad Gamsakhurdia. The latter won the elections by a clear margin, with 155 out of 250 parliamentary seats, whereas the ruling Communist Party (CP) received only 64 seats. All other parties failed to get over the 5%-threshold and were thus allotted only some single-member constituency seats.

[edit] Georgia after restoration of independence
On April 9, 1991, shortly before the collapse of the USSR, Georgia declared independence. On May 26, 1991, Zviad Gamsakhurdia was elected as a first President of independent Georgia. Gamsakhurdia stoked Georgian nationalism and vowed to assert Tbilisi's authority over regions such as Abkhazia and South Ossetia that had been classified as autonomous oblasts under the Soviet Union. However, he was soon deposed in a bloody coup d'état, from December 22, 1991 to January 6, 1992. The coup was instigated by part of the National Guards and a paramilitary organization called "Mkhedrioni" or "horsemen". The country became embroiled in a bitter civil war which lasted almost until 1995. Eduard Shevardnadze returned to Georgia in 1992 and joined the leaders of the coup — Kitovani and Ioseliani — to head a triumvirate called the "State Council".
In 1995, Shevardnadze was officially elected as president of Georgia. At the same time, simmering disputes within two regions of Georgia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia, between local separatists and the majority Georgian populations, erupted into widespread inter-ethnic violence and wars. Supported by Russia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia, with the exception of some "pockets" of territory, achieved de facto independence from Georgia. Roughly 230,000 to 250,000 Georgians[35] were expelled from Abkhazia by Abkhaz separatists and North Caucasians volunteers (including Chechens) in 1992-1993. Around 23,000 Georgians[36] fled South Ossetia as well, and many Ossetian families were forced to abandon their homes in the Borjomi region and move to Russia.
In 2003, Shevardnadze (who won reelection in 2000) was deposed by the Rose Revolution, after Georgian opposition and international monitors asserted that the November 2 parliamentary elections were marred by fraud.[37] The revolution was led by Mikheil Saakashvili, Zurab Zhvania and Nino Burjanadze, former members and leaders of Shevardnadze's ruling party. Mikheil Saakashvili was elected as President of Georgia in 2004.
Following the Rose Revolution, a series of reforms was launched to strengthen the country's military and economic capabilities. The new government's efforts to reassert Georgian authority in the southwestern autonomous republic of Ajaria led to a major crisis early in 2004. Success in Ajaria encouraged Saakashvili to intensify his efforts, but without success, in the breakaway South Ossetia. These events along with accusations of Georgian involvement in the Second Chechen War,[38] resulted in a severe deterioration of relations with Russia, fuelled also by Russia's open assistance and support to the two secessionists areas. Despite these increasingly difficult relations, in May 2005 Georgia and Russia reached a bilateral agreement [39] by which Russian military bases (dating back to the Soviet era) in Batumi and Akhalkalaki were withdrawn. Russia fulfilled the terms, withdrawing all personnel and equipment from these sites by December 2007, ahead of schedule.[40]

[edit] 2008 military conflict with Russia
Main articles: 2008 South Ossetia war and International recognition of Abkhazia and South Ossetia
In July 2008, hostilities started between Ossetian separatists and Georgian armed forces. This quickly evolved into a full-scale war between Georgia on the one side and Russia, Ossetian, and Abkhazian separatists on the other. In the evening of August 7, Georgian armed forces began pushing into South Ossetia, supported by artillery and multiple rocket launcher fire[41] on Tskhinvali (South Ossetia) on Friday August 8.[42] Russia immediately accused Georgian government of "genocide", claiming that 1,600 South Ossetian civilians had been killed by the Georgian army. These allegations have not been substantiated, and Human Rights Watch investigators in South Ossetia accused Russia of exaggerating the scale of the casualties.[13] On August 8 armed formations of Russian 58th army entered South Ossetia through the Russian-controlled Roki tunnel. At the same time Russian air-force launched a series of air strikes against various targets on Georgian territory.
Due to the intensive fighting in South Ossetia there were many disputed reports about the number of casualties on both sides, targets which had fallen under aerial attacks, troop movements and the current front line between the Georgian and Russian-Ossetian combat units.[43]
After a few days of heavy fighting Georgian troops were ejected from South Ossetia. Meanwhile, Russian military stationed in another separatist region of Abkhazia began marching into Western Georgia on August 11.[44] This advance into Georgia was accompanied by reports of widespread looting, burning, and killing of civilians by Ossetian militia.[45] On August 12, however, President Medvedev ordered a halt to Russian military operations in Georgia.[46]

[edit] Post-war settlement
On August 12, Russian President Medvedev met the President-in-Office of the European Union, French President Nicolas Sarkozy, and approved a six-point peace plan. Late that night Georgian President Saakashvili agreed to the text.[47] The translation of the six points is by the Times, from a French language document[48] provided by a Georgian negotiator.[49] Sarkozy's plan originally had just the first four points. Russia added the fifth and sixth points. Georgia asked for the additions in parentheses, but Russia rejected them, and Sarkozy convinced Georgia to agree to the unchanged text.[47]


1. No recourse to the use of force.
2. Definitive cessation of hostilities.
3. Free access to humanitarian aid (addition rejected: and to allow the return of refugees).
4. Georgian military forces must withdraw to their normal bases of encampment.
5. Russian military forces must withdraw to the lines prior to the start of hostilities. While awaiting an international mechanism, Russian peacekeeping forces will implement additional security measures (addition rejected: six months).
6. Opening of international discussions on the modalities of lasting security in Abkhazia and South Ossetia (addition rejected: based on the decisions of the U.N. and the O.S.C.E.).


According to RIA Novosti, "Sarkozy told a briefing after talks with his Georgian counterpart that the deal also includes some changes requested by Georgia... 'we have removed the issue of South Ossetia's status from the document'".[50] But the New York Times, citing a Georgian negotiator, reported that Sarkozy convinced Georgia to accept the Russian version unchanged, after Medvedev waited two hours to return his phone call and then rejected the proposed changes. The U.S. newspaper further asserted that the fifth point was crucial, and Russia used it to justify continuing hostilities into Georgia proper after the agreement.[47]
On August 14, Dmitry Medvedev met with separatist leaders Eduard Kokoity of South Ossetia and Sergei Bagapsh of Abkhazia, where they signed the six principles.[51]
On August 22, Russian Defence Minister reportely said that "the Russian Army units used in the peace enforcement mission finished the withdrawal from the territory of Georgia by 19:50 Moscow time".[52] Apparently, the minister was misquoted, for the Russian troops were still in Georgia as of October 5.[53]
So far Russia has signalled no intention to end its military presence in the disputed Georgian regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. In fact on August 25, 2008, Russia recognized these as independent states.[54][55] Russia now maintains that its troops stationed in Abkhazia and South Ossetia are there according to the agreement between Russian and local governments and their status is not regulated by the Medvedev-Sarkozy peace plan.

[edit] Geography and climate
Main article: Geography of Georgia (country)
See also: Glaciers of Georgia




Svaneti region, North-Western Georgia


In the north, Georgia has a 723 km common border with Russia's Northern Caucasus federal district. The following Russian republics/subdivisions—from west to east—border Georgia: Krasnodar Krai, Karachay-Cherkessia, Kabardino-Balkaria, North Ossetia-Alania, Ingushetia, Chechnya, Dagestan. Georgia also shares borders with Azerbaijan (322 km) to the south-east, Armenia (164 km.) to the south, and Turkey (252 km.) to the south-west.




Kazbek in the Khokh Range


Mountains are the dominant geographic feature of Georgia. The Likhi Range divides the country into eastern and western halves. Historically, the western portion of Georgia was known as Colchis while the eastern plateau was called Iberia. Due to a complex geographic setting, mountains also isolate the northern region of Svaneti from the rest of Georgia.
The Greater Caucasus Mountain Range separates Georgia from the North Caucasian Republics of Russia. The main roads through the mountain range into Russian territory lead through the Roki Tunnel between South and North Ossetia and the Darial Gorge (in the Georgian region of Khevi). The Roki Tunnel was vital for the Russian military in the 2008 South Ossetia War.
The southern portion of the country is bounded by the Lesser Caucasus Mountains. The Greater Caucasus Mountain Range is much higher in elevation than the Lesser Caucasus Mountains, with the highest peaks rising more than 5,000 meters (16,400 ft) above sea level.
The highest mountain in Georgia is Mount Shkhara at 5,201 meters (17,059 ft), and the second highest is Mount Janga (Jangi-Tau) at 5,051 meters (16,572 ft) above sea level. Other prominent peaks include Kazbegi (Kazbek) at 5,047 meters (16,554 ft), Tetnuldi (4,974 m./16,319ft.), Shota Rustaveli (4,960 m./16,273ft.), Mt. Ushba (4,710 m./15,453ft.), and Ailama (4,525 m./14,842ft.). Out of the abovementioned peaks, only Kazbegi is of volcanic origin. The region between Kazbegi and Shkhara (a distance of about 200 km. along the Main Caucasus Range) is dominated by numerous glaciers. Out of the 2,100 glaciers that exist in the Caucasus today, approximately 30% are located within Georgia.




Northern Georgia, Kazbegi region.






Shatili valley in the Khevsureti region.


The term, Lesser Caucasus Mountains is often used to describe the mountainous (highland) areas of southern Georgia that are connected to the Greater Caucasus Mountain Range by the Likhi Range. The area can be split into two separate sub-regions; the Lesser Caucasus Mountains, which run parallel to the Greater Caucasus Range, and the Southern Georgia Volcanic Highland, which lies immediately to the south of the Lesser Caucasus Mountains. The overall region can be characterized as being made up of various, interconnected mountain ranges (largely of volcanic origin) and plateaus that do not exceed 3,400 meters (approximately 11,000 ft) in elevation. Prominent features of the area include the Javakheti Volcanic Plateau, lakes, including Tabatskuri and Paravani, as well as mineral water and hot springs. The Southern Georgia Volcanic Highland is a young and unstable geologic region with high seismic activity and has experienced some of the most significant earthquakes that have been recorded in Georgia.
The Voronya Cave (aka Krubera-Voronia Cave) is the deepest known cave in the world. It is located in the Arabika Massif of the Gagra Range, in Abkhazia. In 2001, a Russian–Ukrainian team had set the world depth record for a cave at 1,710 metres. In 2004, the penetrated depth was increased on each of three expeditions, when a Ukrainian team crossed the 2000-meter mark for the first time in the history of speleology. In October 2005, an unexplored part was found by the CAVEX team, further increasing the known depth of the cave. This expedition confirmed the known depth of the cave at 2,140 (± 9) metres.
Two major rivers in Georgia are the Rioni and the Mtkvari.

[edit] Transcontinental location
Main article: Borders of the continents
Georgia is in the South Caucasus region which is located in Southwest Asia. [2][56][57][58][59][60][61][62][63][64][65][66][67][68][69][70][71] Most modern maps align Europe's southeastern border with the skyline of the Caucasus Mountains,[61] placing minor parts of Georgia -- the Khevi, Khevsureti, and Tusheti regions -- in Europe. Philip Johan von Strahlenberg's 1730 definition of Europe, which was used by the Russian Tsars and which first set the Urals as the eastern border of the continent, drew the continental border along the Kuma-Manych Depression to the Caspian Sea, excluding Georgia (and all the Caucasus) from the continent.
The matter may be related to Georgia's desire to join NATO. Article 10 of the North Atlantic Treaty limits membership extension to European states,[72] so Georgia needs territory in Europe to qualify for membership.

[edit] Topography




Gergeti Trinity Church, 2200 m high, Caucasus mountains in the back, rising more than 4000 m above sea level.


The landscape within the nation's boundaries is quite varied. Western Georgia's landscape ranges from low-land marsh-forests, swamps, and temperate rain forests to eternal snows and glaciers, while the eastern part of the country even contains a small segment of semi-arid plains characteristic of Central Asia. Forests cover around 40% of Georgia's territory while the alpine/subalpine zone accounts for roughly around 10% of the land.
Much of the natural habitat in the low-lying areas of Western Georgia has disappeared over the last 100 years due to the agricultural development of the land and urbanization. The large majority of the forests that covered the Colchis plain are now virtually non-existent with the exception of the regions that are included in the national parks and reserves (i.e. Paleostomi Lake area). At present, the forest cover generally remains outside of the low-lying areas and is mainly located along the foothills and the mountains. Western Georgia's forests consist mainly of deciduous trees below 600 meters (1,968 ft) above sea level and comprise of species such as oak, hornbeam, beech, elm, ash, and chestnut. Evergreen species such as box may also be found in many areas. Ca. 1000 of all 4000 higher plants of Georgia are endemic in this country.[73] The west-central slopes of the Meskheti Range in Ajaria as well as several locations in Samegrelo and Abkhazia are covered by temperate rain forests. Between 600–1,500 meters (1,968-4,920 ft) above sea level, the deciduous forest becomes mixed with both broad-leaf and coniferous species making up the plant life. The zone is made up mainly of beech, spruce, and fir forests. From 1,500-1,800 meters (4,920-5,904 ft), the forest becomes largely coniferous. The tree line generally ends at around 1,800 meters (5,904 ft) and the alpine zone takes over, which in most areas, extends up to an elevation of 3,000 meters (9,840 ft) above sea level. The eternal snow and glacier zone lies above the 3,000 meter line.




Alazani Valley in Kakheti region, Eastern Georgia


Eastern Georgia's landscape (referring to the territory east of the Likhi Range) is considerably different from that of the west. Although, much like the Colchis plain in the west, nearly all of the low-lying areas of eastern Georgia including the Mtkvari and Alazani River plains have been deforested for agricultural purposes. In addition, due to the region's relatively drier climate, some of the low-lying plains (especially in Kartli and south-eastern Kakheti) were never covered by forests in the first place. The general landscape of eastern Georgia comprises numerous valleys and gorges that are separated by mountains. In contrast with western Georgia, nearly 85% of the forests of the region are deciduous. Coniferous forests only dominate in the Borjomi Gorge and in the extreme western areas. Out of the deciduous species of trees, beech, oak, and hornbeam dominate. Other deciduous species include several varieties of maple, aspen, ash, and hazelnut. The Upper Alazani River Valley contains yew forests. At higher elevations above 1,000 meters (3,280 ft) above sea level (particularly in the Tusheti, Khevsureti, and Khevi regions), pine and birch forests dominate. In general, the forests in eastern Georgia occur between 500–2,000 metres (1,640–6,560 ft) above sea level, with the alpine zone extending from 2,000/2,200–3,000/3,500 metres (roughly about 6,560–11,480 ft). The only remaining large, low-land forests remain in the Alazani Valley of Kakheti. The eternal snow and glacier zone lies above the 3,500 metre (11,480 ft) line in most areas of eastern Georgia.

[edit] Fauna
Due to its high landscape diversity and low latitude Georgia is home to a large number of animal species, e. g. ca. 1000 species of vertebrates (330 birds, 160 fish, 48 reptiles, 11 amphibians). A number of large carnivores live in the forests, e. g. Persian leopard, Brown bear, wolf, and lynx. The species number of invertebrates is considered to be very high but data is distributed across a high number of publications. The spider checklist of Georgia, for example, includes 501 species.[74] Non-marine molluscs of Georgia also include high diversity.

[edit] Climate




The local climate is excellent for wine-making and there are 500 different kinds of wine in Georgia


The climate of Georgia is extremely diverse, considering the nation's small size. There are two main climatic zones, roughly separating Eastern and Western parts of the country. The Greater Caucasus Mountain Range plays an important role in moderating Georgia's climate and protects the nation from the penetration of colder air masses from the north. The Lesser Caucasus Mountains partially protect the region from the influence of dry and hot air masses from the south as well.
Much of western Georgia lies within the northern periphery of the humid subtropical zone with annual precipitation ranging from 1000–4000 mm. (39–157 inches). The precipitation tends to be uniformly distributed throughout the year, although the rainfall can be particularly heavy during the Autumn months. The climate of the region varies significantly with elevation and while much of the lowland areas of western Georgia are relatively warm throughout the year, the foothills and mountainous areas (including both the Greater and Lesser Caucasus Mountains) experience cool, wet summers and snowy winters (snow cover often exceeds 2 meters in many regions). Ajaria is the wettest region of the Caucasus, where the Mt. Mtirala rainforest, east of Kobuleti receives around 4500 mm (177 inches) of precipitation per year.
Eastern Georgia has a transitional climate from humid subtropical to continental. The region's weather patterns are influenced both by dry, Central Asian/Caspian air masses from the east and humid, Black Sea air masses from the west. The penetration of humid air masses from the Black Sea is often blocked by several mountain ranges (Likhi and Meskheti) that separate the eastern and western parts of the nation. Annual precipitation is considerably less than that of western Georgia and ranges from 400–1600 mm (16–63 inches). The wettest periods generally occur during Spring and Autumn while Winter and the Summer months tend to be the driest. Much of eastern Georgia experiences hot summers (especially in the low-lying areas) and relatively cold winters. As in the western parts of the nation, elevation plays an important role in eastern Georgia where climatic conditions above 1500 metres are considerably colder than in the low-lying areas. The regions that lie above 2000 meters frequently experience frost even during the summer months.

[edit] Regions
Main article: Administrative divisions of Georgia (country)




Georgia with the autonomous republics of Abkhazia and Ajaria, and the breakaway Tskhinvali region (South Ossetia)


Georgia is divided into 9 regions and 2 autonomous republics. These in turn are subdivided into 69 districts. The main cities of Georgia include:

Tbilisi 1,066,100 (metro area 1,270,800)
Kutaisi 183,300
Batumi 116,900


[edit] Autonomous republics
Main articles: Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia and Autonomous Republic of Adjara
Currently, the status of South Ossetia, an autonomous administrative district (also known as the Tskhinvali region), is being negotiated with the Russian-supported separatist government. Recently, these negotiations have broken down in light of Russia's decision to reinforce the region militarily and give Russian passports to South Ossetians. The government of Georgia has expressed that it views these moves as attempts by Russia to annex the region effectively. The Georgian government levels the same criticism against Russian involvement in Abkhazia, another breakaway region; Abkhazia has the status of an autonomous republic, but operates as a de facto state. This condition follows the ethnic cleansing of at least 200,000 Georgians in the War in Abkhazia in 1992-1993. Ajaria gained autonomy unilaterally under local strongman Aslan Abashidze with help from a Russian military brigade located on a base in Ajaria. Current Georgian president Mikheil Saakashvili restored the region to Georgian control after a local uprising against Abashidze's perceived corruption.

[edit] Government and politics
Main article: Politics of Georgia




Parliament of Georgia


Georgia is a democratic semi-presidential republic, with the President as the head of state, and Prime Minister as the head of government.
The executive branch of power is made up of the President and the Cabinet of Georgia. The Cabinet is composed of ministers, headed by the Prime Minister, and appointed by the President. Notably, the ministers of defense and interior are not members of the Cabinet and are subordinated directly to the President of Georgia.
Mikheil Saakashvili is the current President of Georgia after winning 53.47% of the vote in the 2008 election. Lado Gurgenidze has been Prime Minister since November 22, 2007




The Parliament of Georgia session hall


Legislative authority is vested in the Parliament of Georgia. It is unicameral and has 150 members, known as deputies, from which 75 members are proportional representatives and 75 are elected through single-member district plurality system, representing their constituencies. Members of parliament are elected for 5 five-year term.
Five parties and electoral blocs had representatives elected to the parliament in the 2008 elections: the United National Movement (governing party), the Electoral Bloc The Joint Opposition, the Christian-Democrats, the Labour Party and Republican Party.
Despite considerable progress made since the Rose revolution Georgia is still not a full-fledged democracy[75]. Political system remains in the process of transition, with frequent adjustments to the balance of power between the President and Parliament, and proposals ranging from transforming the country into parliamentary republic to re-estabilishing the monarchy[6][7]. Observers note the deficit of trust in relations between the Government and the opposition.[76] Different opinions exist regarding the degree of political freedom in Georgia. President Saakashvili believes that the country is essentially free[75], many opposition leaders claim that Georgia is a dictatorship, and Freedom House puts Georgia in the group of partly free countries, along with countries like Turkey and Bosnia[77].

[edit] Foreign relations
Main articles: Georgia and the European Union, Georgian-Ukrainian relations, Georgia-Russia relations, Georgia and NATO, and 2008 South Ossetia war




George W. Bush with Mikheil Saakashvili


Georgia maintains good relations with its direct neighbours Armenia, Azerbaijan and Turkey and participates actively in regional organizations, such as the Black Sea Economic Council and the GUAM.[78] Georgia also maintains political, economic and military relations with Japan[79], South Korea [80],Israel[81], Ukraine and many other countries. The growing US and European Union influence in Georgia, notably through proposed EU and NATO membership, the US Train and Equip military assistance program and the construction of the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline, have frequently strained Tbilisi's relations with Moscow. Georgia's decision to boost its presence in the coalition forces in Iraq was an important initiative. [14]
Georgia is currently working to become a full member of NATO. In August 2004, the Individual Partnership Action Plan of Georgia was submitted officially to NATO. On October 29, 2004, the North Atlantic Council of NATO approved the Individual Partnership Action Plan (IPAP) of Georgia and Georgia moved on to the second stage of Euro-Atlantic Integration. In 2005, by the decision of the President of Georgia, a state commission was set up to implement the Individual Partnership Action Plan, which presents an interdepartmental group headed by the Prime Minister. The Commission was tasked with coordinating and controlling the implementation of the Individual Partnership Action Plan.




Visit of the Polish President Lech Kaczyński to Georgia. Poland and Georgia maintain close relations.


On February 14, 2005, the agreement on the appointment of Partnership for Peace (PfP) liaison officer between Georgia and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization came into force, whereby a liaison officer for the South Caucasus was assigned to Georgia. On March 2, 2005, the agreement was signed on the provision of the host nation support to and transit of NATO forces and NATO personnel. On March 6-9, 2006, the IPAP implementation interim assessment team arrived in Tbilisi. On April 13, 2006, the discussion of the assessment report on implementation of the Individual Partnership Action Plan was held at NATO Headquarters, within 26+1 format.[82] In 2006, the Georgian parliament voted unanimously for the bill which calls for integration of Georgia into NATO. The majority of Georgians and politicians in Georgia support the push for NATO membership. Currently, it is expected that Georgia will join NATO in 2009.
George W. Bush became the first sitting U.S. president to visit the country.[83] The street leading to Tbilisi International Airport has since been dubbed George W. Bush Avenue.[84]
From the European commission website: President Saakashvili views membership of the EU and NATO as a long term priority. As he does not want Georgia to become an arena of Russia-US confrontation he seeks to maintain close relations with the United States and European Union, at the same time underlining his ambitions to advance co-operation with Russia.[85]
On October 2, 2006, Georgian and the European Union signed a joint statement on the agreed text of the Georgia-European Union Action Plan within the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP). The Action Plan was formally approved at the EU-Georgia Cooperation Council session on November 14, 2006 in Brussels.[86]
On February 2, 2007, Georgia officially became the most recent regional member of the Asian Development Bank. They currently hold 12,081 shares in the bank, 0.341 percent of the total.

[edit] Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
Georgia joined the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) in December 1993, two years after the creation of the organization. On 12 August 2008, following the breakout of the military conflict with Russia in South Ossetia, Georgia's president Saakashvili announced at a rally outside the country's parliament that Georgia would leave the CIS and urged Ukraine to follow suit.[87] On 18 August 2008 Georgia notified the CIS executive organs of the unanimous decision of its parliament to leave the regional organization.[88] In accordance with Section II, Article 9 of the CIS Charter,[89] Georgia's membership is scheduled to expire in August 2009.[90]

[edit] Military
Main article: Military of Georgia




Georgian troops in Iraq, 2006


Georgia's military is organized into land, air, maritime, special forces and national guard branches. They are collectively known as the Georgian Armed Forces (GAF). The mission and functions of the GAF are based on the Constitution of Georgia, Georgia’s Law on Defense and National Military Strategy, and international agreements to which Georgia is signatory. They are performed under the guidance and authority of the Ministry of Defense.
Since coming to power in 2004, Saakashvili has boosted spending on the country's armed forces and increased its overall size to around 45,000.[citation needed] Of that figure, 12,000 have been trained in advanced techniques by U.S. military instructors, under the Georgia Train and Equip Program. Some of these troops have been stationed in Iraq as part of the international coalition in the region, serving in Baqubah and the Green Zone of Baghdad. In May 2005, the 13th "Shavnabada" Light Infantry Battalion became the first full battalion to serve outside of Georgia. This unit was responsible for two checkpoints to the Green Zone, and provided security for the Iraqi Parliament. In October 2005, the unit was replaced by the 21st Infantry Battalion. Soldiers of the 13th "Shavnabada" Light Infantry Battalion wear the "combat patches" of the American unit they served under, the Third Infantry Division.

[edit] Economy
Main articles: Economy of Georgia (country) and Agriculture in Georgia (country)




Georgian twenty lari note portraying Ilia Chavchavadze, founder of National Bank of Georgia


Archaeological research demonstrates that Georgia has been involved in commerce with many lands and empires since the ancient times, largely due its location on the Black Sea and later on the historical Silk Road. Gold, silver, copper and iron have been mined in the Caucasus Mountains. Wine making is a very old tradition.
Throughout Georgia's modern history agriculture and tourism have been principal economic sectors, due to the country's climate and topography.[2]
For much of the 20th century, Georgia's economy was within the Soviet model of command economy.
Since the fall of the USSR in 1991, Georgia embarked on a major structural reform designed to transition to a free market economy. However, as with all other post-Soviet states, Georgia faced a severe economic collapse. The civil war and military conflicts in South Ossetia and Abkhazia aggravated the crisis. The agriculture and industry output diminished. By 1994 the gross domestic product had shrunk to a quarter of that of 1989.[91]
The first financial help from the West came in 1995, when the World Bank and International Monetary Fund granted Georgia a credit of USD 206 million and Germany granted DM 50 million.
As of 2001 54% of the population lived below the national poverty line but by 2006 poverty decreased to 34%. In 2005 average monthly income of a household was GEL 347 (about 200 USD).[92]




Rkinis Rigi (iron row) in Old Tbilisi


Since early 2000s visible positive developments have been observed in the economy of Georgia. In 2007 Georgia's real GDP growth rate reached 12%, making Georgia one of the fastest growing economies in Eastern Europe.[2] The World Bank dubbed Georgia "the number one economic reformer in the world" because it has in one year improved from rank 112th to 18th in terms of ease of doing business.[93] However, the country has high unemployment rate of 12.6% and has fairly low median income compared to European countries.
IMF 2007 estimates place Georgia's nominal GDP at US$10.3 billion. Georgia's economy is becoming more devoted to services (now representing 65% of GDP), moving away from agricultural sector ( 10.9%).[94]
The country has sizable hydropower resources.
The 2006 ban on imports of Georgian wine to Russia, one of Georgia's biggest trading partners, and break of financial links was described by the IMF Mission as an "external shock",[95] In addition, Russia increased the price of gas for Georgia. This was followed by the spike in the Georgian lari's rate of inflation.[citation needed] The National Bank of Georgia stated that the inflation was mainly triggered by external reasons, including Russia’s economic embargo.[96] The Georgian authorities expected that the current account deficit the embargo would cause in 2007 would be financed by "higher foreign exchange proceeds generated by the large inflow of foreign direct investment" and an increase in tourist revenues.[97] The country has also maintained a solid credit in international market securities.[98]




Map of the Baku-Supsa and BTC pipelines through the nation of Georgia.


Georgia is becoming more integrated into the global trading network: its 2006 imports and exports account for 10% and 18% of GDP respectively.[2] Georgia's main imports are natural gas, oil products, machinery and parts, and transport equipment.
Since coming to power Saakashvili administration accomplished a series of reforms aimed at impoving tax collection. Among other things a flat income tax was introduced in 2004[99] As a result budget revenues have increased fourfold and once large budget deficit has turned into surplus.[100][101][102]
Georgia is developing into an international transport corridor through Batumi and Poti ports, an oil pipeline from Baku through Tbilisi to Ceyhan, the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline (BTC) and a parallel gas pipeline, the South Caucasus Pipeline.
Tourism is an increasingly significant part of the Georgian economy. About a million tourists brought US$313 million to the country in 2006.[103] According to the government, there are 103 resorts in different climatic zones in Georgia. Tourist attractions include more than 2000 mineral springs, over 12,000 historical and cultural monuments, four of which are recognised as UNESCO World Heritage Sites (Bagrati Cathedral in Kutaisi and Gelati Monastery, historical monuments of Mtskheta, and Upper Svaneti).[104]

[edit] Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Georgia




Grapevine Cross of Saint Nino from the 4th century CE






Georgian youth in traditional costumes






Ethno-linguistic groups in the Caucasus region.[105]


Georgians (with Adjarians, Mingrelians, Svans, Lazs) form a majority, about 83.8%, of Georgia's current population of 4,661,473 (July 2006 est.).[106] Other major ethnic groups include Azeris, who form 6.5% of the population, Armenians - 5.7%, Russians - 1.5%, Abkhazians, and Ossetians. Numerous smaller groups also live in the country, including Assyrians, Chechens, Chinese, Georgian Jews, Greeks, Kabardins, Kurds, Tatars, Turks and Ukrainians. Notably, Georgia's Jewish community is one of the oldest Jewish communities in the world.
Georgia also exhibits significant linguistic diversity. Within the South Caucasian family, Georgian, Laz, Mingrelian, and Svan are spoken.[105] South Caucasian groups other than ethnic Georgians often speak their native languages in addition to Georgian. The official languages of Georgia are Georgian and also Abkhaz within the autonomous region of Abkhazia. Georgian, the country's official language, is spoken by 71% of the population, 9% speak Russian, 7% Armenian, 6% Azeri, and 7% other languages.[2] Georgia's literacy rate is said to be 100%.[107]
In the early 1990s, following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, violent separatist conflicts broke out in the autonomous regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Many Ossetians living in Georgia left the country, mainly to Russia's North Ossetia.[108] On the other hand, more than 150,000 Georgians left Abkhazia after the breakout of hostilities in 1993.[109] Of the Meskhetian Turks who were forcibly relocated in 1944 only a tiny fraction returned to Georgia as of 2007.
Georgia's net migration rate is -4.54, excluding Georgian nationals who live abroad. Georgia has nonetheless been inhabited by immigrants from all over the world throughout its independence. According to 2006 statistics, Georgia gets most of its immigrants from Turkey and People's Republic of China.
Today most of the population practices Orthodox Christianity of the Georgian Orthodox Church (81.9%). The religious minorities are: Muslim (9.9%); Armenian Apostolic (3.9%); Russian Orthodox Church (2.0%); Roman Catholic (0.8%). 0.8% of those recorded in the 2002 census declared themselves to be adherents of other religions and 0.7% declared no religion at all.[2]

[edit] Culture
Main article: Culture of Georgia




Ancient Georgian Asomtavruli Alphabet in David Gareja Monastery






Georgian singer Sopho Khalvashi on Eurovision 2007


Georgian culture evolved over thousands of years with its foundations in Iberian and Colchian civilizations,[110] continuing into the rise of the unified Georgian Kingdom under the single monarchy of the Bagrationi. Georgian culture enjoyed a golden age and renaissance of classical literature, arts, philosophy, architecture and science in the 11th century.[111] The Georgian language, and the Classical Georgian literature of the poet Shota Rustaveli, were revived in the 19th century after a long period of turmoil, laying the foundations of the romantics and novelists of the modern era such as Grigol Orbeliani, Nikoloz Baratashvili, Ilia Chavchavadze, Akaki Tsereteli, Vazha Pshavela, and many others.[112] Georgian culture was influenced by Classical Greece, the Roman Empire and the Byzantine Empire, and later by the Russian Empire which contributed to the European elements of Georgian culture.
Georgia is well known for its rich folklore, unique traditional music, theatre, cinema, and art. Georgians are renowned for their love of music, dance, theatre and cinema. In the 20th century there have been notable Georgian painters such as Niko Pirosmani, Lado Gudiashvili, Elene Akhvlediani; ballet choreographers such as George Balanchine, Vakhtang Chabukiani, and Nino Ananiashvili; poets such as Galaktion Tabidze, Lado Asatiani, and Mukhran Machavariani; and theatre and film directors such as Robert Sturua, Tengiz Abuladze, Giorgi Danelia and Otar Ioseliani.[113]

[edit] Architecture and arts




Akaki Khorava State Theatre in Senaki, an example of neoclassicism style with elements of barocco in Georgia. Architect Vakhtang Gogoladze.






Impressionistic painting of Old Town district of Tbilisi by Elene Akhvlediani.


Georgian architecture has been influenced by many civilizations. There are several different architectural styles for castles, towers, fortifications and churches. The Upper Svaneti fortifications, and the castle town of Shatili in Khevsureti, are some of the finest examples of medieval Georgian castle architecture.
Georgian ecclesiastic art is one of the most fascinating aspects of Georgian Christian architecture, which combines classical dome style with original basilica style forming what is known as the Georgian cross-dome style. Cross-dome architecture developed in Georgia during the 9th century; before that, most Georgian churches were basilicas. Other examples of Georgian ecclesiastic architecture can be found outside Georgia: Bachkovo Monastery in Bulgaria (built in 1083 by the Georgian military commander Grigorii Bakuriani), Iviron monastery in Greece (built by Georgians in the 10th century), and the Monastery of the Cross in Jerusalem (built by Georgians in the 9th century).
Other architectural aspects of Georgia include Rustaveli avenue in Tbilisi in the Hausmann style, and the Old Town District.
The art of Georgia spans the prehistoric, the ancient Greek, Roman, medieval, ecclesiastic, iconic and modern visual arts. One of the most famous late nineteenth/early twentieth century Georgian artists is the primitivist painter Niko Pirosmani. Pirosmani's works can also been seen as early impressionistic, due to the fact that his work inspired Lado Gudiashvili and Elene Akhvlediani, who represent the more mainstream impressionism of the twentieth century. Gigo Gabashvili, a Georgian painter and educator from the same period as Pirosmani, is considered to be the founder of Georgian realism. Contemporary Georgian surrealism is represented by Ramaz Razmadze and Rezo Kaishauri.


[edit] Society
Main article: Public holidays in Georgia

[edit] Cuisine
Main article: Georgian Cuisine




Mtsvadi (Georgian Pork Barbecue) on the grill


Georgian Cuisine and wine have evolved through the centuries, adapting traditions in each era. One of the most unusual traditions of dining is Supra, or Georgian table, which is also a way of socialising with friends and family. The head of Supra is known as Tamada. He also conducts the highly philosophical toasts, and makes sure that everyone is enjoying themselves. Various historical regions of Georgia are known for their particular dishes: for example, Khinkali (meat dumplings), from eastern mountainous Georgia, and Khachapuri, mainly from Imereti, Samegrelo and Adjara.
In addition to traditional Georgian dishes, the foods of other countries have been brought to Georgia by immigrants from Russia, Greece, and recently China.

[edit] Education
The education system of Georgia has undergone sweeping modernizing, albeit painful and controversial, reforms since 2004.[114][115] The adult literacy rate in Georgia is given as 100 %.[116] Education in Georgia is mandatory for all children aged 6-14.[117]
The school system is divided into elementary (6 years; age level 6-12), basic (3 years; age level 12-15), and secondary (2 years; age level 15-17), or alternatively vocational studies (2 years). Students with a secondary school certificate have access to higher education. Only the students who have passed the Unified National Examinations may enroll in a state-accredited higher education institution, based on ranking of scores he/she received at the exams. Most of these institutions offer three level studies: a Bachelor's Programme (3-4 years); a Master's Programme (2 years), and a Doctoral Programme (3 years). There is also a Certified Specialist's Programme that represents a single-level higher education programme lasting for 3-6 years.[117][118] As of 2008, 20 higher education institutions are accredited by the Ministry of Education and Science of Georgia.[119] Gross primary enrollment ratio was 94 % for the period of 2001-2006.[120]

[edit] Religion
Main articles: Religion in Georgia (country) and Religion and religious freedom in Georgia




Svetitskhoveli Cathedral, one of the oldest Eastern Orthodox churches in Georgia.[121]


According to the Constitution of Georgia, religious institutions are separate from government and every citizen has the right of religion. However, most of the population of Georgia (82%) practices Orthodox Christianity and Georgian Orthodox Church is an influential institution in the country.
The Gospel was preached in Georgia by the Apostles, Andrew the First Called, Simon the Canaanite, and Matthias. Iberia was officially converted to Christianity in 326[122] by Saint Nino of Cappadocia, who is considered to be the Enlightener of Georgia and the Equal to Apostles by the Orthodox Church. The Georgian Orthodox Church, once being under the See of Antioch, gained an autocephalous status in the 4th century during the reign of King Vakhtang Gorgasali.[123]
Religious minorities of Georgia include Russian Orthodox (2%), Armenian Christians (3.9%), Muslims (9.9%), Roman Catholics (0.8%), as well as sizeable Jewish Communities and various Protestant minorities.[2]
Despite the long history of religious harmony in Georgia,[124] there have been several instances of religious discrimination in the past decade — such as, for example, acts of violence against Jehovah's Witnesses and threats against adherents of other "nontraditional faiths" by followers of the defrocked Orthodox priest Vasil Mkalavishvili.[125]

[edit] Sports
Main article: Sport in Georgia (country)




Ancient Georgian iconic art depicting wrestling


Among the most popular sports in Georgia are football, basketball, rugby union, wrestling, hockey and weightlifting. Historically, Georgia has been famous for its physical education; it is known that the Romans were fascinated with Georgians' physical qualities after seeing the training techniques of ancient Iberia.[126] Wrestling remains a historically important sport of Georgia, and some historians think that the Greco-Roman style of wrestling incorporates many Georgian elements.[127] Within Georgia, one of the most popularized styles of wrestling is the Kakhetian style. However, there were a number of other styles in the past that are not as widely used today. For example, the Khevsureti region of Georgia has three different styles of wrestling. Other popular sports in 19th century Georgia were polo, and lelo, a traditional Georgian game later replaced by rugby union.

[edit] See also



Wikinews has related news: Russia advances into Georgia from Abkhazia




Human rights in Georgia
Communications in Georgia
Georgian Media
Georgian people
Peoples of the Caucasus
State decorations of Georgia
Transport in Georgia
List of countries by received FDI
Health in Georgia



[edit] Gallery of Georgia








Mountain landscape









Gremi Fortress and Church









Ananuri Fortress and church









Famous Georgian vineyards in Kakheti











Tbilisi









Gagra









Sokhumi









12th century Fortress of Vardzia











Gudauri









Northern Georgia









11th century King Bagrat's Church









Shiomgvime Monastery











8th century Davidgareja Monastery Complex located in Kakheti









Gremi Kakheti









Soli, Svaneti









Sighnaghi, Kakheti






[edit] Notes


^ a b c d "IMF Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2004&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=915&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&grp=0&a=&pr.x=46&pr.y=4. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j Georgia, from CIA World Factbook
^ Statistics Georgia: Population by region
^ Statistical Yearbook of Georgia: 2007, p. 22. Tbilisi, 2008.
^ Parsons, Robert (2008-01-11), "Mikheil Saakashvili’s bitter victory", openDemocracy.net. Retrieved on 2008-05-21.
^ a b Zaza Jgharkava (October 18, 2007). Will a Constitutional Monarchy Be Restored in Georgia?. Georgia Today, Issue #379.
^ a b Giorgi Lomsadze (December 18, 2007). Time for a King for Georgia?. EurasiaNet Civil Society.
^ Foreign Policy Strategy 2006-2009, pp. 9-10. Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia. Retrieved on 2006-06-27.
^ [1]
^ Resolution of the Parliament of Georgia declaring Abkhazia and South Ossetia occupied territories, August 28, 2008.
^ Abkhazia, S.Ossetia Formally Declared Occupied Territory. Civil Georgia. 2008-08-28.
^ Rapp (2003), pp. 420, 429-430.
^ Braund, David. Georgia in Antiquity: A History of Colchis and Transcaucasian Iberia, 550 BC-AD 562, pp. 17-18
^ Wilson, Nigel Guy (2006). Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece. Routledge. pp. 320. ISBN 0415973341. 
^ A New Theory on the Etymology of the Designations of the Georgians
^ Hibbert, Christopher. The House of Medici: Its Rise and Fall.
^ David Marshall Lang, The Georgians, (New York: Frederick A. Praeger, Inc., 1966), 17-18.
^ St. Nino And The Conversion Of Georgia
^ Article 3.1 of the Constitution of Georgia
^ Phoenix: The Peoples of the Hills: Ancient Ararat and Caucasus by Charles Burney , David Marshall Lang, Phoenix Press; New Ed edition (December 31, 2001)
^ Phoenix: The Peoples of the Hills: Ancient Ararat and Caucasus by Charles Burney, David Marshall Lang, Phoenix Press; New Ed edition (December 31, 2001)
^ Lives and Legends of the Georgian Saints, St Vladimirs Seminary Pr; N.e.of 2r.e. edition (March 1997) by David Marshall Lang
^ Sketches of Georgian Church History by Theodore Edward Dowling
^ a b c d e "Christianity and the Georgian Empire" (early history) Library of Congress, March 1994, webpage:LCweb2-ge0015.
^ Upper Svaneti, World Heritage Site
^ Gvosdev (2000), p. 85
^ Avalov (1906), p. 186
^ Gvosdev (2000), p. 86
^ Lang (1957), p. 249
^ Lang (1957), p. 251
^ Lang (1957), p. 247
^ Lang (1957), p. 252
^ Anchabadze (2005), p. 29
^ Socialism in Georgian Colors: The European Road to Social Democracy, 1883-1917 by Stephen F. Jones
^ [2] Georgia/Abchasia: Violations of the laws of war and Russia's role in the conflict, March 1995
^ Human Rights Watch/Helsinki, [3] Russia. The Ingush-Ossetian conflict in the Prigorodnyi region, May 1996.
^ EurasiaNet Eurasia Insight - Georgia’s Rose Revolution: Momentum and Consolidation
^ Gorshkov, Nikolai (September 19, 2002). "Duma prepares for Georgia strike". BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/world/europe/2269057.stm. 
^ "Russia, Georgia strike deal on bases". Civil Georgia, Tbilisi. http://www.civil.ge/eng/article.php?id=10007. 
^ "Russia Hands Over Batumi Military Base to Georgia". Civil Georgia, Tbilisi. November 13, 2007. http://www.civil.ge/eng/article.php?id=16321. 
^ [4] Heavy fighting in South Ossetia (Georgian MLRS launched rockets on Tskhinvali - video), BBC News, August 8, 2008
^ [5] Georgia Claims on Russia War Called Into Question, NY Times
^ "Russia sends forces into Georgian rebel conflict". Reuters. August 8, 2008. http://www.reuters.com/article/worldNews/idUSL768040420080808. 
^ "Russian military pushes into Georgia". CNN. 2008-08-11. http://edition.cnn.com/2008/WORLD/europe/08/11/georgia.russia/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-06. 
^ "Georgian villages burned and looted as Russian tanks advance". The Guardian. 2008-08-13. http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2008/aug/13/georgia.russia6. Retrieved on 2008-10-07. 
^ "Russian President Orders Halt To Military Operations In Georgia". GlobalSecurity.org. 2008-08-12. http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/news/2008/08/mil-080812-rferl01.htm. Retrieved on 2008-10-06. 
^ a b c Kramer, Andrew E. (2008-08-13). "Peace Plan Offers Russia a Rationale to Advance". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/14/world/europe/14document.html. 
^ [6]
^ "Russia Endorses Six-Point Plan". Civil.ge. 2008-08-12. http://www.civil.ge/eng/article.php?id=19069. 
^ "Georgia, Russia agree to French-brokered peace plan". Moscow News (RIA Novosti). 2008-08-13. http://mnweekly.ru/politics/20080813/55341585.html.  ""At the request of the Georgian side, we introduced a number of amendments, which we twice discussed on the telephone with Russian President Medvedev. So we have removed the issue of South Ossetia's status from the document," [Sarkozy] said." 
^ http://www.kremlin.ru/eng/text/news/2008/08/205312.shtml
^ http://www.rian.ru/osetia_news/20080822/150608681.html
^ "Russia removes Georgia checkpoint". BBC. 2008-10-05. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7653219.stm. Retrieved on 2008-10-06. 
^ http://kremlin.ru/eng/sdocs/themes.shtml#205753
^ Gregory L. White and John W. Miller, "Russia Raises Ante on Separatist Georgia Regions", Wall Street Journal, 2008-08-26, p. A9.
^ Georgia, from NationMaster
^ Georgia, from UNdata
^ Georgia, from World Gazetteer
^ Georgia, from citypopulation.de
^ Georgia, from Foreign and Commonwealth Office
^ a b Georgia, from Encarta
^ Georgia, from Library of Congress
^ Georgia, from Intute
^ Georgia, from National Geographic
^ Georgia, from economicexpert.com
^ Georgia, from Open Site
^ Georgia, from Greenwich Mean Time
^ Georgia, from cac-biodiversity.org
^ Georgia, from nationsonline.org
^ Georgia, from embassyhomepage.com
^ Georgia, from aboutgeorgia.net
^ "The North Atlantic Treaty". NATO. 1949-04-04. http://www.nato.int/docu/basictxt/treaty.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-20. 
^ Endemic Species of the Caucasus
^ Caucasian Spiders » CHECKLISTS & MAPS
^ a b "Georgia Leader: Country on Right Track". Fox News. 2008-01-07. http://www.foxnews.com/wires/2008Jan07/0,4670,GeorgiaPresidentialElection,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-17. 
^ "Western observers offer varied judgments on the conduct of the Georgian presidential election and its consequences". Armenian Reporter. 2008-08-01. http://yandunts.blogspot.com/2008/08/western-observers-offer-varied.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-17. 
^ "Freedom in the World 2008". Freedom House. http://www.freedomhouse.org/uploads/fiw08launch/FIW08Tables.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-10-17. 
^ redirect
^ [7]
^ [8]
^ [9]
^ Georgia's way to NATO
^ BBC NEWS | Europe | Bush praises Georgian democracy
^ Bush Heads to Europe for G - 8 Summit, The New York Times
^ redirect
^ EU, Georgia Sign ENP Action Plan, Civil Georgia, October 2, 2006.
^ President Saakashvili declares intention to leave the CIS, 12 August 2008.
^ Statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia on Georgia's withdrawal from CIS, 18 August 2008.
^ Unofficial translation by John Fowler (1993-01-22). "Charter of the Commonweatlth of Independent States". http://www.therussiasite.org/legal/laws/CIScharter.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-19.  "A member state shall have the right to withdraw from the Commonwealth. The member state shall notify the depositary of this Charter of such intention 12 months prior to the withdrawal." 
^ "Transcript of Remarks and Response to Questions from Russian Media by Sergey Lavrov, Russia’s Minister of Foreign Affairs". Ministry of foreign affairs of the Russian federation. 2008-10-09. http://www.mid.ru/brp_4.nsf/e78a48070f128a7b43256999005bcbb3/f8239318a64b3edac32574de00287b06?OpenDocument. Retrieved on 2008-11-20. 
^ The EBDR country factsheet - [10].
^ The World Bank's Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Program progress report - [11].
^ World Bank Economy Rankings.
^ World Development Indicators 2008, The World Bank. Data on composition of GDP is available at worldbank.org
^ IMF Mission Press Statement at the Conclusion of a Staff Visit to Georgia. June 1, 2007.
^ Central Bank Chief Reports on Inflation. Civil Georgia, Tbilisi. 2007-05-10.
^ Statement by IMF Staff Mission to Georgia, Press Release No. 06/276. December 15, 2006.
^ Sweet Georgia. The Financial Times - [12]
^ The Financial Times - Flat taxes could be a flash in the pan, IMF research says
^ World Bank, World Development Indicators 2008
^ CIA - The World Factbook -- Georgia
^ Frequently Asked Questions: I.Macroeconomic Environment, investingeorgia.org
^ UNTWO (June 2007). "UNTWO World Tourism Barometer, Vol.5 No.2" (PDF). http://unwto.org/facts/eng/pdf/barometer/unwto_barom07_2_en.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-26. 
^ Invest in Georgia: Tourism
^ a b Ethnographic map of the Caucasus
^ This figure includes the territories currently out of the Georgian government's control – Abkhazia and South Ossetia – whose total population, as of 2005, is estimated by the State Department of Statistics of Georgia at 227,200 (178,000 in Abkhazia plus 49,200 in South Ossetia). Statistical Yearbook of Georgia 2005: Population, Table 2.1, p. 33, Department for Statistics, Tbilisi (2005)
^ Literacy statistics for Georgia from UNDP
^ Human Rights Watch/Helsinki, Russia: The Ingush-Ossetian Conflict in the Prigorodnyi Region, May 1996.
^ Statistical Yearbook of Georgia 2005: Population, Table 2.1, p. 33, Department for Statistics, Tbilisi (2005)
^ Georgia : in the mountains of poetry 3rd rev. ed., Nasmyth, Peter
^ Studies in medieval Georgian historiography: early texts and European contexts, Rapp, Stephen
^ Lang David, Georgians
^ Lang David, Georgians
^ Georgia purges education system. The BBC News. July 29, 2005.
^ Molly Corso (2005-05-13) Education reform rocks Georgia. Eurasianet.
^ Human Development Report, 2007/2008: Georgia. United Nations Development Programme. Retrieved on 2008-09-02.
^ a b Education system in Georgia. National Tempus Office Georgia. Retrieved on 2008-09-02.
^ Education institutions. Ministry of Education and Science of Georgia. Retrieved on 2008-09-02.
^ High education institutions. National Tempus Office Georgia. Retrieved on 2008-09-02.
^ [ http://devdata.worldbank.org/AAG/geo_aag.pdf Georgia at a glance]. World Bank. 2007-07-28.
^ The Early Church, Henry Chadwick, p. 34
^ Riassophore, Adrian monk. "A brief history of Orthodox Christian Georgia." Orthodox Word, 2006: p. 11.
^ Riassophore, Adrian monk. "A brief history of Orthodox Christian Georgia." Orthodox Word, 2006: p. 11.
^ Spilling, Michael. Georgia (Cultures of the world). 1997
^ Memorandum to the U.S. Government on Religious Violence in the Republic of Georgia (Human Rights Watch August 2001)
^ Romans erected the statue of the Iberian King Pharsman after he demonstrated Georgian training methods during his visit to Rome; Cassius Dio, Roman History, LXIX, 15.3
^ Williams, Douglas. Georgia in my Heart, 1999.



[edit] References


Anchabadze, George: History of Georgia: A Short Sketch, Tbilisi 2005 ISBN 99928-71-59-8
Avalov, Zurab: Prisoedinenie Gruzii k Rossii, Montvid, S.-Peterburg 1906
Gvosdev, Nikolas K.: Imperial policies and perspectives towards Georgia: 1760-1819, Macmillan, Basingstoke 2000, ISBN 0-312-22990-9
Lang, David M.: The last years of the Georgian Monarchy: 1658-1832, Columbia University Press, New York 1957
Suny, Ronald Grigor: The Making of the Georgian Nation, (2nd Edition), Bloomington and Indianapolis, 1994, ISBN 0-253-35579-6
Rapp, Stephen H. (2003), Studies In Medieval Georgian Historiography: Early Texts And Eurasian Contexts. Peeters Publishers, ISBN 90-429-1318-5



[edit] Further reading


Bradt Guide: Georgia Tim Burford
Claws of the Crab: Georgia and Armenia in Crisis Stephen Brook
Enough!: The Rose Revolution in the Republic of Georgia 2003 Zurab Karumidze and James V. Wertshtor
Georgia: A Sovereign Country in the Caucasus Roger Rosen
Georgia in Antiquity: A History of Colchis and Transcaucasian Iberia 550 BC–AD 562 Braund, David, 1994. Clarendon Press, Oxford. ISBN 0-19-814473-3
Georgia: In the Mountains of Poetry Peter Nasmyth
Please Don't Call It Soviet Georgia: A Journey Through a Troubled Paradise Mary Russell
The Georgian Feast: The Vibrant Culture and Savory Food of the Republic of Georgia Darra Goldstein
Lonely Planet World Guide: Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan\
Organized Crime and Corruption in Georgia Louise Shelley, Erik Scott, Anthony Latta, eds. Routledge: Oxford.
Stories I Stole Wendell Steavenson



[edit] External links





This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links.






Georgia (country) portal




Find more about Georgia (country) on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Government


President of Georgia
Government of Georgia
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia
Department of Tourism and Resorts
Chief of State and Cabinet Members


General information


Georgia entry at The World Factbook
Georgia at UCB Libraries GovPubs
Georgia (country) at the Open Directory Project
Wikimedia Atlas of Georgia
Topographic Maps from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers


News media


Crisis profile, Georgia, Abkhazia, S. Ossetia From Reuters Alertnet
Georgian Daily, all the latest news from Georgia and related to Georgia
NewsGeorgia Google Translation in to English from the NewsGeorgia (Russian Language) site
Georgia Times, the latest news and articles about Georgia in Russian, English and Georgian.
Full information about (country) Georgia (In English, German, Russian and Georgian)


Other


Georgia (country) travel guide from Wikitravel
Georgian Incoming Tour Operators’ Association
After the Revolution - Georgia, 20-minute 2004 online documentary about the country by Journeyman Pictures
American Friends of Georgia
Official site of American Chamber of Commerce in Georgia







 
Internal














v • d • e

Administrative divisions of Georgia





Autonomous republics

Abkhazia1 · Adjara








Regions



Guria · Imereti2 · Kakheti · Kvemo Kartli · Mtskheta-Mtianeti2 · Racha-Lechkhumi and Kvemo Svaneti2 · Samegrelo-Zemo Svaneti · Samtskhe-Javakheti · Shida Kartli2








City with special status

Tbilisi (capital)






1 Now constitutes the Republic of Abkhazia the independence of which has been recognised by Russia.
2 Parts of these regions constitute the Republic of South Ossetia, the independence of which has been recognised by Russia.












v • d • e

Historical regions of Georgia











Abkhazia · Adjara · Ertso-Tianeti · Guria · Hereti · Imereti · Javakheti · Kartli · Kakheti · Khevi · Khevsureti · Lechkhumi · Mtiuleti · Meskheti · Pshavi · Racha · Samegrelo · Svaneti · Tao-Klarjeti · Tori · Trialeti · Tusheti





















 
Geographic locale














v • d • e

Countries and regions of the Caucasus









   









 Abkhazia
 Adygea
 Adjara
 Armenia




 Azerbaijan
 Chechnya
 Dagestan
 Georgia




 Ingushetia
 Karachay-Cherkessia
 Kabardino-Balkaria
 Krasnodar Krai




 Nagorno-Karabakh
 North Ossetia-Alania
 Stavropol Krai
 South Ossetia

























v • d • e

Countries of Europe








Albania · Andorra · Armenia2 · Austria · Azerbaijan1 · Belarus · Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus2 · Czech Republic · Denmark3 · Estonia · Finland · France1 · Georgia1 · Germany · Greece  · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy1 · Kazakhstan1 · Kosovo5 · Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Macedonia4 · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands3 · Norway3 · Poland · Portugal3 · Romania · Russia1 · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia · Slovenia · Spain1 · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey1 · Ukraine · United Kingdom3 · Vatican City
1 Has part of its territory outside Europe.  2 Entirely in West Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe.  3 Has dependencies or similar territories outside Europe. 4 Name disputed by Greece; see Macedonia naming dispute. 5 Declared independence from Serbia on February 17, 2008 and is recognised by 56 United Nations member states.















v • d • e

Countries of Southwest Asia








Armenia · Azerbaijan1 · Bahrain · Cyprus · Georgia1 · Iran · Iraq · Israel · Jordan · Kuwait · Lebanon · Oman · Qatar · Saudi Arabia · Syria · Turkey1 · United Arab Emirates · Yemen
1 Has part of its territory in Europe. 















v • d • e

Countries of Asia








Afghanistan · Armenia · Azerbaijan1 · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Bhutan · Brunei · Burma · Cambodia · People's Republic of China · Republic of China (Taiwan)2 · Cyprus · Egypt3 · Georgia1 · India · Indonesia4 · Iran · Iraq · Israel · Japan · Jordan · Kazakhstan1 · North Korea · South Korea · Kuwait · Kyrgyzstan · Laos · Lebanon · Malaysia · Maldives · Mongolia · Nepal · Oman · Pakistan · Philippines · Qatar · Russia1 · Saudi Arabia · Singapore · Sri Lanka · Syria · Tajikistan · Thailand · East Timor (Timor-Leste)4 · Turkey1 · Turkmenistan · United Arab Emirates · Uzbekistan · Vietnam · Yemen3

For dependent and other territories, see Dependent territory.

1 Partly or significantly in Europe.  2 The Republic of China (Taiwan) is not officially recognized by the United Nations; see Political status of Taiwan.
3 Partly or significantly in Africa.  4 Partly or wholly reckoned in Oceania.















v • d • e

Countries bordering the Black Sea








 Bulgaria ·  Georgia ·  Romania ·  Russia ·  Turkey ·  Ukraine





















 
International membership and relationships














v • d • e

Member states of the Council of Europe






Albania · Andorra · Armenia · Austria · Azerbaijan · Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus · Czech Republic · Denmark · Estonia · Finland · France · Georgia · Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands · Norway · Poland · Portugal · Romania · Russia · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia · Slovenia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia · Turkey · Ukraine · United Kingdom







Observer member status: Argentina · Canada · Chile · Israel · Japan · Mexico · Morocco · United States of America · Vatican City













v • d • e

Member states and observers of the Francophonie





Members

Albania · Andorra · Armenia · Belgium (French Community) · Benin · Bulgaria · Burkina Faso · Burundi · Cambodia · Cameroon · Canada (New Brunswick • Quebec) · Cape Verde · Central African Republic · Chad · Comoros · Cyprus1 · Democratic Republic of the Congo · Republic of the Congo · Côte d'Ivoire · Djibouti · Dominica · Egypt · Equatorial Guinea · FYR Macedonia · France (French Guiana • Guadeloupe • Martinique • St. Pierre and Miquelon) · Gabon · Ghana1 · Greece · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Haiti · Laos · Luxembourg · Lebanon · Madagascar · Mali · Mauritania · Mauritius · Moldova · Monaco · Morocco · Niger · Romania · Rwanda · St. Lucia · São Tomé and Príncipe · Senegal · Seychelles · Switzerland · Togo · Tunisia · Vanuatu · Vietnam






Observers

Austria · Croatia · Czech Republic · Georgia · Hungary · Latvia · Lithuania · Mozambique · Poland · Serbia · Slovakia · Slovenia · Thailand · Ukraine






1 Associate member.












v • d • e

Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC)









   


 Albania
 Armenia
 Azerbaijan




 Bulgaria
 Georgia
 Greece




 Moldova
 Romania
 Russia




 Serbia
 Turkey
 Ukraine


















v • d • e

Black Sea Naval Co-operation Task Group (BLACKSEAFOR)






 Bulgaria ·  Georgia ·  Romania ·  Russia ·  Turkey ·  Ukraine













v • d • e

GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development





Current members

 Azerbaijan  ·   Georgia  ·   Moldova  ·   Ukraine






Former member

 Uzbekistan






Observers

 Latvia  ·   Turkey













v • d • e

International ties of Georgia





Geographical and geopolitical

Europe | Eurasia (Caucasus) | Asia (Western Asia)







International organisations

BSEC • CACO • CDC • CE • CSTO (observer) • EAPC • EBRD • ECE • ESCAP • FAO • GUAM • IAEA • IBRD • ICAO • ICFTU • ICRM • IDA • IFAD • IFC • IFRCS • ILO • IMF • Interpol • IOC • IOM • ISO • ITU • LF (observer) • NACC • OPCW • OSCE • PACE • PFP • UN • UNCTAD • UNESCO • UNIDO • UPU • UNWTO • WHO • WIPO • WMO • WTO













 



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Georgia_(country)"
Categories: Georgia (country) | Caucasus | Eastern Europe | Near Eastern countries | Republics | Black SeaHidden categories: Articles containing Georgian language text | Articles containing non-English language text | Articles including recorded pronunciations | Articles containing Greek language text | Articles containing Latin language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2007 | Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
Аҧсуа
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
Arpetan
Asturianu
Авар
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
Hawai`i
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kapampangan
ქართული
Kaszëbsczi
Қазақша
Kernewek
Кыргызча
Kiswahili
Коми
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
مَزِروني
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nāhuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
नेपाल भाषा
日本語
Norfuk / Pitkern
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Occitan
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
O'zbek
پښتو
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Ποντιακά
Português
Qırımtatarca
Ripoarisch
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Удмурт
Українська
اردو
Volapük
Winaray
Wolof
吴语
ייִדיש
粵語
Zazaki
Zeêuws
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 06:58.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
