













Haiti - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Haiti";
		var wgTitle = "Haiti";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "13373";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281691418;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Haiti

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Republic of Haiti
République d'Haïti
Repiblik Ayiti










Flag
Coat of arms





Motto: "L'Union Fait La Force"  (French)
"Linyon Fe Lafòs"  (Haitian Creole)
"Strength through Unity"


Anthem: La Dessalinienne










Capital
(and largest city)
Port-au-Prince
18°32′N 72°20′W﻿ / ﻿18.533°N 72.333°W﻿ / 18.533; -72.333


Official languages
French, Haitian Creole


Ethnic groups 
Black 95%; Mulatto and White 5%[1]


Demonym
Haitian


Government
Presidential republic


 - 
President
René Préval


 - 
Prime Minister
Michèle Pierre-Louis


Formation


 - 
as Saint-Domingue
1697 


 - 
Independence from France

1 January 1804 


Area


 - 
Total
27,751 km2 (147th)
10,714 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
0.7


Population


 - 
2009 estimate
9,035,536[1] (91st)


 - 
2003 census
8,527,817 


 - 
Density
335/km2 (38th)
758.1/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$11.150 billion[2] (133rd)


 - 
Per capita
$1,291[2] (154th)


GDP (nominal)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$6.031 billion[2] 


 - 
Per capita
$698[2] 


Gini (2001)
59.2 (high) 


HDI (2007)
▲ 0.529 (medium) (146th)


Currency
Gourde (HTG)


Time zone
(UTC-5)


Drives on the
right


Internet TLD
.ht


Calling code
509


Haiti (pronounced /ˈheɪtiː/; French Haïti pronounced [aiti]; Haitian Creole: Ayiti), officially the Republic of Haiti (République d'Haïti ; Repiblik Ayiti), is a Creole- and French-speaking Caribbean country. Along with the Dominican Republic, it occupies the island of Hispaniola, in the Greater Antillean archipelago. Ayiti (Land on high) was the indigenous Taíno or Amerindian name for the island. The country's highest point is Pic la Selle, at 2,680 metres (8,793 ft). The total area of Haiti is 27,750 square kilometres (10,714 sq mi) and its capital is Port-au-Prince.
Haiti's regional, historical, and ethnolinguistic position is unique for several reasons. It was the first independent nation in the Caribbean, the first post-colonial independent black-led nation in the world, and the only nation whose independence was gained as part of a successful slave rebellion. Haiti is the only predominantly Francophone independent nation in the Caribbean, and one of only two in North America (along with Canada) which designate French as an official language; the other French-speaking North American countries are all overseas départements or collectivités of France.




Contents


1 History

1.1 17th century settlement
1.2 Treaty of Ryswick
1.3 The Haitian Revolution
1.4 Independence
1.5 From 1915 On


2 Politics
3 Departments, arrondissements, and communes
4 Geography
5 Environment

5.1 Environmental issues


6 Economy
7 Education
8 Demographics

8.1 Haitian diaspora
8.2 In North America
8.3 Languages


9 Culture

9.1 Carnival
9.2 Music
9.3 Cuisine


10 See also
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links

13.1 tags







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Main article: History of Haiti
See also: 2004 Haitian rebellion and United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti

The island of Hispaniola, of which Haiti occupies the western third, was originally inhabited by the Taíno Arawaks, a seafaring branch of the South American Arawaks. Christopher Columbus landed at Môle Saint-Nicolas on 5 December 1492, and claimed the island for Spain. Nineteen days later, his ship the Santa Maria ran aground near the present site of Cap-Haitien; Columbus was forced to leave 39 men, founding the settlement of La Navidad. Ayti, which means "mountainous land", is a name used by the Taíno-Arawak people, who also called some sections of it Bohio, meaning "rich villages". Kiskeya is yet a third term that has been attributed to the Taínos for the island.
The Taíno population on Hispaniola was divided through a system of established cacicazgos (chiefdoms), named Marien, Maguana, Higuey, Magua and Xaragua, which could be further subdivided. The cacicazgos (later called caciques in French) were tributary kingdoms, with payment consisting of food grown by the Taíno. Taino cultural artifacts include cave paintings in several locations in the nation, which have become national symbols of Haiti and tourist attractions. Modern-day Léogane, a town in the southwest, is at the epicenter of what was the chiefdom of Xaragua.




1510 pictograph telling a story of missionaries arriving in Hispaniola


Following the destruction of La Navidad by the Amerindians, Columbus moved to the eastern side of the island and established La Isabela. One of the earliest leaders to fight off Spanish conquest was Queen Anacaona, a Taíno princess from Xaragua who married Chief Caonabo, a Taíno king (cacique) from Maguana. The two resisted European rule but to no avail; she was captured by the Spanish and executed in front of her people. To this day, Anacaona is revered in Haiti as one of the country's first founders, preceding the likes of founding fathers such as Toussaint Louverture and Jean-Jacques Dessalines. The Spaniards exploited the island for its gold, mined chiefly by local Amerindians directed by the Spanish occupiers. Those refusing to work in the mines were slaughtered or forced into slavery. Europeans brought chronic infectious diseases with them that were new to the Caribbean. Diseases were the most powerful of the elements because the Taíno had no natural immunity, but ill treatment, malnutrition and a drastic drop of the birthrate also contributed to decimation of the indigenous population.
The Spanish governors began importing enslaved Africans for labor. In 1517, Charles V, authorized the draft of slaves. The Taínos became virtually extinct on the island of Hispaniola. Some who evaded capture fled to the mountains and established independent settlements. These survivors mixed with escaped African slaves (runaways called maroons) and produced a multiracial generation called zambos. French settlers later called people of mixed African and Amerindian ancestry marabou. The mestizo increased in number from children born to relationships between native women and European men. Others were born as a result of unions between African women and European men, who were called mulatto in Spanish and mulâtre in French.
The western part of Hispaniola soon was settled by French buccaneers. Among them, Bertrand D'Ogeron succeeded in growing tobacco, which prompted many of the numerous buccaneers and freebooters to turn into settlers. This population did not submit to Spanish royal authority until the year 1660 and caused a number of conflicts.

[edit] 17th century settlement
Bertrand D'Orgeron attracted many colonists from Martinique and Guadeloupe, such as the Roy family (Jean Roy, 1625-1707), Hebert (Jean Hebert, 1624, with his family) and the Barre (Guillaume Barre, 1642, with his family), driven out by pressure on lands generated by extension of sugar plantations. From 1670 to 1690, a drop in the tobacco markets affected the island and significantly reduced the number of settlers. Freebooters grew stronger, plundering settlements, such as those of Vera Cruz in 1683 and Campêche in 1686. Jean-Baptiste Colbert, Marquis de Seignelay, elder son of Jean-Baptiste Colbert, Jean-Baptiste James and Minister of the Navy, brought back some order. He ordered the establishment of indigo and sugar cane plantations. The first windmill for processing sugar was created in 1685.

[edit] Treaty of Ryswick
France and Spain settled hostilities on the island by the Treaty of Ryswick of 1697, which divided Hispaniola between them. France received the western third and subsequently named it Saint-Domingue. Many French colonists soon arrived and established plantations in Saint-Domingue due to high profit potential. From 1713 to 1787, approximately 30,000 colonists, emigrated from Bordeaux, France to the western part of the island. By about 1790, Saint-Domingue had greatly overshadowed its eastern counterpart in terms of wealth and population. It quickly became the richest French colony in the New World due to the immense profits from the sugar, coffee and indigo industries. The labor and knowledge of thousands of enslaved Africans made it possible, who brought skills and technology for indigo production to the island. The French-enacted Code Noir (Black Code), prepared by Colbert and ratified by Louis XIV, established rigid rules on slave treatment and permissible freedom.

[edit] The Haitian Revolution
Main article: Haitian Revolution




Jean Jacques Dessalines, leader of the Haitian Revolution and the first ruler of an independent Haiti.


The French Revolution contributed to social upheavals in Saint-Domingue and the French and West Indies. Most important was the revolution of the slaves in Saint-Domingue, starting on the northern plains in 1791. In 1792 the French government sent three commissioners with troops to try to reestablish control. They began to build an alliance with gens de couleur, who were looking for their rights. In 1793, France and Great Britain went to war, and British troops invaded Saint-Domingue. The execution of Louis XVI heightened tensions in the colony. To build an alliance with the gens de couleur and slaves, the French commissioners Sonthonax and Polverel abolished slavery in the colony. Six months later, the national Convention endorsed abolition and extended it to all of the French colonies.
Toussaint L'Ouverture, a former slave and leader in the slave revolt who rose in importance as a military commander because of his many skills, achieved peace in Saint-Domingue after years of war against both external invaders and internal dissension. He had established a disciplined, flexible army and driven out both the Spaniards and the English invaders who threatened the colony. He restored stability and prosperity by daring measures, including inviting the return of planters and insisting that freed men work on plantations to renew revenues for the island. He also renewed trading ties with Great Britain and the United States.

[edit] Independence
The French government changes and the legislature began to rethink its decisions on slavery in the colonies. After Toussaint L'Ouverture created a separatist constitution, Napoleon Bonaparte sent an expedition of 30,000 men under the command of his brother-in-law, General Charles Leclerc, to retake the island. Leclerc's mission was to oust Louverture and restore slavery. The French achieved some victories. In addition, Leclerc kidnapped Toussaint Louverture and sent him to France, where he was imprisoned at Fort de Joux. He died there of malnutrition and pneumonia.
The native leader Jean-Jacques Dessalines, long an ally of Toussaint Louverture, defeated the French troops led by Donatien-Marie-Joseph de Vimeur, vicomte de Rochambeau at the Battle of Vertières. At the end of the double battle for emancipation and independence, former slaves proclaimed the independence of Saint-Domingue on 1 January 1804, declaring the new nation as Haiti, honoring the original indigenous Taíno name for the island. Haiti was consequently the first country in the Western Hemisphere to abolish slavery.
Dessalines was proclaimed Emperor for life by his troops.[3] He exiled the remaining whites and ruled as a despot. He was assassinated on 17 October 1806. The country was divided then between a kingdom in the north directed by Henri Christophe, and a republic in the south directed by a gens de couleur Alexandre Pétion. President Jean Pierre Boyer, also a gens de couleur, managed to reunify these two parts and extend control again over the eastern part of the island.
In July 1825, the king of France Charles X sent a fleet of fourteen vessels and troops to reconquer the island. To maintain independence, President Boyer agreed to a treaty by which France recognized the independence of the country in exchange for a payment of 150 million francs (the sum was reduced in 1838 to 90 million francs).
A long succession of coups followed the departure of Jean-Pierre Boyer. National authority was disputed by factions of the army, the elite class and the growing commercial class, now made up of numerous immigrants: Germans, Americans, French and English.

[edit] From 1915 On
The United States occupied the island from 1915 to 1934. From 1957 to 1986, the Duvalier family reigned as dictators. They created the private army and terrorist death squads known as Tonton Macoutes. Many Haitians fled to exile in the United States and Canada, especially French-speaking Quebec.
In December 1990, the former priest Jean-Bertrand Aristide won the election. His mandate began on 7 February 1991. In August 1991, Jean-Bertrand Aristide’s government faced a non-confidence vote within the Haitian Chamber of Deputies and Senate. 83 voted against him, and only 11 members voted in support of Aristide’s government. Following a Coup D'etat in September 1991 President Aristide flew into exile. In accordance with Article 149, of Haiti’s Constitution of 1987, Supreme Court Justice Joseph Nerette was named Provisional President and elections were called for December, 1991. These were blocked by the international community and chaos resulted extending into 1994.
In 1994, Haitian General Raoul Cédras asked former U.S. President Jimmy Carter to help avoid a U.S. military invasion of Haiti.[4] President Carter relayed this information to President Clinton, who asked Carter, in his role as founder of The Carter Center, to undertake a mission to Haiti with Senator Sam Nunn, D-GA, and former Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Colin Powell.[4] The team successfully negotiated the departure of Haiti's military leaders, and the peaceful entry of U.S. forces under Operation Uphold Democracy, paving the way for the restoration of Jean-Bertrand Aristide as president.[4]
Aristide left the presidency in 1995. He was re-elected in 2000. The election of 2000 was not recognized by the United States, which claimed that fraud had taken place over 8 senate seats. The senators in question resigned and the US placed an embargo on Haiti and ended humanitarian aid. The country continued to struggle. In 2004, after several months of popular demonstrations against him because of a poor economy and his corruption, and pressures exerted by the international community, especially by France, the USA and Canada, Aristide was exiled to the Central African Republic.
Boniface Alexandre assumed interim authority. In February 2006, following elections marked by uncertainties and popular demonstrations, René Préval, close to Aristide and former president of the Republic of Haiti between 1995 and 2000, was elected.
The government of Haiti is a presidential republic, pluriform multiparty system wherein the President of Haiti is head of state directly elected by popular elections. The Prime Minister acts as head of government and is appointed by the President from the majority party in the National Assembly. Executive power is exercised by the President and Prime Minister who together constitute the government.
Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of the National Assembly of Haiti. The government is organized unitarily, thus the central government delegates powers to the departments without a constitutional need for consent. The current structure of Haiti's political system was set forth in the Constitution of Haiti on 29 March 1987. The current president is René Préval.
The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (also known as MINUSTAH) has been in the country since 2004.
Haitian politics have been contentious. Most Haitians are aware of Haiti's history as the only country in the Western Hemisphere to undergo a successful slave revolution. On the other hand, the long history of oppression by dictators, including François Duvalier, has markedly affected the nation. France and the United States have repeatedly intervened in Haitian politics since the country's founding, sometimes at the request of one party or another. People's awareness of the threat of such intervention also permeates national life.

[edit] Politics
Main article: Politics of Haiti
See also: Elections in Haiti, National Assembly of Haiti, and President of Haiti
The politics of Haiti takes place in a framework of a presidential republic. It is a pluriform multiparty system in which the President of Haiti is head of state directly elected by popular vote. The Prime Minister acts as head of government and is appointed by the President from the majority party in the National Assembly. Executive power is exercised by the President and Prime Minister who together constitute the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of the National Assembly of Haiti. The government is organized unitarily. Therefore, the central government delegates powers to the departments without a constitutional need for consent. The current structure of Haiti's political system was set forth in the Constitution of March 29, 1987. The country has a particularly high level of corruption.

[edit] Departments, arrondissements, and communes
Main article: Departments of Haiti
Further information: Arrondissements and communes of Haiti
Haiti is divided into 10 departments. The departments are listed below, with the departmental capital cities in parentheses.




Departments of Haiti



Artibonite (Gonaïves)
Centre (Hinche)
Grand'Anse (Jérémie)
Nippes (Miragoâne)
Nord (Cap-Haïtien)
Nord-Est (Fort-Liberté)
Nord-Ouest (Port-de-Paix)
Ouest (Port-au-Prince)
Sud-Est (Jacmel)
Sud (Les Cayes)

The departments are further divided into 41 arrondissements, and 133 communes which serve as second and third level administrative divisions.

[edit] Geography




Map of Haiti


Main article: Geography of Haiti
Haiti is situated on the western part of Hispaniola, the second largest island in the Greater Antilles. Haiti is the third largest country in the Caribbean behind Cuba and the Dominican Republic (the latter shares a 360 kilometer (224 mi) border with Haiti). Haiti at its closest point is only about 45 nautical miles (50 mi; 80 km) away from Cuba and boasts the second longest coastline (1,771 km/1,100 mi) of any country in the Antilles, Cuba having the longest. Haiti's terrain consists mainly of rugged mountains interspersed with small coastal plains and river valleys.
The northern region consists of the Massif du Nord (Northern Massif) and the Plaine du Nord (Northern Plain). The Massif du Nord is an extension of the Cordillera Central in the Dominican Republic. It begins at Haiti's eastern border, north of the Guayamouc River, and extends to the northwest through the northern peninsula. The lowlands of the Plaine du Nord lie along the northern border with the Dominican Republic, between the Massif du Nord and the North Atlantic Ocean. The central region consists of two plains and two sets of mountain ranges. The Plateau Central (Central Plateau) extends along both sides of the Guayamouc River, south of the Massif du Nord. It runs from the southeast to the northwest. To the southwest of the Plateau Central are the Montagnes Noires, whose most northwestern part merges with the Massif du Nord.




Mangrove forest in Haiti


The southern region consists of the Plaine du Cul-de-Sac (the southeast) and the mountainous southern peninsula (also known as the Tiburon Peninsula). The Plaine du Cul-de-Sac is a natural depression which harbors the country's saline lakes, such as Trou Caïman and Haiti's largest lake Lac Azuei. The Chaîne de la Selle mountain range, an extension of the southern mountain chain of the Dominican Republic (the Sierra de Baoruco), extends from the Massif de la Selle in the east to the Massif de la Hotte in the west. This mountain range harbors Pic la Selle, the highest point in Haiti at 2,680 metres (8,793 ft).
The country's most important valley in terms of crops is the Plaine de l'Artibonite, which is oriented south of the Montagnes Noires. This region supports the country's (also Hispaniola's) longest river, the Riviere l'Artibonite which begins in the western region of the Dominican Republic and continues most of its length through central Haiti and onward where it empties into the Golfe de la Gonâve. The eastern and central region of the island is a large elevated plateau. Haiti also includes various offshore islands. The historically famous island of Tortuga (Île de la Tortue) is located off the coast of northern Haiti. The arrondissement of La Gonâve is located on the island of the same name, in the Golfe de la Gonâve. Gonave Island is moderately populated by rural villagers. Île à Vache (Island of Cows) is located off the tip of southwestern Haiti. It is a lush island with many beautiful sights. Also part of Haiti are the Cayemites and Ile de Anacaona.

[edit] Environment
Main article: Deforestation in Haiti
In 1925, Haiti was lush, with 60% of its original forest covering the lands and mountainous regions. Since then, the population has cut down all but an estimated 2% of its original forest cover, and in the process has destroyed fertile farmland soils, contributing to desertification.[5] Erosion has been severe in the mountainous areas. Most Haitian logging is done to produce charcoal, the country's chief source of fuel. The plight of Haiti's forests has attracted international attention, and has led to numerous reforestation efforts, but these have met with little success to date. Despite the large environmental crises, Haiti retains a very high amount of biodiversity in proportion to its small size.




Flamingo tongue on a purple sea fan from Arcadin Islands, Haiti. This sea snail is found living on various species of soft corals and sea fans.


The country is home to more than 6,000 plants, of which 35% are endemic; and 220 species of birds, of which 21 species are endemic. The country's high biodiversity is due to its mountainous topography and fluctuating elevations in which each elevation harbors different microclimates and its own specific native fauna and flora. The country's varied scenery include lush green cloud forests (in some of the mountain ranges and the protected areas), high mountain peaks, arid desert, mangrove forest, and palm tree-lined beaches.[6]




2004 Haiti flood



[edit] Environmental issues
In addition to soil erosion, deforestation has caused periodic flooding, as seen on 17 September 2004. Tropical storm Jeanne skimmed the north coast of Haiti, leaving 3,006 people dead in flooding and mudslides, mostly in the city of Gonaïves.[7] Earlier that year in May, floods killed over 3,000 people on Haiti's southern border with the Dominican Republic.[8]
Haiti was again pummeled by tropical storms in late August and early September 2008. The storms – Tropical Storm Fay, Hurricane Gustav, Hurricane Hanna and Hurricane Ike – all produced heavy winds and rain in Haiti. Due to weak soil conditions throughout Haiti, the country’s mountainous terrain, and the devastating coincidence of four storms within less than four weeks, valley and lowland areas throughout the country experienced massive flooding. Casualties proved difficult to count because the storm diminished human capacity and physical resources for such record keeping. Bodies continued to surface as the flood waters receded. A 10 September 2008 source listed 331 dead and 800,000 in need of humanitarian aid.[9] The grim state of affairs produced by these storms was all the more life threatening due to already high food and fuel prices that had caused a food crisis and political unrest in April of 2008.[10]
As was the case in 2004, the coastal city of Gonaives was hit especially hard by the 2008 storms.
The country is working to implement a biofuel solution to its energy problems.[11] Also, environmental organizations such as the Peasant Movement of Papaye (formed by Jean-Baptiste Chavannes) are trying to find solutions for Haiti's environmental issues.

[edit] Economy
Main article: Economy of Haiti




Bas-Ravine, in the northern part of Cap-Haitien.


Haiti has remained the least-developed country in the Americas. Comparative social and economic indicators show Haiti falling behind other low-income developing countries (particularly in the hemisphere) since the 1980s. Haiti now ranks 146th of 177 countries in the United Nations Human Development Index (2006). About 80% of the population were estimated to be living in poverty in 2003.[1] Haiti is the only country in the Americas on the United Nations list of Least Developed Countries. Economic growth was negative in 2001 and 2002, and flat in 2003.
About 66% of all Haitians work in the agricultural sector, which consists mainly of small-scale subsistence farming,[12] but this activity makes up only 30% of the GDP. The country has experienced little formal job creation over the past decade, although the informal economy is growing. Mangoes and coffee are two of Haiti's most important exports.[12] It has consistently ranked among the most corrupt countries in the world on the Corruption Perceptions Index.
Foreign aid makes up approximately 30%-40% of the national government's budget. The largest donor is the United States followed by Canada, and the European Union also contributes. Venezuela and Cuba also make various contributions to Haiti's economy, especially after alliances were renewed in 2006 and 2007.
U.S. aid to the Haitian government was completely cut off in 2001-2004 after the 2000 election was disputed and President Aristide was accused of various misdeeds. After Aristide's departure in 2004, aid was restored, and the Brazilian army led the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti peacekeeping operation.
Haiti is expected to receive debt forgiveness for about $525 million of its debt through the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative by mid-2009. [13]

[edit] Education
Main article: Education in Haiti
Of Haiti's 8.7 million inhabitants, just below half are illiterate. The literacy rate of 52.9% is the lowest in the region. Haiti counts 15,200 primary schools, of which 90% are non-public and managed by the communities, religious organizations or NGOs.[14] The enrollment rate for primary school is 67%, of which less than 30% reach 6th grade. Secondary schools enroll 20% of eligible-age children. Charity organizations like Food for the Poor are currently working on building schools for children as well as providing them necessary school supplies.
The educational system of Haiti is based on the French system. Higher education is provided by universities and other public and private institutions. It is under the responsibility of the Ministry of Education.[15]
A list of universities in Haiti includes:

University of Caraibe (Université Caraïbe) (CUC)
University of Haiti (Université d'État d'Haïti) (UEH)
University Notre Dame of Haiti (Université Notre Dame d'Haïti) (UNDH)
Université Chrétienne du Nord d'Haïti (UCNH)
Université Lumière / MEBSH
Université Quisqueya (UNIQ)
Ecole Supérieure d'Infotronique d'Haïti (ESIH)


Université Roi Henri Christophe
Université Publique de l'Artibonite aux Gonaïves (UPAG)
Université Publique du Nord au Cap-Haïtien (UPNCH)
Université Publique du Sud au Cayes (UPSAC)


[edit] Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Haiti




Population of Haiti (in thousands) from 1961 to 2003


Although Haiti averages approximately 250 people per square kilometer (650 per sq. mi.), its population is concentrated most heavily in urban areas, coastal plains, and valleys. About 95% of Haitians are predominantly of Afro-Caribbean descent. The remainder of the population is mostly multiracial, and white (mostly of Arab and European origin). The Arab population numbers at about 4,700 or more. European-descended Haitians vary in origin; French, Britons, Spanish, Italian, German, and Portuguese ancestry is noted. Also a significant amount of Jewish ancestry. [16]) [17]. There is a small percentage of the population who are of Asian descent (mostly of Chinese origin) and number at 400.[18]

[edit] Haitian diaspora
Like other poor nations in Latin America and the Caribbean, Haiti has witnessed a diaspora of both educated and poor citizens, some of whom have become illegal immigrants in nearby countries. Millions of Haitians live abroad, chiefly in the United States, Dominican Republic,Cuba, Canada (especially in Quebec), France, Bahamas, French Antilles the Turks and Caicos, Venezuela, and Brazil.

[edit] In North America
There is a significant Haitian population in South Florida, specifically the Miami enclave of Little Haiti. New York City also has a thriving émigré community with the second largest population of Haitians of any state in the nation. There are also large and active Haitian communities in Boston and Providence, Rhode Island. There is also a large Haitian community in Montreal-North.

[edit] Languages
One of Haiti's two official languages is French, which is the principal written and administratively authorized language. It is spoken by most educated Haitians and used in the business sector. The second is the recently standardized Haitian Creole,[19] spoken by virtually the entire population of Haiti. Nearly all Haitians speak the latter as a first language, a French-based creole language that harbors significant African influence, as well as influence from Spanish, and Taíno. Residents near the border with the Dominican Republic have often learned enough Spanish for conversational speaking. Due to its ties to the U.S.A , English has also become an important tool in the business sector.

[edit] Culture
Main article: Culture of Haiti




"Tap tap" bus in Port-Salut.


Haiti has a long and storied history and therefore retains a very rich culture. Haitian culture is a mixture of primarily French, African elements, and native Taíno. With some lesser influence from the colonial Spanish as well as minor influences from colonial Portuguese. The country's customs essentially are a blend of cultural beliefs that derived from the various ethnic groups that inhabited the island of Hispaniola. In nearly all aspects of modern Haitian society however, the European and African element dominate. Haiti is world famous for its distinctive art, notably painting and sculpture.


[edit] Carnival
Carnival

[edit] Music
Music of Haiti

[edit] Cuisine
Culture of Haiti

[edit] See also




Haiti portal



Main article: List of Haiti-related topics


[edit] References


^ a b c CIA - The World Factbook -- Haiti
^ a b c d "Haiti". International Monetary Fund. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2004&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=263&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&grp=0&a=&pr.x=58&pr.y=7. Retrieved on 2008-10-09. 
^ Constitution of Haity [sic] New-York Evening Post July 15 1805
^ a b c The Carter Center, "Activities by Country: Haiti", http://www.cartercenter.org/countries/haiti.html, retrieved on 2008-07-17 
^ "Forestry". http://countrystudies.us/haiti/53.htm. Retrieved on 2006-09-18. 
^ Can Haiti dream of ecotourism ? - Paul Parisky, Kiskeya Alternativa's publications
^ "Photo Gallery: Jeanne hits Haiti". Orlando Sentinel. http://www.orlandosentinel.com/sfl-0923haitigallery,0,7266223.photogallery. Retrieved on 2006-09-18. 
^ Deforestation Exacerbates Haiti Floods
^ "UN seeks almost $108 million for Haiti floods". http://www.miamiherald.com/news/americas/haiti/story/680730.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-12. 
^ "Haiti's government falls after food riots". http://www.reuters.com/article/topNews/idUSN1228245020080413. Retrieved on 2008-09-12. 
^ "Analysis: Haiti seeks a biofuel solution". United Press Internation. http://www.upi.com/Energy/Analysis/2007/07/02/analysis_haiti_seeks_a_biofuel_solution/8110/print_view/. Retrieved on 2007-07-02. 
^ a b "CIA - The World Factbook – Haiti". United States. 2008-03-20. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ha.html#People. Retrieved on 2007-12-20. 
^ CIA World Fact Book
^ "Education: Overview". United States Agency for International Development. http://www.usaid.gov/ht/education.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-15. 
^ "Education in Haiti; Primary Education". http://www.buildingwithbooks.org/intra/Intl_Programs/profile_Haiti.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-15. 
^ http://www.joshuaproject.net/peopctry.php
^ [1]
^ http://www.joshuaproject.net/peopctry.php
^ http://www.indiana.edu/~creole/creolenatllangofhaiti.html



[edit] Further reading

Paul Butel. Histoire des Antilles Françaises XVIIe - XXe siècle, Perrin 2002 ISBN 978-2-2620154-0-6
Noam Chomsky. U.S. & Haiti. Z magazine, April 2004 Accessed 2008-05-07.
Edwidge Danticat. "Breath, Eyes, Memory" & "Krik? Krak!" as well as many other books. 1994-present.
Wade Davis The Serpent and The Rainbow. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1985
Michael Deibert. Notes from the Last Testament: The Struggle for Haiti. Seven Stories Press, New York, 2005. ISBN-10: 1583226974.
Jared Diamond. 2005. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. New York: Viking. ISBN 0-670-03337-5.
Paul Farmer. Pathologies of Power: Health, Human Rights, and the New War on the Poor. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003, 2005 edition. ISBN 978-0-520-24326-2.
Paul Farmer. The uses of Haiti. Monroe, Maine: Common Courage Press 2003. ISBN 1-56751-242-9
Carolyn E. Fick. The Making of Haiti: The Saint Domingue Revolution from Below. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press. first ed edition (1 February 1990). ISBN-10: 0870496670, ISBN-13: 978-0870496677
Alroy Fonseca. "Aristide's Second Fall", April 2006
Alroy Fonseca. "Explaining the Shift in Canada's Haiti Policy, 1991-2004", September 2006
Robert Debs Heinl and Nancy Gordon Heinl. Written in Blood: The Story of the Haitian People 1492-1995. Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1996. ISBN 0761831770
C. L. R. James. The Black Jacobins: Toussaint L’Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution. Vintage, 1938. ISBN 0-679-72467-2.
J. Christopher Kovats-Bernat. Sleeping Rough in Port-au-Prince: An Ethnography of Violence and Street Children in Haiti. University Press of Florida, 2006. ISBN 0-8130-3009-9
Mark Kurlansky. A Continent of Islands: Searching for the Caribbean Destiny. Addison-Wesley Publishing, 1992. ISBN 0-201-52396-5.
Elizabeth McAlister. Rara! Vodou, Power, and Performance in Haiti and its Diaspora. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002. ISBN 0-520-22823-5.
Melinda Miles and Eugenia Charles, eds. Let Haiti Live: Unjust U.S. Policies Toward Its Oldest Neighbor. 2004.
Jack Claude Nezat. The Nezat And Allied Families 1630-2007 Lulu 2007 ISBN 978-2-9528339-2-9, ISBN 978-0-6151-5001-7
Randall Robinson. An Unbroken Agony: Haiti, from Revolution to the Kidnapping of a President. New York: Perseus Books Group, 2007. ISBN 0465070507.
Martin Ros. Night of Fire - The Black Napoleon and the Battle for Haiti. New York: DaCapo Press, 1993. ISBN 0-9627613-8-9


[edit] External links

Find more about Haiti on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Government


Government of the Republic of Haiti - official website
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
Stabilization and Reconstruction Task Force (START), Government of Canada
Updates on nation rebuilding status in Haiti
Canadian Reconstruction and Development in Haiti


General information


Haiti at Encyclopaedia Britannica
Haiti entry at The World Factbook
Haiti at UCB Libraries GovPubs
A Country Study: Haiti from the U.S. Library of Congress (December 1989)
Haiti at the Open Directory Project
Wikimedia Atlas of Haiti


Travel


Haiti travel guide from Wikitravel
Haiti Travel Photos From Port Au Prince, Cap Haitian and Jacmel


Other


VOA kreyol
The place to share Haiti News, chat, economic ideas, music, and haitian movies.
If It's About Haiti, It's On Fouye!
Haiti: Current events, news, politics, nonprofit
International Action: Fighting the Water Crisis in Haiti
Hope for Haiti: Education and grassroots development in rural Haiti
Search engine for the.ht tld (in french)
Official website of The National Telecommunications Council, Conatel (in French)
National Archives of Haiti materials in the Digital Library of the Caribbean
Haiti List
Bob Corbett's Haiti Page
The Carter Center information on Haiti
Voodoo Democracy: Toussaint L'Ouverture and Democracy in Haiti








 
Geographic locale














v • d • e

Departments of Haiti








Artibonite · Centre · Grand'Anse · Nippes · Nord · Nord-Est · Nord-Ouest · Ouest · Sud · Sud-Est
















v • d • e

Countries and territories of the Caribbean










 
Sovereign states










Commonwealth Realms


Antigua and Barbuda · Bahamas · Barbados · Grenada · Jamaica · St. Kitts and Nevis · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines







Commonwealth republics


Dominica · Trinidad and Tobago







Other republics


Cuba · Dominican Republic · Haiti

















 
Dependencies and other territories by parent country










United Kingdom


Anguilla · Bermuda · British Virgin Islands · Cayman Islands · Montserrat · Turks and Caicos Islands







Netherlands


Aruba · Netherlands Antilles (Bonaire · Curaçao · Saba · Sint Maarten · Sint Eustatius)







France


Guadeloupe · Martinique · St. Barthélemy · St. Martin







United States


Navassa Island · Petrel Islands · Puerto Rico · Serranilla Bank · U.S. Virgin Islands



















v • d • e

Countries and dependencies of North America





Several nations listed here straddle both North and South America or can also be considered Caribbean.





Sovereign states

Antigua and Barbuda · Bahamas · Barbados · Belize · Canada · Costa Rica · Cuba · Dominica · Dominican Republic · El Salvador · Grenada · Guatemala · Haiti · Honduras · Jamaica · Mexico · Nicaragua · Panama · St. Kitts and Nevis · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · Trinidad and Tobago · United States






Dependencies





Denmark


Greenland







France


Guadeloupe · Martinique · Saint Barthélemy · Saint Martin · Saint Pierre and Miquelon · Clipperton







Netherlands


Aruba · Netherlands Antilles







United Kingdom


Anguilla · Bermuda · British Virgin Islands · Cayman Islands · Montserrat · Turks and Caicos Islands







United States


Navassa Island · Petrel Islands · Puerto Rico · Serranilla Bank · U.S. Virgin Islands






















 
International membership














v • d • e

Organization of American States (OAS)






Antigua and Barbuda · Argentina · Barbados • Belize • Bahamas · Bolivia · Costa Rica · Cuba · Canada • Dominica · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · El Salvador · Grenada · Guatemala · Guyana · Haiti · Honduras · Jamaica · Mexico · Nicaragua · Panama · Paraguay · Peru · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · St. Kitts and Nevis · Suriname · Trinidad and Tobago · United States · Uruguay · Venezuela
















v • d • e

Latin Union





Member Nations

Andorra · Angola · Bolivia · Brazil · Cape Verde · Chile · Colombia · Costa Rica · Côte d'Ivoire · Cuba · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · El Salvador · France · Guatemala · Guinea-Bissau · Haiti · Honduras · Italy · Mexico · Moldova · Monaco · Mozambique · Nicaragua · Panama · Paraguay · Peru · Philippines · Portugal · Romania · San Marino · São Tomé and Príncipe · Senegal · Spain · East Timor · Uruguay · Venezuela






Permanent Observers

Argentina · Holy See · Sovereign Military Order of Malta






Official languages

Catalan · French · Italian · Portuguese · Romanian · Spanish













v • d • e

Member states and observers of the Francophonie





Members

Albania · Andorra · Armenia · Belgium (French Community) · Benin · Bulgaria · Burkina Faso · Burundi · Cambodia · Cameroon · Canada (New Brunswick • Quebec) · Cape Verde · Central African Republic · Chad · Comoros · Cyprus1 · Democratic Republic of the Congo · Republic of the Congo · Côte d'Ivoire · Djibouti · Dominica · Egypt · Equatorial Guinea · FYR Macedonia · France (French Guiana • Guadeloupe • Martinique • St. Pierre and Miquelon) · Gabon · Ghana1 · Greece · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Haiti · Laos · Luxembourg · Lebanon · Madagascar · Mali · Mauritania · Mauritius · Moldova · Monaco · Morocco · Niger · Romania · Rwanda · St. Lucia · São Tomé and Príncipe · Senegal · Seychelles · Switzerland · Togo · Tunisia · Vanuatu · Vietnam






Observers

Austria · Croatia · Czech Republic · Georgia · Hungary · Latvia · Lithuania · Mozambique · Poland · Serbia · Slovakia · Slovenia · Thailand · Ukraine






1 Associate member.












v • d • e

Caribbean Community (CARICOM)





Members

Antigua and Barbuda · Bahamas1 · Barbados · Belize · Dominica · Grenada · Guyana · Haiti1 · Jamaica · Montserrat2 · St. Kitts and Nevis · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · Suriname · Trinidad and Tobago







Associate members

Anguilla · Bermuda · Cayman Islands · British Virgin Islands · Turks and Caicos Islands






Observers

Aruba · Colombia · Dominican Republic · Mexico · Netherlands Antilles · Puerto Rico · Venezuela






1 Member of the Community but not of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME).   2 British overseas territory awaiting entrustment to join the CSME.














[edit] tags





This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate.






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haiti"
Categories: Haiti | CARICOM members | Member states of La Francophonie | Republics | French-speaking countries | Latin America | Island countries | Countries | Least Developed CountriesHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | Articles containing French language text | Articles containing Haitian Creole language text | Articles lacking in-text citations 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Alemannisch
العربية
Aragonés
مصرى
Arpetan
Asturianu
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kapampangan
ქართული
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Kongo
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Lingála
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
नेपाल भाषा
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Occitan
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
O'zbek
پښتو
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Sámegiella
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Tatarça/Татарча
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
Volapük
Wolof
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 12:54.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
