











Ho Chi Minh - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Ho_Chi_Minh";
		var wgTitle = "Ho Chi Minh";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "67377";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281835701;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["autoconfirmed"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Ho Chi Minh

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 




For the city named after him, see Ho Chi Minh City.




Hồ Chí Minh





First President of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam



In office
2 September 1945 – 2 September 1969


Preceded by
N/A


Succeeded by
Tôn Đức Thắng




Second Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam



In office
2 September 1945 – 20 September 1955


Preceded by
N/A


Succeeded by
Phạm Văn Đồng






Born
19 May 1890(1890-05-19)
Nghệ An Province, French Indochina


Died
2 September 1969 (aged 79)
Hanoi, Democratic Republic of Vietnam


Nationality
Vietnamese


Political party
Vietnam Workers' Party


Hồ Chí Minh  listen (help·info) (name pronounced [hò̤ tɕǐmɪ̄ɲ]) (May 19, 1890 – September 2, 1969) was a Vietnamese Communist revolutionary and statesman who was Prime Minister (1946–1955) and President (1946–1969) of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (North Vietnam).
Ho led the Viet Minh independence movement from 1941 onward, establishing the communist-governed Democratic Republic of Vietnam in 1945 and defeating the French Union in 1954 at Dien Bien Phu. He lost political power inside North Vietnam in the late 1950s, but remained as the highly visible figurehead president until his death. He was named by Time Magazine as one of the 100 most influential people of the 20th century,[1] while the former capital of South Vietnam, Saigon, was renamed Ho Chi Minh City in his honor.




Contents


1 Early life

1.1 First sojourn in France


2 In the USA
3 In England
4 Political education in France
5 In the Soviet Union and China
6 Independence movement

6.1 Birth of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam


7 Becoming president
8 Death
9 Legacy
10 Quotes
11 Notes
12 Further reading

12.1 Essays
12.2 Biography
12.3 The Viet Minh, NLF & the Democratic Republic of Vietnam
12.4 The War in Vietnam
12.5 American Foreign Policy


13 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Early life
Hồ Chí Minh was born, as Nguyễn Sinh Cung, in 1890 in Hoàng Trù Village, his mother's hometown. From 1895, he grew up in his paternal hometown of Kim Liên Village, Nam Đàn District, Nghệ An Province, Vietnam. He had three siblings, his sister Bạch Liên (or Nguyễn Thị Thanh), a clerk in the French Army, his brother Nguyễn Sinh Khiêm (or Nguyễn Tất Đạt), a geomancer and traditional herbalist, and another brother (Nguyễn Sinh Nhuận) who died in his infancy. Following Confucian traditions, at the age of 10 his father named him Nguyễn Tất Thành (Nguyễn the Accomplished).
Ho's father, Nguyễn Sinh Sắc, was a Confucian scholar, small time teacher and later an imperial magistrate in a small remote district Binh Khe (Qui Nhon). He was later demoted for abuse of power after an influential local figure died several days after receiving 100 canes as punishment[2]. This however was merely a pretense by the French-controlled government to get rid of Sac, whose sons had been involved in nationalist, Anti-French activities at the Duc Thanh school, founded in 1907 by patriotic scholars who hoped to imitate the success of the Hanoi Free School. Deferent to his father, Ho received a French education, attended lycée in Huế, the alma mater of his later disciples, Phạm Văn Ðồng and Võ Nguyên Giáp. He later left his studies and chose to teach at Dục Thanh school in Phan Thiết.

First sojourn in France
On 5 June 1911, Hồ Chí Minh left Vietnam on a French steamer, Amiral Latouche-Tréville, working as a kitchen helper. Arriving in Marseille, France, he applied for the French Colonial Administrative School but his application was rejected.[3][unreliable source?] During his stay, he worked as a cleaner, waiter, and film retoucher. Hồ spent most of his free time in public libraries reading history books and newspapers to familiarize himself with Western society and politics.

In the USA
In 1912, again working as the cook's helper on a ship, Hồ Chí Minh traveled to the United States. From 1912 to 1913, he lived in New York (Harlem) and Boston, where he worked as a baker at the Parker House Hotel. He worked in menial jobs and later claimed to have worked for a wealthy family in Brooklyn between 1917 and 1918, and during this time he may have heard Marcus Garvey speak in Harlem. It is believed that while in the United States he made contact with Korean nationalists, an experience that developed his political outlook.[4]

In England
At various points between 1913 and 1919, Hồ lived in West Ealing, west London, and later in Crouch End, Hornsey, north London. He is reported to have worked as a chef at the Drayton Court Hotel, on The Avenue, West Ealing.[5] It is claimed that Ho trained as a pastry chef under the legendary French master, Escoffier, at the Carlton Hotel in the Haymarket, Westminster, but there is no evidence to support this.[4] However, the wall of New Zealand House, home of the New Zealand High Commission, which now stands on the site of the Carlton Hotel, displays a Blue Plaque, stating that Hồ worked there in 1913 as a waiter.[6]

Political education in France
From 1919–1923, while living in France, Hồ Chí Minh embraced communism, through his friend Marcel Cachin (SFIO).[citation needed] Ho claimed to have arrived in Paris from London in 1917 but French police only have documents of his arrival in June 1919.[4] Following World War I, under the name of Nguyễn Ái Quốc (Nguyen the Patriot), he petitioned for recognition of the civil rights of the Vietnamese people in French Indochina to the Western powers at the Versailles peace talks, but was ignored. Citing the language and the spirit of the U.S. Declaration of Independence, Ho petitioned U.S. President Woodrow Wilson for help to remove the French from Vietnam and replace it with a new, nationalist government. His request was ignored.
In 1921, during the Congress of Tours, France, Nguyen Ai Quoc became a founding member of the Parti Communiste Français (French Communist Party) and spent much of his time in Moscow afterwards, becoming the Comintern's Asia hand and the principal theorist on colonial warfare. During the Indochina War, the PCF would be involved with antiwar propaganda, sabotage and support for the revolutionary effort.

In the Soviet Union and China




Ho Chi Minh at the Lijiang River in China, 1961.


In 1923, Hồ left Paris for Moscow, where he was employed by the Comintern, and participated in the Fifth Comintern Congress in June 1924, before arriving in Canton (Guangzhou), China, in November 1924. During 1925-26 he organized 'Youth Education Classes' and occasionally gave lectures at the Whampoa Military Academy on the revolutionary movement in Indochina. He left Canton again in April 1927 and returned to Moscow, spending some of the summer of 1927 recuperating from tuberculosis in the Crimea, before returning to Paris once more in November. He then returned to Asia by way of Brussels, Berlin, Switzerland, Italy, from where he took a ship to Bangkok in Thailand, where he arrived in July 1928. He remained in Thailand, staying in the Thai village of Nachok, until late 1929 when he moved on to Hong Kong, and Shanghai. In June 1931, he was arrested in Hong Kong and incarcerated by British police until his release in 1933. He then made his way back to the Soviet Union, where he spent several more years recovering from tuberculosis. In 1938, he returned to China and served as an adviser with Chinese Communist armed forces.[4] Around 1940, Nguyễn Ái Quốc began regularly using the name "Hồ Chí Minh",[4] a Vietnamese name combining a common Vietnamese surname (Hồ, 胡) with a given name meaning "enlightened will" (from Sino-Vietnamese 志明; Chí meaning 'will' (or spirit), and Minh meaning 'light'), in essence, mean "bringer of light".

Independence movement
In 1941, Hồ returned to Vietnam to lead the Việt Minh independence movement. He oversaw many successful military actions against the Vichy French and Japanese occupation of Vietnam during World War II, supported closely but clandestinely by the United States Office of Strategic Services, and also later against the French bid to reoccupy the country (1946-1954). He was also jailed in China for many months by Chiang Kai-shek's local authorities. After his release in 1943, he again returned to Vietnam. He was treated for malaria and dysentery by American OSS doctors.
After the August Revolution (1945) organized by the Việt Minh, Hồ became Chairman of the Provisional Government (Premier of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam) and issued a Proclamation of Independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam that borrowed much from the French and American declarations.[7] Though he convinced Emperor Bảo Đại to abdicate, his government was not recognized by any country. He repeatedly petitioned American President Harry Truman for support for Vietnamese independence,[8] citing the Atlantic Charter, but Truman never responded.[9]
In 1945, in a power struggle, the Viet Minh killed members of rival groups, such as the leader of the Constitutional Party, the head of the Party for Independence, and Ngo Dinh Diem's brother, Ngo Dinh Khoi.[10] Purges and killings of Trotskyists, the rival anti-Stalinist communists, have also been documented[11]. In 1946, when Hồ traveled outside of the country, his subordinates imprisoned 25,000 non-communist nationalists and forced 6,000 others to flee.[12] Hundreds of political opponents were also killed in July that same year.[13] All rival political parties were banned and local governments purged[14] to minimise opposition later on.

Birth of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam
On 2 September 1945, after Emperor Bao Dai's abdication, Hồ Chí Minh read the Declaration of Independence of Vietnam,[15] under the name of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. With violence between rival Vietnamese factions and French forces spiraling, the British commander, General Sir Douglas Gracey declared martial law. On 24 September, the Viet Minh leaders responded with a call for a general strike.[16]
In September 1945, a force of 200,000 Chinese Nationalists arrived in Hanoi. Hồ Chí Minh made arrangement with their general, Lu Han, to dissolve the Communist Party and to hold an election which would yield a coalition government. When Chiang Kai-Shek later traded Chinese influence in Vietnam for French concessions in Shanghai, Hồ Chí Minh had no choice but to sign an agreement with France on 6 March 1946, in which Vietnam would be recognized as an autonomous state in the Indochinese Federation and the French Union. The agreement soon broke down. The purpose of the agreement was to drive out the Chinese army from North Vietnam. Fighting broke out with the French soon after the Chinese left. Hồ Chí Minh was almost captured by a group of French soldiers led by Jean-Etienne Valluy at Việt Bắc, but was able to escape.
In February 1950, Hồ met with Stalin and Mao in Moscow after the Soviet Union recognized his government. They all agreed that China would be responsible for backing the Viet Minh.[17] Mao's emissary to Moscow stated in August that China planned to train 60-70,000 Viet Minh in the near future.[18] China's support enabled Ho to escalate the fight against France.
According to a story told by Journalist Bernard Fall, after fighting the French for several years, Hồ decided to negotiate a truce. The French negotiators arrived at the meeting site, a mud hut with a thatched roof. Inside they found a long table with chairs and were surprised to discover in one corner of the room a silver ice bucket containing ice and a bottle of good Champagne which should have indicated that Hồ expected the negotiations to succeed. One demand by the French was the return to French custody of a number of Japanese military officers (who had been helping the Vietnamese armed forces by training them in the use of weapons of Japanese origin), in order for them to stand trial for war crimes committed during World War II. Hồ replied that the Japanese officers were allies and friends whom he could not betray. Then he walked out, to seven more years of war. (From Last Reflections on a War, Fall's last book, published posthumously.)
In 1954, after the important defeat of French paratroopers at the Battle of Điện Biên Phủ, France was forced to give up its empire in Indochina.

Becoming president




Ho Chi Minh (right) with Vo Nguyen Giap (left) in Hanoi, 1945






Ho Chi Minh with East German Sailors, 1957


The 1954 Geneva Accords, concluded between France and the Vietminh, provided that communist forces regroup in the North and non-communist forces regroup in the South. Ho's Democratic Republic of Vietnam relocated to Hanoi and became the government of North Vietnam, a Communist-led single party state. The Geneva accords also provided for a national election to reunify the country in 1956, but this provision was rejected by South Vietnam and the United States. [19] The U.S. committed itself to oppose Communism in Asia beginning in 1950, when it funded 80 percent of the French effort. After Geneva, the U.S. replaced France as South Vietnam's chief sponsor and financial backer, but there never was a treaty between the U.S. and South Vietnam.
Main article: Operation Passage to Freedom
Following the Geneva Accords, there was to be a 300-day period in which people could freely move between the zones of the two Vietnams. Some 900,000 to 1 million Vietnamese, mostly Catholic, left for South Vietnam, while a much smaller number, mostly communists, went from South to North.[20][21] This was partly due to propaganda claims by a CIA mission led by Colonel Edward Lansdale that the Virgin Mary had moved South out of distaste for life under communism. Some Canadian observers claimed that some were forced by North Vietnamese authorities to remain against their will.[22] During this era, Hồ, following the communist doctrine initiated by Stalin and Mao, started a land reform in which hundreds of thousands of people accused of being landlords were summarily executed or tortured and starved in prison.[citation needed] This also caused millions of people to flee to South Vietnam.[citation needed]
At the end of 1956, Lê Duẩn was appointed acting party boss and began sending aid to the Vietcong insurgency in South Vietnam. This represented a loss of power by Hồ, who is said to have preferred the more moderate Giáp for the position.[23] The so called Hochiminh Trail was built in 1959 to allow aid to be sent to the Vietcong through Laos and Cambodia, thus escalating the war.[24] Duẩn was named permanent party boss in 1960, leaving Hồ a figurehead president and symbol of Vietnamese Communism.
In late 1964, North Vietnamese combat troops were sent southwest into neutral Laos.[25] During the mid to late 1960s, Lê Duẩn permitted 320,000 Chinese volunteers into northern North Vietnam to help build infrastructure for the country, thereby freeing a similar number of North Vietnamese forces to go south.[26]
By early 1965, U.S. combat troops begins arriving in South Vietnam to counter the threat imposed by both the local Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese troops in the border areas. As the fighting escalated, widespread bombing of North Vietnam by the U.S. Air Force and Navy escalated as Operation Rolling Thunder. Hồ remained in Hanoi for most of the duration of his final years, stubbornly refusing to negotiate with the Americans and demanded nothing but an unconditional withdrawal of all foreign troops in South Vietnam. By July, 1967, Hồ and most of the Politburo of North Vietnam met in a high-level conference where they concluded that the war was not going well for them since the American military blunted every attempt by the Peoples Army of Vietnam to make gains, and inflicted heavy casualties. But Hồ and the rest his government knew that there were two weaknesses: there was still no disguising the continuing ineffectiveness of large portion of the South Vietnamese army, shielded by U.S. firepower, and that American public opinion was not wholeheartedly in favor of the war. With Hồ's permission, the North Vietnamese army and politicians planned to execute the Tet Offensive as a gamble to take the South by force and defeat the U.S. military.
Although the offensive was a huge tactical failure which resulted in the decimation of whole units of Viet Cong, the end result was a moral victory for it broke the U.S. will to fight the war and public opinion in the U.S. turned against the government which resulted in the bombing of North Vietnam halted, and negotiations with U.S. officials opening as to how to end the war.
By 1969, with negotiations still dragging on, Hồ's health began to deteriorate from multiple health problems, including diabetes among other ailments, which prevented him from participating in further active politics. However, he insisted that his forces in South Vietnam continue fighting until all of Vietnam was reunited under his government, regardless of the length of time that it might take, believing that time and politics were on his side.

Death




Ho Chi Minh mausoleum, Hanoi






Ho Chi Minh statue


With the outcome of the Vietnam War still in question, Ho Chi Minh died on the morning of 2 September 1969, at his home in Hanoi at age 79 from heart failure.
News of his death was withheld from the North Vietnamese public for nearly 48 hours due to not wanting to announce his death on the anniversary of the founding of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. He was not initially replaced as president, but a "collective leadership" forming up of several ministers and military leaders took control of North Vietnam to continue his goal of conquering South Vietnam to unite it under Hồ's founding government.
Six years after his death, when the communists were successful in conquering South Vietnam, several North Vietnamese tanks in Saigon displayed a poster with the following quote, "You are always marching with us, Uncle Ho".

Legacy
The former capital of South Vietnam, Saigon, was renamed Ho Chi Minh City on 1 May 1975 shortly after its capture which officially ended the war.
Ho Chi Minh's embalmed body is on display in a granite Ho Chi Minh Mausoleum modeled after Lenin's Tomb in Moscow. This is similar to other Communist leaders who have been similarly displayed before and since, including Mao Zedong, Kim Il-Sung, and for a time, Joseph Stalin, but the "honor" violated Hồ's last wishes (as well as the three leaders mentioned above). Several months before his death, he wished to be cremated and his ashes buried in three urns on three different hilltops of Vietnam (the North, Central and South areas).[citation needed] He wrote, "Not only is cremation good from the point of view of hygiene but also it saves farmland."
The Ho Chi Minh Museum in Hanoi is dedicated to his life and work.
In Vietnam today, he is regarded by the Communist government with almost god-like status in a nationwide personality cult, even though the government has abandoned most of his economic policies since the mid-1980s. He is still referred to as "Uncle Hồ" in Vietnam. Hồ's image appears on the front of every Vietnamese currency note, and Hồ's portrait is featured prominently in many of Vietnam's public buildings. In 1987, UNESCO officially recommended to Member States that they "join in the commemoration of the centenary of the birth of President Ho Chi Minh by organizing various events as a tribute to his memory", considering "the important and many-sided contribution of President Ho Chi Minh in the fields of culture, education and the arts" and that Ho Chi Minh "devoted his whole life to the national liberation of the Vietnamese people, contributing to the common struggle of peoples for peace, national independence, democracy and social progress."[27]
In contrast, some Vietnamese who lived through the war hated Ho Chi Minh for bringing chaos to the country. Vietnamese people living outside of Vietnam, commonly known as Overseas Vietnamese, have more hostile opinions of Ho Chi Minh. In particular, the Vietnamese in the U.S., who fled communist rule after 1975, view Hồ as a murderer and traitor who ruined Vietnam by starting a war.[28]

Quotes





This section is a candidate to be copied to Wikiquote using the Transwiki process.
If the content can be changed to be more encyclopedic rather than just a list of quotes, please do so and remove this message. Otherwise, you can help by formatting it per the Wikiquote guidelines in preparation for the duplication.



"Nothing is more valuable than independence and freedom."
"Those who wish to seize Vietnam, must kill us to the last man, woman, and child"
"I follow only one party: the Vietnamese party."
"You can kill ten of our men for every one we kill of yours. But even at those odds, you will lose and we will win." - referring to France and America in their wars in Vietnam.
"It is better to sacrifice everything than to live in slavery!"
"The Vietnamese people deeply love independence, freedom and peace. But in the face of United States aggression they have risen up, united as one man."
"We have to win independence at any cost, even if the Truong Son mountains burn."
"In (Lenin's Theses on the National and Colonial Questions) there were political terms that were difficult to understand. But by reading them again and again finally I was able to grasp the essential part. What emotion, enthusiasm, enlightenment and confidence they communicated to me! I wept for joy. Sitting by myself in my room, I would shout as if I were addressing large crowds: "Dear martyr compatriots! This is what we need, this is our path to liberation!" Since then (the 1920s) I had entire confidence in Lenin, in the Third International!"
"When the prison doors are opened, the real dragon will fly out."
"It was patriotism, not communism, that inspired me."
"Remember, the storm is a good opportunity for the pine and the cypress to show their strength and their stability."
"My only desire is that all of our Party and people, closely united in struggle, construct a peaceful, unified, independent, democratic and prosperous, and make a valiant contribution to the world Revolution." (Hanoi, 10 May 1969.)


Notes


^ Time 100: Ho Chi Minh by Stanley Karnow, April 13 1998
^ Duiker p. 41
^ Hồ applied for the French Colonial Administrative School
^ a b c d e Sophie Quinn-Judge, Hồ Chí Minh: The Missing Years, University of California Press, 2002 ISBN 0-520-23533-9
^ The Drayton Court Hotel
^ The London Tourism Guide - a free tourist and visitor guidebook for England's capital city
^ Zinn, Howard (1995). A People's History of the United States: 1492-Present. New York: Harper Perennial. pp. 460. ISBN 0060926430. 
^ Collection of Letters by Ho Chi Minh
^ Zinn, Howard (1995). A People's History of the United States: 1492-Present. New York: Harper Perennial. pp. 461. ISBN 0060926430. 
^ Joseph Buttinnger, Vietnam: A Dragon Embattled, vol. 1. (New York: Praeger, 1967)
^ See: The Black Book of Communism
^ Cecil B. Currey, Victory At Any Cost (Washington: Brassey's, 1997), p. 126
^ Spencer Tucker, Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War: a political, social, and military history (vol. 2), 1998
^ John Colvin, Giap: the Volcano under the Snow (New York: Soho Press, 1996), p.51
^ Vietnam Declaration of Independence
^ Stanley Karnow, Vietnam a History
^ Luo Guibo, pp. 233-6
^ Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, "Chronology," p. 45.
^ Marcus Raskin & Bernard Fall, The Viet-Nam Reader, p. 89; William Duiker, U. S. Containment Policy and the Conflict in Indochina, p. 212; Hue-Tam Ho Tai, The Country of Memory: Remaking the Past in Late Socialist Vietnam (2001) p. x notes that "totalitarian governments could not promise a democratic future."
^ Pentagon Papers: http://www.mtholyoke.edu/acad/intrel/pentagon/pent11.htm
^ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, State of the World's Refugees, Chapter 4, "Flight from Indochina".
^ Thakur, p. 204
^ Cheng Guan Ang, Ann Cheng Guan, The Vietnam War from the Other Side, p. 21. (2002).
^ Lind, 1999
^ Davidson, Vietnam at War: the history, 1946–1975, 1988
^ Chen Jian, "China's Involvement in the Vietnam Conflict, 1964-69," China Quarterly, No. 142 (June 1995), pp. 366–69.
^ UNESCO. General Conference; 24th; Records of the General Conference, 24th session, Paris, 20 October to 20 November 1987, v. 1: Resolutions; 1988
^ "Ho Chi Minh poster angers Vietnamese Americans," CNN



Further reading

Essays

Bernard B. Fall, ed., 1967. Ho Chi Minh on Revolution and War, Selected Writings 1920-1966. New American Library.


Biography

William J. Duiker. 2000. Ho Chi Minh: A Life. Theia.
Jean Lacouture. 1968. Ho Chi Minh: A Political Biography. Random House.
N. Khac Huyen. 1971. Vision Accomplished? The Enigma of Ho Chi Minh. The Macmillan Company.
David Halberstam. 1971. Ho. Rowman & Littlefield.
Hồ chí Minh toàn tập. NXB chính trị quốc gia
Sophie Quinn-Judge. 2003. Ho Chi Minh: The missing years. C. Hurst & Co. ISBN 1-85065-658-4
Ton That Thien, Was Ho Chi Minh a Nationalist? Ho Chi Minh and the Comintern Information and Resource Centre, Singapore, 1990


The Viet Minh, NLF & the Democratic Republic of Vietnam

William J. Duiker. 1981. The Communist Road to Power in Vietnam. Westview Press.
Hoang Van Chi. 1964. From colonialism to communism. Praeger.
Truong Nhu Tang. 1986. A Viet Cong Memoir. Vintage.


The War in Vietnam

Frances Fitzgerald. 1972. Fire in the Lake: The Vietnamese and the Americans in Vietnam. Little, Brown and Company.


American Foreign Policy

Christopher Hitchens. 2001. The Trial of Henry Kissinger. Verso.
Henry A. Kissinger. 1979. White House Years. Little, Brown.
Richard Nixon. 1987. No More Vietnams. Arbor House Pub Co.


External links


Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Ho Chi Minh





Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Ho Chi Minh





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Ho Chi Minh



The Drayton Court Hotel
Obituary in The New York Times, 4 September 1969
TIME 100: Hồ Chí Minh
Hồ Chí Minh's biography
Hồ Chí Minh pictures as slides
Satellite photo of the mausoleum on Google Maps
[1]
Final Tribute to Ho Chi Minh from the Central Committee of the Vietnam Workers' Party
Bibliography: Writings of Ho Chi Minh, and Books about Him



Political offices


Preceded by
None
President of the Provisional Government of Vietnam
1945
Succeeded by
Himself
Prime Minister


Preceded by
None
President of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam
1945 – 1969
Succeeded by
Tôn Đức Thắng


Preceded by
Himself
Chairman of the Provisional Government
Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam
1945 – 1955
Succeeded by
Phạm Văn Đồng


Party political offices


Preceded by
New title
Chairman of the Workers' Party of Vietnam
1951 – 1969
Succeeded by
None









v • d • e

Vietnamese independence movement





Events

Bombardment of Đà Nẵng · Capture of Saigon · Capture of the Citadel of Saigon · Colonization of Cochinchina · Ba Dinh uprising · Pacification of Tonkin · Hanoi Poison Plot · World War I · 1916 Cochinchina uprising · Thai Nguyen uprising · Bazin assassination · Yen Bai mutiny · World War II · August Revolution · Proclamation of Independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam · First Indochina War · Operation Camargue · Battle of Dien Bien Phu · Geneva Conference









Organisations

Can Vuong · Dong Du · Duy Tan Hoi · Empire of Vietnam · Nguyen Dynasty · Tonkin Free School · Viet Nam Quang Phuc Hoi · Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang · Viet Minh






Vietnamese
revolutionaries

Cuong De · Dinh Cong Trang · Ho Chi Minh · Huynh Thuc Khang · Luong Van Can · Ngo Duc Ke · Nguyen An Ninh · Nguyen Dinh Chieu · Nguyen Quang Bich · Nguyen Quyen · Nguyen Thai Hoc · Nguyen Than Hien · Nguyen Thanh · Nguyen Thien Tuat · Nguyen Thuong Hien · Nguyen Xuan On · Pham Banh · Phan Boi Chau · Phan Chu Trinh · Phan Dinh Phung · Phan Thanh Gian · Phan Xich Long · Ta Thu Thau · Ton That Thuyet · Tran Cao Van · Tran Trong Kim · Truong Dinh  · Nguyen Trung Truc






Emperors

Tu Duc · Ham Nghi · Thanh Thai · Duy Tan · Bao Dai






French rule

Albert Sarraut · French Indochina (Governor-General)






Collaborators

Hoang Cao Khai · Hoang Ke Viem · Nguyen Than













v • d • e

Post-World War II Heads of state of Vietnam





Cochinchina,
Provisional Government,
State of Vietnam
(1946-1955)



Nguyễn Văn Thinh · Nguyen Van Xuan · Le Van Hoach · Nguyen Van Xuan

Nguyen Van Xuan

Bảo Đại · Ngo Dinh Diem*






South Vietnam
Presidents (1955-1975)



Ngo Dinh Diem · Duong Van Minh† · Nguyen Khanh† · Duong Van Minh† · Nguyen Khanh† · Duong Van Minh† · Phan Khac Suu† · Nguyễn Văn Thiệu† · Tran Van Huong*† · Duong Van Minh*†






Republic of South Vietnam
(1975-1976)



Huỳnh Tấn Phát






North Vietnam
Presidents (1945-1976)



Ho Chi Minh · Ton Duc Thang






Socialist Republic of Vietnam
(1976-)



Ton Duc Thang · Nguyễn Hữu Thọ* · Truong Chinh · Vo Chi Cong · Le Duc Anh · Trần Đức Lương · Nguyễn Minh Triết







* acting     † military













v • d • e

Prime Ministers of Vietnam





Empire of Vietnam
(1945-1945)



Trần Trọng Kim






State of Vietnam
(1949-1955)



Bảo Đại · Nguyen Phan Long · Trần Văn Hữu · Nguyen Van Tam · Nguyen Phuc Buu Loc · Phan Huy Quat · Ngo Dinh Diem






Republic of Cochinchina
(1945–1948)



Nguyễn Văn Thinh · Le Van Hoach · Nguyen Van Xuan






South Vietnam
(1955-1975)



vacant, 1955-63 · Nguyen Ngoc Tho† · Nguyen Khanh† · Nguyen Xuan Oanh*† · Nguyen Khanh† · Tran Van Huong† · Nguyen Xuan Oanh*† · Phan Huy Quat · Nguyen Cao Ky† · Nguyen Van Loc† · Tran Van Huong · Tran Thien Khiem† · Nguyen Ba Can · Vũ Văn Mẫu






Republic of South Vietnam
(1975-1976)



Huỳnh Tấn Phát






North Vietnam
(1945-1976)



Ho Chi Minh · Phạm Văn Đồng






Socialist Republic of Vietnam
(1976-)



Phạm Văn Đồng · Phạm Hùng · Võ Văn Kiệt* · Đỗ Mười · Võ Văn Kiệt · Phan Văn Khải · Nguyễn Tấn Dũng







* acting     † head of a military government













v • d • e

General Secretaries of the Communist Party of Vietnam






Trần Phú • Lê Hồng Phong • Hà Huy Tập • Nguyễn Văn Cừ • Truong Chinh • Ho Chi Minh • Lê Duẩn* • Truong Chinh • Nguyen Van Linh • Đỗ Mười • Lê Khả Phiêu • Nông Đức Mạnh
*First Secretary for part of his term














v • d • e

Cold War






Participants   NATO · Non-Aligned Movement · People's Republic of China · Warsaw Pact





1940s

Yalta Conference · Operation Unthinkable · Potsdam Conference · Gouzenko Affair · Iran crisis of 1946 · Chinese Civil War · Greek Civil War · Restatement of Policy on Germany · Truman Doctrine · Marshall Plan · Czechoslovak coup d'état of 1948 · Tito–Stalin split · Berlin Blockade · Western betrayal · Iron Curtain · Eastern Bloc






1950s

Korean War · First Indochina War · 1953 Iranian coup d'état · Uprising of 1953 in East Germany · 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état · First Taiwan Strait Crisis · Geneva Summit (1955) · Poznań 1956 protests · Hungarian Revolution of 1956 · Suez Crisis · Sputnik crisis · Second Taiwan Strait Crisis · Cuban Revolution · Kitchen Debate · Asian-African Conference · Bricker Amendment · McCarthyism · Operation Gladio · Hallstein Doctrine






1960s

Congo Crisis · Sino-Soviet split · 1960 U-2 incident · Bay of Pigs Invasion · Cuban Missile Crisis · Berlin Wall · Vietnam War · 1964 Brazilian coup d'état · U.S. invasion of the Dominican Republic · South African Border War · Transition to the New Order · Domino theory · Bangkok Declaration · Laotian Civil War · Greek military junta of 1967–1974 · Cultural Revolution · 1962 Sino-Indian War · Prague Spring · Goulash Communism · Sino-Soviet border conflict






1970s

Détente · Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty · Black September in Jordan · Cambodian Civil War · Ping Pong Diplomacy · Four Power Agreement on Berlin · 1972 Nixon visit to China · 1973 Chilean coup d'état · Yom Kippur War · Strategic Arms Limitation Talks · Angolan Civil War · Mozambican Civil War · Ogaden War · Cambodian-Vietnamese War · Sino-Vietnamese War · Iranian Revolution · Operation Condor · Bangladesh Liberation War  · Korean Air Lines Flight 902






1980s

Soviet war in Afghanistan · Olympic boycotts · History of Solidarity · Contras · Central American Crisis · RYAN · Korean Air Lines Flight 007 · Able Archer 83 · Strategic Defense Initiative · Invasion of Grenada · Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 · Singing Revolution · Invasion of Panama · Fall of the Berlin Wall · Revolutions of 1989 · Glasnost · Perestroika






1990s

Breakup of Yugoslavia · Dissolution of the USSR · Dissolution of Czechoslovakia






See also

Soviet and Russian espionage in U.S. · Soviet Union–United States relations · NATO-Russia relations






Establishments

ASEAN · Central Intelligence Agency · Comecon · European Community · KGB · Stasi






Races

Arms race · Nuclear arms race · Space Race






Ideologies

Capitalism · Liberal democracy · Communism · Stalinism · Trotskyism · Maoism






Propaganda

Pravda · Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty · Red Scare · Voice of America · Voice of Russia






Foreign policy

Truman Doctrine · Marshall Plan · Containment · Eisenhower Doctrine · Domino theory · Kennedy Doctrine · Peaceful coexistence · Ostpolitik · Johnson Doctrine · Brezhnev Doctrine · Nixon Doctrine · Ulbricht Doctrine · Carter Doctrine · Reagan Doctrine · Rollback






Timeline of events · Portal · Category












v • d • e

Notable figures of the Cold War






United States

Harry S. Truman · George Marshall (Secretary of State) · Dwight D. Eisenhower · John F. Kennedy · Lyndon B. Johnson · Richard Nixon · Henry Kissinger (Secretary of State) · Gerald Ford · Jimmy Carter · Ronald Reagan · George H. W. Bush






Soviet Union

Joseph Stalin · Nikita Khrushchev · Leonid Brezhnev · Yuri Andropov · Konstantin Chernenko · Mikhail Gorbachev · Boris Yeltsin · Andrei Gromyko (foreign minister) · Anatoly Dobrynin (ambassador to the U.S.)






United Kingdom

Winston Churchill · Clement Attlee · Ernest Bevin (foreign secretary) · Harold Macmillan · Harold Wilson · Margaret Thatcher






West Germany

Konrad Adenauer · Willy Brandt · Helmut Schmidt · Helmut Kohl






People's Republic of China

Mao Zedong · Zhou Enlai (Premier) · Hua Guofeng  · Deng Xiaoping · Zhao Ziyang (General Secretary)






France

Charles de Gaulle · Alain Poher · Georges Pompidou · Valéry Giscard d'Estaing · François Mitterrand






Eastern Europe

Enver Hoxha (Albania) · Josip Broz Tito (Yugoslavia) · Imre Nagy (Hungary) · Nicolae Ceauşescu (Romania) · Alexander Dubček (Czechoslovakia) · Walter Ulbricht  · Erich Honecker (East Germany) · Lech Wałęsa (Poland) · Pope John Paul II (Poland/Vatican City)






Far East

Chiang Kai-shek · Chiang Ching-kuo (Republic of China) · Syngman Rhee · Park Chung-hee (South Korea) · Kim Il-sung (North Korea) · Ho Chi Minh (North Vietnam) · Ngo Dinh Diem (South Vietnam) · Pol Pot (Cambodia) · Aung San (Burma) · Indira Gandhi · Jawaharlal Nehru (India) · Sukarno · Suharto (Indonesia) · Nur Misuari · Jose Maria Sison · Ferdinand Marcos · Imelda Marcos (Philippines)






Canada

William Lyon Mackenzie King · Louis St. Laurent  · John Diefenbaker  · Lester Pearson  · Pierre Trudeau  · Joe Clark  · John Turner  · Brian Mulroney  · Kim Campbell






Latin America

Fidel Castro (Cuba) · Che Guevara (Argentina/Cuba) · Daniel Ortega (Nicaragua) · Salvador Allende · Augusto Pinochet (Chile)






Middle East

Mohammad Reza Pahlavi · Ayatollah Khomeini (Iran) · Saddam Hussein (Iraq) · Gamal Abdel Nasser · Anwar El Sadat (Egypt) · Muammar al-Gaddafi (Libya) Menachem Begin (Israel)






Africa

Patrice Lumumba · Mobutu Sese Seko (Congo/Zaire) · Kwame Nkrumah (Ghana) · Agostinho Neto · José Eduardo dos Santos · Jonas Savimbi (Angola) · Mengistu Haile Mariam (Ethiopia)






Timeline of events · Portal · Category








Persondata


NAME
Minh, Hồ Chí


ALTERNATIVE NAMES



SHORT DESCRIPTION
Prime minister, president, North Vietnam


DATE OF BIRTH
1890-05-19


PLACE OF BIRTH
Nghệ An Province, Vietnam


DATE OF DEATH
1969-09-2


PLACE OF DEATH
Hanoi, Vietnam





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ho_Chi_Minh"
Categories: Presidents of Vietnam | Communist rulers | Vietnamese revolutionaries | Vietnamese communists | People of the Vietnam War | World War II resistance members | People of the First Indochina War | Cold War leaders | 1890 births | 1969 deaths | Prime Ministers of VietnamHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008 | Copy to Wikiquote 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Galego
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latina
Lietuvių
Magyar
മലയാളം
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
संस्कृत
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 04:08.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
