











Mars - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Mars";
		var wgTitle = "Mars";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "14640471";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282263471;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Mars

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the planet.  For other uses, see Mars (disambiguation).







Mars  


Mars as seen by the Hubble Space Telescope




Designations



Adjective
Martian



Orbital characteristics[1]



Epoch J2000


Aphelion
249,209,300 km
1.665 861 AU


Perihelion
206,669,000 km
1.381 497 AU


Semi-major axis
227,939,100 km
1.523 679 AU


Eccentricity
0.093 315


Orbital period
686.971 day
1.8808 Julian years
668.5991 sols


Synodic period
779.96 day
2.135 Julian years


Average orbital speed
24.077 km/s


Inclination
1.850°
5.65° to Sun's Equator


Longitude of ascending node
49.562°


Argument of perihelion
286.537°


Satellites
2



Physical characteristics



Equatorial radius
3 396.2 ± 0.1 km[a][2]
0.533 Earths


Polar radius
3 376.2 ± 0.1 km[a][2]
0.531 Earths


Flattening
0.005 89 ± 0.000 15


Surface area
144,798,500 km²
0.284 Earths


Volume
1.6318 × 1011 km³
0.151 Earths


Mass
6.4185 × 1023 kg
0.107 Earths


Mean density
3.934 g/cm³


Equatorial surface gravity
3.69 m/s²
0.376 g


Escape velocity
5.027 km/s


Sidereal rotation
period
1.025 957 day
24.622 96 h[3]


Equatorial rotation velocity
868.22 km/h (241.17 m/s)


Axial tilt
25.19°


North pole right ascension
21 h 10 min 44 s
317.681 43°


North pole declination
52.886 50°


Albedo
0.15[4]


Surface temp.
   Kelvin
   Celsius



min
mean
max


186 K
227 K
268 K[3]


−87 °C
−46 °C
−5 °C





Apparent magnitude
+1.8 to −2.91[4]


Angular diameter
3.5—25.1"[4]



Atmosphere



Surface pressure
0.7–0.9 kPa


Composition
95.72% Carbon dioxide
2.7% Nitrogen
1.6% Argon
0.2% Oxygen
0.07% Carbon monoxide
0.03% Water vapor
0.01% Nitric oxide
2.5 ppm Neon
300 ppb Krypton
130 ppb Formaldehyde
80 ppb Xenon
30 ppb Ozone
10 ppb Methane







Mars (pronounced /ˈmɑrz/) is the fourth planet from the Sun in the Solar System. The planet is named after Mars, the Roman god of war. It is also referred to as the "Red Planet" because of its reddish appearance, due to iron oxide prevalent on its surface.
Mars is a terrestrial planet with a thin atmosphere, having surface features reminiscent both of the impact craters of the Moon and the volcanoes, valleys, deserts and polar ice caps of Earth. It is the site of Olympus Mons, the highest known mountain in the Solar System, and of Valles Marineris, the largest canyon. Furthermore, in June 2008 three articles published in Nature presented evidence of an enormous impact crater in Mars' northern hemisphere, 10,600 km long by 8,500 km wide, or roughly four times larger than the largest impact crater yet discovered, the South Pole-Aitken basin.[5][6] In addition to its geographical features, Mars’ rotational period and seasonal cycles are likewise similar to those of Earth.
Until the first flyby of Mars by Mariner 4 in 1965, many speculated that there might be liquid water on the planet's surface. This was based on observations of periodic variations in light and dark patches, particularly in the polar latitudes, which looked like seas and continents, while long, dark striations were interpreted by some observers as irrigation channels for liquid water. These straight line features were later proven not to exist and were instead explained as optical illusions. Still, of all the planets in the Solar System other than Earth, Mars is the most likely to harbor liquid water, and perhaps life.[7] Radar data from Mars Express and the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter have revealed the presence of large quantities of water ice both at the poles (July 2005)[8] and at mid-latitudes (November 2008).[9] The Phoenix Mars Lander directly sampled water ice in shallow martian soil on July 31, 2008.[10]
Mars is currently host to three functional orbiting spacecraft: Mars Odyssey, Mars Express, and the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter. With the exception of Earth, this is more than any planet in the Solar System. The surface is also home to the two Mars Exploration Rovers (Spirit and Opportunity) and several inert landers and rovers, both successful and unsuccessful. The Phoenix lander recently completed its mission on the surface. Geological evidence gathered by these and preceding missions suggests that Mars previously had large-scale water coverage, while observations also indicate that small geyser-like water flows have occurred during the past decade.[11] Observations by NASA's Mars Global Surveyor show evidence that parts of the southern polar ice cap have been receding.[12]
Mars has two moons, Phobos and Deimos, which are small and irregularly shaped. These may be captured asteroids, similar to 5261 Eureka, a Martian Trojan asteroid. Mars can be seen from Earth with the naked eye. Its apparent magnitude reaches −2.9,[4] a brightness surpassed only by Venus, the Moon, and the Sun, although most of the time Jupiter will appear brighter to the naked eye than Mars.




Contents


1 Physical characteristics

1.1 Geology
1.2 Soil
1.3 Hydrology
1.4 Geography
1.5 Atmosphere
1.6 Climate


2 Evolution
3 Orbit and rotation
4 Moons
5 Dark Slope Streaks
6 Life
7 Exploration

7.1 Past missions
7.2 Current missions
7.3 Future missions
7.4 Astronomy on Mars


8 Viewing

8.1 2003 closest approach
8.2 Historical observations
8.3 Martian 'canals'


9 In culture

9.1 Historical connections
9.2 Intelligent "Martians"
9.3 In fiction
9.4 In music


10 See also
11 Notes
12 References
13 External links

13.1 Cartographic resources







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Physical characteristics




Size comparison of terrestrial planets (left to right): Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars.


Mars has approximately half the radius of Earth. It is less dense than Earth, having about 15% of Earth's volume and 11% of the mass. Its surface area is only slightly less than the total area of Earth's dry land.[4] While Mars is larger and more massive than Mercury, Mercury has a higher density. This results in a slightly stronger gravitational force at Mercury's surface. Mars is also roughly intermediate in size, mass, and surface gravity between Earth and Earth's Moon (the Moon is about half the diameter of Mars, whereas Earth is twice; the Earth is about ten times more massive than Mars, and the Moon ten times less massive). The red-orange appearance of the Martian surface is caused by iron(III) oxide, more commonly known as hematite, or rust.[13]

Geology




Volcanic plateaus (red) and impact basins (blue) dominate this topographic map of Mars.






Rock strewn surface imaged by Mars Pathfinder


Main article: Geology of Mars
Based on orbital observations and the examination of the Martian meteorite collection, the surface of Mars appears to be composed primarily of basalt. Some evidence suggests that a portion of the Martian surface is more silica-rich than typical basalt, and may be similar to andesitic rocks on Earth; however, these observations may also be explained by silica glass. Much of the surface is deeply covered by a fine iron(III) oxide dust that has the consistency of talcum powder.[citation needed]
Although Mars has no intrinsic magnetic field, observations show that parts of the planet's crust have been magnetized and that alternating polarity reversals of its dipole field have occurred. This paleomagnetism of magnetically susceptible minerals has properties that are very similar to the alternating bands found on the ocean floors of Earth. One theory, published in 1999 and re-examined in October 2005 (with the help of the Mars Global Surveyor), is that these bands demonstrate plate tectonics on Mars 4 billion years ago, before the planetary dynamo ceased to function and caused the planet's magnetic field to fade away.[14]
Current models of the planet's interior imply a core region about 1,480 kilometres in radius, consisting primarily of iron with about 14–17% sulfur. This iron sulfide core is partially fluid, and has twice the concentration of the lighter elements than exist at Earth's core. The core is surrounded by a silicate mantle that formed many of the tectonic and volcanic features on the planet, but now appears to be inactive. The average thickness of the planet's crust is about 50 km, with a maximum thickness of 125 km.[15] Earth's crust, averaging 40 km, is only a third as thick as Mars’ crust relative to the sizes of the two planets.
The geological history of Mars can be split into many epochs, but the following are the three main ones:

Noachian epoch (named after Noachis Terra): Formation of the oldest extant surfaces of Mars, 3.8 billion years ago to 3.5 billion years ago. Noachian age surfaces are scarred by many large impact craters. The Tharsis bulge volcanic upland is thought to have formed during this period, with extensive flooding by liquid water late in the epoch.
Hesperian epoch (named after Hesperia Planum): 3.5 billion years ago to 1.8 billion years ago. The Hesperian epoch is marked by the formation of extensive lava plains.
Amazonian epoch (named after Amazonis Planitia): 1.8 billion years ago to present. Amazonian regions have few meteorite impact craters but are otherwise quite varied. Olympus Mons formed during this period along with lava flows elsewhere on Mars.

A major geological event occurred on Mars on February 19, 2008, and was caught on camera by the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter. Images capturing a spectacular avalanche of materials thought to be fine grained ice, dust, and large blocks are shown to have detached from a 700-metre high cliff. Evidence of the avalanche is present in the dust clouds left above the cliff afterwards.[16]
Recent studies support a theory, first proposed in the 1980s, that Mars was struck by a Pluto-sized meteor about four billion years ago. The event, thought to be the cause of the Martian hemispheric dichotomy, created the smooth Borealis basin that covers 40% of the planet.[17][18]

Soil
In June, 2008, the Phoenix Lander returned data showing Martian soil to be slightly alkaline and containing vital nutrients such as magnesium, sodium, potassium and chloride, all of which are necessary for living organisms to grow. Scientists compared the soil near Mars' north pole to that of backyard gardens on Earth, and concluded that it could be suitable for growth of plants such as asparagus.[19] However, in August, 2008, the Phoenix Lander conducted simple chemistry experiments, mixing water from Earth with Martian soil in an attempt to test its pH, and discovered traces of the salt perchlorate, while also confirming many scientists theories that the Martian surface was considerably basic, measuring at 8.3. The presence of the perchlorate, if confirmed, would make Martian soil more exotic than previously believed.[20] Further testing is necessary to eliminate the possibility of the perchlorate readings being caused by terrestrial sources, which may have migrated from the spacecraft either into samples or the instrumentation.[21]

Hydrology
Main article: Water on Mars




Photo of microscopic rock forms indicating past signs of water, taken by Opportunity


Liquid water cannot exist on the surface of Mars with its present low atmospheric pressure, except at the lowest elevations for short periods[22][23] but water ice is in no short supply, with two polar ice caps made largely of ice.[24] In March 2007, NASA announced that the volume of water ice in the south polar ice cap, if melted, would be sufficient to cover the entire planetary surface to a depth of 11 metres.[25] Additionally, an ice permafrost mantle stretches down from the pole to latitudes of about 60°.[24]
Large quantities of water are thought to be trapped underneath Mars's thick cryosphere. Radar data from Mars Express and the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter have revealed the presence of large quantities of water ice both at the poles (July 2005)[8] and at mid-latitudes (November 2008).[26] The Phoenix Mars Lander directly sampled water ice in shallow martian soil on July 31, 2008.[10] A large release of liquid water is thought to have occurred when the Valles Marineris formed early in Mars's history, forming massive outflow channels. A smaller but more recent outflow may have occurred when the Cerberus Fossae chasm opened about 5 million years ago, leaving a supposed sea of frozen ice still visible today on the Elysium Planitia centered at Cerberus Palus.[27] However, the morphology of this region may correspond to the ponding of lava flows, causing a superficial morphology similar to ice flows,[28] which probably draped the terrain established by earlier massive floods of Athabasca Valles.[29] Rough surface texture at decimetre (dm) scales, thermal inertia comparable to that of the Gusev plains, and hydrovolcanic cones are consistent with the lava flow hypothesis.[29] Furthermore, the stoichiometric mass fraction of water in this area to tens of centimetre depths is only ~4%,[30] easily attributable to hydrated minerals[31] and inconsistent with the presence of near-surface ice.
More recently the high resolution Mars Orbiter Camera on the Mars Global Surveyor has taken pictures which give much more detail about the history of liquid water on the surface of Mars. Despite the many giant flood channels and associated tree-like network of tributaries found on Mars there are no smaller scale structures that would indicate the origin of the flood waters. It has been suggested that weathering processes have denuded these, indicating the river valleys are old features. Higher resolution observations from spacecraft like Mars Global Surveyor also revealed at least a few hundred features along crater and canyon walls that appear similar to terrestrial seepage gullies. The gullies tend to be in the highlands of the southern hemisphere and to face the Equator; all are poleward of 30° latitude.[32] The researchers found no partially degraded (i.e. weathered) gullies and no superimposed impact craters, indicating that these are very young features.
In a particularly striking example (see image) two photographs, taken six years apart, show a gully on Mars with what appears to be new deposits of sediment. Michael Meyer, the lead scientist for NASA's Mars Exploration Program, argues that only the flow of material with a high liquid water content could produce such a debris pattern and colouring. Whether the water results from precipitation, underground or another source remains an open question.[33] However, alternative scenarios have been suggested, including the possibility of the deposits being caused by carbon dioxide frost or by the movement of dust on the Martian surface.[34][35]
Further evidence that liquid water once existed on the surface of Mars comes from the detection of specific minerals such as hematite and goethite, both of which sometimes form in the presence of water.[36]
Nevertheless, some of the evidence believed to indicate ancient water basins and flows has been negated by higher resolution studies taken at resolution about 30 cm by the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter.[37]

Geography
Main articles: Geography of Mars, List of mountains on Mars, and List of craters on Mars
See also: Category:Surface features of Mars





This approximate true-color image, taken by the Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity, shows the view of Victoria Crater from Cape Verde. It was captured over a three-week period, from October 16 – November 6, 2006.


Although better remembered for mapping the Moon, Johann Heinrich Mädler and Wilhelm Beer were the first "areographers". They began by establishing once and for all that most of Mars’ surface features were permanent, and determining the planet's rotation period. In 1840, Mädler combined ten years of observations and drew the first map of Mars. Rather than giving names to the various markings, Beer and Mädler simply designated them with letters; Meridian Bay (Sinus Meridiani) was thus feature "a."[38]
Today, features on Mars are named from a number of sources. Large albedo features retain many of the older names, but are often updated to reflect new knowledge of the nature of the features. For example, Nix Olympica (the snows of Olympus) has become Olympus Mons (Mount Olympus).[39]
Mars’ equator is defined by its rotation, but the location of its Prime Meridian was specified, as was Earth's (at Greenwich), by choice of an arbitrary point; Mädler and Beer selected a line in 1830 for their first maps of Mars. After the spacecraft Mariner 9 provided extensive imagery of Mars in 1972, a small crater (later called Airy-0), located in the Sinus Meridiani ("Middle Bay" or "Meridian Bay"), was chosen for the definition of 0.0° longitude to coincide with the original selection.[citation needed]




Olympus Mons, the highest mountain in the solar system, at 27km.


Since Mars has no oceans and hence no 'sea level', a zero-elevation surface or mean gravity surface also had to be selected. Zero altitude is defined by the height at which there is 610.5 Pa (6.105 mbar) of atmospheric pressure. This pressure corresponds to the triple point of water, and is about 0.6% of the sea level surface pressure on Earth (.006 atm).[40]
The dichotomy of Martian topography is striking: northern plains flattened by lava flows contrast with the southern highlands, pitted and cratered by ancient impacts. Research in 2008 has presented evidence regarding a theory proposed in 1980 postulating that, four billion years ago, the northern hemisphere of Mars was struck by an object one-tenth to two-thirds the size of the Moon. If validated, this would make Mars' northern hemisphere the site of an impact crater 10 600 km long by 8 500 km wide, or roughly the area of Europe, Asia, and Australia combined, surpassing the South Pole-Aitken basin as the largest impact crater in the Solar System.[5][6] The surface of Mars as seen from Earth is divided into two kinds of areas, with differing albedo. The paler plains covered with dust and sand rich in reddish iron oxides were once thought of as Martian 'continents' and given names like Arabia Terra (land of Arabia) or Amazonis Planitia (Amazonian plain). The dark features were thought to be seas, hence their names Mare Erythraeum, Mare Sirenum and Aurorae Sinus. The largest dark feature seen from Earth is Syrtis Major.[41]
The shield volcano, Olympus Mons (Mount Olympus), at 26 km is the highest known mountain in the Solar System.[citation needed] It is an extinct volcano in the vast upland region Tharsis, which contains several other large volcanoes. It is over three times the height of Mount Everest which in comparison stands at just over 8.8 km.
Mars is also scarred by a number of impact craters: a total of 43 000 craters with a diameter of 5 km or greater have been found.[42] The largest confirmed of these is the Hellas impact basin, a light albedo feature clearly visible from Earth.[43] Due to the smaller mass of Mars, the probability of an object colliding with the planet is about half that of the Earth. However, Mars is located closer to the asteroid belt, so it has an increased chance of being struck by materials from that source. Mars is also more likely to be struck by short-period comets, i.e., those that lie within the orbit of Jupiter.[44] In spite of this, there are far fewer craters on Mars compared with the Moon because Mars's atmosphere provides protection against small meteors. Some craters have a morphology that suggests the ground was wet when the meteor impacted.[citation needed]
The large canyon, Valles Marineris (Latin for Mariner Valleys, also known as Agathadaemon in the old canal maps), has a length of 4000 km and a depth of up to 7 km. The length of Valles Marineris is equivalent to the length of Europe and extends across one-fifth the circumference of Mars. By comparison, the Grand Canyon on Earth is only 446 km long and nearly 2 km deep. Valles Marineris was formed due to the swelling of the Tharsis area which caused the crust in the area of Valles Marineris to collapse. Another large canyon is Ma'adim Vallis (Ma'adim is Hebrew for Mars). It is 700 km long and again much bigger than the Grand Canyon with a width of 20 km and a depth of 2 km in some places. It is possible that Ma'adim Vallis was flooded with liquid water in the past.[45]




THEMIS image of cave entrances on Mars. The pits have been informally named (A) Dena, (B) Chloe, (C) Wendy, (D) Annie, (E) Abby (left) and Nikki, and (F) Jeanne.


Images from the Thermal Emission Imaging System (THEMIS) aboard NASA's Mars Odyssey orbiter have revealed seven possible cave entrances on the flanks of the Arsia Mons volcano.[46] The caves, named after loved ones of their discoverers, are collectively known as the "seven sisters."[47] Cave entrances measure from 100 m to 252 m wide and they are believed to be at least 73 m to 96 m deep. Because light does not reach the floor of most of the caves, it is likely that they extend much deeper than these lower estimates and widen below the surface. "Dena" is the only exception; its floor is visible and was measured to be 130 m deep. The interiors of these caverns may be protected from micrometeoroids, UV radiation, solar flares and high energy particles that bombard the planet's surface.[48] Some researchers have suggested that this protection makes the caves good candidates for future efforts to find liquid water and signs of life.[citation needed]
Mars has two permanent polar ice caps: the northern one at Planum Boreum and the southern one at Planum Australe.

Atmosphere
Main article: Atmosphere of Mars




Mars's thin atmosphere, visible on the horizon in this low-orbit photo.


Mars lost its magnetosphere 4 billion years ago, so the solar wind interacts directly with the Martian ionosphere, keeping the atmosphere thinner than it would otherwise be by stripping away atoms from the outer layer. Both Mars Global Surveyor and Mars Express have detected these ionised atmospheric particles trailing off into space behind Mars.[49][50] The atmosphere of Mars is now relatively thin. Atmospheric pressure on the surface varies from around 30 Pa (0.03 kPa) on Olympus Mons to over 1,155 Pa (1.155 kPa) in the depths of Hellas Planitia, with a mean surface level pressure of 600 Pa (0.6 kPa). Mars's mean surface pressure equals the pressure found 35 km above the Earth's surface. This is less than 1% of the surface pressure on Earth (101.3 kPa). The scale height of the atmosphere, about 11 km, is higher than Earth's (6 km) due to the lower gravity. Mars' gravity is only about 38% of the surface gravity on Earth.
The atmosphere on Mars consists of 95% carbon dioxide, 3% nitrogen, 1.6% argon, and contains traces of oxygen and water.[4] The atmosphere is quite dusty, containing particulates about 1.5 µm in diameter which give the Martian sky a tawny color when seen from the surface.[51]




Traces of methane plumes in Mars’ atmosphere during northern summer - NASA



Several researchers claim to have detected methane in the Martian atmosphere with a concentration of about 30 ppb by volume.[52][53] Since methane is an unstable gas that is broken down by ultraviolet radiation, typically lasting about 340 years in the Martian atmosphere,[54] its presence would indicate a current or recent source of the gas on the planet. Volcanic activity, cometary impacts, and the presence of methanogenic microbial life forms are among possible sources. It was recently pointed out that methane could also be produced by a non-biological process called serpentinization[b] involving water, carbon dioxide, and the mineral olivine, which is known to be common on Mars.[55]
During a pole's winter, it lies in continuous darkness, chilling the surface and causing 25–30% of the atmosphere to condense out into thick slabs of CO2 ice (dry ice).[56] When the poles are again exposed to sunlight, the frozen CO2 sublimes, creating enormous winds that sweep off the poles as fast as 400 km/h. These seasonal actions transport large amounts of dust and water vapor, giving rise to Earth-like frost and large cirrus clouds. Clouds of water-ice were photographed by the Opportunity rover in 2004.[57]

Climate
Main article: Climate of Mars




Mars from Hubble Space Telescope October 28, 2005 with dust storm visible.


Of all the planets, Mars's seasons are the most Earth-like, due to the similar tilts of the two planets' rotational axes. However, the lengths of the Martian seasons are about twice those of Earth's, as Mars’ greater distance from the Sun leads to the Martian year being about two Earth years in length. Martian surface temperatures vary from lows of about −140 °C (−220 °F) during the polar winters to highs of up to 20 °C (68 °F) in summers.[22] The wide range in temperatures is due to the thin atmosphere which cannot store much solar heat, the low atmospheric pressure, and the low thermal inertia of Martian soil.[58]
If Mars had an Earth-like orbit, its seasons would be similar to Earth's because its axial tilt is similar to Earth's. However, the comparatively large eccentricity of the Martian orbit has a significant effect. Mars is near perihelion when it is summer in the southern hemisphere and winter in the north, and near aphelion when it is winter in the southern hemisphere and summer in the north. As a result, the seasons in the southern hemisphere are more extreme and the seasons in the northern are milder than would otherwise be the case. The summer temperatures in the south can reach up to 30 °C (54 °F) warmer than the equivalent summer temperatures in the north.[59]




Mars's northern ice cap


Mars also has the largest dust storms in our Solar System. These can vary from a storm over a small area, to gigantic storms that cover the entire planet. They tend to occur when Mars is closest to the Sun, and have been shown to increase the global temperature.[60]
The polar caps at both poles consist primarily of water ice. However, there is dry ice present on their surfaces. Frozen carbon dioxide (dry ice) accumulates as a thin layer about one metre thick on the north cap in the northern winter only, while the south cap has a permanent dry ice cover about eight metres thick.[61] The northern polar cap has a diameter of about 1000 kilometres during the northern Mars summer,[62] and contains about 1.6 million cubic kilometres of ice, which if spread evenly on the cap would be 2 kilometres thick.[63] (This compares to a volume of 2.85 million cubic kilometres for the Greenland ice sheet.) The southern polar cap has a diameter of 350 km and a thickness of 3 km.[64] The total volume of ice in the south polar cap plus the adjacent layered deposits has also been estimated at 1.6 million cubic kilometres.[65] Both polar caps show spiral troughs, which are believed to form as a result of differential solar heating, coupled with the sublimation of ice and condensation of water vapor.[66][67] Both polar caps shrink and regrow following the temperature fluctuation of the Martian seasons.

Evolution



This section requires expansion.







This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)


Recent exploration of Mars has revealed evidence of several defining moments in its history. For example, the remnants of a magnetic field suggest that something more than the mass of Mars once kept its interior molten; the ancient presence of water would have required an atmosphere thicker than that of today; and the Northern Basin records a massive and disruptive impact. Possible explanations include:

A massive satellite, perhaps a captured asteroid, caused enough tidal heating to melt the interior enough to generate a substantial magnetic field. The field protected the Martian atmosphere from the Solar wind, allowing liquid water to remain on the surface.


A massive impact removes the crust of one hemisphere and strips Mars of its atmosphere. This may have been the satellite, whose orbit could have decayed from tidal forces. The entire crust shifts to a more stable configuration with the impact basin centered at the north pole and Mars' massive volcanoes near the equator. Without tidal heating from the satellite, the magnetic field fades, and Solar wind striking the surface prevents the atmosphere from reforming.


The lack of stabilizing satellite allows significant wobble on the order of five million years. This periodically warms the polar regions enough for at least some liquid water to form, and leaves striations in the polar ice cap.


Orbit and rotation
Mars’ average distance from the Sun is roughly 230 million km (1.5 AU) and its orbital period is 687 (Earth) days. The solar day (or sol) on Mars is only slightly longer than an Earth day: 24 hours, 39 minutes, and 35.244 seconds. A Martian year is equal to 1.8809 Earth years, or 1 year, 320 days, and 18.2 hours.
Mars's axial tilt is 25.19 degrees, which is similar to the axial tilt of the Earth. As a result, Mars has seasons like the Earth, though on Mars they are nearly twice as long given its longer year. Mars passed its perihelion in June 2007 and its aphelion in May 2008. Its next perihelion passage is in April 2009.
Mars has a relatively pronounced orbital eccentricity of about 0.09; of the seven other planets in the Solar System, only Mercury shows greater eccentricity. However, it is known that in the past Mars has had a much more circular orbit than it does currently. At one point 1.35 million Earth years ago, Mars had an eccentricity of roughly 0.002, much less than that of Earth today.[68] The Mars cycle of eccentricity is 96,000 Earth years compared to the Earth's cycle of 100,000 years.[69] However, Mars also has a much longer cycle of eccentricity with a period of 2.2 million Earth years, and this overshadows the 96,000-year cycle in the eccentricity graphs. For the last 35,000 years Mars' orbit has been getting slightly more eccentric because of the gravitational effects of the other planets. The closest distance between the Earth and Mars will continue to mildly decrease for the next 25,000 years.[70]







Orbit of Mars (red) and Ceres (yellow)






Orbit of Mars (red) and Ceres (yellow)


The image to the left shows a comparison between Mars and Ceres, a dwarf planet in the Asteroid Belt, as seen from the north ecliptic pole, while the image to the right is as seen from the ascending node. The segments of orbits south of the ecliptic are plotted in darker colors. The perihelia (q) and aphelia (Q) are labelled with the date of the nearest passage.




Moons
Main article: Moons of Mars




Phobos (left) and Deimos (right)


Mars has two tiny natural moons, Phobos and Deimos, which orbit very close to the planet and are thought to be captured asteroids.[71]
Both satellites were discovered in 1877 by Asaph Hall, and are named after the characters Phobos (panic/fear) and Deimos (terror/dread) who, in Greek mythology, accompanied their father Ares, god of war, into battle. Ares was known as Mars to the Romans.[72]
From the surface of Mars, the motions of Phobos and Deimos appear very different from that of our own moon. Phobos rises in the west, sets in the east, and rises again in just 11 hours. Deimos, being only just outside synchronous orbit—where the orbital period would match the planet's period of rotation — rises as expected in the east but very slowly. Despite the 30 hour orbit of Deimos, it takes 2.7 days to set in the west as it slowly falls behind the rotation of Mars, then just as long again to rise.[73]
Because Phobos' orbit is below synchronous altitude, the tidal forces from the planet Mars are gradually lowering its orbit. In about 50 million years it will either crash into Mars’ surface or break up into a ring structure around the planet.[73]
It is not well understood how or when Mars came to capture its two moons. Both have circular orbits, very near the equator, which is very unusual in itself for captured objects. Phobos's unstable orbit would seem to point towards a relatively recent capture. There is no known mechanism for an airless Mars to capture a lone asteroid, so it is likely that a third body was involved — however, asteroids as large as Phobos and Deimos are rare, and binaries rarer still, outside the asteroid belt.[74]

Dark Slope Streaks
Pictures below show dark streaks. Such streaks are very common on Mars. They occur on steep slopes of craters, troughs, and valleys. The streaks are dark at first. They get lighter with age. Sometimes they start in a tiny spot, then spread out and go for hundreds of metres. They have been seen to travel around obstacles, like boulders. It is believed that they are dark underlying layers of soil revealed after avalanches of bright dust. However, several ideas have been advanced to explain them. Some involve water or even the growth of organisms[75][76]. The most exciting thing about dark streaks is that they are currently forming today.




Tharsis Tholus streak, as seen by Hirise. It is located in the middle left of this picture. Tharsis Tholus is just off to the right.



Life
Main article: Life on Mars
The current understanding of planetary habitability—the ability of a world to develop and sustain life — favors planets that have liquid water on their surface. This requires that the orbit of a planet lie within a habitable zone, which for the Sun is currently occupied by Earth. Mars orbits half an astronomical unit beyond this zone and this, along with the planet's thin atmosphere, causes water to freeze on its surface. The past flow of liquid water, however, demonstrates the planet's potential for habitability. Recent evidence has suggested that any water on the Martian surface would have been too salty and acidic to support life.[77]
The lack of a magnetosphere and extremely thin atmosphere of Mars are a greater challenge: the planet has little heat transfer across its surface, poor insulation against bombardment and the solar wind, and insufficient atmospheric pressure to retain water in a liquid form (water instead sublimates to a gaseous state). Mars is also nearly, or perhaps totally, geologically dead; the end of volcanic activity has stopped the recycling of chemicals and minerals between the surface and interior of the planet.[78]
Evidence suggests that the planet was once significantly more habitable than it is today, but whether living organisms ever existed there is still unclear. The Viking probes of the mid-1970s carried experiments designed to detect microorganisms in Martian soil at their respective landing sites, and had some apparently positive results, including a temporary increase of CO2 production on exposure to water and nutrients. However this sign of life was later disputed by many scientists, resulting in a continuing debate, with NASA scientist Gilbert Levin asserting that Viking may have found life. A re-analysis of the now 30-year-old Viking data, in light of modern knowledge of extremophile forms of life, has suggested that the Viking tests were also not sophisticated enough to detect these forms of life. The tests may even have killed a (hypothetical) life form.[79] Tests conducted by the Phoenix Mars Lander have shown that the soil has a very alkaline pH and it contains magnesium, sodium, potassium and chloride.[80] The soil nutrients may be able to support life, but life would still have to be shielded from the intense ultraviolet light.
At the Johnson space center lab organic compounds have been found in the meteorite ALH84001, which is supposed to have come from Mars. They concluded that these were deposited by primitive life forms extant on Mars before the meteorite was blasted into space by a meteor strike and sent on a 15 million-year voyage to Earth. Also, small quantities of methane and formaldehyde recently detected by Mars orbiters are both claimed to be hints for life, as these chemical compounds would quickly break down in the Martian atmosphere.[81][82] It is possible that these compounds may be replenished by volcanic or geological means such as serpentinization.[55]

Exploration
Main article: Exploration of Mars




Mars 3 Lander (stamp, 1972)






Viking Lander 1 site


Dozens of spacecraft, including orbiters, landers, and rovers, have been sent to Mars by the Soviet Union, the United States, Europe, and Japan to study the planet's surface, climate, and geology.
Roughly two-thirds of all spacecraft destined for Mars have failed in one manner or another before completing or even beginning their missions. While this high failure rate can be ascribed to technical problems, enough have either failed or lost communications for causes unknown for some to search for other explanations. Examples include an Earth-Mars "Bermuda Triangle", a Mars Curse, or even the long-standing NASA in-joke, the "Great Galactic Ghoul" that feeds on Martian spacecraft.[83]

Past missions
The first successful fly-by mission to Mars was NASA's Mariner 4, launched in 1964. On November 14, 1971 Mariner 9 became the first space probe to orbit another planet when it entered into orbit around Mars.[84] The first successful objects to land on the surface were two Soviet probes, Mars 2 and Mars 3 from the Mars probe program, launched in 1971, but both lost contact within seconds of landing. Then came the 1975 NASA launches of the Viking program, which consisted of two orbiters, each having a lander; both landers successfully touched down in 1976. Viking 1 remained operational for six years, Viking 2 for three. The Viking landers relayed the first color pictures of Mars[85] and also mapped the surface of Mars so well that the images are still sometimes used to this day.
The Soviet probes Phobos 1 and 2 were sent to Mars in 1988 to study Mars and its two moons. Phobos 1 lost contact on the way to Mars. Phobos 2, while successfully photographing Mars and Phobos, failed just before it was set to release two landers on Phobos's surface.
Following the 1992 failure of the Mars Observer orbiter, NASA launched the Mars Global Surveyor in 1996. This mission was a complete success, having finished its primary mapping mission in early 2001. Contact was lost with the probe in November 2006 during its third extended program, spending exactly 10 operational years in space. Only a month after the launch of the Surveyor, NASA launched the Mars Pathfinder, carrying a robotic exploration vehicle Sojourner, which landed in the Ares Vallis on Mars in the summer of 1997. This mission was also successful, and received much publicity, partially due to the many images that were sent back to Earth.[86]
The most recent mission to Mars was the NASA Phoenix Mars lander, which launched August 4, 2007 and arrived on the north polar region of Mars on May 25, 2008.[87] The lander has a robotic arm with a 2.5 m reach and capable of digging a metre into the Martian soil. The lander has a microscopic camera capable of resolving to one-thousandth the width of a human hair, and discovered a substance at its landing site on June 15, 2008, which was confirmed to be water ice on June 20.[88][89] The mission was declared concluded on November 10, 2008, after engineers were unable to contact the craft.[90]

Current missions




Spirit's lander on Mars


In 2001 NASA launched the successful Mars Odyssey orbiter, which is still in orbit as of November 2008, and the ending date has been extended to September 2010.[91] Odyssey's Gamma Ray Spectrometer detected significant amounts of hydrogen in the upper metre or so of Mars's regolith. This hydrogen is thought to be contained in large deposits of water ice.[92]
In 2003, the European Space Agency (ESA) launched the Mars Express craft, consisting of the Mars Express Orbiter and the lander Beagle 2. Beagle 2 failed during descent and was declared lost in early February 2004.[93] In early 2004 the Planetary Fourier Spectrometer team announced it had detected methane in the Martian atmosphere. ESA announced in June 2006 the discovery of aurorae on Mars.[94]
Also in 2003, NASA launched the twin Mars Exploration Rovers named Spirit (MER-A) and Opportunity (MER-B). Both missions landed successfully in January 2004 and have met or exceeded all their targets. Among the most significant scientific returns has been conclusive evidence that liquid water existed at some time in the past at both landing sites. Martian dust devils and windstorms have occasionally cleaned both rovers' solar panels, and thus increased their lifespan.[95]
On August 12, 2005 the NASA Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter probe was launched toward the planet, arriving in orbit on March 10, 2006 to conduct a two-year science survey. The orbiter will map the Martian terrain and weather to find suitable landing sites for upcoming lander missions. It also contains an improved telecommunications link to Earth, with more bandwidth than all previous missions combined. The Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter snapped the first image of a series of active avalanches near the planet's north pole, scientists said March 3, 2008.[96]




A prototype of the Phoenix lander practices robotic arm control at a test site in Death Valley.


The Dawn spacecraft flew by Mars in February 2009 for a gravity assist on its way to investigate Vesta and then Ceres.

Future missions
Phoenix will be followed by the Mars Science Laboratory in 2011, a bigger, faster (90 m/h), and smarter version of the Mars Exploration Rovers. Experiments include a laser chemical sampler that can deduce the make-up of rocks at a distance of 13 m.[97]
The joint Russian and Chinese Phobos-Grunt mission to return samples of Mars's moon Phobos is scheduled for a 2009 launch. In 2013 the ESA plans to launch its first Rover to Mars; the ExoMars rover will be capable of drilling 2 m into the soil in search of organic molecules.[98]
On September 15, 2008, NASA announced MAVEN, a robotic mission in 2013 to provide information about Mars' atmosphere.[99]
The Finnish-Russian MetNet mission will land tens of small vehicles on the Martian surface to establish a widespread surface observation network to investigate the planet's atmospheric structure, physics and meteorology.[100] A precursor mission using one or a few landers is scheduled for launch in 2009 or 2011.[101] One possibility is a piggyback launch on the Russian Phobos-Grunt mission.[101] Other launches will take place in the launch windows extending to 2019.
Manned Mars exploration by the United States has been explicitly identified as a long-term goal in the Vision for Space Exploration announced in 2004 by US President George W. Bush.[102] NASA and Lockheed Martin have begun work on the Orion spacecraft, formerly the Crew Exploration Vehicle, which is currently scheduled to send a human expedition to Earth's moon by 2020 as a stepping stone to an expedition to Mars thereafter. On September 28, 2007, NASA administrator Michael D. Griffin stated that NASA aims to put a man on Mars by 2037.[103]
ESA hopes to land humans on Mars between 2030 and 2035.[104] This will be preceded by successively larger probes, starting with the launch of the ExoMars probe and a Mars Sample Return Mission.

Astronomy on Mars
Main article: Astronomy on Mars




Photograph of a Martian sunset taken by Spirit at Gusev crater, May 19, 2005.


With the existence of various orbiters, landers, and rovers, it is now possible to study astronomy from the Martian skies. The Earth and the Moon are easily visible[citation needed] while Mars’ moon Phobos appears about one third the angular diameter of the full Moon as it appears from Earth. On the other hand Deimos appears more or less star-like, and appears only slightly brighter than Venus does from Earth.[105]
There are also various phenomena well-known on Earth that have now been observed on Mars, such as meteors and auroras.[94] A transit of the Earth as seen from Mars will occur on November 10, 2084. There are also transits of Mercury and transits of Venus, and the moon Deimos is of sufficiently small angular diameter that its partial "eclipses" of the Sun are best considered transits (see Transit of Deimos from Mars).

Viewing




Apparent retrograde motion of Mars in 2003 as seen from Earth


To the naked eye, Mars usually appears a distinct yellow, orange, or reddish color, and varies in brightness more than any other planet as seen from Earth over the course of its orbit. However the actually colour of Mars is closer to butterscotch, the redness seen is actually just dust in the planets atmosphere; considering this NASA's Spirit rover has taken pictures of a greenish-brown, mud-coloured landscape with blue-grey rocks and patches of light red coloured sand [106]. The apparent magnitude of Mars varies from +1.8 at conjunction to as high as −2.9 at perihelic opposition.[4] When farthest away from the Earth, it is more than seven times as far from the latter as when it is closest. When least favourably positioned, it can be lost in the Sun's glare for months at a time. At its most favourable times — which occur twice every 32 years, alternately at 15 and 17-year intervals, and always between late July and late September — Mars shows a wealth of surface detail to a telescope. Especially noticeable, even at low magnification, are the polar ice caps.[107]
The point of Mars’ closest approach to the Earth is known as opposition. The length of time between successive oppositions, or the synodic period, is 780 days. Because of the eccentricities of the orbits, the times of opposition and minimum distance can differ by up to 8.5 days. The minimum distance varies between about 55 and 100 million km due to the planets' elliptical orbits.[4] The next Mars opposition will occur on January 29, 2010.




Mars oppositions from 2003–2018, viewed from above the ecliptic with the Earth centered


As Mars approaches opposition it begins a period of retrograde motion, which means it will appear to move backwards in a looping motion with respect to the background stars.

2003 closest approach
On August 27, 2003, at 9:51:13 UT, Mars made its closest approach to Earth in nearly 60 000 years: 55 758 006 km (0.372719 AU). This occurred when Mars was one day from opposition and about three days from its perihelion, making Mars particularly easy to see from Earth. The last time it came so close is estimated to have been on September 12, 57 617 BC, the next time being in 2287. However, this record approach was only very slightly closer than other recent close approaches. For instance, the minimum distance on August 22, 1924 was 0.372846 AU, and the minimum distance on August 24, 2208 was 0.372254 AU.[108]

Historical observations




The rotation of Mars as seen in a small telescope in 2003.


The history of observations of Mars is marked by the oppositions of Mars, when the planet is closest to Earth and hence is most easily visible, which occur every couple of years. Even more notable are the perihelic oppositions of Mars which occur about every 15–17 years, and are distinguished because Mars is close to perihelion, making it even closer to Earth. Aristotle was among the first known writers to describe observations of Mars, noting that, as it passed behind the Moon, it was farther away than was originally believed.
The only occultation of Mars by Venus observed was that of October 13, 1590, seen by M. Möstlin at Heidelberg.[109] In 1609, Mars was viewed by Galileo, who was first to see it via telescope.

Martian 'canals'




Map of Mars by Giovanni Schiaparelli


By the 19th century, the resolution of telescopes reached a level sufficient for surface features to be identified. In September 1877, a perihelic opposition of Mars occurred on September 5. In that year, Italian astronomer Giovanni Schiaparelli, then in Milan, used a 22 cm telescope to help produce the first detailed map of Mars. These maps notably contained features he called canali, which were later shown to be an optical illusion. These canali were supposedly long straight lines on the surface of Mars to which he gave names of famous rivers on Earth. His term, which means 'channels' or 'grooves', was popularly mistranslated in English as canals.[110][111]




Mars sketched as observed by Lowell sometime before 1914. (South top)


Influenced by the observations, the orientalist Percival Lowell founded an observatory which had a 300 and 450 mm telescope. The observatory was used for the exploration of Mars during the last good opportunity in 1894 and the following less favorable oppositions. He published several books on Mars and life on the planet, which had a great influence on the public. The canali were also found by other astronomers, like Henri Joseph Perrotin and Louis Thollon in Nice, using one of the largest telescopes of that time.
The seasonal changes (consisting of the diminishing of the polar caps and the dark areas formed during Martian summer) in combination with the canals lead to speculation about life on Mars, and it was a long held belief that Mars contained vast seas and vegetation. The telescope never reached the resolution required to give proof to any speculations. However, as bigger telescopes were used, fewer long, straight canali were observed. During an observation in 1909 by Flammarion with a 840 mm telescope, irregular patterns were observed, but no canali were seen.[112]




Map of Mars from Hubble Space Telescope as seen near the 1999 opposition. (North top)


Even in the 1960s articles were published on Martian biology, putting aside explanations other than life for the seasonal changes on Mars. Detailed scenarios for the metabolism and chemical cycles for a functional ecosystem have been published.[113]
It was not until spacecraft visited the planet during NASA's Mariner missions in the 1960s that these myths were dispelled. The results of the Viking life-detection experiments started an intermission in which the hypothesis of a hostile, dead planet was generally accepted.
Some maps of Mars were made using the data from these missions, but it was not until the Mars Global Surveyor mission, launched in 1996 and operated until late 2006, that complete, extremely detailed maps were obtained. These maps are now available online, for example, at Google Mars.

In culture

Historical connections
Mars is named after the Roman god of war. In Babylonian astronomy, the planet was named after Nergal, their deity of fire, war, and destruction, most likely due to the planet's reddish appearance.[114] When the Greeks equated Nergal with their god of war, Ares, they named the planet Ἄρεως ἀστἡρ (Areos aster), or "star of Ares". Then, following the identification of Ares and Mars, it was translated into Latin as stella Martis, or "star of Mars", or simply Mars. The Greeks also called the planet Πυρόεις Pyroeis meaning "fiery". In Hindu mythology, Mars is known as Mangala (मंगल). The planet is also called Angaraka in Sanskrit, after the celibate god of war, who possesses the signs of Aries and Scorpio, and teaches the occult sciences. The planet was known by the Egyptians as "Ḥr Dšr";;;; or "Horus the Red". The Hebrews named it Ma'adim (מאדים) — "the one who blushes"; this is where one of the largest canyons on Mars, the Ma'adim Vallis, gets its name. It is known as al-Mirrikh in Arabic, and Merih in Turkish. In Urdu and Persian it is written as مریخ and known as "Merikh". The etymology of al-Mirrikh is unknown. Ancient Persians named it Bahram, the Zoroastrian god of faith and it is written as بهرام. Ancient Turks called it Sakit. The Chinese, Japanese, Korean and Vietnamese cultures refer to the planet as 火星, or the fire star, a name based on the ancient Chinese mythological cycle of Five elements.

Its symbol, derived from the astrological symbol of Mars, is a circle with a small arrow pointing out from behind. It is a stylized representation of a shield and spear used by the Roman God Mars. Mars in Roman mythology was the God of War and patron of warriors. This symbol is also used in biology to describe the male sex, and in alchemy to symbolise the element iron which was considered to be dominated by Mars whose characteristic red colour is coincidentally due to iron oxide.[115] ♂ occupies Unicode position U+2642. 
Intelligent "Martians"




An 1893 soap ad playing on the popular idea that Mars was populated.


The popular idea that Mars was populated by intelligent Martians exploded in the late 19th century. Schiaparelli's "canali" observations combined with Percival Lowell's books on the subject put forward the standard notion of a planet that was a drying, cooling, dying world with ancient civilizations constructing irrigation works.[116]
Many other observations and proclamations by notable personalities added to what has been termed "Mars Fever".[117] In 1899 while investigating atmospheric radio noise using his receivers in his Colorado Springs lab, inventor Nikola Tesla observed repetitive signals that he later surmised might have been radio communications coming from another planet, possibly Mars. In a 1901 interview Tesla said:

It was some time afterward when the thought flashed upon my mind that the disturbances I had observed might be due to an intelligent control. Although I could not decipher their meaning, it was impossible for me to think of them as having been entirely accidental. The feeling is constantly growing on me that I had been the first to hear the greeting of one planet to another.[118]

Tesla's theories gained support from Lord Kelvin who, while visiting the United States in 1902, was reported to have said that he thought Tesla had picked up Martian signals being sent to the United States.[119] However, Kelvin "emphatically" denied this report shortly before departing America: "What I really said was that the inhabitants of Mars, if there are any, were doubtless able to see New York, particularly the glare of the electricity."[120]
In a New York Times article in 1901, Edward Charles Pickering, director of the Harvard College Observatory, said that they had received a telegram from Lowell Observatory in Arizona that seemed to confirm that Mars was trying to communicate with the Earth.[121]

Early in December 1900, we received from Lowell Observatory in Arizona a telegram that a shaft of light had been seen to project from Mars (the Lowell observatory makes a specialty of Mars) lasting seventy minutes. I wired these facts to Europe and sent out neostyle copies through this country. The observer there is a careful, reliable man and there is no reason to doubt that the light existed. It was given as from a well-known geographical point on Mars. That was all. Now the story has gone the world over. In Europe it is stated that I have been in communication with Mars, and all sorts of exaggerations have spring up. Whatever the light was, we have no means of knowing. Whether it had intelligence or not, no one can say. It is absolutely inexplicable.[121]

Pickering later proposed creating a set of mirrors in Texas with the intention of signaling Martians.
In recent decades, the high resolution mapping of the surface of Mars, culminating in Mars Global Surveyor, revealed no artifacts of habitation by 'intelligent' life, but pseudoscientific speculation about intelligent life on Mars continues from commentators such as Richard C. Hoagland. Reminiscent of the canali controversy, some speculations are based on small scale features perceived in the spacecraft images, such as 'pyramids' and the 'Face on Mars'. Planetary astronomer Carl Sagan wrote:


“
Mars has become a kind of mythic arena onto which we have projected our Earthly hopes and fears.
”



—Carl Sagan, Cosmos[122]




In fiction
Main article: Mars in fiction
The depiction of Mars in fiction has been stimulated by its dramatic red color and by early scientific speculations that its surface conditions not only might support life, but intelligent life.




Alien tripod illustration from the 1906 French edition of H.G. Wells' The War of the Worlds.


Thus originated a large number of science fiction scenarios, the best known of which is H. G. Wells' The War of the Worlds, published in 1898, in which Martians seek to escape their dying planet by invading Earth. A subsequent radio version of The War of the Worlds on October 30, 1938 was presented as a live news broadcast, and many listeners mistook it for the truth.[123]
Also influential were Ray Bradbury's The Martian Chronicles, in which human explorers accidentally destroy a Martian civilization, Edgar Rice Burroughs' Barsoom series and a number of Robert A. Heinlein stories before the mid-sixties.
A comic figure of an intelligent Martian, Marvin the Martian, appeared on television in 1948 as a character in the Looney Tunes animated cartoons of Warner Brothers, and has continued as part of popular culture to the present.
Author Jonathan Swift made reference to the moons of Mars, about 150 years before their actual discovery by Asaph Hall, detailing reasonably accurate descriptions of their orbits, in the 19th chapter of his novel Gulliver's Travels.[124]
After the Mariner and Viking spacecraft had returned pictures of Mars as it really is, an apparently lifeless and canal-less world, these ideas about Mars had to be abandoned and a vogue for accurate, realist depictions of human colonies on Mars developed, the best known of which may be Kim Stanley Robinson's Mars trilogy. However, pseudo-scientific speculations about the Face on Mars and other enigmatic landmarks spotted by space probes have meant that ancient civilizations continue to be a popular theme in science fiction, especially in film.[125]
Another popular theme, particularly among American writers, is the Martian colony that fights for independence from Earth. This is a major plot element in the novels of Greg Bear and Kim Stanley Robinson, as well as the movie Total Recall (based on a short story by Philip K. Dick) and the television series Babylon 5. Many video games also use this element, including Red Faction and the Zone of the Enders series. Mars (and its moons) were also the setting for the popular Doom video game franchise and the later Martian Gothic.

In music
In Gustav Holst's The Planets, Mars is depicted as the "Bringer of War".

See also




Mars portal







Solar System portal




2007 WD5 – asteroid that had a possible impact with Mars on January 30, 2008
Colonization of Mars
Darian calendar – system of time-keeping
Extraterrestrial life
List of artificial objects on Mars
List of chasmata on Mars
List of craters on Mars
List of valles on Mars
Terraforming of Mars


Notes


^ Best fit ellipsoid
^ There are many serpentinization reactions. Olivine is a solid solution between forsterite and fayalite whose general formula is (Fe,Mg)2SiO4. The reaction producing methane from olivine can be written as: Forsterite + Fayalite + Water + Carbonic acid → Serpentine + Magnetite + Methane , or (in balanced form): 18Mg2SiO4 + 6Fe2SiO4 + 26H2O + CO2 → 12Mg3Si2O5(OH)4 + 4Fe3O4 + CH4



References


^ Yeomans, Donald K. (2006-07-13). "HORIZONS System". NASA JPL. http://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/?horizons. Retrieved on 2007-08-08.  — At the site, go to the "web interface" then select "Ephemeris Type: ELEMENTS", "Target Body: Mars" and "Center: Sun".
^ a b Seidelmann, P. Kenneth; Archinal, B. A.; A'hearn, M. F.; et.al. (2007). "Report of the IAU/IAG Working Group on cartographic coordinates and rotational elements: 2006". Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy 98 (3): 155–180. doi:10.1007/s10569-007-9072-y. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/doi/10.1007/s10569-007-9072-y. Retrieved on 2007-08-28. 
^ a b "Mars: Facts & Figures". NASA. http://solarsystem.jpl.nasa.gov/planets/profile.cfm?Object=Mars&Display=Facts&System=Metric. Retrieved on 2007-03-06. 
^ a b c d e f g h David R. Williams (September 1, 2004). "Mars Fact Sheet". National Space Science Data Center. NASA. http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/factsheet/marsfact.html. Retrieved on 2006-06-24. 
^ a b Ashley Yeager (July 19, 2008). "Impact May Have Transformed Mars". ScienceNews.org. http://www.sciencenews.org/view/generic/id/33622/title/Impact_may_have_transformed_Mars_. Retrieved on 2008-08-12. 
^ a b Ian Sample (June 26, 2008). "Cataclysmic impact created north-south divide on Mars". Science @ guardian.co.uk. http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2008/jun/26/mars.asteroid?gusrc=rss&feed=science. Retrieved on 2008-08-12. 
^ Trudy E. Bell and Tony Phillips (March 12, 2002). "Once Upon a Water Planet". Science @ NASA. http://science.nasa.gov/headlines/y2002/12mar%5Fwaterplanet.htm. Retrieved on 2008-06-21. 
^ a b Water ice in crater at Martian north pole http://www.esa.int/SPECIALS/Mars_Express/SEMGKA808BE_0.html
^ Scientists Discover Concealed Glaciers on Mars at Mid-Latitudes http://www.jsg.utexas.edu/news/rels/112008.html
^ a b NASA (July 31, 2008). "NASA Spacecraft Confirms Martian Water, Mission Extended". Science @ NASA. http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/phoenix/news/phoenix-20080731.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-01. 
^ "NASA Images Suggest Water Still Flows in Brief Spurts on Mars". NASA/JPL. December 6, 2006. http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/mars/news/mgs-20061206.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-04. 
^ Webster, G.; Beasley, D. (September 20, 2005). "Orbiter's Long Life Helps Scientists Track Changes on Mars". NASA. http://mpfwww.jpl.nasa.gov/mgs/newsroom/20050920a.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-26. 
^ Peplow, Mark. "How Mars got its rust". http://www.bioedonline.org/news/news-print.cfm?art=953. Retrieved on 2007-03-10. 
^ Goddard Space Flight Center. "New Map Provides More Evidence Mars Once Like Earth". http://www.nasa.gov/centers/goddard/news/topstory/2005/mgs_plates.html. Retrieved on 2006-03-17. 
^ Dave Jacqué (2003-09-26). "APS X-rays reveal secrets of Mars' core" (in English). Argonne National Laboratory. http://www.anl.gov/Media_Center/News/2003/030926mars.htm. Retrieved on 2006-07-01. 
^ "Mars avalanche caught on camera". Discovery Channel. Discovery Communications. 2008-03-04. http://dsc.discovery.com/news/2008/03/04/mars-avalanche.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-04. 
^ "Giant Asteroid Flattened Half of Mars, Studies Suggest". Scientific American. http://www.sciam.com/article.cfm?id=giant-asteroid-flattened. Retrieved on 2008-06-27. 
^ "Huge Meteor Strike Explains Mars’s Shape, Reports Say". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/06/26/science/space/26mars.html?em&ex=1214712000&en=bd0be05a87523855&ei=5087%0A. Retrieved on 2008-06-27. 
^ "Martian soil 'could support life'". BBC News. June 27, 2008. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/7477310.stm. Retrieved on 2008-08-07. 
^ Chang, Alicia. "Scientists: Salt in Mars soil not bad for life". Associated Press. http://www.usatoday.com/tech/science/space/2008-08-04-mars-soil_N.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-07. 
^ "NASA Spacecraft Analyzing Martian Soil Data". JPL. http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/phoenix/release.php?ArticleID=1816. Retrieved on 2008-08-05. 
^ a b Haberle, R. M.; et al. (2001). "On the possibility of liquid water on present-day Mars". J. Geophys. Res.. http://www.agu.org/pubs/crossref/2001/2000JE001360.shtml. Retrieved on 2006-10-06.  106(E10), 23,317–23,326. (abstract, full paper requires purchase or AGU subscription)
^ Heldmann, Jennifer L.; et al. (2005-05-07), "Formation of Martian gullies by the action of liquid water flowing under current Martian environmental conditions" (PDF), Journal of Geophysical Research 110: Eo5004, doi:10.1029/2004JE002261, http://daleandersen.seti.org/Dale_Andersen/Science_articles_files/Heldmann%20et%20al.2005.pdf, retrieved on 2008-09-17  'conditions such as now occur on Mars, outside of the temperature-pressure stability regime of liquid water' … 'Liquid water is typically stable at the lowest elevations and at low latitudes on the planet because the atmospheric pressure is greater than the vapor pressure of water and surface temperatures in equatorial regions can reach 273 K for parts of the day [Haberle et al., 2001]'
^ a b Kostama, V.-P.; Kreslavsky, M. A.; Head, J. W. (June 3, 2006), "Recent high-latitude icy mantle in the northern plains of Mars: Characteristics and ages of emplacement", Geophysical Research Letters 33: L11201, doi:10.1029/2006GL025946, http://www.agu.org/pubs/crossref/2006/2006GL025946.shtml, retrieved on 2007-08-12  'Martian high-latitude zones are covered with a smooth, layered ice-rich mantle'
^ "Mars' South Pole Ice Deep and Wide". NASA. March 15, 2007. http://jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2007-030. Retrieved on 2007-03-16. 
^ Scientists Discover Concealed Glaciers on Mars at Mid-Latitudes http://www.jsg.utexas.edu/news/rels/112008.html
^ Murray, John B.; et al. (March 17, 2005), "Evidence from the Mars Express High Resolution Stereo Camera for a frozen sea close to Mars' equator", Nature 434: 352–356, doi:10.1038/nature03379 
^ Kerr, Richard A. (March 4, 2005), "Ice or Lava Sea on Mars? A Transatlantic Debate Erupts", Science 307: 1390–1391, doi:10.1126/science.307.5714.1390a, PMID 15746395 
^ a b Jaeger, W. L.; et al. (September 21, 2007), "Athabasca Valles, Mars: A Lava-Draped Channel System", Science 317: 1709–1711, doi:10.1126/science.1143315, PMID 17885126 
^ Boynton, W. V.; et al. (in press), "Concentration of H, Si, Cl, K, Fe, and Th in the low and mid latitude regions of Mars", Journal of Geophysical Research, Planets 112: E12S99, doi:10.1029/2007JE002887 
^ Feldman, W. C.; et al. (November 30, 2005), "Topgraphic control of hydrogen deposits at low latitudes to midlatitudes of Mars", Journal of Geophysical Research 110: E11009, doi:10.1029/2005JE002452 
^ Malin, Michael C. (June 30, 2000). "Evidence for Recent Groundwater Seepage and Surface Runoff on Mars". Science 288: 2330–2335. doi:10.1126/science.288.5475.2330. PMID 10875910. 
^ "NASA Images Suggest Water Still Flows in Brief Spurts on Mars". NASA. December 6, 2006. http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/mars/news/mgs-20061206.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-06. 
^ "Water flowed recently on Mars". BBC. December 6, 2006. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/6214834.stm. Retrieved on 2006-12-06. 
^ "Water May Still Flow on Mars, NASA Photo Suggests". NASA. December 6, 2006. http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=6587226. Retrieved on 2006-04-30. 
^ NASA (March 3, 2004). Mineral in Mars 'Berries' Adds to Water Story. Press release. http://web.archive.org/web/20071109185031/http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2004/88.cfm. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ McEwen, A. S.; et al. (September 21, 2007). "A Closer Look at Water-Related Geologic Activity on Mars". Science 317: 1706–1709. doi:10.1126/science.1143987. PMID 17885125. 
^ Sheehan, William. "Areographers". The Planet Mars: A History of Observation and Discovery. http://www.uapress.arizona.edu/onlinebks/mars/chap04.htm. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ "Viking and the Resources of Mars" (PDF). Humans to Mars: Fifty Years of Mission Planning, 1950–2000. http://history.nasa.gov/monograph21/Chapter%206.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-03-10. 
^ "Topography". Think Quest. http://library.thinkquest.org/04oct/00843/mars_eng.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-13. 
^ Frommert, H.; Kronberg, C.. "Christiaan Huygens". http://www.seds.org/messier/xtra/Bios/huygens.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-10. 
^ Wright, Shawn (April 4, 2003). "Infrared Analyses of Small Impact Craters on Earth and Mars". University of Pittsburgh. http://ivis.eps.pitt.edu/projects/MC/. Retrieved on 2007-02-26. 
^ "Mars Global Geography". Windows to the Universe. http://www.windows.ucar.edu/tour/link=/mars/interior/Martian_global_geology.html. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ Wetherill, G. W. (1999). "Problems Associated with Estimating the Relative Impact Rates on Mars and the Moon". Earth, Moon, and Planets 9: 227. doi:10.1007/BF00565406. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1974Moon....9..227W. Retrieved on 2007-02-26. 
^ Lucchitta, B. K.; Rosanova, C. E. (August 26, 2003). "Valles Marineris; The Grand Canyon of Mars". USGS. http://astrogeology.usgs.gov/Projects/VallesMarineris/. Retrieved on 2007-03-11. 
^ G. E. Cushing, T. N. Titus, J. J. Wynne, P. R. Christensen. (2007). "Themis Observes Possible Cave Skylights on Mars" (PDF). Lunar and Planetary Science XXXVIII. http://www.lpi.usra.edu/meetings/lpsc2007/pdf/1371.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-08-02. 
^ "'Cave entrances' spotted on Mars". NAU. http://www4.nau.edu/insidenau/bumps/2007/3_28_07/mars.htm. Retrieved on 2007-05-28. 
^ "Researchers find possible caves on Mars". Paul Rincon of BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/6461201.stm. Retrieved on 2007-05-28. 
^ Philips, Tony (2001). "The Solar Wind at Mars". Science@NASA. http://science.nasa.gov/headlines/y2001/ast31jan_1.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-08. 
^ R. Lundin, S. Barabash, H. Andersson, M. Holmström, A. Grigoriev, M. Yamauchi, J.-A. Sauvaud, A. Fedorov, E. Budnik, J.-J. Thocaven,2 D. Winningham, R. Frahm, J. Scherrer, J. Sharber, K. Asamura, H. Hayakawa, A. Coates, D. R. Linder, C. Curtis, K. C. Hsieh, B. R. Sandel, M. Grande, M. Carter, D. H. Reading, H. Koskinen, E. Kallio, P. Riihela, W. Schmidt, T. Säles, J. Kozyra, N. Krupp, J. Woch, J. Luhmann, S. McKenna-Lawler, R. Cerulli-Irelli, S. Orsini, M. Maggi, A. Mura, A. Milillo, E. Roelof, D. Williams, S. Livi, P. Brandt, P. Wurz, P. Bochsler (2004). "Solar Wind-Induced Atmospheric Erosion at Mars: First Results from ASPERA-3 on Mars Express". Science 305: 1933–1936. doi:10.1126/science.1101860. PMID 15448263. 
^ Lemmon; et al. (2004). "Atmospheric Imaging Results from Mars Rovers". Science 306: 1753–1756. doi:10.1126/science.1104474. PMID 15576613. 
^ V. Formisano, S. Atreya, T. Encrenaz, N. Ignatiev, M. Giuranna (2004). "Detection of Methane in the Atmosphere of Mars". Science 306: 1758–1761. doi:10.1126/science.1101732. PMID 15514118. 
^ "Mars Express confirms methane in the Martian atmosphere". ESA. March 30, 2004. http://www.esa.int/esaMI/Mars_Express/SEMZ0B57ESD_0.html. Retrieved on 2006-03-17. 
^ Martin Baucom (2006). "Life on Mars?". American Scientist 94 (2): 119–120. http://www.americanscientist.org/template/AssetDetail/assetid/49613. Retrieved on 2007-02-26. 
^ a b C. Oze, M. Sharma (2005). "Have olivine, will gas: Serpentinization and the abiogenic production of methane on Mars". Geophys. Res. Lett. 32: L10203. doi:10.1029/2005GL022691. 
^ J. T. Mellon, W. C. Feldman, T. H. Prettyman (2003). "The presence and stability of ground ice in the southern hemisphere of Mars". Icarus 169 (2): 324–340. doi:10.1016/j.icarus.2003.10.022. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004Icar..169..324M. Retrieved on 2007-02-26. 
^ "Mars Rovers Spot Water-Clue Mineral, Frost, Clouds". NASA. December 13, 2004. http://marsrovers.jpl.nasa.gov/gallery/press/opportunity/20041213a.html. Retrieved on 2006-03-17. 
^ "Mars' desert surface...". MGCM Press release. NASA. http://www-mgcm.arc.nasa.gov/mgcm/HTML/WEATHER/surface.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-25. 
^ Goodman, Jason C (September 22, 1997). "The Past, Present, and Possible Future of Martian Climate". MIT. http://www.mit.edu/people/goodmanj/terraforming/terraforming.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-26. 
^ Philips, Tony (July 16, 2001). "Planet Gobbling Dust Storms". Science @ NASA. http://science.nasa.gov/headlines/y2001/ast16jul_1.htm. Retrieved on 2006-06-07. 
^ Darling, David. "Mars, polar caps, ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTROBIOLOGY, ASTRONOMY, AND SPACEFLIGHT". http://www.daviddarling.info/encyclopedia/M/Marspoles.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-26. 
^ "MIRA's Field Trips to the Stars Internet Education Program". Mira.org. http://www.mira.org/fts0/planets/097/text/txt002x.htm. Retrieved on 2007-02-26. 
^ Carr, Michael H. (2003). "Oceans on Mars: An assessment of the observational evidence and possible fate". Journal of Geophysical Research 108 (5042): 5042. doi:10.1029/2002JE001963. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1998RPPh...61...77K. Retrieved on 2007-02-26. 
^ Phillips, Tony. "Mars is Melting, Science at NASA". http://science.nasa.gov/headlines/y2003/07aug_southpole.htm. Retrieved on 2007-02-26. 
^ J. J. Plaut, G. Picardi, A. Safaeinili, A. B. Ivanov, S. M. Milkovich, A. Cicchetti, W. Kofman, J. Mouginot, W. M. Farrell, R. J. Phillips, S. M. Clifford, A. Frigeri, R. Orosei, C. Federico, I. P. Williams, D. A. Gurnett, E. Nielsen, T. Hagfors, E. Heggy, E. R. Stofan, D. Plettemeier, T. R. Watters, C. J. Leuschen, P. Edenhofer (2007). "Subsurface Radar Sounding of the South Polar Layered Deposits of Mars". Science 315: 92. doi:10.1126/science.1139672. PMID 17363628. 
^ Pelletier J. D. (2004). "How do spiral troughs form on Mars?". Geology 32: 365–367. doi:10.1130/G20228.2. http://www.gsajournals.org/perlserv/?request=get-abstract&doi=10.1130%2FG20228.2. Retrieved on 2007-02-27. 
^ "MarsToday.Com". Mars Polar Cap Mysery Solved. http://www.marstoday.com/viewpr.html?pid=13914. Retrieved on 2007-01-23. 
^ "Mars' Orbital eccentricity over time". Solex. Universita' degli Studi di Napoli Federico II. 2003. http://main.chemistry.unina.it/~alvitagl/solex/MarsDist.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-20. 
^ Jean Meeus (March 2003). "When Was Mars Last This Close?". International Planetarium Society. http://www.ips-planetarium.org/planetarian/articles/whenmars.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-18. 
^ Ron Baalke (August 22, 2003). "Mars Makes Closest Approach In Nearly 60,000 Years". meteorite-list. http://www.mail-archive.com/meteorite-list@meteoritecentral.com/msg14044.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-18. 
^ "Close Inspection for Phobos". ESA website. http://sci.esa.int/science-e/www/object/index.cfm?fobjectid=31031. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ "ARES ATTENDANTS: DEIMOS & PHOBOS". Greek Mythology. http://www.theoi.com/Olympios/AresAttendants.html. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ a b Arnett, Bill (November 20, 2004). "Phobos". nineplanets. http://www.nineplanets.org/phobos.html. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ Ellis, Scott. "Geological History: Moons of Mars". CalSpace. Archived from the original on 2007-05-17. http://web.archive.org/web/20070517181817/http://calspace.ucsd.edu/Mars99/docs/library/science/geological_history/moons1.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-02. 
^ http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/streaks_mars_021211.html
^ A Study of Mars Global Surveyor (MGS), Mars Orbital Camera (MOC) Images Showing Probable Water Seepages. Are They Dust Slides as NASA Claims or Proof of Water on Mars? By Efrain Palermo, Jill England and Harry Moore, 2001
^ Helen Briggs (BBC science reporter, Boston) (February 15, 2008). "Early Mars 'too salty' for life". BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/7248062.stm. Retrieved on 2008-02-16. 
^ Hannsson, Anders (1997). Mars and the Development of Life.. Wiley. ISBN 0-471-96606-1. 
^ "New Analysis of Viking Mission Results Indicates Presence of Life on Mars". Physorg.com. January 7, 2007. http://www.physorg.com/news87401064.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-02. 
^ "Phoenix Returns Treasure Trove for Science". NASA/JPL. 2008-06-26. http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/phoenix/news/phoenix-20080626.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-27. 
^ Vladimir A. Krasnopolsky, Jean-Pierre Maillard, Tobias C. Owen (2004). "Detection of methane in the Martian atmosphere: evidence for life?". Icarus 172: 537–547. doi:10.1016/j.icarus.2004.07.004. 
^ "Formaldehyde claim inflames Martian debate". Nature. February 25, 2005. doi:10.1038/news050221-15. http://www.nature.com/news/2005/050221/full/050221-15.html. Retrieved on 2006-03-19. 
^ Dinerman, Taylor (September 27, 2004). "Is the Great Galactic Ghoul losing his appetite?". The space review. http://www.thespacereview.com/article/232/1. Retrieved on 2007-03-27. 
^ "Mariner 9: Overview". NASA. http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/missions/profile.cfm?MCode=Mariner_09. 
^ "Other Mars Missions". Journey through the galaxy. http://burro.astr.cwru.edu/stu/20th_far_mars.html. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ "Mars Global Surveyor". CNN- Destination Mars. http://www.cnn.com/TECH/9706/pathfinder/surveyor/. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ "Mars Pulls Phoenix In". University of Arizona Phoenix mission Website. http://phoenix.lpl.arizona.edu/05_25_pr.php. Retrieved on 2008-05-25. 
^ "Phoenix: The Search for Water". NASA website. http://www.nasa.gov/missions/solarsystem/phoenix_water.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-03. 
^ "Frozen Water Confirmed on Mars". UANews.org. http://uanews.org/node/20276. Retrieved on 2008-08-24. 
^ "NASA Mars Mission declared dead". BBC. November 10, 2008. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/7721032.stm. Retrieved on 2008-11-10. 
^ "NASA's Mars Odyssey Shifting Orbit for Extended Mission". nasa.com. October 9, 2008. http://mars.jpl.nasa.gov/odyssey/newsroom/pressreleases/20081009a.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-15. 
^ Britt, Robert (March 14, 2003). "Odyssey Spacecraft Generates New Mars Mysteries". Space.com. http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/odyssey_update_030314.html. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ Wardell, Jane (January 26, 2004). "Europe's Beagle 2 Mars Probe Stays Ominously Silent". Space.com. http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/beagle_update_040126.html. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ a b Bertaux, Jean-Loup; et al. (June 9, 2005). "Discovery of an aurora on Mars". Nature Magazine. http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v435/n7043/abs/nature03603.html. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ "Mars Exploration Rovers- Science". NASA MER website. http://marsrovers.jpl.nasa.gov/science/. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ "Photo shows avalanche on Mars". CNN. http://edition.cnn.com/2008/TECH/space/03/03/mars.avalanche.ap/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-04. 
^ "Mars Science Laboratory". NASA's MSL website. http://mars.jpl.nasa.gov/msl/overview/. Retrieved on 2007-03-03. 
^ Rincon, Paul (November 10, 2006). "European Mars launch pushed back". http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/6133712.stm. Retrieved on 2006-10-10. 
^ NASA Selects 'MAVEN' Mission to Study Mars Atmosphere
^ "Introduction to the MetNet Mars Mission". Finnish Meteorological Institute. http://www.ava.fmi.fi/metnet-portal/?sivu=mainpage. Retrieved on 2008-08-28. 
^ a b "The MetNet Mars Precursor Mission". Finnish Meteorological Institute. http://www.ava.fmi.fi/metnet-portal/precursor/?sivu=launch. Retrieved on 2008-08-28. 
^ Britt, Robert. "When do we get to Mars?". Space.com FAQ: Bush's New Space Vision. http://www.space.com/news/bush_plan_faq_040115.html#whenmars. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ "NASA aims to put man on Mars by 2037". AFP. http://www.marsdaily.com/reports/NASA_aims_to_put_man_on_Mars_by_2037_999.html.  (Bad link)
^ "Liftoff for Aurora: Europe’s first steps to Mars, the Moon and beyond". October 11, 2002. http://www.esa.int/SPECIALS/Aurora/ESAONKTHN6D_0.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-03. 
^ "Deimos". Planetary Societies's Explore the Cosmos. http://www.planetary.org/explore/topics/mars/deimos.html. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ lloyd, john; john mitchinson (2006). The QI Book of General Ignorance. Britain: faber and faber limited. p. 102. ISBN 978-0-571-24139-2. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Book_of_General_Ignorance. 
^ "Mars Observing FAQ". Shallow Sky. http://www.shallowsky.com/mars.html. Retrieved on 2006-06-15. 
^ Rao, Joe (August 22, 2003). "NightSky Friday – Mars and Earth: The Top 10 Close Passes Since 3000 B.C.". Space.com. http://www.space.com/spacewatch/mars_10_closest_030822.html. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ Breyer, Stephen (March 1979). "Mutual Occultation of Planets". Sky and Telescope 57 #3: 220. 
^ Snyder, Dave (May 2001). "An Observational History of Mars". http://www.umich.edu/~lowbrows/reflections/2001/dsnyder.7.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-26. 
^ Sagan, Carl (1980). Cosmos. New York, USA: Random House. p. 107. ISBN 0394502949. 
^ Zahnle K. (2001). "Decline and fall of the Martian empire". Nature 412: 209–213. doi:10.1038/35084148. 
^ Salisbury F. B. (1962). "Martian Biology". Science (journal) 136 (3510): 17–26. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0036-8075%2819620406%293%3A136%3A3510%3C17%3AMB%3E2.0.CO%3B2-R. Retrieved on 2007-02-26. 
^ Sheehan, William (February 2, 1997). "Motions of Mars". The Planet Mars: A History of Observation and Discovery. http://www.uapress.arizona.edu/onlinebks/mars/chap01.htm. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ "Planet Symbols". NASA solar system exploration. http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/multimedia/display.cfm?IM_ID=167. Retrieved on 2006-06-13. 
^ "Percivel Lowell's Canals". http://prion.bchs.uh.edu/Mars/Percival_Lowell.htm. Retrieved on 2007-03-01. 
^ Fergus, Charles (May 2004). "Mars Fever". Research/Penn State 24 (2). http://www.rps.psu.edu/0305/mars.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-02. 
^ Tesla, Nikola (February 19, 1901). "Talking with the Planets". Collier's Weekly. http://earlyradiohistory.us/1901talk.htm. Retrieved on 2007-05-04. 
^ Cheney, Margaret (1981). Tesla, man out of time. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. p. 162. ISBN 978-0-13-906859-1. OCLC 7672251. 
^ "Departure of Lord Kelvin", The New York Times, May 11, 1902, p.29.
^ a b Professor Pickering (January 16, 1901). "The Light Flash From Mars" (PDF). The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2007-05-20. http://nbgoku23.googlepages.com/marslight.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-05-20. 
^ Sagan, Carl (1980). Cosmos. New York, USA: Random House. p. 106. ISBN 0394502949. 
^ "Radio's War of the Worlds Broadcast (1938)". http://members.aol.com/jeff1070/wotw.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-01. 
^ "Swift, Jonathan and the moons of Mars". David Darling. http://www.daviddarling.info/encyclopedia/S/Swift.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-01. 
^ Kathy Miles and Charles F Peters II. "Unmasking the Face". http://starryskies.com/Artshtml/dln/5-98/mars.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-01. 



External links


This article contains special characters. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols.



Find more about Mars on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

3D maps of Mars in NASA World Wind
Google Mars – Interactive image of Mars
Guide to Mars – information about Mars and how to observe it.
Nine Planets Mars page
On Mars: Exploration of the Red Planet 1958–1978 from the NASA History Office.
Martian Law – a CATO white paper
Computer Simulation of a flyby through Mariner Valley
Mars Unearthed – Comparisons of terrains between Earth and Mars
Ralph Aeschliman's Online Atlas of Mars
Be on Mars – Anaglyphs from the Mars Rovers (3D)
NASA/JPL OnMars WMS Server for Mars Data – Work as Google Earth client overlays
Exploring Mars: Image Center
Mars Astronomy Cast episode #52, includes full transcript.
BBC News update on Mars Express' findings of polar water ice and water-eroded features on the surface
BBC News Mars pictures reveal frozen sea
Feb 07: ESA Prepares for a Human Mission to Mars
Mars' apparent relative size at opposition as seen by HST
Mars articles in Planetary Science Research Discoveries
Flight Into Mariner Valley – NASA/JPL/Arizona State University 3D flythrough of Valles Marineris
Geody Mars – World's search engine that supports NASA World Wind, Celestia, and other applications


Cartographic resources

Mars Nomenclature
PDS Map-a-planet
Viking Photomap
MOLA (topographic) map








v • d • e

The Solar System













































The Sun · Mercury · Venus · Earth · Mars · Ceres · Jupiter · Saturn · Uranus · Neptune · Pluto · Haumea · Makemake · Eris








Planets · Dwarf planets · Moons: Terrestrial · Martian · Jovian · Saturnian · Uranian · Neptunian · Plutonian · Haumean · Eridian









Small bodies:   Meteoroids · Asteroids/Asteroid moons (Asteroid belt, Centaurs, TNOs: Kuiper belt/Scattered disc) · Comets (Oort cloud)







See also astronomical objects, the Solar System's list of objects, sorted by size, the list of minor planets, or the Solar System Portal












v • d • e

Mars





Geography





General


Albedo features (Solis Lacus) · Atmosphere · Canals (list) · Climate · Life · North Polar Basin · Chaos terrain







Regions


Cydonia · Planum Boreum · Planum Australe · Cerberus Hemisphere · Vastitas Borealis · Iani Chaos · Quadrangles · Tharsis · Ultimi Scopuli · Eridania Lake · Olympia Undae







Mountains


Listed by height · Echus Montes · Elysium Planitia







Volcanoes


Alba Mons · Albor Tholus · Arsia Mons · Ascraeus Mons · Biblis Tholus · Elysium Mons · Hecates Tholus · Olympus Mons · Pavonis Mons · Syrtis Major · Tharsis · Tharsis Montes







Craters


Catenae · Hellas Planitia · Argyre Planitia · Schiaparelli · Gusev · Eberswalde · Bonneville  · Eagle · Endurance · Erebus · Victoria  · Galle







Geology


Carbonates · Spherules · Spiders · Swiss cheese features










Mars portal









Moons

Phobos · Deimos
Discovery · Features (Phobos · Deimos) · Stickney crater (Phobos) · Phobos and Deimos in fiction






Exploration

Colonization · Phobos program · Viking program  · Mars Pathfinder  · Spirit-observed features · Opportunity-observed features · HiRISE · Manned mission · Mars landing · Mars rover · Artificial objects on Mars · Terraforming






Astronomy





Eclipses


Solar eclipses on Mars







Transits


Deimos · Phobos · Earth · Mercury · Venus









Meteorites

Mars meteorite  · ALH84001 · Chassigny · Kaidun · Shergotty · Nakhla






Other topics

Mars-crosser asteroid · 2007 WD5  · Darian calendar · Timekeeping on Mars · Haughton-Mars Project · Martian · Mars Society · Flag of Mars · Mars in fiction  · Mars Ocean Hypothesis  · Water on Mars · Life on Mars  · Astronomy on Mars







            



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mars"
Categories: Mars | Terrestrial planetsHidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism | Wikipedia protected pages without expiry | Featured articles | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles to be expanded since January 2009 | All articles to be expanded | Articles needing additional references from March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
مصرى
Arpetan
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
贛語
Gaelg
Galego
ગુજરાતી
文言
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Hawai`i
Հայերեն
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kapampangan
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Kaszëbsczi
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lojban
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Malti
मराठी
مَزِروني
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Myanmasa
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
नेपाली
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Occitan
Oromoo
O'zbek
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Ripoarisch
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Võro
Walon
Winaray
吴语
ייִדיש
粵語
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 03:28.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
