













Non-Aligned Movement - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Non-Aligned_Movement";
		var wgTitle = "Non-Aligned Movement";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "36565";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281772720;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Non-Aligned Movement

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 



Non-Aligned Movement















Summit, Co-ordinating Bureau
New York, USA


Membership
118
(plus 15 observers)


Leaders


 - 
Secretary-General
Raúl Castro


Establishment
April 1955


Website
http://www.cubanoal.cu/


The Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) is an international organization of states considering themselves not formally aligned with or against any major power bloc. The movement is largely the brainchild of the first Gamal Abdul Nasser, former president of Egypt, Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru and Yugoslav president Josip Broz Tito. It was founded in April 1955; as of 2007, it has 118 members. The purpose of the organization as stated in the Havana Declaration of 1979 is to ensure "the national independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of non-aligned countries" in their "struggle against imperialism, colonialism, neo-colonialism, racism, and all forms of foreign aggression, occupation, domination, interference or hegemony as well as against great power and bloc politics."[1] They represent nearly two-thirds of the United Nations's members and comprise 55 percent of the world population, particularly countries considered to be developing or part of the third world.[2]
Members have, at various times, included: Yugoslavia, India, Ghana, Pakistan, Algeria, Libya, Sri Lanka, Egypt, Indonesia, Cuba, Colombia, Venezuela, post-1994 South Africa, Iran, Malaysia, and, for a time, the People's Republic of China. Brazil has never been a formal member of the movement, but shares many of the aims of NAM and frequently sends observers to the Non-Aligned Movement's summits. While the organization was intended to be as close an alliance as NATO or the Warsaw Pact, it has little cohesion and many of its members were actually quite closely aligned with one or another of the great powers. Additionally, some members were involved in serious conflicts with other members (e.g. India and Pakistan, Iran and Iraq). The movement fractured from its own internal contradictions when the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in 1979. While the Soviet allies supported the invasion, other members (particularly Islamic nations) of the movement did not.
Because the Non-Aligned Movement was formed as an attempt to thwart the Cold War[3], it has struggled to find relevance since the Cold War ended. After the breakup of Yugoslavia, a founding member, its successor states of Yugoslavia have expressed little interest in membership, though some have observer status. In 2004, Malta and Cyprus ceased to be members and joined the European Union.




Member states of the Non-Aligned Movement (2007). Light blue states have observer status.






Contents


1 The origin of the Non-Aligned Movement
2 Organizational structure & membership
3 Policies and ideology
4 Current activities and positions
5 Contemporary relevance
6 Summits
7 Secretaries general
8 Member states and representatives
9 Observers
10 Guests
11 See also
12 References
13 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] The origin of the Non-Aligned Movement
Independent countries, who chose not to join any of the Cold War blocs, were also known as nonaligned nations. Some nations, such as India and Indonesia, were able to maintain their neutrality. But others took sides with the superpowers or played competing sides against each other.
The term "Non-Alignment"[citation needed] itself was coined by Indian Prime Minister Nehru during his speech in 1954 in Colombo, Sri Lanka. In this speech, Nehru described the five pillars to be used as a guide for Sino-Indian relations, which were first put forth by Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai. Called Panchsheel (five restraints), these principles would later serve as the basis of the Non-Aligned Movement.[citation needed] The five principles were:




The founding leaders of the Non-Aligned states meet in New York in October 1960. From left: Jawaharlal Nehru of India, Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana, Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt, Sukarno of Indonesia and Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia.



Mutual respect for each other's territorial integrity and sovereignty
Mutual non-aggression
Mutual non-interference in domestic affairs
Equality and mutual benefit
Peaceful co-existence

A significant milestone in the development of the Non-aligned movement was the 1955 Bandung Conference, a conference of Asian and African states hosted by Indonesian president Sukarno. The attending nations declared their desire not to become involved in the Cold War and adopted a "declaration on promotion of world peace and cooperation", which included Nehru's five principles. Six years after Bandung, an initiative of Yugoslav president Tito led to the first official Non-Aligned Movement Summit, which was held in September 1961 in Belgrade.
At the Lusaka Conference in September 1970, the member nations added peaceful resolution of disputes and abstention from the big power military alliances and pacts as the aim of the movement. Opposition to stationing of military bases in foreign countries was also added as the movement's aim.[3]
The founding fathers of the Non-aligned movement, apart from Nehru of India, Sukarno of Indonesia and Tito of Yugoslavia, were Gamal Abdul Nasser of Egypt and Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana. Their actions were known as 'The Initiative of Five'.

[edit] Organizational structure & membership




Josip Broz Tito with Gamal Abdel Nasser and Jawaharlal Nehru, during summit on Brioni Islands, 1956.


While the NAM is an organization of united countries, much like the United Nations or NATO, it is unique to some of these organizations in its organization and structure. First, it considers itself to be non-hierarchal in nature in that there are no countries that contain veto power or have special privileges in certain areas. The chair is rotated officially at each summit. The administration of the organization falls to the responsibility of a rotating chair (currently Cuba) and the rotation is consistent and fair. Secondly, the organization does not have any sort of constitution as many similar organizations do. This was done out of recognition that with so many countries having so many varying viewpoints and priorities, any formal sort of administrative structure would increase divisiveness and eventually lead to the collapse of the organization.
Membership in the organization has changed from the original requirements as well. As the organization has matured and international political circumstances have changed, so too have the requirements. There is an obvious attempt to integrate the requirements of the NAM with the key beliefs of the United Nations. The latest requirements are now that the candidate country has displayed practices in accordance with:

Respect for fundamental human rights and for the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all nations.
Recognition of the equality of all races and of the equality of all nations, large and small.
Abstention from intervention or interference in the internal affairs of another country.
Respect for the right of each nation to defend itself singly or collectively, in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations.
Refraining from acts or threats of aggression or the use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any country.
Settlement of all international disputes by peaceful means, in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations.
Promotion of mutual interests and co-operation.
Respect for justice and international obligations.


[edit] Policies and ideology




The South Africa Conference NAM Logo


The NAM has espoused a commitment to world peace and security. At the seventh summit held in New Delhi in March 1983, the movement described itself as the "history's biggest peace movement".[4] The movement places equal emphasis on disarmament. NAM's commitment to peace pre-dates its formal institutionalization in 1961. The Brioni meeting between heads of governments of India, Egypt and Yugoslavia in 1956 recognised that there exists a vital link between struggle for peace and endeavours for disarmament.[4]
From the 1960s onwards, critics came to see the movement as unduly dominated by states allied to the Soviet Union. Many questioned how countries in close alliance with the Soviet Union, such as Cuba, could claim to be non-aligned. The movement divided against itself over the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979. This division was an indication that the NAM was indeed aligned, and it is possible that an organization of this nature can never be fully non-aligned.[citation needed]
In contrast, The Non-aligned movement believes in policies and practices of cooperation, especially those that are multilateral and provide mutual benefit to all those involved. Many of the members of the NAM are also members of the United Nations and both organizations have a stated policy of peaceful cooperation, yet successes that the NAM has had in multilateral agreements tends to be ignored by the larger, western and developed nation dominated UN[5]. African concerns about apartheid were linked with Arab-Asian concerns about Palestine[5] and success of multilateral cooperation in these areas has been a stamp of moderate success for the NAM. The NAM has played a major role in various ideological conflicts throughout its existence, including extreme opposition to apartheid regimes and support of liberation movements in various locations including Zimbabwe and South Africa. The support of these sorts of movements stems from a belief that every state has the right to base policies and practices with national interests in mind and not as a result of relations to a particular power bloc[2]. The Non-aligned movement has become a voice of support for issues facing developing nations and is still contains ideals that are legitimate within this context.

[edit] Current activities and positions





The neutrality of this section is disputed. Please see the discussion on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until the dispute is resolved. (July 2008)



Criticism of US policy

In recent years the US has become a target of the organization. The US invasion of Iraq and the War on Terrorism, its attempts to stifle Iran and North Korea's nuclear plans, and its other actions have been denounced as human rights violations and attempts to run roughshod over the sovereignty of smaller nations.[6] The movement’s leaders have also criticized the American control over the United Nations and other international structures. While the organization has rejected terrorism, it condemns the association of terrorism with a particular religion, nationality, or ethnicity, and recognizes the rights of those struggling against colonialism and foreign occupation.[7]

Anti-Zionism

NAM's Havana Declaration of 1979 adopted anti-Zionism as part of the movement's agenda. The movement has denounced Israel’s occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip.[8] It has called upon Israel to halt its settlement activities, open up border crossings, and cease the use of force and violence against civilians. The UN has also been asked to pressure Israel and to do more to prevent human rights abuses.[citation needed]

Sustainable development

The movement is publicly committed to the tenets of sustainable development and the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals, but it believes that the international community has not created conditions conducive to development and has infringed upon the right to sovereign development by each member state. Issues such as globalization, the debt burden, unfair trade practices, the decline in foreign aid, donor conditionalities, and the lack of democracy in international financial decision-making are cited as factors inhibiting development.[9]

Reforms of the UN

The Non-Aligned Movement has been quite outspoken in its criticism of current UN structures and power dynamics, mostly in how the organization has been utilized by powerful states in ways that violate the movement’s principles. It has made a number of recommendations that would strengthen the representation and power of ‘non-aligned’ states. The proposed reforms are also aimed at improving the transparency and democracy of UN decision-making. The UN Security Council is the element considered the most distorted, undemocratic, and in need of reshaping.[10]

South-south cooperation

Lately the Non-Aligned Movement has collaborated with other organizations of the developing world, primarily the Group of 77, forming a number of joint committees and releasing statements and document representing the shared interests of both groups. This dialogue and cooperation can be taken as an effort to increase the global awareness about the organization and bolster its political clout.

Cultural diversity and human rights

The movement accepts the universality of human rights and social justice, but fiercely resists cultural homogenization. In line with its views on sovereignty, the organization appeals for the protection of cultural diversity, and the tolerance of the religious, socio-cultural, and historical particularities that define human rights in a specific region.[11]

Working groups, task forces, committees[12]


High-Level Working Group for the Restructuring of the United Nations
Working Group on Human Rights
Working Group on Peace-Keeping Operations
Working Group on Disarmament
Committee on Palestine
Task Force on Somalia
Non-Aligned Security Caucus
Standing Ministerial Committee for Economic Cooperation
Joint Coordinating Committee (chaired by Chairman of G-77 and Chairman of NAM)


[edit] Contemporary relevance
Since the end of the Cold War and the formal end of colonialism, the Non-aligned movement has been forced to redefine itself and reinvent its purpose in the current world system. A major question has been whether many of its foundational ideologies, principally national independence, territorial integrity, and the struggle against colonialism and imperialism, can be applied to contemporary issues. The movement has emphasized its principles of multilateralism, equality, and mutual non-aggression in attempting to become a stronger voice for the global South, and an instrument that can be utilized to promote the needs of member nations at the international level and strengthen their political leverage when negotiating with developed nations. In its efforts to advance Southern interests, the movement has stressed the importance of cooperation and unity amongst member states,[7] but as in the past, cohesion remains a problem since the size of the organization and the divergence of agendas and allegiances present the ongoing potential for fragmentation. While agreement on basic principles has been smooth, taking definitive action vis-à-vis particular international issues has been rare, with the movement preferring to assert its criticism or support rather than pass hard-line resolutions.[13] The movement continues to see a role for itself, as in its view, the world’s poorest nations remain exploited and marginalized, no longer by opposing superpowers, but rather in a uni-polar world,[14] and it is Western hegemony and neo-colonialism that that the movement has really re-aligned itself against. It opposes foreign occupation, interference in internal affairs, and aggressive unilateral measures, but it has also shifted to focus on the socio-economic challenges facing member states, especially the inequalities manifested by globalization and the implications of neo-liberal policies. The non-aligned movement has identified economic underdevelopment, poverty, and social injustices as growing threats to peace and security.[15]

[edit] Summits




Countries represented in the Asia-Africa Conference in Bandung, Indonesia on 1955 which was a precursor to the organization. Twenty-nine countries were present representing over half the world's population.



First Conference - Belgrade, September 1-6, 1961
Second Conference - Cairo, October 5-10, 1964
Third Conference - Lusaka, September 8-10, 1970
Fourth Conference - Algiers, September 5-9, 1973
Fifth Conference - Colombo, August 16-19, 1976
Sixth Conference - Havana, September 3-9, 1979
Seventh Conference - New Delhi (originally planned for Baghdad), march 7-12, 1983
Eighth Conference - Harare, September 1-6, 1986
Ninth Conference - Belgrade, September 4-7, 1989
Tenth Conference - Jakarta, September 1-7, 1992
Eleventh Conference - Cartagena de Indias (Colombia), October 18-20, 1995
Twelfth Conference - Durban, September 2-3, 1998
Thirteenth Conference - Kuala Lumpur, February 20-25, 2003
Fourteenth Conference - Havana, September 15-16, 2006

[16]

[edit] Secretaries general
Between summits, the Non-Aligned Movement is run by the Secretary general elected at last summit meeting. As a considerable part of the movement's work is undertaken at the United Nations in New York, the chair country's ambassador to the UN is expected to devote time and effort to matters concerning the Non-Aligned Movement. A Co-ordinating Bureau, also based at the UN, is the main instrument for directing the work of the movement's task forces, committees and working groups.


Secretaries-general of the Non-Aligned Movement


Name
Country
From
To


Josip Broz Tito
 Yugoslavia
1961
1964


Gamal Abdel Nasser
 Egypt (United Arab Republic)
1964
1970


Kenneth Kaunda
 Zambia
1970
1973


Houari Boumédienne
 Algeria
1973
1976


William Gopallawa
 Sri Lanka
1976
1978


Junius Richard Jayawardene
1978
1979


Fidel Castro
 Cuba
1979
1983


N. Sanjiva Reddy
 India
1983


Zail Singh
1983
1986


Robert Mugabe
 Zimbabwe
1986
1989


Janez Drnovšek
 Yugoslavia
1989
1990


Borisav Jović
1990
1991


Stjepan (Stipe) Mesić
1991


Branko Kostić
1991
1992


Dobrica Ćosić
1992


Suharto
 Indonesia
1992
1995


Ernesto Samper Pizano
 Colombia
1995
1998


Andrés Pastrana Arango
1998


Nelson Mandela
 South Africa
1998
1999


Thabo Mbeki
1999
2003


Mahathir bin Mohammad
 Malaysia
2003


Abdullah Ahmad Badawi
2003
2006


Fidel Castro[17]
 Cuba
2006
2008


Raúl Castro
2008




[edit] Member states and representatives


 Afghanistan
 Algeria
 Angola
 Antigua and Barbuda
 Bahamas
 Bahrain
 Bangladesh
 Barbados
 Belarus
 Belize
 Benin
 Bhutan
 Bolivia
 Botswana
 Burma (Myanmar)
 Brunei
 Burkina Faso
 Burundi
 Cambodia
 Cameroon
 Cape Verde
 Central African Republic
 Chad
 Chile
 Colombia
 Comoros
 Congo
 Côte d'Ivoire
 Cuba
 Democratic Republic of the Congo
 Djibouti
 Dominica
 Dominican Republic
 Ecuador
 Egypt
 Equatorial Guinea
 Eritrea
 Ethiopia
 Fiji
 Gabon
 Gambia
 Ghana
 Grenada
 Guatemala
 Guinea
 Guinea-Bissau
 Guyana
 Haiti
 Honduras
 Indonesia
 India
 Iran
 Iraq
 Jamaica
 Jordan
 Kenya
 Kuwait
 Laos
 Lebanon
 Lesotho
 Liberia
 Libya
 Madagascar
 Malawi
 Malaysia
 Maldives
 Mali
 Mauritania
 Mauritius
 Mongolia
 Morocco
 Mozambique
 Namibia
 Nepal
 Nicaragua
 Niger
 Nigeria
 North Korea
 Oman
 Pakistan
 Palestine
 Panama
 Papua New Guinea
 Peru
 Philippines
 Qatar
 Rwanda
 Saint Lucia
 Saint Kitts and Nevis
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
 São Tomé and Príncipe
 Saudi Arabia
 Senegal
 Seychelles
 Sierra Leone
 Singapore
 Somalia
 South Africa
 Sri Lanka
 Sudan
 Suriname
 Swaziland
 Syria
 Tanzania
 Thailand
 Timor-Leste
 Togo
 Trinidad and Tobago
 Tunisia
 Turkmenistan
 Uganda
 United Arab Emirates
 Uzbekistan
 Vanuatu
 Venezuela
 Vietnam
 Yemen
 Zambia
 Zimbabwe



[edit] Observers
The following nations have observer status[18]:


 Armenia
 Azerbaijan
 Bosnia and Herzegovina
 Brazil
 Costa Rica
 Croatia
 El Salvador
 Kazakhstan
 Kyrgyzstan
 Mexico
 Montenegro
 Paraguay
 People's Republic of China
 Serbia
 Ukraine
 Uruguay



[edit] Guests
There is no permanent guest status,[19] but often several non-member countries are represented as guests at conferences. In addition, a large number of organizations, both from within the UN system and from outside, are always invited as guests.

[edit] See also

G-77
Role of India in Non-aligned movement
South-South Cooperation
Third World
New World Information and Communication Order
Hans Köchler (ed.), The Principles of Non-Alignment. The Non-aligned Countries in the Eighties -- Results and Perspectives. London: Third World Centre, 1982. ISBN 0-86199-015-3 (Google Print)


[edit] References


^ Fidel Castro speech to the UN in his position as chairman of the nonaligned countries movement 12 October 1979; Pakistan & Non-Aligned Movement, Board of Investment - Government of Pakistan, 2003
^ a b Grant, Cedric. "Equity in Third World Relations: a third world perspective." International Affairs 71, 3 (1995), 567-587.
^ a b Suvedi, Suryaprasada (1996). Land and Maritime Zones of Peace in International Law. Oxford University Press. pp. 169–170. ISBN 0198260962. 
^ a b Ohlson, Thomas; Stockholm (1988). Arms Transfer Limitations and Third World Security. Oxford University Press. pp. 198. ISBN 0198291248. 
^ a b Morphet, Sally. “Multilateralism and the Non-Aligned Movement: What Is the Global South Doing and Where Is It Going?” Global Governance 10 (2004), 517–537
^ http://www.cbc.ca/world/story/2006/09/16/nonalign.html. "Non-aligned nations slam U.S.," CBC News, September 16, 2006.
^ a b http://www.ipsterraviva.net/TV/Noal/en/default.asp. See "Putting Differences Aside," Daria Acosta, September 18, 2006.
^ http://espana.cubanoal.cu/ingles/index.html. See "Statement on the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory.
^ http://espana.cubanoal.cu/ingles/index.html. See "Statement on the implementation of the Right to Development," January 7, 2008.
^ http://www.nam.gov.za/xiisummit/chap1.htm. See no.55 in Durban Summit 'Final Document.'
^ http://espana.cubanoal.cu/ingles/index.html. See "Declaration on the occasion of celebrating Human Rights Day."
^ http://www.nam.gov.za/background/background.htm#2.4. NAM background information.
^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/2798187.stm#facts. BBC Profile, BBC News, January 30, 2008.
^ http://www.nam.gov.za/xiisummit/chap1.htm. See no.10-11 in Durban Summit 'Final Document.'
^ http://www.nam.gov.za/xiisummit/chap1.htm. See no.16-22 in Durban Summit 'Final Document.'
^ NAM Background Information
^ Fidel Castro, having recently undergone gastric surgery, was unable to attend the conference and was represented by his younger brother, Cuba's acting president Raúl Castro. See "Castro elected President of Non-Aligned Movement Nations", People's Daily, 16-09-2006.
^ Observer Countries, Non-Aligned Movement
^ NAM Background Information



[edit] External links





This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links.



Official Site: 14th Summit - Fourteenth Non Aligned Movement Summit, (Havana, September 11-16, 2006) (Spanish)
Non-Aligned Movement - Resource site
[1] International Institute for Non-Aligned Studies - Think Tank for Non-Aligned Movement
Statement of UN Secretary General to NAM, September 28, 2007.
Meeting of NAM at the 58 General Assembly of UN, November 26, 2003.
The Non-Aligned Monument Georgetown, Guyana







 
Links to related articles














v • d • e

Members and observers of the Non-Aligned Movement





Members



Afghanistan · Algeria · Angola · Bahamas · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Barbados · Belarus · Belize · Benin · Bhutan · Bolivia · Botswana · Brunei · Burkina Faso · Burma · Burundi · Cambodia · Cameroon · Cape Verde · Central African Republic · Chad · Chile · Colombia · Comoros · Congo · Côte d'Ivoire · Cuba · Democratic Republic of the Congo · Djibouti · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · Egypt · Equatorial Guinea · Eritrea · Ethiopia · Gabon · Gambia · Ghana · Grenada · Guatemala · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Guyana · Honduras · India · Indonesia · Iran · Jamaica · Jordan · Kenya · Kuwait · Laos · Lebanon · Lesotho · Liberia · Libya · Madagascar · Malawi · Malaysia · Maldives · Mali · Mauritania · Mauritius · Mongolia · Morocco · Mozambique · Namibia · Nepal · Nicaragua · Niger · Nigeria · North Korea · Oman · Pakistan · Palestine · Panama · Papua New Guinea · Peru · Philippines · Qatar · Rwanda · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · São Tomé and Príncipe · Saudi Arabia · Senegal · Seychelles · Sierra Leone · Singapore · Somalia · South Africa · Sri Lanka · Sudan · Suriname · Swaziland · Syria · Tanzania · Thailand · East Timor · Togo · Trinidad and Tobago · Tunisia · Turkmenistan · Uganda · United Arab Emirates · Uzbekistan · Vanuatu · Venezuela · Vietnam · Yemen · Zambia · Zimbabwe








Observers





Countries


Antigua and Barbuda · Armenia · Azerbaijan · Bosnia-Herzegovina · Brazil · China (PRC) · Costa Rica · Croatia · Cyprus · Dominica · El Salvador · Kazakhstan · Kyrgyzstan · Mexico · Montenegro · Serbia · Ukraine · Uruguay




Organizations


African Union · Arab League · United Nations

















v • d • e

South-South Cooperation





The Third World

Developing countries · The Global South · Emerging markets · Newly industrialized countries · Landlocked developing countries · ACP countries · Least Developed Countries · Heavily Indebted Poor Countries · Fourth World






Organizations

Non-aligned movement · G-77 · G-24 · D-8 · UNDP · Arab Monetary Fund · Asian Development Bank · African Union






Geopolitics

Decolonization · Neocolonialism · Third World debt · Cold War · BRIMC · BRIC · Next Eleven · Global digital divide · Flying Geese Paradigm · World Conference against Racism · Durban Review Conference













v • d • e

Cold War






Participants   NATO · Non-Aligned Movement · People's Republic of China · Warsaw Pact





1940s

Yalta Conference · Operation Unthinkable · Potsdam Conference · Gouzenko Affair · Iran crisis of 1946 · Chinese Civil War · Greek Civil War · Restatement of Policy on Germany · Truman Doctrine · Marshall Plan · Czechoslovak coup d'état of 1948 · Tito–Stalin split · Berlin Blockade · Western betrayal · Iron Curtain · Eastern Bloc






1950s

Korean War · First Indochina War · 1953 Iranian coup d'état · Uprising of 1953 in East Germany · 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état · First Taiwan Strait Crisis · Geneva Summit (1955) · Poznań 1956 protests · Hungarian Revolution of 1956 · Suez Crisis · Sputnik crisis · Second Taiwan Strait Crisis · Cuban Revolution · Kitchen Debate · Asian-African Conference · Bricker Amendment · McCarthyism · Operation Gladio · Hallstein Doctrine






1960s

Congo Crisis · Sino-Soviet split · 1960 U-2 incident · Bay of Pigs Invasion · Cuban Missile Crisis · Berlin Wall · Vietnam War · 1964 Brazilian coup d'état · U.S. invasion of the Dominican Republic · South African Border War · Transition to the New Order · Domino theory · Bangkok Declaration · Laotian Civil War · Greek military junta of 1967–1974 · Cultural Revolution · 1962 Sino-Indian War · Prague Spring · Goulash Communism · Sino-Soviet border conflict






1970s

Détente · Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty · Black September in Jordan · Cambodian Civil War · Ping Pong Diplomacy · Four Power Agreement on Berlin · 1972 Nixon visit to China · 1973 Chilean coup d'état · Yom Kippur War · Strategic Arms Limitation Talks · Angolan Civil War · Mozambican Civil War · Ogaden War · Cambodian-Vietnamese War · Sino-Vietnamese War · Iranian Revolution · Operation Condor · Bangladesh Liberation War  · Korean Air Lines Flight 902






1980s

Soviet war in Afghanistan · Olympic boycotts · History of Solidarity · Contras · Central American Crisis · RYAN · Korean Air Lines Flight 007 · Able Archer 83 · Strategic Defense Initiative · Invasion of Grenada · Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 · Singing Revolution · Invasion of Panama · Fall of the Berlin Wall · Revolutions of 1989 · Glasnost · Perestroika






1990s

Breakup of Yugoslavia · Dissolution of the USSR · Dissolution of Czechoslovakia






See also

Soviet and Russian espionage in U.S. · Soviet Union–United States relations · NATO-Russia relations






Establishments

ASEAN · Central Intelligence Agency · Comecon · European Community · KGB · Stasi






Races

Arms race · Nuclear arms race · Space Race






Ideologies

Capitalism · Liberal democracy · Communism · Stalinism · Trotskyism · Maoism






Propaganda

Pravda · Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty · Red Scare · Voice of America · Voice of Russia






Foreign policy

Truman Doctrine · Marshall Plan · Containment · Eisenhower Doctrine · Domino theory · Kennedy Doctrine · Peaceful coexistence · Ostpolitik · Johnson Doctrine · Brezhnev Doctrine · Nixon Doctrine · Ulbricht Doctrine · Carter Doctrine · Reagan Doctrine · Rollback






Timeline of events · Portal · Category















Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-Aligned_Movement"
Categories: Non-Aligned Movement | Cold WarHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | NPOV disputes from July 2008 | All NPOV disputes | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 | Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bosanski
Български
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Македонски
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
Tiếng Việt
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 21:14.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
