











South Africa - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "South_Africa";
		var wgTitle = "South Africa";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "17416221";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282492815;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); South Africa

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the country on the southern tip of the African continent. For its predecessors, see Union of South Africa. For the southern region of Africa, see Southern Africa.









Republic of South Africa


Republiek van Suid-Afrika (Afrikaans)
IRiphabliki yeSewula Afrika (Sth. Ndebele)
IRiphabliki yaseMzantsi Afrika (Xhosa)
IRiphabliki yaseNingizimu Afrika (Zulu)
IRiphabhulikhi yeNingizimu Afrika (Swazi)
Rephaboliki ya Afrika-Borwa (Nth. Sotho)
Rephaboliki ya Afrika Borwa (Sth. Sotho)
Rephaboliki ya Aforika Borwa (Tswana)
Riphabliki ra Afrika Dzonga (Tsonga)
Riphabuḽiki ya Afurika Tshipembe (Venda)






















Flag
Coat of arms





Motto: !ke e: ǀxarra ǁke  (ǀXam)
“Unity In Diversity” (literally “Diverse People Unite”)


Anthem: National anthem of South Africa










Capital
Pretoria (executive)
Bloemfontein (judicial)
Cape Town (legislative)


Largest city
Johannesburg(2006) [1]


Official languages
Afrikaans
English
Southern Ndebele
Northern Sotho
Southern Sotho
Swazi
Tsonga
Tswana
Venda
Xhosa
Zulu


Ethnic groups 
79.5% Black
9.2% White
8.9% Coloured
2.5% Asian


Demonym
South African


Government
Constitutional democracy


 - 
President
Kgalema Motlanthe


 - 
Deputy President
Baleka Mbete


 - 
NCOP Chairman
M. J. Mahlangu


 - 
National Assembly Speaker
Gwen Mahlangu-Nkabinde


 - 
Chief Justice
Pius Langa


Independence
from the United Kingdom 


 - 
Union
31 May 1910 


 - 
Statute of Westminster
11 December 1931 


 - 
Republic
31 May 1961 


Area


 - 
Total
1 221 037 km2 (25th)
471 443 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
Negligible


Population


 - 
2008 estimate
47 900 000[2] (25th)


 - 
2001 census
44 819 778[3] 


 - 
Density
39/km2 (170th)
101/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2008 estimate


 - 
Total
$495.990 billion[4] (25th)


 - 
Per capita
$10,187[4] (76th)


GDP (nominal)
2008 estimate


 - 
Total
$300.397 billion[4] (30th)


 - 
Per capita
$6,169[4] (68th)


Gini (2000)
57.8 (high) 


HDI (2007)
0.674 ▲ (medium) (121st)


Currency
Rand (ZAR)


Time zone
SAST (UTC+2)


Drives on the
left


Internet TLD
.za


Calling code
+27




Historical states of present-day
South Africa




Mapungubwe (1050–1270)
Cape Colony (1652–1910)
Swellendam (1795)
Graaff Reinet (1795–1796)
Waterboer's Land (1813–1871)
Adam Kok's Land (1825–1861)
Winburg (1836–1844)
Potchefstroom (1837–1848)
Republic of Utrecht (1854–1858)
Lydenburg Republic (1856–1860)
Nieuw Republiek (1884–1888)
Griqualand East (1861–1879)
Griqualand West (1870)
Klein Vrystaat (1886–1891)
Stellaland (1882–1885)
Goshen (1882–1883)
Zululand (1816–1897)
Natalia Republic (1839–1843)
Orange Free State (1854–1902)
South African Republic (1857–1902)
Union of South Africa (1910–1961)
Bophuthatswana (1977–1994)
Ciskei (1981–1994)
Transkei (1976–1994)
Venda (1979–1994)
Republic of South Africa (1961–present)




The Republic of South Africa, also known by other official names, is a country located at the southern tip of the continent of Africa. The South African coast stretches 2,798 kilometres (1,739 mi)[5][6] and borders both the Atlantic and Indian oceans.[7] To the north of South Africa lie Namibia, Botswana and Zimbabwe, to the east are Mozambique and Swaziland, while the Kingdom of Lesotho is an independent enclave surrounded by South African territory.[8]
Modern human beings have inhabited South Africa for more than 100,000 years.[9] At the time of European contact, its indigenous peoples reflected migrations from other parts of Africa, where new tribes had become dominant. Two major groups were Xhosa and Zulu peoples.
In 1652, a century and a half after the discovery of the Cape Sea Route, the Dutch East India Company founded a refreshment station at what would become Cape Town.[10] Cape Town became a British colony in 1806. European settlement expanded during the 1820s as the Boers (original Dutch, Flemish, German and French settlers) and the British 1820 Settlers claimed land in the north and east of the country. Conflicts arose among the Xhosa, Zulu and Afrikaner groups who competed for territory.
The discovery of diamonds and later gold triggered the conflict known as the Anglo-Boer War, as the Boers and the British fought for the control of the South African mineral wealth. Although the Boers were defeated, the British gave limited independence to South Africa in 1910 as a British dominion. Within the country, anti-British policies among white South Africans focused on independence. During the Dutch and British colonial years, racial segregation was informal. Power was held by the colonists. In the Boer republics and subsequent South African governments, the system became legally institutionalised segregation known as apartheid. They established three classes of racial stratification: whites, coloured (including mixed-race people of European and African origins, as well as Asians, and mixed-race Asians), and blacks, or indigenous natives. Apartheid was established by law in 1948, and additional legislation, such as the Immorality Act outlawing relations among people of different racial groups, hardened the legal boundaries. At the same time, political movements grew internally among indigenous, mixed-race and whites who opposed apartheid. At one time the Communist Party actively supported racial justice.
South Africa achieved its political independence in 1961 when it was declared a republic. The leading National Party legislated for a continuation of apartheid, despite opposition both in and outside of the country.
In 1990 then-president F.W. de Klerk began to dismantle the apartheid legislation In 1994 South Africa held its first democratic election. Nelson Mandela and the African National Congress (ANC) came to power, and the country rejoined the Commonwealth of Nations.
South Africa is known for its diversity in cultures, languages, and religious beliefs. Eleven official languages are recognised in the constitution.[7] English is the most commonly spoken language in official and commercial public life; however, it is only the fifth most-spoken home language.[7] South Africa is ethnically diverse, with the largest Caucasian, Indian, and racially mixed communities in Africa. Although 79.6% of the South African population is Black,[2] this category is neither culturally nor linguistically homogeneous. People within this classification represent a variety of ethnic groups and speak a number of different Bantu languages, nine of which have official status.[7] Midyear 2007, the South African population was estimated at 47.9 million.[2]




Contents


1 History

1.1 European colonisation
1.2 Independence
1.3 Democracy


2 Politics
3 Foreign relations and military
4 Provinces, districts and municipalities
5 Geography

5.1 Flora and fauna


6 Economy

6.1 Electricity crisis
6.2 Agriculture


7 Demographics
8 Science and technology
9 Society and culture

9.1 Religion
9.2 Languages
9.3 Sports


10 Current issues

10.1 HIV/AIDS
10.2 Crime
10.3 Skills migration
10.4 Xenophobia


11 See also
12 References
13 Further reading
14 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


History





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2008)


Main article: History of South Africa
South Africa contains some of the oldest archaeological sites in the world.[11] [12] Extensive fossil remains at the Sterkfontein, Kromdraai and Makapansgat caves suggest that various australopithecines existed in South Africa from about three million years ago.[13] These were succeeded by various species of Homo, including Homo habilis, Homo erectus and modern humans, Homo sapiens.
Settlements of Bantu-speaking peoples, who were iron-using agriculturists and herdsmen, were already present south of the Limpopo River by the fourth or fifth century (see Bantu expansion), displacing and absorbing the original KhoiSan speakers. They slowly moved south. The earliest ironworks in modern-day KwaZulu-Natal Province are believed to date from around 1050. The southernmost group was the Xhosa people, whose language incorporates certain linguistic traits from the earlier KhoiSan people, reaching the Fish River, in today's Eastern Cape Province. As they migrated, these larger Iron Age populations displaced or assimilated earlier peoples, who often had hunter-gatherer societies.

European colonisation




Painting of an account of the arrival of Jan van Riebeeck, the first European to settle in South Africa, with Devil's Peak in the background


In 1487, the Portuguese explorer Bartolomeu Dias became the first European to reach the southernmost point of Africa. Initially named the Cape of Storms, The King of Portugal, John II, renamed it the Cabo da Boa Esperança or Cape of Good Hope, as it led to the riches of India. Dias' great feat of navigation was later immortalised in Camões' epic Portuguese poem, The Lusiads (1572). In 1652, Jan van Riebeeck established a refreshment station at the Cape of Good Hope on behalf of the Dutch East India Company. The Dutch transported slaves from Indonesia, Madagascar, and India as labour for the colonists in Cape Town. As they expanded east, the Dutch settlers met the south-westerly expanding Xhosa people in the region of the Fish River. A series of wars, called the Cape Frontier Wars, ensued, mainly caused by conflicting land and livestock interests.
Great Britain took over the Cape of Good Hope area in 1795, ostensibly to stop it from falling under Revolutionary French control. Given its standing interests in Australia and India, Great Britain wanted to use Cape Town as an interim port for its merchants' long voyages. The British returned Cape Town to the Dutch in 1803, but soon afterwards the Dutch East India Company declared bankruptcy.
The British annexed the Cape Colony in 1806. The British continued the frontier wars against the Xhosa, pushing the eastern frontier eastward through a line of forts established along the Fish River. They consolidated the territory by encouraging British settlement. Due to pressure of abolitionist societies in Britain, the British parliament first stopped its global slave trade with the passage of the Slave Trade Act 1807, then abolished slavery in all its colonies with the Slavery Abolition Act 1833.
During the 1830s, approximately 12,000 Boers (later known as Voortrekkers), departed from the Cape Colony, where they had been subjected to British control. They migrated to the future Natal, Orange Free State and Transvaal regions. The Boers founded the Boer Republics: the South African Republic (Now Gauteng, Limpopo, Mpumalanga and North West provinces) and the Orange Free State (Free State).
The discovery of diamonds in 1867 and gold in 1884 in the interior encouraged economic growth and immigration. This intensified the European-South African subjugation of the indigenous people. The struggle to control these important economic resources was a factor between Europeans and the indigenous population, and also between the Boers and the British.[14]
The Boer Republics successfully resisted British encroachments during the First Boer War (1880–1881) using guerrilla warfare tactics, which were well suited to local conditions. However, the British returned with greater numbers, more experience, and more suitable tactics in the Second Boer War (1899–1902). The Boers' attempt to ally themselves with German South-West Africa provided the British with yet another excuse to take control of the Boer Republics.[citation needed]




Boers in combat (1881).



Independence
After four years of negotiating, the Union of South Africa was created from the Cape and Natal colonies, as well as the republics of Orange Free State and Transvaal, on 31 May 1910, exactly eight years after the end of the Second Boer War. The newly created Union of South Africa was a dominion of Great Britain. The Natives' Land Act of 1913 severely restricted the ownership of land by 'blacks'; at that stage they had control of a mere 7% of the country. The amount of land reserved for indigenous peoples was later marginally increased.[15]
In 1931 the union was effectively granted independence from the United Kingdom with the passage of the Statute of Westminster, which morphed the British king's position within South Africa into that of the distinct King of South Africa. In 1934, the South African Party and National Party merged to form the United Party, seeking reconciliation between Afrikaners and English-speaking "Whites". In 1939 the party split over the entry of the Union into World War II as an ally of the United Kingdom, a move which the National Party followers strongly opposed.
In 1948, the National Party was elected to power. It intensified the implementation of racial segregation begun under Dutch and British colonial rule, and subsequent South African governments since the Union was formed. The Nationalist Government systematised existing segregationist laws, classifying all peoples into three races, developing rights and limitations for each, such as pass laws and residential restrictions. The white minority controlled the vastly larger black majority. The system of segregation became known collectively as apartheid.
Not surprisingly, this segregation meant that whites controlled the wealth generated during rapid industrialisation of the 1950s, '60s, and '70s. While the White minority enjoyed the highest standard of living in all of Africa, often comparable to First World western nations, the Black majority remained disadvantaged by almost every standard, including income, education, housing, and life expectancy. On 31 May 1961, following a whites-only referendum, the country became a republic and left the (British) Commonwealth. The office of Governor-General was abolished and replaced with the position of State President.
Apartheid became increasingly controversial, leading to widespread sanctions, divestment and growing unrest and oppression within South Africa. (See also the article on the History of South Africa in the apartheid era.) A long period of harsh suppression by the government, and at times violent resistance, strikes, marches, protests, and sabotage by bombing and other means, by various anti-apartheid movements, most notably the African National Congress (ANC), followed.
In the late 1970s, South Africa began a programme of nuclear weapons development. In the following decade, it produced six deliverable nuclear weapons. The rationale for the nuclear arsenal is disputed. Some commentators believed that[who?] leaders Vorster and P.W. Botha wanted to be able to catalyse American intervention in the event of a war between South Africa and the Cuban-supported MPLA government of Angola.

Democracy
In 1990 the National Party government took the first step towards negotiating itself out of power when it lifted the ban on the African National Congress and other left-wing political organisations. It released Nelson Mandela from prison after twenty-seven years' incarceration on a sabotage sentence. The government repealed apartheid legislation. South Africa destroyed its nuclear arsenal and acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. South Africa held its first multi-racial elections in 1994, which the ANC won by an overwhelming majority. It has been in power ever since.
In post-apartheid South Africa, millions of South Africans, mostly black, have continued to live in poverty, as it has been difficult to compensate quickly for generations of educational and social neglect. Poverty among whites, previously rare, has increased greatly.[16] While some have attributed this partly to the legacy of the apartheid system, increasingly many attribute it to the failure of the current government to tackle social issues. In addition, the current government has struggled to achieve the monetary and fiscal discipline to ensure both redistribution of wealth and economic growth. Since the ANC-led government took power, the United Nations Human Development Index of South Africa has fallen, while it was steadily rising until the mid-1990s.[17] Some of this could possibly be attributed to the AIDS pandemic and the failure of the government to take steps to address it.[18] Some can also be attributed to a government policy of redistribution of wealth. As a mitigating factor, the current government has followed a social housing policy to improve living conditions for the majority of people.

Politics
Main articles: Politics of South Africa, Government of South Africa, and Law of South Africa




The Union Buildings in Pretoria are the home of the South African executive.


South Africa has three capital cities: Cape Town, the largest of the three, is the legislative capital; Pretoria is the administrative capital; and Bloemfontein is the judicial capital. South Africa has a bicameral parliament: the National Council of Provinces (the upper house) has 90 members, while the National Assembly (the lower house) has 400 members. Members of the lower house are elected on a population basis by proportional representation: half of the members are elected from national lists and the other half are elected from provincial lists. Ten members are elected to represent each province in the National Council of Provinces, regardless of the population of the province. Elections for both chambers are held every five years. The government is formed in the lower house, and the leader of the majority party in the National Assembly is the President.
The primary sources of South Africa law are Roman-Dutch mercantile law and personal law with English Common law, as imports of Dutch settlements and British colonialism.[19] The first European based law in South Africa was brought by the Dutch East India Company and is called Roman-Dutch law. It was imported before the codification of European law into the Napoleonic Code and is comparable in many ways to Scots law. This was followed in the 19th century by English law, both common and statutory. Starting in 1910 with unification, South Africa had its own parliament which passed laws specific for South Africa, building on those previously passed for the individual member colonies.
Current South African politics are dominated by the African National Congress (ANC), which received 69.7% of the vote during the last 2004 general election and 66.3% of the vote in the 2006 municipal election. The current President of South Africa is Kgalema Motlanthe, who replaced Thabo Mbeki on 25 September 2008. Mbeki succeeded former President Nelson Mandela in 1999, and was re-elected for a second five year term in 2004, but announced his resignation on 20 September 2008.
The main challenger to the rule of the ANC is the Democratic Alliance party, which received 12.4% of the vote in the 2004 election and 14.8% in the 2006 election. Helen Zille, (elected 6 May 2007), is the party leader; the previous leader was Tony Leon. The formerly dominant New National Party, which introduced apartheid through its predecessor, the National Party, chose to merge with the ANC on 9 April 2005. Other major political parties represented in Parliament are the Inkatha Freedom Party, which mainly represents Zulu voters, and the Independent Democrats, who took 6.97% and 1.7% of the vote respectively, in the 2004 election.
Since 2004, the country has had many thousands of popular protests, some violent, making it, according to one academic, the "most protest-rich country in the world".[20] Many of these protests have been organised from the growing shanty towns that surround South African cities.

Foreign relations and military
Main articles: South African National Defence Force, Foreign relations of South Africa, and South Africa and weapons of mass destruction
Since the end of apartheid, the South African foreign policy has focused on its African partners particularly in the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and the African Union. South Africa has played a key role as a mediator in African conflicts over the last decade, such as in Burundi, the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Comoros, and Zimbabwe. After apartheid ended, South Africa was readmitted to the Commonwealth of Nations. As the Union of South Africa, South Africa was a founding member of the United Nations and the then Prime Minister Jan Smuts wrote the preamble to its constitution. South Africa is currently a non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Council and has attracted controversy by voting against a resolution criticising the Burmese government in 2006 and against the implementation of sanctions against Zimbabwe in 2008. South Africa is a member of the Group of 77 and chaired the organisation in 2006. South Africa is a member of the South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone, Southern African Customs Union, World Trade Organization, International Monetary Fund, G20 and G8+5.
The South African armed forces, known as the South African National Defence Force (SANDF), was created in 1994.[21][22] Previously known as the South African Defence Force (SADF), the new force is an all volunteer army and consists of the forces of the old SADF, as well as the forces of the African nationalist groups, namely Umkhonto we Sizwe (MK), Azanian People's Liberation Army (APLA), and the former Bantustan defence forces.[21] The SANDF is subdivided into four branches, the South African Army, the South African Air Force, the South African Navy, and the South African Military Health Services.[23]
In recent years, the SANDF has become a major peacekeeping force in Africa,[24] and has been involved in operations in Lesotho, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,[24] and Burundi,[24] amongst others. It has also participated as a part of multi-national UN peacekeeping forces.
South Africa undertook a nuclear weapons programme in the 1970s[25] and may have conducted a nuclear test over the Atlantic in 1979.[26] It is the only African country to have successfully developed nuclear weapons. It has become the first country (followed by Ukraine) with nuclear capability to voluntarily renounce and dismantle its programme and in the process signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1991.[25]

Provinces, districts and municipalities
Main articles: Provinces of South Africa, Districts of South Africa, and Municipalities of South Africa




Map showing the provinces and districts (numbered) of South Africa.


     Northern Cape      North West      Gauteng      Limpopo      Mpumalanga

     KwaZulu-Natal      Eastern Cape      Free State      Western Cape






When apartheid ended in 1994, the South African government had to integrate the formerly independent and semi-independent Bantustans into the political structure of South Africa. To this end, it abolished the four former provinces of South Africa (Cape Province, Natal, Orange Free State, and Transvaal) and replaced them with nine fully integrated provinces. The new provinces are usually much smaller than the former provinces, which theoretically gives local governments more resources to distribute over smaller areas.
The nine provinces are further subdivided into 52 districts: 6 metropolitan and 46 district municipalities. The 46 district municipalities are further subdivided into 231 local municipalities. The district municipalities also contain 20 district management areas (mostly game parks) that are directly governed by the district municipalities. The six metropolitan municipalities perform the functions of both district and local municipalities. The new provinces are:


Province
Former homelands and provinces
Capital
Area (km²)
Area (sq mi)
Population (2001)


Eastern Cape
Cape Province, Transkei, Ciskei
Bhisho
169,580
65,475
6,436,761


Free State
Orange Free State, QwaQwa
Bloemfontein
129,480
49,992
2,706,776


Gauteng
Transvaal
Johannesburg
17,010
6,568
8,837,172


KwaZulu-Natal
Natal, KwaZulu
Pietermaritzburg
92,100
35,560
9,426,018


Limpopo
Transvaal, Venda, Lebowa, Gazankulu
Polokwane
123,900
47,838
5,273,637


Mpumalanga
Transvaal, KwaNdebele, KaNgwane, Bophuthatswana, Lebowa
Nelspruit
79,490
30,691
3,122,994


Northern Cape
Cape Province
Kimberley
361,830
139,703
822,726


North West
Transvaal, Cape Province, Bophuthatswana
Mafikeng
116,320
44,911
3,669,349


Western Cape
Cape Province
Cape Town
129,370
49,950
4,524,335


Total
1,219,080
470,688
44,819,768



Geography
Main article: Geography of South Africa




Map of South Africa


South Africa is located at the southernmost region of Africa, with a long coastline that stretches more than 2,500 kilometres (1,550 mi) and across two oceans (the South Atlantic and the Indian). At 470,979 sq mi (1,219,912 km²),[27] South Africa is the 25th-largest country in the world (after Mali). It is comparable in size to Colombia. Njesuthi in the Drakensberg at 3,408 m (11,424 ft) is the highest peak in South Africa.




View of the Drakensberg mountains, the highest mountain range in South Africa.


South Africa has a generally temperate climate, due in part to it being surrounded by the Atlantic and Indian Oceans on three sides, by its location in the climatically milder southern hemisphere and due to the average elevation rising steadily towards the north (towards the equator) and further inland. Due to this varied topography and oceanic influence, a great variety of climatic zones exist.
The climatic zones vary, from the extreme desert of the southern Namib in the farthest northwest to the lush subtropical climate in the east along the Mozambique border and the Indian ocean. From the east, the land quickly rises over a mountainous escarpment towards the interior plateau known as the Highveld. Even though South Africa is classified as semi-arid, there is considerable variation in climate as well as topography.
The interior of South Africa is a vast, rather flat, and sparsely populated scrubland, Karoo, which is drier towards the northwest along the Namib desert. In contrast, the eastern coastline is lush and well-watered, which produces a climate similar to the tropics. The extreme southwest has a climate remarkably similar to that of the Mediterranean with wet winters and hot, dry summers, hosting the famous Fynbos Biome. This area also produces much of the wine in South Africa. This region is also particularly known for its wind, which blows intermittently almost all year. The severity of this wind made passing around the Cape of Good Hope particularly treacherous for sailors, causing many shipwrecks. Further east on the south coast, rainfall is distributed more evenly throughout the year, producing a green landscape. This area is popularly known as the Garden Route.




Satellite picture of South Africa


The Free State is particularly flat due to the fact that it lies centrally on the high plateau. North of the Vaal River, the Highveld becomes better watered and does not experience subtropical extremes of heat. Johannesburg, in the centre of the Highveld, is at 1,740 metres (5,709 ft) and receives an annual rainfall of 760 millimetres (30 in). Winters in this region are cold, although snow is rare.
To the north of Johannesburg, the altitude drops beyond the escarpment of the Highveld, and turns into the lower lying Bushveld, an area of mixed dry forest and an abundance of wildlife. East of the Highveld, beyond the eastern escarpment, the Lowveld stretches towards the Indian ocean. It has particularly high temperatures, and is also the location of extended subtropical agriculture.
The high Drakensberg mountains, which form the south-eastern escarpment of the Highveld, offer limited skiing opportunities in winter. The coldest place in South Africa is Sutherland in the western Roggeveld Mountains, where midwinter temperatures can reach as low as −15 degrees Celsius (5 °F). The deep interior has the hottest temperatures: A temperature of 51.7 °C (125 °F) was recorded in 1948 in the Northern Cape Kalahari near Upington.[28]
South Africa also has one possession, the small sub-Antarctic archipelago of the Prince Edward Islands, consisting of Marion Island (290 km²/112 sq mi) and Prince Edward Island (45 km²/17.3 sq mi) (not to be confused with the Canadian province of the same name).



 Weather averages for Cape Town, South Africa 


Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year


Average high °C (°F)
27
(81)
28
(82)
26
(79)
24
(75)
20
(68)
18
(64)
17
(63)
18
(64)
19
(66)
22
(72)
24
(75)
26
(79)
28
(82)


Average low °C (°F)
16
(61)
16
(61)
15
(59)
13
(55)
10
(50)
8
(46)
8
(46)
8
(46)
9
(48)
11
(52)
14
(57)
15
(59)
8
(46)


Precipitation mm (inches)
16.5
(0.65)
13
(0.51)
20
(0.79)
54
(2.13)
92
(3.62)
111
(4.37)
96
(3.78)
87
(3.43)
56
(2.2)
40
(1.57)
24
(0.94)
18
(0.71)
627
(24.69)


Source: EuroWEATHER[29] 2008-02-22



Flora and fauna
See also: Wildlife of South Africa
See also: Protected areas of South Africa




Fynbos, a floral kingdom unique to South Africa, is found near Cape Town






Swartberg mountains near the town of Oudtshoorn






A field of flowers in Weskus National Park.


South Africa is one of only 17 countries worldwide considered megadiverse. It has more than 20,000 different plants, or about 10% of all the known species of plants on Earth, making it particularly rich in plant biodiversity. South Africa is the 6th most biodiverse country,[30] after Brazil, Colombia, Indonesia, China, and Mexico. The most prevalent biome in South Africa is the grassland, particularly on the Highveld, where the plant cover is dominated by different grasses, low shrubs, and acacia trees, mainly camel-thorn and whitethorn. Vegetation becomes even more sparse towards the northwest due to low rainfall. There are several species of water-storing succulents like aloes and euphorbias in the very hot and dry Namaqualand area. The grass and thorn savannah turns slowly into a bush savannah towards the north-east of the country, with denser growth. There are significant numbers of baobab trees in this area, near the northern end of Kruger National Park.[31]
The Fynbos Biome, which makes up the majority of the area and plant life in the Cape floristic region, one of the six floral kingdoms, is located in a small region of the Western Cape and contains more than 9,000 of those species, making it among the richest regions on earth in terms of floral biodiversity. The majority of the plants are evergreen hard-leaf plants with fine, needle-like leaves, such as the sclerophyllous plants. Another uniquely South African plant is the protea genus of flowering plants. There are around 130 different species of protea in South Africa.
While South Africa has a great wealth of flowering plants, it has few forests. Only 1% of South Africa is forest, almost exclusively in the humid coastal plain along the Indian Ocean in KwaZulu-Natal (see KwaZulu-Cape coastal forest mosaic). There are even smaller reserves of forests that are out of the reach of fire, known as montane forests (see Knysna-Amatole montane forests). Plantations of imported tree species are predominant, particularly the non-native eucalyptus and pine. South Africa has lost a large area of natural habitat in the last four decades, primarily due to overpopulation, sprawling development patterns and deforestation during the nineteenth century. South Africa is one of the worst affected countries in the world when it comes to invasion by alien species with many (e.g. Black Wattle, Port Jackson, Hakea, Lantana and Jacaranda) posing a significant threat to the native biodiversity and the already scarce water resources. The original temperate forest that met the first European settlers to South Africa was exploited ruthlessly until only small patches remained. Currently, South African hardwood trees like Real Yellowwood (Podocarpus latifolius), stinkwood (Ocotea bullata), and South African Black Ironwood (Olea laurifolia) are under government protection.
Numerous mammals are found in the bushveld habitats including lions, leopards, white rhinos, blue wildebeest, kudus, impalas, hyenas, hippopotamus and giraffes. A significant extent of the bushveld habitat exists in the north-east including Kruger National Park and the Mala Mala Reserve, as well as in the far north in the Waterberg Biosphere.
Climate change is expected to bring considerable warming and drying to much of this already semi-arid region, with greater frequency and intensity of extreme weather events such as heatwaves, flooding and drought. According to computer generated climate modelling produced by the South African National Biodiversity Institute[32] parts of southern Africa will see an increase in temperature by about one degree Celsius along the coast to more than four degrees Celsius in the already hot hinterland such as the Northern Cape in late spring and summertime by 2050.
The Cape Floral Kingdom has been identified as one of the global biodiversity hotspots since it will be hit very hard by climate change and has such a great diversity of life. Drought, increased intensity and frequency of fire and climbing temperatures are expected to push many of these rare species towards extinction.
South Africa houses many endemic species, among them the critically endangered Riverine Rabbit (Bunolagus monticullaris) in the Karoo.

Economy
Main article: Economy of South Africa




The Victoria & Alfred Waterfront in Cape Town with Table Mountain in the background. Cape Town has become an important retail and tourism centre for the country, and attracts the largest number of foreign visitors in South Africa


By UN classification South Africa is a middle-income country with an abundant supply of resources, well-developed financial, legal, communications, energy, and transport sectors, a stock exchange (the JSE Limited), that ranks among the top twenty in the world, and a modern infrastructure supporting an efficient distribution of goods to major urban centres throughout the entire region. South Africa is ranked 25th in the world in terms of GDP (PPP) as of 2007.
Advanced development is significantly localised around four areas: Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, Durban, and Pretoria/Johannesburg. Beyond these four economic centres, development is marginal and poverty is still prevalent despite government efforts. Consequently the vast majority of South Africans are poor. However, key marginal areas have experienced rapid growth recently. Such areas include Mossel Bay to Plettenberg Bay; Rustenburg area; Nelspruit area; Bloemfontein; Cape West Coast; and the KwaZulu-Natal North Coast.
Even though South Africa has the seventh highest per capita income in Africa, only behind Libya, Mauritius it suffers from large income gaps and a dual economy marking it as a developing country. South Africa has one of the highest rates of income inequality in the world. A decade of continual economic growth has helped to lower unemployment, but daunting economic and social problems remain. The average South African household income decreased considerably between 1995 and 2000. As for racial inequality, Statistics South Africa reported that in 1995 the average white household earned four times as much as the average black household. In 2000 the average white household was earning six times more than the average black household.[33] The affirmative action policies have seen a rise in black economic wealth and an emerging black middle class.[34] Other problems are crime, corruption, and HIV/AIDS.
At the start of 2000, then President Thabo Mbeki vowed to promote economic growth and foreign investment by relaxing restrictive labour laws, stepping up the pace of privatisation, and cutting unneeded governmental spending. His policies face strong opposition from organised labour. South Africa is also the largest energy producer and consumer on the continent. South Africa is a popular tourist destination, and a substantial amount of revenue comes from tourism.[35] Among the main attractions are the diverse and picturesque culture, the game reserves and the highly regarded local wines.
The South African rand (ZAR), is the most actively traded emerging market currency in the world. It has joined an elite club of fifteen currencies, the Continuous linked settlement (CLS), where forex transactions are settled immediately, lowering the risks of transacting across time zones. The rand was the best-performing currency against the United States dollar (USD) between 2002 and 2005, according to the Bloomberg Currency Scorecard.
The volatility of the rand has affected economic activity, falling sharply during 2001 and hitting a historic low of 13.85 ZAR to the USD, raising fears of inflation, and causing the Reserve Bank to increase interest rates. The rand has since recovered, trading at 7.13 ZAR to the dollar as of January 2008. However, as exporters are put under considerable pressure from a stronger domestic currency, many call for government intervention to help soften the rand.
Refugees from poorer neighbouring countries include many immigrants from the DRC, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Malawi and others, representing a large portion of the informal sector. With high unemployment levels amongst poorer South Africans, xenophobia is prevalent and many people born in South Africa feel resentful of immigrants who are seen to be depriving the native population of jobs, a feeling which has been given credibility by the fact that many South African employers have employed migrants from other countries for lower pay than South African citizens, especially in the construction, tourism, agriculture and domestic service industries. Illegal immigrants are also heavily involved in informal trading.[36] However, many immigrants to South Africa continue to live in poor conditions, and the South African immigration policy has become increasingly restrictive since 1994.[37]
Principal international trading partners of South Africa — besides other African countries — include Germany, the United States, China, Japan, the United Kingdom and Spain. [38] Chief exports include corn, diamonds, fruits, gold, metals and minerals, sugar, and wool. Machinery and transportation equipment make up more than one-third of the value of the country’s imports. Other imports include chemicals, manufactured goods, and petroleum.

Electricity crisis
After unsuccessful attempts by the government to encourage private construction of electricity generation capacity, in 2007 the state-owned electricity supplier (Eskom) started experiencing a lack of capacity in the electrical generating and reticulation infrastructure. This led to an inability to meet the routine demands of industry and consumers, resulting in countrywide rolling blackouts. Initially the lack of capacity was triggered by a failure at Koeberg nuclear power station, but since then a general lack of capacity became evident. The supplier has been widely criticised for failing to adequately plan for and construct sufficient electrical generating capacity,[39] although ultimately the government has admitted that it is at fault for refusing to approve funding for investment in infrastructure.[40]

Agriculture




Workers planting on a farm in the central area of Mpumalanga.






Farm workers.


South Africa has a large agricultural sector and is a net exporter of farming products. There are almost a thousand agricultural cooperatives and agribusinesses throughout the country, and agricultural exports have constituted 8% of South African total exports for the past five years. The agricultural industry contributes around 10% of formal employment, relatively low compared to other parts of Africa, as well as providing work for casual labourers and contributing around 2.6% of GDP for the nation.[41] However, due to the aridity of the land, only 13.5% can be used for crop production, and only 3% is considered high potential land.[42]
Although the commercial farming sector is relatively well developed, people in some rural areas still survive on subsistence agriculture. It is the eighth largest wine producer in the world, and the eleventh largest producer of sunflower seed. South Africa is a net exporter of agricultural products and foodstuffs, the largest number of exported items being sugar, grapes, citrus, nectarines, wine and deciduous fruit. The largest locally produced crop is maize (corn), and it has been estimated that 9 million tons are produced every year, with 7.4 million tons being consumed. Livestock are also popular on South African farms, with the country producing 85% of all meat consumed. The dairy industry consists of around 4,300 milk producers providing employment for 60,000 farm workers and contributing to the livelihoods of around 40,000 others.[43]
In recent years, the agricultural sector has introduced several reforms, some of which are controversial, such as land reform and the deregulation of the market for agricultural products. Land reform has been criticised both by farmers' groups and by landless workers, the latter alleging that the pace of change has not been fast enough, and the former alleging racist treatment and expressing concerns that a similar situation to Zimbabwe's land reform policy may develop,[44] a fear exacerbated by comments made by deputy president, the deputy president of South Africa.[45][46] The sector continues to face problems, with increased foreign competition and crime being two of the major challenges for the industry. The government has been accused of either putting in too much effort[47], or not enough effort[48], to tackle the problem of farm attacks as opposed to other forms of violent crime.
Another issue which affects South African agriculture is environmental damage caused by misuse of the land and global climate change. South Africa is unusually vulnerable to climate change and resultant diminution of surface waters. Some predictions show surface water supply could decrease by 60% by the year 2070 in parts of the Western Cape.[49] To reverse the damage caused by land mismanagement, the government has supported a scheme which promotes sustainable development and the use of natural resources.[50] Maize production, which contributes to a 36% majority of the gross value of South Africa’s field crops, has also experienced negative effects due to climate change. The estimated value of loss, which takes into consideration scenarios with and without the carbon dioxide fertilisation effect [2] ,ranges between 10’s to 100’s of millions of Rands.[51]

Demographics
Main article: Demographics of South Africa


Historical populations


Census
Pop.
 %±


1900
5,014,000
—


1910
5,842,000
16.5%


1920
6,953,000
19.0%


1930
8,580,000
23.4%


1940
10,341,000
20.5%


1950
13,310,000
28.7%


1960
16,385,000
23.1%


1970
21,794,000
33.0%


1980
24,261,000
11.3%


1990
37,944,000
56.4%


2000
43,686,000
15.1%


2008 (est.)
43,786,115
0.2%


* Source: "South Africa", Population Statistics






Population density by municipality. The western half of South Africa is sparsely populated, while the eastern half has a high population concentration.






The many migrations that formed the modern Rainbow Nation.


South Africa is a nation of more than 48 million people of diverse origins, cultures, languages, and religions. The last census was held in 2001 and the next will be in 2011. Statistics South Africa provided five racial categories by which people could classify themselves, the last of which, "unspecified/other" drew negligible responses, and these results were omitted.[52] The 2006 midyear estimated figures for the other categories were Black African at 79.5%, White at 9.2%, Coloured at 8.9%, and Indian or Asian at 2.5%.[53] Even though the population of South Africa has increased in the past decade[52][54] (primarily due to immigration), the country had an annual population growth rate of −0.501% in 2008 (CIA est.), including immigration.[55] South Africa is home to an estimated 5 million illegal immigrants, including some 3 million Zimbabweans.[56][57][58] A series of anti-immigrant riots occurred in South Africa beginning on 11 May 2008.[59][60]
By far the major part of the population classified itself as African or black, but it is not culturally or linguistically homogeneous. Major ethnic groups include the Zulu, Xhosa, Basotho (South Sotho), Bapedi (North Sotho), Venda, Tswana, Tsonga, Swazi and Ndebele, all of which speak Bantu languages (see Bantu peoples of South Africa).
Some, such as the Zulu, Xhosa, Bapedi and Venda groups, are unique to South Africa. Other groups are distributed across the borders with neighbours of South Africa: The Basotho group is also the major ethnic group in Lesotho. The Tswana ethnic group constitute the majority of the population of Botswana. The Swazi ethnic group is the major ethnic group in Swaziland. The Ndebele ethnic group is also found in Matabeleland in Zimbabwe, where they are known as the Matabele. These Ndebele people are the descendants of a Zulu faction under the warrior Mzilikazi that escaped persecution from Shaka by migrating to their current territory. The Tsonga ethnic group is also found in southern Mozambique, where they are known as the Shangaan.
The white population is not ethnically homogeneous and descend from many ethnic groups: Dutch, Flemish, Portuguese, German, French Huguenot, English, Irish, Italian, Scottish and Welsh. Culturally and linguistically, they are divided into the Afrikaners, who speak Afrikaans, and English-speaking groups, many of whom are descended from British and Irish immigrants (see Anglo-African). Many small communities that have immigrated over the last century retain the use of other languages. The white population is on the decrease due to a low birth rate and emigration; as a factor in their decision to emigrate, many cite the high crime rate and the affirmative action policies of the government. Since 1994, approximately 1 000 000 white South Africans have permanently emigrated.[61][62][63][64] Despite high emigration levels, a high level of non-South African white immigrants have settled in the country, in particular from countries such as Britain and Zimbabwe. For example, by 2005, an estimated 212 000 British citizens were residing in South Africa. Since 2003, the numbers of British migrants coming to South Africa has risen by 50%. An estimated 20 000 British migrants moved to South Africa in 2007. There have also been a significant number of white Zimbabwean arrivals, fleeing their home country in light of the economic and political problems currently facing the country. As well as recent arrivals, a significant number of white Zimbabweans emigrated to South Africa in the wake of independence in Zimbabwe in 1980. Some of the more nostalgic members of the community are known in popular culture as "Whenwes", because of their nostalgia for their lives in Rhodesia "when we were in Rhodesia".[65]
The term Coloured is still largely used for the people of mixed race descended from slaves brought in from East and Central Africa, the indigenous Khoisan who lived in the Cape at the time, Bantus, Whites (mostly the Dutch/Afrikaner and British settlers) as well as an admixture of Javanese, Malay, Indian, Malagasy and Asian blood (such as Burmese). The majority speak Afrikaans. Khoisan is a term used to describe two separate groups, physically similar: light-skinned and small in stature. The Khoikhoi, who were called Hottentots by the Europeans, were pastoralists and were annihilated; the San, called Bushmen by the Europeans, were hunter-gatherers. Within the Coloured community, more recent immigrants will also be found: Coloureds from the former Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe); Namibia and immigrants of mixed descent from India and Burma (Anglo-Indians/Anglo-Burmese) who were welcomed to the Cape when India and Burma received their Independence.
The major part of the South African Asian population is Indian in origin (see Indian South Africans); many of them descended from indentured workers brought in the nineteenth century to work on the sugar plantations of the eastern coastal area then known as Natal. There is also a significant group of Chinese South Africans (approximately 100,000 individuals) and Vietnamese South Africans (approximately 50,000 individuals). In 2008, the Pretoria High Court has ruled that Chinese South Africans who arrived before 1994 are to be reclassified as Coloureds. As a result of this ruling, about 12,000 - 15,000 [66]ethnically Chinese citizens who arrived before 1994, numbering 3%-5% of the total Chinese population in the country, will be able to benefit from government BEE policies.[67]
South Africa hosts a sizeable refugee and asylum seeker population. According to the World Refugee Survey 2008, published by the U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants, this population numbered approximately 144,700 in 2007.[68] Groups of refugees and asylum seekers numbering over 10,000 included people from Zimbabwe (48,400), The Democratic Republic of the Congo (24,800), and Somalia (12,900).[68] These populations mainly lived in Johannesburg, Pretoria, Durban, Cape Town, and Port Elizabeth.[68]

Science and technology
Several important scientific and technological developments have originated in South Africa. The first human to human heart transplant was performed by cardiac surgeon Christiaan Barnard at Groote Schuur Hospital in December 1967. Max Theiler developed a vaccine against Yellow Fever, Allan McLeod Cormack pioneered x-ray Computed tomography, and Aaron Klug developed crystallographic electron microscopy techniques. These advancements were all recognised with Nobel Prizes. Sydney Brenner won most recently, in 2002, for his pioneering work in molecular biology.
Mark Shuttleworth founded an early Internet security company Thawte, that was subsequently bought out by world-leader VeriSign. Despite government efforts to encourage entrepreneurship in biotechnology, IT and other high technology fields, no other notable groundbreaking companies have been founded in South Africa. However, it is the expressed objective of the government to transition the economy to be more reliant on high technology, based on the realisation that South African cannot compete with Far Eastern economies in manufacturing, nor can the republic rely on its mineral wealth in perpetuity.
South Africa has cultivated a burgeoning astronomy community. It hosts the Southern African Large Telescope, the largest optical telescope in the southern hemisphere. South Africa is currently building the Karoo Array Telescope as a pathfinder for the $20 billion Square Kilometer Array project. South Africa is a finalist, with Australia, to be the host of the SKA.

Society and culture
Main article: Culture of South Africa




Decorated houses, Drakensberg Mountains






Traditional South African cuisine.


It may be argued that there is no "single" culture in South Africa because of its ethnic diversity. Today, the diversity in foods from many cultures is enjoyed by all and especially marketed to tourists who wish to sample the large variety of South African cuisine. In addition to food, music and dance feature prominently.
South African cuisine is heavily meat-based and has spawned the distinctively South African social gathering known as a braai, or barbecue. South Africa has also developed into a major wine producer, with some of the best vineyards lying in valleys around Stellenbosch, Franschoek, Paarl and Barrydale.[69]
There is great diversity in music from South Africa. Many black musicians who sang in Afrikaans or English during apartheid have since begun to sing in traditional African languages, and have developed a unique style called Kwaito. Of note is Brenda Fassie, who launched to fame with her song "Weekend Special", which was sung in English. More famous traditional musicians include Ladysmith Black Mambazo, while the Soweto String Quartet performs classic music with an African flavour. White and Coloured South African singers are historically influenced by European musical styles including such western metal bands such as Seether (formerly Saron Gas). South Africa has produced world-famous jazz musicians, notably Hugh Masekela, Jonas Gwangwa, Abdullah Ibrahim, Miriam Makeba, Jonathan Butler, Chris McGregor, and Sathima Bea Benjamin. Afrikaans music covers multiple genres, such as the contemporary Steve Hofmeyr and the punk rock band Fokofpolisiekar. Crossover artists such as Johnny Clegg and his bands Juluka and Savuka have enjoyed various success underground, publicly, and abroad.
The South African black majority still has a substantial number of rural inhabitants who lead largely impoverished lives. It is among these people, however, that cultural traditions survive most strongly; as blacks have become increasingly urbanised and westernised, aspects of traditional culture have declined. Urban blacks usually speak English or Afrikaans in addition to their native tongue. There are smaller but still significant groups of speakers of Khoisan languages who are not included in the eleven official languages, but are one of the eight other officially recognised languages. There are small groups of speakers of endangered languages, most of which are from the Khoi-San family, that receive no official status; however, some groups within South Africa are attempting to promote their use and revival.
The middle class lifestyle, predominantly of the white minority but with growing numbers of Black, Coloured and Indian people,[70] is similar in many respects to that of people found in Western Europe, North America and Australasia. Members of the middle class often study and work abroad for greater exposure to the markets of the world.
Asians, predominantly of Indian origin, preserve their own cultural heritage, languages and religious beliefs, being either Christian, Hindu or Sunni Muslim and speaking English, with Indian languages like Hindi, Telugu, Tamil or Gujarati being spoken less frequently, but the majority of Indians being able to understand their mother tongue. The first Indians arrived on the famous Truro ship as indentured labourers in Natal to work the Sugar Cane Fields. There is a much smaller Chinese community in South Africa, although its numbers have increased due to immigration from Republic of China (Taiwan).
South Africa has also had a large influence in the Scouting movement, with many Scouting traditions and ceremonies coming from the experiences of Robert Baden-Powell (the founder of Scouting) during his time in South Africa as a military officer in the 1890s. The South African Scout Association was one of the first youth organisations to open its doors to youth and adults of all races in South Africa. This happened on 2 July 1977 at a conference known as Quo Vadis.[71]
The South African music scene consists of Kwaito, a new music genre that had developed in the mid 80s and has since developed to become the most popular social economical form of representation among the populous. Though some may argue that the political aspects of Kwaito has since diminished after Apartheid, and the relative interest in politics has become a minor aspect of daily life. Some argue that in a sense, Kwaito is in fact a political force that shows activism in its apolitical actions. Today, major corporations like Sony, BMG, and EMI have appeared on the South African scene to produce and distribute Kwaito music. Due to its overwhelming popularity, as well as the general influence of DJs, who are among the top 5 most influential types of people within the country, Kwaito has taken over radio, television, and magazines.[72]
Kwaito, much like most hip-hop has its own local flavor and originality. However, unlike when hip-hop first burst on the scene as a politically driven and rebellious underground movement, South Africans wanted to create a happier vibe. As the post-apartheid fog cleared, South African youth found their "own voice in a style of music known as kwaito, spawning a new (and profitable) industry".[73] According to TIMEeurope magazine, "The kwaito sound now regularly incorporates traditional African music, jazz, gospel, and even rock guitar, most notably on Mandoza's 2000 hit Nkalakatha, one of the few kwaito records to cross over onto traditionally white radio".[74] In the kwaito, the samples from old school Jamaican dancehall, European house, etc., tempos are changed, beats are added, and urban street slang is also incorporated. This local flavour of music more recently has been attacked for its lack of ingenuity and its betrayal of its roots. The melodies and the incorporation of sex and dance have since become very similar to the American standard. In addition Kwaito has been criticised for its absence of influential lyrical content. As Kwaito is still a developing genre, and since the South African population is only around 48 million, sales of only 25,000 CDs are required for "gold" certification in South Africa.[73]

Religion
Main article: Religion in South Africa




St. Mark's Anglican Cathedral.


According to the latest 2001 national census, Christians accounted for 79.7% of the population. This includes Zion Christian 11.1%, Pentecostal (Charismatic) 8.2%, Roman Catholic 7.1%, Methodist 6.8%, Dutch Reformed 6.7%, Anglican 3.8%, and other Christian 36%. Islam accounted for 1.5% of the population, Hinduism about 1.3%, and Judaism 0.2%. 15.1% had no religious affiliation, 2.3% were other and 1.4% were unspecified.[75][76]
African Indigenous Churches were the largest of the Christian groups. It was believed that many of these persons who claimed no affiliation with any organised religion adhered to traditional indigenous religions. Many peoples have syncretic religious practices combining Christian and indigenous influences.[77]
Islam in South Africa itself is not known to pre-date the colonial period, despite the isolated contact neighbouring Mozambique had with Arab and East African traders.[citation needed] There is no evidence that Islam was known to the Zulu, Swazi, or Xhosa of the east coast prior to the colonial era. Many South African Muslims are described as Coloureds, notably in the Western Cape, especially those whose ancestors came as slaves from the Indonesian archipelago (the Cape Malays). Others are described as Indians, notably in KwaZulu-Natal, including those whose ancestors came as traders from South Asia; they have been joined by others from other parts of Africa as well as white or black South African converts. It is estimated that Islam is the fastest growing religion of conversion in the country,[78] with the number of black Muslims growing sixfold, from 12,000 in 1991 to 74,700 in 2004.[79]
Hinduism dates back to British Colonial period primarily but later waves of continuous immigrants from India have contributed to a sizeable Hindu population. Most Hindus are ethnically South Asian but there are many who come from mixed racial stock and many are converts with the efforts of Hindu missionaries such as ISKCON. Other religions in smaller numbers are Sikhism, Jainism and Bahá'í Faith.[76]

Languages
Main article: Languages of South Africa




Map showing principal South African languages by municipality. Lighter shades indicate a non-majority plurality.


     Afrikaans      Northern Sotho      Southern Sotho      Swati      Tsonga

     Tswana      Venda      Xhosa      Zulu






South Africa has eleven official languages:[80] Sepedi, Sesotho, Setswana, siSwati, Tshivenda, Xitsonga, Afrikaans, English, isiNdebele, isiXhosa and isiZulu. In this regard it is second only to India in number. While each language is formally equal to every other, some languages are spoken more than others. According to the 2001 National Census, the three most spoken first home languages are Zulu (23.8%), Xhosa (17.6%) and Afrikaans (13.3%).[52] Despite the fact that English is recognised as the language of commerce and science, it was spoken by only 8.2% of South Africans at home in 2001, an even lower percentage than in 1996 (8.6%).[52]
There are eleven official names for South Africa, one in each of the official national languages. The country also recognises eight non-official languages: Fanagalo, Khoe, Lobedu, Nama, Northern Ndebele, Phuthi, San and South African Sign Language.[citation needed] These non-official languages may be used in certain official uses in limited areas where it has been determined that these languages are prevalent. Nevertheless, their populations are not such that they require nationwide recognition.
Many of the "unofficial languages" of the San and Khoikhoi people contain regional dialects stretching northward into Namibia and Botswana, and elsewhere. These people, who are a physically distinct population from other Africans, have their own cultural identity based on their hunter-gatherer societies. They have been marginalised to a great extent, and many of their languages are in danger of becoming extinct.
Many white South Africans also speak other European languages, such as Portuguese (also spoken by Angolan and Mozambican blacks), German, and Greek, while some Asians and Indians in South Africa speak South Asian languages, such as Tamil, Hindi, Gujarati, Urdu and Telugu. French is still widely spoken by French South Africans especially in places like Franschhoek, where many South Africans are of French origin. South African French is spoken by less than 10,000 individuals. Congolese French is also spoken in South Africa by migrants.

Sports





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2008)


The main sports in South Africa are soccer, rugby, cricket, boxing and lawn bowls. Other sports with significant support are swimming, golf and netball. Basketball, surfing and skateboarding are popular among the youth.
Famous boxing personalities include Baby Jake Jacob Matlala, Vuyani Bungu, Welcome Ncita, Dingaan Thobela, Gerrie Coetzee and Brian Mitchell. Football players who have excelled in international clubs include Lucas Radebe of Leeds United and Quinton Fortune, formerly of Manchester United, Benni McCarthy and Aaron Mokoena of Blackburn Rovers and Steven Pienaar of Everton. South Africa produced Formula 1 motor racing's 1979 world champion Jody Scheckter.
South Africa hosted and won the 1995 Rugby World Cup at their first attempt and again won the 2007 Rugby World Cup in France. South Africa was only allowed to participate from 1995 since the end of Apartheid. It followed the 1995 Rugby World Cup by hosting and winning the 1996 African Cup of Nations football tournament. It also hosted the 2003 Cricket World Cup and the 2007 World Twenty20 Championship. South Africa will be the host nation for the 2010 FIFA World Cup, which will be the first time the tournament is held on the African continent.
In 2004, the swim team of Roland Schoeman, Lyndon Ferns, Darian Townsend and Ryk Neethling won the gold medal at the 2004 Olympic Games in Athens, simultaneously breaking the world record in the 4x100 freestyle relay. Penny Heyns won Olympic Gold in the 1996 Atlanta Olympic Games.
In golf, Gary Player is generally regarded as one of the greatest golfers of all time, having won the Career Grand Slam, one of five golfers to have done so. Other South African golfers to have successfully won a major tournament include Bobby Locke, Ernie Els, Retief Goosen and Trevor Immelman.

Current issues

HIV/AIDS
Main article: HIV/AIDS in South Africa
The spread of AIDS (acquired immuno-deficiency syndrome) is an alarming problem in South Africa with up to 31% of pregnant women found to be HIV infected in 2005 and the infection rate among adults estimated at 20%.[81] The link between HIV, a virus spread primarily by sexual contact, and AIDS was long denied by prior president Thabo Mbeki and then health minister Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, who insisted that the many deaths in the country are due to malnutrition, and hence poverty, and not HIV.[82] In 2007, in response to international pressure, the government made efforts to fight AIDS.[83] In September 2008 Thabo Mbeki was ousted by the ANC and Kgalema Motlanthe was appointed for the interim. One of Mr. Motlanthe's first actions was to replace Mrs. Tshabalala-Msimang with the current minister, Barbara Hogan.
AIDS affects mainly those who are sexually active and is far more prevalent in the black population. Most deaths are people who are also economically active, resulting in many families losing their primary wage earners. This has resulted in many 'AIDS orphans' who in many cases depend on the state for care and financial support.[84] It is estimated that there are 1,200,000 orphans in South Africa.[84] Many elderly people also lose the support from lost younger members of their family. Roughly 5 million people are infected with the disease.[83]

Crime
Main article: Crime in South Africa




Prison buildings on Robben Island


According to a survey for the period 1998–2000 compiled by the United Nations, South Africa was ranked second for murder and first for assaults and rapes per capita.[85] Total crime per capita is 10th out of the 60 countries in the data set.
Crime has had a pronounced effect on society: many middle-class South Africans moved into gated communities, abandoning the central business districts of some cities for the relative security of suburbs. This effect is most pronounced in Johannesburg, although the trend is noticeable in other cities as well.[citation needed] Many emigrants from South Africa also state that crime was a big motivator for them to leave. Crime against the farming community has continued to be a major problem.[86]

Skills migration
Along with many African nations, South Africa has been experiencing a "brain drain" in the past 20 years. This is believed to be potentially damaging for the regional economy,[87] and is almost certainly detrimental for the well-being of the majority of people reliant on the healthcare infrastructure, given the HIV/AIDS epidemic.[88] The skills drain in South Africa tends to demonstrate racial contours (naturally given the skills distribution legacy of South Africa) and has thus resulted in large white South African communities abroad.[89]

Xenophobia
Main article: Xenophobia in South Africa
In May 2008 long standing state hostility to African migrants exploded in a series of pogroms that left up to 100 people dead and 100,000 displaced. [90]

See also




South Africa portal




List of South Africa–related topics
Outline of South Africa


References


^ Principal Agglomerations of the World at www.citypopulation.de
^ a b c "Mid-year population estimates, South Africa: 2007". Statistics South Africa. 2007 -07-03. pp. 3. http://www.statssa.gov.za/PublicationsHTML/P03022007/html/P03022007.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-07. 
^ "Census 2001 at a glance". Statistics South Africa. http://www.statssa.gov.za/census01/html/default.asp. Retrieved on 2008-07-07. 
^ a b c d "South Africa". International Monetary Fund. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?pr.x=49&pr.y=15&sy=2004&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=199&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&grp=0&a=. Retrieved on 2008-10-09. 
^ "South African Maritime Safety Authority". South African Maritime Safety Authority. http://www.samsa.org.za/. Retrieved on 2008-06-16. 
^ "World Factbook - Coastline". CIA. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/fields/2060.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-16. 
^ a b c d "South Africa Fast Facts". SouthAfrica.info. April 2007. http://www.southafrica.info/about/facts.htm. Retrieved on 2008-06-14. 
^ "Encyclopædia Britannica Online". Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.. http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-9113829/LESOTHO. 
^ "en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klasies_River_Caves". http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klasies_River_Caves. 
^ "African History Timeline". West Chester University of Pennsylvania. http://courses.wcupa.edu/jones/his311/timeline/t-19saf.htm. 
^ "About Sterkfontein Caves". http://www.maropeng.co.za/index.php/sterkfontein/. 
^ "Fossil Hominid Sites of Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai, and Environs". http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/915. 
^ Stephen P. Broker. "Hominid Evolution". Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute. http://www.yale.edu/ynhti/curriculum/units/1979/6/79.06.02.x.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-19. 
^ Williams, Garner F (1905). The Diamond Mines of South Africa, Vol II. New York, USA: B. F Buck & Co.. pp. Chapter XX. http://www.farlang.com/diamonds/williams_diamond_mines_2/page_285.  Garnder Williams was General Manager of the De Beers mines and recounts the story of the British siege of the major Diamond mines such as the famous Kimberly mine
^ "19 June 1913 Native Land Act", This day in history, publish date unknown (accessed 20 December 2007).
^ http://www.mg.co.za/article/2008-04-18-zuma-surprised-at-level-of-white-poverty
^ "South Africa". Human Development Report. United Nations Development Programme. 2006. http://hdrstats.undp.org/countries/country_fact_sheets/cty_fs_ZAF.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-28. 
^ "Ridicule succeeds where leadership failed on AIDS". South African Institute of Race Relations. 10 November 2006. http://0-www.sairr.org.za.innopac.up.ac.za:80/wsc/pstory.htx?storyID=428. 
^ Pamela Snyman and Amanda Barratt (2002-10-02). "Researching South African Law". Library Resource Xchange. http://0-www.llrx.com.innopac.up.ac.za:80/features/southafrica.htm. Retrieved on 2008-06-23. 
^ "Article by Imran Buccus in the Mercury newspaper". http://abahlali.org/node/1898. 
^ a b "Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Act 200 of 1993 (Section 224)". South African Government. 1993. http://www.info.gov.za/documents/constitution/93cons.htm#SECTION224. Retrieved on 2008-06-23. 
^ Col L B van Stade, Senior Staff Officer Rationalisation, SANDF (1997). "Rationalisation in the SANDF: The Next Challenge". Institute for Security Studies. http://www.issafrica.org/Pubs/ASR/6No2/VanStade.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-23. 
^ "Defence Act 42 of 2002" (PDF). South African Government. 2003-02-12. pp. 18. http://www.info.gov.za/gazette/acts/2002/a42-02.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-06-23. 
^ a b c Mosiuoa Lekota (2005-09-05). "Address by the Minister of Defence at a media breakfast at Defence Headquarters, Pretoria". Department of Defence. http://www.dod.mil.za/media/media2005/sep/media_statements5sep2005.htm. Retrieved on 2008-06-23. 
^ a b Lieutenant Colonel Roy E. Horton III (BS, Electrical Engineering; MS, Strategic Intelligence) (October 1999). "Out of (South) Africa: Pretoria's Nuclear Weapons Experience". USAF Institute for National Security Studies. http://www.fas.org/nuke/guide/rsa/nuke/ocp27.htm. Retrieved on 2008-06-23. 
^ Christine Dodson (1979-10-22). "South Atlantic Nuclear Event (National Security Council, Memorandum)" (PDF). George Washington University under Freedom of Information Act Request. http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB190/01.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-06-23. 
^ "World Factbook". CIA. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2147rank.html. 
^ "SouthAfrica.info: South Africa's geography". http://www.safrica.info/ess_info/sa_glance/geography/geography.htm. 
^ "Euroweather - Climate averages: Cape Town, South Africa" (in English). http://www.eurometeo.com/english/climate/city_FACT/id_GTx/meteo_cape%20town%20south%20africa. Retrieved on 2008-02-22. 
^ Biodiversity of the world by countries
^ Plants and Vegetation in South Africa, South Africa Online Travel Guide.
^ South African National Biodiversity Institute.
^ SARPN - South Africa at www.sarpn.org.za
^ "Black middle class boosts car sales in South Africa: Mail & Guardian Online". http://www.mg.co.za/articlePage.aspx?articleid=261345&area=/breaking_news/breaking_news__business/. 
^ "SA Economic Research - Tourism Update" (PDF). Investec. October 2005. http://www.investec.com/NR/rdonlyres/13AEE8DD-1266-420D-B7BE-DCF92C12967F/4035/TourismUpdateOctober2005.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-06-23. 
^ "African Security Review Vol 5 No 4, 1996: Strategic Perspectives on Illegal Immigration into South Africa". http://0-www.iss.co.za.innopac.up.ac.za:80/pubs/ASR/5No4/StrategigPerspectives.html. 
^ "Queens College: The Brain Gain: Skilled Migrants and Immigration Policy in Post-Apartheid South Africa". http://www.queensu.ca/samp/sampresources/samppublications/policyseries/policy20.htm. 
^ "CIA-the World Fact book--South Africa". https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/sf.html. 
^ "Power Failures Outrage South Africa" article by Barry Bearak and Celia W. Dugger in The New York Times 31 January 2008
^ "S Africa cuts power to neighbours". BBC News. 21 January 2008. http://0-news.bbc.co.uk.innopac.up.ac.za:80/2/hi/africa/7199814.stm. Retrieved on 2008-04-20. 
^ Human Rights Watch, 2001. Unequal Protection: The State Response to Violent Crime on South African Farms, ISBN 1-56432-263-7.
^ Mohamed, Najma. 2000. "Greening Land and Agrarian Reform: A Case for Sustainable Agriculture", in At the Crossroads: Land and Agrarian Reform in South Africa into the 21st century, ed. Cousins, Ben. Bellville, School of Government, University of the Western Cape. ISBN 1-86808-467-1.
^ "Agriculture". South Africa Online. http://www.southafrica.co.za/agriculture_29.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-17. 
^ South Africa's bitter harvest.
^ South Africans' long wait for land, BBC News.
^ SA 'to learn from' land seizures, BBC News.
^ Bronwen Manby (August 2001). Unequal Protection - The State Response to Violent Crime on South African Farms. Human Rights Watch. ISBN 1-56432-263-7. http://www.hrw.org/reports/2001/safrica2/. Retrieved on 2006-10-28. 
^ Farms of Fear, The Sunday Times Magazine.
^ Climate change to create African 'water refugees' – scientists, Reuters Alertnet. Accessed 21 September 2006].
^ Department of Agriculture South Africa.
^ Economic Impacts of Climate Change in South Africa: A Preliminary Analysis of Unmitigated Damage Costs, J. Turpie et al. 2002. Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies Inc. Southern Waters Ecological Research & Consulting & Energy & Development Research Centre. 64 pages.
^ a b c d Census 2001, Statistics South Africa.
^ "Midyear population estimates, South Africa" (PDF). Statistics South Africa. 2006. http://www.statssa.gov.za/publications/P0302/P03022006.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-11-28. 
^ "statssa.gov.za" (PDF). http://www.statssa.gov.za/Publications/CS2007Basic/CS2007Basic.pdf. 
^ "The demographic status of the world's population". Global Statistics. GeoHive. http://www.xist.org/earth/pop_growth.aspx. 
^ "Anti-immigrant violence spreads in South Africa, with attacks reported in Cape Town". http://www.iht.com/articles/2008/05/23/africa/23saf.php. 
^ "Escape From Mugabe: Zimbabwe's Exodus". http://news.sky.com/skynews/article/0,,30200-1277808,00.html. 
^ "More illegals set to flood SA". http://www.fin24.com/articles/default/display_article.aspx?ArticleId=1518-25_2035097. 
^ "South African mob kills migrants". BBC. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/africa/7396868.stm. Retrieved on 2008-05-19. 
^ Barry Bearak (23 May 2008). "Immigrants Fleeing Fury of South African Mobs". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/05/23/world/africa/23safrica.html?_r=1&ref=africa&oref=slogin. Retrieved on 2008-08-05. 
^ Million whites leave SA- study
^ Unisa.
^ Policy Series, Queen’s University.
^ The Economist.
^ "Rhodie oldies". New Internationalist. 1985. http://www.newint.org/issue155/briefly.htm. Retrieved on 2007-10-29. 
^ http://www.salon.com/tech/htww/2008/06/19/chinese_declared_black/ Chinese declared black
^ We agree that you are black, South African court tells Chinese, The Times
^ a b c "World Refugee Survey 2008". U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants. 2008-06-19. http://www.refugees.org/survey. 
^ "thewinedoctor.com". http://www.thewinedoctor.com/regionalguides/southafrica.shtml. 
^ "Black middle class explodes". FIN24. 22 May 2007. http://www.fin24.co.za/articles/default/display_article.aspx?Nav=ns&ArticleID=1518-25_2117122. 
^ "History of Scouting in South Africa". History of Scouting in South Africa. South African Scout Association. 2006. http://www.scouting.org.za/visitors/history.html. Retrieved on 2006-11-30. 
^ "South African music after Apartheid: kwaito, the "party politic," and the appropriation of gold as a sign of success". http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m2822/is_3_28/ai_n15648564/pg_5. 
^ a b "Kwaito: much more than music - SouthAfrica.info". http://www.southafrica.info/what_happening/news/features/kwaitomental.htm. 
^ "TIMEeurope Magazine". http://www.time.com/time/europe/html/040419/kwaito.html. 
^ Factbook, CIA.
^ a b "South Africa - Section I. Religious Demography". U.S. Department of State. http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2005/51496.htm. Retrieved on 2006-07-15. 
^ Department of State, USA.
^ "In South Africa, many blacks convert to Islam". http://www.csmonitor.com/2002/0110/p13s1-woaf.html. 
^ "Muslims say their faith growing fast in Africa". http://www.wwrn.org/article.php?idd=14286&sec=33&con=58. 
^ Constitution of South Africa, Chapter 1, Section 6 [1]
^ "HIV & Aids in South Africa". Avert. http://www.avert.org/aidssouthafrica.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-08. 
^ ""Sack SA Health Minister" – world's AIDS experts". afrol News. http://www.afrol.com/articles/21094. Retrieved on 2006-10-08. 
^ a b "info.gov.za" (PDF). http://0-www.info.gov.za.innopac.up.ac.za:80/otherdocs/2007/aidsplan2007/situation_analysis.pdf. 
^ a b "AIDS orphans". Avert. http://www.avert.org/aidsorphans.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-08. 
^ "NationMaster: South African Crime Statistics". http://www.nationmaster.com/red/country/sf/Crime&b_cite=1. 
^ "Farms of fear". The Times Online. 2 April 2006. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/life_and_style/article694534.ece. 
^ http://jae.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/13/suppl_2/ii15 World Bank, IMF study 2004
^ http://www.equinetafrica.org/bibl/docs/healthpersonnel.pdf Health Personnel in Southern Africa: Confronting maldistribution and brain drain
^ http://www-ilo-mirror.cornell.edu/public/english/protection/migrant/download/imp/imp52e.pdf Skilled Labour Migration from Developing Countries: Study on South and Southern Africa
^ A collection of published articles on the May 2008 pogroms



Further reading

A History of South Africa, Third Edition. Leonard Thompson. Yale University Press. 1 March 2001. 384 pages. ISBN 0-300-08776-4.
Emerging Johannesburg: Perspectives on the Postapartheid City. Richard Tomlinson, et al. 1 January 2003. 336 pages. ISBN 0-415-93559-8.
Making of Modern South Africa: Conquest, Segregation and Apartheid. Nigel Worden. 1 July 2000. 194 pages. ISBN 0-631-21661-8.
Religion and Politics in South Africa. David Hein. Modern Age 31 (1987): 21–30.
South Africa: A Narrative History. Frank Welsh. Kodansha America. 1 February 1999. 606 pages. ISBN 1-56836-258-7.
South Africa in Contemporary Times. Godfrey Mwakikagile. New Africa Press. February 2008. 260 pages. ISBN 978-0-9802587-3-8.
The Atlas of Changing South Africa. A. J. Christopher. 1 October 2000. 216 pages. ISBN 0-415-21178-6.
The Politics of the New South Africa. Heather Deegan. 28 December 2000. 256 pages. ISBN 0-582-38227-0.
Twentieth-Century South Africa. William Beinart Oxford University Press 2001, 414 pages, ISBN 0-19-289318-1
The Diamond Mines of South Africa. Gardner F. Williams, General Manager De Beers, Buck & Co, 1905, 845 pages, Vol I and II. Online full text version: Diamond Mines Vol. I and Diamond Mines Vol. II


External links

Find more about South Africa on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Government of South Africa
Chief of State and Cabinet Members
South Africa entry at The World Factbook
South Africa from UCB Libraries GovPubs
South Africa at the Open Directory Project
SouthAfrica.info
Wikimedia Atlas of South Africa
South Africa travel guide from Wikitravel








 
Links to related articles














v • d • e

 South Africa topics





History

Cape Colony · Orange Free State · Transvaal · Apartheid · Foreign relations · Nuclear programme






Geography

Provinces · Municipalities · Cities · Towns · National parks · Rivers · Postal codes · Telephone codes






Politics

Constitution · Political parties · Diplomatic missions · Elections · Military · Police






Economy

Communications · Transport · Companies · Tourism






Culture

Art · Cinema · Cuisine · Education · Language · Literature · Music · Poets · Public holidays · Religion · Sport · Media






Other topics

Notable South Africans · HIV/AIDS · Crime



















 
Geographic locale














v • d • e

Countries and territories of Africa





 West Africa

Benin · Burkina Faso · Cape Verde · Côte d'Ivoire · The Gambia · Ghana · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Liberia · Mali · Mauritania · Niger · Nigeria · Senegal · Sierra Leone · Togo






 North Africa

Algeria · Egypt1 · Libya · Mauritania · Morocco · Sudan · Tunisia · Western Sahara 2






 Central Africa

Angola · Burundi · Cameroon · Central African Republic · Chad · Democratic Republic of the Congo · Republic of the Congo · Equatorial Guinea · Gabon · Rwanda · São Tomé and Príncipe






 East Africa

Burundi · Comoros · Djibouti · Eritrea · Ethiopia · Kenya · Madagascar · Malawi · Mauritius · Mozambique · Rwanda · Seychelles · Somalia · Tanzania · Uganda · Zambia · Zimbabwe






 Southern Africa

Botswana · Lesotho · Namibia · South Africa · Swaziland






 Dependencies

British Indian Ocean Territory / St. Helena3 (UK) · Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) · Madeira (Portugal) · Mayotte / Réunion (France) · Socotra (Yemen)






 Unrecognized

Puntland · Somaliland · Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic






1 Partly in Asia.  2 Status undetermined.  3 Includes the dependencies of Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha.












v • d • e

Countries and territories bordering the Indian Ocean





Africa

Comoros · Djibouti · Eritrea · Kenya · Madagascar · Mauritius · Mayotte · Mozambique · Réunion · Seychelles · Somalia · South Africa · Sudan · Tanzania







Asia

Bahrain · Bangladesh · Burma · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands · India · Indonesia · Iran · Iraq · Kuwait · Malaysia · Maldives · Oman · Pakistan · Qatar · Saudi Arabia · Sri Lanka · Thailand · United Arab Emirates · Yemen






Oceania

Australia · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands






Islands

Bahrain · British Indian Ocean Territory · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands · Madagascar · Maldives · Mauritius · Mayotte · Réunion · Seychelles · Sri Lanka



















 
International membership














v • d • e

South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone





Members

Angola • Argentina • Benin • Brazil • Cameroon • Cape Verde • Republic of the Congo • Democratic Republic of the Congo • Côte d'Ivoire • Equatorial Guinea • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea • Guinea-Bissau • Liberia • Namibia • Nigeria • São Tomé and Príncipe • Senegal • Sierra Leone • South Africa • Togo • Uruguay






Ministerial Meetings

2nd (1993) · 3rd (1994) · 4th (1996) · 5th (1998) · 6th (2007)













v • d • e

Southern African Development Community (SADC)





Member states


Angola · Botswana · Democratic Republic of the Congo · Lesotho · Madagascar · Malawi · Mauritius · Mozambique · Namibia · South Africa · Swaziland · Tanzania · Zambia · Zimbabwe








Leaders

Chairpersons: Levy Mwanawasa · Kgalema Motlanthe
Secretaries-General: Kaire Mbuende · Prega Ramsamy · Tomaz Salomão






See also

Southern African Development Coordination Conference · Southern African Customs Union · Common Monetary Area · Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa













v • d • e

African Union (AU)








Algeria · Angola · Benin · Botswana · Burkina Faso · Burundi · Cameroon · Cape Verde · Central African Republic · Chad · Comoros · Democratic Republic of the Congo · Republic of the Congo · Côte d'Ivoire · Djibouti · Egypt · Eritrea · Ethiopia · Equatorial Guinea · Gabon · The Gambia · Ghana · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Kenya · Lesotho · Liberia · Libya · Madagascar · Malawi · Mali · Mauritania · Mauritius · Mozambique · Namibia · Niger · Nigeria · Rwanda · Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic · São Tomé and Príncipe · Senegal · Seychelles · Sierra Leone · Somalia · South Africa · Sudan · Swaziland · Tanzania · Togo · Tunisia · Uganda · Zambia · Zimbabwe
















v • d • e

States belonging to the Community of Democracies at the United Nations





Members

 Cape Verde ·  Chile ·  Czech Republic ·  El Salvador ·  India ·  Italy ·  Korea, South ·  Lithuania ·  Mali
 Mexico ·  Mongolia ·  Morocco ·  Philippines ·  Poland ·  Portugal ·  South Africa ·  United States













v • d • e

Peri-Antarctic countries and overseas territories








Argentina · Australia (Heard Island and McDonald Islands • Macquarie Island) · Chile · Falkland Islands · French Southern and Antarctic Lands (Kerguelen Islands) · New Zealand (New Zealand Sub-Antarctic Islands) · Norway (Bouvet Island) · South Africa (Prince Edward Islands) · South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands









"Peri-Antarctic" (meaning "close to the Antarctic") does not include territorial claims on Antarctica itself.












v • d • e

Members of the Commonwealth of Nations





Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda · Australia · Bahamas · Bangladesh · Barbados · Belize · Botswana · Brunei · Cameroon · Canada · Cyprus · Dominica · Fiji · The Gambia · Ghana · Grenada · Guyana · India · Jamaica · Kenya · Kiribati · Lesotho · Malawi · Malaysia · Maldives · Malta · Mauritius · Mozambique · Namibia · Nauru · New Zealand · Nigeria · Pakistan · Papua New Guinea · St. Kitts and Nevis · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · Samoa · Seychelles · Sierra Leone · Singapore · Solomon Islands · South Africa · Sri Lanka · Swaziland · Tanzania · Tonga · Trinidad and Tobago · Tuvalu · Uganda · United Kingdom · Vanuatu · Zambia











Dependencies





Australia




Ashmore and Cartier Islands · Australian Antarctic Territory · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands · Coral Sea Islands · Heard Island and McDonald Islands · Norfolk Island









New Zealand




Cook Islands · Niue · Ross Dependency · Tokelau









United Kingdom




Akrotiri and Dhekelia · Anguilla · Bermuda · British Antarctic Territory · British Indian Ocean Territory · British Virgin Islands · Cayman Islands · Falkland Islands · Gibraltar · Guernsey · Isle of Man · Jersey · Montserrat · Pitcairn Islands · St. Helena (including Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha) · South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands · Turks and Caicos Islands


















   



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/South_Africa"
Categories: African Union member states | English-speaking countries and territories | Liberal democracies | Members of the Commonwealth of Nations | South AfricaHidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism | Wikipedia protected pages without expiry | Articles needing additional references from September 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since October 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2007 | Articles needing additional references from June 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
مصرى
Arpetan
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
Bamanankan
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Chi-Chewa
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deitsch
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
ཇོང་ཁ
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Føroyskt
Fiji Hindi
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
文言
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
Иронау
isiXhosa
isiZulu
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kapampangan
ქართული
ಕನ್ನಡ
कश्मीरी - (كشميري)
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Коми
Kongo
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lingála
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Māori
मराठी
مَزِروني
Bahasa Melayu
Мокшень
Монгол
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
नेपाली
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
O'zbek
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Ripoarisch
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
संस्कृत
Sardu
Scots
Sesotho
Setswana
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
SiSwati
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Soomaaliga
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Tok Pisin
Tshivenda
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
Volapük
Walon
Wolof
吴语
Xitsonga
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
粵語
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 04:40 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
