













Lee Kuan Yew - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Lee_Kuan_Yew";
		var wgTitle = "Lee Kuan Yew";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "65064";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281739499;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Lee Kuan Yew

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 



Lee Kuan Yew
李光耀








Minister Mentor



Incumbent


Assumed office 
12 August 2004


President
S.R. Nathan (1999-Present)


Prime Minister
Lee Hsien Loong (2004-Present)


Preceded by
Post created


Constituency
Tanjong Pagar Group Representation Constituency (Tanjong Pagar)




1st Prime Minister of Singapore



In office
3 June 1959 – 28 November 1990


President
Yusof bin Ishak (1965-1970)
Benjamin Henry Sheares (1970-1981)
C.V. Devan Nair (1981-1985)
Wee Kim Wee (1985-1993)


Deputy
Toh Chin Chye (1959 to 1968)
Goh Keng Swee (1968 to 1984)
S. Rajaratnam (1980 to 1985)
Goh Chok Tong (1985 to 1990)
Ong Teng Cheong (1985 to 1990)


Preceded by
None (post created)


Succeeded by
Goh Chok Tong




Senior Minister



In office
28 November 1990 – 12 August 2004


President
Wee Kim Wee (1985-1993)
Ong Teng Cheong (1993-1999)
S.R. Nathan (1999-Present)


Preceded by
S. Rajaratnam


Succeeded by
Goh Chok Tong






Born
September 16, 1923 (1923-09-16) (age 85)
Singapore, British Empire


Political party
People's Action Party


Spouse
Kwa Geok Choo



This is a Chinese name; the family name is 李 (Li).

Lee Kuan Yew, GCMG, CH (Chinese: 李光耀; pinyin: Lǐ Guāngyào; POJ: Lí Kng-iāu; born 16 September 1923; also Harry Lee Kuan Yew and Lee Kwan-Yew) was the first Prime Minister of the Republic of Singapore from 1959 to 1990.
As leader of the People's Action Party (PAP), he oversaw the separation of Singapore from the Federation of Malaysia in 1965 and the subsequent transformation of Singapore from a volatile, underdeveloped colonial outpost with no natural resources into a stable, First World Asian Tiger. He has remained one of the most influential political figures in the South-East Asian region. Under the administration of Singapore's second prime minister, Goh Chok Tong, he served as Senior Minister. He currently holds the post of Minister Mentor created when his son, Lee Hsien Loong, became the nation's third prime minister on 12 August 2004.




Contents


1 Family background
2 Early life
3 Early political career – 1951 to 1959

3.1 Pre-People's Action Party (PAP)
3.2 Formation of the PAP
3.3 In opposition


4 Prime Minister, pre-independence – 1959 to 1965

4.1 Self-government administration – 1959 to 1963
4.2 Merger with Malaya, then separation – 1963 to 1965


5 Prime Minister, post-independence – 1965 to 1990

5.1 Decisions and policies

5.1.1 National security
5.1.2 Economic issues
5.1.3 Designating official languages
5.1.4 Government policies


5.2 Relations with Malaysia

5.2.1 Mahathir bin Mohamad




6 Senior Minister – 1990 to 2004
7 Minister Mentor – 2004 to present

7.1 Singapore General Elections 2006


8 Legacy and memoirs

8.1 Legacy
8.2 Controversies

8.2.1 Defamation judgment


8.3 Memoirs


9 Health
10 Awards
11 See also
12 References
13 Secondary sources
14 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Family background
In his memoirs, Lee refers to his immigrant background as a fourth-generation Chinese Singaporean: his Hakka great-grandfather, Lee Bok Boon (born 1846), emigrated from the Dapu county of Guangdong province to the Straits Settlements in 1862. His mother Chua Jim Neo was a Hokkien Nyonya.
The eldest child of Lee Chin Koon and Chua Jim Neo, Lee Kuan Yew was born at 92 Kampong Java Road in Singapore, in a large and airy bungalow. As a child Lee was strongly influenced by British culture, due in part to his grandfather, Lee Hoon Leong, who had given his sons an English education. His grandfather gave him the name "Harry" in addition to his Chinese name (given by his father) Kuan Yew. Thus Lee is known informally as "Harry Lee" to his close friends and family and his name is sometimes cited as Harry Lee Kuan Yew, although this first name is seldom used in official settings.
Lee and his wife Kwa Geok Choo were married on September 30, 1950. They have two sons and one daughter. [1] Kwa Geok Choo have her ancestry from Min Nan Tong'an.[2][3][4]
Note: Family tree are mostly based on Memoirs of LEE KUAN YEW; Pinyin of Lee is Li


Lee Bok Boon
b.1846

 

Seow Huan Neo
b.1850.est



 


 







 


 








Lee Hoon Leong
b.1871

 

Ko Liem Nio
b.1883



 


 









 


 










Lee Chin Koon
b.1903

 

Chua Jim Neo
b.1907



 


 











 


 












Lee Kuan Yew
b.1923

 


 


 


 


 

Kwa Geok Choo
b.1921



 


 


 


 


 


 










 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



Wong Ming Yang
b.1951

 

Lee Hsien Loong
b.1952

 

Ho Ching
b.1953

Lee Wei Ling
b.1955

Lee Hsien Yang
b.1957

 

Lim Suet Fern
b.1957



 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 





 


 













 


 






Lee Xiu Qi
b.1980

 


 

Li Hongyi
b.1987

 


 









Li Shengwu
b.1985

 


 




 


 


 







 


 





 


 













 


 






Lee Yi Peng
b.1982

 


 

Li Haoyi
b.1989

 


 









Li Huanwu
b.1986

 


 




 


 


 























 


 






















Li Shaowu
b.1995

 


 




 







His elder son Lee Hsien Loong has been Prime Minister of Singapore since 2004.


Several members of Lee's family hold prominent positions in Singaporean society, and his sons and daughter hold high government and government-linked posts. His elder son Lee Hsien Loong, a former Brigadier-General, has been the Prime Minister since 2004. He is also the Deputy Chairman of the Government of Singapore Investment Corporation (GIC) — Lee himself is the Chairman. Lee's younger son, Lee Hsien Yang, is a former Brigadier-General and also a former President and Chief Executive Officer of SingTel, a pan-Asian telecommunications giant and Singapore's largest company by market capitalisation (listed on the Singapore Exchange, SGX). Fifty-six percent of SingTel is owned by Temasek Holdings, a prominent government holding company with controlling stakes in a variety of very large government-linked companies such as Singapore Airlines and DBS Bank. Temasek Holdings in turn is run by Executive Director and CEO Ho Ching, the wife of Lee's elder son, the Prime Minister. Lee's daughter, Lee Wei Ling, runs the National Neuroscience Institute, and remains unmarried. Lee's wife Kwa Geok Choo used to be a partner of the prominent legal firm Lee & Lee. His younger brothers, Dennis, Freddy, and Suan Yew were partners of the same firm. He also has a younger sister, Monica.

[edit] Early life
Lee was educated at Telok Kurau Primary School, Raffles Institution, and Raffles College. His university education was delayed by World War II and the 1942–45 Japanese occupation of Singapore. During the occupation, he operated a successful black market business selling tapioca-based glue called Stikfas.[5] Having taken Chinese and Japanese lessons since 1942, he was able to collaborate as a transcriber of Allied wire reports for the Japanese, as well as being the English-language editor on the Japanese Hodobu (報道部 — an information or propaganda department) from 1943 to 1944.[6][7]
After the war, he studied law at Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge in the United Kingdom, of which he was subsequently made an honorary fellow, (graduating with Double Starred First Class honours), and briefly attended the London School of Economics. He returned to Singapore in 1949 to work as a lawyer in Laycock and Ong, the legal practice of John Laycock, a pioneer of multiracialism who, together with A.P. Rajah and C.C. Tan, had founded Singapore's first multiracial club open to Asians.

[edit] Early political career – 1951 to 1959

[edit] Pre-People's Action Party (PAP)
Lee's first experience with politics in Singapore was his role as election agent for his boss John Laycock under the banner of the pro-British Progressive Party in the 1951 legislative council elections. However, Lee eventually realised the party’s future looked bleak as it was unlikely to have mass support, especially from the Chinese-speaking working class masses. This was especially important when the 1953 Rendel Constitution significantly expanded the electoral rolls to include all local-born as voters, resulting in a significant increase in Chinese voters. His big break came when he was engaged as a legal advisor to the trade and Students' unions which provided Lee with the link to the Chinese-speaking, working class world (later on in his career, his party the People's Action Party (PAP) would use these historical links to unions as a negotiating tool in industrial disputes).

[edit] Formation of the PAP
On 12 November 1954, Lee, together with a group of fellow English-educated middle-class men whom he himself described as "beer-swilling bourgeois" formed the socialist PAP in an expedient alliance with the pro-communist trade unionists. This alliance was described by Lee as a marriage of convenience, since the English-educated group needed the pro-communists' mass support base while the communists needed a non-communist party leadership as a smoke screen because the Malayan Communist Party was illegal. Their common aims were to agitate for self-government and put an end to British colonial rule. An inaugural conference was held at the Victoria Memorial Hall, packed with over 1,500 supporters and trade unionists. Lee became secretary-general, a post he held until 1992, save for a brief period in 1957. UMNO's Tunku Abdul Rahman and MCA’s Tan Cheng Lock were invited as guests to give credibility to the new party.

[edit] In opposition
Lee contested and comprehensively won the Tanjong Pagar seat in the 1955 elections. He became the opposition leader, pitting himself against David Saul Marshall's Labour Front-led coalition government. He was also one of PAP's representatives to the two constitutional discussions held in London over the future status of Singapore; the first led by Marshall and the second by Lim Yew Hock, Marshall's hardline successor. It was during this period that Lee had to contend with rivals from both within and outside the PAP. While he had to keep a safe distance from his pro-communist colleagues as they actively participated in mass and often violent actions to undermine the government's authority[citation needed], he also consistently maintained his opposition to the ruling coalition, often attacking the latter as incompetent and corrupt. Lee's position in the PAP was seriously under threat in 1957 when pro-communists took over the leadership posts, following a party conference which the party's left wing had stacked with fake members.[8] Fortunately for Lee and the party's moderate faction, Lim Yew Hock ordered a mass arrest of the pro-communists and Lee was reinstated as secretary-general. After the communist 'scare', Lee subsequently sought and received a fresh and stronger mandate from his Tanjong Pagar constituents in a by-election in 1957. The communist threat within the party was temporarily removed as Lee prepared for the next round of elections. It was during this period that he had the first of a series of secret meetings with the underground communist leader, Fong Chong Pik (or Fang Chuan Pi) whom Lee referred to as the Plen, short form for plenipotentiary.

[edit] Prime Minister, pre-independence – 1959 to 1965

[edit] Self-government administration – 1959 to 1963
In the national elections held on 1 June 1959, the PAP won forty-three of the fifty-one seats in the legislative assembly. Singapore gained self-government with autonomy in all state matters except in defence and foreign affairs, and Lee became the first prime minister of the state of Singapore on 3 June 1959, taking over from Chief Minister Lim Yew Hock. Before he took office, Lee demanded and secured the release of Lim Chin Siong and Devan Nair who were arrested earlier by Lim Yew Hock's government.
Lee faced many problems after gaining self-rule for Singapore from the British, including education, housing, and unemployment. In response to the housing problem, Lee established the Housing and Development Board (HDB), an agency which began a massive public housing construction programme to relieve the housing shortage.

[edit] Merger with Malaya, then separation – 1963 to 1965
Main article: Singapore in Malaysia
After Malayan Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman proposed the formation of a federation which would include Malaya, Singapore, Sabah and Sarawak in 1961, Lee began to campaign for a merger with Malaysia to end British colonial rule. He used the results of a referendum held on 1 September 1962, in which 70% of the votes were cast in support of his proposal, to demonstrate that the people supported his plan. During Operation Coldstore, Lee crushed the pro-communist factions who were strongly opposing the merger and who were allegedly involved in subversive activities.
On 16 September 1963, Singapore became part of the Federation of Malaysia. However, the union was short-lived. The Malaysian Central Government, ruled by the United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), became worried by the inclusion of Singapore's Chinese majority and the political challenge of the PAP in Malaysia. Lee openly opposed the bumiputra policy and used the Malaysian Solidarity Convention's famous cry of "Malaysian Malaysia!", a nation serving the Malaysian nationality, as opposed to the Malay race. PAP-UMNO relations were seriously strained. Some in UMNO also wanted Lee to be arrested.
Racial riots followed, such as that on Muhammad's birthday (21 July 1964), near Kallang Gasworks, in which twenty-three were killed and hundreds injured as Chinese and Malays attacked each other. It is still disputed how the riots started, and theories include a bottle being thrown into a Muslim rally by a Chinese, while others have argued that it was started by a Malay. More riots broke out in September 1964, as rioters looted cars and shops, forcing both Tunku Abdul Rahman and Lee Kuan Yew to make public appearances in order to calm the situation. The price of food also rose dramatically during this period, due to the disruption in transport, which caused further hardship.
Unable to resolve the crisis, the Malaysian Prime Minister, Tunku Abdul Rahman, decided to expel Singapore from Malaysia, choosing to "sever all ties with a State Government that showed no measure of loyalty to its Central Government". Lee was adamant and tried to work out a compromise, but without success. He was later convinced by Goh Keng Swee that the secession was inevitable. Lee Kuan Yew signed a separation agreement on 7 August 1965, which discussed Singapore's post-separation relations with Malaysia in order to continue co-operation in areas such as trade and mutual defence.




On national television, Prime Minister Lee announces the separation of Singapore from the Federation of Malaysia on 9 August 1965.


The failure of the merger was a heavy blow to Lee, who believed that it was crucial for Singapore’s survival. In a televised press conference, he broke down emotionally as he announced the separation to the people (this particular conference is used as evidence by supporters of Lee that he had not intentionally instigated the breakup of Malaysia):

"For me, it is a moment of anguish. All my life, my whole adult life, I believed in merger and unity of the two territories. ... Now, I, Lee Kuan Yew, Prime Minister of Singapore, do hereby proclaim and declare on behalf on the people and the Government of Singapore that as from today, the ninth day of August in the year one thousand nine hundred and sixty-five, Singapore shall be forever a sovereign democratic and independent nation, founded upon the principles of liberty and justice and ever seeking the welfare and happiness of the people in a most and just equal society."

On that day, 9 August 1965, the Malaysian Parliament passed the required resolution that would sever Singapore's ties to Malaysia as a state, and thus the Republic of Singapore was created. Singapore's lack of natural resources, a water supply that was beholden primarily to Malaysia and a very limited defensive capability were the major challenges that Lee and the Singaporean Government faced.

[edit] Prime Minister, post-independence – 1965 to 1990
In his biography, Lee Kuan Yew stated that he did not sleep well, and fell sick days after Singapore's independence. Upon learning of Lee's condition from the British High Commissioner to Singapore, John Robb, Prime Minister Harold Wilson expressed concern, in response to which, Lee replied:

"Do not worry about Singapore. My colleagues and I are sane, rational people even in our moments of anguish. We will weigh all possible consequences before we make any move on the political chessboard..."

Lee began to seek international recognition of Singapore's independence. Singapore joined the United Nations (UN) on 21 September 1965, and founded the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) on 8 August 1967 with four other South-East Asian countries. Lee made his first official visit to Indonesia on 25 May 1973, just a few years after the Konfrontasi under Sukarno's regime. Relations between Singapore and Indonesia substantially improved as subsequent visits were made between Singapore and Indonesia.
Singapore has never had a dominant culture to which immigrants could assimilate even though Malay was the dominant language at that time. Together with efforts from the government and ruling party, Lee tried to create a unique Singaporean identity in the 1970s and 1980s -- one which heavily recognised racial consciousness within the umbrella of multi-culturalism.
Lee and his government stressed the importance of maintaining religious tolerance and racial harmony, and they were ready to use the law to counter any threat that might incite ethnic and religious violence. For example, Lee warned against "insensitive evangelisation", by which he referred to instances of Christian proselytising directed at Malays. In 1974 the government advised the Bible Society of Singapore to stop publishing religious materials in Malay.[9]

[edit] Decisions and policies
Lee had three main concerns — national security, the economy, and social issues — during his post-independence administration.

[edit] National security
The vulnerability of Singapore was deeply felt, with threats from multiple sources including the communists, Indonesia (with its Confrontation stance), and UMNO extremists who wanted to force Singapore back into Malaysia. As Singapore gained admission to the United Nations, Lee quickly sought international recognition of Singapore's independence. He declared a policy of neutrality and non-alignment, following Switzerland's model. At the same time, he asked Goh Keng Swee to build up the Singapore Armed Forces (SAF) and requested help from other countries for advice, training and facilities.
With Britain's announcement of its intention to pull out or cut down the troops from Singapore and Malaysia, in 1967, Lee and Goh introduced National Service, a conscription program that developed a large reserve force that can be mobilized in a short notice. In January 1968, Singapore bought some AMX-13 French-made tanks and then in 1972 purchased another 99 refurbished tanks. In 1969, Singapore bought Strikemasters (armed jet Provosts) from Britain and based them at RAF Tengah where the government set up pilot training.
Later, Singapore was able to establish strong military relations with other nations of Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the Five Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA) and other noncommunist states. This partially restored the security of the country following the withdrawal of British troops on 31 October 1971.
Singapore still maintains conscription today, even though the initial security threats which originally led to the introduction of the policy have been since eradicated.

[edit] Economic issues
The separation from Malaysia signified a permanent loss of a common market (though it was part of the Merger agreement, it was never set up) and an economic hinterland. The economic woes were further exacerbated by the British military withdrawal East of the Suez that would eliminate over 50,000 jobs. Although the British were backing out from their earlier commitment to keep their bases till 1975, Lee decided not to strain the relationship with London. He convinced Harold Wilson to allow the substantial military infrastructure (including a dockyard) to be converted for civilian use, instead of destroying them in accordance with British law. With advice from Dr Albert Winsemius, Lee set Singapore on the path of industrialization. In 1961, the Economic Development Board was established to attract foreign investment, offering attractive tax incentives and providing access to the highly skilled, disciplined and relatively low paid work force. At the same time, the government maintained tight control of the economy, regulating the allocation of land, labour and capital resources. In the balancing of labour and capital, specifically the labour unions and employers of Singapore, a form of tripartite corporatism was introduced to provide stability and consistent economic growth that arguably ended exploitation and major strike activity simultaneously. Modern infrastructure like the airport, the port, roads, and communications networks were improved or constructed with state intervention. The Singapore Tourist Promotion Board was set up to promote tourism, which would eventually create many jobs in the service industry and prove to be a major source of income for the country.
In formulating economic policies, Lee was primarily assisted by his ablest ministers, especially Goh Keng Swee and Hon Sui Sen. They managed to reduce the unemployment rate from 14 percent in 1965 to 4.5 percent in 1973. Some structural problems, however, have remained in Singapore including the heavy foreign ownership of capital.

[edit] Designating official languages
Lee continued the colonial legacy of using English as the language of the workplace and as the common language among the different races, while recognising Malay, Mandarin Chinese, and Tamil as the other three official languages. All state schools now use English as the medium of instruction, although there are also "mother tongue" lessons in students' respective languages. Malay remains the "national language" of Singapore, although a majority of Singaporeans do not speak it.
Lee discouraged the usage of non-Mandarin Chinese dialects (such as Hokkien, Teochew and Cantonese) by promoting Mandarin as the 'Mother Tongue' of ethnic Chinese, in view of having a common language of communication within the Chinese community. In 1979, Lee officially launched the first Speak Mandarin Campaign. He also cancelled the broadcasting of television programmes in non-Mandarin dialects, with the exception of news and operas for the benefit of the older audience. Since that time, most younger Chinese Singaporeans are no longer able to speak non-Mandarin Chinese dialects fluently, thus encountering some difficulty when communicating with their dialect-speaking grandparents. However, many dialect words (especially Hokkien words) persist as a component of "Singlish", a pidgin version of English which is very widely spoken in colloquial settings, despite official disapproval.
In the 1970s, graduates of the Chinese-language Nanyang University were facing huge problems finding jobs because of their lack of command in the English language, which was increasingly required in the workforce, especially in the public sector. In response, Lee had Nanyang University absorbed by the English-language University of Singapore; the combined institution was renamed the National University of Singapore. This move greatly affected the Chinese-speaking lecturers and professors who would now have to teach in English. It was also opposed by some Chinese groups who had contributed significantly to the building of Nanyang University and therefore had strong emotional attachment to the school. These protests went unheeded, and the English-language policy prevailed; it is nowadays cited as a key element in Singapore's economic success.

[edit] Government policies
Like many countries, Singapore was not immune to the disease of corruption. Lee was well aware how corruption had led to the downfall of the Nationalist Chinese government in mainland China. Fighting against the communists himself, he knew he had to 'clean house'. Lee introduced legislation giving the Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau (CPIB) greater power to conduct arrests, search, call up witnesses, and investigate bank accounts and income tax returns of suspected persons and their family. CPIB was given the authority to investigate any officer or minister, and several ministers were later charged with corruption.
Lee believed that ministers should be well paid in order to maintain a clean and honest government. In 1994 he proposed to link the salaries of ministers, judges, and top civil servants to the salaries of top professionals in the private sector, arguing that this would help recruit and retain talent to serve in the public sector.
In the late 1960s, fearing that Singapore's growing population might overburden the developing economy, Lee started a vigorous 'Stop-at-Two' family planning campaign. Couples were urged to undergo sterilisation after their second child. Third or fourth children were given lower priorities in education and such families received fewer economic rebates.
In 1983, Lee sparked the 'Great Marriage Debate' when he encouraged Singapore men to choose women with high education as wives. He was concerned that a large number of graduate women were unmarried. Some sections of the population, including graduate women, were upset by his views. None the less, a match-making agency Social Development Unit (SDU) was set up to promote socialising among men and women graduates. Lee also introduced incentives, such as tax rebates, schooling, and housing priorities for graduate mothers who had three or four children, in a reversal of the over-successful 'Stop-at-Two' family planning campaign in the 1960s and 1970s. By the late-1990s, birth rates had become so low that Lee's successor Goh Chok Tong extended these incentives to all married women, and gave even more incentives, such as the 'baby bonus' scheme.

[edit] Relations with Malaysia

[edit] Mahathir bin Mohamad
Lee looked forward to improving relationships with Mahathir bin Mohamad upon the latter's promotion to Deputy Prime Minister. Knowing that Mahathir was in line to become the next Prime Minister of Malaysia, Lee invited Mahathir (through then-President of Singapore Devan Nair) to visit Singapore in 1978. The first and subsequent visits improved both personal and diplomatic relationships between them. Mahathir told Lee to cut off links with the Chinese leaders of the Democratic Action Party; in exchange, Mahathir undertook not to interfere in the affairs of the Malay Singaporeans. In addition, each country refrains from selling its newspapers in the other.
In December 1981, Mahathir changed the time zone of the Malay Peninsula in order to create just one time zone for Malaysia, and Lee followed suit for economic and social reasons. Relations with Mahathir subsequently improved in 1982.
In January 1984, Mahathir imposed a RM100 levy on all goods vehicles leaving Malaysia and Singapore. However, when Musa Hitam tried to discourage Mahathir's policy, the levy was doubled to discourage the use of Singapore's port, and a breakdown in relations with Malaysia was evident.
In June 1988, Lee and Mahathir reached agreement in Kuala Lumpur to build the Linggui dam on the Johor River. Lee approached Mahathir in 1989, when he intended to move the railway station and its associated customs facilities from Tanjong Pagar in southern Singapore to Woodlands at the end of the Causeway, in part because of an increasing number of cases of drug smuggling into Singapore. This caused resentment in Malaysia, as some of the land would revert to Singapore when the railway tracks were no longer used, and also because Malaysia would lose its railway station in the city centre. In response, Mahathir designated Daim Zainuddin, then Minister of Finance of Malaysia, to settle the terms.
After months of negotiation, an agreement was reached involving the joint development of three main parcels of land in Tanjong Pagar, Kranji, and Woodlands. Malaysia had a sixty per cent share, while Singapore had a forty per cent share. The Points of Agreement (POA) was signed on 27 November 1990, a day before Lee stepped down as Prime Minister. However, disagreements between the two countries continue, and the agreement remains unimplemented.

[edit] Senior Minister – 1990 to 2004




Lee Kuan Yew (middle) meets with U.S. Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen and Singapore's Ambassador to the U.S. Chan Heng Chee in 2000.


After leading the PAP in seven victorious elections, Lee stepped down on 28 November 1990, handing over the prime ministership to Goh Chok Tong. He was then the world's longest ever serving Prime Minister.[10]
This leadership transition was meticulously planned and executed. The recruitment and grooming of the second generation leaders took place as early as the 1970s. In the 1980s, Goh and the younger leaders started to assume important cabinet positions. Prior to the official transition, all other first generation leaders (the "old guards") retired, including Goh Keng Swee, S. Rajaratnam and Toh Chin Chye. Being so thoroughly planned, the transition was quite a non-event in Singapore, even though it was the first leadership transition since independence. By stepping down when he was still mentally alert and in good health, Lee set himself apart from other strong contemporary Asian leaders such as Mao Zedong, Suharto, Ferdinand Marcos, and Ne Win.
As Goh Chok Tong became the head of government, Lee remained in the cabinet with a non-executive position of Senior Minister and played a role he described as advisory. In public, Lee would refer to Goh as "my Prime Minister", in deference to Goh's authority. Nonetheless, Lee's opinions still carry much weight with the public and in the cabinet. He has continued to wield much influence in the country and is ready to use it when necessary. As he said in a 1988 National Day rally:

"Even from my sick bed, even if you are going to lower me into the grave and I feel something is going wrong, I will get up."

Lee subsequently stepped down as the Secretary-General of the PAP and was succeeded by Goh Chok Tong in November 1992.
Lee has refrained from official dealings with all ASEAN governments, including Malaysia, so as not to cross lines with his successor, Goh Chok Tong. He played a major role, however, in diplomacy, such as with the agreement of the transfer of public-administration software for the development and management of China's Suzhou Industrial Park with then Vice-president Li Lanqing on 26 February 1994.

[edit] Minister Mentor – 2004 to present
On 12 August 2004 Goh Chok Tong stepped down in favour of Lee's eldest son, Lee Hsien Loong. Goh became the Senior Minister and Lee Kuan Yew assumed a new cabinet position of Minister Mentor.
Regarding gambling laws, Lee stated that he was "emotionally and intellectually" against gambling. However, he made no opposition to his son's proposal to allow casinos in the country, stating: "Having a casino is something the new leaders will have to decide".
Recently, Lee has expressed his concern about the declining proficiency of Mandarin among younger Singaporeans. In one of his parliamentary speeches, he said: "Singaporeans must learn to juggle English and Mandarin". Subsequently, he launched a television programme, 华语 Cool!, in January 2005, in an attempt to attract young viewers to learn Mandarin.
In June 2005, Lee published a book, Keeping My Mandarin Alive, documenting his decades of effort to master Mandarin, a language which he said he had to re-learn due to disuse:

"...because I don't use it so much, therefore it gets disused and there's language loss. Then I have to revive it. It's a terrible problem because learning it in adult life, it hasn't got the same roots in your memory."

In an interview with CCTV on 12 June 2005, Lee stressed the need to have a continuous renewal of talent in the country's leadership, saying:

"In a different world we need to find a niche for ourselves, little corners where in spite of our small size we can perform a role which will be useful to the world. To do that, you will need people at the top, decision-makers who have got foresight, good minds, who are open to ideas, who can seize opportunities like we did... My job really was to find my successors. I found them, they are there; their job is to find their successors. So there must be this continuous renewal of talented, dedicated, honest, able people who will do things not for themselves but for their people and for their country. If they can do that, they will carry on for another one generation and so it goes on. The moment that breaks, it's gone.";


[edit] Singapore General Elections 2006
Main article: James Gomez
Lee's Tanjong Pagar GRC was not contested by opposition parties. He was noted to be amongst the several PAP leaders to criticise James Gomez over a controversy surrounding Gomez's application for a minority certificate from the Elections Department. Gomez had wrongly claimed that he submitted the application, but admitted his mistake a few days later, but only after he was confronted with video evidence contradicting his claim. Lee branded Gomez a liar and challenged Gomez to sue for libel to clear his name. The controversy became a major issue during the election.

[edit] Legacy and memoirs

[edit] Legacy
During the three decades in which Lee held office, Singapore grew from being a developing country to one of the most developed nations in Asia, despite its small population, limited land space and lack of natural resources. Lee has often stated that Singapore's only natural resources are its people and their strong work ethic. He is widely respected by many Singaporeans, particularly the older generation, who remember his inspiring leadership during independence and the separation from Malaysia. He has often been credited with being the architect of Singapore's present prosperity, although a key role was also played by his Deputy Prime Minister, Dr Goh Keng Swee, who was in charge of the economy.

[edit] Controversies
Lee was once quoted as saying he preferred to be feared than loved.[11]
Devan Nair, the third President of Singapore and who was living in exile in Canada, remarked in a 1999 interview with the Toronto Globe and Mail that Lee's technique of suing his opponents into bankruptcy or oblivion was an abrogation of political rights. He also remarked that Lee is "an increasingly self-righteous know-all", surrounded by "department store dummies". In response to these remarks, Lee sued Devan Nair in a Canadian court and Nair countersued.[12]

[edit] Defamation judgment
On 24 September 2008 the High Court, in a summary judgement by Justice Woo Bih Li, ruled that the Far Eastern Economic Review (FEER) magazine-Hugo Restall, editor, defamed Lee Kuan Yew and his son, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong. The court found the 2006 article "Singapore's 'Martyr': Chee Soon Juan" meant that Lee Kuan Yew "has been running and continues to run Singapore in the same corrupt manner as Durai operated NKF and he has been using libel actions to suppress those who would question to avoid exposure of his corruption." FEER has 30 days to appeal.[13] The court sentenced FEER publisher and editor, owned by Dow Jones & Company (in turn owned by Rupert Murdoch's News Corp), to pay damages to complainants.[14]

[edit] Memoirs
Lee Kuan Yew has written a two-volume set of memoirs: The Singapore Story (ISBN 0-13-020803-5), which covers his view of Singapore's history until its separation from Malaysia in 1965, and From Third World to First: The Singapore Story (ISBN 0060197765), which gives his account of Singapore's subsequent transformation into a developed nation.

[edit] Health
On 13 September 2008, Lee, 84, underwent successful treatment for abnormal heart rhythm (atrial flutter) at Singapore General Hospital. But he was still able to address a philanthropy forum via video link from hospital. [15]

[edit] Awards

Lee has received a number of state decorations, including the Order of the Companions of Honour (1970), Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George (1972), the Freedom of the City of London (1982), the Order of the Crown of Johore First Class (1984), the Order of Great Leader (1988) and the Order of the Rising Sun (1967).[16]
Lee also received other decorations which include the highest honour of Honorary Fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh (1988), and Man for Peace (1990).[citation needed]
Lee was awarded the Ig Nobel Prize in 1994.[17]
In 2002, Lee Kuan Yew was formally admitted to the Fellowship of Imperial College London in recognition of his promotion of international trade and industry, and development of science and engineering study initiatives with the UK.[18]
In 2006, Lee was presented with the Woodrow Wilson Award for Public Service by the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars.
In 2007, Lee was conferred an honorary Doctorate in Law at the Australian National University in Canberra, albeit amid protest from students and staff.[19]


[edit] See also

People's Action Party
Minister Mentor


[edit] References


^ "The Cabinet - Mr LEE Kuan Yew". http://www.cabinet.gov.sg/CabinetAppointments/Mr+LEE+Kuan+Yew.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-26. 
^ 李光耀稱大陸不會因奧運容忍台獨 Sina.com
^ 新加坡內閣資政李光耀 Xinhua.com
^ 李光耀劝扁勿藉奥运搞台独 Zaobao.com
^ Ooi, Jeff (2005). ""Perils of the sitting duck"". Archived from the original on 2005-11-25. http://web.archive.org/web/20051125194719/http://www.jeffooi.com/archives/2005/11/i_went_into_act.php. . Retrieved Nov. 6, 2005.
^ Pillai, M.G.G. (Nov. 1, 2005). ""Did Lee Kuan Yew want Singapore ejected from Malaysia?"". Archived from the original on 2007-10-13. http://web.archive.org/web/20071013161748/http://www.malaysia-today.net/columns/pillai/2005/11/did-lee-kuan-yew-want-singapore.htm. . Malaysia Today.
^ Lee, Time Magazine Asia 1999.
^ Mauzy, Diane K. and R.S. Milne (2002). Singapore Politics Under the People's Action Party. Routledge ISBN 0-415-24653-9
^ public domain information from the US State Department Country Guide.
^ Erlanger, Steven. "New Leader takes Singapore's helm", The New York Times, 29 November 1990.
^ http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/apcity/unpan002548.pdf
^ "Lee v. Globe and Mail (Nair v. Lee)". Sack Goldblatt Mitchell. http://www.sgmlaw.com/PageFactory.aspx?PageID=252. Retrieved on 2008-08-19. 
^ news.bbc.co.uk, Editor 'defamed' Singapore leader
^ reuters.com, Singapore court rules FEER magazine defamed leaders
^ iht.com "Singapore's Lee Kwan Yew hospitalized", International Herald Tribune, 13 September 2008.
^ "Bio of Lee Kuan Yew". http://www.pmo.gov.sg/AboutGovernment/CabinetAppointments/MMLeeKuanYew/. Retrieved on 2008-09-10. 
^ "List of Ig Nobel past winners". Archived from the original on 2006-01-11. http://web.archive.org/web/20060111004730/http://www.improb.com/ig/ig-pastwinners.html. .
^ Imperial College London.
^ "Hostile welcome for Lee Kuan Yew". http://www.smh.com.au/articles/2007/03/28/1174761533651.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-19. 



[edit] Secondary sources

Barr, Michael D. 2000. Lee Kuan Yew: The Beliefs Behind the Man. Washington D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
Gordon, Uri. 2000. Machiavelli's Tiger: Lee Kwan Yew and Singapore's Authoritarian regime* Josey, Alex. 1980. Lee Kuan Yew — The Crucial Years. Singapore and Kuala Lumpur: Times Books International.
Kwang, Han Fook, Warren Fernandez and Sumiko Tan. 1998. Lee Kuan Yew: The Man and His Ideas. Singapore: Singapore Press Holdings.
McCarthy, Terry (1999-08-23). "Lee Kuan Yew". Time Asia. http://www.time.com/time/asia/asia/magazine/1999/990823/lee1.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-04. 
Minchin, James. 1986. No Man is an Island. A Study of Singapore’s Lee Kuan Yew. Sydney: Allen & Unwin.


[edit] External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Lee Kuan Yew





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Lee Kuan Yew



Official profile.
Lee Kuan Yew Watch
Culture Is Destiny; A Conversation with Lee Kuan Yew. Foreign Affairs, interview by Fareed Zakaria.
War of Words Alejandro Reyes, Asiaweek.com, September 25, 1998. Retrieved 2004-12-08.
Lee Kuan Yew: A Chronology, 1923–1965 Largely based on Lee Kuan Yew, The Singapore Story: Memoirs of Lee Kuan Yew. Singapore: Times, 1998. Retrieved 2004-12-08
Charlie Rose interview LEE KUAN YEW - 58 mins interview video
CNN interview Part 1, Part 2: CNN's Fareed Zakaria talks with Lee Kuan Yew about his life as prime minister of Singapore.
Memories of Asia



Preceded by
None (Post Created)
Prime Minister of Singapore
3 June 1959 – 28 November 1990
Succeeded by
Goh Chok Tong


Preceded by
None
Secretary General of People's Action Party
1954–1992


Preceded by
S Rajaratnam
Senior Minister
1990–2004


Preceded by
Hon Sui Sen
Minister for Finance
1983
Succeeded by
Tony Tan


Preceded by
None (Post Created)
Minister Mentor
2004–present
Incumbent









v • d • e

Prime Ministers of Singapore











Lee Kuan Yew · Goh Chok Tong · Lee Hsien Loong












Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lee_Kuan_Yew"
Categories: Prime Ministers of Singapore | People's Action Party (Singapore) politicians | Cold War leaders | Members of the Cabinet of Singapore | Chinese Singaporeans | Singaporean Members of Parliament | Singaporean lawyers | Hakka people | Hakka Singaporeans | People from Dabu | Alumni of Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge | Fellows of Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge | Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George | Alumni of the London School of Economics | Members of the Order of the Companions of Honour | Overseas Chinese politicians | Ig Nobel Prize winners | 1923 births | Living peopleHidden categories: Articles containing Chinese language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Bân-lâm-gú
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Français
한국어
हिन्दी
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Latviešu
Limburgs
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
ភាសាខ្មែរ
Polski
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
संस्कृत
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tagalog
Tiếng Việt
Winaray
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 18:11.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
