













Mixtape - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Mixtape";
		var wgTitle = "Mixtape";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "18934994";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281848140;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Mixtape

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For the album by Los Abandoned, see Mix Tape (album).




An early pirate 8 track mixtape from 1974






The compact audio cassette brought homemade mixes of pop songs within the reach of the casual music fan.


A mixtape or mixed tape is a compilation of songs recorded in a specific order, traditionally onto a compact audio cassette.
A mixtape, which usually reflects the musical tastes of its compiler, can range from a casually selected list of favorite songs, to a conceptual mix of songs linked by a theme or mood, to a highly personal statement tailored to the tape's intended recipient. Essayist Geoffrey O'Brien has called the personal mixtape "the most widely practiced American art form",[1] and many mixtape enthusiasts believe that by carefully selecting and ordering the tracks in a mix, an artistic statement can be created that is greater than the sum of its individual songs, much as an album of pop music in the post-Beatles era can be considered as something more than a collection of singles.
With the advent of affordable, consumer-level digital audio, creating and distributing mixes in the form of compact disc or MP3 playlists has become the contemporary method of choice, but the term mixtape is still commonly used, even for mixes in different media (CD, MP3, MiniDisc, audio cassette 8 track, etc.). Video mixtapes have emerged as well.




Contents


1 History
2 Mixtapes vs. compilations
3 Legal issues in the United States
4 Aesthetics
5 Types of mixtapes
6 Mixtapes in hip hop
7 Mixtapes in global culture
8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
The most common early mixtapes were bootleg 8 track tapes that were sold at flea markets and truck stops in the late 60's through the early 80's, with names like "Super 73", "Country Chart Toppers" or "Top Pops 1977".
Homemade mixtapes became common in the 1980s. Although the compact audio cassette by Philips appeared at the 1963 Berlin radio show, the sound quality of cassettes was not good enough to be seriously considered for music recording until further advances in tape formulations, including the advent of chrome and metal tape. Before the introduction of the audio cassette, the creation of a pop music compilation required specialized or cumbersome equipment, such as a reel-to-reel or 8 track recorder, that was often inaccessible to the casual music fan. As cassette tapes and recorders grew in popularity and portability, these technological hurdles were lowered to the point where the only resources required to create a mix were a handful of cassettes and a cassette recorder connected to a source of prerecorded music, such as a radio or LP player. The 8-track tape cartridge was more popular for music recording during much of the 1960s, as the cassette was originally only mono and intended for vocal recordings only, such as in office dictation machines. But improvements in fidelity finally allowed the cassette to become a major player. The ready availability of the cassette and higher quality home recording decks to serve the home casual user allowed the cassette to become the dominant tape format, to the point that the 8 track tape nearly disappeared shortly after the turn of the 1980s. The growth of the mixtape was also encouraged by improved quality and increased popularity of audio cassette players in car entertainment systems, and by the introduction of the Sony Walkman in 1979.
A distinction should be drawn between a private mixtape, which is usually intended for a specific listener or private social event, and a public mixtape, or "party tape", usually consisting of a recording of a club performance by a DJ and intended to be sold to multiple individuals. In the 1970s, such DJs as Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five, Afrika Bambaataa and the Soulsonic Force, Kool Herc and the Herculoids, DJ Breakout, the Funky Four, and DJ Hollywood would often distribute recordings of their club performances via audio cassette, as well as customized recordings (often prepared at exorbitant prices) for individual tape purchasers. These recordings tended to be of higher technical ability than home-made mixtapes and incorporated techniques such as beatmatching and scratching. One 12 October 1974 article in Billboard Magazine reported, "Tapes were originally dubbed by jockeys to serve as standbys for times when they did not have disco turntables to hand. The tapes represent each jockey's concept of programming, placing, and sequencing of record sides. The music is heard without interruption. One- to three-hour programs bring anywhere from $30 to $75 per tape, mostly reel-to-reel, but increasingly on cartridge and cassette." Club proprietors, as well as DJs, would often prepare such tapes for sale.




The CD-R disc is currently the most common medium for homemade mixes


Throughout the 1980s, mixtapes were a highly visible element of youth culture. However, the increased availability of CD burners and MP3 players and the gradual disappearance of cassette players in cars and households have led to a decline in the popularity of the compact audio cassette as a medium for homemade mixes. The high point of traditional mixtape culture was arguably the publication of Nick Hornby's novel High Fidelity in 1995. Since then, mixtapes have largely been replaced by mix CDs and shared MP3 playlists, which are more durable, can hold more songs, and require minutes (rather than hours) to prepare. While some mixtape enthusiasts bemoan the obsolescence of the cassette tape, others concede that the greater convenience offered by the mix CD has expanded the possibilities and accessibility of the medium, as indicated by the recent resurgence of mix-swapping clubs that trade mix CDs by regular mail. Some mix enthusiasts also appreciate the potential of the mix CD for extended, continuous mixes and creative album art.
Today, websites concerned with electronic music provide mixes in a digital format.[2][3][4] These usually consist of recorded DJ sets of live, beat-matched mixes of songs, which are used by DJs seeking to demonstrate their mixing skills to an online audience. Some radio shows worldwide specialize in mix series, including The Breezeblock on BBC Radio 1, The Solid Steel Show (formerly on KISS-FM), and The BTTB Show.
Additionally, DJs like Grandmaster Flash, DJ QBert, DJ Spooky, DJ Z-Trip or DJ Shadow, The Avalanches, and Rjd2 have gained fame for creating new songs by combining fragments of existing songs (which need not necessarily belong to the same genre). The resulting remix or mash-up can be seen as an evolution of the mixtape, in that it appropriates existing songs to give them new meanings through their juxtaposition, but does so in a quicker, more integrated style. This practice is heavily derived from the use of song loops as musical backdrops for an MC's rhymes in hip hop music, which is also related to turntablism.
Recently DJs, official or not, have been putting together cd's with exclusive songs giving the Hip-Hop community a daily glimpse on what the different artist are working on. Almost every artist in Hip-Hop has music on a Mixtape, from up and comers, to big names. Some have even used it to fuel their prestige such as Lil' Wayne by releasing mixtapes such as Da Drought 3, The Dedication I,II, & III, and other unofficial Mixtapes to fuel thier fan base. Mixtapes are also a way for different artists to be on the same album to make more of a variety of mixes, and are all available for download online for free. The "Mixtape Game" is considered to be the underground Hip-Hop and Rap that is not considered "Maintstream".

[edit] Mixtapes vs. compilations
Many commercially available compilations of pop music initially seem to share certain important characteristics with mixtapes. Like many private mixes, a significant number of the earliest pop LPs were essentially collections of popular singles, and such compilation albums have often taken cues from underground mixes of the same era. One example is Disco Par-r-r-ty, the first nonstop dancing LP record, which was released by Spring Records in October 1974. Consisting of a continuous mix of songs by such artists as James Brown, Mandrill, and Barry White, it was clearly inspired by the bootleg DJ mixes that were becoming popular at the same time. However, the relative anonymity of the compilers of such albums is arguably inconsistent with the rationale behind most mixtapes, which typically reflect the musical tastes of a single compiler. While the editors of such compilations do exercise a certain amount of discretion over song order and selection, the term mixtape is generally restricted to a compilation where the identity of the compiler is clearly associated with the album itself. For example, Starbucks, the coffee chain, sells a compilation CD series called Artist's Choice, which consists of mixes based on selections by such artists as Johnny Cash, Tony Bennett, and Sheryl Crow. Similarly, Apple Computer's iTunes Store features Celebrity Playlists, downloadable mixtapes in AAC-compatible form, selected by such artists as Moby, Barry Manilow, and Andrew W.K. The Late Night Tales series has seen artists such as Four Tet and Turin Brakes make their own compilations that are distributed in mainstream record shops such as HMV.
The presence of an identifiable compiler whose tastes are reflected in song selection and arrangement allow retail mix CDs to be distinguished from other types of compilations. The distinction can be rather subtle. For example, while most "greatest hits" compilations of individual recording artists consist of a collection of singles in chronological order, others include album tracks, new songs, or obscure selections in addition to established hits, and sometimes reorder the songs for optimal listening. As such, these compilations can be seen as "artist-specific" mixes selected and arranged by the artists themselves.
One could also argue that the modern movie soundtrack, which often consists of selected pop music tracks (rather than the traditional orchestral score) is a mixtape with songs selected by the film's director or music supervisor.

[edit] Legal issues in the United States
One important distinction between homemade mixes and retail compilations of pop music is that the latter generally obtain permissions for the use of copyrighted songs, while the former do not. As a result, mixtapes such as those produced and sold by club DJs in the 1970s are illegal (although rarely, if ever, prosecuted) under the definition of fair use expressed in the Copyright Act of 1976.[citation needed] Most mixtape enthusiasts assume that private mixtapes are inoffensive from a fair use standpoint, but this is far from clear. An article in the New York Times cites Frank Creighton, a director of anti-copyright infringement efforts for the Recording Industry Association of America, as saying that "money did not have to be involved for copying to be illegal."[5] While mixes on cassette tapes may not have inspired the wrath of the record industry in the past, Mr. Creighton said, "digital mixes have better sound quality." And given the proliferation of CD burning for friends and relatives, "it would be naive of us to say that we should allow that type of activity", he said. Others have argued that the Audio Home Recording Act protects the noncommercial use of home recording devices.

[edit] Aesthetics
While the process of recording a mix onto an audio cassette from LPs or compact discs is technically straightforward, many music fans who create more than one mixtape are eventually compelled to confront some of the practical and aesthetic challenges involved in the mixtape format. From a practical standpoint, such issues as avoiding an excessive amount of blank tape at the end of one side (which requires careful planning of the length of each side of the mix) and reducing the audible click between songs (which requires mastery of the pause button on the cassette recorder) have been identified as part of the shared experience of mixtape aficionados. From an aesthetic point of view, many enthusiasts believe that because a tape player, unlike a CD player, lacks the ability to skip from song to song, the mixtape needs to be considered in its entirety. This requires the mixtape creator to consider the transitions between songs, the effects caused by juxtaposing a soft song with a loud song, and the overall "narrative arc" of the entire tape. One notable listing of such aesthetic "rules" can be found in a paragraph from Nick Hornby's High Fidelity:


“
To me, making a tape is like writing a letter — there's a lot of erasing and rethinking and starting again. A good compilation tape, like breaking up, is hard to do. You've got to kick off with a corker, to hold the attention (I started with "Got to Get You Off My Mind", but then realized that she might not get any further than track one, side one if I delivered what she wanted straightaway, so I buried it in the middle of side two), and then you've got to up it a notch, or cool it a notch, and you can't have white music and black music together, unless the white music sounds like black music, and you can't have two tracks by the same artist side by side, unless you've done the whole thing in pairs and...oh, there are loads of rules.
”


Many enthusiasts also devote substantial attention to the packaging of a mixtape intended as a gift, sometimes going so far as to create cover art and customized liner notes. The cover of the original McSweeney's edition of 31 Songs, a 2003 essay collection by Nick Hornby, was intended to suggest the packaging of a homemade mix CD. It also came with an actual CD featuring ten of the songs discussed in the text. Indeed, the look of mixtapes, featuring hand-written notes on the recording medium manufacturer's supplied labels, has become one of the aesthetic conventions of modern design, a distinct style that designers may attempt to copy or cite.
From an artistic point of view, many creators of mixtapes seem to regard them as a form of emotional self-expression, although whether a mixtape retains the same web of emotional associations when passed from its creator to the recipient is, at best, debatable. Some argue that in selecting, juxtaposing, or even editing originally unrelated tracks of pop music into a new work of art, the "author" of a mixtape moves from passive listener to archivist, editor, and finally active participant in the process of musical creation. (Some legitimacy for this viewpoint was provided by Cassette Stories, a 2003 exhibition at the Museum of Communication in Hamburg, Germany, which featured stories and submissions from eighty mixtape enthusiasts.) However, this perception of the mixtape as a work of art has been criticized as resulting in a sort of elitism, with creators becoming more concerned with finding arcane and surprising combinations of tracks than with creating a tape that is listenable, enjoyable, or appropriate to its intended recipient. (In High Fidelity, for example, the narrator's girlfriend complains that his mixtapes are too didactic.) On a very basic level, the creation of a mixtape can be seen as an expression of the individual compiler's taste in music, often put forward for the implicit approval of the tape's recipient, and in many cases as a tentative step towards building the compiler's personal canon of pop music.

[edit] Types of mixtapes
Although a "comprehensive" list of the different genres or categories of mixtapes could be extended indefinitely, and probably to no useful end, creating a taxonomy of mixtapes is a project that many mixtape enthusiasts have intuitively attempted. The different types of mixtapes identified on such community sites as FoundTrack and Art of the Mix (which lists over two hundred genres, sometimes tongue-in-cheek) suggest the variety of potential categories. Beyond such basic genres as the simple taping of an entire album, the collection of favorite songs, and the "snapshot" mix of recent favorites, some of the more commonly cited categories (most of which are self-explanatory) include the driving mix, the workout mix, the party mix, the krazy mix (eclectic selections of obscure, rare or otherwise unconventional tracks), the didactic mix (intended to educate the recipient as to the essential works of a particular artist or genre), the concept / theme mix (a mix of Christmas songs, songs about cars, or covers of songs by a particular artist or similar), and the mood mix (simply a mix of songs intended to sustain a specific mood, stated or unstated — notable sub genres include the romantic mix and the break-up mix). As times changed, mixtapes eventually made their way onto television screens by video mix DJs (i.e., DJ SWB).

[edit] Mixtapes in hip hop
In hip hop's earliest days, the music only existed in live form, and the music was spread via tapes of parties and shows.[6] Hip hop mixtapes first appeared in the mid-1970s in New York City, featuring artists such as Kool Herc and Afrika Bambaata.[6] As more tapes became available, they began to be collected and traded by fans. In the mid-1980s, DJs such as Brucie B began recording their live sets themselves and selling their own mixtapes, which was soon followed by other DJs such as Kid Capri and Doo Wop creating their own mixtapes at home.[6] Ron G moved the mixtape forward in the early 1990s by blending R&B a capellas with hip hop beats (known as "blends").[6] Blend tapes became increasingly popular by the mid-1990s, and fans increasingly looked for exclusive tracks and freestyles on the tapes. Mixtapes are now commonly used by labels and new artists as a promotional tool, as a way of generating hype.[6] An unsigned artist might release several mixtapes to generate buzz, leading to interest from record labels, while a signed artist may release a mixtape to promote a future studio album, in a sales model relying on word of mouth to increase the artist's street cred. Often each track on a promotional hip hop mixtape will feature the same artist, thus making it more difficult to differentiate from a standard album. However, these mixtapes will usually have much lower production values than a studio album (such as housing "demo" or roughly mixed versions of the tracks), and contain numerous collaborations, remixes, freestyles and voice-overs, often arranged in a specific flowing fashion, much like retail albums are.
Most hip hop mixtapes are professionally packaged, with a pressed CD and artwork, and are often housed in a slim-format jewel case, rather than the more expensive full jewel cases most retail albums come in. Hip hop mixtapes are usually sold on the street, given out at the artists' live shows, or through independent record dealers or mail order. Many mixtapes are also sold or given away for free in MP3 format over the internet.
In the Mixtape, Inc. documentary, filmmakers attempt to show the importance of an otherwise illegal practice (specifically hip hop mixtapes) and how it relates to the growing popularity of this music genre.
Although hip hop mixtapes have been instrumental in supplementing the marketing and promotions endeavors of record labels, and are utilized by major acts with the implicit support of their labels, the Recording Industry Association of America, a political lobby group funded by the major record corporations, classifies these mixtapes as bootleg or pirated music CDs.

[edit] Mixtapes in global culture
All of the references to mixtapes cited above come from media sources in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, or continental Europe. The use of mixtapes in other countries is less documented. However, it seems reasonable to believe that mixes exist wherever access to popular music is combined with a convenient means of recording homemade compilations (although mixtapes may not have been a significant element of the youth culture in such countries). For example, Sarah Erdman's 2003 book Nine Hills to Nambonkaha includes a description of the tape collection of a middle-class African in Côte d'Ivoire:


“
I click through his box of tapes, finding African musicians I've never heard of, old Phil Collins, Rod Stewart with a long earring before his "Some Guys Have All the Luck" days. But I also discover Van Morrison, a Rolling Stones bootleg, Peter Tosh, Dire Straits, Pink Floyd, Tracy Chapman, Sting. His mixed tapes flit from Donna Summer to Joe Cocker to Bonnie Raitt.
”


One should also note that in Africa, India, and parts of the Middle East, audio cassettes currently remain the most popular medium for prerecorded music. This suggests that the compact audio cassette may still be the preferred medium for mixes in at least some parts of the world.

[edit] See also

DJ mix
Mix Tape: The Art of Cassette Culture
MP3 CD


[edit] References


^ Resnick, Michael (2006). "BurnLists: The Digital "Mix Tape" Comes Of Age". http://www.events-in-music.com/burnlist-mix-tapes.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-15. 
^ Drum & Bass mix search engine - crawling for D&B mixes and sets
^ (X) Free Music Downloads Mp3 Blog Free DJ-Sets Mixe Mixtapes Live Sets DJ-Mixe
^ DNB mixes archive
^ Gallagher, David (January 2003). "For the Mix Tape, A Digital Upgrade And Notoriety". http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9E0CE7DC1F39F933A05752C0A9659C8B63&sec=&spon=&pagewanted=all. Retrieved on 2008-05-23. 
^ a b c d e Shapiro, Peter (2005) The Rough Guide to Hip-Hop, Rough Guides, ISBN 1-84353-263-8, p.332-333



[edit] Further reading

Ellis, Bret Easton (1986). Less Than Zero. ISBN 0-679-78149-8
Erdman, Sarah (2003). Nine Hills to Nambonkaha: Two Years in the Heart of An African Village. ISBN 0-8050-7381-7
Gallagher, David (30 January 2003). For the mix tape, a digital upgrade and notoriety. The New York Times.
Hornby, Nick (1995). High Fidelity. ISBN 1-57322-551-7
Hornby, Nick (2003). Songbook. ISBN 1-57322-356-5
Keller, Joel (22 January 2004). PCs killed the mix-tape star. Salon.com.
Mobley, Max (5 December 2007). "Requiem for the Mixtape". Crawdaddy!.
Moore, Thurston (2004). Mix Tape. ISBN 0-7893-1199-2
McMahon, Andrew (2005): "The Mixed Tape", Everything In Transit — Jack's Mannequin
O'Brien, Geoffrey (2004). Sonata for Jukebox. ISBN 1-58243-192-2
Paul, James (26 September 2003). Last night a mix tape saved my life. The Guardian.
Sante, Luc (13 May 2004). Disco Dreams. The New York Review of Books. (This review of Songbook and Sonata for Jukebox describes the mix tape as "one part Victorian flower album, one part commonplace book, one part collage, and one part recital.")
Stuever, Hank (29 October 2002). Unspooled: In the digital age, the quaint cassette is sent reeling into history's dustbin. Washington Post.
Vowell, Sarah (2001). Take the Cannoli: Stories from the New World. ISBN 0-7432-0540-5
Warner, Alan (1995). Morvern Callar. ISBN 0-385-48741-X


[edit] External links

audio tape cassette photo collection
Thattherepaul's Guide To Making A Mixtape
My Rap News - Mixtape Downloads
Mixtape Netlabel The New Worck








v • d • e

DJing and Turntablism





Equipment

DJ mixer · Direct-drive turntable · Mixing console · Phono input · Minutoli · Pitch control · Slipmat · Two turntables and a microphone · Vinyl emulation software






Techniques

Audio mixing · Back spinning · Beat juggling · Beatmatching · Beatmixing · Break · Chopped and screwed · Chopping · Covered · Cut · Drop · Hamster style · Harmonic mixing · Crate digging · Needle drop · Music loop · Phrasing · Sampling · Scratching · Slip-cueing · Pitch cue · Voice-tracking · Video scratching






Scratches

Orbit · Tear · Transform · Flare · Chirp · Crab






Releases and distribution

DJ mix · Battle records · Promo Only · Rare groove · Digital pool · Remix service  · Mixtape






Related articles

Turntablist transcription methodology









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mixtape"
Categories: Sound production technologyHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
Español
Français
Italiano
日本語
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Suomi
Svenska









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 06:07 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
