













Modern musical symbols - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Modern_musical_symbols";
		var wgTitle = "Modern musical symbols";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "3243540";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282745539;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Modern musical symbols

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
Modern musical symbols are the marks and symbols that are widely used in musical scores of all styles and instruments today. This is intended to be a comprehensive English guide to the various symbols encountered in modern musical notation.




Contents


1 Lines
2 Clefs
3 Notes and rests
4 Breaks
5 Accidentals and key signatures
6 Time signatures
7 Note relationships
8 Dynamics
9 Articulation marks
10 Ornaments
11 Octaves
12 Repetition and codas
13 Instrument-specific notation

13.1 Guitar
13.2 Piano

13.2.1 Pedal marks
13.2.2 Other piano notation




14 See also
15 References





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Lines



Staff, Stave
The fundamental latticework of music notation, upon which symbols are placed. The five staff lines and four intervening spaces correspond to pitches of the diatonic scale - which pitch is meant by a given line or space is defined by the clef. With treble clef, the bottom staff line is assigned to E above middle C (E4 in note-octave notation); the space above it is F4, and so on. The grand staff combines bass and treble staffs into one system joined by a brace. It is used for keyboard and harp music. The lines on a basic five-line staff are designated a number from one to five, the bottom line being the first one and the top line being the fifth. The spaces between the lines are, in the same fashion, numbered from one to four. In music education, the mnemonic "Every Good Boy Deserves Fudge" is used to remember the value of each line from bottom to top. The interstitial spaces are often remembered as spelling the word "face" (notes F-A-C-E).



Ledger lines, Leger lines
Used to extend the staff to pitches that fall above or below it. Such ledger lines are placed behind the note heads, and extend a small distance to each side.



Bar line, Barline
Used to separate measures (see time signatures below for an explanation of measures). Bar lines are extended to connect the upper and lower staffs of a grand staff.



Double bar line, Double barline
Used to separate two sections or phrases of music. Also used at changes in key signature or major changes in style or tempo. A bold double bar line indicates the conclusion of a movement or an entire composition.



Dotted bar line, Dotted barline
Subdivides long measures into shorter segments for ease of reading, usually according to natural rhythmic subdivisions.



[edit] Clefs
Clefs define the pitch range, or tessitura, of the staff on which it is placed. A clef is usually the leftmost symbol on a staff. Additional clefs may appear in the middle of a staff to indicate a change in register for instruments with a wide range. In early music, clefs could be placed on any of several lines on a staff.



G clef (Treble Clef)
The centre of the spiral defines the line or space upon which it rests as the pitch G above middle C, or approximately 392 Hz. Positioned here, it assigns G above middle C to the second line from the bottom of the staff, and is referred to as the "treble clef." This is the most commonly encountered clef in modern notation, and is used for most modern vocal music.



C clef (Alto Clef and Tenor Clef)
This clef points to the line (or space, rarely) representing middle C, or approximately 262 Hz. Positioned here, it makes the center line on the staff middle C, and is referred to as the "alto clef." This clef is used in modern notation for the viola. While all clefs can be placed anywhere on the staff to indicate various tessitura, the C clef is most often considered a "movable" clef: it is frequently seen pointing instead to the fourth line and called a "tenor clef". This clef is used very often in music written for bassoon, cello, and trombone; it replaces the bass clef when the number of ledger lines above the bass staff hinders easy reading. Both the alto and tenor clefs are used in traditional choral scores.



F clef (Bass Clef)
The line or space between the dots in this clef denotes F below middle C, or approximately 175 Hz. Positioned here, it makes the second line from the top of the staff F below middle C, and is called a "bass clef." This clef appears nearly as often as the treble clef, especially in choral music, where it represents the bass and baritone voices.




Neutral clef
Used for pitchless instruments, such as some of those used for percussion. Each line can represent a specific percussion instrument within a set, such as in a drum set. Two different styles of neutral clefs are pictured here. It may also be drawn with a separate single-line staff for each untuned percussion instrument.



Octave Clef
Treble and bass clefs can also be modified by octave numbers. An eight or fifteen above a clef raises the intended pitch range by one or two octaves respectively. Similarly, an eight or fifteen below a clef lowers the pitch range by one or two octaves respectively. A treble clef with an eight below is the most commonly used, often used instead of a C clef for tenor lines in choral scores.


Tablature
For guitars and other plucked instruments it is possible to notate tablature in place of ordinary notes. In this case, a TAB-sign is often written instead of a clef. The number of lines of the staff is not necessarily five: one line is used for each string of the instrument (so, for standard 6-stringed guitars, six lines would be used). Numbers on the lines show on which fret the string should be played. This Tab-sign, like the Percussion clef, is not a clef in the true sense, but rather a symbol employed instead of a clef. The interstitial spaces on a tablature are never used.

[edit] Notes and rests
Note and rest values are not absolutely defined, but are proportional in duration to all other note and rest values. For the purpose of definition, the duration of the quarter note is represented by R, for "reference length."


Note
Duration
Rest



Longa
Also called a "quadruple whole". This value appears in early music.
In modern notation, it is usually represented as semibreves tied across two measures. It is also called an Brasieroule Quatrinote.
Duration: 16 R




Breve
Also called a "double whole".
Duration: 8 R




Semibreve
Also called a "whole".
Duration: 4 R




Minim
Also called a "half".
Duration: 2 R




Crotchet
Also called a "quarter".
Duration: 1 R




Quaver
Also called an "eighth".
Duration: 1/2 R




Semiquaver
Also called a "sixteenth". Note the correspondence between the number of flags on the note and the number of branches or pawls on the rest.
Duration: 1/4 R




Demisemiquaver
Also called a "thirty-second".
Duration: 1/8 R




Hemidemisemiquaver
Also called a "sixty-fourth".
Duration: 1/16 R




Quasihemidemisemiquaver
Also called a "hundred-twenty-eighth" or "semihemidemisemiquaver".
Duration: 1/32 R




Beamed notes
Beams connect quavers and notes of shorter value. In instrumental music, beams reflect the natural rhythmic grouping of notes. In vocal music, beams are used when several notes are to be sung to one beat. The exact rules vary based on the composer or arranger's preference.



Dotted note
Placing dots to the right of the corresponding notehead lengthens the note's duration. One dot lengthens the note by one-half its value, two dots by three-quarters, three dots by seven-eighths, and so on. Rests can be dotted in the same manner as notes.



Multi-measure rest
Indicates the number of measures in a resting part without a change in meter, used to conserve space and to simplify notation. Also called "gathered rest" or "multi-bar rest".


Durations shorter than the 128th are not unknown. 256th notes occur in works of Vivaldi and even Beethoven. An extreme case is the Toccata Grande Cromatica by early-19th-century American composer Anthony Phillip Heinrich, which uses note values as short as 2,048ths; however, the context shows clearly that these notes have one beam more than intended, so they should really be 1,024th notes. The name of these notes can be found with this formula:
Name = 2(number of flags on note + 2)th note.

[edit] Breaks



Breath mark
In a score, this symbol tells the performer to take a breath. (or make a slight pause for non-wind instruments). This pause usually does not affect the overall tempo. For bowed instruments, it indicates to lift the bow and play the next note with a downward (or upward, if marked) bow.



Caesura, Grand Pause, or "railroad tracks"
Indicates a brief, silent pause, during which time is not counted. In ensemble playing, time resumes when so indicated by the conductor or leader.




[edit] Accidentals and key signatures
Accidentals modify the pitch of the notes that follow them on the same staff position within a measure, unless cancelled by an additional accidental.



Double flat
Lowers the pitch of a note by two chromatic semitones.



Flat-and-a-half
Lowers the pitch of a note by three quarter tones. (Used in microtonal music.)



Flat
Lowers the pitch of a note by one semitone.



Demiflat
Lowers the pitch of a note by one quarter tone. (Used in microtonal music.)



Natural
Cancels a previous accidental, or modifies the pitch of a sharp or flat as defined by the prevailing key signature (such as F-sharp in the key of G major, for example).



Demisharp
Raises the pitch of a note by one quarter tone. (Used in microtonal music.)



Sharp
Raises the pitch of a note by one semitone.



Sharp-and-a-half
Raises the pitch of a note by three quarter tones. (Used in microtonal music.)



Double sharp
Raises the pitch of a note by two chromatic semitones.


Key signatures define the prevailing key of the music that follows, thus avoiding the use of accidentals for many notes. If no key signature appears, the key is assumed to be C major/A minor, but can also signify a neutral key, employing individual accidentals as required for each note. The key signature examples shown here are described as they would appear on a treble staff.



Flat key signature
Lowers by a semitone the pitch of notes on the corresponding line or space, and all octaves thereof, thus defining the prevailing major or minor key. Different keys are defined by the number of flats in the key signature, starting with the leftmost, i.e., B♭, and proceeding to the right; for example, if only the first two flats are used, the key is B♭ major/G minor, and all B's and E's are "flattened", i.e. lowered to B♭ and E♭.



Sharp key signature
Raises by a semitone the pitch of notes on the corresponding line or space, and all octaves thereof, thus defining the prevailing major or minor key. Different keys are defined by the number of sharps in the key signature, also proceeding from left to right; for example, if only the first four sharps are used, the key is E major/C♯ minor, and the corresponding pitches are raised.



[edit] Time signatures
Time signatures define the meter of the music. Music is "marked off" in uniform sections called measures, and time signatures establish the number of beats in each. This is not necessarily intended to indicate which beats are emphasized, however. A time signature that conveys information about the way the piece actually sounds is thus chosen. Time signatures tend to suggest, but only suggest, prevailing groupings of beats or pulses.



Specific time
The bottom number represents the note value of the basic pulse of the music (in this case the 4 represents the quarter-note). The top number indicates how many of these note values appear in each measure. This example announces that each measure is the equivalent length of three crotchets (quarter-notes). It was referred to as a "perfect" time.



Common time
This symbol is a throwback to sixteenth century rhythmic notation, when it represented 2/4, or "imperfect time". Today it represents 4/4.



Alla breve or Cut time
This symbol represents 2/2 time, indicating two half-notes (or equivalent) per measure.



Metronome mark
Written at the start of a score, and at any significant change of tempo, this symbol precisely defines the tempo of the music by assigning absolute durations to all note values within the score. In this particular example, the performer is told that 120 crotchets, or quarter notes, fit into one minute of time. Many publishers precede the marking with letters "M.M.", referring to Maelzel's Metronome.



[edit] Note relationships



Tie
Indicates that the two notes joined together are to be played as one note. This can also indicate a note sustained over two or more measures.



Slur
Indicates that the two notes are to be played in one physical stroke, one uninterrupted breath, or (on instruments with neither breath nor bow) connected into a phrase as if played in a single breath.
Slurs and ties are similar in appearance. A tie is distinguishable because it always joins exactly two immediate adjacent notes of the same pitch, whereas a slur may join any number of notes of varying pitches.




Legato
Notes covered by this sign are to be played with no gaps. Sometimes indistinguishable from a slur.



Glissando or Portamento
A continuous, unbroken glide from one note to the next that includes the pitches between. Some instruments, such as the trombone, timpani, non-fretted string instruments, and the human voice can make this glide continuously (portamento), while other instruments such as the piano or mallet instruments will blur the discrete pitches between the start and end notes to mimic a continuous slide (glissando).



Ligature
Also known as a phrase mark. Usually appears in music for string instruments to indicate bowing.



Tuplet
A number of notes of irregular duration are performed within the duration of a given number of notes of regular time value; e.g., five notes played in the normal duration of four notes; seven notes played in the normal duration of two; three notes played in the normal duration of four. Tuplets are named according to the number of irregular notes; e.g., duplets, triplets, quadruplets, etc.



Chord
Several notes sounded simultaneously ("solid" or "block"), or in succession ("broken"). Two-note chords are called diads; three-note chords are called triads. A chord may contain any number of notes.



Arpeggiated chord
A chord with notes played in rapid succession, usually ascending, each note being sustained as the others are played.



[edit] Dynamics
Dynamics are indicators of the relative intensity or volume of a musical line.



Pianississimo
Extremely soft. Very infrequently does one see softer dynamics than this, which are specified with additional ps.



Pianissimo
Very soft. Usually the softest indication in a piece of music, though softer dynamics are often specified with additional ps.



Piano
Soft. Usually the most often used indication.



Mezzo piano
Literally, half as soft as piano.



Mezzo forte
Similarly, half as loud as forte. More commonly used than mezzo-piano. Note: if no dynamic appears, mezzo-forte is assumed to be the prevailing dynamic level.



Forte
Loud. Used as often as piano to indicate contrast.



Fortissimo
Very loud. Usually the loudest indication in a piece, though louder dynamics are often specified with additional fs (such as fortississimo - seen below).



Fortississimo
Extremely loud. Very infrequently does one see louder dynamics than this, which are specified with additional fs.



Sforzando
Literally "forced", denotes an abrupt, fierce accent on a single sound or chord. Note: when written out in full, it applies to the sequence of sounds or chords under or over which it is placed.



Crescendo
A gradual increase in volume.
Can be extended under many notes to indicate that the volume steadily increases during the passage.



Diminuendo
Also decrescendo
A gradual decrease in volume. Can be extended in the same manner as crescendo.


Other commonly used dynamics build upon these values. For example "piano-pianissimo" (represented as 'ppp' meaning so softly as to be almost inaudible, and forte-fortissimo, ('fff') meaning extremely loud. In some European countries, use of this dynamic has been virtually outlawed as endangering the hearing of the performers.[1]

[edit] Articulation marks
Articulations (or accents) specify how individual notes are to be performed within a phrase or passage. They can be fine-tuned by combining more than one such symbol over or under a note. They may also appear in conjunction with phrasing marks listed above.



Staccato
This indicates that the note is to be played shorter than notated, usually half the value, the rest of the metric value is then silent. Staccato marks may thus appear on notes of any value, thus shortening their actual performed duration without speeding up the music itself.



Staccatissimo
Indicates a longer silence after the note (as described above), making the note very short. Usually applied to quarter notes or shorter. (In the past, this marking’s meaning was more ambiguous: it sometimes was used interchangeably with staccato, and sometimes indicated an accent and not staccato. These usages are now almost defunct, but still appear in some scores.)



Dynamic accent
The note is played louder or with a harder attack than any surrounding unaccented notes. May appear on notes of any duration.



Tenuto
This symbol has several meanings. It usually indicates that it be played for its full value, or slightly longer. It may indicate a separate attack on the note, or may indicate legato, in contrast to the dot of staccato. Combining a tenuto with a staccato dot indicates a slightly detaching ("portato" or "mezzo staccato").



Marcato
The note is played much louder or with a much stronger attack than any surrounding unaccented notes. May appear on notes of any duration. Also called petit chapeau.



Left-hand pizzicato or Stopped note
A note on a stringed instrument where the string is plucked with the left hand (the hand that usually stops the strings) rather than bowed. On the horn, this accent indicates a "stopped note" (a note played with the stopping hand shoved further into the bell of the horn).



Snap pizzicato
On a stringed instrument, a note played by stretching a string away from the frame of the instrument and letting it go, making it "snap" against the frame. Also known as a Bartók pizzicato.



Natural harmonic or Open note
On a stringed instrument, denotes that a natural harmonic is to be played. On a valved brass instrument, denotes that the note is to be played "open" (without lowering any valve). In organ music, this denotes that a pedal note is to be played with the heel.



Fermata (Pause)
An indefinitely-sustained note or chord. Usually appears over all parts at the same metrical location in a piece, to show a halt in tempo. It can be placed above or below the note.



Up bow or Sull'arco
On a bowed string instrument, the note is played while drawing the bow upward. On a plucked string instrument played with a plectrum or pick (such as a guitar played pickstyle or a mandolin), the note is played with an upstroke. Also note that in organ notation, this marking indicates to play the pedal note with the toe.



Down bow or Giù arco
Like sull'arco, except the bow is drawn downward. On a plucked string instrument played with a plectrum or pick (such as a guitar played pickstyle or a mandolin), the note is played with a downstroke. Also note in organ notation, this marking indicates to play the pedal note with the heel.



[edit] Ornaments
Ornaments modify the pitch pattern of individual notes.



Trill
A rapid alternation between the specified note and the next higher note (according to key signature) within its duration. Also called a "shake." When followed by a wavy horizontal line, this symbol indicates an extended, or running, trill. In much music, the trill begins on the upper auxiliary note.



Mordent
Rapidly play the principal note, the next higher note (according to key signature) then return to the principal note for the remaining duration. In much music, the mordent begins on the auxiliary note, and the alternation between the two notes may be extended.



Mordent (inverted)
Rapidly play the principal note, the semitone below it, then return to the principal note for the remaining duration. In much music, the mordent begins on the auxiliary note, and the alternation between the two notes may be extended.



Turn
When placed directly above the note, the turn (also known as a gruppetto) indicates a sequence of upper auxiliary note, principal note, lower auxiliary note, and a return to the principal note. When placed to the right of the note, the principal note is played first, followed by the above pattern. A vertical line placed through the turn reverses the order of the auxiliary notes.



Appoggiatura
The first half of the principal note's duration has the pitch of the grace note (the first two-thirds if the principal note is a dotted note).



Acciaccatura
The acciaccatura is of very brief duration, as though brushed on the way to the principal note, which receives virtually all of its notated duration.



[edit] Octaves



Ottava alta
Notes below the dashed line are played one octave higher than notated.

Ottava bassa
Notes below the dashed line are played one octave lower than notated.



Quindicesima alta
Notes below the dashed line are played two octaves higher.

Quindicesima bassa
Notes below the dashed line are played two octaves lower.



[edit] Repetition and codas



Tremolo
A rapidly-repeated note. If the tremolo is between two notes, then they are played in rapid alternation. The number of slashes through the stem (or number of diagonal bars between two notes) indicates the frequency at which the note is to be repeated (or alternated). As shown here, the note is to be repeated at a demisemiquaver (thirty-second note) rate.
In percussion notation, tremolos are used to indicate rolls, diddles, and drags. Typically, a single tremolo line on a sufficiently short note (such as a sixteenth) is played as a drag, and a combination of three stem and tremolo lines indicates a double-stroke roll for a period equivalent to the duration of the note. In other cases, the interpretation of tremolos is highly variable, and should be examined by the director and performers.




Repeat signs
Enclose a passage that is to be played more than once. If there is no left repeat sign, the right repeat sign sends the performer back to the start of the piece or the nearest double bar.



Simile marks
Denote that preceding groups of beats or measures are to be repeated.



Volta brackets (1st and 2nd endings)
Denote that a repeated passage is to be played in different ways on different playings.



Da capo
Tells the performer to repeat playing of the music from its beginning. This is followed by al fine, which means to repeat to the word fine and stop, or al coda, which means repeat to the coda sign and then jump forward.



Dal segno
Tells the performer to repeat playing of the music starting at the nearest segno. This is followed by al fine or al coda just as with da capo.



Segno
Mark used with dal segno.



Coda
Indicates a forward jump in the music to its ending passage, marked with the same sign. Only used after playing through a D.S. al coda or D.C. al coda.



[edit] Instrument-specific notation

[edit] Guitar
The guitar has a right-hand fingering notation system derived from the names of the fingers in Spanish. They are written above, below, or beside the note to which they are attached. They read as follows:


Symbol
Spanish
English


p
pulgar
thumb


i
indice
index


m
medio
middle


a
anular
ring


c, x, e, q
meñique
little



[edit] Piano

[edit] Pedal marks
These pedal marks appear in music for the piano.



Engage pedal
Tells the pianist to put the sustain pedal down.



Release pedal
Tells the pianist to let the sustain pedal up.



Variable pedal mark
More accurately indicates the precise use of the sustain pedal. The extended lower line tells the pianist to keep the sustain pedal depressed for all notes below which it appears. The inverted "V" shape (/\) indicates the pedal is to be momentarily released, then depressed again.



[edit] Other piano notation


m.d. or MD
mano destra (Italian)
Tells the pianist to use the right hand.


m.s. or MS
mano sinistra (Italian)
Tells the pianist to use the left hand.





r.h. or RH
right hand (English)
Tells the pianist to use the right hand.


l.h. or LH
left hand (English)
Tells the pianist to use the left hand.





m.d. or MD
main droite (French)
Tells the pianist to use the right hand.


m.g. or MG
main gauche (French)
Tells the pianist to use the left hand.





r.H.
rechte Hand (German)
Tells the pianist to use the right hand.


l.H.
linke Hand (German)
Tells the pianist to use the left hand.



[edit] See also

Graphic notation
Music theory
Musical terminology
Eye movement in music reading



[edit] References

^ http://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/20/arts/music/20noise.html


Comprehensive list of music symbols fonts
Dolmetsch Online:

Music theory & history
Dictionary of musical symbols










v • d • e

Musical notation and development





Staff

Bar & Bar line · Clef · Coda · Da Capo · Dal Segno · Key signature · Ledger line · Musical mode · Musical scale · Rehearsal letter · Repeat sign · Time signature · Transposition · Transposing instrument







Notes

Accidental (Flat · Natural · Sharp) · Dotted note · Grace note · Note value (Beam · Note head · Stem) · Pitch · Rest · Letter notation






Articulation

Dynamics · Ornament · Ossia · Portato · Accent · Legato · Tenuto · Marcato · Staccato · Staccatissimo · Tie · Slur · Fermata






Development

Exposition · Harmony · Melody · Motif · Recapitulation · Rhythm (Beat · Meter · Tempo) · Theme · Tonality · Atonality






Related

Chord chart · Figured bass · Graphic notation · Lead sheet · Eye music · Modern musical symbols · Neume · Tablature









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modern_musical_symbols"
Categories: Musical notation 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Eesti
Español
Français
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Português
Русский
Svenska









 This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 11:13 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
