













French Foreign Legion - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "French_Foreign_Legion";
		var wgTitle = "French Foreign Legion";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "11544";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281508206;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); French Foreign Legion

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"Legionnaire" redirects here. For the 1998 film, see Legionnaire (film).


French Foreign Legion



The Legion emblem.


Active
10 March 1831—present


Country
 France


Branch
French Army


Size
c. 7,700 men in nine regiments and one sub-unit


Garrison/HQ
Aubagne (Headquarters)
Metropolitan France (5 regiments)
French Guiana (3rd Infantry Regiment)
Djibouti (13th Half-Brigade)
Mayotte (Detachment)


Motto
"Legio Patria Nostra" (The Legion is our Homeland)
"Honneur et Fidélité" (Honour and Fidelity)
"Marche ou crève" (March or die, unofficial)


March
Le Boudin


Anniversaries
Camerone Day (30 April) and Christmas


Commanders


Current
commander
Brigade General Louis Pichot de Champfleury


The French Foreign Legion (French: Légion étrangère) is a unique unit separate from the regular French Army, established in 1831. The legion was specifically created as a unit for foreign volunteers, to be commanded by French officers; it is however also open to French citizens, who amount to 24% of recruits[1]. After the July Revolution of 1830, foreigners were forbidden to enlist in the French Army. The Legion was also seen as a convenient way to dispose of numerous recently-displaced foreign nationals (many of whom were thought to hold revolutionary political beliefs) by sending them to Algeria to fight in the French campaign of colonialization.
The Legion was primarily used to protect and expand the French colonial empire during the 19th century, but it also fought in all French wars including the Franco-Prussian War and both World Wars.
The Foreign Legion has remained an important part of the French Army. It has survived three Republics, one empire, two World Wars, the rise and fall of mass conscript armies, the dismantling of the French colonial empire and the French loss of the legion's birthplace, Algeria.
The French Foreign Legion is known as an elite military unit whose training focuses not only on traditional military skills but also on its strong esprit de corps. As its men come from different countries with different cultures, this is a widely accepted solution to strengthen them enough to work as a team. Consequently, training is often described as not only physically challenging, but also extremely psychologically stressful.




Contents


1 History

1.1 The French Foreign Legion in Spain
1.2 Mexico
1.3 Franco-Prussian War
1.4 19th century colonial warfare
1.5 Tonkin campaign and Sino-French War
1.6 World War I
1.7 Between the World Wars
1.8 World War II
1.9 First Indochina War
1.10 Algerian War
1.11 Post-colonial Africa
1.12 The Gulf War


2 Emulation

2.1 Spanish Foreign Legion
2.2 KNIL


3 Legion membership

3.1 Ranks and promotions
3.2 Code of Honour


4 Composition

4.1 Disbanded unit and attempted coup
4.2 Current deployments


5 Recruitment process
6 Legion basic training
7 Recruitment chart
8 Uniforms

8.1 Equipment


9 Marching step
10 References in popular culture
11 See also
12 Notes

12.1 References
12.2 Sources


13 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Main article: History of the French Foreign Legion
The French Foreign Legion was created by Louis Philippe, then King of the French, on 10 March 1831. The direct reason was that foreigners were forbidden to serve in the French Army after the 1830 July Revolution.[2]
The purpose of the Legion was to remove disruptive elements from society and put them to use fighting the enemies of France. Recruits included failed revolutionaries from the rest of Europe, soldiers from the disbanded foreign regiments, and troublemakers in general, both foreign and French. Algeria was designated as the Legion's home; as the colony was proving to be a very unpopular posting with regular regiments in the French Army, the introduction of the Legion was well received.[citation needed]
In late 1831, the first Legionnaires landed in Algeria, the country that would be the Legion's homeland for 130 years and shape its character. The early years in Algeria were hard for Legionnaires because they were often sent to the worst postings, received the worst assignments and were generally uninterested in the new colony of the French.[3]
The Legion's first service in Algeria came to an end after only four years, since it was needed elsewhere.

[edit] The French Foreign Legion in Spain
Main article: First Carlist War
To support Isabella's claim to the Spanish throne against her uncle, the French government decided to send the Legion to Spain. On 28 June 1835, the unit was handed over to the Spanish government. The Legion landed at Tarragona on 17 August with around 4,000 men who were quickly dubbed Los Argelinos (the Algerians) by locals because of their previous posting.
The Legion's commander immediately dissolved the national battalions to improve the esprit de corps. Later, he also created three squadrons of lancers and an artillery battery from the existing force to increase independence and flexibility.
The Legion was dissolved on 8 December 1838, when it had dropped to only 500 men. The survivors returned to France, many reenlisting in the new Legion along with many of their former Carlist enemies.

[edit] Mexico
Main article: Battle of Camarón




Battle of Camarón.


It was in Mexico on 30 April 1863 that the Legion earned its legendary status. A compain led by Capitaine Danjou, numbering 62 soldiers and 3 officers, was escorting a convoy to the besieged city of Puebla when it was attacked and besieged by two thousand revolutionaries,[4] organized in three battalions of infantry and cavalry, numbering 1,200 and 800 respectively. The patrol was forced to make a defence in Hacienda Camarón, and despite the hopelessness of the situation, fought nearly to the last man. When only six survivors remained, out of ammunition, a bayonet charge was conducted in which three of the six were killed. The remaining three were brought before the Mexican general, who allowed them to return to France as an honour guard for the body of Capitaine Danjou. The captain had a wooden hand which was stolen during the battle; it was later returned to the Legion and is now kept in a case in the Foreign Legion museum at Aubagne, and paraded annually on Camerone day.

[edit] Franco-Prussian War
Main article: Franco-Prussian War
According to French law, the Legion was not to be used within Metropolitan France except in the case of a national invasion, and was consequently not a part of Napoleon III’s Imperial Army that capitulated at Sedan. With the defeat of the Imperial Army, the Second French Empire fell and the Third Republic was created.




Monument commemorating the soldiers of the Foreign Legion killed on duty during the South-oranais campaign (1897-1902).


The new Third Republic was desperately short of trained soldiers in the Franco-Prussian War, so the Legion was ordered to provide a contingent. On 11 October 1870 two provisional battalions disembarked at Toulon, the first time the Legion had been deployed in France itself. They attempted to lift the Siege of Paris by breaking through the German lines. They succeeded in re-taking Orléans, but failed to break the siege.

[edit] 19th century colonial warfare
During the Third Republic, the Legion played a major role in French colonial expansion. They fought in North Africa (where they established their headquarters at Sidi-Bel-Abbès in Algeria), Benin, Madagascar, Indochina and Taiwan.

[edit] Tonkin campaign and Sino-French War




Soldier of the Foreign Legion at Keelung, January 1885


The Legion's 1st Battalion (Lieutenant-Colonel Donnier) was sent to Tonkin in the autumn of 1883, during the period of undeclared hostilities that preceded the Sino-French War (August 1884 to April 1885), and formed part of the attack column that stormed the western gate of Son Tay on 16 December. The 2nd and 3rd infantry battalions (chef de bataillon Diguet and Lieutenant-Colonel Schoeffer) were also deployed to Tonkin shortly afterwards, and were present in all the major campaigns of the Sino-French War. Two Legion companies led the defence at the celebrated Siege of Tuyen Quang (24 November 1884 to 3 March 1885). In January 1885 the Legion's 4th Battalion (chef de bataillon Vitalis) was deployed to the French bridgehead at Keelung (Jilong) in Formosa (Taiwan), where it took part in the later battles of the Keelung Campaign. The battalion played an important role in Colonel Jacques Duchesne's offensive in March 1885 that captured the key Chinese positions of La Table and Fort Bamboo and disengaged Keelung.

In December 1883, during a review of the 2nd Legion Battalion on the eve of its departure for Tonkin to take part in the Bac Ninh campaign, General François de Négrier pronounced a famous mot: Vous, légionnaires, vous êtes soldats pour mourir, et je vous envoie où l’on meurt! ('Legionnaires, you became soldiers in order to die, and I'm taking you to a place where you can die!')

[edit] World War I
In World War I, the Legion fought in many critical battles of the war, on the Western Front including Artois, Champagne, Somme, Aisne, Verdun (in 1917) and also suffered heavy casualties during 1918. The Legion was also in the Dardanelles and Macedonian front, and the Legion was highly decorated for its efforts. Many young foreigners, including Americans like Fred Zinn, volunteered for the Legion when the war broke out in 1914. There were marked differences between such idealistic volunteers as the poet Alan Seeger and the hardened mercenaries of the old Legion, making assimilation difficult. Nevertheless, the old and the new men of the Legion fought and died in vicious battles on the Western front, including Belloy-en-Santerre during the Battle of the Somme, where Seeger, after being mortally wounded by machine gun fire, cheered on the rest of his advancing battalion.[5]
As most European countries and the US were drawn into the War, many of the newer "duration only" volunteers who managed to survive the first years of the war were generally released from the Legion to join their respective national armies. Citizens of the Central Powers serving with the Legion on the outbreak of war were normally posted to garrisons in North Africa to avoid problems of divided loyalties.

[edit] Between the World Wars
In 1932, the Legion comprised 30,000 men in 6 multi-battalion regiments:

1st - Algeria and Syria
2d, 3d, and 4th - Morocco
5th - Indochina
1st Cavalry - Tunisia and Morocco.


[edit] World War II
The Foreign Legion played a smaller role in World War II, though having a part in the Norwegian, Syrian and North African campaigns. The 13th Demi-Brigade was deployed in the Battle of Bir Hakeim. Reflecting the divided loyalties of the time, part of the Legion joined the Free French movement while another part served the Vichy government. A battle in the Syria-Lebanon campaign of June 1941 saw legionnaire fighting legionnaire as the 13th Demi-Brigade (D.B.L.E.) clashed with the 6th Regiment Etranger d'Infanterie at Damas in Syria. Later, 1,000 of the rank and file of the Vichy Legion unit joined the 13th D.B.L.E. of the Free French forces as a third battalion. Following the war, many former German soldiers joined the Legion to pursue a military career with an elite unit, an option that was no longer possible in Germany. Germans still constitute a strong presence in the Legion.

[edit] First Indochina War




Uniforms of the Foreign Legion paratroopers during the First Indochina War.






Battle of Kolwezi, 1978.


Units of the Legion were involved in the defense of Dien Bien Phu during the First Indochina War and lost a large number of men in the battle. Towards the desperate end of the battle, Legionnaires formed the bulk of the volunteer relief force delivered by parachute to the base.[citation needed]

[edit] Algerian War
The Legion was heavily engaged in fighting against the National Liberation Front and other, smaller groups in the Algerian War of Independence from 1954 to 1962. Notable operations included the Battle of Algiers and various offensives launched by General Maurice Challe including Operations Oranie and Jumelles.

[edit] Post-colonial Africa




A Foreign Legion soldier with a captured rebel, Ivory Coast, 10 August 2004.


In spite of the view on the part of some that the Legion had by 1962 become an anachronism, the Legion found a new role as a rapid intervention force to preserve French interests not only in its former African colonies but in other nations as well. Some notable operations include: the Suez Crisis in 1956; the Chadian-Libyan conflict in 1969-72, 1978-79, and 1983-87; Kolwezi in what is now the Democratic Republic of the Congo in May 1978; Rwanda in 1990-94; and the Côte d'Ivoire (the Ivory Coast) in 2002 to the present. 
[edit] The Gulf War
In September 1990, the 2e REI, 6e REG and 1e REC were sent to the Persian Gulf as a part of Opération Daguet. They were a part of the French 6th Light Armoured Division, whose mission was to protect the coalition's left flank.
After a four-week air campaign, coalition forces launched the ground campaign. It quickly penetrated deep into Iraq, with the Legion taking the Al Salman airport, meeting little resistance. The war ended after a hundred hours of fighting on the ground, which resulted in very light casualties for the Legion.

[edit] Emulation

[edit] Spanish Foreign Legion
The Spanish Foreign Legion was created in 1920, in emulation of the French one, and had a significant role in Spain's colonial wars in Morocco and in the Spanish Civil War on the Nationalist side. Unlike its French model, the number of non-Spanish recruits never exceeded 25%, and most of these were Latin Americans.

[edit] KNIL
Though not named "Foreign Legion", the Dutch Koninklijk Nederlandsch-Indische Leger (KNIL), or Royal Netherlands-Indian Army (in reference to the Dutch East Indies, now Indonesia), was created in 1830, a year before the French legion, and had a similar recruitment policy. It stopped being a foreign legion around 1900 when recruitment was restricted to Dutch citizens and to the indigenous peoples of the Dutch East Indies. The KNIL was finally disbanded on 26 July 1950, seven months after Indonesian independence.

[edit] Legion membership




Légionnaires in Saudi Arabia.


While most of the Legion's commissioned officers are French, approximately 10% of them are former Legionnaires who have risen through the ranks. Though open to people of any nationality, most Legionnaires still come from European countries.
Membership of the Legion is a useful guide to political history: specific national representations generally surge whenever a country has a political crisis, and tend to subside once the crisis is over and the flow of recruits dries up. After the First World War, many (Tsarist) Russians joined.
Immediately before the Second World War, Czechs, Poles and Jews from Eastern Europe fled to France and ended up enlisting in the Legion. After World War Two, the German presence was particularly strong. Following the break-up of Yugoslavia, there were many Serbian nationals. Also in the 1990s, the collapse of the Soviet Union, and the changes in the former Warsaw Pact countries, led to an increase in recruitment from Poland and from the former republics of the USSR. Recent years have seen an increasing number of recruits from African and Balkan countries.
However, in addition to the fluctuating numbers of political refugees, asylum seekers and economic migrants from a wide variety of nations, there has been, since the end of World War Two, a strong core from two nations in particular, Germany and Britain. The Legion appears to have become as much a part of these two nations' culture as a French institution, and a certain stability in recruitment levels has developed; it does not follow the general 'yo-yo' trend as closely.
After the fall of the Third Reich, Germans, long a major presence in the legion, are believed to have accounted for roughly sixty percent of its manpower,[citation needed]. After the war, the French administered two zones of Western Germany adjacent to France. In these zones, recruitment offices enabled many former German POWs to join the legion almost immediately after their release from prison camps. However, Bernard B. Fall, a leading expert on French Indochina and the author of the famous accounts Street without Joy and Hell in a Very Small Place, disputes this figure and claims that Germans made up thirty-five percent of the Legion at most in the post-WWII period. Nevertheless, the image of a German-dominated postwar Foreign Legion is the setting for the well-known novel Devil's Guard, which narrates a former Waffen-SS member's brutal experience of joining the Legion and fighting alongside other former SS against the Vietminh in Indochina.
During the late 1980s, the Legion saw a large intake of trained soldiers from the UK. These men had left the British Army following its restructuring and the Legion's parachute unit was a popular destination. At one point, the famous 2eme REP had such a large number of British citizens amongst the ranks that it was a standing joke that the unit was really called '2eme PARA', a reference to the 2nd Battalion, the Parachute Regiment of the British Army.
While no serious studies have been made of the motives for enlistment over the years, the majority in the Legion's ranks were either those transient souls in need of escape and a regular wage, or refugees from countries undergoing crises. In recent years, however, the improved conditions and professionalism of the Legion have in turn attracted a new kind of 'vocational' recruit, from middle-class backgrounds in stable and prosperous countries, such as the US, Britain and France itself.
In the past, the Legion had a reputation for attracting criminals on the run and would-be mercenaries, but in recent years the admissions have been severely restricted and background checks are performed on all applicants. Generally speaking, convicted felons are prohibited from joining the service.
Legionnaires can choose to enlist under a pseudonym ("declared identity"). This disposition exists in order to allow people who want to start their lives over to enlist. French citizens can enlist under a declared, fictitious, foreign citizenship (generally, a francophone one, often that of Canada or Monaco). After one year's service, Legionnaires can regularize their situation under their true identity.
After serving in the Legion for three years, a legionnaire may apply for French citizenship[6]. He must be serving under his real name, no longer have problems with the authorities, and must have served with “honour and fidelity” for at least three years. French nationality cannot be granted under a declared identity. Furthermore, a soldier who becomes injured during a battle for France can apply for French citizenship under a provision known as “Français par le sang versé” (”French by spilled blood”).

[edit] Ranks and promotions

Legionnaire
Caporal (Corporal) - after 2 years of service
Caporal Chef (Senior Corporal) - 6 years of service
Sergent (Sergeant) - after 3 years of service
Sergent Chef (Staff Sergeant) - after 3 years in rank of sergeant and 7 to 14 years of service
Adjudant (Adjutant) - after 3 years in rank of staff sergeant
Adjudant Chef (Senior Adjutant) - 4 years as adjutant with at least 14 years in service
Regimental Sergeant Major - after 4 years in rank of adjutant
Major - after 14 years - Either after passing the examination or being appointed without the examination.

officers are seconded from the French Army
All French Foreign Legion NCOs began their careers as legionnaires with one in four legionnaires joining today becoming an NCO. NCOs count for 25% of the legion today.




[edit] Code of Honour
Every Legionnaire must know by heart the "Legionnaire's Code of Honour". The Legionnaires spend many hours learning it, reciting it, and then getting the vocal synchronization together:

Légionnaire, you are a volunteer serving France with "Honour and Fidelity".
Every legionnaire is your brother-in-arms, regardless of his nationality, race, or religion. You will demonstrate this by strict solidarity which must always unite members of the same family.
Respect of traditions, devotion to your leaders, discipline and comradeship are your strengths, courage and loyalty your virtues.
Proud of your status as legionnaire, you display this in your uniform, which is always impeccable, your behaviour always dignified but modest, your living quarters always clean.
An elite soldier, you will train rigorously, you will maintain your weapon as your most precious possession, you are constantly concerned with your physical form.
A mission is sacred, you will carry it out until the end respecting laws, customs of war, international conventions and, if necessary, at a risk of your life. (Changed in November 2000)
In combat, you will act without passion and without hate, you will respect the vanquished enemy, you will never abandon your dead or wounded, nor surrender your arms.


[edit] Composition




A "sapeur" (sapper combat engineer) of the Foreign Légion, circa 1970.


Previously, the Légion was not stationed in mainland France except in wartime. Until 1962, the Legion headquarters were located in Sidi-Bel-Abbès, Algeria. Nowadays, some units of the Légion are in Corsica or overseas possessions, while the rest are in the south of mainland France. Current headquarters are in Aubagne, France, just outside Marseille.
There are nine regiments and one independent sub-unit :

Mainland France

1st Foreign Cavalry Regiment (1e REC), based in Orange (armoured troops),
1st Foreign Regiment (1e RE), based in Aubagne (legion headquarters),
2nd Foreign Infantry Regiment (2e REI), based in Nîmes,
4th Foreign Regiment (4e RE), based in Castelnaudary (training);
1st Foreign Engineer Regiment (1e REG), based in Laudun;
2nd Foreign Engineer Regiment (2e REG), based in St Christol;


Corsica

2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment (2e REP), based in Calvi, Corsica;


French Overseas Territories and Overseas Collectives,

3rd Foreign Infantry Regiment (3e REI), based in French Guiana,
Foreign Legion Detachment in Mayotte (DLEM);


Africa

13th Foreign Legion Demi-Brigade (13 DBLE), based in Djibouti.




[edit] Disbanded unit and attempted coup
Further information: Generals' Putsch
The 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment (1e Régiment Étranger Parachutiste, 1e REP) was established in 1955 during the Algerian War and disbanded in April 1961 as the entire regiment rose against the French government of Charles de Gaulle (Algiers Putsch), in protest against moves to negotiate an end to the Algerian War.
Following Algerian Independence in 1962, the Legion was reduced in numbers but not disbanded like most other units comprising the Armée d’Afrique: Zouaves, Tirailleurs, Meharistes, Harkis, Goums, Chasseurs d'Afrique and all but one of the Spahi regiments). The intention seems to have been to retain the Foreign Legion as a professional force which could be used for military interventions outside France and not involve the politically unpopular use of French conscripts. The subsequent abolition of conscription in France in 2001 and the creation of an entirely professional army might be expected to put the Legion's long-term future at risk, and indeed when Paris contributed a 2,000-strong contingent to the U.N. force in Lebanon in 2006, it included only 200 Legion engineers.

[edit] Current deployments




Paratroopers in Djibouti.


These deployments are current as of December 2008:[7]
Note: English names for countries or territories are in parentheses.

Opérations extérieures (other than at home bases or on standard duties)

Guyane (French Guiana) Mission de presence sur l’Oyapok - Protection - 3e REI Protection CSG ; 2e REP / CEA; 2e REI / 4° compagnie
Afghanistan Intervention 1e REC / 3° escadron (1 peloton); 2e REI / 4° compagnie OMLT; 2e REG / 1ère compagnie
Mayotte (Departmental Collectivity of Mayotte) Prevention DLEM Mission de souveraineté
Djibouti Prevention 13 DBLE; 1e REC / 1° escadron; 1e REG / 3° compagnie
Gabon Prevention 2e REP / 3° compagnie - 4° compagnie




Units

Acronym
French Name
English Meaning


CEA
Compagnie d'éclairage et d'appuis
Reconnaissance and Support Company


CAC
Compagnie anti-char
Anti-Tank Company


UCL
Unité de commandement et de logistique
Unit of Command and Logistics


EMT
État-major tactique
Tactical Command Post


NEDEX
Neutralisation des explosifs
Neutralization and Destruction of Explosives


OMLT
Operational Monitoring and Liaison Team (The official name for this branch is in English)



[edit] Recruitment process
First Day - In a legion Information Center for Reception, Information, and Terms of contract
Preselection - 1 to 3 days In a legion Recruitment Center (Paris - Aubagne) for Confirmation of motivation, Initial medical check-up , finalizing enlistment papers, and signing 5 year service contract
Selection - 1 to 10 days In the Recruitment and Selection Center in Aubagne for Psychological tests, Personality tests (complementary to the psychological tests), logic tests (without minimum education requirements), medical exam and physical condition tests, motivation and security interviews, and finally confirmation or denial of selection.
Final Selection - 7 days Signing and handing-over of the five year service and Incorporation into the Legion as a trainee.

[edit] Legion basic training
Basic training is conducted in the 4th Foreign Regiment with a duration of 15 weeks:

Initial training of 4 weeks - initiation to military lifestyle; outdoor and field activities; learning legion traditions.
March "Képi Blanc" and graduation ceremony - 1 week.
Technical and practical training (alternating with barracks and field training) - 3 weeks.
Mountain training (Chalet at Formiguière in the French Pyrenees) - 1 week.
Technical and practical training (alternating barracks and field training) - 2 weeks.
Examinations and obtaining of the elementary technical certificate (CTE) - 1 week.
March ending basic training - 1 week.
Light vehicle / trucks school - 1 week.
Return to Aubagne before reporting to the assigned regiment - 1 week.


[edit] Recruitment chart




American poet Alan Seeger in his Legion uniform


The following is a chart showing the national origin of the more than 600,000 Legionaries of the force from 1831 to 1961, which was compiled in 1963. It should be noted that, at a given moment, principal original nationalities of the foreign legion reflect the events in history at the time they join. The legion allows men to escape from the worries of war, especially if their native country has lost. The large numbers of Germans joining in the wake of WWII led to the misconception that the Legion was full of former Waffen SS and Wehrmacht personnel. It is not surprising to see that a large number of German enlistments in the period following WWII, but the figures do not show whether or not the post-WWI period had a similar boost. Bernard B. Fall, writing in the context of the First Indochina War, has called the notion that the Foreign Legion was mainly German at that time:

"a canard . . . with the sub variant that all those Germans were at least SS generals and other much wanted war criminals. As a rule, and in order to prevent any particular nation from making the Legion into a Praetorian guard, any particular national component is kept at about 25 percent of the total. Even supposing (and this was the case, of course) that the French recruiters, in the eagerness for candidates would sign up Germans enlisting as Swiss, Austrian, Scandinavian and other nationalities of related ethnic background, it is unlikely that the number of Germans in the Foreign Legion ever exceeded 35 percent. Thus, without making an allowance for losses, rotation, discharges, etc., the maximum number of Germans fighting in Indochina at any one time reached perhaps 7 000 out of 278 000. As to the ex-Nazis, the early arrivals contained a number of them, none of whom were known to be war criminals. French Intelligence saw to that. Since, in view of the rugged Indochinese climate, older men without previous tropical experience constituted more a liability than an asset, the average age of the Legion enlistees was about 23. At the time of the battle of Dien Bien Phu, any Legionnaire of that age group was at the worst, in his "Hitler Youth" shorts when the [Third] Reich collapsed. [8]

When looking at the overall recruitment chart, one must keep in mind that the Legion accepts people enlisting under a nationality that is not their own. The large number of Swiss and Belgians are actually more likely than not Frenchmen who wish to avoid detection.[9]


Rank
Country of origin
Total numbers


1
 Germany
210000


2
 Italy
60000


3
 Belgium
50000


4
 France
50000


5
 Spain
40000


6
 Switzerland
30000


7
 Poland
10000


8
 Russia
6000


9
 Austria
5000


10
 Hungary
4000


11
 Greece
4000


12
 Czechoslovakia
4000


13
 Netherlands
3000


14
 Yugoslavia
3000


15
 Luxembourg
2300


16
 United Kingdom
1500


17
 Romania
1500


18
 Portugal
1300


19
 Denmark
1000


20
 Turkey
1000


21
 United States
700


22
 Bulgaria
500


23
 Finland
500


24
 Sweden
500


25
 Algeria
500


26
 Vietnam
200


27
 Morocco
200


28
 Tunisia
200


29
 Argentina
100


30
 Brazil
100


31
 Japan
100


32
 Canada
100


33
 Lithuania
100


34
 Latvia
100


35
 Norway
100


36
 Egypt
100


Regarding recruitment conditions within the Foreign Legion, please see the official page (in English) dedicated to the subject: [1]. However, with regard to age limits, recruits can be accepted from ages ranging from 17 ½ (with parental consent) to 40 years old.

[edit] Uniforms




Légionnaires in modern dress uniform. Note the green and red epaulettes and the distinctive white kepi. They carry France's standard assault rifle, the FAMAS.


From its foundation until World War I the Legion wore the uniform of the French line infantry for parade with a few special distinctions. The field uniform was often modified under the influence of the extremes of climate and terrain in which the Legion served. Shakos were soon replaced by the light cloth kepi which was far more suitable for North African conditions. One short lived aberration was the wearing of green uniforms in 1856 by Legion units recruited in Switzerland for service in the Crimean War.
In the early 1900s the Legionnaire wore a red kepi with blue band and piping, dark blue tunic with red collar, red cuff patches, and red trousers. The most distinctive features were the green epaulettes (replacing the red of the line) worn with red woolen fringes; plus the embroidered Legion badge of a red flaming grenade, worn on the kepi front instead of a regimental number. In the field a light khaki cover was worn over the kepi, sometimes with a protective neck curtain attached. The standard medium-blue double breasted greatcoat (capote) of the French infantry was worn, usually buttoned back to free the legs for marching. Around the waist was a broad blue sash, copied from that of the Zouaves. The blue sash provided warmth and support as well as (supposedly) preventing intestine diseases. White linen trousers tucked into short leather leggings were substituted for red serge in hot weather. This was the origin of the "Beau Geste" image of the Legion.
In barracks a white bleached kepi cover was often worn together with a short dark blue jacket ("veste") or white blouse plus white trousers. The original kepi cover was khaki and due to constant washing turned white quickly. The white or khaki kepi cover was not unique to the Legion at this stage but was commonly seen amongst other French units in North Africa. It later became particularly identified with the Foreign Legion as the unit most likely to serve at remote frontier posts (other than locally recruited tirailleurs who wore fezzes or turbans). The variances of climate in North Africa led the French Army to the sensible expedient of letting local commanders decide on the appropriate "tenue de jour" (uniform of the day) according to circumstances. Thus a Legionnaire might parade or walk out in blue tunic and white trousers in hot weather, blue tunic and red trousers in normal temperatures or wear the blue greatcoat with red trousers under colder conditions. The sash could be worn with greatcoat, blouse or veste but not with the tunic. Epaulettes were a detachable dress item worn only with tunic or greatcoat for parade or off duty wear.
Officers wore the same dark blue (almost black) tunics as those of their colleagues in the French line regiments, except that black replaced red as a facing colour on collar and cuffs. Gold fringed epaulettes were worn for full dress and rank was shown by the number of gold rings on both kepi and cuffs. Trousers were red with black stripes or white according to occasion or conditions. All-white or light khaki uniforms (from as early as the 1890s) were often worn in the field or for ordinary duties in barracks.
Non-commissioned officers were distinguished by red or gold diagonal stripes on the cuffs of tunics, vestes and greatcoats. Small detachable stripes were buttoned on to the white shirt-like blouse.
Prior to 1914 units in Indo-China wore white or khaki Colonial Infantry uniforms with Legion insignia, to overcome supply difficulties. This dress included a white sun helmet of a model that was also worn by Legion units serving in the outposts of Southern Algeria, though never popular with the wearers.
During the initial months of World War I Legion units serving in France wore the standard blue greatcoat and red trousers of the French line infantry, distinguished only by collar patches of the same blue as the capote, instead of red. After a short period in sky-blue the Legion adopted khaki with steel helmets, from early 1916. A mustard shade of khaki drill had been worn on active service in Morocco from 1909, replacing the classic blue and white. The latter continued to be worn in the relatively peaceful conditions of Algeria throughout World War I, although increasingly replaced by khaki drill. The pre-1914 blue and red uniforms could still be occasionally seen as garrison dress in Algeria until stocks were used up about 1919.
During the early 1920s plain khaki drill uniforms of a standard pattern became universal issue for the Legion with only the red and blue kepi (with or without a cover) and green collar braiding to distinguish the Legionnaire from other French soldiers serving in North African and Indo-China. The neck curtain ceased to be worn from about 1915, although it survived in the newly raised Foreign Legion Cavalry Regiment into the 1920s. The white blouse (bourgeron) and trousers dating from 1882 were retained for fatigue wear until the 1930s.
At the time of the Legion's centennial in 1931, a number of traditional features were reintroduced at the initiative of the then commander Colonel Rollet. These included the blue sash and green/red epaulettes. In 1939 the white covered kepi won recognition as the official headdress of the Legion to be worn on most occasions, rather than simply as a means of reflecting heat and protecting the blue and red material underneath. The 3rd REI adopted white tunics and trousers for walking out dress during the 1930s and all Legion officers were required to obtain full dress uniforms in the pre-war colours of black and red from 1932 to 1939.
During World War II the Legion wore a wide range of uniform styles depending on supply sources. These ranged from the heavy capotes and Adrian helmets of 1940 through to British battledress and US field uniforms from 1943 to 1945. The white kepi was stubbornly retained whenever possible.
The white kepis, together with the sash and epaulettes survive in the Legion's modern parade dress. Since the 1990s the modern kepi has been made wholly of white material rather than simply worn with a white cover. Officers and senior NCOs still wear their kepis in the pre-1939 colours of dark blue and red. A green tie and (for officers) a green waistcoat recall the traditional branch colour of the Legion. From 1959 a green beret became the ordinary duty headdress of the Legion, with the kepi reserved for parade and off duty wear. Other items of dress are the standard issue of the French Army. Officers seconded to the Foreign Legion retain one Legion button on the vests of their dress uniforms upon returning to their original regiments.

[edit] Equipment

The FAMAS assault rifle


[edit] Marching step
Also notable is the marching pace of the Legion. In comparison to the 120-step-per-minute pace of other French units, the Legion has an 88-step-per-minute marching speed. It is also referred by Legionnaires as the "crawl". This can be seen at ceremonial parades and public displays attended by the Legion, particularly while parading in Paris on 14 July (Bastille Day). Because of the impressively slow pace, the Legion is always the last unit marching in any parade. The Legion is normally accompanied by its own band which traditionally plays the march of any one of the regiments comprising the Legion, except that of the unit actually on parade. The regimental song of each unit and "Le Boudin" (commonly called the blood sausage) is sung by Legionnaires standing at attention. Also, because the Legion must always stay together, it doesn't break formation into two when approaching the presidential grandstand, as other French military units do, in order to preserve the unity of the Legion.
Contrary to popular belief, the adoption of the Legion's slow marching speed was not due to a need to preserve energy and fluids during long marches under the hot Algerian sun. Its exact origins are somewhat unclear, but the official explanation is that although the pace regulation does not seem to have been instituted before 1945, it hails back to the slow, majestic marching pace of the Ancien Régime, and its reintroduction was a "return to traditional roots". [10]

[edit] References in popular culture
Main article: French Foreign Legion in popular culture
Beyond its reputation as an elite unit often embroiled in serious fighting, the recruitment practices of the French Foreign Legion have also led to a romantic view of it being a place for a wronged man to leave behind his old life to start a new one, yet also being full of scoundrels and men escaping justice. This view of the legion is common in literature, and has been used for dramatic effect in many films, not the least of which are the several versions of Beau Geste.
In the 1952 animated cartoon Little Beau Pepé, Pepé Le Pew tried to join the Foreign Legion and evacuated a desert fort with his stench. Pepe Le Pew says, "I am the broken heart of love. I am the disillusioned. I wish to enlist in the Foreign Legion so I may forget. Take me!" And later, "Why did everyone leave? Oh, but of course! Already I have achieved a post of honor, and have been left to defend the fort. Viva la Republique!" (http://us.imdb.de/title/tt0044840/)

[edit] See also

List of Foreign Legionnaires
Spanish Legion
Devil's Guard
Memorial to the American Volunteers, Paris


[edit] Notes

[edit] References


^ Jean-Dominique Merchet, La Légion s'accroche à ses effectifs
^ Porch p. 2-4
^ Porch p. 17-18
^ "About the Legion". http://www.channel4.com/life/microsites/E/escape_to_the_legion/legion.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-09. 
^ Shortly before his death, Seeger wrote, "I have a rendez-vous with Death, at some disputed barricade...And I to my pledged word am true, I shall not fail that rendevous."
^ "Frequently Asked Questions About the Legion (French)". http://www.legion-recrute.com/fr/faq.php#f4. Retrieved on 2008-09-10. 
^ http://www.legion-etrangere.info/index.php?post/2008/12/D%C3%A9cembre-2008
^ Bernard B. Fall, Street Without Joy, pp. 279-280
^ Evan McGorman, Life in the French Foreign Legion, p. 21
^ Szecsko, P.17



[edit] Sources


Geraghty, Tony. March or Die: A New History of the French Foreign Legion, 1987, ISBN 0816017948
McGorman, Evan. Life in the French Foreign Legion: How to Join and What to Expect When You Get There. Hellgate Press, 2000. ISBN 1-55571-633-4
Porch, Douglas. The French Foreign Legion. New York: Harper Collins, 1991. ISBN 0-06-092308-3
The French Foreign Legion in Kolwezi Roger Rousseau, 2006. ISBN 2-9526927-1-8
Szecsko, Tibor. Le Grand Livre des Insignes de la Légion Etrangère. Aubagne, I.I.L.E / S.I.H.L.E, 1991. ISBN 2-9505938-0-1



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: French Foreign Legion



Official Website
Official Recruitment Office of the Foreign Legion
Le Musée de la Légion étrangère (legion museum)


Encyclopedia Britannica, French Foreign Legion
French Foreign Legion information
French Foreign Legion forum
An unoffical French Foreign Legion BBS(Chinese)
Foreign Legion Info Site by ex-legionnaire
Warriors of the French Foreign Legion (video)
Foreign Legion Insignia
Foreign Legion life
Kepi - Moments and Pictures from current life in 2REP (2002 - present)
(German) Very detailed Foreign Legion Info Site with Forum & Photo Archive
(French) Historique du 2eme REP de 1946 a 2005.
(French) Foreign Legion Info site by ex-legionnaire
(French) French Foreign Legion information (french)


Books


In the Foreign Legion (1910) - by Erwin Rosen (b. 1876)
Books about the Foreign Legion 1905-1992




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_Foreign_Legion"
Categories: French Army | French Foreign LegionHidden categories: Articles containing French language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Bosanski
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Français
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 14:47.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
