













Genetic genealogy - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Genetic_genealogy";
		var wgTitle = "Genetic genealogy";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "1090609";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 279634297;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Genetic genealogy

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 




George Darwin, son of Charles Darwin, was the first to estimate the frequency of first-cousin marriages


Genetic genealogy is the application of genetics to traditional genealogy. Genetic genealogy involves the use of genealogical DNA testing to determine the level of genetic relationship between individuals.




Contents


1 History
2 Interpretation
3 Uses

3.1 Paternal and maternal lineages
3.2 Biogeographical and ethnic origins
3.3 Human migration
3.4 Typical customers and interest groups


4 Paternal and maternal lineages
5 Benefits
6 Drawbacks
7 Expected growth
8 Genetic similarity among relatives
9 References
10 See also
11 Recommended readings
12 External links and resources

12.1 Maps
12.2 News
12.3 Research facilities/institutions and organizations
12.4 Informational websites
12.5 Haplogroup and Surname Projects
12.6 DNA databases

12.6.1 Y chromosome (Y-DNA) testing
12.6.2 Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) testing









//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
The investigation of surnames in genetics can be said to go back to George Darwin, a son of Charles Darwin. In 1875, George Darwin used surnames to estimate the frequency of first-cousin marriages and calculated the expected incidence of marriage between people of the same surname (isonymy).[1] He arrived at a figure between 2.25% and 4.5% for cousin-marriage in the population of Great Britain, with the upper classes being on the high end and the general rural population on the low end. (His parents, Charles Darwin and Emma Wedgwood, were first cousins.) This simple study was innovative for its era. The next stimulus toward using genetics to study family history had to wait until the 1990s, when certain locations on the Y chromosome were identified as being useful for tracing male-to-male inheritance.
Dr. Karl Skorecki, a Canadian nephrologist of Ashkenazi parentage, noticed that a Sephardic fellow-congregant who was a Kohen like himself had completely different physical features. According to Jewish tradition, all Kohanim are descended from the priest Aaron, brother of Moses. Skorecki reasoned that if Kohanim were indeed the descendants of only one man, they should have a common set of genetic markers and should perhaps preserve some family resemblance to each other.
To test that hypothesis, he contacted Professor Michael Hammer of the University of Arizona, a researcher in molecular genetics and pioneer in Y chromosome research. Their report in the Nature in 1997 sent shock waves through the worlds of science and religion. A particular marker was indeed more likely to be present in Jewish men from the priestly tradition than in the general Jewish population. It was apparently true that a common descent had been strictly preserved for thousands of years. (See Y-chromosomal Aaron). Moreover, the data showed that there were very few “non-paternity events”.[2]
The first to test the new methodology in general surname research was Bryan Sykes, a molecular biologist at Oxford University. His study of the Sykes surname obtained valid results by looking at only four markers on the male chromosome. It pointed the way to genetics becoming a valuable assistant in the service of genealogy and history. In 2001, Sykes went on to write the popular book The Seven Daughters of Eve, which described the seven major haplogroups of European ancestors.
In the wake of that book's success, and the growing availability and affordability of genealogical DNA tests, genetic genealogy as a field began growing rapidly. By 2003, the field of DNA testing of surnames was declared officially to have “arrived” in an article by Jobling and Tyler-Smith in Nature Reviews Genetics. The number of firms offering tests, and the number of consumers ordering them, had risen dramatically.[3]
Another milestone in the acceptance of genetic genealogy is the Genographic Project. The Genographic Project is a five-year research partnership launched by the National Geographic Society and IBM in 2005. Although its goals are primarily anthropological, not genealogical, the project's sale by October 2007 of over 225,000 of its public participation testing kits, which test the general public for either twelve STR markers on the Y chromosome or the HVR1 region of the mtDNA, has helped increase the visibility of genetic genealogy.[4]
More state-of-the-art commercial laboratories now recommend testing at least 25 markers, since the more markers tested, the more discriminating and powerful the results will be. A 12-marker STR test is usually not discriminating enough to provide conclusive results for a common surname. Genetic laboratories such as Genebase and Family Tree DNA give the option of testing 67 Y-DNA Markers.[5]
Annual sales of genetic genealogical tests for all companies, including the laboratories that support them, are estimated to be in the area of $60 million (2006).[6]

[edit] Interpretation
Since the year 2000, dozens of relevant academic papers have been published, and thousands of private test results organised by surname study groups have been made available on the internet. The comparison of results may be complicated by the fact that some laboratories use different testing methods. Apparently differing results from two sources may in fact be identical, and vice-versa.

[edit] Uses

[edit] Paternal and maternal lineages
The two most common types of genetic genealogy tests are Y-DNA (paternal line) and mtDNA (maternal line) genealogical DNA tests.
These tests involve the comparison of certain sequences of DNA pairs of individuals in order to estimate the probability that they share a common ancestor in a genealogical time frame and, through the use of a Bayesian model published by Bruce Walsh, to estimate the number of generations separating the two individuals from their most recent common ancestor.
Y-DNA research involves short tandem repeat (STR) and, sometimes, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) testing of the Y-chromosome. The Y-chromosome is present only in males and reveals information on the strict paternal line. These tests can provide insight in the recent (via STRs) and ancient (via SNPs) genetic ancestry. A Y-chromosome STR test will reveal a haplotype, which should be similar among all male descendants of a male ancestor. SNP tests are used to assign people to a paternal haplogroup, which defines a genetic population.
mtDNA research involves sequencing the HVR-1 region, HVR-2 region or both. A mtDNA test can also be used to assign people to a maternal haplogroup.
Either Y-DNA or mtDNA test results can be compared to the results of others via private or public DNA databases.

[edit] Biogeographical and ethnic origins
Additional DNA tests exist for determining biogeographical and ethnic origin, but these tests have less relevance for traditional genealogy.
Genetic genealogy has revealed astonishing links between peoples. For instance, it has shown that the ancient Phoenician people were ancestors of much of the present-day population of the island of Malta. Preliminary results from a study by Pierre Zalloua of the American University of Beirut and Spencer Wells, supported by a grant from National Geographic's Committee for Research and Exploration, were published in the October 2004 issue of National Geographic. One of the conclusions is that "more than half of the Y chromosome lineages that we see in today's Maltese population could have come in with the Phoenicians."[7]
See biogeographic ancestry, genealogical DNA test and population genetics (the study of the distribution of and change in allele frequencies).

[edit] Human migration
Main article: Human migration




mtDNA-based chart of large human migrations.


Genealogical DNA testing methods are also being used on a longer time scale to trace human migratory patterns. For example, they have been used to determine when the first humans came to North America and what path they followed.
For several years, a number of researchers and laboratories from around the world have been sampling indigenous populations from around the globe in an effort to map historical human migration patterns. Recently, several projects have been created that are aimed at bringing this science to the public. One example is the National Geographic Society's Genographic Project, which aims to map historical human migration patterns by collecting and analyzing DNA samples from over 100,000 people across five continents. Another example is the DNA Clans Genetic Ancestry Analysis, which measures a person's precise genetic connections to indigenous ethnic groups from around the world.[8]

[edit] Typical customers and interest groups
Male DNA testing customers most often start with a Y chromosome test to determine their father's paternal ancestry. Females generally begin with a mitochondrial test to trace their ancient maternal lineage, which males often have tested for the same purpose.
A common consumer goal in purchasing DNA testing services is to acquire quantified, scientific linkage to a specific ancestral group. A compelling example of this motive is found in the expressed desires of some consumers to be proven to have Viking paternal ancestry. In keeping with this marketplace demand, one British DNA testing service, Oxford Ancestors, offers a Y chromosome test purporting to assess whether given males are of "Viking stock." Those whose DNA falls into the designated haplogroup are issued Viking Descendant certificates by the testing service. The same DNA testing company participated in producing a televised documentary, "The Blood of the Vikings," in conjunction with the BBC, which showed how DNA testing could reveal Viking ancestry.
The Rootsweb DNA-Genealogy Internet discussion group has a membership of 750 subscribers from around the world. Some subscribers have had various DNA tests performed and are seeking advice and guidance in interpreting their results. The list also includes administrators of DNA projects that examine surnames, geographic regions, or ethnic groups. The sophistication of subscribers ranges from expert to novice. In some cases, subscribers have been credited with making useful and novel contributions to knowledge in the field of genetic genealogy.[citation needed]

[edit] Paternal and maternal lineages




     Ancestral Haplogroup      Haplogroup A (Hg A)     Haplogroup B (Hg B) All of these molecules are part of the ancestral haplogroup, but at some point in the past a mutation occurred in the ancestral molecule, mutation A, which produced a new lineage; this is haplogroup A and is defined by mutation A. At some more recent point in the past, a new mutation, mutation B, occurred in a person carrying haplogroup A; mutation B defined haplogroup B. Haplogroup B is a subgroup, or subclade of haplogroup A; both haplogrups A and B are subclades of the ancestral haplogroup.


Mitochondria are small organelles that lie in the cytoplasm of eucaryotic cells, such as those of humans. Their primary purpose is to provide energy to the cell. Mitochondria are thought to be the vestigial remains of symbiotic bacteria that were once free living. One indication that mitochondria were once free living is that they contain a relatively small circular segment of DNA, called mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). The overwhelming majority of a human's DNA is contained in chromosomes in the nucleus of the cell, but mtDNA is an exception. An individual inherits their cytoplasm and the organelles it contains exclusively from their mother, as these are derived from the ovum (egg cell), sperm only carry chromosomal DNA due to the necessity of maintaining motility. When a mutation arises in mtDNA molecule, the mutation is therefore passed in a direct female line of descent. These mutations are derived from copying mistakes, when the DNA is copied it is possible that a single mistake occurs in the DNA sequence, these single mistakes are called single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).
Human Y chromosomes are male-specific sex chromosomes; nearly all humans that possess a Y chromosome will be morphologically male. Y chromosomes are therefore passed from father to son; although Y chromosomes are situated in the cell nucleus, they only recombine with the X chromosome at the ends of the Y chromosome; the vast majority of the Y chromosome (95%) does not recombine. When mutations (SNPs) arise in the Y chromosome, they are passed on directly from father to son in a direct male line of descent. The Y chromosome and mtDNA therefore share certain properties.
Humans are all linked to one man in reference to their Y chromosome, scientists named him [Adam][1]. He was alive about 60,000 years ago near Kenya, Africa. Everyone shares his DNA, which means we are all descendants of him. Humans are also linked to one female also found near Kenya, Africa. [Mitochondrial Eve][2] lived 140,000 years ago, much older than her counterpart Adam. Adam and Eve are considered our([MRCA][3]) [Most Recent Common Ancestor][4].
Other chromosomes, autosomes and X chromosomes in women, share their genetic material (called crossing over leading to recombination) during meiosis (a special type of cell division that occurs for the purposes of sexual reproduction). Effectively this means that the genetic material from these chromosomes gets mixed up in every generation, and so any new mutations are passed down randomly from parents to offspring.
The special feature that both Y chromosomes and mtDNA display is that mutations can accrue along a certain segment of both molecules and these mutations remain fixed in place on the DNA. Furthermore the historical sequence of these mutations can also be inferred. For example, if a set of ten Y chromosomes (derived from ten different men) contains a mutation, A, but only five of these chromosomes contain a second mutation, B, it must be the case that mutation B occurred after mutation A. Furthermore all ten men who carry the chromosome with mutation A are the direct male line descendants of the same man who was the first person to carry this mutation. The first man to carry mutation B was also a direct male line descendant of this man, but is also the direct male line ancestor of all men carrying mutation B. Series of mutations such as this form molecular lineages. Furthermore each mutation defines a set of specific Y chromosomes called a haplogroup. All men carrying mutation A form a single haplogroup, all men carrying mutation B are part of this haplogroup, but mutation B also defines a more recent haplogroup (which is a subgroup or subclade) of its own which men carrying only mutation A do not belong to. Both mtDNA and Y chromosomes are grouped into lineages and haplogroups; these are often presented as tree like diagrams.

[edit] Benefits
Genetic genealogy gives genealogists a means to check or supplement the historical record with information from genetic data. A positive test match with another individual may:

provide locations for further genealogical research
help determine ancestral homeland
discover living relatives
validate existing research
confirm or deny suspected connections between families
prove or disprove theories regarding ancestry


[edit] Drawbacks
People who resist testing may cite one of the following concerns:

Cost
Quality of testing
Concerns over privacy issues
Loss of ethnic identity

Finally, Y-DNA and mtDNA tests each only trace a single lineage (one's father's father's father's etc. lineage or one's mother's mother's mother's etc. lineage). At 10 generations back, an individual has up to 1024 unique ancestors (fewer if ancestor cousins interbred) and a Y-DNA or mtDNA test is only studying one of those ancestors, as well as their descendants and siblings (same sexed siblings for Y-DNA or all siblings for mtDNA). However, most genealogists maintain contact with many cousins (1st, 2nd, 3rd, etc., with different surnames) whose Y-DNA and mtDNA are different, and thus can be encouraged to be tested to find additional ancestral DNA lineages.

[edit] Expected growth
Genetic genealogy is a rapidly growing field. As the cost of testing continues to drop, the number of people being tested continues to increase. The probability of finding a genetic match among the DNA databases should continue to improve. Laboratories and testing firms are engaging in active research and development that will allow for higher confidence intervals and better results interpretation, including historical interpretive reports and customized research.

[edit] Genetic similarity among relatives
Where the genogram or family tree of individuals is known, it can be used to determine the genetic identity between individuals. It is often described as percentage of genetic identity, referring to the fraction of genome inherited from common ancestors, and not actual genomic identity, which is always approximately 99.9%[9] identical from one human to another.
One method of calculating this genetic similarity is to do an inbreeding calculation by the path or tabular method and then multiply by 2, because any progeny would have a 1 in 2 risk of actually inheriting the identical alleles from both parents. For instance, a brother/sister relation gives 25% risk for two alleles to be identical by descent.


Degree of relation
Genetic identity (%)
Relation examples



100%
Identical twins


1st
50%


parents
siblings
children
fraternal twins




2nd
25%


grandparents
grandchildren
aunts
uncles
nieces
nephews
half-siblings
Double first cousins
identical twin cousins (children of identical twins)




3rd
12.5%


first cousins
great grandparents
great grandchildren
great aunts
great uncles
grandnieces
grandnephews
half-aunts
half-uncles
half-nephews
half-nieces




4th
6.25%


Great great grandparents
great great grandchildren
great great aunts
great great uncles
great grandnieces
great grandnephews
first cousin once removed
great half-aunts
great half-uncles
half-grandnephews
half-grandnieces




5th
3.13%


great great great grandparents
great great great grandchildren
second cousins
first cousin twice removed
great great great uncles
great great great aunts
great great grandnieces
great great grandnephews
great great half-aunts
great great half-uncles
great half-grandnephews
great half-grandnieces




Unless else specified in table, then source is: [10]



[edit] References


^ George H. Darwin, "Note on the Marriages of First Cousins", Journal of the Statistical Society of London 38:3 (Sep., 1875), pp. 344-348. DOI
^ Steve Olson, "Who’s Your Daddy?", The Atlantic, Jul-Aug 2007, accessed 19 Feb 2009
^ Guido Deboeck, "Genetic Genealogy Becomes Mainstream", BellaOnline, accessed 19 Feb 2009
^ "The Genographic Project: A Landmark Study of the Human Journey", National Geographic, accessed 19 Feb 2009
^ Genebase, Genetic Genealogy, accessed 19 Feb 2009
^ "How Big Is the Genetic Genealogy Market?", The Genetic Genealogist, accessed 19 Feb 2009
^ Cassandra Franklin-Barbajosa, "In the Wake of the Phoenicians: DNA study reveals a Phoenician-Maltese link", National Geographic Online, Oct 2004, accessed 19 Feb 2009
^ "DNA Clans (Y-Clan)", DNA Ancestry Analysis, Genebase, accessed 19 Feb 2009
^ AMNH > Our genetic identity Retrieved on 21 Mars, 2009
^ Ancestry.com > Degrees of Relation and Number of Genes Shared Retrieved on 21 Mars, 2009


Jobling, Mark; Chris Tyler-Smith (August 2003). "The human Y chromosome: an evolutionary marker comes of age" ([dead link] – Scholar search). Nature Reviews Genetics (Nature Publishing Group) 4: 599–612. doi:10.1038/nrg1124. http://www.gs.washington.edu/courses/king/46506/YChromosome_NatRevGen2003.pdf. 

[edit] See also
Main article: List of genetic genealogy topics

Allele
Allele frequency
Electropherogram
Genealogical DNA test
Genetic recombination
Haplogroup
Haplotype
Human mitochondrial DNA haplogroups
Human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroups
Human mitochondrial genetics
Most recent common ancestor
Short tandem repeat (STR)
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
Y-STR (Y-chromosome short tandem repeat)
Y-DNA haplogroups by ethnic groups
Non-paternity event


[edit] Recommended readings


Terrence Carmichael and Alexander Kuklin (2000). How to DNA Test Our Family Relationships. DNA Press. Early (and still unique) book on adoptions, paternity and other relationship testing. Carmichael is a founder of GeneTree.


L. Cavalli-Sforza et al (1994). The History and Geography of Human Genes. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Dense but very comprehensive.


Luigi-Luca and Francesco Cavalli-Sforza (1998). The Great Human Diasporas, translated from the Italian by Sarah Thorne. Reading, Mass. : Perseus Books. More readable than the Stanford professor’s other books.


Colleen Fitzpatrick and Andrew Yeiser (2005). DNA and Genealogy. Rice Book Press. Highly regarded commentary on news stories about DNA and how-to introduction for laymen.


Clive Gamble (1993). Timewalkers: The Prehistory of Global Colonization. Stroud: Sutton. Popular account of human prehistory by British anthropologist/archeologist. Article from American Scientist.


Anne Hart - How to Interpret Family History & Ancestry DNA Test Results for Beginners, includes books, online articles and videos on genetic genealogy by this journalist and author


Cyndi Howells (n.d.). Netting Your Ancestors – Genealogical Research on the Internet. Baltimore: Genealogical Publishing Company. Guide to electronic sources by author of Cyndi’s List website.


M. Jobling (2003). Human Evolutionary Genetics. Standard college and graduate school level textbook by leading expert.


Charles F. Kerchner Jr. (2004). Self-published. Genetic Genealogy DNA Testing Dictionary. Lookup source for esoteric terminology used.


Steve Olson (2002). Mapping Human History. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. Survey of major populations.


Stephen Oppenheimer (2003). The Real Eve. Modern Man’s Journey out of Africa. Carroll & Graf. Champions the “beachcomber route” theory with much technical detail.


PBS (2003). The Journey of Man DVD. Broadcast aired in January 2003, Spencer Wells, host.


Donald Panther-Yates and Elizabeth Caldwell Hirschman (2006). “DNA Haplotyping and Diversity: An Anthropogenealogical Method for Researching Lineages and Family Ethnicity,” International Journal of the Humanities 2:2043-55. Guide to finding matches in world databanks and interpreting genetic information in terms of history and recent emigration studies.


Chris Pomery (2004) DNA and Family History: How Genetic Testing Can Advance Your Genealogical Research. London: National Archives. Early guide for do-it-yourself genealogists. Now updated (2007) as Family History in the Genes: Trace Your DNA and Grow Your Family Tree.


Alan Savin (2003). DNA for Family Historians. Maidenhead: Genetic Genealogy Guides. Slim paperback first published in 2000, now available also in German.


Thomas H. Shawker (2004). Unlocking Your Genetic History: A Step-by-Step Guide to Discovering Your Family's Medical and Genetic Heritage (National Genealogical Society Guide, 6). Guide to the difficult subject of family medical history and genetic diseases.


Megan Smolenyak and Ann Turner (2005). Trace Your Roots with DNA: Using Genetic Tests to Explore Your Family Tree. Rodale Books. Recent tool for amateur genealogists by seminar speaker and DNA listserv moderator.


Bryan Sykes (2001) The Seven Daughters of Eve. The Science that Reveals Our Genetic Ancestry. New York, Norton. Names the founders of Europe’s major female haplogroups Helena, Jasmine, Katrine, Tara, Velda, Xenia, and Ursula.


Bryan Sykes (2004). Adam's Curse. A Future without Men. New York: W. W. Norton. The Oxford professor’s male sequel to The Seven Daughters of Eve.


Linda Tagliaferro (1999). The Complete Idiot’s Guide to Decoding Your Genes. Alpha Books. Uses everyday language to explain the role genes play in shaping who we are.


Spencer Wells (2004). The Journey of Man. New York: Random House.



[edit] External links and resources





This article or section may contain spam.
If you are familiar with the content of the external links, please help by removing promotional links in accordance with Wikipedia:External links. (You can help!)



[edit] Maps

National Geographic's interactive Atlas of the Human Journey (Flash required)


[edit] News

MSNBC — Genetic Genealogy Front Page


[edit] Research facilities/institutions and organizations

National Human Genome Research Institute - Talking Glossary with viewable graphics and diagrams
Sorenson Molecular Genealogy Foundation - Why Molecular Genealogy?
Smurfit Institute of Genetics
International Society of Genetic Genealogy (ISOGG)


[edit] Informational websites

Genetics, Genealogy and History
www.dirkschweitzer.net — presentation about genealogical DNA Testing
www.Kerchner.com — DNA Testing Info & Resources help page
www.CyndisList.com — Genetics, DNA & Family Health
Genealogy by DNA: Can it Deliver? — Genetic Testing Guidelines
www.jogg.info/ - Journal of Genetic Genealogy
www.make-family-tree.com - The relation between DNA and Genealogy


[edit] Haplogroup and Surname Projects

DNA.reinyday.com — Genealogical DNA Testing
BlairGenealogy.com — Blair surname project
WorldFamilies.net - Directory of surname DNA projects


[edit] DNA databases

[edit] Y chromosome (Y-DNA) testing

Ysearch — Largest public access Y-DNA database
Ybase — public access Y-DNA database
SMGF Y-chromosome Database - 23,400 haplotypes linked to ~six million ancestral records
Y Chromosome Haplotype Reference Database — YHRD


[edit] Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) testing

Mitosearch — One of the largest public access mtDNA database
MtDNA Test Results Log - First public log/blog to post, share, and compare mtDNA test results
Mt Population Database - The mtDNA Population Database for Forensic Comparison
SMGF Mitochondrial Database - 51,000 searchable sequences (from np 15841 to np 720) linked to ~six million ancestral records




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genetic_genealogy"
Categories: Genetic genealogy | Population genetics | DNA | Kinship and descent | GenealogyHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead external links since June 2008 | Wikipedia spam cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Български
Deutsch
Magyar
Русский
Српски / Srpski
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 25 March 2009, at 18:29 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
