













Sustainable development - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Sustainable_development";
		var wgTitle = "Sustainable development";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "29501";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283667613;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Sustainable development

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 




Scheme of sustainable development: at the confluence of three constituent parts.[1]







Environmental law


 


Theory


Earth jurisprudence
Intergenerational equity
Polluter pays principle
Precautionary principle
Public trust doctrine
Sustainable development


Specific issues


Asbestos
Brownfield land
Illegal logging
Poaching · Unlawful fishing
Mitigation of global warming
International environmental law
Wildlife Enforcement Monitoring System
War and environmental law


Instruments of Environmental policy


Ecotax · Market-based instruments
Environmental impact assessment



v • d • e



Sustainable development is a pattern of resource use that aims to meet human needs while preserving the environment so that these needs can be met not only in the present, but also for future generations to come. The term was used by the Brundtland Commission which coined what has become the most often-quoted definition of sustainable development as development that "meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs."[2][3]
Sustainable development ties together concern for the carrying capacity of natural systems with the social challenges facing humanity. As early as the 1970s "sustainability" was employed to describe an economy "in equilibrium with basic ecological support systems."[4] Ecologists have pointed to the “limits of growth”[5] and presented the alternative of a “steady state economy”[6] in order to address environmental concerns.
The field of sustainable development can be conceptually broken into three constituent parts: environmental sustainability, economic sustainability and sociopolitical sustainability.




Contents


1 Scope and definitions
2 Environmental sustainability
3 The Notion of Capital in Sustainable Development

3.1 Market Failure as a Reason
3.2 The Business Case for Sustainable Development


4 Decade of Education for Sustainable Development
5 Critique of the Concept of Sustainable Development

5.1 Critique regarding consequences
5.2 Critique regarding vagueness of the term
5.3 Critique regarding the basis
5.4 Critique regarding "de-growth"


6 See also
7 References
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Scope and definitions
The concept has included notions of weak sustainability, strong sustainability and deep ecology. Sustainable development does not focus solely on environmental issues. The United Nations 2005 World Summit Outcome Document refers to the "interdependent and mutually reinforcing pillars" of sustainable development as economic development, social development, and environmental protection.[7]
Indigenous people have argued, through various international forums such as the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues and the Convention on Biological Diversity, that there are four pillars of sustainable development, the fourth being cultural. The Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity (UNESCO, 2001) further elaborates the concept by stating that "...cultural diversity is as necessary for humankind as biodiversity is for nature”; it becomes “one of the roots of development understood not simply in terms of economic growth, but also as a means to achieve a more satisfactory intellectual, emotional, moral and spiritual existence". In this vision, cultural diversity is the fourth policy area of sustainable development.
Economic Sustainability: Agenda 21 clearly identified information, integration, and participation as key building blocks to help countries achieve development that recognises these interdependent pillars. It emphasises that in sustainable development everyone is a user and provider of information. It stresses the need to change from old sector-centred ways of doing business to new approaches that involve cross-sectoral co-ordination and the integration of environmental and social concerns into all development processes. Furthermore, Agenda 21 emphasises that broad public participation in decision making is a fundamental prerequisite for achieving sustainable development.[8]
According to Hasna, sustainability is a process which tells of a development of all aspects of human life affecting sustenance. It means resolving the conflict between the various competing goals, and involves the simultaneous pursuit of economic prosperity, environmental quality and social equity famously known as three dimensions (triple bottom line) with is the resultant vector being technology, hence it is a continually evolving process; the ‘journey’ (the process of achieving sustainability) is of course vitally important, but only as a means of getting to the destination (the desired future state). However,the ‘destination’ of sustainability is not a fixed place in the normal sense that we understand destination. Instead, it is a set of wishful characteristics of a future system.[9]
Green development is generally differentiated from sustainable development in that Green development prioritizes what its proponents consider to be environmental sustainability over economic and cultural considerations. Proponents of Sustainable Development argue that it provides a context in which to improve overall sustainability where cutting edge Green development is unattainable. For example, a cutting edge treatment plant with extremely high maintenance costs may not be sustainable in regions of the world with fewer financial resources. An environmentally ideal plant that is shut down due to bankruptcy is obviously less sustainable than one that is maintainable by the community, even if it is somewhat less effective from an environmental standpoint.
Some research activities start from this definition to argue that the environment is a combination of nature and culture. The Network of Excellence "Sustainable Development in a Diverse World",[10] sponsored by the European Union, integrates multidisciplinary capacities and interprets cultural diversity as a key element of a new strategy for sustainable development.
Still other researchers view environmental and social challenges as opportunities for development action. This is particularly true in the concept of sustainable enterprise that frames these global needs as opportunities for private enterprise to provide innovative and entrepreneurial solutions. This view is now being taught at many business schools including the Center for Sustainable Global Enterprise at Cornell University and the Erb Institute for Global Sustainable Enterprise at the University of Michigan.
The United Nations Division for Sustainable Development lists the following areas as coming within the scope of sustainable development:[11]


Agriculture
Atmosphere
Biodiversity
Biotechnology
Capacity-building
Climate Change
Consumption and Production Patterns
Demographics
Desertification and Drought
Disaster Reduction and Management
Education and Awareness
Energy
Systems ecology
Finance
Forests
Fresh Water
Health
Human Settlements
Indicators
Industry
Information for Decision Making and Participation
Integrated Decision Making
International Law
International Cooperation for Enabling Environment
Institutional Arrangements
Land management
Major Groups
Mountains
National Sustainable Development Strategies
Oceans and Seas
Poverty
Sanitation
Science
SIDS
Sustainable tourism
Technology
Toxic Chemicals
Trade and Environment
Transport
Waste (Hazardous)
Waste (Radioactive)
Waste (Solid)
Water



Sustainable development is an eclectic concept, as a wide array of views fall under its umbrella. The concept has included notions of weak sustainability, strong sustainability and deep ecology. Different conceptions also reveal a strong tension between ecocentrism and anthropocentrism. The concept remains weakly defined and contains a large amount of debate as to its precise definition.
During the last ten years, different organizations have tried to measure and monitor the proximity to what they consider sustainability by implementing what has been called sustainability metrics and indices.
Sustainable development is said to set limits on the developing world. While current first world countries polluted significantly during their development, the same countries encourage third world countries to reduce pollution, which sometimes impedes growth. Some consider that the implementation of sustainable development would mean a reversion to pre-modern lifestyles.[12]
Others have criticized the overuse of the term:

"[The] word sustainable has been used in too many situations today, and ecological sustainability is one of those terms that confuse a lot of people. You hear about sustainable development, sustainable growth, sustainable economies, sustainable societies, sustainable agriculture. Everything is sustainable (Temple, 1992)."[12]


[edit] Environmental sustainability
Environmental sustainability is the process of making sure current processes of interaction with the environment are pursued with the idea of keeping the environment as pristine as naturally possible based on ideal-seeking behavior.
An "unsustainable situation" occurs when natural capital (the sum total of nature's resources) is used up faster than it can be replenished. Sustainability requires that human activity only uses nature's resources at a rate at which they can be replenished naturally. Inherently the concept of sustainable development is intertwined with the concept of carrying capacity. Theoretically, the long-term result of environmental degradation is the inability to sustain human life. Such degradation on a global scale could imply extinction for humanity.


Consumption of renewable resources
State of environment
Sustainability


More than nature's ability to replenish
Environmental degradation
Not sustainable


Equal to nature's ability to replenish
Environmental equilibrium
Steady-state economy


Less than nature's ability to replenish
Environmental renewal
Sustainable development



[edit] The Notion of Capital in Sustainable Development
The sustainable development debate is based on the assumption that societies need to manage three types of capital (economic, social, and natural), which may be non-substitutable and whose consumption might be irreversible.[13] Daly (1991),[14] for example, points to the fact that natural capital can not necessarily be substituted by economic capital. While it is possible that we can find ways to replace some natural resources, it is much more unlikely that they will ever be able to replace eco-system services, such as the protection provided by the ozone layer, or the climate stabilizing function of the Amazonian forest. In fact natural capital, social capital and economic capital are often complementarities. A further obstacle to substitutability lies also in the multi-functionality of many natural resources. Forests, for example, do not only provide the raw material for paper (which can be substituted quite easily), but they also maintain biodiversity, regulate water flow, and absorb CO2. Another problem of natural and social capital deterioration lies in their partial irreversibility. The loss in biodiversity, for example, is often definite. The same can be true for cultural diversity. For example with globalisation advancing quickly the number of indigenous languages is dropping at alarming rates. Moreover, the depletion of natural and social capital may have non-linear consequences. Consumption of natural and social capital may have no observable impact until a certain threshold is reached. A lake can, for example, absorb nutrients for a long time while actually increasing its productivity. However, once a certain level of algae is reached lack of oxygen causes the lake’s ecosystem to break down all of a sudden.

[edit] Market Failure as a Reason
If the degradation of natural and social capital has such important consequence the question arises why action is not taken more systematically to alleviate it. Cohen and Winn (2007)[15] point to four types of market failure as possible explanations: First, while the benefits of natural or social capital depletion can usually be privatized the costs are often externalized (i.e. they are borne not by the party responsible but by society in general). Second, natural capital is often undervalued by society since we are not fully aware of the real cost of the depletion of natural capital. Information asymmetry is a third reason--often the link between cause and effect is obscured, making it difficult for actors to make informed choices. Cohen and Winn close with the realization that contrary to economic theory many firms are not perfect optimizers. They postulate that firms often to do not optimize resource allocation because they are caught in a "business as usual" mentality.

[edit] The Business Case for Sustainable Development
The most broadly accepted criterion for corporate sustainability constitutes a firm’s efficient use of natural capital. This eco-efficiency is usually calculated as the economic value added by a firm in relation to its aggregated ecological impact.[16] This idea has been popularised by the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) under the following definition: “Eco-efficiency is achieved by the delivery of competitively-priced goods and services that satisfy human needs and bring quality of life, while progressively reducing ecological impacts and resource intensity throughout the life-cycle to a level at least in line with the earth’s carrying capacity.” (DeSimone and Popoff, 1997: 47)[17]
Similar to the eco-efficiency concept but so far less explored is the second criterion for corporate sustainability. Socio-efficiency[18] describes the relation between a firm’s value added and its social impact. Whereas, it can be assumed that most corporate impacts on the environment are negative (apart from rare exceptions such as the planting of trees) this is not true for social impacts. These can be either positive (e.g. corporate giving, creation of employment) or negative (e.g. work accidents, mobbing of employees, human rights abuses). Depending on the type of impact socio-efficiency thus either tries to minimize negative social impacts (i.e. accidents per value added) or maximise positive social impacts (i.e. donations per value added) in relation to the value added.
Both eco-efficiency and socio-efficiency are concerned primarily with increasing economic sustainability. In this process they instrumentalize both natural and social capital aiming to benefit from win-win situations. However, as Dyllick and Hockerts[19] point out the business case alone will not be sufficient to realise sustainable development. They point towards eco-effectiveness, socio-effectiveness, sufficiency, and eco-equity as four criteria that need to be met if sustainable development is to be reached.

[edit] Decade of Education for Sustainable Development
The United Nations has declared a Decade of Education for Sustainable Development to run from 2005-2014. A non-partisan multi-sector response to the decade has formed within the U.S. via the U.S. Partnership for the Decade of Education for Sustainable Development.[20] Active sectors teams have formed for youth, higher education, business, religion, the arts, and more. Organizations and individuals can join in sharing resources and success stories, and creating a sustainable future. Sustainable development is not just about business perspective but should be understood in such way to benefit the world as a whole.

[edit] Critique of the Concept of Sustainable Development
The concept of “ Sustainable Development ” raises several critiques at different levels.

[edit] Critique regarding consequences
John Baden[21] reckons that the notion of sustainable development is dangerous because the consequences are proceedings with unknown effects or potentially dangerous. He writes: "In economy like in ecology, the interdependence rules applies. Isolated actions are impossible. A policy which is not enough carefully thought will carry along various perverse and adverse effects for the ecology as much as for the economy. Many suggestions to save our environment and to promote a model of 'sustainable development' risk indeed leading to reverse effects."[22] Moreover, he evokes the bounds of the public action which are underlined by the public choice theory: quest by the politics of their own interests, lobby pressure, partial disclosure etc. He develops his critique by note the vagueness of the expression, which can cover anything :   It is a gateway to interventionist proceedings which can be against the principle of freedom and without proven efficacy. Against this notion, he is a proponent of private property to impel the producers and the consumers to save the natural resources. According to Baden, “the improvement of environment quality depends on the market economy and the existence of legitimate and protected property rights.” They enable the effective practice of personal responsibility and the development of mechanisms to protect the environment. The State can in this context “create conditions which encourage the people to save the environment.”[23]

[edit] Critique regarding vagueness of the term
The term of “sustainable development” is criticized because of its vagueness. For example, Jean-Marc Jancovici[24] or the philosopher Luc Ferry[25] express this view. The latter writes about sustainaible development: "I know that this term is obligatory, but I find it also absurd, or rather so vague that it says nothing." Luc Ferry adds that the term is trivial by a proof by contradiction: "who would like to be a proponent of an “untenable development! Of course no one! [..] The term is more charming than meaningful. [..] Everything must be done so that it does not turn into a Russian-type administrative planning with ill effects."

[edit] Critique regarding the basis
Sylvie Brunel, French geographer and specialist of the Third World, develops in A qui profite le développement durable (Who benefits from sustainable development?) (2008) a critique of the basis of sustainable development, with its binary vision of the world, can be compared to the Christian vision of Good and Evil, a idealized nature where the human being is an animal like the others or even an alien. Nature – as Rousseau thought – is better than the human being. It is a parasite, harmful for the nature. But the human is the one who protects the biodiversity, where normally only the strong survive.[26]
Moreover, she thinks that the ideas of sustainable development can hide a will to protectionism from the developed country to impede the development of the other countries. For Sylvie Brunel, the sustainable development serves as a pretext for the protectionism and “I have the feeling about sustainable development that it is perfectly helping out the capitalism”.[26]

[edit] Critique regarding "de-growth"
The proponents of the de-growth reckon that the term of sustainable development is an oxymoron. According to them, on a planet where 20% of the population consumes 80% of the natural resources, a sustainable development cannot be possible for this 20%: “According to the origin of the concept of sustainable development , a development which meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs, the right term for the developed countries should be a sustainable de-growth”.[27]

[edit] See also

[2] CII - ITC Centre of Excellence for Sustainable Development





Sustainable development portal







Environment portal







Ecology portal







Earth_sciences portal





Afrique verte
Appropedia
Bright green environmentalism
Carrying capacity
Clean tech law
Cleaner Production
Conservation development
Conservation ethic
Dashboard of Sustainability
Ecologically sustainable development
Green building
Green Globe
Industrial Ecology
Institute for Environment and Sustainability (IES)
Institute for Trade, Standards and Sustainable Development (ITSSD)
International Institute for Environment and Development
International Institute for Sustainable Development
International Organization for Sustainable Development
Living Planet Index
Passive solar building design


Strategic Sustainable Development
Sustainable forest management
Sustainable living
Sustainable Tourism CRC
Sustainopreneurship
The Earth Institute



[edit] References


^ UCN. 2006. The Future of Sustainability: Re-thinking Environment and Development in the Twenty-first Century. Report of the IUCN Renowned Thinkers Meeting, 29-31 January, 2006 http://cmsdata.iucn.org/downloads/iucn_future_of_sustanability.pdf
^ United Nations. 1987."Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development." General Assembly Resolution 42/187, 11 December 1987. Retrieved: 2007-04-12
^ Smith, Charles; Rees, Gareth (1998). Economic Development, 2nd edition. Basingstoke: Macmillan. ISBN 0333722280. 
^ Stivers, R. 1976. The Sustainable Society: Ethics and Economic Growth. Philadelphia: Westminster Press.
^ Meadows, D., Meadows, D. L., Randers, J., & Behrens, W. 1971. The Limits to Growth. New York: Universe Books.
^ Daly, H. E. 1973. Towards a Steady State Economy. San Francisco: Freeman. Daly, H. E. 1991. Steady-State Economics (2nd ed.). Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
^ 2005 World Summit Outcome Document, World Health Organization, 15 September 2005
^ Will Allen. 2007."Learning for Sustainability: Sustainable Development."
^ Hasna, A. M. (2007). "Dimensions of sustainability". Journal of Engineering for Sustainable Development: Energy, Environment, and Health 2 (1): 47–57. 
^ SUS.DIV
^ United Nations Division for sustainable Development. Documents: Sustainable Development Issues Retrieved: 2007-05-12
^ a b What Is Sustainable Development?
^ Dyllick, T. & Hockerts, K. 2002. Beyond the business case for corporate sustainability. Business Strategy and the Environment, 11(2): 130-141
^ Daly, H. E. 1973. Towards a Steady State Economy. San Francisco: Freeman.
^ Cohen, B. & Winn, M. I. 2007. Market imperfections, opportunity and sustainable entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Venturing, 22(1): 29-49.
^ Schaltegger, S. & Sturm, A. 1998. Eco-Efficiency by Eco-Controlling. Zürich: vdf.
^ DeSimone, L. & Popoff, F. 1997. Eco-efficiency: The business link to sustainable development. Cambridge: MIT Press.
^ Dyllick, T. & Hockerts, K. 2002. Beyond the business case for corporate sustainability. Business Strategy and the Environment, 11(2): 130-141.
^ Dyllick, T. & Hockerts, K. 2002. Beyond the business case for corporate sustainability. Business Strategy and the Environment, 11(2): 130-141.
^ US Partnership for the Decade of Education for Sustainable Development. Retrieved on: 2007-07-16
^ chairman of the Foundation for Research on Economics and the Environment (FREE)
^ [1] L'économie politique du développement durable, John Baden, document de l'ICREI
^ « L'économie politique du développement durable », John Baden, document de l'ICREI
^ « À quoi sert le développement durable ? »
^ « Protéger l'espèce humaine contre elle-même », entretien avec Luc Ferry dans la Revue des Deux Mondes, octobre-novembre 2007, pp.75-79
^ a b « Les enjeux internationaux », entretien avec Sylvie Brunel sur France Culture, 11 juin 2008
^ Bruno Clémentin et Vincent Cheynet, Contre le développement durable



[edit] External links





This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links.



CII - ITC Centre of Excellence for Sustainable Development


Erb Institute for Global Sustainable Enterprise at the University of Michigan
World Creative Youth Forum (WCYF) 2009 - Upcoming international youth forum on Education for Sustainable Development in May 2009 in the Philippines
WWW-Virtual Library Sustainable development - Links to sustainable development sources
World Business Council for Sustainable Development
European Sustainable Development Network - ESDN - Sustainable development policies and strategies in Europe
The Center for Sustainable Global Enterprise at Cornell University views environmental and social needs as business opportunities.
U.K. Sustainable Development Commission
Appropedia - a Wiki focused on sustainable international development and poverty reduction
World Bank website on sustainable development.
Citizens Network for Sustainable Development
Sustainable Development Law & Policy
Stakeholder Forum
Book Review on An Introduction to Sustainable Development by Peter Rogers, Kazi Jalal, & John Boyd Sustainability: Science, Practice, & Policy, Published online June 18, 2008








v • d • e

Sustainability





Philosophy and
definition

Environmentalism · Environmental ethics · Rio Declaration on Environment and Development · Sustainable development






Population

Birth control · Family planning · Overpopulation · Population control · Zero population growth






Consumption

Anti-consumerism · Ecological footprint · Ethical consumerism · Overconsumption · Tragedy of the commons






Technology

Environmental technology











 
Resource use and conservation





Food and Water

Food security · Local food · Permaculture · Sustainable food system (Agriculture · Fisheries) · Urban horticulture Water (footprint · crisis · efficiency / conservation)






Energy

Biofuels · Carbon footprint · Emissions trading · Energy conservation · Energy descent · Peak oil · Renewable energy · Solar power · Wind power






Materials

Industrial ecology · Recycling · Waste · Zero waste






Biodiversity

Biosecurity · Biosphere · Endangered species · Holocene extinction · Invasive species














 
Sustainability disciplines, professions and activities





Subdisciplines

Science · Measurement · Governance






Sustainable activities
and professions

Advertising · Architecture · Art · Business · City (infrastructure · drainage) · Community (UK Sustainable Communities Plan) · Design · Fashion · Fisheries management · Forest management / Forestry · Gardening · Landscape architecture · Living · Industries · Packaging · Procurement · Reporting · Tourism · Transport · Yield






Related disciplines

Conservation biology · Environmental biotechnology / chemistry / design / economics / engineering / ethics / history / law / psychology / science / sociology














 
International reports and agreements






UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) · Brundtlandt Commission Report, 1983 (Our Common Future, 1987) · Earth Summit (1992) · Agenda 21 (1992) · Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) · ICPD Programme of Action (1994) · Earth Charter · Millennium Declaration (2000) · Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2005)














 
Lists and glossaries





Lists

Association of Environmental Professionals · Climate change topics · Conservation issues / topics · Environmental agreements / health hazards / issues / organisations / topics (sound topics / studies topics) · Global sustainability statistics






Glossaries

Climate change · Environmental science









Category · Portal












v • d • e

Global warming and climate change










 
Temperatures






Instrumental record · Satellite record · Past 1,000 years · Since 1880 · Geologic record · Historical climatology · Paleoclimatology














 
Causes









Anthropogenic

Aviation · Biofuel · Carbon dioxide · Fossil fuel · Global dimming · Global warming potential · Greenhouse effect · Greenhouse gases · Land use and forestry · Urban heat island






Natural

Albedo · Bond events · Cloud forcing · Glaciation · Global cooling · Ocean variability (AMO · ENSO · IOD · PDO) · Orbital variations · Orbital forcing · Radiative forcing · Solar variation · Volcanism






Opinion and
controversy

Scientific opinion · Scientists opposing the mainstream assessment · Climate change denial

















 
Models and politics









Models

Global climate model






Politics

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC / FCCC) · Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)

















 
Potential effects and issues









General

Climate change and agriculture · Drought · Economics of global warming · Glacier retreat · Mass extinction · Ozone depletion · Ocean acidification · Sea level rise · Season creep · Shutdown of thermohaline circulation






By country

Australia · India · United States

















 
Mitigation









Kyoto Protocol

Clean Development Mechanism · Joint Implementation · Bali roadmap






Governmental

European Climate Change Programme · United Kingdom Climate Change Programme · Oil phase-out in Sweden · Coal phase out






Schemes

Emissions trading · Personal carbon trading · Carbon tax · Carbon offset · Carbon credit · Carbon dioxide sink (carbon sequestration) · Cap and Share






Energy conservation

Efficient energy use · Renewable energy · Renewable energy commercialization · Renewable energy development · Soft energy path






Other

G8 Climate Change Roundtable · Individual and political action on climate change · Climate change mitigation scenarios

















 
Proposed adaptations









Strategies

Damming glacial lakes · Drought tolerance · Irrigation investment · Rainwater storage · Sustainable development · Weather control






Programmes

Avoiding Dangerous Climate Change · Land Allocation Decision Support System












Category:Global warming · Category:Climate change · Glossary of climate change












v • d • e

Topics related to environmental technology






Environmental impact assessment · Environmental design · Sustainable development






Pollution

Industrial ecology · Solid waste treatment · Waste management  · Air pollution (control · dispersion modeling) · Water (Wastewater treatment · Agricultural wastewater treatment · Industrial wastewater treatment · Water purification)






Renewable energy

Alternative energy · Energy development · Energy efficiency · Renewable energy (development) · Sustainable energy · Fuel (Alternative fuel · Biofuel · Hydrogen technologies) · Transportation (Electric vehicle · Hybrid vehicle)






Conservation

Birth control · Permaculture · Conservation ethic · Recycling · Ecoforestry · Conservation biology · Environmental preservation · Remediation · Green computing · Building (Green · Natural · Sustainable architecture)









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sustainable_development"
Categories: Sustainable development | Academic disciplinesHidden categories: Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
مصرى
Български
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Français
Galego
ગુજરાતી
한국어
हिन्दी
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
Tiếng Việt
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 13 April 2009, at 23:01 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
