













Francis Drake - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Francis_Drake";
		var wgTitle = "Francis Drake";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "11508";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281565025;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Francis Drake

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the Elizabethan naval commander.  For other uses, see Francis Drake (disambiguation).


Sir Francis Drake


February-March 1540 – 27 January 1596



A 16th century oil on canvas portrait of Sir Francis Drake in Buckland Abbey, painting by Marcus Gheeraerts the Younger.


Nickname:
El Draque ("The Dragon")


Type:
Privateer


Place of birth:
Tavistock, Devon, England


Place of death:
Portobelo, Colón, Panama


Allegiance:
England


Years of service:
1563 – 1596


Rank:
Vice Admiral


Base of Operations:
Caribbean Sea


Commands:
Golden Hind (previously known as Pelican)


Battles/wars:
Anglo–Spanish War (1585)
Battle of Gravelines


Sir Francis Drake, Vice Admiral (1540 – 27 January 1596), was an English sea captain, privateer, navigator, slaver, and politician of the Elizabethan era. Queen Elizabeth I awarded Drake a knighthood in 1581. He was second-in-command of the English fleet against the Spanish Armada in 1588, subordinate only to Charles Howard and the Queen herself. He died of dysentery in January 1596[1] after unsuccessfully attacking San Juan, Puerto Rico.
His exploits were legendary, making him a hero to the English but a pirate to the Spaniards, to whom he was known as El Draque, "the Dragon";[citation needed] "Draque" is the Spanish pronunciation of "Drake". His name in Latin was Franciscvs Draco. [2]. King Philip II was claimed to have offered a reward of 20,000 ducats[3] (about £4m or $8m by modern standards) for his life.
He is famous for (among other things) sailing around the world, returning to England in 1580.




Contents


1 Birth and early years
2 Circumnavigating the world

2.1 Entering the Pacific
2.2 A most consequential action
2.3 Nova Albion
2.4 Continuing the journey


3 Spanish Armada

3.1 Cadiz Raid
3.2 Defeat of the Spanish Armada
3.3 Drake-Norris Expedition


4 Final years
5 Cultural impact
6 Controversies

6.1 Slave Trading
6.2 Conflict in the Caribbean
6.3 Atrocities in Ireland
6.4 Execution of Thomas Doughty


7 See also
8 References
9 Bibliography
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Birth and early years




Miniature of Drake, age 42 by Nicholas Hilliard in 1581


Sir Francis Drake was born in the parish of Crowndale, a mile south of Tavistock, Devon, in February or March 1540.[4] He was the eldest of the twelve sons[5] of Edmund Drake (1518–1585), a Protestant farmer who later became a preacher, and his wife Mary Mylwaye. The elder Drake is sometimes confused with his nephew John Drake (1573–1634), who was the son of Edmund's older brother, Richard Drake. (cf. John White, note 2). Francis Drake's maternal grandfather was Richard Mylwaye. Francis Drake married 1: Mary Newman; married 2: Elizabeth Sydenham (m.2 Sir William Courtenay of Powderham) 1585.[6]


“
The people of quality dislike him for having risen so high from such a lowely family; the rest say he is the main cause of wars.
”



—Gonzalo González del Castillo in a letter to King Philip II in 1592.[3]



Francis Drake was reportedly named after his godfather Francis Russell, 2nd Earl of Bedford,[7] and throughout his cousins' lineages are direct connections to royalty and famous personages, such as Sir Richard Grenville, Ivor Callely, Amy Grenville and Geoffrey Chaucer. However, James Froud states, "He told Camden that he was of mean extraction. He meant merely that he was proud of his parents and made no idle pretensions to noble birth. His father was a tenant of the Earl of Bedford, and must have stood well with him, for Francis Russell, the heir of the earldom, was the boy's godfather."[8]
As with many of Drake's contemporaries, the exact date of his birth is unknown and could be as early as 1535, the 1540 date being extrapolated from two portraits: one a miniature painted by Nicholas Hilliard in 1581 when he was allegedly 42, the other painted in 1594 when he was said to be 53.[9]
During the Prayer Book Rebellion of 1549, the family was forced to flee to Kent. Before he turned thirteen, Drake started his sea career when he became an apprentice member of the crew of a bark trading between the Thames and the cross-Channel ports. He became owner-master of the ship at the age of twenty after the death of its previous captain, who bequeathed it to him. At age twenty-three, Drake made his first voyage to the New World, sailing, in company with his second cousin, Sir John Hawkins, on one of a fleet of ships owned by his relatives, the Hawkins family of Plymouth.
In 1569 he was again with the Hawkins fleet when it was trapped by the Spaniards in the Mexican port of San Juan de Ulua. He escaped along with Hawkins but the experience is said to have led him to his lifelong revenge against the Spanish.

[edit] Circumnavigating the world

[edit] Entering the Pacific




Statue of Drake in Plymouth, England where he returned to on September 26, 1580 after circumnavigating the world


In 1577 Queen Elizabeth I sent Drake to start an expedition against the Spanish along the Pacific coast of the Americas. He set out from Plymouth on 15 November 1577, but bad weather threatened him and his fleet, who were forced to take refuge in Falmouth, Cornwall, from where they returned to Plymouth for repair. After this major setback, he set sail once again on the 13th of December, aboard Pelican, with five other ships and 164 men. He soon added a sixth ship, Mary (formerly Santa Maria) which had been captured off the coast of Africa from the Spaniards. More importantly, he added its captain, Nuno de Silva, a man with considerable experience navigating in South American waters.
Drake's fleet suffered great attrition; he scuttled both Christopher and the flyboat Swan due to loss of men on the Atlantic crossing. At San Julian, Argentina, Mary was found to be rotten and was burned. After the trial and execution of Thomas Doughty, Drake decided to remain the winter in San Julian before attempting the Straits of Magellan.
The three remaining ships of his convoy departed for the Magellan Strait, at the southern tip of South America. A few weeks later (September 1578) Drake made it to the Pacific, but violent storms destroyed one of the three ships in the strait and caused another to return to England, leaving only the Pelican. After this passage the Pelican was pushed south, and Drake, like navigators before him, probably reached a latitude of 55°S (according to astronomical data quoted in Hakluyt's "The Principall Navigators" of 1589) along the Chilean coast[10]. Despite popular lore, it seems unlikely that he reached Cape Horn or the eponymous Drake Passage[10], because his descriptions do not fit the first and his shipmates denied having seen an open sea, while the first report of his discovery of an open channel south of Tierra del Fuego was written after the 1618 publication of the voyage of Willem Schouten and Jacob le Maire around Cape Horn in 1616.[11]
He pushed onwards in his lone flagship, now renamed the Golden Hinde in honour of Sir Christopher Hatton (after his coat of arms). The Golden Hinde sailed north along the Pacific coast of South America, attacking Spanish ports and rifling towns. Some Spanish ships were captured, and Drake used their more accurate charts.
Before reaching the coast of Peru, Drake visited Mocha Island where he was seriously injured by hostile Mapuches. Later he sacked the port of Valparaíso further north in Chile.

[edit] A most consequential action
Near Lima, Drake captured a Spanish ship laden with 25,000 pesos of Peruvian gold, amounting in value to 37,000 ducats of Spanish money (about £7m by modern standards). Drake also discovered news of another ship, Nuestra Señora de la Concepción, which was sailing west towards Manila. It would come to be called the Cacafuego. Drake gave chase and eventually captured the treasure ship which proved their most profitable capture. Aboard Nuestra Señora de la Concepción, Drake found 80 lb (36 kg) of gold, a golden crucifix, jewels, 13 chests full of royals of plate and 26 tons of silver. This particular catch had far-reaching consequences because the Spanish ship, having been intercepted sailing due west in the Pacific, exposed to the whole world in early 1580 that the Spanish were active in the Far East, a concession which had been awarded to the Portuguese by the Pope at Rome. This crisis forced Philip II of Spain to invade Portugal in 1580 to claim the Portuguese crown.[12]

[edit] Nova Albion
Main article: Nova Albion




Drake's landing in California, engraving published 1590 by Theodor De Bry


On 17 June 1579, Drake landed somewhere north of Spain's northern-most claim at Point Loma. He found a good port, landed, repaired and restocked his vessels, then stayed for a time, keeping friendly relations with the natives. He claimed the land in the name of the Holy Trinity for the English Crown as called Nova Albion - Latin for "New England". Assertions that he left some of his men behind as an embryo "colony" are founded merely on the reduced number who were with him in the Moluccas.[13]
The precise location of the port was carefully guarded to keep it secret from the Spaniards, and several of Drake's maps may even have been altered to this end. All first-hand records from the voyage, including logs, paintings and charts were lost when Whitehall Palace burned in 1698. A bronze plaque inscribed with Drake's claim to the new lands, fitting the description in Drake's own account, was discovered in Marin County, California, but was later declared a hoax. Another location often claimed to be Nova Albion is Whale Cove (Oregon), although to date there is no evidence to suggest this, other than a general resemblance to a single map penned a decade after the landing.
Samuel Bawlf[14] marshalled indications that "Nova Albion" was established at Comox on Vancouver Island, during an undocumented "secret voyage" north. It is known that Drake and his men sailed north from Nova Albion in search of a western opening to the Northwest Passage, a potentially valuable asset to the English at the time. During this venture the sailors accurately mapped the westward trend of the north-western corner of the North American continent, present-day British Columbia and Alaska. They had a rough voyage among the islands of the Alaskan panhandle, and were forced to turn back due to freezing weather.
Bawlf argues that Drake's ship reached 56°N, much farther north than was recorded. The reason for this false record, Bawlf writes, was for political reasons: competition with the Spanish in the Americas. Queen Elizabeth wanted to keep any information on the Northwest Passage secret, with the result that the location of Nova Albion and the highest latitude the expedition reached is still a source of controversy today.
Drake's brother endured a long period of torture in South America at the hands of Spaniards, who sought intelligence from him about Francis Drake's voyage.
His voyage to the west coast of North America is important for a number of reasons. When he landed, his chaplain held Holy Communion; this was one of the first Protestant church services in the New World (though French Huguenots had founded an ill-fated colony in Florida in the 1560s). Drake was seen to be gaining prestige at the expense of the Papacy.
What is certain of the extent of Drake's claim and territorial challenge to the Papacy and the Spanish crown is that his port was founded somewhere north of Point Loma; that all contemporary maps label all lands above the Kingdoms of New Spain and New Mexico as "Nova Albion", and that all colonial claims made from the East Coast in the 1600s were "From Sea to Sea". The colonial claims were established with full knowledge of Drake's claims, which they reinforced, and remained valid in the minds of the English colonists on the Atlantic coast when those colonies became free states. Maps made soon after would have "Nova Albion" written above the entire northern frontier of New Spain. These territorial claims became important during the negotiations that ended the Mexican-American War between the United States and Mexico.

[edit] Continuing the journey




A modern replica of Drake's Golden Hind


Drake now headed westward across the Pacific, and a few months later reached the Moluccas, a group of islands in the south west Pacific, in eastern modern-day Indonesia. While there, Golden Hind became caught on a reef and was almost lost. After three days of waiting for expedient tides and dumping cargo, the barque was freed. Drake and his men befriended a sultan king of the Moluccas and involved themselves in some intrigues with the Portuguese there.
He made multiple stops on his way toward the tip of Africa, eventually rounded the Cape of Good Hope, and reached Sierra Leone by 22 July 1580. On 26 September Golden Hind sailed into Plymouth with Drake and 59 remaining crew aboard, along with a rich cargo of spices and captured Spanish treasures. The Queen's half-share of the cargo surpassed the rest of the crown's income for that entire year. Drake was hailed as the first Englishman to circumnavigate the Earth (and the second such voyage arriving with at least one ship intact, after Elcano's in 1520). Drake was awarded a knighthood, but not by Queen Elizabeth aboard Golden Hind, as is commonly thought. He was actually knighted by a French nobleman called Monsieur de Marchaumont. on 4 April 1581,[15] and, in September 1581, became the Mayor of Plymouth.[5] He was also a Member of Parliament in 1581, for an unknown constituency, and again in 1584 for Bossiney.[5]
In 1580 Drake purchased Buckland Abbey, a large manor near Yelverton in Devon. He lived there for fifteen years, until his final voyage, and it remained in his family for several generations. Buckland Abbey is now in the care of the National Trust and a number of mementos of his life are displayed there.
The Queen ordered all written accounts of Drake's voyage to be considered classified information, and its participants sworn to silence on pain of death; her aim was to keep Drake's activities away from the eyes of rival Spain. Also considering the friction with Spain, on the occasion of the knighting, Elizabeth I handed the sword to the Marquis de Marchaumont, ambassador from France, and asked him to dub Drake as the knight. During the Victorian era, in a spirit of nationalism, the story was promoted that Elizabeth I had done the actual knighting.[15][16]




"The "Drake Jewel Portrait, by Marcus Gheeraerts, 1591 (National Maritime Museum, Greenwich)


On his return Drake presented the Queen with a jewel token commemorating the circumnavigation. It bore a ship with an ebony hull, enameled gold taken from a prize off the Pacific coast of Mexico, and an African diamond. For her part, the Queen gave Drake a jewel with her portrait, an uncommon gift to bestow upon a commoner, and one that Drake sported proudly in his portrait by Marcus Gheeraerts, 1591. On one side is a state portrait of Elizabeth by the miniaturist Nicholas Hilliard, on the other a sardonyx cameo of double portrait busts, a regal woman and an African male. The "Drake Jewel", as it is known today, is a rare documented survivor among sixteen-century jewels; it is conserved at the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich.[17]

[edit] Spanish Armada
Main article: Spanish Armada
War broke out between Spain and England in 1585. Drake sailed to the New World and sacked the ports of Santo Domingo and Cartagena. On the return leg of the voyage, he captured the Spanish fort of San Augustín in Spanish Florida. These exploits encouraged Philip II of Spain to order the planning for an invasion of England.

[edit] Cadiz Raid
In a pre-emptive strike, Drake "singed the beard of the King of Spain" by sailing a fleet into Cádiz and also La Coruña, two of Spain's main ports, and occupied the harbours, destroying 37 naval and merchant ships. The attack delayed the Spanish invasion by a year.[18] Over the next month, Drake patrolled the Iberian Coasts between Lisbon and Cape St. Vincent intercepting and destroying Spanish supply lines. Drake estimated that he captured around 1600-1700 tons of barrel staves, enough to make 25,000 to 30,000 barrels (4,800 m3) for containing provisions.[19]


“
I would be more greatly worried about this situation if you were not in charge; therefore I expect it will have a good outcome.
”



—King Philip's postscript in a dispatch to the Duke of Medina Sidonia two days after receiving the news of the Cadiz Raid and ordering him to pull out.







The Spanish Armada



[edit] Defeat of the Spanish Armada
Drake was vice admiral in command of the English fleet (under Lord Howard of Effingham) when it overcame the Spanish Armada that was attempting to invade England in 1588. As the English fleet pursued the Armada up the English Channel in closing darkness, Drake broke off and captured the Spanish galleon Rosario, along with Admiral Pedro de Valdés and all his crew. The Spanish ship was known to be carrying substantial funds to pay the Spanish Army in the Low Countries. Drake's ship had been leading the English pursuit of the Armada by means of a lantern. By extinguishing this for the capture, Drake put the fleet into disarray overnight.
On the night of 29 July, along with Howard, Drake organised fire-ships, causing the majority of the Spanish captains to break formation and sail out of Calais into the open sea. The next day, Drake was present at the Battle of Gravelines.


“
Coming up to them, there has passed some common shot between some of our fleet and some of them; and as far as we perceive, they are determined to sell their lives with blows.
”



— Letter to Admiral Henry Seymour, after coming upon part of the Spanish Armada, written aboard Revenge on 31 July 1588 (21 July 1588 O.S.)[20]



The most famous (but probably apocryphal) anecdote about Drake relates that, prior to the battle, he was playing a game of bowls on Plymouth Hoe. On being warned of the approach of the Spanish fleet, Drake is said to have remarked that there was plenty of time to finish the game and still beat the Spaniards. There is no known eyewitness account of this incident and the earliest retelling of it was printed 37 years later.[11] Adverse winds and currents caused some delay in the launching of the English fleet as the Spanish drew nearer [11] so it is easy to see how a popular myth of Drake's cavalier attitude to the Spanish threat may have originated.

[edit] Drake-Norris Expedition
Main article: English Armada
In 1589, the year after defeating the Armada, Drake and Sir John Norreys were given three tasks. They were ordered to first seek out and destroy the remaining ships, second they were to support the rebels in Lisbon, Portugal against King Philip II (king of Spain and Portugal then), and third they were to take the Azores if possible. Drake and Norreys destroyed a few ships in the harbour of La Coruña in Spain but lost more than 12,000 lives and 20 ships.[citation needed] This delayed Drake, and he was forced to forgo hunting the rest of the surviving ships and head on to Lisbon.[19]

[edit] Final years
Drake's seafaring career continued into his mid-fifties. In 1595, following a disastrous campaign against Spanish America, where he suffered several defeats in a row, he unsuccessfully attacked San Juan, Puerto Rico. The Spanish gunners from El Morro Castle shot a cannonball through the cabin of Drake's flagship, but he survived. In 1596, he died of dysentery, at age 56 while anchored off the coast of Puerto Bello, Panama where some Spanish treasure ships had sought shelter. He was buried at sea in a lead coffin, near Portobelo.

[edit] Cultural impact




Sir Francis Drake, circa 1581. This portrait may have been copied from Hilliard's miniature—note that the shirt is the same — and the somewhat oddly proportioned body added by an artist who did not have access to Drake. National Portrait Gallery, London.


Drake's exploits as an explorer have become an enduring part of the world's consciousness, particularly in Europe. Numerous stories and fictional adaptations of his adventures exist to this day. Considered a hero in England, it is said that if England is ever in peril, beating Drake's Drum will cause Drake to return to save the country. This is a variation of the sleeping hero folktale.
Drake's adventures, though less known in the United States, still have some effect. For instance, Drakes Bay and Sir Francis Drake Boulevard of Marin County, California are both named after him. The boulevard runs between Drakes Bay at Point Reyes to Point San Quentin on San Francisco Bay. Each end is near a site considered by some to be Drake's landing place in Northern California.[21] Along that road Sir Francis Drake High School of San Anselmo is the only high school in the United States named after him. A large hotel in Union Square, San Francisco also bears his name.
Drake's will was the focus of a vast confidence scheme which Oscar Hartzell perpetrated in the 1920s and 1930s. He convinced thousands of people, mostly in the American Midwest, that Drake's fortune was being held by the British government, and had compounded to a huge amount. If their last name was Drake they might be eligible for a share if they paid Hartzell to be their agent. The swindle continued until a copy of Drake's will was brought to Hartzell's mail fraud trial and he was convicted and imprisoned.[22]
In 1960 the television series Sir Francis Drake debuted on ITV, starring Terence Morgan in the title role.
In Devon there are various places named after him, especially in Plymouth where a shopping center is named Drakes Circus.
The novel, Caribbean by author James A. Michener accurately summarizes Drake's exploits in the chapter entitled 'Spanish Lake'.
Nathan Drake, a supposed descendant of the explorer Sir Francis Drake, searches for lost treasure in the video game Uncharted: Drake's Fortune.
In 2009, the television movie The Immortal Voyage of Captain Drake, on the SciFi Channel, has Sir Francis Drake, played by Adrian Paul, on a quest for a Sultan to find the tree of life.

[edit] Controversies

[edit] Slave Trading
Drake accompanied his second cousin Sir John Hawkins in making the third English slave-trading expeditions, making fortunes through the abduction and transportation of West African people, and then exchanging them for high-value goods.[citation needed] The first Englishman recorded to have taken slaves from Africa was John Lok, a London trader who, in 1555, brought to England five slaves from Guinea.[citation needed] A second London trader taking slaves at that time was William Towerson whose fleet sailed into Plymouth following his 1556 voyage to Africa and from Plymouth on his 1557 voyage. Despite the exploits of Lok and Towerson, John Hawkins of Plymouth is widely acknowledged to be the pioneer of the English slave trade.[citation needed]
Around 1563 Drake first sailed west to the Spanish Main, on a ship owned and commanded by his uncle John Hawkins, with a cargo of people forcibly removed from the coast of West Africa. The Englishmen sold their African captives into slavery in Spanish plantations. These profitable activities (which he continued) undermine the tendency to view Drake as simply an untarnished English hero. Although slavery was legal throughout the world at the time, its expansion by Hawkins and Drake is now widely seen as a great blot upon their records. In general, the kidnapping and forced transportation of people was considered to be a criminal offence under English law at the time, although legal protection did not necessarily extend to slaves, non-Protestants or criminals. Hawkins' own account of his actions (in which Drake took part) cites two sources for their victims. One was military attacks on African towns and villages (with the assistance of rival African warlords). The other was privateer actions against Portuguese slave ships. Britain's slave trade later came to be regarded as a terrible stain on the moral history of the nation, and Drake's role in laying the technical, legal and political foundations for the slave trade cannot be overlooked.

[edit] Conflict in the Caribbean
During his early days as a slave-trader, Drake took an immediate dislike to the Spanish, at least in part due to their Catholicism and inherent mistrust of non-English. His hostility is said to have increased over an incident at San Juan de Ulua in 1568, when Drake was sailing with the fleet of his cousin John Hawkins. While negotiating to resupply and repair at the Spanish port, the fleet were attacked by Spanish warships, with all but two of the English ships lost. Drake survived the attack to swim.[citation needed]The most celebrated of Drake's adventures along the Spanish Main was his capture of the Spanish Silver Train at Nombre de Dios in March 1573. With a crew including many French privateers and Maroons — African slaves who had escaped the Spanish — Drake raided the waters around Darien (in modern Panama) and tracked the Silver Train to the nearby port of Nombre de Dios. He made off with a fortune in gold, but had to leave behind another fortune in silver, because it was too heavy to carry back to England. It was during this expedition that he climbed a high tree in the central mountains of the Isthmus of Panama and thus became the first Englishman to see the Pacific Ocean. He remarked as he saw it that he hoped one day an Englishman would be able to sail it -- which he would do years later as part of his circumnavigation of the world.
When Drake returned to Plymouth after the raids, the government signed a temporary truce with King Philip II of Spain and so was unable to acknowledge Drake's accomplishment officially.
Drake was considered a hero in England for his raids.[23]

[edit] Atrocities in Ireland
In 1575 Drake was present at Rathlin Island, part of the English plantation effort in Ulster when 600 men, women, and children were massacred after surrendering.[24]
Francis Drake was in charge of the ships which transported John Norreys' Troops to Rathlin Island, commanding a small frigate called "Falcon", with a total complement of 25. At the time of the massacre, he was charged with the task of keeping Scottish vessels from bringing reinforcements to Rathlin Island. The people who were massacred were, in fact, the families of Sorley Boy MacDonnell's followers.[25]

[edit] Execution of Thomas Doughty


“
And after this holy repast, they dined also at the same table together, as cheerfully, in sobriety, as ever in their lives they had done aforetime, each cheering up the other, and taking their leave, by drinking each to other, as if some journey only had been in hand.
”



—Francis Fletcher in his account of the Communion



Main article: Thomas Doughty (explorer)
In 1578 Drake accused his co-commander Thomas Doughty of witchcraft in a shipboard trial.[16] Doughty was charged with mutiny and treason. Drake then denied his requests to see Drake's commission from the Queen to carry out such acts and was denied a trial in England. The two main pieces of evidence against Doughty were the testimony of the ship's carpenter, Edward Bright and also that Doughty admitted to telling Lord William Burghley of the voyage. Drake consented to his request of Communion and dined with him. Thomas Doughty was beheaded on July 2 1578.

[edit] See also

Roberto Trefusis fictional nephew in Marvel 1602
Buckland Abbey, home of Sir Francis Drake.
Drake in California
Drake's Leat, a water supply for Plymouth, promoted by Drake.
Drake's Plate of Brass, a forgery of a plate purported to have be posted by Drake in California.
Francis William Drake, descendant of Sir Francis Drake.
Giovanni Battista Boazio Drake's mapmaker
Golden Hind Drake's flagship
Thomas Doughty Drake's co-captain whose death is surrounded by controversy
Uncharted: Drake's Fortune, a game by Naughty Dog about Nathan Drake, the descendant of Sir Francis Drake.


[edit] References


^ According to the English calendar then in use, Drake's date of death was 27 January 1595, as the new year began on 25 March.
^ In 1590 his name was published in Latin as Franciscvs Draco: Theodor de Bry
^ a b Cummins, John, Francis Drake: The Lives of a Hero, 1996, Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 0312163657
^ Turner, Michael. (2005). In Drake's Wake - The Early Voyages, Paul Mould Publishing. ISBN 978-1904959212
^ a b c Thomson,George Malcolm(1972), ‘Sir Francis Drake’, William Morrow & Company Inc. ISBN 978-0436520495
^ "Captain Sir Francis DRAKE". tudorplace.com.ar. http://www.tudorplace.com.ar/Bios/FrancisDrake.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-28. 
^ Tudor Place - Francis Drake bio
^ Froude, James Anthony, English Seamen in the Sixteenth Century, London 1896
^ 1921/22 edition of the Dictionary of National Biography, which quotes Barrow's Life of Drake (1843) p. 5.
^ a b Wagner, Henry R., Sir Francis Drake's Voyage Around The World: Its Aims And Achievements, Kessinger Publishing, LLC, 2006, ISBN 1-428-62255-1
^ a b c Kelsey, Harry, Sir Francis Drake; The Queen's Pirate, Yale University Press, New Haven, 1998, ISBN 0-300-07182-5
^ Charles Wehrenberg, Before New York, Solo Zone Publishing, San Francisco, 1995/2001, ISBN 1-886163-16-2
^ Dismissed by John Cummins, Francis Drake: The Lives of a Hero 1997:118: "In view of the prominence given in different versions to the crowning of Drake it would be odd if the establishment of a colony had gone unrecorded."
^ R. Samuel Bawlf, The Secret Voyage of Sir Francis Drake: 1577-1580 (Walker Publishing) 2003.
^ a b The Encyclopaedia of Plymouth History: Sir Francis Drake
^ a b Coote, Stephen, Drake: The Life and Legend of an Elizabethan Hero Saint Martin's Press, New York, 2003. ISBN 0-312-34165-2
^ "The Drake Jewel"
^ Thompson, E. and Freeman, E.A. History of England, p. 188.
^ a b Kraus, Hans. Sir Francis Drake: A Pictorial Biography, 1970
^ Turner, Sharon. The History of England from the Earliest Period to the Death of Elizabeth, 1835
^ Olompoli contends with Drakes Bay as Drake's Bay Area landing place. Thomas, Robert C., Drake at Olompali Apala Press: 1979. ISBN-10: 0-9602546-0-9
^ Rayner, Richard. The Admiral and the Con Man The New Yorker, April 22, 2002, p. 150
^ See especially Drake's Spanish nickname and its mythic power to frighten naughty children. John Cummins, Francis Drake: The Lives of a Hero, page 273. ISBN 0312163657.
^ Brief mention of the massacre
^ John Sugden, "Sir Francis Drake" Simon Schuster New York, ISBN 0671758632



[edit] Bibliography

Bawlf, Samuel (2003) The Secret Voyage of Sir Francis Drake, 1577-1580 Walker & Company ISBN 0802714056
Hughes-Hallett, Lucy (2004) Heroes: A History of Hero Worship Alfred A. Knopf, New York, New York. ISBN 1-4000-4399-9
Kelsey, Harry (1998) Sir Francis Drake, the Queen's Pirate New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 0300071825
Mattingly, Garett (1959) The Defeat of the Spanish Armada ISBN 0-395-08366-4 – a detailed account of the defeat of the Spanish Armada, it received a special citation from the Pulitzer Prize committee in 1960
Merideth, Mrs Charles, Notes and Sketches of New South Wales, during a residence in that colony from 1839 to 1844; Bound With: "Life of Drake" by John Barrow (1st ed, 1844) [xi, 164; and xii, 187 pp. respectfully]
Rodger, N.A.M. The Safeguard of the Sea; A Naval History of Britain 660-1649 (London, 1997)
Wilson, Derek (1977) The World Encompassed: Drake’s Great Voyage, 1577–80. Harper & Row. ISBN 0060146796


[edit] External links

The Circumnavigation

Google Earth Tour of Drake's Circumnavigation
Lesson plans for classroom use




General Sites

Francis Drake
Hand-colored map depicting Sir Francis Drake's attack on Saint Augustine from the State Archives of Florida
In Drake's Wake - "The world's best Drake resource"
Kraus Collection of Sir Francis Drake at the Library of Congress
Mission to rescue Drake's body
Oliver Seeler's website "Sir Francis Drake"
Drake's methods of Navigation"











v • d • e

Piracy





Historical
1620s · 1630s · 1640s · 1650s · 1660s  · 1670s · 1680s
Modern
1995 · 1996 · 1997  · 1998 · 1999 · 2000 · 2001 · 2002 · 2003 · 2004 · 2005 · 2006 · 2007 · 2008 · 2009





Types of pirate

Pirates · Privateers · Buccaneers · Corsairs · Frisian Pirates · Raiders · Barbary pirates · Wōkòu · Vikings · Ushkuiniks · Neretva pirates · Cilician pirates · Slavic pirates






Areas of piracy

Piracy in the Caribbean · Piracy in the British Virgin Islands · Piracy in the Strait of Malacca · Piracy in Somalia
Port Royal · Tortuga · Saint-Malo · Barbary Coast · Lundy · Lagos · Salé






Famous pirates

Black Bart · Pier Gerlofs Donia · Blackbeard · Stede Bonnet · Anne Bonny · Calico Jack · Sir Francis Drake · Alexandre Exquemelin · Captain Kidd · Ned Low · Redbeard · Wijerd Jelckama · Roberto Cofresí · Captain Morgan
Pirates · By nationality · Barbary pirates · Female pirates






Pirate ships

Adventure Galley · Batavia · Fancy · Ganj-i-Sawai · Queen Anne's Revenge · Whydah Galley






Pirate hunters

Pedro Menéndez de Avilés · Angelo Emo · Richard Avery Hornsby · Robert Maynard · Chaloner Ogle · Pompey
Treaty of Ratisbon · Piracy Act 1698 · Piracy Act 1717 · Piracy Act 1837






Fictional pirates

Captain Hook · Long John Silver · Captain Flint






Miscellaneous

Golden Age of Piracy · Jolly Roger · Skull and crossbones · Walking the plank · Treasure map · Buried treasure · Pirate booty · Marooning · Brethren of the Coast · Pirate code · Pirate utopia · Victual Brothers · Pirate Round · Libertatia · Sack of Baltimore · Turkish Abductions · Colby Pirates · A General History of the Pyrates






Lists

Pirates · Privateers · Timeline of piracy · Years in piracy · Pirate films · Women in piracy · Pirates in fiction






Modern piracy

Piracy in Somalia · Piracy in Nigeria · Piracy in Indonesia · Piracy in Yemen








Persondata


NAME
Drake, Francis


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
El Draque


SHORT DESCRIPTION
Privateer; circumnavigator of the world


DATE OF BIRTH
c. 1540


PLACE OF BIRTH
Crowndale, Devon, England


DATE OF DEATH
27 January 1596


PLACE OF DEATH
Off the coast of Puerto Bello, Panama





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francis_Drake"
Categories: Circumnavigators of the globe | English sailors | English explorers | Privateers | 16th-century explorers | Burials at sea | People connected with Plymouth | People from Tavistock | 1540 births | 1596 deaths | British slave traders and slave holders | Explorers of Oregon | Members of Parliament for constituencies in CornwallHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Aragonés
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Français
Gaeilge
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kapampangan
ქართული
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Magyar
Македонски
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Pangasinan
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Scots
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Võro
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 20:22.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
