













Richard Rorty - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Richard_Rorty";
		var wgTitle = "Richard Rorty";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "205495";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 279521171;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Richard Rorty

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 

Richard Rorty

Western Philosophy
20th-century philosophy



©Steve Pyke


Full name
Richard McKay Rorty


School/tradition
Postanalytic · Pragmatism


Main interests
Philosophy of language
Philosophy of mind
Ethics · Liberalism
Meta-epistemology


Notable ideas
Postphilosophy · Ironism
Final vocabulary
Epistemological behaviorism




Influenced by
John Dewey · Martin Heidegger
Ludwig Wittgenstein · Wilfrid Sellars
Friedrich Nietzsche · W.V.O. Quine
Donald Davidson · William James
John Rawls · Marcel Proust
Vladimir Nabokov  · Hans Georg Gadamer






Influenced
Robert Brandom · John McDowell
Gianni Vattimo · Cornel West
Nancy Fraser · Sam Harris




Richard McKay Rorty (October 4, 1931 - June 8, 2007) was an American philosopher. He had a long and diverse career in Philosophy, Humanities, and Literature departments. His complex intellectual background gave him a comprehensive and nuanced understanding of the analytical tradition in philosophy he would later famously reject.




Contents


1 Biography
2 Major works

2.1 Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature
2.2 Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity
2.3 Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth
2.4 Essays on Heidegger and Others
2.5 Achieving Our Country
2.6 Rorty and His Critics


3 On Human Rights
4 Reception and criticism
5 Select bibliography
6 Further reading
7 See also
8 External links

8.1 Essays and Articles by Rorty
8.2 Book Reviews by Rorty
8.3 Interviews
8.4 Obituaries, Eulogies and Memorials


9 Notes





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography
Richard Rorty was born October 4, 1931 in New York City to James and Winifred Rorty. Winifred was the daughter of Social Gospel theologian Walter Rauschenbusch. Rorty enrolled at the University of Chicago shortly before turning 15, where he received a bachelor's and a master's degree in philosophy, continuing at Yale University for a PhD in philosophy[1]. He served two years in the army, and then taught at Wellesley College for three years, until 1961.[2]
Thereafter for 21 years at Princeton University Rorty was a professor of philosophy.[2] In 1982 he became Kenan Professor of the Humanities at the University Of Virginia.[3] In 1997 Rorty became professor emeritus of comparative literature (and philosophy, by courtesy), at Stanford University.[3] During this period he was especially popular, and once quipped that he had been assigned to the position of "transitory professor of trendy studies".[4]
Rorty's doctoral dissertation, "The Concept of Potentiality", and his first book (as editor), The Linguistic Turn (1967), were firmly in the prevailing analytic mode. However, he gradually became acquainted with the American philosophical movement known as pragmatism, particularly the writings of John Dewey. The noteworthy work being done by analytic philosophers such as W.V.O. Quine and Wilfrid Sellars caused significant shifts in his thinking, which were reflected in his next book, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (1979).
Pragmatists generally hold that a proposition is useful if employing it helps us understand or solve a given problem. Rorty combined pragmatism about truth and other matters with a later Wittgensteinian philosophy of language which declares that meaning is a social-linguistic product, and sentences do not 'link up' with the world in a correspondence relation. Rorty wrote in his Contingency, irony, and solidarity (1989):

"Truth cannot be out there—cannot exist independently of the human mind—because sentences cannot so exist, or be out there. The world is out there, but descriptions of the world are not. Only descriptions of the world can be true or false. The world on its own—unaided by the describing activities of humans—cannot.” (5)

Views like this led Rorty to question many of philosophy's most basic assumptions — and have also led to him being apprehended as a postmodern/deconstructionist philosopher par excellence. Indeed, from the late 1980s through the 1990s, Rorty focused on the continental philosophical tradition, examining the works of Friederich Nietzsche, Martin Heidegger, Michel Foucault, and Jacques Derrida. His work from this period included Contingency, irony, and solidarity, Essays on Heidegger and Others: Philosophical Papers (1991) and Truth and Progress: Philosophical Papers (1998). The latter two works attempt to bridge the dichotomy between analytic and continental philosophy by claiming that the two traditions complement rather than oppose each other.
According to Rorty, analytic philosophy may not have lived up to its pretensions and may not have solved the puzzles it thought it had. Yet such philosophy, in the process of finding reasons for putting those pretensions and puzzles aside, helped earn itself an important place in the history of ideas. By giving up on the quest for apodicticity and finality that Husserl shared with Carnap and Russell, and by finding new reasons for thinking that such quest will never succeed, analytic philosophy cleared a path that leads past scientism, just as the German idealists cleared a path that led around empiricism.
In the last fifteen years of his life, Rorty continued to publish voluminously, including four volumes of philosophical papers, Achieving Our Country (1998), a political manifesto partly based on readings of John Dewey and Walt Whitman in which he defended the idea of a progressive, pragmatic left against what he feels are defeatist, anti-liberal, anti-humanist positions espoused by the critical left and continental school, personified by figures like Nietzsche, Heidegger, and Foucault. Such theorists were also guilty of an "inverted Platonism" in which they attempted to craft over-arching, metaphysical, "sublime" philosophies—which in fact contradicted their core claims to be ironist and contingent. Rorty's last works focused on the place of religion in contemporary life, liberal communities, and philosophy as "cultural politics".
On June 8, 2007, Rorty died in his home of pancreatic cancer. [1][3][5]
Shortly before his death, he wrote a piece called "The Fire of Life", (published in the November 2007 issue of Poetry Magazine)[6], in which he meditates on his diagnosis and the comfort of poetry. He concludes, "I now wish that I had spent somewhat more of my life with verse. This is not because I fear having missed out on truths that are incapable of statement in prose. There are no such truths; there is nothing about death that Swinburne and Landor knew but Epicurus and Heidegger failed to grasp. Rather, it is because I would have lived more fully if I had been able to rattle off more old chestnuts — just as I would have if I had made more close friends."

[edit] Major works

[edit] Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature
Main article: Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature
In Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (1979), Rorty argues that the central problems of modern epistemology depend upon a picture of the mind as trying to faithfully represent (or "mirror") a mind-independent, external reality. If we give up this metaphor, then the entire enterprise of foundationalist epistemology is misguided. A foundationalist believes that in order to avoid the regress inherent in claiming that all beliefs are justified by other beliefs, some beliefs must be self-justifying and form the foundations to all knowledge. There were two senses of "foundationalism" criticized in Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. In the philosophical sense, Rorty criticized the attempt to justify knowledge claims by tracing them to a set of foundations; more broadly, he criticized the claim of philosophy to function foundationally within a culture. The former argument draws on Sellars's critique of the idea that there is a "given" in sensory perception, in combination with Quine's critique of the distinction between analytic sentences (sentences which are true solely in virtue of what they mean) and synthetic sentences (sentences made true by the world). Each critique, taken alone, provides a problem for a conception of how philosophy ought to proceed. Combined, Rorty claimed, the two critiques are devastating. With no privileged insight into the structure of belief and no privileged realm of truths of meaning, we have, instead, knowledge as those beliefs that pay their way. The only worthwhile description of the actual process of inquiry, Rorty claimed, was a Kuhnian account of the standard phases of the progress of discipline, oscillating through normal and abnormal science, between routine problem solving and intellectual crises. The only role left for a philosopher is to act as an intellectual gadfly, attempting to induce a revolutionary break with previous practice, a role that Rorty was happy to take on himself. Rorty claims that each generation tries to subject all disciplines to the model that the most successful discipline of the day employs. On Rorty's view, the success of modern science has led academics in philosophy and the humanities to mistakenly imitate scientific methods. Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature popularized and extended ideas of Wilfrid Sellars (the critique of the Myth of the given) and W. V. O. Quine (the critique of the analytic-synthetic distinction) and others who advocate the doctrine of "dissolving" rather than solving philosophical problems.

[edit] Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity
Main article: Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity
In Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity (1989), Rorty abandons the attempt to explain his theories in analytic terms and creates an alternative conceptual schema to that of the "Platonists" he rejects. This schema is based on the belief that there is no intelligible truth (at least not in the sense in which it is conventionally conceptualized). Rorty proposes that philosophy (along with art, science, etc.) can and should be used to provide one with the ability to (re)create oneself, a view adapted from Nietzsche and which Rorty also identifies with the novels of Proust, Nabokov, and Henry James. This book also marks his first attempt to specifically articulate a political vision consistent with his philosophy, the vision of a diverse community bound together by opposition to cruelty, and not by abstract ideas such as 'justice' or 'common humanity' policed by the separation of the public and private realms of life.
In this book, Rorty first introduces the terminology of Ironism, which he uses to describe his mindset and his philosophy.

[edit] Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth
Amongst the essays in Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth: Philosophical Papers, Volume 1 (1990), is "The Priority of Democracy to Philosophy," in which Rorty defends Rawls against communitarian critics and argues that personal ideals of perfection and standards of truth were no more needed in politics than a state religion. He sees Rawls' concept of reflective equilibrium as a more appropriate way of approaching political decision-making in modern liberal democracies.

[edit] Essays on Heidegger and Others
In this text, Rorty focuses primarily on the continental philosophers Martin Heidegger and Jacques Derrida. He argues that these European "post-Nietzscheans" share much in common with American pragmatists, in that they critique metaphysics and reject the correspondence theory of truth. When discussing Derrida, Rorty claims that Derrida is most useful when viewed as a funny writer who attempted to circumvent the Western philosophical tradition, rather than the inventor of a philosophical "method." In this vein, Rorty criticizes Derrida's followers like Paul de Man for taking deconstructive literary theory too seriously.

[edit] Achieving Our Country
Main article: Achieving Our Country
In Achieving Our Country: Leftist Thought in Twentieth-Century America (1998), Rorty differentiates between what he sees as the two sides of the Left, a critical Left and a progressive Left. He criticizes the critical Left, which is exemplified by post-structuralists such as Michel Foucault and postmodernists such as Jean-François Lyotard. Although these intellectuals make insightful claims about the ills of society, Rorty holds that they provide no alternatives and even present progress as problematic at times. On the other hand, the progressive Left, exemplified for Rorty by the pragmatist John Dewey, makes progress its priority in its goal of "achieving our country." Rorty sees the progressive Left as acting in the philosophical spirit of pragmatism.

[edit] Rorty and His Critics
On fundamentalist religion, Rorty said:

“It seems to me that the regulative idea that we heirs of the Enlightenment, we Socratists, most frequently use to criticize the conduct of various conversational partners is that of ‘needing education in order to outgrow their primitive fear, hatreds, and superstitions’ ... It is a concept which I, like most Americans who teach humanities or social science in colleges and universities, invoke when we try to arrange things so that students who enter as bigoted, homophobic, religious fundamentalists will leave college with views more like our own ... The fundamentalist parents of our fundamentalist students think that the entire ‘American liberal establishment’ is engaged in a conspiracy. The parents have a point. Their point is that we liberal teachers no more feel in a symmetrical communication situation when we talk with bigots than do kindergarten teachers talking with their students ... When we American college teachers encounter religious fundamentalists, we do not consider the possibility of reformulating our own practices of justification so as to give more weight to the authority of the Christian scriptures. Instead, we do our best to convince these students of the benefits of secularization. We assign first-person accounts of growing up homosexual to our homophobic students for the same reasons that German schoolteachers in the postwar period assigned The Diary of Anne Frank... You have to be educated in order to be ... a participant in our conversation ... So we are going to go right on trying to discredit you in the eyes of your children, trying to strip your fundamentalist religious community of dignity, trying to make your views seem silly rather than discussable. We are not so inclusivist as to tolerate intolerance such as yours ... I don’t see anything herrschaftsfrei [domination free] about my handling of my fundamentalist students. Rather, I think those students are lucky to find themselves under the benevolent Herrschaft [domination] of people like me, and to have escaped the grip of their frightening, vicious, dangerous parents ... I am just as provincial and contextualist as the Nazi teachers who made their students read Der Stürmer; the only difference is that I serve a better cause.”
– ‘Universality and Truth,’ in Robert B. Brandom (ed.), Rorty and his Critics (Oxford: Blackwell, 2000), pp. 21-2.


[edit] On Human Rights
His notion of human rights is grounded on the notion of sentimentality. He contended that throughout history humans have devised various means of construing certain groups of individuals as inhuman or subhuman. Thinking in rationalist (foundationalist) terms will not solve this problem. We need to create a global human rights culture in order to stop violations from happening through sentimental education. He argued that we should create a sense of empathy or teach empathy to others so as to understand others' suffering.

[edit] Reception and criticism
Rorty is one of the most widely discussed and most controversial of philosophers of recent years,[7] and his works have provoked thoughtful responses from many well-respected philosophers. In Robert Brandom's anthology, entitled Rorty and His Critics, for example, Rorty's philosophy is discussed by Donald Davidson, Jürgen Habermas, Hilary Putnam, John McDowell, Jacques Bouveresse, and Daniel Dennett, among others.[8]
John McDowell is strongly influenced by Rorty, particularly by Rorty's Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (1979).[9] In continental philosophy, authors such as Jürgen Habermas, Gianni Vattimo, Jacques Derrida, Albrecht Wellmer, Hans Joas, Chantal Mouffe, Simon Critchley, Esa Saaarinen and Mike Sandbothe are influenced in different ways by Rorty's thinking.
Although Rorty was a hardened liberal, his political and moral philosophies have been attacked from the Left, some of whom believe them to be insufficient frameworks for social justice[10]. Rorty was also criticized by others for his rejection of the idea that science can depict the world.[11] One major criticism, especially of Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity is that Rorty's philosophical 'hero', the ironist, is an elitist figure [12]. Rorty claims that the majority of people would be "commonsensically nominalist and historicist" but not ironist. These people would combine an ongoing attention to the particular as opposed to the transcendent (nominalism), with an awareness of their place in a continuum of contingent lived experience alongside other individuals (historicist), without necessarily recognizing the resulting worldview as contingent as well. An ironist, Rorty's ideal personal stance, was someone who: 1) "has radical and continuing doubts about her final vocabulary"; 2) "realizes that argument phrased in her vocabulary can neither underwrite nor dissolve these doubts; and 3) "does not think her vocabulary is closer to reality than others" (all 73, Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity).
Rorty often draws on a broad range of other philosophers to support his views, and his interpretation of their works has been contested.[13] Since Rorty is working from a tradition of re-interpretation, he remains uninterested in 'accurately' portraying other thinkers, but rather in utilizing their work in the same way a literary critic might use a novel. His essay "The Historiography of Philosophy: Four Genres" is a thorough description of how he treats the greats in the history of philosophy.
As detailed in Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity, many philosophical criticisms against Rorty are made using axioms that are explicitly rejected within Rorty's own philosophy.[14] For instance, Rorty defines allegations of irrationality as affirmations of vernacular "otherness", and so accusations of irrationality are not only brushed aside, but are expected during any argument.[15]

[edit] Select bibliography

Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979. ISBN
Consequences of Pragmatism. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1982. ISBN
Philosophy in History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985. (co-editor)
Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989. ISBN
Objectivity, Relativism and Truth: Philosophical Papers I. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991. ISBN
Essays on Heidegger and Others: Philosophical Papers II. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991. ISBN
Achieving Our Country: Leftist Thought in Twentieth Century America. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998. ISBN
Truth and Progress: Philosophical Papers III. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. ISBN
Philosophy and Social Hope. New York: Penguin, 2000. ISBN
Against Bosses, Against Oligarchies: A Conversation with Richard Rorty. Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press, 2002. ISBN
The Future of Religion with Gianni Vattimo Ed. Santiago Zabala. Columbia: Columbia University Press, 2005. ISBN
Philosophy as Cultural Politics: Philosophical Papers IV. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.


[edit] Further reading
Books:

The domestication of Derrida: Rorty, pragmatism and deconstruction / Lorenzo Fabbri., 2008
Richard Rorty: politics and vision / Christopher Voparil., 2006
Heidegger, Rorty, and the Eastern thinkers : a hermeneutics of cross-cultural understanding / Wei Zhang., 2006
Richard Rorty: his philosophy under discussion / Andreas Vieth., 2005
The concept of Rortyan Christian ironism / Odom, Barton Page., 2005
The Pragmatic Turn in Philosophy: Contemporary Engagement between Analytic and Continental Thought / Eds. William Egginton and Mike Sandbothe., 2005
Richard Rorty / Charles B Guignon., 2003
Between Rorty and MacIntyre: A Kierkegaardian account of irony and moral commitment / Frazier, Bradley., 2003
Richard Rorty's American faith / Taub, Gad Shmuel., 2003
The ethical ironist: Kierkegaard, Rorty, and the educational quest / Rohrer, Patricia Jean., 2003
Doing philosophy as a way to individuation: Reading Rorty and Cavell / Kwak, Duck-Joo., 2003
Richard Rorty / Alan R Malachowski., 2002
Richard Rorty: critical dialogues / Matthew Festenstein., 2001
Richard Rorty: education, philosophy, and politics / Michael Peters., 2001
Religion and the Demise of Liberal Rationalism / Judd Owen., 2001
Rorty and his critics / Robert Brandom., 2000
On Rorty / Richard Rumana., 2000
Philosophy and freedom : Derrida, Rorty, Habermas, Foucault / John McCumber., 2000
A pragmatist's progress?: Richard Rorty and American intellectual history / John Pettegrew., 2000
Problems of the modern self: Reflections on Rorty, Taylor, Nietzsche, and Foucault / Dudrick, David Francis., 2000
The last conceptual revolution: a critique of Richard Rorty's political philosophy / Eric Gander., 1999
Cultural otherness : correspondence with Richard Rorty / Anindita Niyogi Balslev., 1999
The work of friendship : Rorty, his critics, and the project of solidarity / Dianne Rothleder., 1999
Pragmatism and political theory : from Dewey to Rorty / Matthew Festenstein., 1997
Debating the state of philosophy: Habermas, Rorty, and Kolakowski / Józef Niznik., 1996
For the love of perfection : Richard Rorty and liberal education / René Vincente Arcilla., 1995
Rorty & pragmatism: the philosopher responds to his critics / Herman J Saatkamp., 1995
Richard Rorty : prophet and poet of the new pragmatism / David L Hall., 1994
Without God or his doubles : realism, relativism, and Rorty / D Vaden House., 1994
Beyond postmodern politics : Lyotard, Rorty, Foucault / Honi Fern Haber., 1994
After the demise of the tradition : Rorty, critical theory, and the fate of philosophy/ Kai Nielsen., 1991
Reading Rorty: critical responses to Philosophy and the mirror of nature (and beyond) / Alan R Malachowski., 1990
Rorty's humanistic pragmatism : philosophy democratized / Konstantin Kolenda., 1990
Pragmatist Aesthetics / Richard Shusterman. Rowman Littlefield 2000. [esp. Chapter 9: 236-261)

Articles:

Rorty R / "The Fire of Life" POETRY / NOV 2007 [available online]


Lynch S / On Richard Rorty's use of the distinction between the private and the public

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES 15 (1): 97-120 MAR 2007

Dombrowski DA / Rorty versus Hartshorne, or, poetry versus metaphysics (Richard Rorty, Charles Hartshorne)

METAPHILOSOPHY 38 (1): 88-110 JAN 2007

Arriaga M / Richard Rorty's anti-foundationalism and traditional philosophy's claim of social relevance

INTERNATIONAL PHILOSOPHICAL QUARTERLY 45 (4): 467-482 DEC 2005

Barthold LS / How hermeneutical is he? A gadamerian analysis of Richard Rorty

PHILOSOPHY TODAY 49 (3): 236-244 FAL 2005

Stieb JA / Rorty on realism and constructivism

METAPHILOSOPHY 36 (3): 272-294 APR 2005

Flaherty J / Rorty, religious beliefs, and pragmatism

INTERNATIONAL PHILOSOPHICAL QUARTERLY 45 (2): 175-185 JUN 2005

Smith NH / Rorty on religion and hope

INQUIRY-AN INTERDISCIPLINARY JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 48 (1): 76-98 FEB 2005

Santos RJ / Richard Rorty's philosophy of social hope

PHILOSOPHY TODAY 47 (4): 431-440 WIN 2003

Miller CB / Rorty and moral relativism

EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 10 (3): 354-374 DEC 2002

Abrams JJ / Aesthetics of self-fashioning and cosmopolitanism - Foucault and Rorty on the art of living

PHILOSOPHY TODAY 46 (2): 185-192 SUM 2002

Margolis J / Dewey's and Rorty's opposed pragmatisms

TRANSACTIONS OF THE CHARLES S PEIRCE SOCIETY 38 (1-2): 117-135 WIN-SPR 2002

Talisse RB / A pragmatist critique of Richard Rorty's hopeless politics

SOUTHERN JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 39 (4): 611-626 WIN 2001

Picardi E / Rorty, Sorge and truth

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES 9 (3): 431-439 Sp. Iss. SI AUG 2001

McDermid DJ / Does epistemology rest on a mistake? Understanding Rorty on scepticism

CRITICA-REVISTA HISPANOAMERICANA DE FILOSOFIA 32 (96): 3-42 DEC 2000

Owens J / The obligations of irony: Rorty on irony, autonomy, and contingency

REVIEW OF METAPHYSICS 54 (1): 27-41 SEP 2000

Margolis J / Richard Rorty: Philosophy by other means

METAPHILOSOPHY 31 (5): 529-546 OCT 2000

Kompridis N / So we need something else for reason to mean

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES 8 (3): 271-295 OCT 2000

Cohen AJ / On Universalism: Commuitarians, Rorty, and ('Objectivist') 'liberal metaphysicians'

SOUTHERN JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 38 (1): 39-75 SPR 2000

Rorty R / Response to Randall Peerenboom ('Rorty and the China Challenge')

PHILOSOPHY EAST & WEST 50 (1): 90-91 JAN 2000

Peerenboom R / The limits of irony: Rorty and the China challenge

PHILOSOPHY EAST & WEST 50 (1): 56-89 JAN 2000

[edit] See also

Analytic philosophy
Contributions to liberal theory
Liberalism
List of thinkers influenced by deconstruction
Postanalytic philosophy
Deconstruction-and-religion


[edit] External links

Rorty audio, "Dewey and Posner on Pragmatism and Moral Progress," University of Chicago Law School, April 14, 2006.
Rorty audio, "National Pride, National Shame," panel discussion on Achieving Our Country with responses from Angela Davis, Gordon Wood and Kathleen Sullivan, Jan. 13, 2003.
PhilWeb's entry for Richard Rorty An exhaustive compilation of on-line links and off-line sources.
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry
Richard Rorty; el pragmatismo y la filosofía como género literario by Adolfo Vasquez Rocca PH. D. (Spanish)
Introduction to Rorty's Consequences of Pragmatism
How Richard Rorty Found Religion in First Things




Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Richard Rorty



Short film about Richard Rorty
New York Times Magazine profile (4600 words), "Richard Rorty: Philosopher-King", December 2, 1990 (no link available)


[edit] Essays and Articles by Rorty

Rorty's thoughts on dying, Poetry magazine, November 2007.
Rorty review of Bernard Williams's Truth and Truthfulness, LRB, Oct. 31, 2002.
Rorty essay, possibly his last published, "A rejoinder to Béla Egyed," March 2007, reprinted in "Kritika & Kontext," May 2007.
Richard Rorty essays published in Dissent (magazine)
Rorty essay, "Democracy and philosophy", originally delivered April 2004, in Tehran, reprinted in Kritika & Kontext, May 2007.
Rorty essay "Pragmatism as Romantic Polytheism", 1998.
Rorty on President Clinton's legacy, New York Times op-ed, March 6, 2000.
Rorty on Oliver North, New York Times op-ed, October 13, 1994.


[edit] Book Reviews by Rorty

Rorty book reviews published at Notre Dame Philosophical Review.
Rorty on Freud, NYT Book Review, October 22, 2000.
Rorty on papal history, NYT Book Review, June 11, 2000.
Rorty review of Marc Hauser's Moral Minds, NYT Book Review, Aug. 27, 2006.
Rorty review of Scott Soames's history of analytic philosophy, London Review of Books, Jan. 20, 2005.
Rorty disagrees with Andrew Delbanco, NYT Book Review, Nov. 7, 1999.


[edit] Interviews

Rorty audio, informative interview by Prof. Robert P. Harrison, Nov. 22, 2005.
Rorty interview, Against Bosses, Against Oligarchies, conducted by Derek Nystrom & Kent Puckett, Prickly Paradigm Press, Sept. 1998.
Rorty interview, The Atlantic Monthly, April 23, 1998.
Rorty interview, Flash Art Magazine, Nov/Dec. 1993.


[edit] Obituaries, Eulogies and Memorials

Rorty Memorial Lecture by Jürgen Habermas, Stanford University, Nov. 2, 2007.
Jürgen Habermas's obituary for Richard Rorty, signandsight.com, June 12, 2007.
Dan Adleman's obituary for Richard Rorty, June 2007.
Danny Postel's obituary for Richard Rorty in New Humanist, July/August 2007.
Rorty eulogized by Richard Posner, Brian Eno, Mark Edmundson, Jürgen Habermas, Daniel Dennett, Stanley Fish, David Bromwich, Simon Blackburn, Morris Dickstein & others, Slate Magazine, June 18, 2007.
"The Inspiring Power of the Shy Thinker: Richard Rorty" by Hans Ulrich Gumbrecht, TELOS, June 13, 2007.


[edit] Notes


^ a b "Richard Rorty, distinguished public intellectual and controversial philosopher, dead at 75" (Stanford's announcement), June 10, 2007.
^ a b [1]Stanford Encyclopedia Of Philosophy
^ a b c "Richard Rorty, Philosopher, Dies at 75" (NY Times Obituary), June 11, 2007
^ Ryerson, James. "Essay: Thinking Cheerfully." The New York Times Book Review. July 22, 2007: p 27.
^ "Richard Rorty," (short obituary), June 9, 2007.
^ "The Fire of Life" by Richard Rorty
^ http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/rorty/ (Last sentence of the introduction)
^ Amazon.com: Rorty and His Critics (Philosophers and their Critics): Robert B. Brandom: Books
^ In the preface to Mind and World (pp. ix-x) McDowell states that "it will be obvious that Rorty's work is [...] central for the way I define my stance here".
^ "Objectivity and Action: Wal-Mart and the Legacy of Marx and Nietzsche", A discussion of Terry Eagleton's attacks on Rorty's philosophy as insufficient in the fight against corporations such as Wal-Mart
^ "The failure to recognize science's particular powers to depict reality, Daniel Dennett wrote, shows 'flatfooted ignorance of the proven methods of scientific truth-seeking and their power.'"[2]
^ Rob Reich - The Paradoxes of Education in Rorty's Liberal Utopia
^ Richard Rorty (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)
^ Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989. ISBN, p 44
^ Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989. ISBN, p 48





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Rorty"
Categories: 1931 births | 2007 deaths | 20th-century philosophers | American philosophers | Deaths from pancreatic cancer | Pragmatists | Philosophers of language | Philosophers of mind | Irony theorists | MacArthur Fellows | University of Chicago alumni | Princeton University faculty | Wellesley College faculty 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
فارسی
Français
Galego
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Latviešu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська









 This page was last modified on 25 March 2009, at 04:43.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
