











Moon - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Moon";
		var wgTitle = "Moon";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "19331";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283063587;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Moon

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 






This article is about Earth's moon.  For moons in general, see natural satellite. For other uses, see Moon (disambiguation).




Moon  


A full moon as seen from Earth's northern hemisphere




Designations



Adjective
"lunar"



Orbital characteristics



Perigee
363,104 km  (0.002 4 AU)


Apogee
405,696 km  (0.002 7 AU)


Semi-major axis
384,399 km  (0.002 57 AU[1])


Eccentricity
0.054 9[1]


Orbital period
27.321 582 d  (27 d 7 h 43.1 min[1])


Synodic period
29.530 588 d  (29 d 12 h 44.0 min)


Average orbital speed
1.022 km/s


Inclination
5.145° to the ecliptic[1]
(between 18.29° and 28.58° to Earth's equator)


Longitude of ascending node
regressing by one revolution in 18.6 years


Argument of perigee
progressing by one revolution in 8.85 years


Satellite of
Earth



Physical characteristics



Mean radius
1,737.10 km  (0.273 Earths)[1][2]


Equatorial radius
1,738.14 km  (0.273 Earths)[2]


Polar radius
1,735.97 km  (0.273 Earths)[2]


Flattening
0.001 25


Circumference
10,921 km (equatorial)


Surface area
3.793 × 107 km²  (0.074 Earths)


Volume
2.195 8 × 1010 km³  (0.020 Earths)


Mass
7.347 7 × 1022 kg  (0.012 3 Earths[1])


Mean density
3,346.4 kg/m³[1]


Equatorial surface gravity
1.622 m/s² (0.165 4 g)


Escape velocity
2.38 km/s


Sidereal rotation
period
27.321 582 d (synchronous)


Equatorial rotation velocity
4.627 m/s


Axial tilt
1.542 4° (to ecliptic)
6.687° (to orbit plane)


Albedo
0.12


Surface temp.
   equator
   85°N[5]



min
mean
max


100 K
220 K
390 K


70 K
130 K
230 K





Apparent magnitude
−2.5 to −12.9[3]
−12.74 (mean full moon)[2]


Angular diameter
29.3 to 34.1 arcminutes[2][4]















Some details of the Earth-Moon system. Besides the radius of each object, the radius to the Earth-Moon barycenter is shown. Photos from NASA. Data from NASA. Planets are not spheres and orbits are not circles, so radii values are only indicative (and not drawn to scale). The Moon's orbital plane precesses about the Earth in an 18.6 year cycle. Its axis is located by Cassini's third law.





The Moon (Latin: Luna) is Earth's only natural satellite and the fifth largest satellite in the Solar System. The average centre-to-centre distance from the Earth to the Moon is 384,403 km, about thirty times the diameter of the Earth. The common centre of mass of the system (the barycentre) is located about 1,700 km—a quarter the Earth's radius—beneath the surface of the Earth. The Moon makes a complete orbit around the Earth every 27.3 days (the orbital period), and the periodic variations in the geometry of the Earth–Moon–Sun system are responsible for the lunar phases that repeat every 29.5 days (the synodic period).
The Moon's diameter is 3,474 km,[6] a little more than a quarter of that of the Earth. Thus, the Moon's surface area is less than a tenth that of the Earth (about a quarter the Earth's land area, approximately as large as Russia, Canada, and the United States combined), and its volume is about 2 percent that of Earth. The pull of gravity at its surface is about 17 percent of that at the Earth's surface.
The Moon is the only celestial body to which humans have traveled and upon which humans have performed a manned landing. The first artificial object to pass near the Moon was the Soviet Union's Luna 1, the first artificial object to impact the lunar surface was Luna 2, and the first photographs of the normally occluded far side of the Moon were made by Luna 3, all in 1959. The first spacecraft to perform a successful lunar soft landing was Luna 9, and the first unmanned vehicle to orbit the Moon was Luna 10, both in 1966.[6] The United States (U.S.) Apollo program achieved the only manned missions to date, resulting in six landings between 1969 and 1972. Human exploration of the Moon ceased with the conclusion of the Apollo program, although a few robotic landers and orbiters have been sent to the Moon since that time. Several countries have announced plans to return humans to the surface of the Moon in the 2020s.




Contents


1 Name and etymology
2 Lunar surface

2.1 Two sides of the Moon
2.2 Maria
2.3 Terrae
2.4 Impact craters
2.5 Regolith
2.6 Presence of water


3 Physical characteristics

3.1 Internal structure
3.2 Topography
3.3 Gravity field
3.4 Magnetic field
3.5 Atmosphere
3.6 Surface temperature


4 Origin and geologic evolution

4.1 Formation
4.2 Lunar magma ocean
4.3 Geologic evolution
4.4 Moon rocks


5 Orbit and relationship to Earth
6 Ocean tides
7 Eclipses
8 Observation
9 Exploration
10 Human understanding
11 Legal status
12 See also
13 References
14 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Name and etymology
The proper English name for Earth's natural satellite is, simply, the Moon (capitalized).[7][8] Moon is a Germanic word, related to the Latin mensis (month). It is ultimately a derivative of the Proto-Indo-European root me-, also represented in measure[9] (time), with reminders of its importance in measuring time in words derived from it like Monday, month and menstrual. The related adjective is lunar, as well as an adjectival prefix seleno- and suffix -selene (from selēnē, the Ancient Greek word for the Moon). In English, the word moon exclusively meant "the Moon" until 1665, when it was extended to refer to the recently-discovered natural satellites of other planets.[9] Subsequently, these objects were given distinct names in order to avoid confusion.[8] The Moon is occasionally referred to by its Latin name Luna, primarily in science fiction.

Lunar surface
Main article: Geology of the Moon

Two sides of the Moon
The Moon is in synchronous rotation, which means that it rotates about its axis in the about the same time it takes to orbit the Earth. This results in it keeping nearly the same face turned towards the Earth at all times. The Moon used to rotate at a faster rate, but early in its history, its rotation slowed and became locked in this orientation as a result of frictional effects associated with tidal deformations caused by the Earth.[10]
Small variations (libration) in the angle from which the Moon is seen allow about 59% of its surface to be seen from the Earth (but only half at any instant).[6]



 



Near side of the Moon
 
Far side of the Moon


The side of the Moon that faces Earth is called the near side, and the opposite side the far side. The far side is often inaccurately called the "dark side," but in fact, it is illuminated exactly as often as the near side: once per lunar day, during the new moon phase we observe on Earth when the near side is dark. The far side of the Moon was first photographed by the Soviet probe Luna 3 in 1959. One distinguishing feature of the far side is its almost complete lack of maria.




Lunar libration



Maria
Main article: Lunar mare
The dark and relatively featureless lunar plains which can clearly be seen with the naked eye are called maria (singular mare), Latin for seas, since they were believed by ancient astronomers to be filled with water. These are now known to be vast solidified pools of ancient basaltic lava. The majority of these lavas erupted or flowed into the depressions associated with impact basins that formed by the collisions of meteors and comets with the lunar surface. (Oceanus Procellarum is a major exception in that it does not correspond to a known impact basin). Maria are found almost exclusively on the near side of the Moon, with the far side having only a few scattered patches covering about 2% of its surface,[11] compared with about 31% on the near side.[6] The most likely explanation for this difference is related to a higher concentration of heat-producing elements on the near-side hemisphere, as has been demonstrated by geochemical maps obtained from the Lunar Prospector gamma-ray spectrometer.[12][13] Several provinces containing shield volcanoes and volcanic domes are found within the near side maria.[14]

Terrae
The lighter-colored regions of the Moon are called terrae, or more commonly just highlands, since they are higher than most maria. Several prominent mountain ranges on the near side are found along the periphery of the giant impact basins, many of which have been filled by mare basalt. These are believed to be the surviving remnants of the impact basin's outer rims.[15] In contrast to the Earth, no major lunar mountains are believed to have formed as a result of tectonic events.[16]
From images taken by the Clementine mission in 1994, it appears that four mountainous regions on the rim of the 73 km-wide Peary crater at the Moon's north pole remain illuminated for the entire lunar day. These peaks of eternal light are possible because of the Moon's extremely small axial tilt to the ecliptic plane. No similar regions of eternal light were found at the south pole, although the rim of Shackleton crater is illuminated for about 80% of the lunar day. Another consequence of the Moon's small axial tilt is regions that remain in permanent shadow at the bottoms of many polar craters.[17]

Impact craters




Lunar crater Daedalus on the Moon's far side


The Moon's surface is marked by impact craters[18] which form when asteroids and comets collide with the lunar surface. There are about half a million craters with diameters greater than 1 km on the moon. Since impact craters accumulate at a nearly constant rate, the number of craters per unit area superposed on a geologic unit can be used to estimate the age of the surface (see crater counting). The lack of an atmosphere, weather and recent geological processes ensures that many of these craters have remained relatively well preserved in comparison to those on Earth.
The largest crater on the Moon, which also has the distinction of being one of the largest known craters in the Solar System,[19] is the South Pole-Aitken basin. It is on the far side, between the South Pole and equator, and is some 2,240 km in diameter and 13 km in depth.[20] Prominent impact basins on the near side include Imbrium, Serenitatis, Crisium, and Nectaris.

Regolith
Blanketed atop the Moon's crust is a highly comminuted (broken into ever smaller particles) and "impact gardened" surface layer called regolith. Since the regolith forms by impact processes, the regolith of older surfaces is generally thicker than for younger surfaces. In particular, it has been estimated that the regolith varies in thickness from about 3–5 m in the maria, and by about 10–20 m in the highlands.[21] Beneath the finely comminuted regolith layer is what is generally referred to as the megaregolith. This layer is much thicker (on the order of tens of kilometres) and comprises highly fractured bedrock.[22]

Presence of water
Main article: Lunar ice
The continuous bombardment of the Moon by comets and meteoroids has most likely added small amounts of water to the lunar surface. If so, sunlight would split much of this water into its constituent elements of hydrogen and oxygen, both of which would ordinarily escape into space over time, because of the Moon's weak gravity. However, because of the slightness of the axial tilt of the Moon's spin axis to the ecliptic plane—only 1.5°—some deep craters near the poles never receive direct light from the Sun and are thus in permanent shadow (see Shackleton crater). Water molecules that ended up in these craters could be stable for long periods of time.
Clementine has mapped craters at the lunar south pole[23] that are shadowed in this way, and computer simulations suggest that up to 14,000 km² might be in permanent shadow.[17] Results from the Clementine mission bistatic radar experiment are consistent with small, frozen pockets of water close to the surface, and data from the Lunar Prospector neutron spectrometer indicate that anomalously high concentrations of hydrogen are present in the upper metre of the regolith near the polar regions.[24] Estimates for the total quantity of water ice are close to one cubic kilometre.
Water ice can be mined and then split into its constituent hydrogen and oxygen atoms by means of nuclear generators or electric power stations equipped with solar panels. The presence of usable quantities of water on the Moon is an important factor in rendering lunar habitation cost-effective, since transporting water from Earth would be prohibitively expensive. However, recent observations made with the Arecibo planetary radar suggest that some of the near-polar Clementine radar data that were previously interpreted as being indicative of water ice might instead be a result of rocks ejected from young impact craters.[25] The question of how much water there is on the Moon has not been resolved.
In July 2008, small amounts of water were found in the interior of volcanic pearls from the Moon (brought to Earth by Apollo 15).[26]

Physical characteristics

Internal structure
Main article: Internal structure of the Moon




Schematic illustration of the internal structure of the Moon


The Moon is a differentiated body, being composed of a geochemically distinct crust, mantle, and core. This structure is believed to have resulted from the fractional crystallization of a magma ocean shortly after its formation, at about 4.4 billion years ago[27]. The energy required to melt the outer portion of the Moon is commonly attributed to a giant impact event that is postulated to have formed the Earth-Moon system, and the subsequent reaccretion of material in Earth orbit. Crystallization of this magma ocean would have given rise to a mafic mantle and a plagioclase-rich crust (see Origin and geologic evolution below).
Geochemical mapping from orbit implies that the crust of the Moon is largely anorthositic in composition,[28] consistent with the magma ocean hypothesis. In terms of elements, the crust is composed primarily of oxygen, silicon, magnesium, iron, calcium, and aluminium. Based on geophysical techniques, its thickness is estimated to be on average about 50 km.[1]
Partial melting within the mantle of the Moon gave rise to the eruption of mare basalts on the lunar surface. Analyses of these basalts indicate that the mantle is composed predominantly of the minerals olivine, orthopyroxene and clinopyroxene, and that the lunar mantle is more iron rich than that of the Earth. Some lunar basalts contain high abundances of titanium (present in the mineral ilmenite), suggesting that the mantle is highly heterogeneous in composition. Moonquakes have been found to occur deep within the mantle of the Moon about a thousand kilometres below the surface. These occur with monthly periodicities and are related to tidal stresses caused by the eccentric orbit of the Moon about the Earth.[1]
The Moon has a mean density of 3 346.4 kg/m³, making it the second densest moon in the Solar System after Io. Nevertheless, several lines of evidence imply that the core of the Moon is small, with a radius of about 350 km or less.[1] This corresponds to only about 20% the size of the Moon, in contrast to about 50% as is the case for most other terrestrial bodies. The composition of the lunar core is not well constrained, but most believe that it is composed of metallic iron alloyed with a small amount of sulfur and nickel. Analyses of the Moon's time-variable rotation indicate that the core is at least partly molten.[29]

Topography
Main article: Topography of the Moon




Topography of the Moon, referenced to the lunar geoid


The topography of the Moon has been measured by the methods of laser altimetry and stereo image analysis, most recently from data obtained during the Clementine mission. The most visible topographic feature is the giant far side South Pole-Aitken basin, which possesses the lowest elevations of the Moon. The highest elevations are found just to the north-east of this basin, and it has been suggested that this area might represent thick ejecta deposits that were emplaced during an oblique South Pole-Aitken basin impact event. Other large impact basins, such as Imbrium, Serenitatis, Crisium, Smythii, and Orientale, also possess regionally low elevations and elevated rims. Another distinguishing feature of the Moon's shape is that the elevations are on average about 1.9 km higher on the far side than the near side.[1]

Gravity field
Main article: Gravity of the Moon
The gravitational field of the Moon has been determined through tracking of radio signals emitted by orbiting spacecraft. The principle used depends on the Doppler effect, whereby the spacecraft acceleration in the line-of-sight direction can be determined by means of small shifts in frequency of the radio signal, and the distance from the spacecraft to a station on Earth. However, because of the Moon's synchronous rotation it is not possible to track spacecraft much over the limbs of the Moon, and the farside gravity field is thus only poorly characterised.[30]




Radial gravitational anomaly at the surface of the Moon


The major characteristic of the Moon's gravitational field is the presence of mascons, which are large positive gravitational anomalies associated with some of the giant impact basins.[31] These anomalies greatly influence the orbit of spacecraft about the Moon, and an accurate gravitational model is necessary in the planning of both manned and unmanned missions. The mascons are in part due to the presence of dense mare basaltic lava flows that fill some of the impact basins. However, lava flows by themselves can not explain the entirety of the gravitational signature, and uplift of the crust-mantle interface is required as well. Based on Lunar Prospector gravitational models, it has been suggested that some mascons exist that do not show evidence for mare basaltic volcanism.[32] The huge expanse of mare basaltic volcanism associated with Oceanus Procellarum does not possess a positive gravitational anomaly.

Magnetic field
Main article: Magnetic field of the Moon




Total magnetic field strength at the surface of the Moon as derived from the Lunar Prospector electron reflectometer experiment


The Moon has an external magnetic field of the order of one to a hundred nanotesla—less than one hundredth that of the Earth, which is 30–60 microtesla. Other major differences are that the Moon does not currently have a dipolar magnetic field (as would be generated by a geodynamo in its core), and the magnetizations that are present are almost entirely crustal in origin.[33] One hypothesis holds that the crustal magnetizations were acquired early in lunar history when a geodynamo was still operating. The small size of the lunar core, however, is a potential obstacle to this theory. Alternatively, it is possible that on an airless body such as the Moon, transient magnetic fields could be generated during large impact events. In support of this, it has been noted that the largest crustal magnetizations appear to be located near the antipodes of the giant impact basins. It has been proposed that such a phenomenon could result from the free expansion of an impact generated plasma cloud around the Moon in the presence of an ambient magnetic field.[34]

Atmosphere
Main article: Atmosphere of the Moon
The Moon has an atmosphere so thin as to be almost negligible, with a total atmospheric mass of less than 104 kg.[35] The effective surface pressure of this small mass is around 3  × 10-15 atm [36]. This pressure varies, of course, with the diurnal moon cycle. One source of its atmosphere is outgassing—the release of gases such as radon that originate by radioactive decay processes within the crust and mantle.[citation needed] Another important source is generated through the process of sputtering, which involves the bombardment of micrometeorites, solar wind ions, electrons, and sunlight.[28] Gases that are released by sputtering can either reimplant into the regolith as a result of the Moon's gravity, or can be lost to space either by solar radiation pressure or by being swept away by the solar wind magnetic field if they are ionised. The elements sodium (Na) and potassium (K) have been detected using earth-based spectroscopic methods, whereas the element radon–222 (222Rn) and polonium-210 (210Po) have been inferred from data obtained from the Lunar Prospector alpha particle spectrometer.[37] Argon–40 (40Ar), helium-4 (4He), oxygen (O2) and/or methane (CH4), nitrogen (N2) and/or carbon monoxide (CO), and carbon dioxide (CO2) were detected by in-situ detectors placed by the Apollo astronauts.[38]

Surface temperature
During the lunar day, the surface temperature averages 107°C, and during the lunar night, it averages -153°C.[39]

Origin and geologic evolution

Formation







Several mechanisms have been suggested for the Moon's formation. The formation of the Moon is believed to have occurred 4.527 ± 0.010 billion years ago, about 30–50 million years after the origin of the Solar System.[40]

Fission hypothesis 
Early speculation proposed that the Moon broke off from the Earth's crust because of centrifugal forces, leaving a basin – presumed to be the Pacific Ocean – behind as a scar.[41] This idea, however, would require too great an initial spin of the Earth; and, even had this been possible, the process should have resulted in the Moon's orbit following Earth's equatorial plane. This is not the case.


Capture hypothesis 
Other speculation has centered on the Moon being formed elsewhere and subsequently being captured by Earth's gravity.[42] However, the conditions believed necessary for such a mechanism to work, such as an extended atmosphere of the Earth in order to dissipate the energy of the passing Moon, are improbable.


Co-formation hypothesis 
The co-formation hypothesis proposes that the Earth and the Moon formed together at the same time and place from the primordial accretion disk. The Moon would have formed from material surrounding the proto-Earth, similar to the formation of the planets around the Sun. Some suggest that this hypothesis fails adequately to explain the depletion of metallic iron in the Moon.


A major deficiency in all these hypotheses is that they cannot readily account for the high angular momentum of the Earth–Moon system.[43]


Giant Impact hypothesis

Main article: Giant impact hypothesis

The prevailing hypothesis today is that the Earth–Moon system formed as a result of a giant impact. A Mars-sized body (labelled "Theia") is believed to have hit the proto-Earth, blasting sufficient material into orbit around the proto-Earth to form the Moon through accretion.[6] As accretion is the process by which all planetary bodies are believed to have formed, giant impacts are thought to have affected most if not all planets. Computer simulations modelling a giant impact are consistent with measurements of the angular momentum of the Earth–Moon system, as well as the small size of the lunar core.[44] Unresolved questions regarding this theory concern the determination of the relative sizes of the proto-Earth and Theia and of how much material from these two bodies formed the Moon.


Lunar magma ocean
As a result of the large amount of energy liberated during both the giant impact event and the subsequent reaccretion of material in Earth orbit, it is commonly believed that a large portion of the Moon was once initially molten. The molten outer portion of the Moon at this time is referred to as a magma ocean, and estimates for its depth range from about 500 km to the entire radius of the Moon.[12]
As the magma ocean cooled, it fractionally crystallised and differentiated, giving rise to a geochemically distinct crust and mantle. The mantle is inferred to have formed largely by the precipitation and sinking of the minerals olivine, clinopyroxene, and orthopyroxene. After about three-quarters of magma ocean crystallisation was complete, the mineral anorthite is inferred to have precipitated and floated to the surface because of its low density, forming the crust.[12]
The final liquids to crystallise from the magma ocean would have been initially sandwiched between the crust and mantle, and would have contained a high abundance of incompatible and heat-producing elements. This geochemical component is referred to by the acronym KREEP, for potassium (K), rare earth elements (REE), and phosphorus (P), and appears to be concentrated within the Procellarum KREEP Terrane, which is a small geologic province that encompasses most of Oceanus Procellarum and Mare Imbrium on the near side of the Moon.[1]

Geologic evolution
See also: Geology of the Moon
A large portion of the Moon's post–magma-ocean geologic evolution was dominated by impact cratering. The lunar geologic timescale is largely divided in time on the basis of prominent basin-forming impact events, such as Nectaris, Imbrium, and Orientale. These impact structures are characterised by multiple rings of uplifted material, and are typically hundreds to thousands of kilometres in diameter. Each multi-ring basin is associated with a broad apron of ejecta deposits that forms a regional stratigraphic horizon. While only a few multi-ring basins have been definitively dated, they are useful for assigning relative ages on the basis of stratigraphic grounds. The continuous effects of impact cratering are responsible for forming the regolith.
The other major geologic process that affected the Moon's surface was mare volcanism. The enhancement of heat-producing elements within the Procellarum KREEP Terrane is thought to have caused the underlying mantle to heat up, and eventually, to partially melt. A portion of these magmas rose to the surface and erupted, accounting for the high concentration of mare basalts on the near side of the Moon.[12] Most of the Moon's mare basalts erupted during the Imbrian period in this geologic province 3.0–3.5 billion years ago. Nevertheless, some dated samples are as old as 4.2 billion years,[45] and the youngest eruptions, based on the method of crater counting, are believed to have occurred only 1.2 billion years ago.[46]
There has been controversy over whether features on the Moon's surface undergo changes over time. Some observers have claimed that craters either appeared or disappeared, or that other forms of transient phenomena had occurred. Today, many of these claims are thought to be illusory, resulting from observation under different lighting conditions, poor astronomical seeing, or the inadequacy of earlier drawings. Nevertheless, it is known that the phenomenon of outgassing does occasionally occur, and these events could be responsible for a minor percentage of the reported lunar transient phenomena. Recently, it has been suggested that a roughly 3 km diameter region of the lunar surface was modified by a gas release event about a million years ago.[47][48]

Moon rocks
Main article: Moon rocks
Moon rocks fall into two main categories, based on whether they underlie the lunar highlands (terrae) or the maria. The lunar highlands rocks are composed of three suites: the ferroan anorthosite suite, the magnesian suite, and the alkali suite (some consider the alkali suite to be a subset of the mg-suite). The ferroan anorthosite suite rocks are composed almost exclusively of the mineral anorthite (a calic plagioclase feldspar), and are believed to represent plagioclase flotation cumulates of the lunar magma ocean. The ferroan anorthosites have been dated using radiometric methods to have formed about 4.4 billion years ago.[45][46]
The mg- and alkali-suite rocks are predominantly mafic plutonic rocks. Typical rocks are dunites, troctolites, gabbros, alkali anorthosites, and more rarely, granite. In contrast to the ferroan anorthosite suite, these rocks all have relatively high Mg/Fe ratios in their mafic minerals. In general, these rocks represent intrusions into the already-formed highlands crust (though a few rare samples appear to represent extrusive lavas), and they have been dated to have formed about 4.4–3.9 billion years ago. Many of these rocks have high abundances of, or are genetically related to, the geochemical component KREEP.
The lunar maria consist entirely of mare basalts. While similar to terrestrial basalts, they have much higher abundances of iron, are completely lacking in hydrous alteration products, and have a large range of titanium abundances.[49][50]
Astronauts have reported that the dust from the surface felt like snow and smelled like spent gunpowder.[51] The dust is mostly made of silicon dioxide glass (SiO2), most likely created from the meteors that have crashed into the Moon's surface. It also contains calcium and magnesium.

Orbit and relationship to Earth
Main articles: Orbit of the Moon and Lunar theory




Earth as viewed from the Moon during the Apollo 8 mission, Christmas Eve, 1968






Earth and the Moon, from 50,000,000 km, taken by Deep Impact


The Moon makes a complete orbit around the Earth with respect to the fixed stars about once every 27.3 days (its sidereal period). However, since the Earth is moving in its orbit about the Sun at the same time, it takes slightly longer for the Moon to show its same phase to Earth, which is about 29.5 days (its synodic period).[6] Unlike most satellites of other planets, the Moon orbits near the ecliptic and not the Earth's equatorial plane. It is the largest moon in the solar system relative to the size of its planet. (Charon is larger relative to the dwarf planet Pluto.) The natural satellites orbiting other planets are called "moons", after Earth's Moon.
Most of the tidal effects seen on the Earth are caused by the Moon's gravitational pull, with the Sun making a somewhat smaller contribution. Tidal drag slows the Earth's rotation by about 0.002 seconds per day per century.[52] As a result of the conservation of angular momentum, the slowing of Earth's rotation is accompanied by an increase of the mean Earth-Moon distance of about 3.8 m per century, or 3.8 cm per year.[53] The Moon is exceptionally large relative to the Earth, being a quarter the diameter of the planet and 1/81 its mass. However, the Earth and Moon are still commonly considered a planet-satellite system, rather than a double-planet system, since the common centre of mass of the system (the barycentre) is located about 1,700 km beneath the surface of the Earth, or about a quarter of the Earth's radius. The surface of the Moon is less than one-tenth that of the Earth, and only about a quarter the size of the Earth's land area (or about as large as Russia, Canada, and the U.S. combined).
In 1997, the asteroid 3753 Cruithne was found to have an unusual Earth-associated horseshoe orbit. However, astronomers do not consider it to be a second moon of Earth, and its orbit is not stable in the long term.[54] Three other near-Earth asteroids, (54509) 2000 PH5, (85770) 1998 UP1 and 2002 AA29, which exist in orbits similar to Cruithne's, have since been discovered.[55]





The relative sizes and separation of the Earth–Moon system are shown to scale above. The beam of light is depicted travelling between the Earth and the Moon in the same time it actually takes light to scale the real distance between them: 1.255 seconds at its mean orbital distance. The light beam helps provide the sense of scale of the Earth-Moon system relative to the Sun, which is 8.28 light-minutes away (photosphere to Earth surface).




Ocean tides
Earth's ocean tides are initiated by the tidal force (a gradient in intensity) of Moon's gravity and are magnified by a host of effects in Earth's oceans. The gravitational tidal force arises because the side of Earth facing the Moon (nearest it) is attracted more strongly by the Moon's gravity than is the center of the Earth and—even less so—the Earth's far side. The gravitational tide stretches the Earth's oceans into an ellipse with the Earth in the center. The effect takes the form of two bulges—elevated sea level relative to the Earth; one nearest the Moon and one farthest from it. Since these two bulges rotate around the Earth once a day as it spins on its axis, ocean water is continuously rushing towards the ever-moving bulges. The effects of the two bulges and the massive ocean currents chasing them are magnified by an interplay of other effects; namely frictional coupling of water to Earth's rotation through the ocean floors, inertia of water's movement, ocean basins that get shallower near land, and oscillations between different ocean basins. The magnifying effect is a bit like water sloshing high up the sloped end of a bathtub after a relatively small disturbance of one's body in the deep part of the tub.
Gravitational coupling between the Moon and the ocean bulge nearest the Moon affects its orbit. The Earth rotates on its axis in the very same direction, and roughly 27 times faster, than the Moon orbits the Earth. Thus, frictional coupling between the sea floors and ocean waters, as well as water's inertia, drags the peak of the near-Moon tidal bulge slightly forward of the imaginary line connecting the centers of the Earth and Moon. From the Moon's perspective, the center of mass of the near-Moon tidal bulge is perpetually slightly ahead of the point about which it is orbiting. Precisely the opposite effect occurs with the bulge farthest from the Moon; it lags behind the imaginary line. However it is 12,756 km farther away and has slightly less gravitational coupling to the Moon. Consequently, the Moon is constantly being gravitationally attracted forward in its orbit about the Earth. This gravitational coupling drains kinetic energy and angular momentum from the Earth's rotation (see also, Day and Leap second). In turn, angular momentum is added to the Moon's orbit, which lifts the Moon into a higher orbit with a longer period. The effect on the Moon's orbital radius is a small one, just 0.10 ppb/year, but results in a measurable 3.82 cm annual increase in the Earth-Moon distance.[53] Cumulatively, this effect becomes ever more significant over time; since astronauts first landed on the Moon approximately 40 years ago, it is 1.52 metres farther away.

Eclipses
Main articles: Solar eclipse and Lunar eclipse




The 1999 solar eclipse






The March 3, 2007 lunar eclipse


Eclipses can occur only when the Sun, Earth, and Moon are all in a straight line. Solar eclipses occur near a new moon, when the Moon is between the Sun and Earth. In contrast, lunar eclipses occur near a full moon, when the Earth is between the Sun and Moon.
Because the Moon's orbit around the Earth is inclined by about 5° with respect to the orbit of the Earth around the Sun, eclipses do not occur at every full and new moon. For an eclipse to occur, the Moon must be near the intersection of the two orbital planes.[56]
The periodicity and recurrence of eclipses of the Sun by the Moon, and of the Moon by the Earth, is described by the saros cycle, which has a period of approximately 6 585.3 days (18 years 11 days 8 hours).[57]
The angular diameters of the Moon and the Sun as seen from Earth overlap in their variation, so that both total and annular solar eclipses are possible.[58] In a total eclipse, the Moon completely covers the disc of the Sun and the solar corona becomes visible to the naked eye. Since the distance between the Moon and the Earth is very slightly increasing over time, the angular diameter of the Moon is decreasing. This means that hundreds of millions of years ago the Moon could always completely cover the Sun on solar eclipses so that no annular eclipses were possible. Likewise, about 600 million years from now (assuming that the angular diameter of the Sun will not change), the Moon will no longer cover the Sun completely and only annular eclipses will occur.[56]
A phenomenon related to eclipse is occultation. The Moon is continuously blocking our view of the sky by a 1/2 degree-wide circular area. When a bright star or planet passes behind the Moon it is occulted or hidden from view. A solar eclipse is an occultation of the Sun. Because the Moon is close to Earth, occultations of individual stars are not visible everywhere, nor at the same time. Because of the precession of the lunar orbit, each year different stars are occulted.[59]
The most recent lunar eclipse was on February 20, 2008. It was a total eclipse. The entire event was visible from South America and most of North America (on Feb. 20), as well as Western Europe, Africa, and western Asia (on Feb. 21). The most recent solar eclipse took place on September 11, 2007, visible from southern South America and parts of Antarctica. The last total solar eclipse, on August 1, 2008, had a path of totality beginning in northern Canada and passed through Russia and China.[60]

Observation
See also: Lunar phase, Earthshine, and Observing the Moon
During its brightest phase, at "full moon", the Moon has an apparent magnitude of about −12.6. By comparison, the Sun has an apparent magnitude of −26.8. When the Moon is in a quarter phase, its brightness is not half of a full moon, but only about a tenth. This is because the lunar surface is not a perfect Lambertian reflector. When the Moon is full the opposition effect makes it appear brighter, but away from full there are shadows projected onto the surface which diminish the amount of reflected light.
The Moon appears larger when close to the horizon. This is a purely psychological effect (see Moon illusion). It is actually about 1.5% smaller when the Moon is near the horizon than when it is high in the sky (because it is farther away by up to one Earth radius).
The moon appears as a relatively bright object in the sky, in spite of its low albedo. The Moon is about the poorest reflector in the solar system and reflects only about 7% of the light incident upon it (about the same proportion as is reflected by a lump of coal).[61] Color constancy in the visual system recalibrates the relations between the colours of an object and its surroundings, and since the surrounding sky is comparatively dark the sunlit Moon is perceived as a bright object.




A halo around the Moon


The highest altitude of the Moon on a day varies and has nearly the same limits as the Sun. It also depends on the Earth season and lunar phase, with the full moon being highest in winter. Moreover, the 18.6 year nodes cycle also has an influence, as when the ascending node of the lunar orbit is in the vernal equinox, the lunar declination can go as far as 28° each month (which happened most recently in 2006). This results that the Moon can go overhead on latitudes up to 28 degrees from the equator (e.g. Florida, Canary Islands or in the southern hemisphere Brisbane). Slightly more than 9 years later (next time in 2015) the declination reaches only 18° N or S each month. The orientation of the Moon's crescent also depends on the latitude of the observation site. Close to the equator, an observer can see a boat Moon.[62]
Like the Sun, the Moon can give rise to atmospheric effects, including a 22° halo ring, and the smaller coronal rings seen more often through thin clouds. For more information on how the Moon appears in Earth's sky, see lunar phase.

Exploration
Main articles: Exploration of the Moon, Apollo program, and Moon landing
See also: Robotic exploration of the Moon, Future lunar missions, and Colonization of the Moon
The first leap in lunar observation was prompted by the invention of the telescope. Galileo Galilei made good use of this new instrument and observed mountains and craters on the Moon's surface.
The Cold War-inspired space race between the Soviet Union and the U.S. led to an acceleration of interest in the Moon. Unmanned probes, both flyby and impact/lander missions, were sent almost as soon as launcher capabilities would allow. The Soviet Union's Luna program was the first to reach the Moon with unmanned spacecraft. The first man-made object to escape Earth's gravity and pass near the Moon was Luna 1, the first man-made object to impact the lunar surface was Luna 2, and the first photographs of the normally occluded far side of the Moon were made by Luna 3, all in 1959. The first spacecraft to perform a successful lunar soft landing was Luna 9 and the first unmanned vehicle to orbit the Moon was Luna 10, both in 1966.[6] Moon samples have been brought back to Earth by three Luna missions (Luna 16, 20, and 24) and the Apollo missions 11 to 17 (except Apollo 13, which aborted its planned lunar landing).
The landing of the first humans on the Moon in 1969 is seen by many as the culmination of the space race.[63] Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the Moon as the commander of the American mission Apollo 11 by first setting foot on the Moon at 02:56 UTC on July 21, 1969. The American Moon landing and return was enabled by considerable technological advances, in domains such as ablation chemistry and atmospheric re-entry technology, in the early 1960s.
Scientific instrument packages were installed on the lunar surface during all of the Apollo missions. Long-lived ALSEP stations (Apollo lunar surface experiment package) were installed at the Apollo 12, 14, 15, 16, and 17 landing sites, whereas a temporary station referred to as EASEP (Early Apollo Scientific Experiments Package) was installed during the Apollo 11 mission. The ALSEP stations contained, among others, heat flow probes, seismometers, magnetometers, and corner-cube retroreflectors. Transmission of data to Earth was terminated on September 30, 1977 because of budgetary considerations.[64][65] Since the lunar laser ranging (LLR) corner-cube arrays are passive instruments, they are still being used. Ranging to the LLR stations is routinely performed from earth-based stations with an accuracy of a few centimetres, and data from this experiment are being used to place constraints on the size of the lunar core.[66]
&0000000000000036.00000036 years, &0000000000000118.000000118 days have now passed since Eugene Cernan and Harrison Schmitt, as part of the mission Apollo 17, left the surface of the Moon on December 14, 1972 (Cernan being the last to enter the LM) and no one has set foot on it since.




Astronaut Buzz Aldrin photographed by Neil Armstrong during the first moon landing on July 20, 1969.


From the mid-1960s to the mid-1970s, there were 65 instances of artificial objects reaching the Moon (both manned and robotic, with ten in 1971 alone), with the last being Luna 24 in 1976. Only 18 of these were controlled moon landings, with nine completing a round trip from Earth and returning samples of moon rocks. The Soviet Union then turned its primary attention to Venus and space stations, and the U.S. to Mars and beyond. In 1990, Japan orbited the Moon with the Hiten spacecraft, becoming the third country to place a spacecraft into lunar orbit. The spacecraft released a smaller probe, Hagormo, in lunar orbit, but the transmitter failed, thereby preventing further scientific use of the mission.
In 1994, the U.S. finally returned to the Moon, robotically at least, sending the Joint Defense Department/NASA spacecraft Clementine. This mission obtained the first near-global topographic map of the Moon, and the first global multispectral images of the lunar surface. This was followed by the Lunar Prospector mission in 1998. The neutron spectrometer on Lunar Prospector indicated the presence of excess hydrogen at the lunar poles, which is likely to have been caused by the presence of water ice in the upper few metres of the regolith within permanently shadowed craters. The European spacecraft Smart 1 was launched September 27, 2003 and was in lunar orbit from November 15, 2004 to September 3, 2006.
On January 14, 2004, U.S. President George W. Bush called for a plan to resume manned missions to the Moon by 2020 (see Vision for Space Exploration).[67] NASA is now planning for the construction of a permanent outpost at one of the lunar poles.[68] The People's Republic of China has expressed ambitious plans for exploring the Moon and has started the Chang'e program for lunar exploration, successfully launching its first spacecraft, Chang'e-1, on October 24, 2007. Like NASA, China hopes to land people on the Moon by 2020.[69] The U.S. will launch the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter and the Lunar Crater Observation and Sensing Satellite in late April 2009 (the two missions are co-manifested). Russia also announced to resume its previously frozen project Luna-Glob, consisting of an unmanned lander and orbiter, which is slated to land in 2012.[70]
The Google Lunar X Prize, announced September 13, 2007, hopes to boost and encourage privately funded lunar exploration. The X Prize Foundation is offering anyone US$20 million who can land a robotic rover on the Moon and meet other specified criteria.
On September 14, 2007 the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency launched SELENE, also known as Kaguya, a lunar orbiter which is fitted with a high-definition camera and two small satellites. The mission is expected to last one year.[71]
On October 22, 2008 India successfully launched the Chandrayaan I (a Sanskrit word literally meaning the 'Moon-craft') unmanned mission to the Moon and intends to launch several further unmanned missions. The country plans to launch Chandrayaan II in 2010 or 2011, which is slated to include a robotic lunar rover. India also has expressed its hope for a manned mission to the Moon by 2020.[72]

Human understanding
See also: The Moon in mythology, Moon in art and literature, Lunar effect, and Lunar deity




Map of the Moon by Johannes Hevelius (1647)


The Moon has been the subject of many works of art and literature and the inspiration for countless others. It is a motif in the visual arts, the performing arts, poetry, prose and music. A 5000-year-old rock carving at Knowth, Ireland may represent the Moon, which would be the earliest depiction discovered.[73] In many prehistoric and ancient cultures, the Moon was thought to be a deity or other supernatural phenomenon, and astrological views of the Moon continue to be propagated today.
Among the first in the Western world to offer a scientific explanation for the Moon was the Greek philosopher Anaxagoras (d. 428 BC), who reasoned that the Sun and Moon were both giant spherical rocks, and that the latter reflected the light of the former. His atheistic view of the heavens was one cause for his imprisonment and eventual exile.[74]
In Aristotle's (384–322 BC) description of the universe, the Moon marked the boundary between the spheres of the mutable elements (earth, water, air and fire), and the imperishable stars of aether. This separation was held to be part of physics for many centuries after.[75]




Moon against the Belt of Venus


During the Warring States of China, astronomer Shi Shen (fl. 4th century BC) gave instructions for predicting solar and lunar eclipses based on the relative positions of the moon and sun.[76] Although the Chinese of the Han Dynasty (202 BC–202 AD) believed the moon to be energy equated to qi, their 'radiating influence' theory recognized that the light of the moon was merely a reflection of the sun (mentioned by Anaxagoras above).[77] This was supported by mainstream thinkers such as Jing Fang (78–37 BC) and Zhang Heng (78–139 AD), but it was also opposed by the influential philosopher Wang Chong (27–97 AD).[77] Jing Fang noted the sphericity of the moon, while Zhang Heng accurately described a lunar eclipse and solar eclipse.[77][78] These assertions were supported by Shen Kuo (1031–1095) of the Song Dynasty (960–1279) who created an allegory equating the waxing and waning of the moon to a round ball of reflective silver that, when doused with white powder and viewed from the side, would appear to be a crescent.[79] He also noted that the reason for the sun and moon not eclipsing every time their paths met was because of a small obliquity in their orbital paths.[79]
By the Middle Ages, before the invention of the telescope, more and more people began to recognise the Moon as a sphere, though they believed that it was "perfectly smooth".[80] In 1609, Galileo Galilei drew one of the first telescopic drawings of the Moon in his book Sidereus Nuncius and noted that it was not smooth but had mountains and craters. Later in the 17th century, Giovanni Battista Riccioli and Francesco Maria Grimaldi drew a map of the Moon and gave many craters the names they still have today.




Still from silent film Le Voyage dans la Lune (1902) by Georges Méliès


On maps, the dark parts of the Moon's surface were called maria (singular mare) or seas, and the light parts were called terrae or continents. The possibility that the Moon contains vegetation and is inhabited by selenites was seriously considered by major astronomers even into the first decades of the 19th century. The contrast between the brighter highlands and darker maria create the patterns seen by different cultures as the Man in the Moon, the rabbit and the buffalo, among others.
In 1835, the Great Moon Hoax fooled some people into thinking that there were exotic animals living on the Moon.[81] Almost at the same time however (during 1834–1836), Wilhelm Beer and Johann Heinrich Mädler were publishing their four-volume Mappa Selenographica and the book Der Mond in 1837, which firmly established the conclusion that the Moon has no bodies of water nor any appreciable atmosphere.
The far side of the Moon remained completely unknown until the Luna 3 probe was launched in 1959, and it was extensively mapped by the Lunar Orbiter program in the 1960s.

Legal status
Main article: Space law
Although several pennants of the Soviet Union were scattered by Luna 2 in 1959 and by later landing missions, and U.S. flags have been symbolically planted on the Moon, no nation currently claims ownership of any part of the Moon's surface. Russia and the U.S. are party to the Outer Space Treaty, which places the Moon under the same jurisdiction as international waters (res communis). This treaty also restricts the use of the Moon to peaceful purposes, explicitly banning military installations and weapons of mass destruction (including nuclear weapons).[82]
A second treaty, the Moon Treaty, was proposed to restrict the exploitation of the Moon's resources by any single nation, but it has not been signed by any of the space-faring nations. Several individuals have made claims to the Moon in whole or in part, although none of these are generally considered credible.[83]

See also




Solar System portal





3753 Cruithne
Blue moon
Cassini's Laws
Colonization of the Moon
Extraterrestrial real estate
Google Lunar X Prize
Late Heavy Bombardment
List of Apollo astronauts (includes list of people who have walked on the Moon)
List of artificial objects on the Moon
List of craters on the Moon
List of features on the Moon
List of maria on the Moon
List of mountains on the Moon
List of valleys on the Moon
Lunar phase
Lunar space elevator
Lunar theory
Month
Moon in art and literature
Orbit of the Moon
Selenography
Space weathering



References

Cited



^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Wieczorek, M.; et al. (2006). "The constitution and structure of the lunar interior". Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry 60: 221–364. doi:10.2138/rmg.2006.60.3. 
^ a b c d e Williams, Dr. David R. (2006-02-10). "Moon Fact Sheet". NASA (National Space Science Data Center). http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/factsheet/moonfact.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-31. 
^ The maximum value is given based on scaling of the brightness from the value of -12.74 given for an equator to Moon-centre distance of 378 000 km in the NASA factsheet reference to the minimum Earth-Moon distance given there, after the latter is corrected for the Earth's equatorial radius of 6 378 km, giving 350 600 km. The minimum value (for a distant new moon) is based on a similar scaling using the maximum Earth-Moon distance of 407 000 km (given in the factsheet) and by calculating the brightness of the earthshine onto such a new moon. The brightness of the earthshine is [ Earth albedo × (Earth radius / Radius of Moon's orbit)² ] relative to the direct solar illumination that occurs for a full moon. (Earth albedo = 0.367; Earth radius = (polar radius × equatorial radius)½ = 6 367 km).
^ The range of angular size values given are based on simple scaling of the following values given in the fact sheet reference: at an Earth-equator to Moon-centre distance of 378 000 km, the angular size is 1896 arcseconds. The same fact sheet gives extreme Earth-Moon distances of 407 000 km and 357 000 km. For the maximum angular size, the minimum distance has to be corrected for the Earth's equatorial radius of 6 378 km, giving 350 600 km.
^ A.R. Vasavada, D.A. Paige, and S.E. Wood (1999). "Near-Surface Temperatures on Mercury and the Moon and the Stability of Polar Ice Deposits". Icarus 141: 179. doi:10.1006/icar.1999.6175. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1999Icar..141..179V. 
^ a b c d e f g Spudis, P.D. (2004). "Moon". World Book Online Reference Center, NASA. http://www.nasa.gov/worldbook/moon_worldbook.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ "Spelling of Names of Astronomical Objects". International Astronomical Union. http://www.iau.org/SPELLING_OF_NAMES.240.0.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-10. 
^ a b "Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature: Planetary Nomenclature FAQ". USGS Astrogeology Research Program. http://planetarynames.wr.usgs.gov/nomenFAQ.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-16. 
^ a b Harper, D. (November 2001). "Moon". Online Etymology Dictionary. http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?term=moon. Retrieved on 2008-02-05. 
^ Alexander, M. E. (1973). "The Weak Friction Approximation and Tidal Evolution in Close Binary Systems". Astrophysics and Space Science 23: 459–508. doi:10.1007/BF00645172. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1973Ap&SS..23..459A. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Gillis, J.J.; Spudis, P.D. (1996). "The Composition and Geologic Setting of Lunar Far Side Maria". Lunar and Planetary Science 27: 413–404. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1996LPI....27..413G. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ a b c d Shearer, C.; et al. (2006). "Thermal and magmatic evolution of the Moon". Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry 60: 365–518. doi:10.2138/rmg.2006.60.4. 
^ Taylor, G.J. (2000-08-31). "A New Moon for the Twenty-First Century". Planetary Science Research Discoveries, Hawai'i Institute of Geophysics and Planetology. http://www.psrd.hawaii.edu/Aug00/newMoon.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Head, L.W.J.W. (2003). "Lunar Gruithuisen and Mairan domes: Rheology and mode of emplacement". Journal of Geophysical Research 108: 5012. doi:10.1029/2002JE001909. http://www.agu.org/pubs/crossref/2003/2002JE001909.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Kiefer, W. (2000-10-03). "Lunar Orbiter: Impact Basin Geology". Lunar and Planetary Institute. http://www.lpi.usra.edu/expmoon/orbiter/orbiter-basins.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Munsell, K. (2006-12-04). "Majestic Mountains". Solar System Exploration. NASA. http://sse.jpl.nasa.gov/educ/themes/display.cfm?Item=mountains. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ a b Martel, L.M.V. (2003-06-04). "The Moon's Dark, Icy Poles". Planetary Science Research Discoveries, Hawai'i Institute of Geophysics and Planetology. http://www.psrd.hawaii.edu/June03/lunarShadows.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Melosh, H. J. (1989). Impact cratering: A geologic process. Oxford Univ. Press. 
^ Nasa Spacecraft Reveal Largest Crater in Solar System - on Mars, http://www.spaceref.com/news/viewpr.rss.spacewire.html?pid=25777, retrieved on 2008-06-26 
^ Taylor, G.J. (1998-07-17). "The Biggest Hole in the Solar System". Planetary Science Research Discoveries, Hawai'i Institute of Geophysics and Planetology. http://www.psrd.hawaii.edu/July98/spa.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Heiken, G.; Vaniman, D.; French, B. (eds.) (1991). Lunar Sourcebook, a user's guide to the Moon. New York: Cambridge University Press. pp. 736. 
^ Rasmussen, K.L.; Warren, P.H. (1985). "Megaregolith thickness, heat flow, and the bulk composition of the moon". Nature 313: 121–124. doi:10.1038/313121a0. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1985Natur.313..121R. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ "Lunar Polar Composites". Lunar and Planetary Institute. http://www.lpi.usra.edu/publications/slidesets/clem2nd/slide_32.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ "Eureka! Ice found at lunar poles". Lunar Prospector (NASA). 2001-08-31. http://lunar.arc.nasa.gov/results/ice/eureka.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Spudis, P. (2006-11-06). "Ice on the Moon". The Space Review. http://www.thespacereview.com/article/740/1. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Versteckt in Glasperlen: Auf dem Mond gibt es Wasser - Wissenschaft - SPIEGEL ONLINE - Nachrichten
^ Timing of crystallization of the lunar magma ocean constrained by the oldest zircon, Nemchin, Timms, Pidgeon, Geisler, Reddy & Meyer, published in Nature 25 January, 2009, latest access 4 February 2009
^ a b Lucey, P.; et al. (2006). "Understanding the lunar surface and space-Moon interactions". Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry 60: 83–219. doi:10.2138/rmg.2006.60.2. 
^ Williams, J.G.; Turyshev, S.G.; Boggs, D.H.; Ratcliff, J.T. (2006). "Lunar laser ranging science: Gravitational physics and lunar interior and geodesy". Advances in Space Research 37 (1): 6771. doi:10.1016/j.asr.2005.05.013. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1987AREPS..15..271S. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ "Doppler Gravity Experiment Results". Lunar Prospector (NASA). 2001-08-31. http://lunar.arc.nasa.gov/results/dopres.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Muller, P.; Sjogren, W. (1968). "Masons: lunar mass concentrations". Science 161: 680–684. doi:10.1126/science.161.3842.680. PMID 17801458. 
^ Konopliv, A.; Asmar, S.; Carranza, E.; Sjogren, W.; Yuan, D. (2001). "Recent gravity models as a result of the Lunar Prospector mission". Icarus 50: 1–18. doi:10.1006/icar.2000.6573. 
^ "Magnetometer / Electron Reflectometer Results". Lunar Prospector (NASA). 2001. http://lunar.arc.nasa.gov/results/magelres.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Hood, L.L.; Huang, Z. (1991). "Formation of magnetic anomalies antipodal to lunar impact basins: Two-dimensional model calculations". J. Geophys. Res. 96: 9837–9846. doi:10.1029/91JB00308. 
^ Globus, Ruth (2002). "Impact Upon Lunar Atmosphere". http://www.nas.nasa.gov/About/Education/SpaceSettlement/75SummerStudy/5appendJ.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-29. 
^ "Moon." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 10 Sep. 2008 <http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/391266/Moon>.
^ Lawson, S.; Feldman, W.; Lawrence, D.; Moore, K.; Elphic, R.; Belian, R. (2005). "Recent outgassing from the lunar surface: the Lunar Prospector alpha particle spectrometer". J. Geophys. Res. 110: 1029. doi:10.1029/2005JE002433. 
^ Stern, S.A. (1999). "The Lunar atmosphere: History, status, current problems, and context". Rev. Geophys. 37: 453–491. doi:10.1029/1999RG900005. 
^ Artemis Project: Lunar Surface Temperatures
^ Kleine, T.; Palme, H.; Mezger, K.; Halliday, A.N. (2005). "Hf–W Chronometry of Lunar Metals and the Age and Early Differentiation of the Moon". Science 310 (5754): 1671–1674. doi:10.1126/science.1118842. PMID 16308422. 
^ Binder, A.B. (1974). "On the origin of the moon by rotational fission". The Moon 11 (2): 53–76. doi:10.1007/BF01877794. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1974Moon...11...53B. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Mitler, H.E. (1975). "Formation of an iron-poor moon by partial capture, or: Yet another exotic theory of lunar origin". Icarus 24: 256–268. doi:10.1016/0019-1035(75)90102-5. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1975Icar...24..256M. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Stevenson, D.J. (1987). "Origin of the moon–The collision hypothesis". Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences 15: 271–315. doi:10.1146/annurev.ea.15.050187.001415. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1987AREPS..15..271S. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Canup, R.; Asphaug, E. (2001). "Origin of the Moon in a giant impact near the end of the Earth's formation". Nature 412: 708–712. doi:10.1038/35089010. 
^ a b Papike, J.; Ryder, G.; Shearer, C. (1998). "Lunar Samples". Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry 36: 5.1–5.234. 
^ a b Hiesinger, H.; Head, J.W.; Wolf, U.; Jaumanm, R.; Neukum, G. (2003). "Ages and stratigraphy of mare basalts in Oceanus Procellarum, Mare Numbium, Mare Cognitum, and Mare Insularum". J. Geophys. Res. 108: 1029. doi:10.1029/2002JE001985. 
^ Taylor, G.J. (2006-11-08). "Recent Gas Escape from the Moon". Planetary Science Research Discoveries, Hawai'i Institute of Geophysics and Planetology. http://www.psrd.hawaii.edu/Nov06/MoonGas.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Schultz, P.H.; Staid, M.I.; Pieters, C.M. (2006). "Lunar activity from recent gas release". Nature 444: 184–186. doi:10.1038/nature05303. 
^ Norman, M. (2004-04-21). "The Oldest Moon Rocks". Planetary Science Research Discoveries. http://www.psrd.hawaii.edu/April04/lunarAnorthosites.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Varricchio, L. (2006). Inconstant Moon. Xlibris Books. ISBN 1-59926-393-9. 
^ The Smell of Moondust from NASA
^ Ray, R. (2001-05-15). "Ocean Tides and the Earth's Rotation". IERS Special Bureau for Tides. http://bowie.gsfc.nasa.gov/ggfc/tides/intro.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ a b "Apollo Laser Ranging Experiments Yield Results". NASA. 2005-07-11. http://sunearth.gsfc.nasa.gov/eclipse/SEhelp/ApolloLaser.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-30. 
^ Vampew, A. "No, it's not our "second" moon!!!". http://www.captaincosmos.clara.co.uk/cruithne.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Morais, M.H.M.; Morbidelli, A. (2002). "The Population of Near-Earth Asteroids in Coorbital Motion with the Earth". Icarus 160: 1–9. doi:10.1006/icar.2002.6937. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2002Icar..160....1M. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ a b Thieman, J.; Keating, S. (2006-05-02). "Eclipse 99, Frequently Asked Questions". NASA. http://eclipse99.nasa.gov/pages/faq.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Espenak, F. "Saros Cycle". NASA. http://sunearth.gsfc.nasa.gov/eclipse/SEsaros/SEsaros.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Espenak, F (2000). "Solar Eclipses for Beginners". MrEclipse. http://www.mreclipse.com/Special/SEprimer.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ "Total Lunar Occultations". Royal Astronomical Society of New Zealand. http://occsec.wellington.net.nz/total/totoccs.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Espenak, F. (2007). "NASA Eclipse Home Page". NASA. http://sunearth.gsfc.nasa.gov/eclipse/eclipse.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Mike Luciuk. "How Bright is the Moon?". http://www.asterism.org/tutorials/tut26-1.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-03. 
^ Spekkens, K. (2002-10-18). "Is the Moon seen as a crescent (and not a "boat") all over the world?". Curious About Astronomy. http://curious.astro.cornell.edu/question.php?number=393. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Coren, M (2004-07-26). "'Giant leap' opens world of possibility". CNN.com. http://edition.cnn.com/2004/TECH/space/07/16/moon.landing/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ (PDF)NASA news release 77-47 page 242. Press release. 1977-09-01. http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/pdf/83129main_1977.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-08-29. 
^ Appleton, James; Charles Radley, John Deans, Simon Harvey, Paul Burt, Michael Haxell, Roy Adams, N Spooner and Wayne Brieske (1977). "OASI Newsletters Archive". NASA Turns A Deaf Ear To The Moon. http://www.ast.cam.ac.uk/~ipswich/Miscellaneous/Archived_spaceflight_news.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-29. 
^ Dickey, J.; et al. (1994). "Lunar laser ranging: a continuing legacy of the Apollo program". Science 265: 482–490. doi:10.1126/science.265.5171.482. PMID 17781305. 
^ NASA (2004-12-14). President Bush Offers New Vision For NASA. Press release. http://www.nasa.gov/missions/solarsystem/bush_vision.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ NASA (2006-12-04). NASA Unveils Global Exploration Strategy and Lunar Architecture. Press release. http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/dec/HQ_06361_ESMD_Lunar_Architecture.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ "“嫦娥一号”发射时间确定 但未到公布时机". XINHUA Online. July 7, 2007. http://news3.xinhuanet.com/tech/2007-07/07/content_6340313.htm. Retrieved on July 12 2007. 
^ Covault, C. (2006-06-04). "Russia Plans Ambitious Robotic Lunar Mission". Aviation Week. http://www.aviationnow.com/avnow/news/channel_awst_story.jsp?id=news/aw060506p2.xml. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Japan Embarks on the Largest Moon Mission Since Apollo
^ "India's Space Agency Proposes Manned Spaceflight Program". SPACE.com. 2006-11-10. http://www.space.com/news/061110_india_mannedspace.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-23. 
^ "Carved and Drawn Prehistoric Maps of the Cosmos". Space Today Online. 2006. http://www.spacetoday.org/SolSys/Earth/OldStarCharts.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ O'Connor, J.J.; Robertson, E.F. (February 1999). "Anaxagoras of Clazomenae". University of St Andrews. http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Anaxagoras.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Lewis, C.S. (1964). The Discarded Image. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 108. ISBN 0-521047735-2. 
^ Needham, Joseph. (1986). Science and Civilization in China: Volume 3, Mathematics and the Sciences of the Heavens and Earth. Taipei: Caves Books, Ltd. Page 411.
^ a b c Needham, Joseph. (1986). Science and Civilization in China: Volume 3, Mathematics and the Sciences of the Heavens and Earth. Taipei: Caves Books, Ltd. Page 413–414.
^ Needham, Joseph. (1986). Science and Civilization in China: Volume 3, Mathematics and the Sciences of the Heavens and Earth. Taipei: Caves Books, Ltd. Page 227.
^ a b Needham, Joseph. (1986). Science and Civilization in China: Volume 3, Mathematics and the Sciences of the Heavens and Earth. Taipei: Caves Books, Ltd. Page 415–416.
^ Van Helden, A. (1995). "The Moon". Galileo Project. http://galileo.rice.edu/sci/observations/moon.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ Boese, A. (2002). "The Great Moon Hoax". Museum of Hoaxes. http://www.museumofhoaxes.com/moonhoax.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ "International Space Law". United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs. 2006. http://www.unoosa.org/oosa/en/SpaceLaw/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
^ theregister.co.uk "NASA crushes lunar real estate industry"



General



Bussey, B.; Spudis, P.D. (2004). The Clementine Atlas of the Moon. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-81528-2. 
Jolliff, B.; Wieczorek, M.; Shearer, C.; Neal, C. (eds.) (2006). "New views of the Moon". Rev. Mineral. Geochem. (Chantilly, Virginia: Min. Soc. Amer.) 60: 721. doi:10.2138/rmg.2006.60.0. http://www.minsocam.org/msa/RIM/Rim60.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
Mackenzie, Dana (2003). The Big Splat, or How Our Moon Came to Be. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Moore, P. (2001). On the Moon. Tucson, Arizona: Sterling Publishing Co.. ISBN 0-304-35469-4. 
Spudis, P.D. (1996). The Once and Future Moon. Smithsonian Institution Press. ISBN 1-56098-634-4. 
Taylor, S.R. (1992). Solar system evolution. Cambridge Univ. Press. pp. 307. 
Wilhelms, D.E. (1987). "Geologic History of the Moon". U.S. Geological Survey Professional paper 1348. http://ser.sese.asu.edu/GHM/. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
Wilhelms, D.E. (1993). To a Rocky Moon: A Geologist's History of Lunar Exploration. Tucson, Arizona: University of Arizona Press. http://www.lpi.usra.edu/publications/books/rockyMoon/. Retrieved on 2009-03-10. 



External links

Find more about Moon on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Images and maps


"Clementine Lunar Image Browser 1.5". U.S. Navy. 2003-10-15. http://www.cmf.nrl.navy.mil/clementine/clib/. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
"Digital Lunar Orbiter Photographic Atlas of the Moon". Lunar and Planetary Institute. http://www.lpi.usra.edu/resources/lunar_orbiter/. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
"Google Moon". Google. 2007. http://moon.google.com. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
"Lunar Atlases". Lunar and Planetary Institute. http://www.lpi.usra.edu/resources/lunar_atlases/. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
Aeschliman, R.. "Lunar Maps". Planetary Cartography and Graphics. http://ralphaeschliman.com/id26.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
"Lunar Photo of the Day". 2004. http://lpod.wikispaces.com/. Retrieved on 2009-04-05. 
"Moon". World Wind Central. NASA. 2007. http://www.worldwindcentral.com/wiki/Moon. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
"The Moon: 50 fantastic features". Skymania. 2007. http://moon.skymania.com/. Retrieved on 2007-09-29. 
Video of Earth rising from moon orbit by the camera of the JAXA (Japanese) satellite Kaguya (Selene). See press release (The Earth only appears to rise because of the orbiting satellite. As seen from a stationary point on the Moon's surface the Earth doesn't move, because the Moon always shows the same side to the Earth.)
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), numerous Selene satellite Moon images beginning in 2007.


Exploration


Jones, E.M. (2006). "Apollo Lunar Surface Journal". NASA. http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/alsj/. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
"Exploring the Moon". Lunar and Planetary Institute. http://www.lpi.usra.edu/expmoon/. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
Teague, K. (2006). "The Project Apollo Archive". http://www.apolloarchive.com/apollo_archive.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 


Moon phases


"Current Moon Phase". 2007. http://www.moonphaseinfo.com/. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
"NASA's SKYCAL - Sky Events Calendar". NASA Eclipse Home Page. http://sunearth.gsfc.nasa.gov/eclipse/SKYCAL/SKYCAL.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-27. 
"Virtual Reality Moon Phase Pictures". U.S. Naval Observatory. http://tycho.usno.navy.mil/vphase.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
"Find moonrise, moonset and moonphase for a location". 2008. http://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/moonrise.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-18. 


Others


"The Earth, Sun and Moon". Thinkquest.org. http://library.thinkquest.org/29033/begin/earthsunmoon.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-17. 
"Precession of Moon's orbit". Pearson Education Inc /Addison Wesley put on line by University of Hawaii Institute of Astronomy. 2004. http://www.ifa.hawaii.edu/users/lin/ast110-6/applets/precession_of_moon_orbit.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-17. 
"All About the Moon". Space.com. 2007. http://www.space.com/moon/. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
Earth's Moon Profile by NASA's Solar System Exploration
"Moon Articles". in Planetary Science Research Discoveries, educational journal. http://www.psrd.hawaii.edu/Archive/Archive-Moon.html. 
Williams, D.R. (2006). "Moon Fact Sheet". NASA. http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/factsheet/moonfact.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-12. 
"Moon Wiki". 2007. http://the-moon.wikispaces.com/. Retrieved on 2007-09-06. 
Cain, Fraser. "Where does the Moon Come From?". Universe Today. http://www.astronomycast.com/astronomy/episode-17-where-does-the-moon-come-from/. Retrieved on 2008-04-01. 


Cartographic resources


Map of the Moon
Lunar nomenclature
PDS Map-a-Planet








v • d • e

The Moon





Physical features

Internal structure · Gravity field · Topography · Magnetic field · Atmosphere







Orbit

Orbit of the Moon · Phases · Solar eclipse · Lunar eclipse · Tides






Lunar surface

Selenography · Near side · Far side · Lunar mare · Impact crater · South Pole-Aitken basin · Shackleton crater · Ice · Peak of eternal light · Space weathering · Transient lunar phenomenon






Lunar science

Geology (timescale) · Giant impact hypothesis · Moon rocks · Lunar meteorites · KREEP · ALSEP · Lunar laser ranging · Late Heavy Bombardment






Exploration

Exploration of the Moon · Project Apollo · Robotic exploration · Future missions · Lunar colonization · Moon Landing hoax accusations






Other topics

Calendar · Month · The Moon in art and literature · The Moon in mythology · Moon illusion · Lunar effect · Craters named after people






See also Solar System · Natural satellite












v • d • e

Natural satellites of the Solar System





Planetary satellites

Terrestrial · Martian · Jovian · Saturnian · Uranian · Neptunian







Other satellite systems

Plutonian · Eridian · Haumean · Asteroid satellites






Largest satellites

Ganymede · Titan · Callisto · Io · Moon · Europa · Triton
Titania · Rhea · Oberon · Iapetus · Charon · Umbriel · Ariel · Dione · Tethys  · Enceladus · Miranda · Proteus · Mimas






Inner satellites · Trojans · Irregulars · List · List by diameter · Timeline of discovery · Naming












v • d • e

The Solar System













































The Sun · Mercury · Venus · Earth · Mars · Ceres · Jupiter · Saturn · Uranus · Neptune · Pluto · Haumea · Makemake · Eris








Planets · Dwarf planets · Moons: Terrestrial · Martian · Jovian · Saturnian · Uranian · Neptunian · Plutonian · Haumean · Eridian









Small bodies:   Meteoroids · Asteroids/Asteroid moons (Asteroid belt, Centaurs, TNOs: Kuiper belt/Scattered disc) · Comets (Oort cloud)







See also astronomical objects, the Solar System's list of objects, sorted by size, the list of minor planets, or the Solar System Portal





        



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moon"
Categories: Moon | MoonsHidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism | Wikipedia protected pages without expiry | Featured articles | Articles containing Latin language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2008 | Articles containing French language text | Articles containing German language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
Arpetan
Asturianu
Aymar aru
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Cebuano
Česky
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Diné bizaad
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Эрзянь
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
贛語
ગુજરાતી
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ಕನ್ನಡ
Kapampangan
ქართული
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Kreyòl ayisyen
ລາວ
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lingála
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Malti
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
Nēhiyawēwin / ᓀᐦᐃᔭᐍᐏᐣ
नेपाली
नेपाल भाषा
日本語
Nnapulitano
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
O'zbek
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
Tok Pisin
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Ποντιακά
Português
Ripoarisch
Română
Romani
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sawcuengh
Scots
Seeltersk
Shqip
Sicilianu
සිංහල
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Twi
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
Volapük
Võro
Walon
文言
吴语
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
粵語
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 10 April 2009, at 22:16 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
