













Philosophy of religion - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Philosophy_of_religion";
		var wgTitle = "Philosophy of religion";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "23003";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281682704;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Philosophy of religion

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article's warning boxes need additional citations for verification of their claims that the article's content needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve these warning boxes by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced warning box claims may be challenged and removed.







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2008)







This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details. (October 2008)






Philosophy portal



Philosophy of religion is a branch of philosophy that asks questions about religion. As with all philosophies, the topics at hand are generated by those who participate. In the philosophy of religion, these may include but are not limited to the nature and existence of God, religious language, miracles, prayer, the problem of evil, and how religion and other value-systems such as ethics interrelate. Religious philosophy, on the other hand, is the philosophical thinking that is inspired and directed by religion, such as Christian philosophy and Islamic philosophy. As an alternative, philosophy of religion is the philosophical thinking about religion. It is designed such that it can be carried out dispassionately by what are thought of as those in two "camps": adherents or believers, and non-believers. [1]




Contents


1 Philosophy of religion as a part of metaphysics
2 Questions asked in philosophy of religion
3 What is God?

3.1 Monotheistic definitions
3.2 Polytheistic definitions
3.3 Pantheistic definitions


4 Rationality of belief

4.1 Positions
4.2 Natural theology


5 Major philosophers of religion
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Philosophy of religion as a part of metaphysics




Aristotle


Philosophy of religion has classically been regarded as a part of metaphysics. In Aristotle's Metaphysics, he described first causes as one of the subjects of his investigation. For Aristotle, the first cause was the unmoved mover, which has been read as God, particularly when Aristotle's work became prevalent again in the Medieval West. This first PO cause argument later came to be called natural theology by rationalist philosophers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. In Metaphysics, Aristotle also states that the word that comes closest to describing the meaning of the word God is 'Understanding.'[citation needed] Today, philosophers have adopted the term philosophy of religion for the subject, and typically it is regarded as a separate field of specialization, though it is also still treated by some, particularly Catholic philosophers, as a part of metaphysics.
To understand the historical relationship between metaphysics and philosophy of religion, remember that the traditional objects of religious discussion have been very special sorts of entities (such as gods, angels, supernatural forces, and the like) and events, abilities, or processes (the creation of the universe, the ability to do or know anything, interaction between humans and gods, and so forth). Metaphysicians (and ontologists in particular) are characteristically interested in understanding what it is for something to exist--what it is for something to be an entity, event, ability, process, and so forth. Because many members of religious traditions believe in things that exist in profoundly different ways from more everyday things, objects of religious belief both raise special philosophical problems and, as extreme or limiting cases, invite us to clarify central metaphysical concepts.
However, the philosophy of religion has concerned itself with more than just metaphysical questions. In fact the subject has long involved important questions in areas such as epistemology, philosophy of language, philosophical logic, and moral philosophy. See also world view.

[edit] Questions asked in philosophy of religion




Kierkegaard


One way to understand the tasks at hand for philosophers of religion is to contrast them with theologians. Theologians sometimes consider the existence of God as axiomatic, or self-evident. Most theological treatises seek to justify or support religious claims by two primary epistemic means: rationalization or intuitive metaphors. A philosopher of religion examines and critiques the epistemological, logical, aesthetic and ethical foundations inherent in the claims of a religion. Whereas a theologian could elaborate metaphysically on the nature of God either rationally or experientially, a philosopher of religion is more interested in asking what may be knowable and opinable with regards to religions' claims.
A philosopher of religion does not ask "What is God?", for such is a complex question in that it assumes the existence of God and that God has a knowable nature. Instead, a philosopher of religion asks whether there are sound reasons to think that God does or does not exist.[citation needed]
Still, there are other questions studied in the philosophy of religion. For example: What, if anything, would give us good reason to believe that a miracle has occurred? What is the relationship between faith and reason? What is the relationship between morality and religion? What is the status of religious language? Does petitionary prayer (sometimes still called impetratory prayer) make sense? Are salvo-lobotomies (lobotomies performed to keep believers from sinning) moral actions?

[edit] What is God?
The question "What is God?" is sometimes also phrased as "What is the meaning of the word God?" Most philosophers expect some sort of definition as an answer to this question, but they are not content simply to describe the way the word is used: they want to know the essence of what it means to be God. Western philosophers typically concern themselves with the God of monotheistic religions (see the nature of God in Western theology), but discussions also concern themselves with other conceptions of the divine.[original research?]
Indeed, before attempting a definition of a term it is essential to know what sense of the term is to be defined. In this case, this is particularly important because there are a number of widely different senses of the word 'God.' So before we try to answer the question "What is God?" by giving a definition, first we must get clear on which conception of God we are trying to define. Since this article is on "philosophy of religion" it is important to keep to the canon of this area of philosophy. For whatever reasons, the Western, monotheistic conception of God (discussed below) has been the primary source of investigation in philosophy of religion. (One likely reason as to why the Western conception of God is dominant in the canon of philosophy of religion is that philosophy of religion is primarily an area of analytic philosophy, which is primarily Western.) Among those people who believe in supernatural beings, some believe there is just one God (monotheism; see also monotheistic religion), while others, such as Hindus, believe in many different deities (polytheism; see also polytheistic religion) while maintaining that all are manifestations of one God. Hindus also have a widely followed monistic philosophy that can be said to be neither monotheistic nor polytheistic (see Advaita Vedanta). Since Buddhism tends to deal less with metaphysics and more with ontological (see Ontology) questions, Buddhists generally do not believe in the existence of a creator God similar to that of the Abrahamic religions, but direct attention to a state called Nirvana (See also Mu).
Within these two broad categories (monotheism and polytheism) there is a wide variety of possible beliefs, although there are relatively few popular ways of believing. For example, among the monotheists there have been those who believe that the one God is like a watchmaker who wound up the universe and now does not intervene in the universe at all; this view is deism. By contrast, the view that God continues to be active in the universe is called theism. (Note that 'theism' is here used as a narrow and rather technical term, not as a broader term as it is below. For full discussion of these distinct meanings, refer to the article Theism.)

[edit] Monotheistic definitions




Augustine


Monotheism is the view that only one God exists (as opposed to multiple gods). In Western thought, God is traditionally described as a being that possesses at least three necessary properties: omniscience (all-knowing), omnipotence (all-powerful), and omnibenevolence (supremely good). In other words, God knows everything, has the power to do anything, and is perfectly good. Many other properties (e.g., omnipresence) have been alleged to be necessary properties of a god; however, these are the three most uncontroversial and dominant in Christian tradition. By contrast, Monism is the view that all is of one essential essence, substance or energy. Monistic theism, a variant of both monism and monotheism, views God as both immanent and transcendent. Both are dominant themes in Hinduism.
Even once the word "God" is defined in a monotheistic sense, there are still many difficult questions to be asked about what this means. For example, what does it mean for something to be created? How can something be "all-powerful"?

[edit] Polytheistic definitions
The distinguishing characteristic of polytheism is its belief in more than one god(dess). There can be as few as two (such as a classical Western understanding of Zoroastrian dualism) or an innumerably large amount, as in Hinduism (as the Western world perceives it). There are many varieties of polytheism; they all accept that many gods exist, but differ in their responses to that belief. Henotheists for example, worship only one of the many gods, either because it is held to be more powerful or worthy of worship than the others (some pseudo-Christian sects take this view of the Trinity, holding that only God the Father should be worshipped, Jesus and the Holy Spirit being distinct and lesser gods), or because it is associated with their own group, culture, state, etc. The distinction isn't a clear one, of course, as most people consider their own culture superior to others, and this will also apply to their culture's God. Kathenotheists have similar beliefs, but worship a different god at different times or places. In Kali Yukam all gets unified into Ayya Vaikundar for destroying the Kaliyan.

[edit] Pantheistic definitions
Pantheists assert that God is itself the natural universe. The most famous Western pantheist is Baruch Spinoza.
Panentheism holds that the physical universe is part of God, but that God is more than this. While pantheism can be summed up by "God is the world and the world is God", panentheism can be summed up as "The world is in God and God is in the world, but God is more than the world and is not synonymous with the world". However, this might be a result of a misinterpretation of what is meant by world in pantheism, as many pantheists use "universe" rather than "world" and point out the utter vastness of the universe and how much of it (temporal causality, alternate dimensions, superstring theory) remains unknown to humanity. By expressing pantheism in this way and including such elements, rather than limiting it to this particular planet, and specifically limiting it to human experience, the theory is somewhat nearer to the view of panentheists while still maintaining the distinct characteristics of pantheism.[original research?]

[edit] Rationality of belief
Main article: Existence of God




Aquinas



[edit] Positions
The second question, "Do we have any good reason to think that God does (or does not) exist?", is equally important in the philosophy of religion. There are six main positions with regard to the existence of God that one might take:

Theism - the belief in the existence of one or more divinities or deities.
Pantheism - the belief that God is both immanent and transcendent; God is one and all is God.
Deism - the belief that God does exist, but does not interfere with human life and the laws of the universe.
Agnosticism - the belief that the existence or non-existence of deities is currently unknown or unknowable, or that the existence of a God or of gods cannot be proven.
Atheism - the rejection of belief, or absence of belief, in deities.
Retreism - The belief in the ending or previous existence of god or gods

It is important to note that some of these positions are not mutually exclusive. For example, agnostic theists choose to believe God exists while asserting that knowledge of God's existence is inherently unknowable. Similarly, agnostic atheists lack belief in God or choose to believe God does not exist while also asserting that knowledge of God's existence is inherently unknowable.

[edit] Natural theology
The attempt to provide proofs or arguments for the existence of God is one aspect of what is known as natural theology or the natural theistic project. This strand of Natural theology attempts to justify belief in God by independent grounds. There is plenty of philosophical literature on faith (especially fideism) and other subjects generally considered to be outside the realm of natural theology. Perhaps most of philosophy of religion is predicated on natural theology's assumption that the existence of God can be justified or warranted on rational grounds. There has been considerable philosophical and theological debate about the kinds of proofs, justifications and arguments that are appropriate for this discourse.[2]
The philosopher Alvin Plantinga has shifted his focus to justifying belief in God (that is, those who believe in God, for whatever reasons, are rational in doing so) through reformed epistemology, in the context of a theory of warrant and proper function.
Other reactions to natural theology are those of Wittgensteinian philosophers of religion, most notably D. Z. Phillips who died in 2006. Phillips rejects "natural theology" and its evidentialist approach as confused, in favor of a grammatical approach which investigates the meaning of belief in God. For Phillips, belief in God is not a proposition with a particular truth value, but a form of life. Consequently, the question of whether God exists confuses the logical categories which govern theistic language with those that govern other forms of discourse (most notably, scientific discourse). According to Phillips, the question of whether or not God exists cannot be "objectively" answered by philosophy because the categories of truth and falsity, which are necessary for asking the question, have no application in the religious contexts wherein religious belief has its sense and meaning. In other words, the question cannot be answered because it cannot be asked without entering into confusion. As Phillips sees things, the job of the philosopher is not to investigate the "rationality" of belief in God but to elucidate its meaning.

[edit] Major philosophers of religion




Abhinavagupta
Adi Shankara
Avicenna (also known as Ibn Sina)
Ramanuja
Madhvacharya
Marilyn McCord Adams
Robert Adams
William Alston
Anselm of Canterbury
Averroes (also known as Ibn Rushd)
Thomas Aquinas
Augustine of Hippo
Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius
Giordano Bruno
Joseph Butler
Samuel Clarke
Anne Conway
William Lane Craig
René Descartes
Pseudo-Dionysius
Herman Dooyeweerd
Mircea Eliade
Desiderius Erasmus
Al-Farabi (also known as Alpharabius)
Siddartha Gautama
Al Ghazali (also known as Algazel)
Yehuda Halevi
Charles Hartshorne
Ibn al-Haytham (also known as Alhazen)
Heraclitus
John Hick
Professor. Dr. Mohamed Osman Elkhosht
David Hume




Peter van Inwagen
Allama Iqbal
William James
Immanuel Kant
Ibn Khaldun
Søren Kierkegaard
Al-Kindi (also known as Alkindus)
Nishida Kitaro
Ruhollah Khomeini
Nishitani Keiji
Harold Kushner
C. S. Lewis
Gottfried Leibniz
Knud Ejler Løgstrup
J. L. Mackie
Maimonides
Nicolas Malebranche
Jean-Luc Marion
Michael Martin
Herbert McCabe
Alister E. McGrath
Thomas V. Morris
Nagarjuna
Milarepa
Dogen Zenji
Ibn al-Nafis
Friedrich Nietzsche
William of Ockham
Rudolph Otto
William Paley
Blaise Pascal
D. Z. Phillips




Philo of Alexandria
Alvin Plantinga
Plotinus
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan
Ayn Rand
Muhammad ibn Zakarīya Rāzi (also known as Rhazes)
Bertrand Russell
Mulla Sadra
Duns Scotus
Ninian Smart
Abdolkarim Soroush
Baruch Spinoza
Melville Y. Stewart
Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi
Richard Swinburne
Denys Turner
Peter Vardy
Vasubandhu
Keith Ward
William Whewell
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Keith Yandell
Ramakrishna
Vivekananda
René Guénon
Frithjof Schuon
Seyyed Hossein Nasr
F.W.J. Schelling
Paul Tillich
Gordon Clark
Ahmad Rafique
Dr. Zakir Naik





[edit] See also

Evolutionary origin of religions
Evolutionary psychology of religion
Issues in Science and Religion
Major world religions
Natural theology
Psychology of religion
Religion
Theodicy
Theology
Theories of religion


[edit] References


^ Evans, C. Stephen (1985). Philosophy of Religion: Thinking about Faith. InterVarsity Press. pp. 16. ISBN 0877843430. 
^ see eg Antony Flew, John Polkinghorne, Keith Ward and Richard Swinburne



[edit] Further reading

The London Philosophy Study Guide offers many suggestions on what to read, depending on the student's familiarity with the subject: Philosophy of Religion
William L. Rowe, William J. Wainwright, Philosophy of Religion: Selected Readings, Third Ed. (Florida: Harcourt Brace & Company, 1998)


[edit] External links

Philosophy of Religion links Massive list, which includes religion, theology, and general philosophy links as well. Maintained by philosophy professor Dale Tuggy.
An introduction to the Philosophy of Religion by Paul Newall.
Philosophy of Religion Useful annotated index of religious philosophy topics.
Islamic Philosophy Online Comprehensive resource on Islamic philosophy
Christian CADRE Philosophy Page Philosophy and research from a Christian perspective.
Philosophy of Religion .Info Introductory articles on philosophical arguments for and against theism.
Aroumah - Journal for literary philosophy of ReligionGerman and English e-journal.
The Australasian Philosophy of Religion Association








v • d • e

Philosophy





Eastern philosophy · Western philosophy





History





Ancient


Buddhist · Chinese · Greek · Hellenistic · Hindu · Indian · Jain · Persian







Medieval


Christian · Early Islamic · Islamic · Jewish · Judeo-Islamic







Modern


Empiricism · Rationalism







Contemporary


Analytic · Continental









Lists

Basic topics · Topic list · Philosophers · Glossary of philosophical theories · List of philosophical theories · Movements · more






Branches

Aesthetics · Ethics · Epistemology · Logic · Metaphysics






Philosophy of

Action · Biology · Chemistry · Education · Economics · Environment · Geography · Information · Healthcare · History · Human nature · Humor · Language · Law · Literature · Mathematics · Mind · Music · Being · Philosophy · Physics · Politics · Psychology · Religion · Science · Social science · Technology · War






Schools

Aristotelianism · Averroism · Avicennism · Critical theory · Cynicism · Deconstructionism · Deontology · Dialectical materialism · Dualism · Egoism · Epicureanism · Epiphenomenalism · Existentialism · Feminist · Functionalism · Hedonism · Hegelianism · Hermeneutics · Humanism · Idealism · Kantianism · Kyoto School · Individualism · Logical positivism · Marxism · Materialism · Monism · Naturalism · Neoplatonism · New Philosophers · Nihilism · Ordinary language · Particularism · Peripatetic · Phenomenology · Platonism · Positivism · Posthumanism · Postmodernism · Poststructuralism · Pragmatism · Presocratic · Process · Solipsism · Realism · Relativism · Scholasticism · Skepticism · Stoicism · Structuralism · Thomism · Utilitarianism






Portal · Category listings












v • d • e

Religion and philosophy in popular culture





Religion portal · Philosophy portal





Main articles

Parody religion · Philosophy of religion · Pseudoreligion · Pseudophilosophy · Popular culture · Religious satire · List of fictional religions






Religions and philosophies

Bahá'í Faith in fiction · Humor about Catholicism · Cults and new religious movements in literature and popular culture · est and The Forum in popular culture · Gnosticism in popular culture · Hare Krishna in popular culture · Hell in popular culture · Cultural depictions of Jesus · Portrayals of Mormons in popular media · Reincarnation in popular western culture · Satan in popular culture · Scientology in popular culture · Spiritualism in fiction









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philosophy_of_religion"
Categories: Philosophy of religion | Philosophy by fieldHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from October 2008 | Articles that may contain original research since October 2008 | All articles that may contain original research | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2007 | Articles that may contain original research since January 2008 | Articles that may contain original research since December 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
فارسی
Français
Hrvatski
Íslenska
Italiano
Magyar
Монгол
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Português
Русский
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 11:41.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
