













Wounded Knee Massacre - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Wounded_Knee_Massacre";
		var wgTitle = "Wounded Knee Massacre";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "209886";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281081035;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Wounded Knee Massacre

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Wounded Knee.





The neutrality of this article is disputed. Please see the discussion on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until the dispute is resolved. (December 2007)







This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please improve this article if you can. (February 2008)




Wounded Knee Massacre


Part of the Sioux Wars



Mass grave for the dead Lakota after massacre of Wounded Knee





Date
December 29, 1890


Location
Wounded Knee Creek, South Dakota


Result
United States / Great loss





Belligerents


Sioux
United States


Commanders


Big Foot†
James W. Forsyth


Strength


220 men
530 women and children

1500 men


Casualties and losses


200 killed
69 wounded 150 missing

25 killed
42 wounded










v • d • e

Pine Ridge Campaign







Wounded Knee Massacre






In the Wounded Knee Massacre, on December 29, 1890, 500 troops of the U.S. 7th Cavalry, supported by four Hotchkiss guns (a lightweight artillery piece designed for travel with cavalry and used as a replacement for the aging twelve-pound mountain howitzer), surrounded an encampment of Miniconjou Sioux (Lakota) and Hunkpapa Sioux (Lakota).[1] The Army had orders to escort the Sioux to the railroad for transport to Omaha, Nebraska. One day prior, the Sioux had given up their protracted flight from the troops and willingly agreed to turn themselves in at the Pine Ridge Agency in South Dakota. They were the very last of the Sioux to do so. They were met by the 7th Cavalry, who intended to use a display of force coupled with firm negotiations to gain compliance from them.
The commander of the 7th had been ordered to disarm the Lakota before proceeding. During the process of disarmament, a deaf tribesman named Black Coyote could not hear the order to give up his rifle. [2] This set off a chain reaction of events that led to a scene of sheer chaos and mayhem with fighting between both sides in all directions.
By the time it was over, about 300 men, women, and children of the Lakota Sioux had been killed. Twenty-five troopers also died during the massacre, some believed to have been the victims of friendly fire as the shooting took place at point blank range in chaotic conditions.[3] Around 150 Lakota are believed to have fled the chaos, with an unknown number later dying from hypothermia.
This battle is noteworthy, as it is the battle in which the most Medals of Honor have ever been awarded in the history of all wars in the United States. The Medal of Honor is the United States highest award for bravery.
The site has been designated a National Historic Landmark.[4]




Contents


1 Lakota prelude

1.1 Ghost Dance


2 The Massacre

2.1 Big Foot

2.1.1 Peaceful surrender
2.1.2 Big Foot's Death




3 Aftermath

3.1 Skirmish at Drexel Mission


4 Popular culture
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Lakota prelude




Map of Wounded Knee.


In February 1890, the United States government broke a Lakota treaty by adjusting the Great Sioux Reservation of South Dakota, an area that formerly encompassed the majority of the state, into five relatively smaller reservations.[5] This was done to accommodate homesteaders from the east. It also carried out the government’s policy of "breaking up tribal relationships"[6] and "conforming Indians to the white man’s ways, peaceably if they will, or forcibly if they must".[7] Once on the half-sized reservations, tribes were separated into family units on 320-acre (1.3 km2) plots, forced to farm, raise livestock, and send their children to boarding schools that forbade inclusion of traditional Native American culture and language.
To support the Sioux during the period of transition, the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) was responsible for supplying the Sioux with food (they were traditionally a hunter-gatherer society) and hiring white farmers to teach them agriculture. The farming plan failed to take into account the difficulty Sioux farmers would have in trying to cultivate crops in the semi-arid region of South Dakota. By the end of the 1890 growing season, a time of intense heat and low rainfall, it was clear that the land was unable to produce substantial agricultural yields.




U.S officers at scene of wounded knee, Buffalo Bill, Capt. Baldwin, Gen. Nelson A. Miles, Capt. Moss, and others, on horseback


But, this was when government officials’ patience with supporting the so-called “lazy Indians" ran out. They cut rations to the Sioux in half. As American bison had been nearly eradicated from the Plains a few years earlier, the Sioux began to starve. Tribal members turned to spiritual revival, and many performed the Ghost Dance religious ceremony. Supervising agents of the BIA were alarmed at the activity. They requested and were granted thousands more troops deployed to the reservation. [8]




U.S. troops surrounding the Lakota at Wounded Knee, Photograph shows the Lakota encampment in the foreground with a short line of U.S. troops in the background.


The Lakota were overwhelmed by the flood of settlers onto their lands. A gold rush in the 1870s brought hordes of prospectors and settlers. Many whites wanted to claim the Black Hills, which formed part of the assigned land given to the Lakota by the Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868), but the Lakota were not interested in selling territory which they considered sacred.
In 1876, frustrated by the refusal of the Lakota to give up the Black Hills, the government ordered the Lakota confined to their reservation; Indians found off the reservation were to be returned by force. By 1889, the situation on the reservations was getting desperate. After reducing their land area, the U.S. failed to honor its promise to increase the amount of food and other necessities for the Lakota.

[edit] Ghost Dance





This article is in need of attention from an expert on the subject. WikiProject History or the History Portal may be able to help recruit one. (April 2008)


Main article: Ghost Dance




Wovoka – Paiute spiritual leader and creator of the Ghost Dance


The Ghost Dance was a form of circle or spirit dancing which, according to contemporary anthropologist James Mooney, had existed for centuries. It is a religious ceremony by which participants believe that their dead relatives will come back, and the world will be restored. In some aspects that restoration included the removal of all white people from their lands. Paiute prophet Wovoka reported in 1888 that the Great Spirit had spoken to him in a vision, asking him to take the message to all Indian tribes that performing the Ghost Dance would bring about a renewal of the earth, the return of the buffalo, and their deceased loved ones would live again. Wovoka preached peace, saying that God asked Indians not to fight each other or the white man. ("You must not fight. Do right always.") Tribal leaders met with Wovoka and took the message home. Many people began to hold Ghost Dances according to Wovoka's advice. The movement spread to the Plains and beyond. All other tribes adopted Wovoka's advice against violence except for the Sioux.
Although Ghost Dancing was a spiritual ceremony, some US Indian agents for other tribes misinterpreted it as a war dance. The Sioux danced in part because of their antagonism to the whites and believed it was a preparation for war. This was distant from the pacifistic teachings of the Pauite prophet Wovoka (Utley, p. 73). In any case, fearing that the Ghost Dance philosophy signaled an Indian uprising, many agents outlawed it.
In October 1890, believing that a renewal of the earth would take place in the coming spring, the Lakota of Pine Ridge and Rosebud defied their agents and continued to hold dance rituals. Lakota delegations to Wovoka's Paiute reserve had reinterpreted Wovoka's message to suggest that the whites would disappear (they would be exterminated by the Messiah - Utley, p. 73) and that the renewed earth would be for Indians alone (Mooney, p. 820). Lakota Ghost Dancers wore Ghost Shirts, specially consecrated garments which they believed rendered them impervious to harm from rifle bullets when in battle against the whites (Utley, p. 86). Devotees were dancing to pitches of excitement that frightened the government employees. "[T]he Sioux apostles had perverted Wovoka's doctrine into a militant crusade against the white man." (Utley, p. 87) White settlers became panicked. Pine Ridge agent Daniel F. Royer called for military help to restore order with the Indians and calm white settlers.

[edit] The Massacre




The scene three weeks afterward, with several bodies partially wrapped in blankets in the foreground


On December 28, 1890 Chief Big Foot of the Miniconjojou Sioux nation, and 350 of his followers were intercepted by James W. Forsyth and a squadron of the 7th Cavalry Regiment as they camped along Wounded Knee Creek. The Indians were on their way to the Pine Ridge Reservation, in hopes of persuading the warriors at Stronghold to surrender.[9] During the night, more soldiers arrived at the camp and began to set up their artillery; four powerfull Hotchkiss guns capable of rapid fire were placed along the South and West hills surrounding Big Foot's camp.[10]
At daybreak on December 29, 1890, Colonel Forsyth ordered the surrender of weapons and the immediate removal and transportation of the Indians from the "zone of military operations" to awaiting trains. Angered by the demands of the troops, Yellow Bird (tribal medicine man) began dancing and urged his people to put on their sacred shirts and defy the demands of the troops. At that moment Black Coyote, a young warrior, raised his gun in protest, shouting that he had paid money for his weapon and was not going to just give it to anyone.
Forsyth's troops surrounded Black Coyote to disarm him and a struggle ensued. During the struggle Black Coyote's firearm rang out. With the sounding of gun shots, the troops began shooting at the Indians, many of whom were unarmed.[11]




Birds-eye view of canyon at Wounded Knee, Dead horses and Lakota bodies are visible.


At first, the struggle was fought at close range; fully half the Indian men were killed or wounded before they had a chance to get off any shots. Some of the Indians grabbed rifles they had been hiding for self-defense and opened fire on the soldiers. With no cover, and with many of the Sioux unarmed, this phase of the fighting lasted a few minutes at most. While the Indian warriors and soldiers were shooting it out at close range, other soldiers used the Hotchkiss guns against the tipi camp full of women and children. It is believed that many of the troops on the battle field, were victims of friendly fire from their own Hotchkiss guns. The Indian women and children fled the camp, seeking shelter in a nearby ravine from the crossfire.[12] The officers had lost all control of their men. Some of the soldiers fanned out to run across the battlefield and finish off wounded Indians. Others leaped onto their horses and pursued the Lakota(men,women and children), in some cases for miles across the prairies. By the end of the fighting, which lasted less than an hour, at least 150 Lakota had been killed and 50 wounded. Army casualties numbered 25 dead and 39 wounded.

Specific details of what triggered the fight are debated. According to historian Robert Utley, a medicine man called Yellow Bird began to perform the Ghost Dance, reiterating his assertion to the Lakota that the ghost shirts were bulletproof. As tension mounted, Black Coyote refused to give up his rifle. He was deaf and had not understood the order. Another Indian said: "Black Coyote is deaf." (He did not speak English). When the soldier refused to heed his warning, he said "Stop! He cannot hear your orders!" At that moment, two soldiers seized Black Coyote from behind, and in the struggle (it is believed but not necessarily accurate that), his rifle discharged. At the same moment, Yellow Bird threw some dust into the air, and approximately five young Lakota men with concealed weapons threw aside their blankets and pointed their rifles at Troop K of the 7th. The Lakota opened fire on the soldiers and did damage; however, a massive volley was returned back at the tribe[13].
According to Commanding General Nelson A. Miles, a "scuffle occurred between one warrior who had [a] rifle in his hand and two soldiers. The rifle was discharged and a massacre occurred, not only the warriors but the sick Chief Big Foot, and a large number of women and children who tried to escape by running and scattering over the prairie were hunted down and killed."[14] The military hired civilians to bury the dead Lakota after an intervening snowstorm had abated. Arriving at the battleground, the burial party found the deceased frozen in contorted positions. They were gathered up and placed in a common grave. It was reported that four infants were found alive, wrapped in their deceased mothers' shawls. In all, 84 men, 44 women, and 18 children reportedly died on the field, while at least seven Lakota were mortally wounded.

[edit] Big Foot




Big Foot (Si Tȟaŋka) in a 1872 portrait taken while part of a Dakota delegation visiting Washington D.C.


On December 15, Chief Sitting Bull was killed at his cabin on the Standing Rock Reservation by Indian police who were trying to arrest him on government orders. After his death, refugees from Sitting Bull’s tribe fled in fear. They joined Sitting Bull's half brother, Big Foot, at a reservation at Cheyenne River. Unaware that Big Foot had renounced the Ghost Dance,[verification needed] General Nelson A. Miles ordered him to move his people to a nearby fort.
On December 28, 1890, Big Foot became seriously ill with pneumonia. His tribe then set off to seek shelter with Red Cloud at Pine Ridge reservation. Big Foot’s band was intercepted by Major Samuel Whitside and his battalion of the Seventh Cavalry Regiment and were escorted five miles (8 km) westward to Wounded Knee Creek. There, Colonel James W. Forsyth arrived to take command and ordered his guards to place four Hotchkiss guns in position around the camp. The soldiers numbered around 500. There were 350 Native Americans; all but 120 were women and children.

[edit] Peaceful surrender
On December 29, the 7th Cavalry intercepted them. Ill with pneumonia, Big Foot surrendered peacefully. The cavalry took him and his band into custody and escorted them to a site near Wounded Knee Creek, where they were to set up camp. The campsite was already established with a store and several log houses.

[edit] Big Foot's Death




The corpse of Big Foot at Wounded Knee (1890)


The night before the ‘Wounded Knee Massacre', Colonel James Forsyth had arrived at Wounded Knee Creek, and had ordered his men to place four Hotchkiss cannons in position around the area in which the Indians had been forced to camp. Morning arrived, and on 29 December 1890, what has become known as the ‘Wounded Knee Massacre’ took place. Soldiers, under the command of Colonel Forsyth, entered the camp and demand that the Native Americans gave up their weaponry. In the confrontation that ensued, a firearm was discharged, believed to be by a deaf Indian named Black Coyote. A large gun fight ensued and the end result was the massacre of at least 150 Indian men, women and children, Big Foot being among one of the killed.

[edit] Aftermath





This article is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add inline citations to guard against copyright violations and factual inaccuracies. (August 2007)






Returning from Wounded Knee.


General Nelson Miles denounced Colonel Forsyth and relieved him of command. An exhaustive Army Court of Inquiry convened by Miles criticized Forsyth for his tactical dispositions but otherwise exonerated him of responsibility. The Court of Inquiry, however, was not conducted as a formal court-martial. Without the legal boundaries of that format, several of the witnesses minimized their statements to protect themselves or peers.[citation needed] The Secretary of War concurred with the decision and reinstated Forsyth to command of the 7th Cavalry. Testimony indicated that for the most part troops attempted to avoid non-combatant casualties. Nevertheless, Miles ignored the results of the Court of Inquiry and continued to criticize Forsyth, whom he believed had deliberately disobeyed orders. Miles promoted the conclusion that Wounded Knee was a deliberate massacre rather than a tragedy caused by poor decisions.[citation needed]
The American public's reaction to the battle at the time was generally favorable. The Army awarded twenty Medals of Honor, its highest award, for the action. When the awards were reviewed a decade later, Miles supported them.[citation needed]




Wounded Knee grave, 2003


In the 21st century, Native American activists have urged the medals be withdrawn, as they say they were "Medals of Dis-Honor". [1]
Historian Will G. Robinson noted that in contrast, only three Medals of Honor were awarded to men among the 64,000 South Dakotans who fought for four years of the Second World War.[15] This criticism fails to take into account the different times and standards[citation needed]. The significance of the medal was raised to a higher standard and awarded less frequently.




Portrait of General L. W. Colby of Nebraska State Troops Holding Baby Girl, Zintkala Nuni (Little Lost Bird), Found On Wounded Knee Battlefield, South Dakota, 1890.


Many non-Lakota living near the reservations interpreted the battle as the defeat of a murderous cult; others confused Ghost Dancers with Native Americans in general. In an editorial response to the event, the young newspaper editor L. Frank Baum, later the author of The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, wrote in the Aberdeen Saturday Pioneer on January 3, 1891:

The Pioneer has before declared that our only safety depends upon the total extermination of the Indians. Having wronged them for centuries, we had better, in order to protect our civilization, follow it up by one more wrong and wipe these untamed and untameable creatures from the face of the earth. In this lies future safety for our settlers and the soldiers who are under incompetent commands. Otherwise, we may expect future years to be as full of trouble with the redskins as those have been in the past.[16]

More than 80 years after the massacre, beginning on February 27, 1973, Wounded Knee was the site of a 71-day standoff between federal authorities and militants of the American Indian Movement.

[edit] Skirmish at Drexel Mission




Wounded Knee hill


Historically, Wounded Knee is generally considered to be the end of the collective multi-century series of conflicts between colonial and U.S. forces and American Indians, known collectively as the Indian Wars. It led to a dramatic decline in the Ghost Dance movement; however, it was not the last armed conflict between Native Americans and the United States.
A related skirmish took place at Drexel Mission the day after the Battle of Wounded Knee. One soldier died and six were wounded from K Troop, 7th Cavalry. Lakota casualties were not recorded. After news of Wounded Knee reached them, Lakota Ghost Dancers from bands which had surrendered, fled, burning several buildings at the mission as they left. They ambushed a squadron of the 7th Cavalry that responded to the incident and pinned it down until a relief force from the 9th Cavalry arrived. The 9th had been trailing the Lakota from the White River. Lieutenant James D. Mann, who had been a key participant in the outbreak of firing at Wounded Knee, died of his wounds 17 days later at Ft. Riley, Kansas, on January 15, 1891. The Drexel Mission skirmish is often overlooked.

[edit] Popular culture





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2008)







This Section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please improve this Section if you can. (March 2008)


In the late 20th century, much of American history was reconsidered, especially treatment of Native Americans. Indian activists raised criticism of this and other killings. Many consider the incident one of the most grievous atrocities in United States history. The 1970 book Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee by historian Dee Brown raised awareness of the massacre and became a bestseller.
In 1972, Johnny Cash wrote and released a song titled "Big Foot" which related the tragedy at Wounded Knee. Like many of Cash's songs about Native Americans, it describes their poor treatment and victimization by whites.
In 1973, the American rock band Redbone, formed by two Native Americans, released the politically oriented song "We were all wounded at Wounded Knee". The song ends with the subtly altered sentence, "We were all wounded by Wounded Knee". The song reached the number one chart position across Europe. In the U.S., the song was initially withheld from release and then banned by several radio stations.[citation needed]
"Wounded Knee" is a track from Nik Kershaw's 1989 album The Works.
The 1992 video game Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Turtles in Time included a Wild West level named "Bury My Shell at Wounded Knee".
In 1992, the film Thunderheart starring Val Kilmer and Graham Greene was released. It combined a modern era crime-story with spiritual allusions to both the massacre in 1890 and a fictional version of the Wounded Knee incident in 1973 on the Sioux reservation.
Also in 1992 the Battle of Wounded Knee Creek was commemorated in the popular protest song "Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee", written by Buffy Sainte-Marie.
In 1995 the Indigo Girls released a cover of this song on their 1200 Curfews (Live) CD.
In 1996 a trilogy of inter-linked dramas on man's inhumanity to man, The Four Seasons Of Wounded Knee by English playwright Ralph Morse was premiered. The first play Ghost Dance was related to the massacre.
In 1997, rock band Toad the Wet Sprocket had success "Crazy Life", a song about Indian rights and Leonard Peltier.
Petri Hiltunen's 2000 graphic novel Aavetanssi (Ghost Dance in Finnish) depicted the massacre from a Native American point of view.
2001 - Five Iron Frenzy, "The Day We Killed" , song on Electric Boogaloo. The song makes references to the massacre at Wounded Knee.
Primus recorded a Percussion Instrumental called "Wounded Knee" which appears on the album Pork Soda.
Scottish songwriter Alan Cassidy makes reference to Wounded Knee in "The Red The White and The Blue".
The 2004 film Hidalgo has a brief passage about the 1870s Battle of Wounded Knee Creek.
The 2005 film Into the West had a re-enactment of the battle. It was produced by Steven Spielberg for Turner Network Television.
2005 - Marty Stuart produced Badlands; Ballads of the Lakota, with original songs about the Lakota and a cover of the Cash song "Bigfoot."
May 2007 - HBO Films released the film adaptation of the Dee Brown bestseller Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee on HBO.
2008 - the British rock band Uriah Heep released Wake the Sleeper, including "What Kind of God", inspired by the Wounded Knee Massacre.

[edit] References


^ Liggett, Lorie (1998). "Wounded Knee Massacre - An Introduction". Bowling Green State University. http://www.bgsu.edu/departments/acs/1890s/woundedknee/WKIntro.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-02. 
^ http://www.lastoftheindependents.com/wounded.htm
^ Strom, Karen (1995). "The Massacre at Wounded Knee". Karen Strom. http://www.hanksville.org/daniel/lakota/Wounded_Knee.html. 
^ "National Historic Landmarks Program: Wounded Knee". National Park Service. http://tps.cr.nps.gov/nhl/detail.cfm?ResourceId=540&ResourceType=Site. Retrieved on 2008-01-10. 
^ *Kehoe, B Alice "The Ghost Dance: Ethnohistory and Revitalization", Massacre at Wounded Knee Creek, pg 15. Thompson publishing; 1989
^ Wallace, Anthony F. C. "Revitalization Movements: Some Theoretical Considerations for Their Comparative Study", American Anthropologist, n.s. 58(2):264-81. 1956
^ Wallace, Anthony F. C. "Revitalization Movements: Some Theoretical Considerations for Their Comparative Study", American Anthropologist, n.s. 58(2):264-81. 1956
^ Mooney, James, "The Ghost-Dance Religion and Wounded Knee", originally published as "The Ghost-Dance Religion and the Sioux Outbreak of 1890" as part of the Fourteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 1896. 1973 Dover edition.
^ Bateman, Robert. Wounded Knee. Military History Jun2008 24(4) pp. 62-67.
^ Axelrod, Alan. (1993) Chronicles of the Indian Wars: From Colonial Times to Wounded Knee. (p.254)
^ Phillips, Charles. December 29, 1890. American History. Dec 2005 40(5) pp. 16-68.
^ Bateman, Robert. Wounded Knee. Military History. Jun2008, 24(4) pp. 62-67.
^ Utley, Robert (1963). "The Last Days of the Sioux Nation". Yale University Press. http://yalepress.yale.edu/yupbooks/book.asp?isbn=9780300103168. Retrieved on 2007-08-04. 
^ [http://www.dickshovel.com/WagnerA.html "Doctor Sally Wagner Testifies At Wounded Knee Hearings, Part One"]
^ Doctor Sally Wagner Testifies At Wounded Knee Hearings Part Two
^ Baum's "Genocide" Editorials



[edit] Further reading

Brown, Dee. Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee: An Indian History of the American West, Owl Books (1970). ISBN 0-8050-6669-1.
Coleman, William S.E. Voices of Wounded Knee, University of Nebraska Press (2000). ISBN 0-8032-1506-1.
Smith, Rex Alan. Moon of Popping Trees, University of Nebraska Press (1981). ISBN 0-8032-9120-5.
Utley, Robert M. Last Days of the Sioux Nation, Yale University Press (1963).
Utley, Robert M. The Indian Frontier 1846-1890, University of New Mexico Press (2003). ISBN 0-8263-2998-5.
Utley, Robert M. Frontier Regulars The United States Army and the Indian 1866-1891, MacMillan Publishing (1973).
Yenne, Bill. Indian Wars: The Campaign for the American West, Westholme (2005). ISBN 1-59416-016-3.
Champlin, Tim. A Trail To Wounded Knee : A Western Story, Five Star (2001). ISBN 0-7826-2401-0


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Wounded Knee Massacre 



The Wounded Knee Museum in Wall, South Dakota
Read a review of HBO's Bury My Heart At Wounded Knee
Bureau of American Ethnology report on the Ghost Dance Religion
Editorials by L. Frank Baum
History of the Ghost Dance Religion
PBS biography of Jack Wilson
Walter Mason camp collection includes photographs from the Battle of Wounded Knee Creek
The Lost Bird of Wounded Knee (1890-1920)
US Army Casuality list of Wounded Knee
The effect of the massacre, a photo essay of life in villages near Wounded Knee today








v • d • e

U.S. National Register of Historic Places






Keeper of the Register · History of the National Register of Historic Places · Property types · Historic district · Contributing property








List of entries
National Park Service · National Historic Landmarks · National Battlefields · National Historic Sites · National Historical Parks · National Memorials · National Monuments












Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wounded_Knee_Massacre"
Categories: Massacres of Native Americans | Mass graves | Pine Ridge Campaign | Sioux | 19th-century colonization of the Americas | National Historic Landmarks in South Dakota | Massacres committed by the United States | 1890 in the United StatesHidden categories: NPOV disputes from December 2007 | All NPOV disputes | Cleanup from February 2008 | All pages needing cleanup | History articles needing expert attention | Articles needing expert attention since April 2008 | Wikipedia articles needing factual verification since January 2009 | All pages needing factual verification | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2007 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 | Articles needing additional references from March 2008 | Cleanup from March 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 | South Dakota articles missing geocoordinate data 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
한국어
Italiano
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Русский
Slovenščina
Suomi
Türkçe









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 14:25.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
