













Jack Kirby - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Jack_Kirby";
		var wgTitle = "Jack Kirby";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "16556";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 276750767;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Jack Kirby

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For the Australian rules footballer, see Jack Kirby (footballer).


Jack Kirby



Jack Kirby in 1982.


Birth name
Jacob Kurtzberg


Born
August 28, 1917(1917-08-28)
New York City, New York, United States


Died
February 6, 1994 (aged 76)
Thousand Oaks, California, United States


Nationality
American


Area(s)
Penciller, inker, writer, editor


Pseudonym(s)
Jack Curtiss
Curt Davis
Ted Grey


Notable works
Captain America, Fantastic Four, The Hulk, X-Men, The Avengers, Fourth World


Awards
Alley Award

Best Pencil Artist (1967), plus many awards for individual stories

Shazam Award

Special Achievement by an Individual (1971)




Jacob Kurtzberg (August 28, 1917 – February 6, 1994),[1] better known by the pen name Jack Kirby, was an American comic book artist, writer and editor. Growing up poor in New York City, Kurtzberg entered the nascent comics industry in the 1930s. He drew various comic strips under different pseudonyms, ultimately settling on Jack Kirby. In 1941, Kirby and writer Joe Simon created the highly successful superhero character Captain America for Timely Comics. During the 1940s, Kirby would create a number of comics for various publishers, often teamed with Simon.
After serving in World War II, Kirby returned to comics and worked in a variety of genres. He contributed to a number of publishers, including Archie Comics and DC Comics, but ultimately found himself at Timely's 1950s iteration, Atlas Comics. Together with writer-editor Stan Lee at what then became Marvel Comics, Kirby during the 1960s created many of the company's major characters, including the Fantastic Four, the X-Men, and the Hulk. Despite the high sales and critical acclaim of the Lee-Kirby titles, Kirby felt treated unfairly, and left the company in 1970 for rival DC Comics.
While working for DC, Kirby created his Fourth World saga, which spanned several comics titles. While these and other titles proved commercially unsuccessful and were canceled, several of their characters and the Fourth World mythos have continued as a significant part of the DC Comics universe. Kirby returned to Marvel briefly in the mid- to late 1970s, then ventured into television animation and independent comics. In his later years, Kirby received great recognition for his career accomplishments, and is regarded by historians and fans as one of the major innovators and most influential creators in the comic-book medium.




Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Early life
1.2 Entry into comics
1.3 Partnership with Joe Simon
1.4 Marriage and World War II
1.5 Postwar career
1.6 After Simon
1.7 Marvel Comics in the Silver Age
1.8 DC Comics and the Fourth World saga
1.9 Return to Marvel
1.10 Film and animation
1.11 Final years and death


2 Legacy
3 Awards and honors
4 Bibliography
5 Notes
6 References
7 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography

[edit] Early life
Kirby was born in August 1917 in New York City. His father was an Austrian Jewish immigrant who earned a living as a garment-factory worker. Growing up on Suffolk Street, Kirby was often involved in street fights with other kids, he later said that "fighting became second nature. I began to like it." Through his youth Kirby desired to escape his neighborhood. He liked to draw and sought out places he could learn more about art.[2] Essentially self-taught,[3] Kirby cited among his influences the comic strip artists Milton Caniff, Hal Foster, and Alex Raymond, as well as such editorial cartoonists as C. H. Sykes, "Ding" Darling, and Rollin Kirby.[3] He was rejected by the Educational Alliance because he "[drew] too fast with charcoal", according to Kirby. He later found an outlet for his skills by drawing cartoons for the newspaper of the Boys Brotherhood Republic, a "miniature city" on East 3rd Street where street kids ran their own government.[4]
Kirby enrolled at the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, at what he said was age 14, leaving after a week. "I wasn't the kind of student that Pratt was looking for. They wanted people who would work on something forever. I didn't want to work on any project forever. I intended to get things done".[5]

[edit] Entry into comics




Captain America Comics #1 (March 1941). Cover art by Kirby & Joe Simon.


Per his own sometimes-unreliable memory, Kirby joined the Lincoln Newspaper Syndicate in 1936, working there on newspaper comic strips and on single-panel advice cartoons such as Your Health Comes First!!! (under the pseudonym "Jack Curtiss"). He remained until late 1939, then worked for the movie animation company Fleischer Studios as an "inbetweener" (an artist who fills in the action between major-movement frames) on Popeye cartoons. "I went from Lincoln to Fleischer," he recalled. "From Fleischer I had to get out in a hurry because I couldn't take that kind of thing," describing it as "a factory in a sense, like my father's factory. They were manufacturing pictures."[6]
Around that time, the American comic book industry was booming. Kirby began writing and drawing for the comic-book packager Eisner & Iger, one of a handful of firms creating comics on demand for publishers. Through that company, Kirby did what he remembers as his first comic book work, for Wild Boy Magazine.[7] This included such strips as the science fiction adventure The Diary of Dr. Hayward (under the pseudonym "Curt Davis"), the Western crimefighter strip Wilton of the West (as "Fred Sande"), the swashbuckler strip The Count of Monte Cristo (again as "Jack Curtiss"), and the humor strips Abdul Jones (as "Ted Grey)" and Socko the Seadog (as "Teddy"), all variously for Jumbo Comics and other Eisner-Iger clients. He ultimately settled on the pen name Jack Kirby because it reminded him of actor James Cagney. However, he took offense to those who suggested he changed his name in order to hide his Jewish heritage.[8]
In the summer of 1940, Kirby and his family moved to Brooklyn. There, Kirby met Rosalind "Roz" Goldstein, who lived in his family's apartment building. The pair began dating soon afterward.[9] Kirby proposed to Goldstein on her eighteenth birthday, and the two became engaged.[10]

[edit] Partnership with Joe Simon
Kirby moved on to comic-book publisher and newspaper syndicator Fox Feature Syndicate, earning a then-reasonable $15 a week salary. He began exploring superhero narrative with the comic strip The Blue Beetle (Jan.-March 1940), starring a character created by the pseudonymous Charles Nicholas, a house name that Kirby retained for the three-month-long strip. During this time, Kirby met and began collaborating with cartoonist and Fox editor Joe Simon, who in addition to his staff work continued to freelance. Simon recalled in 1988, "I loved Jack's work and the first time I saw it I couldn't believe what I was seeing. He asked if we could do some freelance work together. I was delighted and I took him over to my little office. We worked from the second issue of Blue Bolt..."[11]
After leaving Fox and landing at pulp magazine publisher Martin Goodman's Timely Comics (the future Marvel Comics), created the patriotic superhero Captain America in late 1940. Simon cut a deal with Goodman that gave him and Kirby 15 percent of the profits from the strip as well as salaried positions as the company's editor and art director, respectively. The first issue of Captain America Comics, released in early 1941, sold out in days, and the second issue's print run was set at over a million copies. The title's success established the team as a notable creative force in the industry.[12] After the first issue was published, Simon asked Kirby to join the Timely staff as the company's art director.[13]
Despite the success of the Captain America character, Simon felt that Goodman was not paying the pair the promised percentage of profits, and so sought work for the two of them at National Comics (later named DC Comics).[14] Kirby and Simon negotiated a deal that would pay them a combined $500 a week, as opposed to the $75 and $85 they respectively earned at Timely.[15] Fearing that Goodman would not pay them if he found out they were moving to National, the pair kept the deal a secret while they continued producing work for the company. Eventually the staff at Timely (most of whom were relatives of Goodman) found out, so Kirby and Simon left after they completed their work on Captain America Comics.[16]
Kirby and Simon spent their first weeks at National trying to come up with characters while the company attempted to find out how to use the pair.[17] After a few failed editor-assigned ghosting assignments, National's Jack Liebowitz told them to just do what you want" since they were being paid anyway. The pair then revamped the Sandman strip in Adventure Comics and created the superhero Manhunter.[18] In July 1942 they began the Boy Commandos strip. The ongoing Boy Commandos series, launched later that same year, sold over a million copies a month, becoming National's third best-selling title.[19]

[edit] Marriage and World War II
Kirby married Roz Goldstein on May 23, 1942.[20] The same year that he married, he changed his name legally from Jacob Kurtzberg to Jack Kirby.
With World War II underway, Liebowitz expected that Simon and Kirby would be drafted, so he asked the artists to create an inventory of material to be published in their absence. The pair hired writers, inkers, letters, and colorists in order to create a year's worth of material.[19] Kirby was drafted into the U.S. Army on June 7, 1943.[21] After basic training at Camp Stewart, near Atlanta, Georgia, he was assigned to Company F of the 11th Infantry.[22] landed on Omaha Beach in Normandy on August 23, 1944, two-and-a-half months after D-Day,[22] though Kirby's reminiscences would place his arrival just 10 days after.[21] Kirby recalled that a lieutenant, learning that comics artist Kirby was in his command, made him a scout who would advance into towns and draw reconnaissance maps and pictures.[23]
Kirby and his wife corresponded regularly by v-mail, with Roz sending "him a letter a day" while she worked in a lingerie shop and lived with her mother.[24] During the winter of 1944, Kirby suffered severe frostbite on his lower extremities and was taken to a hospital in London, England, for recovery. Doctors considered amputating Kirby's legs, but he eventually recovered from the frostbite.[25] He returned to the United States in January 1945, assigned to Camp Butner in North Carolina, where he spent the last six months of his service as part of the motor pool. Kirby was honorably discharged as a private first class on July 20, 1945, having received combat infantry badge and a European/African/Middle Eastern Theater ribbon with a bronze battle star.[26][27]

[edit] Postwar career




Young Romance #1 (Oct. 1947). Cover art by Kirby & Simon.


After returning from the army, Kirby's first daughter, Susan, was born on December 6, 1945. Simon arranged for work for Kirby and himself at Harvey Comics.[28] There through the early 1950s, Simon and Kirby created such titles as the the kid-gang adventure Boy Explorers Comics, the kid-gang western Boys' Ranch, and the superhero comics Stuntman, and, in vogue with the fad for 3-D movies, Captain 3-D. The duo additionally freelanced for Hillman Periodicals (the crime fiction comic Real Clue Crime) and for Crestwood Publications (Justice Traps the Guilty).
Kirby and Simon found success in the postwar period by creating romance comics. Simon, inspired by Macfadden Publications' romantic-confession magazine True Story, transplanted the idea to comic books and with Kirby created a first-issue mock-up of Young Romance.[29] Showing it to Crestwood general manager Maurice Rosenfeld, Simon asked for 50% of the comic's profits. Crestwood publishers Teddy Epstein and Mike Bleier agreed,[29] stipulating that the creators would take no money up front[30] Young Romance #1 (Sept./Oct. 1947) "became Jack and Joe's biggest hit in years".[31] Indeed, the pioneering title sold a staggering 92% of its print run, inspiring Crestwood to increase the print run by the third issue to triple the initial number of copies.[32] Initially published bimonthly, Young Romance quickly became a monthly title and produced the spin-off Young Love — together the two titles sold two million copies per month, according to Simon[33] — later joined by Young Brides and In Love, the latter "featuring full-length romance stories".[32] Young Romance spawned dozens of imitators from publishers such as Timely, Fawcett, Quality, and Fox Features Syndicate.[31] Despite the glut, the Simon & Kirby romance titles continued to sell millions of copies a month, which allowed Kirby to buy a house for his family in Mineola, Long Island.[31]
Kirby's second child, Neal, was born in May 1948.[31] His third child, Barbara, was born in November 1952. In order to support his family, Kirby worked harder, assisted by the deal Simon arranged for the pair that gave them 50 percent of the profits for their work.[34] Bitter that Atlas Comics (formerly Timely) had relaunched Captain America in a new series, in 1954, Kirby and Simon created Fighting American; Simon recalled, "We thought we'd show them how to do Captain American".[35] While the comic book initially portrayed the protagonist as anti-Communist, in the aftermath of the Army-McCarthy hearings Simon and Kirby turned it into a satire.[36]

[edit] After Simon




Sky Masters by Kirby & Wally Wood.


At the urging of a Crestwood/Prize salesman, Kirby and Simon launched their own comics company, Mainline Publications.[36] Titles included Bullseye: Western Scout, Foxhole, In Love, and Police Trap. After the duo rearranged and republished artwork from an old Crestwood story in In Love, Crestwood refused to pay Simon and Kirby.[37] After reviewing Crestwood's finances, the pair's attorney's stated hat the company owed them $130,000 over the past seven years. Crestwood paid them $10,000 in addition to their recent delayed payments. However, the partnership between Kirby and Simon had become strained.[38] Simon left the industry for a career in advertising, while Kirby continued to freelance. He was instrumental in the creation of Archie Comics' The Fly and The Double Life of Private Strong, reuniting briefly with Joe Simon. He also drew some issues of Classics Illustrated.
For DC Comics, then known as National Comics, Kirby co-created with writers Dick and Dave Wood the non-superpowered adventuring quartet the Challengers of the Unknown in Showcase #6 (Feb. 1957), while also contributing to such anthologies as House of Mystery. During 30 months at DC, Kirby drew slightly more than 600 pages, which included 11 six-page Green Arrow stories in World's Finest Comics and Adventure Comics that, in a rarity, Kirby inked himself.[39] Kirby recast the archer as a science-fiction hero, moving him away from his Batman-formula roots, but in the process alienating Green Arrow co-creator Mort Weisinger.[40] He also began drawing a newspaper comic strip, Sky Masters of the Space Force, written by the Wood brothers and initially inked by the unrelated Wally Wood.[41]
Kirby left National Comics due largely to a contractual dispute in which editor Jack Schiff, who had been involved in getting Kirby and the Wood brothers the Sky Masters contract, claimed he was due royalties from Kirby's share of the strip's profits. Schiff successfully sued Kirby.[42] Some DC editors also had criticized him over art details, such as not drawing "the shoelaces on a cavalryman's boots" and showing a Native American "mounting his horse from the wrong side."[43]

[edit] Marvel Comics in the Silver Age




One of comics' most iconic covers: The Avengers #4 (March 1964). Art by Kirby & George Roussos.


Kirby returned to work with Stan Lee on the cusp of the company's evolution from its 1950s incarnation as Atlas Comics (previously Timely Comics) to become Marvel. Inker Frank Giacoia approached Lee for work, but when informed that Atlas artists inked their own pencils, suggested he could "get Kirby back here to pencil some stuff."[44] Kirby was still working on DC's Challengers of the Unknown, but also searching for work from other publishers, with little success. Continuing with DC on such titles as House of Mystery and House of Secrets, Kirby drew occasional stories for Atlas, including the Lone Ranger-like Black Rider and the Fu Manchu stand-in Yellow Claw.[45]
Kirby began working at Atlas. Because of the poor page rates, Kirby had to spend 12 to 14 hours at his drawing table at home, producing eight to ten pages of artwork a day.[46] His first published work at Atlas was the cover of and the seven-page story "I Discovered the Secret of the Flying Saucers" in Strange Worlds #1 (Dec. 1958). Initially with Christopher Rule as his regular inker, and later Dick Ayers, Kirby drew across all genres, from romance to war comics, crime stories to Westerns, but made his mark primarily with a series of supernatural-fantasy and science fiction stories featuring giant, drive-in movie-style monsters with names like Groot, the Thing from Planet X; Grottu, King of the Insects; and Fin Fang Foom for the company's many anthology series, such as Amazing Adventures, Strange Tales, Tales to Astonish, Tales of Suspense, and World of Fantasy. His bizarre designs of powerful, unearthly creatures proved a hit with readers.
Then, with Marvel editor-in-chief Lee, Kirby began working on superhero comics again, beginning with The Fantastic Four #1 (Nov. 1961). The landmark series became a hit that revolutionized the industry with its comparative naturalism and, eventually, a cosmic purview informed by Kirby's seemingly boundless imagination — one coincidentally well-matched with the consciousness-expanding youth culture of the 1960s.
For almost a decade, Kirby provided Marvel's house style, co-creating with Stan Lee many of the Marvel characters and designing their visual motifs. At Lee's request, he often provided new-to-Marvel artists "breakdown" layouts, over which they would pencil in order to become acquainted with the Marvel look. As artist Gil Kane described,


“
...Jack was the single most influential figure in the turnaround in Marvel's fortunes from the time he rejoined the company ... It wasn't merely that Jack conceived most of the characters that are being done, but ... Jack's point of view and philosophy of drawing became the governing philosophy of the entire publishing company and, beyond the publishing company, of the entire field ... [Marvel took] Jack and use[d] him as a primer. They would get artists ... and they taught them the ABCs, which amounted to learning Jack Kirby. ... Jack was like the Holy Scripture and they simply had to follow him without deviation. That's what was told to me ... It was how they taught everyone to reconcile all those opposing attitudes to one single master point of view.[47]
”


Highlights besides the Fantastic Four include Thor, the Hulk, Iron Man, the original X-Men, the Silver Surfer, Doctor Doom, Galactus, The Watcher, Magneto, Ego the Living Planet, the Inhumans and their hidden city of Attilan, and the Black Panther — comics' first known Black superhero — and his African nation of Wakanda. Simon and Kirby's Captain America was also incorporated into Marvel's continuity with Kirby approving Lee's idea[citation needed] of partially remaking the character as a man out of his time and regretting the death of his sidekick.
In 1968 and 1969, Joe Simon was involved in litigation with Marvel Comics over the ownership of Captain America, initiated by Marvel after Simon registered the copyright renewal for Captain America in his own name. According to Simon, Kirby agreed to support the company in the litigation and, as part of a deal Kirby made with publisher Martin Goodman, signed over to Marvel any rights he might have had to the character.[48]
Kirby continued to expand the medium's boundaries, devising photo-collage covers and interiors, developing new drawing techniques such as the method for depicting energy fields now known as "Kirby Dots," and other experiments.[49] Yet he grew increasingly dissatisfied with working at Marvel. There have been a number of reasons given for this dissatisfaction, including resentment over Stan Lee's increasing media prominence, a lack of full creative control, anger over breaches of perceived promises by publisher Martin Goodman, and frustration over Marvel's failure to credit him specifically for his story plotting and for his character creations and co-creations.[50][51] He began to both script and draw some secondary features for Marvel, such as "The Inhumans" in Amazing Adventures and horror stories for the anthology title Chamber of Darkness, and received full credit for doing so; but he eventually left the company in 1970 for rival DC Comics, under editorial director Carmine Infantino.

[edit] DC Comics and the Fourth World saga




The New Gods #1 (March 1971) Cover art by Kirby & Don Heck.


Kirby spent nearly two years negotiating a deal to move to DC Comics.[52] Kirby returned to DC in late 1970, signing a three-year contract with an option for two additional years.[53] He produced a series of inter-linked titles under the blanket sobriquet "The Fourth World" including a trilogy of new titles, New Gods, Mister Miracle, and The Forever People, as well as the Superman title, Superman’s Pal Jimmy Olsen. Kirby picked the latter book because the series was without a stable creative team and he did not want to cost anyone a job.[54] The central villain of the Fourth World series, Darkseid, and some of the Fourth World concepts, appeared in Jimmy Olsen before the launch of the other Fourth World books, giving the new titles greater exposure to potential buyers.
Kirby later produced other DC titles such as OMAC, Kamandi, The Demon, and, together with former partner Joe Simon for one last time, a new incarnation of the Sandman.

[edit] Return to Marvel
Kirby then returned to Marvel Comics where he both wrote and drew Captain America and created the series The Eternals, which featured a race of inscrutable alien giants, the Celestials, whose behind-the-scenes intervention influenced the evolution of life on Earth. Kirby’s other Marvel creations in this period include Devil Dinosaur, Machine Man, and an adaptation and expansion of the movie 2001: A Space Odyssey as well as an abortive attempt to do the same for the classic television series, The Prisoner.[55] He also wrote and drew The Black Panther and did numerous covers across the line.

[edit] Film and animation
Still dissatisfied with Marvel's treatment of him, and with the company's refusal to provide health and other employment benefits,[citation needed] Kirby left Marvel to work in animation. In that field, he did designs for Turbo Teen, Thundarr the Barbarian and other animated television series. He also worked on The Fantastic Four cartoon show, reuniting him with scriptwriter Stan Lee. He illustrated an adaptation of the Walt Disney movie The Black Hole for Walt Disney’s Treasury of Classic Tales syndicated comic strip in 1979-80.
In 1979, Kirby drew concept art for film producer Barry Geller's script treatment adapting Roger Zelazny's science fiction novel, Lord of Light, for which Geller had purchased the rights. Geller, who additionally imagined using Kirby's set designs for a Colorado theme park to be called Science Fiction Land, announced his plans at a November press conference attended by Kirby, former NFL American football star and prospective cast-member Rosey Grier, and others. While the film did not come to fruition, Kirby's drawings were used for the C.I.A.'s "Canadian caper", in which some members of the U.S. embassy in Tehran, Iran, who had avoided capture in the Iran hostage crisis, were able to escape the country posing as members of a movie location-scouting crew.[56]

[edit] Final years and death




Topps Comics' Bombast #1 (April 1993). Cover art by Kirby


In the early 1980s, Pacific Comics, a new, non-newsstand comic book publisher, made a then-groundbreaking deal with Kirby to publish a creator-owned series Captain Victory and the Galactic Rangers,[57] followed by a second called Silver Star, which Image Comics has been working on collecting.[58][59][60] This, together with similar actions by other independent comics publishers as Eclipse Comics where he co-created Destroyer Duck to help Steve Gerber fight in his case versus Marvel,[61] helped establish a precedent to end the monopoly of the work for hire system, wherein comics creators, even freelancers, had owned no rights to characters they created.
Kirby also retained ownership of characters used by Topps Comics beginning in 1993, for a set of series in what the company dubbed "The Kirbyverse".[62] These titles were derived mainly from designs and concepts that Kirby had kept in his files, some intended initially for the by-then-defunct Pacific Comics, and then licensed to Topps for what would become the "Jack Kirby's Secret City Saga" mythos.[63]
Kirby died at age 76 of heart failure in his Thousand Oaks, California home and is buried at the Pierce Brothers Valley Oaks Memorial Park, Westlake Village, California.[64]

[edit] Legacy
The New York Times, in a Sunday op-ed piece written more than a decade after his death, said Kirby


“
created a new grammar of storytelling and a cinematic style of motion. Once-wooden characters cascaded from one frame to another — or even from page to page — threatening to fall right out of the book into the reader’s lap. The force of punches thrown was visibly and explosively evident. Even at rest, a Kirby character pulsed with tension and energy in a way that makes movie versions of the same characters seem static by comparison.[65]
”


Kirby's daughter, Lisa Kirby, announced in early 2006 that she and co-writer Steve Robertson, with artist Mike Thibodeaux, plan to publish via the Marvel Comics Icon imprint, a six-issue limited series, Jack Kirby’s Galactic Bounty Hunters, featuring characters and concepts created by her father for Captain Victory.[66] The series has been reprinted in both hardcover and paperback. Marvel also posthumously published a "lost" Kirby/Lee Fantastic Four story.[67]
Several Kirby images are among those on the "Marvel Super Heroes" set of commemorative stamps issued by the U.S. Postal Service on July 27, 2007.[68] Ten of the stamps are portraits of individual Marvel characters and the other 10 stamps depict individual Marvel Comic book covers. According to the credits printed on the back of the pane, Kirby's artwork is featured on: Captain America, The Thing, Silver Surfer, The Amazing Spider-Man #1, The Incredible Hulk #1, Captain America #100, The X-Men #1, and The Fantastic Four #3.[65][68]

[edit] Awards and honors
Jack Kirby received a great deal of recognition over the course of his career, including the 1967 Alley Award for Best Pencil Artist.[69] The following year he was runner-up behind Jim Steranko. His other Alley Awards were:

1963: Favorite Short Story - "The Human Torch Meets Captain America,", by Stan Lee & Jack Kirby, Strange Tales #114[70]
1964:[71]

Best Novel - "Captain America Joins the Avengers", by Stan Lee & Jack Kirby, from The Avengers #4
Best New Strip or Book - "Captain America", by Stan Lee & Jack Kirby, in Tales of Suspense


1965: Best Short Story - "The Origin of the Red Skull", by Stan Lee & Jack Kirby, Tales of Suspense #66[72]
1966: Best Professional Work, Regular Short Feature - "Tales of Asgard" by Stan Lee & Jack Kirby, in The Mighty Thor[73]
1967: Best Professional Work, Regular Short Feature - (tie) "Tales of Asgard" and "Tales of the Inhumans", both by Stan Lee & Jack Kirby, in The Mighty Thor[69]
1968:[74]

Best Professional Work, Best Regular Short Feature - "Tales of the Inhumans", by Stan Lee & Jack Kirby, in The Mighty Thor
Best Professional Work, Hall of Fame - Fantastic Four, by Stan Lee & Jack Kirby; Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D., by Jim Steranko[75]



Kirby won a Shazam Award for Special Achievement by an Individual in 1971 for his "Fourth World" series in Forever People, New Gods, Mister Miracle, and Superman's Pal Jimmy Olsen.[76] He was inducted into the Shazam Awards Hall of Fame in 1975.[77] In 1987 he was an inaugural inductee into The Will Eisner Award Hall.[78] 1993 saw him receive the Bob Clampett Humanitarian Award at that year's Eisner Awards.[79]
His work was honored posthumously in 1998. The collection of his New Gods material, Jack Kirby's New Gods by Jack Kirby, edited by Bob Kahan won both the Harvey Award for Best Domestic Reprint Project[80] and the Eisner Award for Best Archival Collection/Project.[81]
The Jack Kirby Awards and Jack Kirby Hall of Fame were named in his honor.
With Will Eisner, Robert Crumb, Harvey Kurtzman, Gary Panter and Chris Ware, Kirby was among the artists honored in the exhibition "Masters of American Comics" at the Jewish Museum in New York City, New York, from Sept. 16, 2006 to Jan. 28, 2007.[82][83]

[edit] Bibliography
Main article: Jack Kirby bibliography

[edit] Notes


^ Jack Kirby, Social Security Death Index details, FamilySearch
^ Jones, Gerard. Men of Tomorrow: Geeks, Gangsters, and the Birth of the Comic Book (Basic Books, 2004; trade paperback ISBN 0-465-03657-0), p. 195-96
^ a b Evanier, Mark. Kirby: King of Comics. Abrams, 2008. ISBN 081099447X, p. 34
^ Jones, p. 196
^ Interview, The Comics Journal #134 (Feb. 1990), reprinted in George, Milo, ed., The Comics Journal Library, Volume One: Jack Kirby (Fantagraphics Books, 2002) ISBN 1-56097-466-4, p. 22
^ Interview, The Comics Journal #134, reprinted in George, p. 24
^ Interview, The Nostalgia Journal #30 (Nov. 1976), reprinted in George, p. 3
^ Jones, p. 197
^ Ro, p. 14
^ Ro, p. 16
^ "More Than Your Average Joe" (excerpts from Joe Simon's panels at 1998 Comi-Con International), Jack Kirby Collector #25 (Aug. 1999)
^ Jones, p. 200
^ Ro, p. 21
^ Ro, p. 25
^ Ro, p. 25-26
^ Ro, p. 29
^ Ro, p. 28
^ Ro, p. 30
^ a b Ro, p. 32
^ Evanier, King of Comics, p. 57
^ a b Ro, p. 33
^ a b Evanier, p. 67
^ Ro, p. 35
^ Ro, p. 40
^ Ro, p. 40-41
^ Evanier, p. 69
^ Ro, p. 42
^ Ro, p. 45
^ a b Simon, Joe, with Jim Simon. The Comic Book Makers (Crestwood/II, 1990) ISBN 1-887591-35-4; reissued (Vanguard Productions, 2003) ISBN 1-887591-35-4, pp. 123-125
^ Evanier, King of Comics. p. 72
^ a b c d Ro, p. 46
^ a b Howell, Richard, "Introduction" to Real Love - The Best of the Simon and Kirby Romance Comics 1940s-1950s (Eclipse Books, 1988)
^ Simon, p. 125
^ Ro, p. 51-52
^ Ro, p. 52
^ a b Ro, p. 54
^ Ro, p. 55
^ Ro, p. 56
^ Mark Evanier, Introduction, The Green Arrow by Jack Kirby (DC Comics, New York, 2001, ISBN 6194123064): "All were inked by Jack with the aid of his dear spouse, Rosalind. She would trace his pencil work with a static pen line; he would then take a brush, put in all the shadows and bold areas and, where necessary, heavy-up the lines she'd laid down. (Jack hated inking and only did it because he needed the money. After departing DC this time, he almost never inked his own work again.)"
^ Ro, p. 61
^ Evanier, King of Comics, pp. 103-106
^ Evanier, King of Comics, p. 109
^ Ro, p. 91
^ Ro, p. 60
^ Kirby's freelance work appeared in five issues cover-dated Dec. 1956 and Feb. 1957. They were Astonishing #56 (4 pp.), Strange Tales of the Unusual #7 (4 pp.), Quick-Trigger Western #16 (5 pp.), and Yellow Claw #2-3 (19 pp. each).
^ Jones, p. 282
^ Gil Kane, speaking at a forum on July 6, 1985, at the Dallas Fantasy Fair. As quoted in George, p. 109
^ Simon, p. 205
^ Kracklin' Kirby: Tracing the advent of Kirby Krackle by Shane Foley, from Jack Kirby Collector #33 (Nov. 2001)
^ Evanier, King of Comics, p. 126-163
^ Groth, Gary. "Interview III: 'I've never done anything halfheartedly.'" The Comics Journal Library Volume 1: Jack Kirby (2002). p 19-49. ISBN 1560974346 (Originally published in The Comics Journal, 134 February 1990)
^ Ro, p.139
^ Ro, p. 143
^ Evanier, Mark. "Afterword." Jack Kirby's Fourth World Omnibus; Volume 1, New York: DC Comics, 2007.
^ Hatfield, Charles Once Upon A Time: Kirby's Prisoner, The Jack Kirby Collector #11
^ Joshuah Bearman. "How the CIA Used a Fake Sci-Fi Flick to Rescue Americans from Tehran", Wired issue 15.05, posted April 4, 2007.
^ Morrow, John "The Captain Victory Connection" (collected in The Collected Jack Kirby Collector Volume 1, TwoMorrows Publishing, ISBN 1893905004. page 105)
^ One Fan's Opinion by Erik Larsen, Comic Book Resources, February 18, 2007
^ SDCC '07: Erik Larsen, Eric Stephenson on Image's Kirby Plans, Newsarama, July 29, 2007
^ The Current Image: Erik Larsen on Jack Kirby's Silver Star, Newsarama, May 2, 2007
^ Destroyer Duck at Don Markstein's Toonopedia
^ Evanier, p. 207
^ Cooke, Jon B. "Twilight at Topps" (in The Jack Kirby Collector #21, collected in The Collected Jack Kirby Collector, TwoMorrows Publishing, 220 pages, 2006, ISBN 1893905578 ,pages 149-153)
^ Jack Kirby at Find A Grave. Accessed February 21, 2009
^ a b Staples, Brent "Editorial Observer: Jack Kirby, a Comic Book Genius, Is Finally Remembered", The New York Times, August 26, 2007
^ Lisa Kirby, Mike Thibodeaux, & Tom Brevoort on Galactic Bounty Hunters, Newsarama, September 29, 2006
^ SDCC '06: Marvel to Publish "Lost" Lee/Kirby FF Issue, Newsarama, July 22, 2006
^ a b "Postal Service Previews 2007 Commemorative Stamp Program" (Oct. 25, 2006 press release)
^ a b 1967 Alley Awards
^ 1963 Alley Awards
^ 1964 Alley Awards
^ 1965 Alley Awards
^ 1966 Alley Awards
^ 1968 Alley Awards
^ Mark Hanerfeld, who counted the votes, first listed Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D. as the winner. Later, he noticed that he had counted votes for a) "Fantastic Four by Jack Kirby", b) "Fantastic Four by Stan Lee", and c) "Fantastic Four by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby", separately. Had they been counted as one feature, these votes combined would have given the Fantastic Four the victory.
^ 1971 Academy of Comic Book Arts Awards
^ 1975 Academy of Comic Book Arts Awards
^ Will Eisner Comic Industry Award: Summary of Winners
^ The Bob Clampett Humanitarian Award
^ 1998 Harvey Award Nominees and Winners
^ 1998 Will Eisner Comic Industry Award Nominees
^ The Jewish Museum - Special Exhibition - Masters of American Comics
^ See you in the funny papers, The New York Times, October 13, 2006



[edit] References

Evanier, Mark. Kirby: King of Comics. Abrams, 2008. ISBN 081099447X
George, Milo, ed. The Comics Journal Library, Volume One: Jack Kirby. Fantagraphics Books, 2002. ISBN 1-56097-466-4
Jones, Gerard. Men of Tomorrow: Geeks, Gangsters, and the Birth of the Comic Book. Basic Books, 2004. ISBN 0-465-03656-2
Ro, Ronin. Tales to Astonish: Jack Kirby, Stan Lee and the American Comic Book Revolution. Bloomsbury, 2004. ISBN 1-58234-345-4


[edit] External links

The Jack Kirby Museum & Research Center
Jack Kirby at the Grand Comic-Book Database
Jack Kirby at the Comic Book DB
POV Online: "Jack Kirby", by Mark Evanier (includes Jack Kirby FAQ)
"Jack Kirby Heroes Thrive in Comic Books and Film", by Elvis Mitchell, The New York Times, August 27, 2003
"Roz Kirby Interview Excerpts", The Jack Kirby Collector #10, April 1966
Creations of Jack Kirby at the Appendix to the Handbook of the Marvel Universe
The Monsters of Jack Kirby








 
Jack Kirby














v • d • e

Avengers





Creators

Stan Lee · Jack Kirby






Current Books









v • d • e

New Avengers





Creators

Brian Michael Bendis · David Finch






Members

Luke Cage · Ronin · Spider-Man · Wolverine · Captain America (Bucky Barnes) · Ms. Marvel · Spider-Woman · Mockingbird · Jessica Jones






Former members

Captain America · Doctor Strange · Iron Man · The Sentry · Echo · Iron Fist · Veranke (disguised as Spider-Woman)






Enemies

Iron Patriot · Dark Avengers · Hood






Storylines

Story arcs · House of M · New Avengers: Illuminati · World War Hulk · Secret Invasion · Dark Reign · New Avengers/Transformers






Related series

Avengers · "Avengers Disassembled" · Mighty Avengers · Dark Avengers













v • d • e

Mighty Avengers





Creators

Brian Michael Bendis · Frank Cho







Members

Stature · U.S.Agent · Vision · Wasp (Henry Pym)






Adversaries

Chthon · New Avengers · Modred the Mystic · Mole Man · Skrulls · Symbiotes · Ultron






Storylines

Story arcs · Dark Reign






Related series

Avengers · Avengers: The Initiative · New Avengers · Dark Avengers













v • d • e

The Initiative





Teams

Primary: Dark Avengers · Trainees · Thunderbolts
Ancillary: Action Pack · The Called · The Cavalry · The Command · Defenders · Desert Stars · Force Works · Freedom Force · The Garrison · Great Lakes Initiative · Heavy Hitters · Liberteens · The Mavericks · The Order · Point Men · Rangers · Spaceknights






Locations

Stark Tower · Camp Hammond






Anti-Registration teams

Mighty Avengers · New Avengers · Counter Force · New Warriors · Young Avengers · Runaways · X-Factor Investigations













Comic book titles

Primary: The Avengers · New Avengers · Mighty Avengers · Dark Avengers · West Coast Avengers
Ancillary: Agents of Atlas · Force Works · Great Lakes Avengers · Avengers: The Initiative · Young Avengers · Solo Avengers
Alternate continuities: The Ultimates (Members) · A-Next (Members)  · Marvel Adventures: The Avengers · Squadron Supreme (Members)






Opponents

Baron Zemo · Collector · Count Nefaria · Egghead · Grandmaster · Graviton · Grim Reaper · Hood · Immortus · Kang · Korvac · Legion of the Unliving · Lethal Legion · Master Pandemonium · Masters of Evil · Sons of the Serpent · Space Phantom · Super-Adaptoid · Squadron Sinister · Taskmaster · Ultron






Locations

Avengers Mansion · Avengers Island · Stark Tower






In other media

Avengers in Galactic Storm · The Avengers: United They Stand · Captain America and the Avengers · Ultimate Avengers · Ultimate Avengers 2






Miscellania

Bibliography of Avengers titles · List of Avengers members · New Avengers story arcs













v • d • e

Black Panther





Creators

Stan Lee and Jack Kirby






Supporting Characters

Brother Voodoo · White Tiger · Queen Ororo · Coal Tiger · Tom Foster






Villains

Baron Macabre · Erik Killmonger · Hellrazor · Kiber the Cruel · Klaw · Man-Ape · Madam Slay · Malice · Moses Magnum · Sons of the Serpent · Venomm · Windeagle






Publications

Jungle Action · Marvel Premiere






Television

Black Panther






Other media

Ultimate Avengers 2 · Marvel Ultimate Alliance






Related articles

Wakanda · Vibranium













v • d • e

Captain America





Creators

Jack Kirby • Joe Simon






Alter egos

Steve Rogers • William Naslund • Jeffrey Mace • Grand Director • John Walker • James Barnes






Supporting
characters

The Avengers • Battlestar • Isaiah Bradley • Bucky/Winter Soldier • Sharon Carter • Diamondback • Falcon • Free Spirit • Golden Girl • The Invaders • Jack Flag • Josiah X • Nomad • Patriot (Elijah Bradley) • U.S. Agent • Bernie Rosenthal






Villains

Baron Blood • Baron Zemo • Batroc the Leaper • Blue Streak • Crossbones • Cutthroat • Doctor Faustus • Everyman • Flag-Smasher • Hate-Monger • Jack O'Lantern • Aleksander Lukin • Madame Hydra • Master Man • National Force • Nefarius • Porcupine • Protocide • Red Skull • Scourge of the Underworld • Serpent Squad • Serpent Society • Sin • Slither • Baron Strucker • Superia • Tumbler • Ultimatum • Viper • Watchdogs • Arnim Zola






Storylines

Civil War • "The Death of Captain America" • Fallen Son: The Death of Captain America






Film

Captain America (1944) • Captain America (1990) • The First Avenger: Captain America (2011)






TV series

The Marvel Super Heroes






Video games

Captain America in: The Doom Tube of Dr. Megalomann • Spider-Man and Captain America in Doctor Doom's Revenge • Captain America and the Avengers






Miscellanea

Alternate versions • In other media • Captain America's shield













v • d • e

Fantastic Four





Creators

Stan Lee  • Jack Kirby






Main characters

Mister Fantastic • The Invisible Woman • The Human Torch • The Thing






Villains

Annihilus • Aron • Beyonder • Blastaar • The Brute • Devos • Diablo • Doctor Doom • Dragon Man • Ego the Living Planet • Frightful Four • Galactus • Hyperstorm • Immortus • Impossible Man • Klaw • Kree • Mad Thinker • Malice • Maximus • Mole Man • Molecule Man · Occulus • Onslaught • Overmind • Paibok • Psycho-Man • Puppet Master • Rama-Tut • Red Ghost • Ronan the Accuser • Salem's Seven • Nicholas Scratch • Skrulls • Super-Skrull · Terminus • Terrax • Trapster • Kristoff Vernard • Wizard






Supporting characters

Ant-Man (Scott Lang) • Black Panther • Caledonia • Agatha Harkness • H.E.R.B.I.E. • Inhumans • Willie Lumpkin • Lyja • Alicia Masters • Alyssa Moy • Namor the Sub-Mariner • Frankie Raye • Franklin Richards • Nathaniel Richards • Valeria Richards • Shalla-Bal • She-Hulk • She-Thing • Silver Surfer • Dr. Franklin Storm • Thundra • Watcher (Uatu) • Wyatt Wingfoot • Yancy Street Gang






Headquarters

Baxter Building  • Avengers Mansion  • Four Freedoms Plaza






Titles

Main continuity: 1234 • Fantastic Four • Human Torch • Marvel Collectors' Item Classics • Marvel Two-in-One • Marvel's Greatest Comics • Strange Tales • The Thing
Other continuities: Challengers of the Fantastic • Earth-A • Fantastic Five • Marvel 1602: Fantastick Four • Marvel Adventures Fantastic Four • Ultimate Fantastic Four • Unstable Molecules






Television

Fantastic Four (1967) • Fantastic Four (1978) • Fred and Barney Meet the Thing (1979) • Fred and Barney Meet the Shmoo (1979) • Fantastic Four (1994) • Fantastic Four: World's Greatest Heroes (2006)






Films

The Fantastic Four (1994) • Fantastic Four (2005) • Fantastic Four: Rise of the Silver Surfer (2007)






Related articles

Alternate versions of the Human Torch • Alternate versions of Mister Fantastic • Alternate versions of the Thing • Counter-Earth (Heroes Reborn) • "Days of Future Present" • Doctor Doom's Fearfall • Doom 2099 • Earth X • Fantastic Force • Fantastic Four 2099 • Fantasticar • "The Galactus Trilogy" • "Heroes Reborn" • Latveria • Negative Zone • Super-Villain Team-Up • Unstable molecules • Video games













v • d • e

Hulk





Creators

Stan Lee • Jack Kirby






Supporting characters

Amadeus Cho • Betty Ross • Bereet • Caiera • Marlo Chandler • Doc Samson • Jarella • Rick Jones • She-Hulk • Skaar • Warbound • Jim Wilson






Villains

Abomination • Agamemnon • Bi-Beast • Brian Banner • Flux • Gamma Corps • Hulkbusters • Leader • Madman • Maestro • Mercy • Moonstone • Red Hulk • Speedfreek • Thunderbolt Ross • John Ryker • Glenn Talbot • Tyrannus • U-Foes • Wendigo • Zzzax






Film & television

TV series: The Incredible Hulk (1977) • The Incredible Hulk Returns (TV film, 1988) • The Trial of the Incredible Hulk (TV film, 1989) • The Death of the Incredible Hulk (TV film, 1990)
Animated TV series: The Marvel Super Heroes (1966) The Incredible Hulk (1982) • The Incredible Hulk (1996)
Films: Hulk (2003) • The Incredible Hulk (2008) • The Avengers (2012)






Video games

Questprobe Featuring The Hulk (1984) • The Incredible Hulk (1994) • The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga (1996) • Hulk (2003) • The Incredible Hulk: Ultimate Destruction (2005) • The Incredible Hulk (2008)






Titles and storylines

Incredible Hulk: The End • Hulk: The Manga • Tales to Astonish • World War Hulk






Miscellanea

Alternate versions of Hulk • Hulk 2099 • Hulk Hands • Incredible Hulk Coaster













v • d • e

Iron Man





Creators

Don Heck · Stan Lee · Larry Lieber · Jack Kirby






Supporting characters

Bethany Cabe · Guardsman · Maria Hill · Rumiko Fujikawa · Happy Hogan · Edwin Jarvis · Pepper Potts · War Machine · Howard Stark · Ho Yinsen






Villains

Blizzard · Blacklash · Controller · Crimson Dynamo · Dreadknight · Ezekiel Stane · Fin Fang Foom · Firebrand · Firepower · Ghost · Iron Monger · Justin Hammer · Living Laser · Madame Masque · Mandarin · Melter · M.O.D.O.K. · Spymaster · Sunset Bain · Temugin · Titanium Man · Unicorn · Ultimo






Storylines

Iron Man and Sub-Mariner · "Demon in a Bottle" · "Doomquest" · "Armor Wars" · Ultimate Iron Man · "Extremis" · Enter the Mandarin






Films

The Invincible Iron Man · Iron Man · Iron Man II






TV series

The Marvel Super Heroes · Iron Man · Iron Man: Armored Adventures






Video games

Captain America and the Avengers · Iron Man / X-O Manowar in Heavy Metal · The Invincible Iron Man · Marvel: Ultimate Alliance · Iron Man






Related articles

Alternate versions · In other media · Avengers Mansion · Iron Man's armor · Roxxon · Stark Industries · Stark Tower













v • d • e

Thor





Creators

Stan Lee • Larry Lieber • Jack Kirby 






Characters

Balder • Beta Ray Bill • Frey • Hercules • Jane Foster • Heimdall • Hermod • Hoder • Idunn • Karnilla • Odin • Sif • Thunderstrike • Tyr • Valkyrie • Vidar • Volla • Warriors Three (Fandral • Hogun • Volstagg) • Zeus • Olympians 






Villains

Absorbing Man • Ares • Cobra • Destroyer • Ego the Living Planet • Lorelei  • Enchantress • Executioner • Fafnir • Fenris Wolf • Grey Gargoyle • Hela • Kurse • Loki • Mangog • Midgard Serpent • Pluto • Radioactive Man • Surtur • Ulik • Wrecking Crew • Ymir • Zarrko 






In other media

The Marvel Super Heroes (television, 1966) • The Incredible Hulk Returns (live-action film, 1988)






Related articles

Asgard • Asgardians • Journey into Mystery • Mjolnir • Thor: Blood Oath • Thor: Son of Asgard • Ultimate Thor 













v • d • e

X-Men





Comics

Core Titles: Astonishing X-Men • New Mutants • Uncanny X-Men • X-Men: Legacy • X-Factor • X-Force
Secondary Titles: Cable • Captain Britain and MI: 13 • Deadpool • New Exiles • Wolverine • Wolverine: Origins
Past Titles: Alpha Flight • Cable & Deadpool • Dazzler • District X • Excalibur • Exiles • Generation X • Giant-Size X-Men • New Excalibur • New X-Men • X-Man • X-Men: The Hidden Years • X-Men Unlimited • X-Statix • X-Treme X-Men • Young X-Men
Alternate Universe Titles: Wolverine: First Class • X-Men: First Class Finals • X-Men: Noir
Alternate Universe Past Titles: Ultimate X-Men • X-Men 2099 • X-Men: First Class






Major storylines

"The Dark Phoenix Saga" • "Days of Future Past" • "Mutant Massacre" • "Fall of the Mutants" • "Inferno" • "Days of Future Present" • "X-Tinction Agenda" • "Muir Island Saga" • "X-Cutioner's Song" • "Fatal Attractions" • "Phalanx Covenant" • "Age of Apocalypse" • "Onslaught" • "Children of the Atom" • "Operation: Zero Tolerance" • "The Twelve" • "Eve of Destruction" • "E is for Extinction" • "Planet X" • "Here Comes Tomorrow" • "House of M" • "Decimation" • "Deadly Genesis" • "Endangered Species" • "Messiah Complex" • "Divided We Stand" • "Manifest Destiny" • "X-Infernus" • "Kingbreaker" • "Messiah War"






Members

Anole • Archangel • Armor • Banshee • Beast • Bishop • Blindfold • Cable • Caliban • Cannonball • Chamber • Changeling • Cipher • Colossus • Cyclops • Darwin • Dazzler • Dust • Elixir • Forge • Emma Frost • Gambit • Gentle • Graymalkin • Nate Grey • Havok • Hellion • Hepzibah • Husk • Iceman • Ink • Joseph • Jubilee • Juggernaut • Karma • Lady Mastermind • Lifeguard • Lockheed • Longshot • Maggott • Magma • Marrow • Marvel Girl • Mercury • Mimic • Moonstar • Mystique • Nightcrawler • Northstar • Omega Sentinel • Petra • Phoenix • Pixie • Polaris • Prodigy • Professor X • Psylocke • Revanche • Cecilia Reyes • Rockslide • Rogue • Sabretooth • Sage • Shadowcat • Slipstream • Stacy X • Storm • Sunfire • Sunspot • Surge • Sway • Thunderbird (John Proudstar) • Thunderbird (Neal Shaara) • Warpath • Wolf Cub • Wolverine • X-23 • Xorn






Villains

Apocalypse • Acolytes • Avalanche • Bastion • Black Tom Cassidy • Blob • Dark Beast • Brood • Brotherhood of Mutants • Deathbird • Exodus • Friends of Humanity • Gene Nation • Graydon Creed • Hellfire Club • Cameron Hodge • Holocaust • Horsemen of Apocalypse • Juggernaut • Kimura • Krakoa • Lady Deathstrike • Lady Mastermind • Legion • Living Monolith • Lucifer • Magneto • Marauders • Master Mold • Mastermind • Mr. Sinister • Mojo • Mutant Liberation Front • Mystique • Nimrod • Cassandra Nova • Omega Red • Onslaught • Predator X • Proteus • Purifiers • Madelyne Pryor • Pyro • Quicksilver • Reavers • Sabretooth • Sauron • Scarlet Witch • Sentinels • Shadow King • Silver Samurai • Spiral • Stryfe • William Stryker • Sublime • Toad • Vertigo • Vulcan • Weapon X • Wendigo • X-Cell • X-Cutioner • Xorn






Universe

Avalon • Asteroid M • Cerebro • Crimson Dawn • Crossmore • Danger Room • District X/Mutant Town • Fastball Special • Genosha • Legacy Virus • Limbo • M'Kraan Crystal • Madripoor • Massachusetts Academy • Morlocks • Muir Island • Mutants • Providence • Savage Land • Teams • Xavier Protocols • X-Jet • X-Mansion






In other media









v • d • e

X-Men film series





X-Men • X2: X-Men United • X-Men: The Last Stand • X-Men Origins: Wolverine • X-Men Origins: Magneto • X-Men: First Class





Cast

Hugh Jackman (Wolverine) • Halle Berry (Storm) • Patrick Stewart (Professor X) • Ian McKellen (Magneto) • Famke Janssen (Phoenix) • Rebecca Romijn (Mystique) • James Marsden (Cyclops) • Anna Paquin (Rogue) • Shawn Ashmore (Iceman) • Aaron Stanford (Pyro) • Sumela Kay/Katie Stuart/Ellen Page (Kitty Pryde) • Tyler Mane/Liev Schreiber (Sabretooth) • Ray Park (Toad) • Bruce Davison (Robert Kelly)• Brian Cox/Danny Huston (William Stryker) • Alan Cumming (Nightcrawler) • Kelly Hu (Lady Deathstrike) • Daniel Cudmore (Colossus) • Steve Bacic/Kelsey Grammer (Beast) • Ben Foster (Angel) • Olivia Williams (Moira MacTaggert) • Vinnie Jones (Juggernaut) • Dania Ramírez (Callisto) • Meiling Melançon (Psylocke) • Ken Leung (Kid Omega) • Omahyra Mota (Arclight) • Cameron Bright (Leech) • Shohreh Aghdashloo (Kavita Rao) • Kea Wong (Jubilee) • Shauna Kain (Siryn) • Eric Dane (Multiple Man) • Bill Duke (Bolivar Trask) • Haley Ramm (Young Jean Grey) • Cayden Boyd (Young Warren Worthington III) • Taylor Kitsch (Gambit) • Lynn Collins (Silver Fox) • Daniel Henney (Agent Zero) • Ryan Reynolds (Deadpool) • Will.i.am (Kestrel) • Dominic Monaghan (Beak) • Kevin Durand (Blob) • Scott Adkins (Weapon XI) • Troye Mellet (Young Logan)






Crew

Bryan Singer • Brett Ratner • David S. Goyer • Avi Arad • Lauren Shuler Donner • Tom DeSanto • David Hayter • Michael Dougherty • Dan Harris • Zak Penn • Simon Kinberg • John Logan • Ed Solomon • Christopher McQuarrie • Ralph Winter • Richard Donner • Michael Kamen • Scott Leva • Steven Rosenblum • Kevin Sitt • John Wright • John Ottman • John Myhre • Guy Dyas • John Powell • Dante Spinotti • Mark Helfrich • Mark Goldblatt • Julia Wong • Gavin Hood • David Benioff • James Vanderbilt • Scott Silver • Skip Woods • David Ayer • Harry Gregson-Williams • Donald McAlpine • Rhythm and Hues Studios






Video games

X2: Wolverine's Revenge • X-Men: The Official Game • X-Men Origins: Wolverine






X-Men characters in
other media articles

Cyclops • Magneto • Professor X • Wolverine






Sets and locations

Danger Room • Muir Island • X-Mansion • Fox Studios Australia






See also

Brotherhood of Mutants • Cerebro • Fastball Special • Sentinel • X-Jet






TV: Pryde of the X-Men • X-Men: The Animated Series (episodes) • Generation X • X-Men: Evolution (episodes) • Wolverine and the X-Men (episodes)







v • d • e

X-Men video games





Main Games

X-Men (1989) · Madness in Murderworld (1989) · The Fall of the Mutants (1990) · Arcade's Revenge (1992) · X-Men (1992) · X-Men (1993) · Clone Wars (1994) · Children of the Atom (1994) · Game Master's Legacy (1995) · X-Men vs. Street Fighter (1996) · Mutant Apocalypse (1995) · Mojo World (1996) · The Ravages of Apocalypse (1997) · Mutant Academy (2000) · Mutant Wars (2000) · Mutant Academy 2 (2001) · Reign of Apocalypse (2001) · Next Dimension (2002) · X-Men Legends (2004) · Rise of Apocalypse (2005) · The Official Game (2006) ·






Wolverine Games

Wolverine (1991) · Adamantium Rage (1994) · War of the Gems (1996) · Wolverine's Rage (2001) · Wolverine's Revenge (2003) · X-Men Origins: Wolverine (2009)













Other

History of the X-Men comics • Storm Force Accelatron













v • d • e

New Gods





Creators

Jack Kirby






New Genesis

Highfather • Orion • Mister Miracle • Takion • Big Barda • Lightray • Forager • Forever People






Apokolips

Darkseid • Desaad • Granny Goodness • Glorious Godfrey • Virman Vundabar • Kalibak • Steppenwolf • Doctor Bedlam • Grayven • Kanto • Female Furies • Deep Six • Mantis • Devilance • Parademon • Justifiers






Other Characters

Metron • Black Racer • Himon • Infinity-Man






Concepts and Items

The Source • Source Wall • Anti-Life Equation • Mother Box • Boom Tube






Major Storylines

Jack Kirby's Fourth World • "The Great Darkness Saga" • Legends • Cosmic Odyssey • Genesis • Death of the New Gods • Final Crisis













v • d • e

The Space Odyssey series





Films

2001: A Space Odyssey (1968) · 2010 (1984)






Books

2001: A Space Odyssey (1968) · 2010: Odyssey Two (1982) · 2061: Odyssey Three (1987) · 3001: The Final Odyssey (1997) · The Lost Worlds of 2001 (1972)






Comics

2001: A Space Odyssey (1976)






Short stories

"The Sentinel" (written 1948, first published 1951 as "Sentinel of Eternity") · "Encounter in the Dawn" (first published 1953)






Characters

HAL 9000 · David Bowman · Dr. Chandra · Walter Curnow · Heywood Floyd · Frank Poole






Vehicles

Discovery One · List of spacecraft






Locations

Earth · Moon · Clavius Base · Tycho · Jupiter · Europa · Io · Ganymede · Ganymede City · Saturn · Iapetus · Beyond the Infinite






Cast

Keir Dullea · John Lithgow · Gary Lockwood · Helen Mirren · Douglas Rain · Roy Scheider · William Sylvester · Leonard Rossiter · Margaret Tyzack






Crew/creators

Arthur C. Clarke · Peter Hyams · Jack Kirby · Stanley Kubrick






Related articles

Interpretations of 2001: A Space Odyssey · 2001: A Space Odyssey score · Monoliths · Poole - HAL 9000













v • d • e

Henry Pym





Creators

Stan Lee · Larry Lieber · Jack Kirby






Identities

Ant-Man · Giant-Man · Goliath · Yellowjacket · Dr. Pym · The Wasp






Opponents

Dr. Nemesis · Egghead · MODAM · Porcupine · Ultron · Whirlwind






Comic book titles

Tales to Astonish · Marvel Feature






Teams

Avengers · West Coast Avengers · Mighty Avengers






Pym Powered

Ant-Man: Scott Lang, Eric O'Grady · (Black) Goliath/Giant-Man: Bill Foster · Goliath: Clint Barton, Erik Josten, Tom Foster · Yellowjacket: Rita DeMara · Wasp · Stature
















Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jack_Kirby"
Categories: 1917 births | 1994 deaths | American comics artists | American comics writers | American military personnel of World War II | Deaths from heart failure | Eisner Award winners | Golden Age comics creators | Jewish American artists | Jewish American writers | People from ManhattanHidden categories: Comics creator pop | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Français
Galego
Italiano
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Português
Shqip
Suomi
Svenska
Українська









 This page was last modified on 12 March 2009, at 14:30.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
