













Underground Railroad - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Underground_Railroad";
		var wgTitle = "Underground Railroad";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "32190";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281629957;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Underground Railroad

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about a 19th-century slave escape routes.  For railroads built below ground, see rapid transit.  For the band, see Underground Railroad (band).




Harriet Tubman (photo H. B. Lindsley), c.1880. A worker on the Underground Railroad, Tubman made 19 trips to the South, helping to free approximately 70 people.


The Underground Railroad was an informal network of secret routes and safe houses used by 19th century Black slaves in the United States to escape to free states and Canada with the aid of abolitionists who were sympathetic to their cause.[1] The term is also applied to the abolitionists who aided the fugitives.[2] Other various routes led to Mexico or overseas.[3] The Underground Railroad was at its height between 1810 and 1850,[4] with over 30,000 people escaping enslavement (mainly to Canada) via the network,[5] though US Census figures only account for 6,000.[6]




Contents


1 Political background
2 Structure
3 Route

3.1 Traveling conditions
3.2 Terminology
3.3 Folklore


4 Legal and political
5 Arrival in Canada
6 Notable people
7 Notable locations
8 Contemporary literature
9 Related events
10 See also
11 References
12 Sources
13 Further reading
14 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Political background
Even at the height of the Underground Railroad, fewer than one thousand slaves from all slave holding states were able to escape each year, a quantity much smaller than the natural annual increase of the enslaved population. Though the economic impact was small, the psychological impact upon slaveholders of an informal network to assist escaped slaves was immense. Under the original Fugitive Slave Law of 1793, the responsibility for catching runaway slaves fell to officials of the states whence the slaves came, and the Underground Railroad thrived.
With heavy political lobbying, the Compromise of 1850, passed by Congress after the Mexican-American War, stipulated a more stringent Fugitive Slave Law. Ostensibly, the compromise redressed all regional problems. However, it coerced officials of free states to assist slave catchers if there were runaway slaves in the area, and granted slave catchers national immunity when in free states to do their job. Additionally, free blacks of the North could easily be forced into slavery, whether they had been freed earlier or had never been slaves. Suspected slaves were unable to defend themselves in court, and it was difficult to prove a free status. In a de facto bribe[7], judges were paid more ($10) for a decision that forced a suspected slave back into slavery than ($5) for a decision that the suspected slave was in fact free. Thus, many Northerners who would have otherwise been able and content to ignore far-away regional slavery chafed under nationally-sanctioned slavery, leading to one of the primary grievances of the Union cause by the Civil War's outbreak.

[edit] Structure
See also: Vigilance committee
The escape network was solely "underground" in the sense of being an underground resistance. The network was known as a "railroad" by way of the use of rail terminology in the code. The Underground Railroad consisted of meeting points, secret routes, transportation, and safe houses, and assistance provided by abolitionist sympathizers. Individuals were often organized in small, independent groups, which helped to maintain secrecy since some knew of connecting "stations" along the route but few details of their immediate area. Escaped slaves would move along the route from one way station to the next, steadily making their way north. "Conductors" on the railroad came from various backgrounds and included free-born blacks, white abolitionists, former slaves (either escaped or manumitted), and Native Americans. Churches also often played a role, especially the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers), Congregationalists, Wesleyans, and Reformed Presbyterians as well as certain sects of mainstream denominations such as branches of the Methodist church and American Baptists.

[edit] Route




Map of some Underground Railroad routes


Many people associated with the Underground Railroad only knew their part of the operation and not of the whole scheme. Though this may seem like an unreliable route for slaves to gain their freedom, hundreds of slaves obtained freedom to the North every year.
The resting spots where the runaways could sleep and eat were given the code names “stations” and “depots” which were held by “station masters”. There were also those known as “stockholders” who gave money or supplies for assistance. There were the “conductors” who ultimately moved the runaways from station to station. The “conductor” would sometimes act as if he or she were a slave and enter a plantation. Once a part of a plantation the "conductor" would direct the fugitives to the North. During the night the slaves would move, traveling on about 10–20 miles (15–30 km) per night. They would stop at the so-called “stations” or "depots" during the day and rest. While resting at one station, a message was sent to the next station to let the station master know the runaways were on their way. Sometimes boats or trains would be used for transportation. Money was donated by many people to help buy tickets and even clothing for the fugitives so they would remain unnoticeable. Soon after the railroad had freed 300 slaves, some of the freed slaves made a store for the railroad.

[edit] Traveling conditions
Although the fugitives sometimes traveled on real railways, the primary means of transportation were on foot or by wagon.
In addition, routes were often purposely indirect in order to throw off pursuers. Most escapes were by individuals or small groups; occasionally, such as with the Pearl incident, there were mass escapes. The majority of the escapees were young bondmen, usually artisans from border states who believed their skills gave them a chance of survival in the North. The journey was often seen as too arduous and treacherous for women or children to complete. (However, the woman Harriet Tubman made the journey several times.) Many fugitive bondmen, however, who escaped via the Railroad and established livelihoods as free men, later purchased their wives, children, and other family members out of slavery. Because of this, the number of former slaves who owed their freedom at least in part to the courage and determination of those who operated the Underground Railroad was greater than the many thousands who actually traveled its secret routes.
Due to the risk of discovery, information about routes and safe havens was passed along by word of mouth. Southern newspapers of the day were often filled with pages of notices soliciting information about escaped slaves and offering sizable rewards for their capture and return. Federal marshals and professional bounty hunters known as slave catchers pursued fugitives as far as the Canadian border.
The risk was not limited solely to actual fugitives. Because strong, healthy blacks in their prime working and reproductive years were highly valuable commodities, it was not unusual for free blacks — both freedmen (former slaves) and those who had lived their entire lives in freedom — to be kidnapped and sold into slavery. "Certificates of freedom" — signed, notarized statements attesting to the free status of individual blacks — could easily be destroyed and thus afforded their owners little protection. Moreover, under the terms of the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850, when suspected fugitives were seized and brought to a special magistrate known as a commissioner, they had no right to a jury trial and could not testify in their own behalf, since technically they were guilty of no crime; the marshal or private slave-catcher only needed to swear an oath to acquire a writ of replevin, for the return of property.
Nevertheless, Congress believed the fugitive slave laws were necessary because of the lack of cooperation by the police, courts, and public outside of the Deep South. States such as Michigan passed laws interfering with the federal bounty system, which politicians from the South felt was grossly inadequate, and this became a key motivation for secession. In some parts of the North slave-catchers needed police protection to carry out their federal authority. Despite their resistance to pro-slavery laws several states still made blacks unwelcome; Indiana went as far as to pass a constitutional amendment that barred blacks from settling in that state.

[edit] Terminology
Members of The Underground Railroad often used specific jargon, based on the metaphor of the railway. For example:

People who helped slaves find the railroad were "agents" (or "shepherds")
Guides were known as "conductors"
Hiding places were "stations"
Abolitionists would fix the "tracks"
"Stationmasters" hid slaves in their homes
Escaped slaves were referred to as "passengers" or "cargo"
Slaves would obtain a "ticket".
Just as in common gospel lore, the "wheels would keep on turning"
Financial benefactors of the Railroad were known as "stockholders".

As well, the Big Dipper asterism, whose "bowl" points to the north star, was known as the drinkin' gourd, and allegedly immortalized in a contemporary song. The Railroad itself was often known as the "freedom train" or "Gospel train," which headed towards "Heaven" or "the Promised Land"—Canada.
William Still, often called "The Father of the Underground Railroad", helped hundreds of slaves to escape (as many as 60 a month), sometimes hiding them in his Philadelphia home. He kept careful records, including short biographies of the people, that contained frequent railway metaphors. He maintained correspondence with many of them, often acting as a middleman in communications between escaped slaves and those left behind. He then published these accounts in the book The Underground Railroad in 1872.
According to Still, messages were often encoded so that messages could only be understood by those active in the railroad. For example, the following message, "I have sent via at two o'clock four large and two small hams", indicated that four adults and two children were sent by train from Harrisburg to Philadelphia. However, the additional word via indicated that the "passengers" were not sent on the usual train, but rather via Reading, Pennsylvania. In this case, authorities were tricked into going to the regular train station in an attempt to intercept the runaways, while Still was able to meet them at the correct station and guide them to safety, where they eventually escaped to Canada.

[edit] Folklore
Main article: Quilts of the Underground Railroad
Since the 1980s, claims have arisen that quilt designs were used to signal and direct slaves to escape routes and assistance. According to advocates of the quilt theory, there were ten quilt patterns that were used to direct slaves to take particular actions. The quilts were placed one at time on a fence as a means of nonverbal communication to alert escaping slaves. The code had a dual meaning: first to signal slaves to prepare to escape and second to give clues and indicate directions on the journey.[8]
The quilt design theory is disputed. The first published work documenting an oral history source was in 1999 and the first publishing is believed to be a 1980 children's book,[9] so it is difficult to evaluate the veracity of these claims, which are not accepted by quilt historians or scholars of antebellum America.[citation needed] There is no contemporary evidence of any sort of quilt code, and quilt historians such as Pat Cummings and Barbara Brackman have raised serious questions about the idea. In addition, Underground Railroad historian Giles Wright has published a pamphlet debunking the quilt code. Scholars note that rural Americans hardly had to be told which way was North, since the sun rose daily in the East.
Main article: Songs of the underground railroad
Many popular, nonacademic sources claim that spirituals and other songs, such as "Steal Away" or "Follow the Drinking Gourd," contained coded information and helped individuals navigate the railroad, but these sources offer very little evidence to support their claims. Scholars who have examined these claims tend to believe that while the slave songs may certainly have expressed hope for deliverance from the sorrows of this world, these songs did not present literal help for runaway slaves.[10]
The Underground Railroad did spur cultural works, though. For example, a song written in 1860 about a man fleeing slavery in Tennessee by escaping to Canada, entitled Song of the Free, was composed to the tune of Oh! Susanna. Every stanza ends with a reference to Canada as the land "where colored men are free". Slavery in Canada had been in rapid decline after an 1803 court ruling, and abolished outright in 1834.

[edit] Legal and political
When frictions between North and South culminated in the American Civil War, many blacks, slave and free, fought with the Union Army. Following passage of the Thirteenth Amendment, in some cases the Underground Railroad operated in reverse as fugitives returned to the United States.[citation needed]

[edit] Arrival in Canada




International Underground Railroad Memorial in Windsor, Ontario.


Estimates vary widely, but at least 30,000 slaves, some saying more than 100,000, escaped to Canada via the Underground Railroad.[5] The largest group settled in Upper Canada (called Canada West from 1841, and today southern Ontario), where numerous Black Canadian communities developed. These were generally in the triangular region bounded by Toronto, Niagara Falls, and Windsor. Nearly 1,000 refugees settled in Toronto, and several rural villages made up mostly of ex-slaves were established in Kent County and Essex County.
Another important center of population was Nova Scotia, for example Africville and other villages near Halifax, see Black Nova Scotians. Important black settlements also developed in other parts of British North America (now parts of Canada). These included Lower Canada (present-day Quebec) and Vancouver Island, where Governor James Douglas encouraged black immigration because of his opposition to slavery and because he hoped a significant black community would form a bulwark against those who wished to unite the island with the United States.
Upon arriving at their destinations, many fugitives were disappointed. While the British colonies had no slavery, discrimination was still common. Many of the new arrivals had great difficulty finding jobs, in part because of mass European immigration at the time, and overt racism was common. For example, the charter of the city of Saint John, New Brunswick was amended in 1785 specifically to exclude blacks from practicing a trade, selling goods, fishing in the harbour, or becoming freemen; these provisions stood until 1870.[11]
With the outbreak of the Civil War in the U. S., many black refugees enlisted in the Union Army and, while some later returned to Canada, many remained in the United States. Thousands of others returned to the American South after the war ended. The desire to reconnect with friends and family was strong, and most were hopeful about the changes emancipation and Reconstruction would bring.

[edit] Notable people




Alexander Milton Ross
Dr. Anderson Ruffin Abbott
Levi Coffin
Calvin Fairbank
Thomas Garrett
William Lloyd Garrison
Samuel Green (freedman)
Josiah Bushnell Grinnell




Josiah Henson
Henry "Box" Brown
James Butler ("Wild Bill") Hickok
Isaac Hopper
Roger Hooker Leavitt
Samuel J. May
John Parker
John Wesley Posey
John Rankin




David Ruggles
Samuel Seawell
William Still
Harriet Tubman - made 19 trips back to the South and helped free over 300 people
Charles Augustus Wheaton
Frederick Douglass
Sojourner Truth





[edit] Notable locations




Albany, New York
Bialystoker Synagogue
Boston, Massachusetts
Buffalo, New York
Burkle Estate, Tennessee
Burlington, Wisconsin
Chatham-Kent, Ontario
Chicago, Illinois
Cincinnati, Iowa
Cincinnati, Ohio
Charlemont, Massachusetts
Cyrus Gates Farmstead
Detroit, Michigan
Wabaunsee County, Kansas




Dresden, Ontario
Elmira, New York
Farmington, Connecticut
Ironton, Ohio
Jacksonville, Illinois
Lawnside, New Jersey
Lewis, Iowa
Mayhew Cabin
Milton, Wisconsin
Nebraska City, Nebraska
New Albany, Indiana
Oberlin, Ohio




Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Portsmouth, Ohio
Ripley, Ohio
Rochester, New York
Salem, Ohio
Sandusky, Ohio
Sandy Ground - Staten Island, New York
St. Catharines, Ontario
Troy, New York
Westfield, Indiana
Wilmington, Delaware
Windsor, Ontario
Vandalia, MI





[edit] Contemporary literature

1829 Appeal to the Coloured Citizens of the World by David Walker (a call for resistance to slavery in Georgia)
1832 The Planter's Northern Bride by Caroline Lee Hentz
1852 Uncle Tom's Cabin by Harriet Beecher Stowe


[edit] Related events

1776 – Declaration of Independence
1800 – Second Great Awakening
1820 – Missouri Compromise
1850 – Compromise of 1850
1850 – Fugitive Slave Act
1854 – Kansas-Nebraska Act
1857 – Dred Scott Decision
1858 – Oberlin-Wellington Rescue
1860 – Abraham Lincoln of Illinois elected the first Republican U.S. President
1861 through 1865 – American Civil War
1863 – Emancipation Proclamation issued by President Lincoln
1865 – Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution


[edit] See also

National Underground Railroad Freedom Center
National Underground Railroad Network to Freedom
Reverse Underground Railroad
List of notable opponents of slavery‎
List of African-American abolitionists
Slavery in Canada
Alice M. Ward Library
Boston African American National Historic Site
John Freeman Walls Historic Site
Underground Railroad Bicycle Route


[edit] References


^ "Underground Railroad" (HTML). dictionary.com. http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/Underground%20Railroad. Retrieved on 2007-07-25.  "[American Heritage Dictionary:] A network of houses and other places abolitionists used to help slaves escape to freedom in the northern states or in Canada" 
^ "The Underground Railroad" (HTML). Public Broadcasting Service (PBS). http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/aia/part4/4p2944.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-25. 
^ PURPOSE AND BACKGROUND. Underground Railroad: Special Research Study Nation Park Service
^ The Fugitive Slave Law African-American History, pg. 2. About.com
^ a b "Settling Canada Underground Railroad" (HTML with Javascript). Historica. http://www.histori.ca/minutes/minute.do?id=10166.  "Between 1840 and 1860, more than 30,000 American slaves came secretly to Canada and freedom" 
^ From slavery to freedom see pg. 3 #5. The Grapevine.
^ http://www.historyisaweapon.org/defcon1/douglassjuly4.html The Meaning of July Fourth for the Negro, Frederick Douglass, 5 July 1852
^ Williams, Ozella McDaniels, 1999.
^ School Library Journal: "History That Never Happened." Marc Aronson, April 2007.
^ Kelley, James. Song, Story, or History: Resisting Claims of a Coded Message in the African American Spiritual ‘Follow the Drinking Gourd’”. The Journal of Popular American Culture 41.2 (April 2008): 262-80.. 
^ Arrival of the Black Loyalists: Saint John's Black Community: Heritage Resources Saint John



[edit] Sources

Operating the Underground Railroad, from National Park Service.
The Underground Railroad, from PBS.
1998

Forbes, Ella. But We Have No Country: The 1851 Christiana Pennsylvania Resistance. Africana Homestead Legacy Publishers.


2000

Chadwick, Bruce. Traveling the Underground Railroad: A Visitor's Guide to More Than 300 Sites. Citadel Press. ISBN 0-8065-2093-0.


2001

Blight, David W. Passages to Freedom: The Underground Railroad in History and Memory. Smithsonian Books. ISBN 1-58834-157-7.


2002

Hudson, J. Blaine. Fugitive Slaves and the Underground Railroad in the Kentucky Borderland. McFarland & Company. ISBN 0-7864-1345-X.


2003

Hendrick, George, and Willene Hendrick. Fleeing for Freedom: Stories of the Underground Railroad As Told by Levi Coffin and William Still. Ivan R. Dee Publisher. ISBN 1-56663-546-2.


2004

Hagedorn, Ann. Beyond the River: The Untold Story of the Heroes of the Underground Railroad. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-87066-5.
Griffler, Keith P. Front Line of Freedom: African Americans and the Forging of the Underground Railroad in the Ohio Valley. University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 0-8131-2298-8.


2005

Bordewich, Fergus M. "Bound for Canaan: The Underground Railroad and the War for the Soul of America". Harper Collins. ISBN 0-06-052430-8.




[edit] Further reading

Underground Railroad, 1872, by William Still, from Project Gutenberg (classic book documenting the Underground Railroad operations in Philadelphia)
Stories of the Underground Railroad, 1941, by Anna L. Curtis (stories about Thomas Garrett, a famous agent on the Underground Railroad)
Mike Ely. "I’ll Fly Away, O Glory! — Outlaws of the Underground Railroad". Kasama project. June 2008 [mikeely.wordpress.com] [mikeely.wordpress.com/2008/06/24/freedom-train-the-story-of-the-underground-railroad/ Available online]

Folklore/Myth:

New Jersey's Underground Railroad Myth-Buster: Giles Wright is on a Mission to Fine Tune Black History
Putting it in Perspective: The Symbolism of Underground Railroad quilts
Underground Railroad Quilts & Abolitionist Fairs
Documentary Evidence is Missing on Underground Railroad Quilts


[edit] External links




African American portal




Africanaonline - A study of the Underground Railroad.
Tracks to Freedom: Canada and the Underground Railroad
Annual historic re-creation of Underground Railroad in Sugar Grove, Pennsylvania
Friends of the Underground Railroad
The William Still National Underground Railroad Foundation
National Underground Railroad Freedom Center
National Park Service: Aboard the Underground Railroad
The Underground Railroad: Escape from Slavery | Scholastic.com
National Geographic: Underground Railroad
Maryland's Cooling Springs Farm: The Story of a Still-Existing Underground Railroad Safe-House
Underground Railroad in Canada
Tracks to Freedom - Canada.com special on the Underground Railway in Canada
Ontario's Underground Railroad - Includes an interactive map, a tour, and more.
Underground Railroad in Westfield, Indiana - Includes Anti-Slavery Friends Cemetery list and more
Prospect Place mansion, Underground Railroad safehouse in Trinway, Ohio
Underground Railroad Research Institute at Georgetown College
The Oberlin Heritage Center-Learn about Oberlin's role in the Underground Railroad, the abolition movement, and more.
Pathways to Freedom: Maryland and the Underground Railroad - educational website developed by Maryland Public Television
NPS Underground Railroad Sites
Adventure Cycling Association's Underground Railroad Bicycle Route
Underground Railroad in Wisconsin, Wisconsin Historical Society
Historica’s Heritage Minute video docudrama about the Underground Railroad. (Adobe Flash Player.)
Bresler, Joel (2007) "Cultural History of Follow the Drinking Gourd"
Song, Story, or History: Resisting Claims of a Coded Message in the African American Spiritual "Follow the Drinking Gourd"







 
Links to related articles














v • d • e

American Civil War










 
Origins










Origins


Timeline leading to the War · Antebellum · Bleeding Kansas · Dred Scott v. Sandford · Border states · Secession · States' rights







Slavery


African-Americans · Emancipation Proclamation · Fugitive slave laws · Slave power · Uncle Tom's Cabin







Abolitionism


John Brown · Frederick Douglass · William Lloyd Garrison · Lysander Spooner · Harriet Tubman · Underground Railroad

















 
Combatants · Theaters · Campaigns · Battles · States










Combatants






Union (USA)


Union Army · Union Navy







Confederacy (CSA)


Confederate States Army · Confederate States Navy










Theaters


Eastern · Western · Lower Seaboard · Trans-Mississippi · Pacific Coast · Union naval blockade







Campaigns


Anaconda Plan · New Mexico · Jackson's Valley · Peninsula · Northern Virginia · Maryland · Stones River · Vicksburg · Tullahoma · Gettysburg · Morgan's Raid · Bristoe · Knoxville · Red River · Overland · Atlanta · Valley 1864 · Bermuda Hundred · Richmond-Petersburg · Franklin-Nashville · Price's Raid · Sherman's March · Carolinas · Appomattox







Major battles


Fort Sumter · 1st Bull Run · Wilson's Creek · Fort Donelson · Pea Ridge · Hampton Roads · Shiloh · New Orleans · Corinth · Seven Pines · Seven Days · 2nd Bull Run · Antietam · Perryville · Fredericksburg · Stones River · Chancellorsville · Gettysburg · Vicksburg · Chickamauga · Chattanooga · Wilderness · Spotsylvania · Cold Harbor · Atlanta · Mobile Bay · Franklin · Nashville · Five Forks







Involvement
by state or territory


AL · AZ · AR · CA · CO · CT · DC · DE · FL · GA · ID · IL · IN · IA · KS · KY · LA · ME · MD · MA · MI · MN · MS · MO · MT · NV · NE · NH · NJ · NM · NY · NC · OH · OK · OR · PA · RI · SC · TN · TX · UT · VT · VA · WV · WI

















 
Leaders










Confederate






Military


R.H. Anderson · Beauregard · Bragg · Cooper · Early · Ewell · Forrest · Gorgas · Hill · Hood · Jackson · A.S. Johnston · J.E. Johnston · Lee · Longstreet · Morgan · Mosby · Price · Quantrill · Semmes · E.K. Smith · Stuart · Taylor · Wheeler







Civilian


Benjamin · Davis · Mallory · Seddon · Stephens










Union






Military


Anderson · Buell · Butler · Burnside · Du Pont · Farragut · Foote · Grant · Halleck · Hooker · Hunt · McClellan · McDowell · Meade · Meigs · Pope · D.D. Porter · Rosecrans · Scott · Sheridan · Sherman · Thomas







Civilian


Adams · Chase · Ericsson · Lincoln · Pinkerton · Seward · Stanton · Stevens · Wade · Welles




















 
Aftermath






13th Amendment · 14th Amendment · 15th Amendment · Alabama Claims · Carpetbaggers · Freedmen's Bureau · Jim Crow laws · Ku Klux Klan · Reconstruction · Redeemers














 
Related topics · Categories










Related topics






Military


Balloons · Bushwhacker · Cavalry · Field artillery · Military leadership · Naval battles · Official Records · Signal Corps







Political


Committee on the Conduct of the War · Copperheads · Political General · Radical Republicans · Trent Affair · War Democrats







Other topics


List of Civil War topics · Draft Riots · Music · Naming the War · Photography · Rail transport · Supreme Court cases · Turning points










Categories


American Civil War · People · Battles · Union Army generals · Union armies · Union Army corps · Confederate States of America (CSA) · Confederate Army generals · Confederate armies · Spies · National Battlefields · Veterans' organizations · Museums · Forts · Prisons

















 
American Civil War at sister projects













   


 American Civil War at Wiktionary
 Source texts at Wikisource




 Textbooks at Wikibooks
 Images and media at the Commons




 Quotations at Wikiquote
 News stories at Wikinews

















American Civil War portal












v • d • e

African American topics





African American
history

Atlantic slave trade · Maafa · Slavery in the United States · Military history of African Americans · Jim Crow laws · Redlining · Civil Rights Movements 1896–1954 and · 1955–1968 · Afrocentrism · Reparations for slavery







African American
culture

African American studies · Neighborhoods · Juneteenth · Black Colleges and Universities · Kwanzaa · Art · Museums · Dance · Literature · Music






Religion

Black church · Black liberation theology · Black theology · Doctrine of Father Divine · Nation of Islam · Black Hebrew Israelites






Political
movements

Pan-Africanism · Nationalism · Black Power · Capitalism · Conservatism · Populism · Leftism · Black Panther Party · Garveyism






Civic and economic
groups

National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) · Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) · Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) · Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) · National Urban League (NUL) · Rights organizations · Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH) · United Negro College Fund (UNCF) · National Black Chamber of Commerce (NBCC) · National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC) · The Links · National Council of Negro Women (NCNW) · Ebony Experiment






Sports

Negro league baseball · Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association (CIAA) · Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (SIAC) · Mid-Eastern Athletic Conference (MEAC) · Southwestern Athletic Conference (SWAC)






Ethnic sub-divisions

Black Indians · Gullah






Languages

English · Gullah · Louisiana Creole French · African American Vernacular English






Diaspora

Americo-Liberian · Nova Scotia · Sierra Leone · United Kingdom · France






Lists

African Americans · African-American firsts · First mayors · US state firsts · Landmark African-American legislation · African-American-related topics · Topics related to Black and African people






Category · Portal















Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Underground_Railroad"
Categories: Underground RailroadHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Česky
Deutsch
Español
Français
Italiano
עברית
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 03:35.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
