













Alchemy - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Alchemy";
		var wgTitle = "Alchemy";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "573";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281964246;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [""];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [""];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Alchemy

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Alchemy (disambiguation).


Part of a series of articles on
Hermetism





Hermetic Religion
Hermetism · Hermeticism
Mythology
Hermes Trismegistus · Thoth · Poimandres
Hermetica
Corpus Hermeticum · Kybalion
Three Parts of the Wisdom of the Whole Universe
Alchemy · Astrology · Theurgy
Influence and Influences
Hermetic Movements
Rosicrucianism
Orders
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn · Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor · Hermetic Brotherhood of Light
Topics in Hermetism
Qabalah
Hermetists and Hermeticists
John Dee . Aleister Crowley · Israel Regardie
Thābit ibn Qurra · Paracelsus
Giordano Bruno · Manly P. Hall · Samuel MacGregor Mathers · William Westcott · Emmanuel Campostrini
Franz Bardon




This box: view • talk • edit



Alchemy (Arabic: الخيمياء al-khimia), a part of the Occult Tradition, is both a philosophy and a practice with an aim of achieving ultimate wisdom as well as immortality, involving the improvement of the alchemist as well as the making of several substances described as possessing unusual properties. The practical aspect of alchemy generated the basics of modern inorganic chemistry, namely concerning procedures, equipment and the identification and use of many current substances. The fundamental ideas of alchemy are said to have arisen in the ancient Persian Empire.[1] Alchemy has been practiced in Mesopotamia, Egypt, Persia (today's Iran), India, China, Japan, and Korea in Classical Greece and Rome, in the Muslim civilizations, and then in Europe up to the 20th century—in a complex network of schools and philosophical systems spanning at least 2500 years.




Contents


1 Etymology
2 Alchemy as a philosophical and spiritual discipline

2.1 Psychology
2.2 Magnum opus


3 Alchemy as a subject of historical research

3.1 History


4 Modern connections to alchemy

4.1 Alchemy in traditional medicine
4.2 Nuclear transmutation
4.3 In Literature
4.4 In popular culture
4.5 In contemporary art


5 See also

5.1 Other alchemical pages
5.2 Alchemy and psychoanalysis
5.3 Other resources
5.4 Related and alternative philosophies
5.5 Substances of the alchemists
5.6 Scientific connections


6 Notes
7 References
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Etymology
Alchemy, generally, derives from the Old French alkemie; from the Arabic al-kimia: "the art of transformation." Some scholars believe the Arabs borrowed the word kimia ("χημεία") from Greek for transmutation.[2] Others, such as Mahdihassan,[3] argue that its origins are Chinese.
During the seventeenth century the change of name from Alchemy to chemistry took place, with the work of Robert Boyle, sometimes known as "The father of Chemistry", who in his book "The Skeptical Chymist" attacked Paracelsus and the old Aristotelian concepts of the elements and laid down the foundations of modern chemistry.


[edit] Alchemy as a philosophical and spiritual discipline




"Renel the Alchemist", by Sir William Douglas, 1853


Alchemy became known as the spagyric art after Greek words meaning to separate and to join together in the 16th century, the word probably being coined by Paracelsus. Compare this with one of the dictums of Alchemy in Latin: SOLVE ET COAGULA — Separate, and Join Together (or dissolve and coagulate).
The best-known goals of the alchemists were the transmutation of common metals into gold (called chrysopoeia) or silver (less well known is plant alchemy, or "spagyric"); the creation of a "panacea", or the elixir of life, a remedy that supposedly would cure all diseases and prolong life indefinitely; and the discovery of a universal solvent.[4] Although these were not the only uses for the discipline, they were the ones most documented and well known. Certain Hermetic schools argue that the transmutation of lead into gold is analogical for the transmutation of the physical body (Saturn or lead) into Solar energy (gold) with the goal of attaining immortality.[5] This is described as Internal Alchemy. Starting with the Middle Ages, Arabic and European alchemists invested much effort in the search for the "philosopher's stone", a legendary substance that was believed to be an essential ingredient for either or both of those goals. Alchemists were alternately persecuted or supported through the centuries. For example in 1317 Pope John 22nd issued a Bull against alchemical counterfeiting, and the Cistercians banned the practise amongst their members. In 1403 Henry 4th of England banned the practise of Alchemy. In the late 14th century Piers the Ploughman and Chaucer both painted unflattering pictures of Alchemists as theives and liars. By contrast Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor, in the late 16th century, sponsored various alchemists in their work at his court in Prague.
Some people suppose that Alchemists made mundane contributions to the "chemical" industries of the day—ore testing and refining, metalworking, production of gunpowder, ink, dyes, paints, cosmetics, leather tanning, ceramics, glass manufacture, preparation of extracts, liquors, and so on (it seems that the preparation of aqua vitae, the "water of life", was a fairly popular "experiment" among European alchemists). In reality, although Alchemists contributed distillation to Western Europe, they did little for any known industry. Goldsmiths knew long before Alchemists appeared how to tell what was good gold or fake, and industrial technology grew by the work of the artisans themselves, rather than any Alchemical helpers.
Several early alchemists, such as Zosimos of Panopolis, are recorded as viewing alchemy as a spiritual discipline, and in the Middle Ages, metaphysical aspects increasingly came to be viewed as the true foundation of the art. Organic and inorganic chemical substances, physical states, and molecular material processes as mere metaphors for spiritual entities, spiritual states and ultimately, transformations. In this sense, the literal meanings of 'Alchemical Formulas' were a blind, hiding their true spiritual philosophy, which being at odds with the Medieval Christian Church was a necessity that could have otherwise led them to the "stake and rack" of the Inquisition under charges of heresy.[6] Thus, both the transmutation of common metals into gold and the universal panacea symbolized evolution from an imperfect, diseased, corruptible and ephemeral state towards a perfect, healthy, incorruptible and everlasting state; and the philosopher's stone then represented some mystic key that would make this evolution possible. Applied to the alchemist himself, the twin goal symbolized his evolution from ignorance to enlightenment, and the stone represented some hidden spiritual truth or power that would lead to that goal. In texts that are written according to this view, the cryptic alchemical symbols, diagrams, and textual imagery of late alchemical works typically contain multiple layers of meanings, allegories, and references to other equally cryptic works; and must be laboriously "decoded" in order to discover their true meaning.
In his Alchemical Catechism, Paracelsus clearly denotes that his usage of the metals was a symbol:

Q. When the Philosophers speak of gold and silver, from which they extract their matter, are we to suppose that they refer to the vulgar gold and silver? A. By no means; vulgar silver and gold are dead, while those of the Philosophers are full of life.[7]


[edit] Psychology
Alchemical symbolism has been occasionally used by psychologists and philosophers. Carl Jung reexamined alchemical symbolism and theory and began to show the inner meaning of alchemical work as a spiritual path.[8][9] Alchemical philosophy, symbols and methods have enjoyed something of a renaissance in post-modern contexts.[citation needed]
Jung saw alchemy as a Western proto-psychology dedicated to the achievement of individuation.[10] In his interpretation, alchemy was the vessel by which Gnosticism survived its various purges into the Renaissance.[11] In this sense, Jung viewed alchemy as comparable to a Yoga of the East. The practice of Alchemy seemed to change the mind and spirit of the Alchemist. His interpretation of Chinese alchemical texts in terms of his analytical psychology also served the function of comparing Eastern and Western alchemical imagery and core concepts and hence its possible inner sources (archetypes).[12][13]

[edit] Magnum opus
Main article: Magnum opus
The Great Work; mystic interpretation of its three stages:[14]

nigredo(-putrefactio), blackening(-putrefaction): individuation, purification, burnout of impurity; see also Suns in alchemy - Sol Niger
albedo, whitening: spiritualisation, enlightenment
rubedo, reddening: unification of man with god, unification of the limited with the unlimited.

Within the Magnum Opus, was the creation of the Sanctum Moleculae, that is the 'Sacred Masses' that were derived from the Sacrum Particulae, that is the 'Sacred Particles', needed to complete the process of achieving the Magnum Opus.

[edit] Alchemy as a subject of historical research
The history of alchemy has become a vigorous academic field. As the obscure hermetic language of the alchemists is gradually being "deciphered", historians are becoming more aware of the intellectual connections between that discipline and other facets of Western cultural history, such as the sociology and psychology of the intellectual communities, kabbalism, spiritualism, Rosicrucianism, and other mystic movements, cryptography, witchcraft, and the evolution of science and philosophy.

[edit] History
In an historical sense, Alchemy is the pursuit of transforming common metals into valuable gold.
Main article: Alchemy in history
The origins of Western alchemy are traceable back to ancient Egypt.[15] The Leyden papyrus X and the Stockholm papyrus along with the Greek magical papyri comprise the first "book" on alchemy still existent. Greek and Indian philosophers theorized that there were only four classical elements (rather than today's 117 chemical elements, a useful analogy is with the highly similar states of matter); Earth, Fire, Water, and Air. The Greek philosophers, in order to prove their point, burned a log: The log was the earth, the flames burning it was fire, the smoke being released was air, and the smoldering soot at the bottom was bubbling water. Because of this, the belief that these four "elements" were at the heart of everything soon spread, only later being replaced in the Middle Ages by Geber's theory of seven elements, which was then replaced by the modern theory of chemical elements during the early modern period.




Extract and symbol key from a 17th century book on alchemy. The symbols used have a one-to-one correspondence with symbols used in astrology at the time.


Alchemy encompasses several philosophical traditions spanning some four millennia and three continents. These traditions' general penchant for cryptic and symbolic language makes it hard to trace their mutual influences and "genetic" relationships. Alchemy starts becoming much clearer in the 8th century with the works of the Islamic alchemist, Jabir ibn Hayyan (known as "Geber" in Europe), who introduced a methodical and experimental approach to scientific research based in the laboratory, in contrast to the ancient Greek and Egyptian alchemists whose works were mainly allegorical.[16]
Other famous alchemists include Wei Boyang in Chinese alchemy; Calid and Rhazes in Islamic alchemy; Nagarjuna in Indian alchemy; and Albertus Magnus and pseudo-Geber in European alchemy; as well as the anonymous author of the Mutus Liber, published in France in the late 17th century, and which was a 'wordless book' that claimed to be a guide to making the philosopher's stone, using a series of 15 symbols and illustrations. The philosopher's stone was an object that was thought to be able to amplify ones power in alchemy, and, if possible, grant the user ageless immortality, unless he fell victim to burnings or drowning; the common belief was that fire and water were the two greater elements that were implemented into the creation of the stone.
In the case of the Chinese and European alchemists, there was a difference between the two. The European alchemists tried to transmute lead into gold, and, no matter how futile or toxic the element, would continue trying until it was royally outlawed later into the century. The Chinese, however, paid no heed to the philosopher's stone or transmutation of lead to gold; they focused more on medicine for the greater good. During Enlightenment, these "elixirs" were a strong cure for sicknesses, unless it was a test medicine. Most tests were generally fatal, but stabilized elixirs served great purposes. On the other hand, the Islamic alchemists were interested in alchemy for a variety of reasons, whether it was for the transmutation of metals or artificial creation of life, or for practical uses such as Islamic medicine or the chemical industries.
A tentative outline is as follows:

Egyptian alchemy [5000 BCE – 400 BC], beginning of alchemy
Indian alchemy [1200 BC – Present][17], related to Indian metallurgy; Nagarjuna was an important alchemist
Greek alchemy [332 BCE – 642 AD], studied at the Library of Alexandria Stockholm papyrus
Chinese alchemy [142 AD], Wei Boyang writes The Kinship of the Three
Islamic alchemy [700 – 1400], Muslims were at the forefront of Alchemy and Chemistry in the period of the Islamic Golden Age or Islamic Renaissance.
Islamic chemistry [800 – Present], Alkindus and Avicenna refute transmutation, Rhazes refutes four classical elements, and Tusi discovers conservation of mass
European alchemy [1300 – Present], Saint Albertus Magnus builds on Arabic alchemy
European chemistry [1661 – Present], Boyle writes The Sceptical Chymist, Lavoisier writes Elements of Chemistry, and Dalton publishes his Atomic Theory


[edit] Modern connections to alchemy
Islamic alchemy was a forerunner of modern scientific chemistry. Alchemists used many of the same laboratory tools that are used today. These tools were not usually sturdy or in good condition, especially during the medieval period of Europe. Many transmutation attempts failed when alchemists unwittingly made unstable chemicals. This was made worse by the unsafe conditions.
Up to the 16th century, alchemy was considered serious science in Europe; for instance, Isaac Newton devoted considerably more of his writing to the study of alchemy (see Isaac Newton's occult studies) than he did to either optics or physics, for which he is famous. Other eminent alchemists of the Western world are Roger Bacon, Saint Thomas Aquinas, Tycho Brahe, Thomas Browne, and Parmigianino. The decline of alchemy began in the 18th century with the birth of modern chemistry, which provided a more precise and reliable framework for matter transmutations and medicine, within a new grand design of the universe based on rational materialism.

[edit] Alchemy in traditional medicine



This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards.


Traditional medicines involve transmutation by alchemy, using pharmacological or a combination of pharmacological and spiritual techniques. In Chinese medicine the alchemical traditions of pao zhi will transform the nature of the temperature, taste, body part accessed or toxicity. In Ayurveda the samskaras are used to transform heavy metals and toxic herbs in a way that removes their toxicity. These processes are actively used to the present day.[18]

[edit] Nuclear transmutation
Main article: Nuclear transmutation
Main article: Synthesis of noble metals
In 1919, Ernest Rutherford used artificial disintegration to convert nitrogen into oxygen.[19] From then on, this sort of scientific transmutation has been routinely performed in many nuclear physics-related laboratories and facilities, like particle accelerators, nuclear power stations and nuclear weapons as a by-product of fission and other physical processes.

[edit] In Literature
A play by Ben Jonson, The Alchemist, is a satirical and sceptical take on the subject
Part 2 of Goethe's Faust, is full of alchemical symbolism[20].

[edit] In popular culture
The subject of alchemy is extensively used in many cartoons and comic books, often in the form of superpowers. In some Japanese anime and manga, most notably Fullmetal Alchemist, alchemy and transmutation are treated as sciences, mixed with magic but fully understandable and utilizable with proper knowledge. Fullmetal Alchemist also refers to equivalency or equivalent exchange for alchemy to work; i.e to create, something of equal value must be lost, thus making something into something related or new. In Buso Renkin, alchemy is used primarily as a means for superpowers, however it holds little resemblance to "actual" alchemy.
Alchemy is also used in many video games, usually as some form of item creation and often involving the fusion of two or more items. In Secret of Evermore, the only video game from Square's North American division, alchemy takes the place of the normal magic system. The main character receives alchemic formulas instead of spells and by combining a wide variety of ingredients (such as wax, oil, limestone, and dry ice) a reaction will take place such as fireballs, healing, or shields. The Atelier and Mana Khemia series from GUST also heavily emphasize on alchemy. The games feature hundreds of ingredient and recipes that players need to find or derive themselves. Additionally, all weapons and certain items must be made, or synthesized, and they are not sold in shops, which therefore makes alchemy essential in character growth.
Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, as the name would suggest, has as a central theme a magical stone (called the Philosopher's Stone) that is supposed to grant ever-lasting life and be able to turn anything to gold. For the American publication, the name was changed to "sorcerer's stone," but the parallels between the book's magical stone and the alchemists' philosophers stone are still unmistakable. The U.S. version title was changed to "Harry Potter and the Sorceror's Stone," likely to try and attract a broader audience by using the term sorceror.
The Alchemist, by Paulo Coelho, discusses one boy's quest to fulfill his destiny, and on the way he is aided by an alchemist.
Another novel called The Alchemist by Donna Boyd explains the life of an immortal Egyptian going about life from Ancient Egypt to modern civilization.
The Alchemyst: The Secrets of the Immortal Nicholas Flamel by Michael Scott centers on twins, Sophie and Josh Newman, who are guided through their prophesied quest by Nicholas Flamel, a well-known alchemist in the 14th century.
Short story by H. P. Lovecraft [1908] (1986). "The Alchemist". in S. T. Joshi (ed.). Dagon and Other Macabre Tales (9th corrected printing ed.). Sauk City, WI: Arkham House. ISBN 0-87054-039-4.
Alchemy also serves as one of the themes in White Wolf's Promethean: The Created role-playing game, using the humours, classical metals, and the ideas of refinement and the Magnum Opus as central ideas.
In Star Wars, the Sith have their own variation called Sith Alchemy, which calls upon the use of their magic to create hideous, unnatural beasts of the dark side, summon forth monsters called Sithspawn, and to strengthen their weapons.
California band Thrice created a four EP set named the Alchemy Index which centers around each of the four elements involved in the alchemical process.

[edit] In contemporary art
In the twentieth century alchemy was a profoundly important source of inspiration for the Surrealist artist Max Ernst, who used the symbolism of alchemy to inform and guide his work. M.E. Warlick wrote his Max Ernst and Alchemy describing this relationship in detail.
Contemporary artists use alchemy as inspiring subject matter, like Odd Nerdrum, whose interest has been noted by Richard Vine, and the painter Michael Pearce [21], whose interest in alchemy dominates his work. His works Fama [22] and The Aviator's Dream [23] particularly express alchemical ideas in a painted allegory.


[edit] See also





[edit] Other alchemical pages

Alchemical symbol
Alchemy in art and entertainment
Alchemy in history
Alembic
Alkahest
Astrology and alchemy
Berith
Jakob Boehme
Circle with a point at its centre
Elixir of life
Emerald Tablet
Robert Fludd
Four Humors
Hermeticism
Homunculus
Michael Maier
Musaeum Hermeticum
Paracelsus
Philosopher's stone
Quintessence
Herbert Silberer
Vulcan of the alchemists
Monas Hieroglyphica


[edit] Alchemy and psychoanalysis

Carl Jung
Analytical psychology


[edit] Other resources

List of alchemists
List of magical terms and traditions
List of occultists





[edit] Related and alternative philosophies

Western mystery tradition
Internal alchemy
Astrology
Necromancy, magic, magick
Esotericism, Rosicrucianism, Illuminati
Taoism and the Five Elements
Asemic writing
Kayaku-Jutsu
Acupuncture, moxibustion, ayurveda, homeopathy
Anthroposophy
Psychology and Carl Jung
New Age
Tay al-Ard


[edit] Substances of the alchemists

lead • tin • iron • copper • mercury • silver • gold
phosphorus • sulfur • arsenic • antimony
vitriol • quartz • cinnabar • pyrites • orpiment • galena
magnesia • lime • potash • natron • saltpetre • kohl
ammonia • ammonium chloride • alcohol • camphor
Acids: sulfuric • muriatic • nitric • acetic • formic • citric• tartaric
aqua regia • gunpowder
carmot


[edit] Scientific connections

Chemistry
Physics
Synthesis of noble metals
Nuclear transmutation
Scientific method
Protoscience, Pseudoscience, and Anti-science
Obsolete scientific theories
Historicism







[edit] Notes


^ E. J. Holmyard, Alchemical Equipment in "A History of Technologyy ed. E. Singer et al." vol. II (Oxford, 1957), p. 731.
^ Walter W. Skeat (1892). Principles of English Etymology. Oxford: Clarendon Press. http://books.google.com/books?id=M7kCAAAAIAAJ&pg=PA286&dq=arabs+kimia+greeks&lr=&as_brr=3&as_pt=ALLTYPES&ei=Z0dYSdmvD5rqkQSF0dz4Bw#PPA287,M1. 
^ Mahdihassan S. "Alchemy, Chinese versus Greek, an etymological approach: a rejoinder"
^ Alchemy at Dictionary.com
^ The True Nature of Hermetic Alchemy
^ Blavatsky, H.P. (1888). The Secret Doctrine. ii. Theosophical Publishing Company. 238. ISBN 978-1557000026. http://www.phx-ult-lodge.org/SDVolume2.htm. 
^ Paracelsus. "Alchemical Catechism". http://www.sacred-texts.com/alc/tschoudy.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-18. 
^ Jung, C. G. (1944). Psychology and Alchemy (2nd ed. 1968 Collected Works Vol. 12 ISBN 0-691-01831-6). London: Routledge.
^ Jung, C. G., & Hinkle, B. M. (1912). Psychology of the Unconscious : a study of the transformations and symbolisms of the libido, a contribution to the history of the evolution of thought. London: Kegan Paul Trench Trubner. (revised in 1952 as Symbols of Transformation, Collected Works Vol.5 ISBN 0-691-01815-4)
^ Jung, C. G. (1944). Psychology and Alchemy (2nd ed. 1968 Collected Works Vol. 12 ISBN 0-691-01831-6). London: Routledge.
^ Jung, C. G., & Jaffe A. (1962). Memories, Dreams, Reflections. London: Collins. This is Jung's autobiography, recorded and edited by Aniela Jaffe, ISBN 0-679-72395-1
^ C.-G. Jung Preface to Richard Wilhelm's translation of the I Ching
^ C.-G. Jung Preface to the translation of The Secret of The Golden Flower
^ Meyrink und das theomorphische Menschenbild
^ Neumann, Erich. The origins and history of consciousness, with a foreword by C.G. Jung. Translated from the German by R.F.C. Hull. New York : Pantheon Books, 1954. Confer p.255, footnote 76: "Since Alchemy actually originated in Egypt, it is not improbable that esoteric interpretations of the Osiris myth are among the foundations of the art ..."
^ Kraus, Paul, Jâbir ibn Hayyân, Contribution à l'histoire des idées scientifiques dans l'Islam. I. Le corpus des écrits jâbiriens. II. Jâbir et la science grecque,. Cairo (1942-1943). Repr. By Fuat Sezgin, (Natural Sciences in Islam. 67-68), Frankfurt. 2002:


“To form an idea of the historical place of Jabir’s alchemy and to tackle the problem of its sources, it is advisable to compare it with what remains to us of the alchemical literature in the Greek language. One knows in which miserable state this literature reached us. Collected by Byzantine scientists from the tenth century, the corpus of the Greek alchemists is a cluster of incoherent fragments, going back to all the times since the third century until the end of the Middle Ages.”




“The efforts of Berthelot and Ruelle to put a little order in this mass of literature led only to poor results, and the later researchers, among them in particular Mrs. Hammer-Jensen, Tannery, Lagercrantz , von Lippmann, Reitzenstein, Ruska, Bidez, Festugiere and others, could make clear only few points of detail…




The study of the Greek alchemists is not very encouraging. An even surface examination of the Greek texts shows that a very small part only was organized according to true experiments of laboratory: even the supposedly technical writings, in the state where we find them today, are unintelligible nonsense which refuses any interpretation.




It is different with Jabir’s alchemy. The relatively clear description of the processes and the alchemical apparatuses, the methodical classification of the substances, mark an experimental spirit which is extremely far away from the weird and odd esotericism of the Greek texts. The theory on which Jabir supports his operations is one of clearness and of an impressive unity. More than with the other Arab authors, one notes with him a balance between theoretical teaching and practical teaching, between the `ilm and the `amal. In vain one would seek in the Greek texts a work as systematic as that which is presented for example in the Book of Seventy.”


(cf. Ahmad Y Hassan. "A Critical Reassessment of the Geber Problem: Part Three". http://www.history-science-technology.com/Geber/Geber%203.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. )
^ "The oldest Indian writings, the Vedas (Hindu sacred scriptures), contain the same hints of alchemy" - Multhauf, Robert P. & Gilbert, Robert Andrew (2008). Alchemy. Encyclopædia Britannica (2008).
^ Junius, Manfred M; The Practical Handbook of Plant Alchemy: An Herbalist's Guide to Preparing Medicinal Essences, Tinctures, and Elixirs; Healing Arts Press 1985
^ [|Amsco School Publications]. "Reviewing Physics: The Physical Setting" (in English). Amsco School Publications. http://www.stmary.ws/physics/amsco_review_and_glencoe/chapter05.pdf.  ""The first artificial transmutation of one element to another was performed by Rutherford in 1919. Rutherford bombarded nitrogen with energetic alpha particles that were moving fast enough to overcome the electric repulsion between themselves and the target nuclei. The alpha particles collided with, and were absorbed by, the nitrogen nuclei, and protons were ejected. In the process oxygen and hydrogen nuclei were created." 
^ see Alice Raphael: Goethe and the Philosopher's Stone, symbolical patterns in 'The Parable' and the second part of 'Faust', London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1965
^ Cal Lutheran | Department of Art - Faculty
^ The Gilded Raven Blog + » fama
^ The Gilded Raven Blog + » Storm / The Aviator’s Dream



[edit] References


Cavendish, Richard, The Black Arts, Perigee Books
Gettgins, Fred (1986). Encyclopedia of the Occult. London: Rider. 
Greenberg, Adele Droblas (2000). Chemical History Tour, Picturing Chemistry from Alchemy to Modern Molecular Science. Wiley-Interscience. ISBN 0-471-35408-2. 
Hart-Davis, Adam (2003). Why does a ball bounce? 101 Questions that you never thought of asking. New York: Firefly Books. 
Hughes, Jonathan (2002). Arthurian Myths and Alcheny, the Kingship of Edward IV. Stroud: Sutton. 
Marius (1976). On the Elements. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-02856-2.  Trans. Richard Dales.
Thorndike, Lynn (1923-1958) (8 volumes). A History of Magic and Experimental Science. New York: Macmillan. 
Weaver, Jefferson Hane (1987). The World of Physics. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Zumdahl, Steven S. (1989). Chemistry (2nd ed. ed.). Lexington, Maryland: D.C. Heath and Company. ISBN 0-669-16708-8. 



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Alchemy



Etymology of "alchemy"
Hidden Symbolism of Alchemy and the Occult Arts by Herbert Silberer
The Alchemy website - Alchemy from a metaphysical perspective.
The al-kemi.org website - Alchemy from a spiritual/philosophical perspective.
Society for the History of Alchemy and Chemistry
Alchemy images
Dictionary of the History of Ideas: Alchemy
Antiquity, Vol. 77 (2003) - "A 16th century lab in a 21st century lab".
The Story of Alchemy and the Beginnings of Chemistry, Muir, M. M. Pattison (1913)
"Transforming the Alchemists", New York Times, August 1, 2006. Historical revisionism and alchemy.
Electronic library with some 420 alchemical books (15th- and 20th century) and 65 original manuscripts.

   



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alchemy"
Categories: Alchemy | Arabic words and phrases | Defunct occupations | HermeticismHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008 | Cleanup from October 2008 | All pages needing cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
বাংলা
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Galego
한국어
Հայերեն
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 21:04.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
