













Fasting - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Fasting";
		var wgTitle = "Fasting";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "187886";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281384463;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Fasting

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2008)


Fasting is primarily the act of willingly abstaining from some or all food, drink, or both, for a period of time. A fast may be total or partial concerning that from which one fasts, and may be prolonged or intermittent as to the period of fasting. Fasting practices may preclude sexual activity as well as food, in addition to refraining from eating certain types or groups of foods; for example, one might refrain from eating meat. A complete fast in its traditional definition is abstinence of all food and liquids except for water.
Fasting for religious and spiritual reasons has been a part of human custom since pre-history. It is mentioned in the Bible, in both the Old Testament (the Tanach) and New Testament, the Qur'an, the Mahabharata, and the Upanishads. Fasting is also practiced in many other religious traditions and spiritual practices.
In a medical context fasting may refer to (1) the metabolic status of a person who has not eaten overnight, (2) to the metabolic state achieved after complete digestion and absorption of a meal, or (3) an unusually extended period of starvation. Several metabolic adjustments occur during fasting, and many medical diagnostic tests are standardized for fasting conditions. For most ordinary diagnostic purposes a person is assumed to be fasting after 8–12 hours. Many of the metabolic shifts of fasting begin as absorption of a meal is complete (typically 3–5 hours after a meal); "post-absorptive state" is synonymous with this usage, in contrast to the "post-prandial" state of ongoing digestion. A diagnostic fast refers to prolonged fasting (from 8–72 hours depending on age) conducted under medical observation for investigation of a problem, usually hypoglycemia. Finally, extended fasting has been recommended as therapy for various conditions by physicians of most cultures, throughout history, from ancient to modern.




Contents


1 Health effects
2 Religious fasting

2.1 Bahá'í Faith
2.2 Buddhism
2.3 Christianity

2.3.1 Biblical accounts of fasting
2.3.2 Biblical teaching on fasting
2.3.3 Roman Catholicism
2.3.4 Anglicanism
2.3.5 Eastern Orthodoxy and Greek-Catholicism

2.3.5.1 Fast days
2.3.5.2 Fasting rules
2.3.5.3 Fast-free periods


2.3.6 Oriental Orthodox Churches
2.3.7 Protestant churches
2.3.8 Pentecostal
2.3.9 Charismatic
2.3.10 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints


2.4 Hinduism
2.5 Islam
2.6 Jainism
2.7 Judaism

2.7.1 Purpose of fasting in Judaism


2.8 Sikhism
2.9 Other


3 Medical fasting
4 Therapeutic Fasting
5 Political fasting
6 See also
7 References
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Health effects
See also: Famine response
Glucose is the body's primary fuel source and is essential for the brain's functioning. When denied glucose for more than 4–8 hours, the body will turn to the liver for glycogen, a storage form of glucose, to be used for fuel. A process called glycogenolysis converts glycogen into a usable form of fuel. At this point, the body will also use small amounts of protein to supplement this fuel. This fuel will last for up to 12 hours before the body needs to turn to muscle stores of glycogen, lasting for a few more days. If glucose is still denied at this point, muscle wasting is prevented by temporarily switching to fat as the fuel source, meaning fat is converted into ketone through catabolism. Ketones, while not sugars, are able to be used by the brain as a fuel source as long as glucose is denied.
As a byproduct of metabolism, some toxins are captured in adipose tissue. During fat catabolism these toxins are released into the blood stream[1] and present the body with a second challenge for their elimination. The body will continue to use fat for as long as there is fat to consume. The body will generally indicate to the faster when fat levels are running extremely low (less than 7% of bodyweight for males 10% for females) with an increased urge for food. Fasts are usually broken long before this point. If the fast is not broken, starvation will begin to occur, as the body begins to use protein for fuel. Death can occur if fasting is pursued to the point of complete starvation.
Research conducted by University of California, Berkeley, suggests there are major health benefits to caloric restriction. Benefits include a reduced risk of cancer, the slowing of the aging process and the potential to increase maximum life span.[2] Currently, the reduction of caloric intake is the only proven method of increasing the lifespan of an organism[3]. According to Dr. Mark P. Mattson, chief of the laboratory of neurosciences at the National Institute on Aging, fasting every other day (intermittent fasting) shows as strong of beneficial effects as caloric-restriction diets[4]. According to The National Academy of Sciences other health benefits include stress resistance, increased insulin sensitivity, reduced morbidity, and increased life span [5][6]. Long term studies in humans have not been conducted. However, short term human trials showed benefits in weight loss. The side effect was the participants felt cranky during the three week trial. According to the study conducted by Dr. Eric Ravussin "Alternate-day fasting may be an alternative to prolonged diet restriction for increasing the life span".[7]
Adherence to Greek Orthodox fasting periods contributes to a reduction in the blood lipid profile including a non-significant reduction in HDL cholesterol and possible impact on obesity.[8]
Prolonged fasting can result in serious health problems. It is highly advised that anyone thinking of fasting as a "diet" consult a physician or dietitian before they start. Fasting can result in harmful and irreversible health problems if maintained too long, or not done properly with the advice of a health professional.
Fasting leads to lowered blood sugar and blood pressure which can lead to dizziness and blackouts. People who had low blood pressure before the fast can have these problems on a one day fast. For most this becomes a problem on 5+ days water fasts. One way to avoid blackouts is to breath deeply before standing up and to raise up slowly. [9]

[edit] Religious fasting

[edit] Bahá'í Faith
Main article: Nineteen Day Fast
In the Bahá'í Faith, fasting is observed from sunrise to sunset during the Bahá'í month of `Ala' (March 2-March 20).[10] Bahá'u'lláh established the guidelines in the Kitáb-i-Aqdas. It is the complete abstaining from both food and drink (including abstaining from smoking). Observing the fast is an individual obligation and is binding on all Bahá'ís who have reached the age of maturity, which is 15 years of age.[10]
Along with obligatory prayer, it is one of the greatest obligations of a Bahá'í.[10] The Guardian of the Bahá'í Faith, Shoghi Effendi, explains: "It is essentially a period of meditation and prayer, of spiritual recuperation, during which the believer must strive to make the necessary readjustments in his inner life, and to refresh and reinvigorate the spiritual forces latent in his soul. Its significance and purpose are, therefore, fundamentally spiritual in character. Fasting is symbolic, and a reminder of abstinence from selfish and carnal desires."[11]

[edit] Buddhism




The Buddha as an ascetic. Gandhara, 2-3rd century CE. British Museum.


Buddhist monks and nuns following the Vinaya rules commonly do not eat each day after the noon meal [12]. This is not considered a fast but rather a disciplined regimen aiding in meditation. Fasting is not practiced by lay Buddhists because it is seen as a deviation from the Middle Path. This is because prior to attaining Buddhahood, prince Siddhartha practiced a regime of four years of strict austerity during which he consumed very little food. Henceforth, prince Siddhartha practiced moderation in eating which he later advocated for his disciples. However, on Uposatha days lay Buddhists are instructed to observe the eight precepts which includes refraining from eating after noon till the following morning.
The Vajrayana practice of Nyung Ne is based on the tantric practice of Chenrezig. It is said that Chenrezig appeared to Gelongma Palmo, an Indian nun who had contracted leprosy and was on the verge of death. Chenrezig taught her the method of Nyung Ne in which one keeps the eight precepts on the first day, then refrains from both food and water on the second. Although seemingly against the Middle Way, this practice is to experience the negative karma of both oneself and all other sentient beings and, as such is seen to be of benefit. Other self-inflicted harm is discouraged.
Perhaps because of sectarian differences, some lineages of Buddhism consider taking the eight precepts, even for a limited period of time, to be a fast.[who?] In fact, they are occasionally referred to as "fasting precepts." The eight precepts closely resemble the ten vinaya precepts for novice monks and nuns. The novice precepts are the same with the prohibition against handling money.[13]

[edit] Christianity
The "acceptable fast" is discussed in the biblical Book of Isaiah, chapter 58:3-7. In essence, it means afflict the soul through abstaining from fulfilling the needs or wants of the flesh. The opening chapter of the Book of Daniel, vv. 8-16, describes a partial fast and its effects on the health of its observers.
Fasting is a practice in several Christian denominations or other churches. Some denominations do not practice it, considering it an external observance, but many individual believers choose to observe fasts at various times at their own behest. The Lenten fast observed in the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church is a forty-day partial fast to commemorate the fast observed by Christ during his temptation in the desert. This is similar to the partial fasting within the Ethiopian Orthodox Church (abstaining from meat and milk) which takes place during certain times of the year and lasts for weeks.

[edit] Biblical accounts of fasting

Moses fasted for forty days and forty nights while he was on the mountain with God. (Exodus 34:28)
King David fasted when the son of his adulterous union with Bathsheba was struck sick by God, in punishment for the adultery and for David's murder of Bathsheba's husband, Uriah the Hittite. Nevertheless, the son died, upon which David broke his fast (2 Samuel 12:15-25).
King Jehosaphat proclaimed a fast throughout Judah for victory over the Moabites and Ammonites who were attacking them (2 Chronicles 20:3).
The prophet Joel called for a fast to avert the judgement of God.
The people of Nineveh, in response to Jonah's prophecy, fasted to avert the judgement of God (Jonah 3:7).
The Jews of Persia, following Mordechai's example, fasted because of the genocidal decree of Haman. Queen Esther declared a three-day fast for all the Jews prior to risking her life in visiting King Ahasuerus uninvited (Esther 4).
Saul, later Paul, did not eat or drink anything for 3 days after Jesus converted on the road to Damascus.
Jesus fasted for forty days and forty nights while in the desert, prior to the three temptations (Matthew 4:2, Luke 4:2).
The prophetess Anna, who proclaimed the birth of Jesus in the Temple, fasted regularly (Luke 2:37).
There are indications in the New Testament as well as from the Didache that members of an Early Christian Church fasted regularly.
David used fasting as an act of humbling his soul (Psalm 35:13).
The church in Antioch were worshipping the Lord and fasting when the holy spirit told them to send Barnabas and Saul for work (Acts 13:2).
Paul and Barnabus appointed elders with prayer and fasting (Acts 14:23).


[edit] Biblical teaching on fasting

The prophet Isaiah chastised the Israelites in Isaiah 58 for the unrighteous methods and motives of their fasting. He clarified some of the best reasons for fasting and listed both physical and spiritual benefits that would result (Isaiah 58:3-13).
Jesus warned his followers against fasting to gain favour from men. He suggested practical steps should be taken to fast in private. (Matthew 6:16–18). It is important to note that v16 says "When you fast" not "if you fast".
The Pharisees in Jesus' time fasted regularly and asked Jesus why his disciples did not. Jesus answered them using a parable (Matthew 9:14-15, Mark 2:18-20, Luke 5:33-39, see also Mark 2).


[edit] Roman Catholicism
Main article: Fasting and abstinence in the Roman Catholic Church
For Roman Catholics, fasting is the reduction of one's intake of food to one full meal (which may not contain meat during Fridays in Lent) and two small meals (known liturgically as collations, taken in the morning and the evening). Eating solid food between meals is not permitted. Fasting is required of the faithful on specified days. Complete abstinence is the avoidance of meat for the entire day. Partial abstinence prescribes that meat be taken only once during the course of the day. To some Roman Catholics, fasting still means consuming nothing but water.
Pope Pius XII had initially relaxed some of the regulations concerning fasting in 1956. In 1966, Pope Paul VI in his apostolic constitution Paenitemini, changed the strictly regulated Roman Catholic fasting requirements. He recommended that fasting be appropriate to the local economic situation, and that all Catholics voluntarily fast and abstain. In the United States, there are only two obligatory days of fast - Ash Wednesday and Good Friday. The Fridays of Lent are days of abstinence: those observing the practice may not eat meat. Pastoral teachings since 1966 have urged voluntary fasting during Lent and voluntary abstinence on the other Fridays of the year. The regulations concerning such activities do not apply when the ability to work or the health of a person would be negatively affected.
Prior to the changes made by Pius XII and Paul VI, fasting and abstinence were more strictly regulated. The church had prescribed that Roman Catholics observed fasting and/or abstinence on a number of days throughout the year.
In addition to the fasts mentioned above, Roman Catholics must also observe the Eucharistic Fast, which involves taking nothing but water and medicines into the body for one hour before receiving the Eucharist. The ancient practice was to fast from midnight until Mass that day, but as Masses after noon and in the evening became common, this was soon modified to fasting for three hours. Current law requires merely one hour of eucharistic fast, although some Roman Catholics still abide by the older rules.
The Catholic Church has also promoted a Black Fast, in which in addition to water, bread is consumed. Typically, this form of fasting was only used by monks and other religious individuals who practice mortifications and asceticism, but all Catholics are invited to take part in it with the advice and consent of their Spiritual Director.

[edit] Anglicanism
The Book of Common Prayer prescribes certain days as days for fasting and abstinence, but since the separation of the Church of England from the Roman Catholic Church, there have been no regulations prescribing the mode of observance of these days, nor is any distinction made between fasting and abstinence. Observance of fast days declined until the 19th century, when under the influence of the Oxford Movement many Anglicans began once again taking the prescribed fast days more seriously.
The Book of Common Prayer sets out the prescribed days as follows:

A Table of the Vigils, Fasts, and Days of Abstinence, to be Observed in the Year.

The Evens or Vigils before:

The Nativity of our Lord.
The Purification of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
The Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin.
Easter Day.
Ascension Day.
Pentecost.
St. Matthias.
St. John Baptist.
St. Peter.
St. James.
St. Bartholomew.
St. Matthew.
St. Simon and St. Jude.
St. Andrew.
St. Thomas.
All Saints.


Note: if any of these Feast-Days fall upon a Monday, then the Vigil or Fast-Day shall be kept upon the Saturday, and not upon the Sunday next before it.
Days of Fasting, or Abstinence.

I.	The Forty Days of Lent.
II.	The Ember-Days at the Four Seasons, being the Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday after the First Sunday in Lent, the Feast of Pentecost, September 14, and December 13.
III.	The Three Rogation Days, being the Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, before Holy Thursday, or the Ascension of our Lord.
IV.	All the Fridays in the Year, except Christmas Day.




In the process of revising the Book of Common Prayer in various parts of the Anglican Communion the specification of abstinence or fast for certain days has been retained, though because each province is free to set its own calendar, there is no universal Anglican rule for which days are fast days. Generally Lent and Fridays are set aside, though Fridays during the Easter season are sometimes avoided. Often the Ember Days or Rogation Days are also specified, and the eves of certain feasts.
Individual Anglicans are free to determine for themselves what particular measures of abstinence they will follow in the observance of these days, though certain parishes and dioceses are more encouraging of fasting than others. One diocese, that of Sydney in Australia, discourages its people from fasting during the season of Lent.

[edit] Eastern Orthodoxy and Greek-Catholicism
For Eastern Orthodox and Greek-Catholic Christians, fasting is an important spiritual discipline, found in both the Old Testament and the New, and is tied to the principle in Orthodox theology of the synergy between the body (Greek: soma) and the soul (pnevma). That is to say, Orthodox Christians do not see a dichotomy between the body and the soul but rather consider them as a united whole, and they believe that what happens to one affects the other (this is known as the psychosomatic union between the body and the soul).[14][15] Saint Gregory Palamas argued that man's body is not an enemy but a partner and collaborator with the soul. Christ, by taking a human body at the Incarnation, has made the flesh an inexhaustible source of sanctification.[16] This same concept is also found in the much earlier homilies of Saint Macarius the Great.
Fasting can take up a significant portion of the calendar year. The purpose of fasting is not to suffer, but according to Sacred Tradition to guard against gluttony and impure thoughts, deeds and words.[17] Fasting must always be accompanied by increased prayer and almsgiving (donating to a local charity, or directly to the poor, depending on circumstances). To engage in fasting without them is considered useless or even spiritually harmful.[14] To repent of one's sins and to reach out in love to others is part and parcel of true fasting.

[edit] Fast days
There are four fasting seasons, which include:

Great Lent (40 days) and Holy Week (7 days),
Nativity Fast (40 days),
Apostles' Fast (variable length), and
Dormition Fast (2 weeks)

Wednesdays and Fridays are also fast days throughout the year (with the exception of fast-free periods. In some Orthodox monasteries, Mondays are also observed as fast days (Mondays are dedicated to the Angels, and monasticism is called the "angelic life").[15]
Other days occur which are always observed as fast days:

The paramony or Eve of Christmas and of Theophany (Epiphany)
Beheading of John the Baptist
Exaltation of the Cross


[edit] Fasting rules
Fasting during these times includes abstention from:

animal products, all dairy products, and—with the exception of some specific days—fish,
oil (interpreted variously as abstension from olive oil only, or as abstension from all cooking oils in general), and
wine (which is often interpreted as including all alcoholic beverages)

When a feast day occurs on a fast day, the fast is often mitigated (lessened) to some degree (though meat and dairy are never consumed on any fast day). There are two degrees of mitigation: allowance of wine and oil; and allowance of fish, wine and oil. The very young and very old, nursing mothers, as well as those for whom fasting would endanger their health, are exempt from the strictest fasting rules.[14]
On weekdays of the first week of Great Lent, fasting is particularly severe, and many observe it by abstaining from all food for some period of time. According to strict observance, on the first five days (Monday through Friday) there are only two meals eaten, one on Wednesday and the other on Friday, both after the Presanctified Liturgy. Those who are unable to follow the strict observance may eat on Tuesday and Thursday (but not, if possible, on Monday) in the evening after Vespers, when they may take bread and water, or perhaps tea or fruit juice, but not a cooked meal. The same strict abstension is observed during Holy Week, except that a meal (with wine and oil) is allowed on Great Thursday.[14]
On Wednesday and Friday of the first week of Great Lent the meals which are taken consist of xerophagy (literally, "dry eating"). That is to say, vegetables cooked with water and salt.[14] In a number of monasteries, and in the homes of more devout laypeople, xerophagy is observed on every weekday (Monday through Friday) of Great Lent, except when wine and oil are allowed.
Those desiring to receive Holy Communion keep a total fast from all food and drink from midnight the night before (see Eucharistic discipline).

[edit] Fast-free periods
Certain festal periods are fast-free, meaning that fasting is forbidden, even on Wednesdays and Fridays (though fasting before Holy Communion is never relaxed, except for health reasons). These periods are:

The 12 days from the Nativity of Christ to Theophany (Epiphany)
The week of the Publican and the Pharisee (which is the week that falls exactly two weeks before the beginning of Great Lent each year)
The week following Pascha (Easter), usually called "Bright Week"—and during the 50 days from Easter Sunday to Pentecost, the fasting laws are lessened, wine and oil being permitted even on Wednesdays and Fridays
The week following Pentecost.


[edit] Oriental Orthodox Churches
Main article: Coptic abstinence
With exception of the Fifty days following Easter in the Coptic Orthodox Church fish is not allowed during Lent, Wednesdays, Fridays, and Baramon days. Other than that Fish and Shellfish are allowed during Fasting days.
The discipline of fasting entails that apart from Saturdays, Sundays, and Holy feasts should keep a total fast from all food and drink from midnight the night before to a certain time in the day usually three O'clock in the afternoon (the hour Jesus died on the Cross). Also, it is preferred to practice the reduction of one's daily intake of food (typically, by eating only one full meal a day).

[edit] Protestant churches
In Protestantism, the continental Reformers criticized fasting as a purely external observance that can never gain a person salvation. The Swiss Reformation of the "Third Reformer" Huldrych Zwingli began with an ostentatious public sausage-eating during Lent.
In more recent years, many churches affected by liturgical renewal movements have begun to encourage fasting as part of Lent and sometimes Advent, two penitential seasons of the Liturgical Year.
Likewise, many Lutheran churches encourage fasting during Lent. It is also considered to be an appropriate physical preparation for partaking of the Eucharist (or Lord's Supper), as Martin Luther writes in his Small Catechism: Fasting and bodily preparation are in fact a fine external discipline, but a person who has faith in these words, 'given for you' and 'shed for you for the forgiveness of sins,' is really worthy and well prepared.
Members of the Anabaptist movement generally fast in private. The practice is not regulated by ecclesiastic authority. [18]
Other Protestants consider fasting, usually accompanied by prayer, to be an important part of their personal spiritual experience, apart from any liturgical tradition. The United Methodist Church fasts according to John Wesley's way of sundown to sundown on Mondays to Tuesdays and Thursdays to Fridays to promote discipline among Christ's followers.

[edit] Pentecostal
Individuals in mainline Pentecostal denominations undertake both short and extended fasts as the Spirit leads them.
Some groups have classified types of fasting. In the "Normal Fast" pure water alone is consumed. During the "Black Fast" nothing, not even water, is consumed. In addition to the Normal Fast and the Black Fast, Pentecostals sometimes undertake what they call the Daniel Fast (or Partial Fast) in which only one type of food (e.g., fruit or fruit and non starchy vegetables) is consumed.
In some circles of Pentecost, the term "fast" is simply used, and the decision to drink water is determined on an individual basis.

[edit] Charismatic
For Charismatic Christians fasting is undertaken at the leading of God. Fasting is done in order to seek a closer intimacy with God, as well as an act of petition. Some take up a regular fast of one or two days each week as a spiritual observance. Holiness movements, such as those started by John Wesley, Charles Wesley, and George Whitefield in the early days of Methodism, often practice such regular fasts as part of their regimen.

[edit] The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
For members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, fasting is total abstinence from food and drink, including water. Members are encouraged to fast on the first Sunday of each month, designated as Fast Sunday. During Fast Sunday, members fast for two consecutive meals. The money saved by not having to purchase and prepare meals is donated to the church as a fast offering, which is to be used to help people in need. The late LDS President Gordon B. Hinckley asked: “What would happen if the principles of fast day and the fast offering were observed throughout the world[?] The hungry would be fed, the naked clothed, the homeless sheltered. … A new measure of concern and unselfishness would grow in the hearts of people everywhere.”[19]
Sunday worship meetings on Fast Sunday include opportunities for church members to publicly bear testimony during the sacrament meeting portion, often referred to as fast and testimony meeting.
Fasting is also encouraged for members any time they desire to grow closer to their Father in heaven and to show self-mastery of spirit over body. Members may also implement personal, family or group fasts any time they desire to solicit special blessings from God, including health or comfort for themselves and/or others.
Individuals can also use fasting as a part of their repentance process or to show gratitude towards God.

[edit] Hinduism
Fasting is a very integral part of the Hindu religion. Individuals observe different kinds of fasts based on personal beliefs and local customs. Some are listed below.

Some Hindus fast on certain days of the month such as Ekadasi or Purnima.


Certain days of the week are also set aside for fasting depending on personal belief and favorite deity. For example, devotees of Shiva tend to fast on Mondays, while devotees of Vishnu tend to fast on Fridays or Saturdays.


Thursday fasting is very common among the Hindus of northern India. On Thursdays devotees listen to a story before breaking their fast. On the Thursday fasters also worship Vrihaspati Mahadeva. They wear yellow clothes, and meals with yellow colour are preferred. Women worship the banana tree and water it. Food items are made with yellow-coloured ghee.


Fasting during religious festivals is also very common. Common examples are Maha Shivaratri (Most people conduct a fast on Maha Shivratri which includes consuming fruit and milk) , or the 9 days of Navratri (which occurs twice a year in the months of April and October/November during Vijayadashami just before Diwali, as per the Hindu calendar). Karwa Chauth is a form of fasting unique to the northern part of India where married women undertake a fast for the well-being, prosperity, and longevity of their husbands. The fast is broken after the wife views the moon through a sieve after sunset.


In the state of Andhra Pradesh, the month of Kaarthika, which begins with the day after Deepavali is often a period of frequent (though not necessarily continuous) fasting for some people, especially women. Common occasions for fasting during this month include Mondays (for Lord Shiva), the full-moon day of Karthika and the occasion of Naagula Chaviti.

Methods of fasting also vary widely and cover a broad spectrum. If followed strictly, the person fasting does not partake any food or water from the previous day's sunset until 48 minutes after the following day's sunrise. Fasting can also mean limiting oneself to one meal during the day and/or abstaining from eating certain food types and/or eating only certain food types. In any case, even if the fasting Hindu is non-vegetarian, he/she is not supposed to eat or even touch any animal products (i.e. meat, eggs) on a day of fasting. (Milk is an exception for animal products).
In Sri Vidya, one is forbidden to fast because the Devi is within them, and starving would in return starve the god. The only exception in Srividya for fasting is on the anniversary of the day one's parents died.

[edit] Islam
Main article: Sawm
Fasting is the fourth of the Five Pillars of Islam and involves fasting during Ramadan
In Islam, fasting for a month is an obligatory practice during the holy month of Ramadan, from fajr (dawn), until the maghrib (sunset). Muslims are prohibited from eating, drinking, smoking, and engaging in sexual intercourse while fasting. Fasting in the month of Ramadan is one of the Pillars of Islam, and thus one of the most important acts of Islamic worship. By fasting, whether during Ramadan or other times, a Muslim draws closer to their Lord by abandoning the things they enjoy, such as food and drink. This makes the sincerity of their faith and their devotion to God (Arabic: Allah) all the more evident.
The Qur'an states that fasting was prescribed for those before them (i.e., the Jews and Christians) and that by fasting a Muslim gains taqwa, which can be described as the care taken by a person to do everything God has commanded and to keep away from everything that He has forbidden. Fasting helps prevent many sins and is a shield with which the Muslim protects him/herself from jahannam (hell).
O who believe, fasting is decreed for you as it was decreed for those before you; perchance you will guard yourselves. ...
The month of Ramadan is the month in which the Koran was sent down, a guidance for the people, and clear verses of guidance and criterion. [Quran: Chapter 2, 183]
Muslims believe that fasting is more than abstaining from food and drink. It also includes abstaining from any falsehood in speech and action, from any ignorant and indecent speech, and from arguing and fighting, and lustful thoughts. Therefore, fasting strengthens control of impulses and helps develop good behavior.
Fasting also inculcates a sense of fraternity and solidarity, as Muslims feel and experience what their needy and hungry brothers and sisters feel. However, even the poor, needy, and hungry participate in the fast. Moreover, Ramadan is a month of giving charity and sharing meals to break the fast together.
The Siyam is intended to teach muslims patience and self-control, and to remind them of the less fortunate in the world. The fast is also seen as a debt owed by the muslim to God. Faithful observance of the Siyam is believed to atone for personal faults and misdeeds, at least in part, and to help earn a place in paradise. It is also believed to be beneficial for personal conduct, that is, to help control impulses, passions and temper. The fast is also meant to provide time for meditation and to strengthen one's faith.
While fasting in the month of Ramadan is considered Fard (obligatory), Islam also prescribed certain days for non-obligatory, voluntary fasting, such as:

each Monday and Thursday of a week
the 13th, 14th, and 15th day of each lunar month
six days in the month of Shawwal (the month following Ramadan)
the Day of Arafat (9th of Dhu al-Hijjah in the Hijri (Islamic calendar)
the Day of Ashura (10th of Muharram in the Hijri calendar), (Only Sunni Muslims fast on this day. In Shia Islam it is prohibited.)

Fasting is forbidden on these days: [20]

Eid Fitr (1st Shawwal) and Eid Adha (10th Dzulhijjah)
Tashriq (11th, 12th, 13th Dzulhijjah)

Although fasting is fard (obligatory), exceptions are made for persons in particular circumstances:

Prepubescent children; though some parents will encourage their children fast earlier for shorter periods, so the children get used to fasting.
Serious illness; the days lost to illness will have to be made up after recovery.
If one is traveling but one must make up any days missed upon arriving at one's destination.
Women who are pregnant or nursing.
A woman during her menstrual period; although she must count the days she missed and make them up at the end of Ramadan.
An ill person or old person who is not physically able to fast. They should donate the amount of a normal persons diet for each day missed if they are financially capable.
A mentally-ill person

Penalty of purposefully breaking fast at Ramadan:

For elders who will not be able to fast, a lunch meal (or an equivalent amount of money) is to be donated to the poor or needy for each day of missed fasting.
If an adult who is sane, men or women, breaks his fast intentionally and without any excuse, expiation is achieved by freeing a slave, fasting for 60 days successively (two months) without missing a day, or feeding sixty poor people.


[edit] Jainism
There are many types of fasting in Jainism. One is called Chauvihar Upwas, in which no food or water may be consumed until sunrise the next day. Another is called Tivihar Upwas, in which no food may be consumed, but boiled water is allowed. The main goal of any type of Fasting in Jainism is to achieve complete Non-Violence (दया, ahimsa) during that period. Fasting is usually done during Paryushana but can be done during other times. If one fasts for the eight days of Paryushana, it is called Atthai, and when it is for One Month, it is known as Maskhamana. Also, it is common for Jains not to fast but only to limit their intake of food. When a person only eats lentils and tasteless food with salt and pepper as the only spices, the person is said to do Ayambil. There are other types of fasting in which a Jain eats only one meal a day, it is known as Ekassana. Similarly, another fast allows for two meals a day called Beasana. The goal of all these fastings is to decrease desire and passion for the physical world, and attain spirituality by meditation.
Self-starvation by fasting is known as Sallekhana and is supposed to help shed karma according to Jain philosophy. Another form of fasting is Santhara, the Jain religious ritual of voluntary death by fasting. Supporters of the practice believe that Santhara cannot be considered suicide, but rather something one does with full knowledge and intent, while suicide is viewed as emotional and hasty. Due to the prolonged nature of Santhara, the individual is given ample time to reflect on his or her life. The vow of Santhara is taken when one feels that one's life has served its purpose. The goal of Santhara is to purify the body and, with this, the individual strives to abandon desire.

[edit] Judaism
Fasting for Jews means completely abstaining from food and drink, including water. Brushing teeth is forbidden on the major fast days of Yom Kippur and Tisha B'Av (See below), but permitted on minor fast days. Taking medications is generally not permitted, except where a doctor's orders would forbid abstaining. Traditionally observant Jews fast on up to six days of the year. With the exception of Yom Kippur, fasting is never permitted on Shabbat, for the commandment of keeping Shabbat is biblically ordained and overrides the later rabbinically-instituted fast days. Yom Kippur is the only fast day which is ordained in the Torah.
Yom Kippur is considered to be the most important day of the Jewish year and fasting as a means of repentance is expected of every Jewish man and boy above the age of bar mitzvah and every Jewish woman and girl above the age of bat mitzvah. It is so important to fast on this day, that only those who would be put in danger by fasting are exempt, such as the ill, elderly, or pregnant or nursing women, as endangering one's life is against a core principle of Judaism. Those that do eat on this day are encouraged to eat as little as possible at a time and to avoid a full meal. For some, fasting on Yom Kippur is considered more important than the prayers of this holy day. If one fasts, even if one is at home in bed, one is considered as having participated in the full religious service. In addition to fasting and prayer, Yom Kippur -- as the "Sabbath of Sabbaths" -- has the same restrictions regarding work as the Sabbath, such as striking a fire, carrying objects outside the home, using tools, and so on. Traditionally, leather shoes are not worn on this day. Men may wear a white gown (kittel) over their clothes, symbolic of a burial shroud on this Day of Judgement. Women may either wear all white, or they may simply wear a large white scarf over their heads, and many do not put on make-up or jewelry. The aura of the day is serious, humble, sacred and repentant, yet happy in the knowledge that sincere repentance brings redemption.
The second major day of fasting is Tisha B'Av, the day nearly 2000 years ago on which the Romans destroyed the Holy Temple in Jerusalem and the Jews were banished from their homeland. Tisha B'Av ends a three-week mourning period beginning with the fast of the 17th of Tammuz. Unlike the fast of Yom Kippur, there are no restrictions on activities, although one should try to avoid doing regular work the first part of the day, sit in a low chair or on the floor, and wear no leather shoes. This is also the day when observant Jews remember the many tragedies which have befallen the Jewish people, including the Holocaust. The atmosphere of this holiday is serious and deeply sad.
Both of these holy days are considered major fasts and are observed from sunset to sunset the following day by both men and women. The remaining four fasts are considered minor and fasting is only observed from sunrise to sunset. Men are expected to observe them, and women should observe them, but a rabbi may often give dispensions if the fast represents too much of a hardship to a sick or weak person.
On the two major fast days sexual relations are also forbidden.
The four public fast days

The Fast of Gedaliah
The Fast of the 10th of Tevet
The Fast of the 17th of Tammuz,
The Fast of Esther, which takes place immediately before Purim

Minor fast days, not universally observed, include:

The first Monday and Thursday of the months Marcheshvan and Iyar
The day before every Rosh Chodesh
The Fast of the Firstborn, on the day before Passover, which applies only to first-born sons; this obligation is usually avoided by participating in a ritual meal that takes precedence over fasting.

It is traditional for a bride and groom to fast on their wedding day before the ceremony as the day represents a personal Yom Kippur. In some congregations, repentance prayers that are taken from the Yom Kippur service are included by the bride and groom in the service before the ceremony.
Aside from these official days of fasting, Jews may take upon themselves personal or communal fasts, often to seek repentance in the face of tragedy or some impending calamity. For example, a fast is sometimes observed if the scrolls of the Torah are dropped. The length of the fast varies, and some Jews will reduce the length of the fast through tzedakah, or charitable acts. Mondays and Thursdays are considered especially auspicious days for fasting.

[edit] Purpose of fasting in Judaism
Judaism views three essential potential purposes of fasting, and a combination of some or all of these could apply to any given fast. One purpose in fasting is the achievement of atonement for sins and omissions in Divine service. Fasting is not considered the primary means of acquiring atonement; rather, sincere regret for and rectification of wrongdoing is key (see Isaiah, 58:1-13, which appropriately is read as the haftorah on Yom Kippur).
Nevertheless, fasting is conducive to atonement, for it tends to precipitate contrition in the one who fasts (see Joel, 2:12-18). This is why the Bible requires fasting (lit. self affliction) on Yom Kippur (see Leviticus, 23:27,29,32; Numbers, 29:7; Tractate Yoma, 8:1; ibid. (Babylonian Talmud), 81a). Because, according to the Hebrew Bible, hardship and calamitous circumstances can occur as a result of wrongdoing (see, for example, Leviticus, 26:14-41), fasting is often undertaken by the community or by individuals to achieve atonement and avert catastrophe (see, for example, Esther, 4:3,16; Jonah, 3:7). Most of the Talmud's Tractate Ta'anit ("Fast[s]") is dedicated to the protocol involved in declaring and observing fast days.
The second purpose in fasting is commemorative mourning. Indeed, most communal fast days that are set permanently in the Jewish calendar fulfil this purpose. These fasts include: Tisha B'Av, Seventeenth of Tammuz, Tenth of Tevet (all of the three dedicated to mourning the loss of the destroyed Temple in Jerusalem), and Fast of Gedaliah. The purpose of a fast of mourning is the demonstration that those fasting are impacted by and distraught over earlier loss. This serves to heighten appreciation of that which was lost. This is in line with Isaiah (66:10), who indicates that mourning over a loss leads to increased happiness upon return of the loss:

Be glad with Jerusalem, and exult in her, all those who love her; rejoice with her in celebration, all those [who were] mourners over her.

The third purpose in fasting is commemorative gratitude. Since food and drink are corporeal needs, abstinence from them serves to provide a unique opportunity for focus on the spiritual. Indeed, the Midrash explains that fasting can potentially elevate one to the exalted level of the Mal'achay HaSharait (ministering angels) (Pirkei d'Rabbi Eliezer, 46). This dedication is considered appropriate gratitude to God for providing salvation. Additionally, by refraining from such basic physical indulgence, one can more greatly appreciate the dependence of humanity on God, leading to appreciation of God's benificience in sustaining His creations. Indeed, Jewish philosophy considers this appreciation one of the fundamental reasons for which God endowed mankind with such basic physical needs as food and drink. This is seen from the text of the blessing customarily recited after consuming snacks or drinks:

You are the Source of all blessing, O' Eternal One, our God, King of the universe, Creator of many souls, who gave [those souls] needs for all that which You created, to give life through them to every living soul. Blessed is the Eternal Life-giver.


[edit] Sikhism
Sikhism does not promote fasting except for medical reasons. The Sikh Gurus discourage the devotee from engaging in this ritual as it "brings no spiritual benefit to the person". The Sikh holy Scripture, Sri Guru Granth Sahib tell us: "Fasting, daily rituals, and austere self-discipline - those who keep the practice of these, are rewarded with less than a shell."(Guru Granth Sahib page 216). So most Sikhs have never undertaken a fast of any kind.[citation needed]

[edit] Other

The Bridegroom Fast - This fast was initiated by the leaders of the International House of Prayer, and is observed on the first Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday of each month. Based on Matthew 9:15, its focus is intimacy with Christ, who is described in the Bible as the bridegroom of the Church. The fast is accompanied by services in Kansas City, which are freely accessible by webcast. It is observed largely in charismatic circles.
Jeûne genevois (lit. "fast of Geneva") is a public holiday and day of fasting in the canton of Geneva, Switzerland, occurring on the Thursday following the first Sunday of September.
Rael teaches fasting for one 24 hour period per a week, to give rest to the digestive system.


[edit] Medical fasting
See also: Fasting and surgery
See also: Body cleansing
Fasting is often indicated prior to surgery or other procedures that require anesthetics. Because the presence of food in a person's system can cause complications during anesthesia, medical personnel strongly suggest that their patients fast for several hours (or overnight) before the procedure.[citation needed]. Additionally, certain medical tests, such as cholesterol testing (lipid panel) or certain blood glucose measurements require fasting for several hours so that a baseline can be established. In the case of cholesterol, the failure to fast for a full 12 hours (including vitamins) will guarantee an elevated Triglyceride measurement.[citation needed]
People near the end of their lives sometimes consciously refuse food and/or water. The term in the medical literature is "patient refusal of nutrition and hydration".

[edit] Therapeutic Fasting
More prolonged Fasting also has a long, albeit controversial, history as a form of medical treatment. Some recent studies on mice show that fasting every other day while eating double the normal amount of food on non-fasting days can lead to improved insulin and blood sugar control, neuronal resistance to injury, and general health indicators. Punctuated fasting diets produced superior improvements compared with mice on 40% calorie restricted diets.[21][22] Alternate-day calorie restriction may prolong lifespan[23] and attenuate diseases associated with inflammation, oxidative stress and aging.[24]
Liquid fasts are a popular form of detox diet. Proponents contend that abstaining from food detoxifies the body and improves greater health.[25][26] Because less energy is expended on digestion of foods, it is contended that the body has more energy to expel toxins as well as to recover and heal itself from the stresses digestion places upon it.[27] Other proponents claim that protein sparing minimizes muscle loss as the body adapts to the lack of incoming protein by drawing upon almost solely fat for energy.[citation needed] Despite their popularity, however, detox diets are not supported by the medical field. A healthy human body is capable of eliminating the toxins it encounters on its own, and no evidence supporting detox.[28]

[edit] Political fasting
Fasting is often used as a tool to make a political statement, to protest or to bring awareness to a cause.
Notable annual events of such a nature are the famine events developed by World Vision to bring donation and awareness to end world poverty and hunger.
Activists have also used fasting to bring attention to a cause and to pressure authority or government to act. For example, Canadian medical doctor and politician David Swann launched a seven-day fast in December 2007 to bring attention to the world's inaction on the humanitarian crisis in Darfur.
In Northern Ireland in 1981 a prisoner, Bobby Sands, was part of the 1981 Irish hunger strike, protesting for better rights in prison. Sands had just been elected to the British Parliament and died after 66 days of not eating. His funeral was attended by 100,000 people and the strike ended only in October, after 9 other men died.
In British India, the political and religious leader Mahatma Gandhi undertook several long fasts as political and social protests. Gandhi's fasts had a significant impact on the British Raj and the Indian population generally.
A hunger strike is a method of non-violent resistance in which participants fast as an act of political protest, or to provoke feelings of guilt or to achieve a goal such as a policy change.

[edit] See also

Anorexia mirabilis
Anorexia nervosa
Asceticism
Black Fast
Break fast
Calorie restriction
Daniel Fast
Famine response
Fruitarianism
Gastroenteritis
Hunger strike
Intermittent fasting
Juice fasting
Poustinia
Santhara
Simple living
Taboo food and drink
Vegetarianism and religion


[edit] References


^ This increases the likelihood of acetaminophen poisoning for example, possibly because of depletion of hepatic glutathione reserves.Whitcomb DC, Block GD. Association of acetaminophen hepatotoxicity with fasting and ethanol use. JAMA 1994;272(23):1845-50
^ Every Other Day Fasting May Reduce Cancer Risk - WorldHealth.net
^ [1]
^ [2]
^ [3]
^ [4]
^ Alternate-day fasting in nonobese subjects
^ Sarri, Katerina O. et al.. "Effects of Greek orthodox Christian church fasting on serum lipids and obesity <Internet>". http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/3/16/. Retrieved on 8 July. 
^ fasting.ws
^ a b c Smith, Peter (2000). "fasting". A concise encyclopedia of the Bahá'í Faith. Oxford: Oneworld Publications. pp. p. 157. ISBN 1-85168-184-1. 
^ Effendi, Shoghi (1973). Directives from the Guardian. Hawaii Bahá'í Publishing Trust. pp. 28. http://reference.bahai.org/en/t/se/DG/dg-71.html#pg28. 
^ http://www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/authors/khantipalo/wheel130.html#food
^ For further information, see The Way to Buddhahood: Instructions from a Modern Chinese Master by Venerable Yin-shun.
^ a b c d e Kallistos (Ware), Bishop; Mary, Mother (1978), The Lenten Triodion, South Canaan PA: St. Tikhon's Seminary Press (published 2002), pp. 35ff, ISBN 1-878997-51-3 
^ a b Kallistos (Ware), Bishop (1964), The Orthodox Church, London: Penguin Books, pp. 75–77, 306ff, ISBN 0-14-020592-6 
^ Gregory Palamas, Letter 234, I (Migne, Patrologia Graecae, 1361C)
^ Old Orthodox Prayer Book (2nd ed.), Erie PA: Russian Orthodox Church of the Nativity of Christ (Old Rite), 2001, pp. 349ff 
^ http://www.wvup.edu/academics/humanities/Oldaker/german_anabaptist_faith_groups.htm
^ “The State of the Church,” Ensign, May 1991, 52–53
^ Ismail Kamus (1993). Hidup Bertaqwa (2nd ed.). Kuala Lumpur: At Tafkir Enterprise. ISBN 9-839990-20-9.
^ Anson, R. Michael; Rafael de Cabo, Titilola Iyun, Michelle Rios, Adrienne Hagepanos, Donald K. Ingram, Mark A. LaneDagger, Mark P. Mattson (May 13, 2003). "Intermittent fasting dissociates beneficial effects of dietary restriction on glucose metabolism and neuronal resistance to injury from calorie intake". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (The National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America) 100 (10): 6216–6220. doi:10.1073/pnas.1035720100. PMID 12724520. http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/100/10/6216. Retrieved on 2006-11-30. 
^ Wan, Ruiqian; Simonetta Camandola, Mark P. Mattson (June 2003). "Intermittent Food Deprivation Improves Cardiovascular and Neuroendocrine Responses to Stress in Rats". The Journal of Nutrition (The American Society for Nutritional Sciences) (133): 1921–1929. PMID 12771340. http://jn.nutrition.org/cgi/content/full/133/6/1921. Retrieved on 2006-11-30. 
^ Johnson JB, Laub DR, John S. The effect on health of alternate-day calorie restriction: eating less and more than needed on alternate days prolongs life. Med Hypotheses. 2006;67(2):209-11. Epub 2006 Mar 10. PMID 16529878.
^ Johnson JB, Summer W, Cutler RG, Martin B, Hyun DH, Dixit VD, Pearson M, Nassar M, Tellejohan R, Maudsley S, Carlson O, John S, Laub DR, Mattson MP. Alternate-day calorie restriction improves clinical findings and reduces markers of oxidative stress and inflammation in overweight adults with moderate asthma. Free Radic Biol Med. 2007 Mar 1;42(5):665-74. Epub 2006 Dec 14. PMID 17291990.
^ http://altmedicine.about.com/od/detoxcleansing/a/juice_fasting.htm
^ http://www.webmd.com/diet/features/detox-diets-cleansing-body-feature
^ The Miracle of Fasting,Paul C. Bragg and Patricia Bragg, ISBN 0-87790-038-8
^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/4576574.stm Scientists dismiss detox schemes



[edit] External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Fasting



Fasting at the Open Directory Project
Fasting.ws - Healing, Weightloss, Detoxification
Meaning of fasting in the month of Ramadan
Fasting Support - Fasting Retreats
The Emergence of Fasting into Mainstream Diets & Detox Programs by Katie Weston
Therapeutic Fasting - Worldwide Links
Christian Fasting: A Theological Approach
The Fasting Rule of the Orthodox Church
The fast of Karwa Chauth
Picture Gallery of Santhara fasting : Jainism
Your Personal Guide to Fasting and Prayer
Fasting for everyone
Fasting testimonials




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fasting"
Categories: Fasting | Nutrition | Asceticism | Biologically based therapies | Religious behaviour and experience | Eating behaviors | Diets | Philosophy of Mohandas Karamchand GandhiHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2008 | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since March 2009 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
مصرى
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kurdî / كوردی
Македонски
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 22:39.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
