













Roman numerals - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Roman_numerals";
		var wgTitle = "Roman numerals";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "25657";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282452688;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Roman numerals

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
Roman numerals are a numeral system of ancient Rome based on letters of the alphabet, which are combined to signify the sum of their values. The first ten Roman numerals are:



The Roman numeral system is decimal[1] but not directly positional and does not include a zero. It is a cousin of the Etruscan numerals, and the letters derive from earlier non-alphabetical symbols; over time the Romans came to identify the symbols with letters of their Latin alphabet. The system was modified slightly during the Middle Ages to produce the system used today.
Roman numerals are commonly used in numbered lists (such as the outline format of an article), clock faces, pages preceding the main body of a book, chord triads in music analysis, the numbering of movie publication dates, months of the year, successive political leaders or children with identical names, and the numbering of annual events. See Modern usage below.
For arithmetic involving Roman numerals, see Roman arithmetic and Roman abacus.


Numeral systems by culture


Hindu-Arabic numerals


Western Arabic
Indian family
Khmer
Eastern Arabic
Brahmi
Thai


East Asian numerals


Chinese
Suzhou
Counting rods
Mongolian 


Alphabetic numerals


Abjad
Armenian
Cyrillic
Ge'ez
Hebrew
Greek (Ionian)
Āryabhaṭa
 


Other systems


Attic
Babylonian
Egyptian
Inuit
Etruscan
Mayan
Roman
Urnfield


List of numeral system topics


Positional systems by base


Decimal (10)


2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64


1, 3, 6, 9, 12, 20, 24, 30, 36, 60, more…



v • d • e







Entrance to section LII of the Colosseum, with numerals still visible






Contents


1 Symbols
2 Origins
3 Zero
4 Fractions
5 IIII vs IV

5.1 Calendars and clocks
5.2 Chemistry


6 XCIX vs. IC
7 Year in Roman numerals
8 Modern usage

8.1 Music theory
8.2 Modern non-English-speaking usage


9 Alternate forms

9.1 Medieval Roman numerals


10 Modern Roman numerals

10.1 Unicode


11 Games
12 Mnemonic devices
13 References
14 See also
15 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Symbols
Roman numerals are based on seven symbols: a stroke (identified with the letter I) for a unit, a chevron (identified with the letter V) for a five, a cross-stroke (identified with the letter X) for a ten, a C (identified as an abbreviation of Centum) for a hundred, etc.:


Symbol
Value


I
1 (one) (unus)


V
5 (five) (quinque)


X
10 (ten) (decem)


L
50 (fifty) (quinquaginta)


C
100 (one hundred) (centum)


D
500 (five hundred) (quingenti)


M
1000 (one thousand) (mille)


Symbols are iterated to produce multiples of the decimal (1, 10, 100, 1000) values, with V, L, D substituted for a multiple of five, and the iteration continuing: I "1", II "2", III "3", V "5", VI "6", VII "7", etc., and the same for other bases: X "10", XX "20", XXX "30", L "50", LXXX "80"; CC "200", DCC "700", etc. At the fourth iteration, a subtractive principle may be employed, with the base placed before the higher base: IIII or IV "4", VIIII or IX "9", XXXX or XL "40", LXXXX or XC "90", CCCC or CD "400", DCCCC or CM "900".
The Romans only used what we now call capital (upper case) letters. In the Middle Ages, minuscule (lower case) letters were developed, and these are commonly used for Roman numerals: i, ii, iii, iv, etc. Also in medieval use was the substitution of j for a final i to end numbers, such as iij for 3 or vij for 7. This was not a separate letter, but merely a swash variant of i. It is used today, especially in medical prescriptions, to prevent tampering with the numbers after they are written.
For large numbers (4000 and above), a bar can be placed above a base numeral, or parentheses placed around it, to indicate multiplication by 1000, although the Romans themselves often just wrote out the "M"s:[2]

V or (V) for five thousand
X or (X) for ten thousand
L or (L) for fifty thousand
C or (C) for one hundred thousand
D or (D) for five hundred thousand
M or (M) for one million

The parentheses are more versatile; (II) is synonymous with MM, but *II is not found.
The basic multiples of Roman numerals thus follow a pattern:



×1
×2
×3
×4
×5
×6
×7
×8
×9


Ones
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX


Tens
X
XX
XXX
XL
L
LX
LXX
LXXX
XC


Hundreds
C
CC
CCC
CD
D
DC
DCC
DCCC
CM


Thousands
M
MM
MMM
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX


Ten thousands
X
XX
XXX
XL
L
LX
LXX
LXXX
XC


Hundred thousands
C
CC
CCC
CD
D
DC
DCC
DCCC
CM


A practical way to write a Roman number is to consider the modern Arabic numeral system, and separately convert the thousands, hundreds, tens, and ones as given in the chart above. So, for instance, 1234 may be thought of as "one thousand and two hundreds and three tens and four", obtaining M (one thousand) + CC (two hundreds) + XXX (thirty) + IV (four), for MCCXXXIV. Thus eleven is XI (ten and one), 32 is XXXII (thirty and two) and 2009 is MMIX (two thousand and nine). Note that the subtractive principle is not extended beyond the chart, and VL is not used for 45, which can only be forty (XL) and five (V), or XLV.

[edit] Origins
Although the Roman numerals are now written with letters of the Roman alphabet, they were originally independent symbols. The Etruscans, for example, used I Λ X ⋔ 8 ⊕ for I V X L C M, of which only I and X happened to be letters in their alphabet. One folk etymology has it that the V represented a hand, and that the X was made by placing two Vs on top of each other, one inverted. However, the Etrusco-Roman numerals actually appear to derive from notches on tally sticks, which continued to be used by Italian and Dalmatian shepherds into the 19th century.[3]
Thus I descends not from the letter I but from a notch scored across the stick. Every fifth notch was double cut (i.e. ⋀, ⋁, ⋋, ⋌, etc.), and every tenth was cross cut (X), IIIIΛIIIIXIIIIΛIIIIXII…, much like European tally marks today. This produced a positional system: Eight on a counting stick was eight tallies, IIIIΛIII, or the eighth of a longer series of tallies; either way, it could be abbreviated ΛIII (or VIII), as the existence of a Λ implies four prior notches. By extension, eighteen was the eighth tally after the first ten, which could be abbreviated X, and so was XΛIII. Likewise, number four on the stick was the I-notch that could be felt just before the cut of the Λ (V), so it could be written as either IIII or IΛ (IV). Thus the system was neither additive nor subtractive in its conception, but ordinal. When the tallies were transferred to writing, the marks were easily identified with the existing Roman letters I, V, X
The tenth V or X along the stick received an extra stroke. Thus 50 was written variously as N, И, K, Ψ, ⋔, etc., but perhaps most often as a chicken-track shape like a superimposed V and I - ᗐ. This had flattened to ⊥ (an inverted T) by the time of Augustus, and soon thereafter became identified with the graphically similar letter L. Likewise, 100 was variously Ж, ⋉, ⋈, H, or as any of the symbols for 50 above plus an extra stroke. The form Ж (that is, a superimposed X and I) came to predominate. It was written variously as >I< or ƆIC, was then abbreviated to Ɔ or C, with C variant finally winning out because, as a letter, it stood for centum, Latin for "hundred".
The hundredth V or X was marked with a box or circle. Thus 500 was like a Ɔ superposed on a ⋌ or ⊢ — that is, like a Þ with a cross bar,— becoming D or Ð by the time of Augustus, under the graphic influence of the letter D. It was later identified as the letter D, perhaps as an abbreviation of demi-mille "half-thousand"; this at least was the folk etymology given to it later on.
Meanwhile, 1000 was a circled or boxed X: Ⓧ, ⊗, ⊕, and by Augustinian times was partially identified with the Greek letter Φ phi. In different traditions it then evolved along several different routes. Some variants, such as Ψ and ↀ, were historical dead ends, although folk etymology later identified D for 500 as graphically half of Φ for 1000 because of the CD variant. A third line, ↀ, survives to this day in two variants:

One, CIƆ, led to the convention of using parentheses to indicate multiplication by a thousand: the original CIƆ = (I) 1000, then (III) for 3000, (V) 5000, (IX) 9000, (X) 10 000, (L) 50 000, (C) 100 000, (D) 500 000, (M) 1000 000, etc. This was later extended to double parentheses, as in ↁ , ↂ, etc. See #Alternate forms below.
In the other, ↀ became ∞ and ⋈, eventually changing to M under the influence of the Latin word mille "thousand".


[edit] Zero
In general, the number zero did not have its own Roman numeral, but a primitive form (nulla) was known by medieval computists (responsible for calculating the date of Easter). They included zero (via the Latin word nulla meaning "none") as one of nineteen epacts, or the age of the moon on March 22. The first three epacts were nullae, xi, and xxii (written in minuscule or lower case). The first known computist to use zero was Dionysius Exiguus in 525. Only one instance of a Roman numeral for zero is known. About 725, Bede or one of his colleagues used the letter N, the initial of nullae, in a table of epacts, all written in Roman numerals.

[edit] Fractions




A triens coin (1/3 or 4/12 of an as). Note the four dots •••• indicating its value.






A semis coin (1/2 or 6/12 of an as). Note the S indicating its value.


Though the Romans used a decimal system for whole numbers, reflecting how they counted in Latin, they used a duodecimal system for fractions, because the divisibility of twelve (12 = 3 × 2 × 2) makes it easier to handle the common fractions of 1/3 and 1/4 than does a system based on ten (10 = 2 × 5). On coins, many of which had values that were duodecimal fractions of the unit as, they used a tally-like notational system based on twelfths and halves. A dot • indicated an uncia "twelfth", the source of the English words inch and ounce; dots were repeated for fractions up to five twelfths. Six twelfths (one half) was abbreviated as the letter S for semis "half". Uncia dots were added to S for fractions from seven to eleven twelfths, just as tallies were added to V for whole numbers from six to nine.
Each of these fractions had a name, which was also the name of the corresponding coin:


Fraction
Roman Numeral
Name (nominative and genitive)
Meaning


1/12
•
uncia, unciae
"ounce"


2/12 = 1/6
•• or :
sextans, sextantis
"sixth"


3/12 = 1/4
••• or ∴
quadrans, quadrantis
"quarter"


4/12 = 1/3
•••• or ::
triens, trientis
"third"


5/12
••••• or :•:
quincunx, quincuncis
"five-ounce" (quinque unciae → quincunx)


6/12 = 1/2
S
semis, semissis
"half"


7/12
S•
septunx, septuncis
"seven-ounce" (septem unciae → septunx)


8/12 = 2/3
S•• or S:
bes, bessis
"twice" (as in "twice a third")


9/12 = 3/4
S••• or S:•
dodrans, dodrantis
or nonuncium, nonuncii
"less a quarter" (de-quadrans → dodrans)
or "ninth ounce" (nona uncia → nonuncium)


10/12 = 5/6
S•••• or S::
dextans, dextantis
or decunx, decuncis
"less a sixth" (de-sextans → dextans)
or "ten ounces" (decem unciae → decunx)


11/12
S••••• or S:•:
deunx, deuncis
"less an ounce" (de-uncia → deunx)


12/12 = 1
I
as, assis
"unit"


The arrangement of the dots was variable and not necessarily linear. Five dots arranged like :·: (as on the face of a dice) are known as a quincunx from the name of the Roman fraction/coin. The Latin words sextans and quadrans are the source of the English words sextant and quadrant.
Other Roman fractions include:

1/8 sescuncia, sescunciae (from sesqui- + uncia, i.e. 1½ uncias), represented by a sequence of the symbols for the semuncia and the uncia.
1/24 semuncia, semunciae (from semi- + uncia, i.e. ½ uncia), represented by several variant glyphs deriving from the shape of Greek letter sigma Σ, one variant resembling the pound sign £ without the horizontal line(s) and another resembling Cyrillic letter Є.
1/36 binae sextulae, binarum sextularum ("two sextulas") or duella, duellae, represented by ƧƧ, a sequence of two reversed S.
1/48 sicilicus, sicilici, represented by Ɔ, a reversed C.
1/72 sextula, sextulae (1/6 of an uncia), represented by Ƨ, a reversed S.
1/144 dimidia sextula, dimidiae sextulae ("half a sextula"), represented by ƻ, a reversed S crossed by a horizontal line.
1/288 scripulum, scripuli (a scruple), represented by the symbol ℈.
1/1728 siliqua, siliquae, represented by a symbol resembling closing guillemets ».


[edit] IIII vs IV
The notation of Roman numerals has varied through the centuries. Originally, it was common to use IIII to represent four, because IV represented the Roman god Jupiter, whose Latin name, IVPPITER, begins with IV. The subtractive notation (which uses IV instead of IIII) has become the standard notation only in modern times. For example, Forme of Cury, a manuscript from 1390, uses IX for nine, but IIII for four. Another document in the same manuscript, from 1381, uses IV and IX. A third document in the same manuscript uses IIII, IV, and IX. Constructions such as IIIII for five, IIX for eight or VV for 10 have also been discovered. Subtractive notation arose from regular Latin usage: the number 18 was duodeviginti or “two from twenty”; the number 19 was undeviginti or "one from twenty". The use of subtractive notation increased the complexity of performing Roman arithmetic, without conveying the benefits of a full positional notation system.




An inscription on Admiralty Arch, London. The numeral translates to 1910.


Likewise, on some buildings it is possible to see MDCCCCX, for example, representing 1910 instead of MCMX – notably Admiralty Arch in London. The Leader Building in Cleveland, Ohio, at the corner of Superior Avenue and E.6th Street, is marked MDCCCCXII, representing 1912 instead of MCMXII. Another notable example is on Harvard Medical School's Gordon Hall, which reads MDCCCCIIII for 1904 instead of MCMIV. In Dubrovnik, Croatia, a commemorative inscription marking the 1000th anniversary of King Tomislav’s coronation (Croatia’s first King), appears as DCCCCXXV - MDCCCCXXV (925 -1925).

[edit] Calendars and clocks




The Shepherd gate clock with Roman numbers up to XXIII (and 0), in Greenwich


Clock faces that are labeled using Roman numerals conventionally show IIII for four o'clock and IX for nine o'clock, using the subtractive principle in one case and not the other. There are many suggested explanations for this, several of which may be true:

Louis XIV, king of France, who preferred IIII over IV, ordered his clockmakers to produce clocks with IIII and not IV, and thus it has remained.[4]
Using the standard numerals, two sets of figures would be similar and therefore confuseable by children and others unused to reading clockfaces: IV and the VI; and IX and XI. Since the first pair are additionally upside down on the face, an added level of confusion would be introduced. Better, then, to make greater character distinction between them by using IIII and VI
The four-character form IIII creates a visual symmetry with the VIII on the other side, which the character IV would not.
With IIII, the number of symbols on the clock totals twenty I's, four V's, and four X's, so clock makers need only a single mold with a V, five I's, and an X in order to make the correct number of numerals for their clocks: VIIIIIX. This is cast four times for each clock and the twelve required numerals are separated:

V IIII IX
VI II IIX
VII III X
VIII I IX




The IIX and one of the IX’s are rotated 180° to form XI and XII. The alternative with IV uses seventeen I's, five V's, and four X's, requiring the clock maker to have several different molds.


Only the I symbol would be seen in the first four hours of the clock, the V symbol would only appear in the next four hours, and the X symbol only in the last four hours. This would add to the clock's radial symmetry.


[edit] Chemistry
As it relates to the nomenclature of inorganic compounds. For example MnO2 should be named manganese(IV) oxide; manganese(IIII) oxide is not used.

[edit] XCIX vs. IC
Modern Roman numerals are written by summing up the separate decimal digits, starting with the left-most digit and skipping any digit with a value of zero. Thus 1990 is rendered MCMXC: M for the 1000, plus CM for the 900, plus XC for the 90. 2009 is MMIX: MM for 2000 plus IX for 9. Each of those digits may involve an additive principle, such as VIII (V plus III) for 8, or IX (I less than X) for 9.
The subtractive principle of the IX, XC, and CM in these examples is that a numeral for 10n may not precede a numeral larger than 10n+1, where n is an integer. That is, I may precede V and X, but not L or C; X may precede L or C, but not D or M. The numerals 5×10n (V, L, D) may not precede a larger numeral at all. Thus, the number ninety-nine is XCIX (90 (XC) plus 9 (IX)), not the shortcut *IC. Similarly, 1990 is MCMXC, not *MXM; 1999 is MCMXCIX, not *MIM or *IMM.

[edit] Year in Roman numerals





This section overlaps with other sections too much. It should be combined with the rest of the article.
Please improve this article if you can.


In seventeenth-century Europe, using Roman numerals for the year of publication for books was standard; there were many other places it was used as well. Publishers attempted to make the number easier to read by those more accustomed to Arabic positional numerals. On British title pages, there were often spaces between the groups of digits: M DCC LX I (relating to 1000 700 60 1 or 1761) is one example. This may have come from the French, who separated the groups of digits with periods, as: M.DCC.LXI. or M. DCC. LXI. Notice the period at the end of the sequence; many countries did this for Roman numerals in general, but not necessarily Britain. (Periods were also common on each side of numerals in running text, as in "commonet .iij. viros illos".)
These practices faded from general use before the start of the twentieth century, though the cornerstones of major buildings still occasionally use them. Roman numerals are today still used on building faces for dates: 2009 can be represented as MMIX. They are also sometimes used in the credits of movies and television programs to denote the year of production, particularly programs made by the TVB, BBC and CBS.

[edit] Modern usage




Roman numbers on stern of Cutty Sark, Greenwich






Bow of Clipper ship Cutty Sark


Roman numerals remained in common use until about the 14th century, when they were replaced by Arabic numerals (thought to have been introduced to Europe from al-Andalus, by way of Arab traders and arithmetic treatises, around the 11th century). The Roman number system is generally regarded as obsolete in modern usage, but is still seen occasionally. Classical numbering is often used to suggest importance or timelessness, or in other cases where an alternate numbering system is useful for clarity. Examples of their current use include:

Names of monarchs and Popes are still displayed in Roman numerals, e.g. Elizabeth II, Benedict XVI. These are ordinal numbers; e.g. "II" is pronounced "the second".
The year and, if any, credits shown at the end of a television show or film, especially in the United Kingdom.
Some faces of clocks and timepieces show hours in Roman numerals.
Books (particularly older ones) are dated in Roman numerals, and display preliminary pages in Roman numbers. Volume numbers on spines and chapter numbers can also be in Roman numerals.
Film series and sequels of novels and video games (such as Final Fantasy) are often numbered with Roman numerals, typically done in emulation of older books.
Outlines use I, II, III and i, ii, iii as part of their organizational structure.
A recurring grand event, such as the Olympic Games, Super Bowl, WrestleMania, or the Sprint All-Star Race.
Historic events, such as World War II
Army Corps are typically named using Roman numerals.
Roman numerals often appear in crossword puzzles. For example, "DLII" could be the answer to clues such as "Ovid's 552" or "half of MCIV".
Names of cranial nerves.
Guitar chord diagrams.
Parts of laws, such as Titles (EG. Civil Rights Act of 1964) or Schedules (EG. Controlled Substances Act).
Sports teams can be referred to as the number of players in the squad with Roman numerals. In rugby union, the 1st XV of a particular club would be the 1st and best team the club has, likewise for the XIII in rugby league, and XI for football (soccer), field hockey and cricket.

Sometimes the numerals are written using lower-case letters (thus: i, ii, iii, iv, etc.), particularly if numbering paragraphs or sections within chapters, or for the pagination of the front matter of a book.
Undergraduate degrees at British universities are generally graded using I, IIi, IIii, III for first, upper second (often pronounced "two one"), lower second (often pronounced "two two") and third class respectively.
In chemistry, Roman numerals were formerly used to denote the group in the periodic table of the elements. But there was not international agreement as to whether the group of metals which dissolve in water should be called Group IA or IB, for example, so although references may use them, the international norm has recently switched to Arabic numerals. However, Roman numerals are still used in the IUPAC nomenclature of inorganic chemistry, for the oxidation number of cations which can take on several different positive charges. For example, FeO is iron(II) oxide and Fe2O3 is iron(III) oxide. In contrast, Arabic numerals are used to denote the formal oxidation state (which is not always the same as the oxidation number) of positively or negatively charged atoms. They are also used for naming phases of polymorphic crystals, such as ice.
In astronomy, the natural satellites or "moons" of the planets are traditionally designated by capital Roman numerals, at first by order from the center of the planet, as the four Galilean satellites of Jupiter are numbered, and later by order of discovery; e.g., Callisto was "Jupiter IV" or "J IV". This is particularly amusing in the case of Callisto, because, as mentioned above, the notation IV was mostly disused by the Romans for its similarity to the first two letters of Jupiter. With recent discoveries—Jupiter currently has 63 known satellites—as well as computerization, this is somewhat disparaged for the minor worlds, at least in computerized listings.
Science fiction, and not astronomy per se, has adopted the use for numbering the planets around a star; e.g., Planet Earth is called "Sol III".
In photography, Roman numerals (with zero) are used to denote varying levels of brightness when using the Zone system.
In earthquake seismology, Roman numerals are used to designate degrees of the Mercalli intensity scale.

[edit] Music theory
In music theory, while scale degrees are typically represented with Arabic numerals, often modified with a caret or circumflex, the triads that have these degrees as their roots are often identified by Roman numerals (as in chord symbols). See also diatonic functions. Upper-case Roman numerals indicate major triads while lower-case Roman numerals indicate minor triads, as the following chart illustrates. Lower-case Roman numerals with a degree symbol indicate diminished triads. For example, in the major mode the triad on the seventh scale degree, the leading tone triad is diminished.
Also in music theory, individual strings of stringed instruments, such as the violin, are often denoted by Roman numerals, with higher numbers denoting lower strings. For example I signifies the E string on the violin and the A string on the viola and cello, these being the highest strings, respectively, on each instrument. They are also sometimes used to signify position. In this case, the number in Roman numerals corresponds with the position number. For example, III means third position and V means fifth.


Roman numeral
I
ii
iii
IV
V
vi
vii°


Scale degree
(major mode)
tonic
supertonic
mediant
subdominant
dominant
submediant
leading tone




Roman numeral
i
ii°
III
iv
V
VI
(♭)VII
vii°


Scale degree
(minor mode)
tonic
supertonic
mediant
subdominant
dominant
submediant
subtonic
leading tone



[edit] Modern non-English-speaking usage
The above uses are customary for English-speaking countries. Although many of them are also maintained in other countries, those countries have additional uses for Roman numerals which are unknown in English-speaking regions.
The Catalan, French, Hungarian, Italian, Portuguese, Polish, Romanian, Russian and Spanish languages use capital Roman numerals to denote centuries. For example, XVIII refers to the eighteenth century, so as to avoid confusion between the 18th century and the 1800s. (The Italians also take the opposite approach, basing names of centuries on the digits of the years; quattrocento for example is a common Italian name for secolo XV, the fifteenth century.) Some scholars in English-speaking countries have adopted the former method.
In Italy, Poland, Russia, Central Europe, and in Portuguese, Romanian and Serbian languages, mixed Roman and Arabic numerals are used to record dates (usually on tombstones, but also elsewhere, such as in formal letters and official documents). Just as an old clock recorded the hour by Roman numerals while the minutes were measured in Arabic numerals, the month is written in Roman numerals while the day is in Arabic numerals: 14-VI-1789 is 14 June 1789. This is how dates are inscribed on the walls of the Kremlin, for example. This method has the advantage that days and months are not confused in rapid note-taking, and that any range of days or months can be expressed without confusion. For instance, V-VIII is May to August, while 1-V-31-VIII is May 1 to August 31.
In Eastern Europe, especially the Baltic nations, Roman numerals are used to represent the days of the week in hours-of-operation signs displayed in windows or on doors of businesses. Monday is represented by I, which is the initial day of the week. Sunday is represented by VII, which is the final day of the week. The hours of operation signs are tables composed of two columns where the left column is the day of the week in Roman numerals and the right column is a range of hours of operation from starting time to closing time. The following example hours-of-operation table would be for a business whose hours of operation are 9:30AM to 5:30PM on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays; 9:30AM to 7:00PM on Tuesdays and Fridays; and 9:30AM to 1:00PM on Saturdays; and which is closed on Sundays.


I
9:30–17:30


II
9:30–19:00


III
9:30–17:30


IV
9:30–17:30


V
9:30–19:00


VI
9:30–13:00


VII
—






A five–watt resistor as per GOST 2.728–74.


In CIS countries, capital Roman numerals I, II and V still are sometimes used according to the regional standard GOST 2.728–74 (2002), to specify rated resistor power (in watts) in schematic symbols by inscribing the numeral along inside the symbol rectangle.
Since the French use capital Roman numerals to refer to the quarters of the year (III is the third quarter), and this has become the norm in some European standards organisation, the mixed Roman–Arabic method of recording the date has switched to lowercase Roman numerals in many circles, as 4-viii-1961. (ISO has since specified that dates should be given in all Arabic numerals, in ISO 8601 formats.)
In geometry, Roman numerals are often used to show lines of equal length.
In Romania and Serbia to lesser extent, Roman numerals are used for floor numbering. Likewise apartments in central Amsterdam are indicated as 138-III, with both an Arabic numeral (number of the block or house) and a Roman numeral (floor number). The apartment on the ground floor is indicated as '138-huis'.
In Poland, Roman numerals are used for ordinals in names of some institutions. In particular high schools ("V Liceum Ogólnokształcące w Krakowie" - 5th High School in Kraków), tax offices ("II Urząd Skarbowy w Gdańsku" - 2nd Office of Treasury in Gdańsk) and courts ("I Wydział Cywilny Sądu Okręgowego" - District Court, 1st Civil Division) - use Roman numerals. Institutions that use "Institution nr N" notation always use Arabic numerals. These include elementary ("Szkoła Podstawowa nr 5") and middle schools ("Gimnazjum nr 5").
Roman numerals are rarely used in Asia. The motion picture rating system in Hong Kong uses categories I, IIA, IIB, and III based on Roman numerals.

[edit] Alternate forms




Roman numerals, 16th century


In the Middle Ages, Latin writers used a horizontal line above a particular numeral to represent one thousand times that numeral, and additional vertical lines on both sides of the numeral to denote one hundred times the number, as in these examples:

I for one thousand
V for five thousand
|I| for one hundred thousand
|V| for five hundred thousand

The same overline was also used with a different meaning, to clarify that the characters were numerals. Sometimes both underline and overline were used, e. g. MCMLXVII, and in certain (serif) typefaces, particularly Times New Roman, the capital letters when used without spaces simulates the appearance of the under/over bar, e.g. MCMLXVII.
Sometimes 500, usually D, was written as I followed by an apostrophus or apostrophic C (which resembles a backwards C, i.e. Ɔ), while 1,000, usually M, was written as CIƆ. This is believed to be a system of encasing numbers to denote thousands (imagine the Cs as parentheses). This system has its origins from Etruscan numeral usage. The D and M symbols to represent 500 and 1,000 were most likely derived from IƆ and CIƆ, respectively.
An extra Ɔ denoted 500, and multiple extra Ɔs are used to denote 5,000, 50,000, etc. For example:


Base number
 
CIƆ = 1,000
CCIƆƆ = 10,000
CCCIƆƆƆ = 100,000


1 extra Ɔ
IƆ = 500
CIƆƆ = 1,500
CCIƆƆƆ = 10,500
CCCIƆƆƆƆ = 100,500


2 extra Ɔs
IƆƆ = 5,000
 
CCIƆƆƆƆ = 15,000
CCCIƆƆƆƆƆ = 105,000


3 extra Ɔs
IƆƆƆ = 50,000
 
 
CCCIƆƆƆƆƆƆ = 150,000


Sometimes CIƆ was reduced to an lemniscate symbol (ↀ) for denoting 1,000. John Wallis is often credited for introducing this symbol to represent infinity (∞), and one conjecture is that he based it on this usage, since 1,000 was hyperbolically used to represent very large numbers. Similarly, 5,000 (IƆƆ) was reduced to ↁ; and 10,000 (CCIƆƆ) was reduced to ↂ.
In medieval times, before the letter j emerged as a distinct letter, a series of letters i in Roman numerals was commonly ended with a flourish; hence they actually looked like ij, iij, iiij, etc. This proved useful in preventing fraud, as it was impossible, for example, to add another i to vij to get viij. This practice is now merely an antiquarian's note; it is never used.

[edit] Medieval Roman numerals
Most uniquely, during the Middle Ages there came about a unique, more comprehensive shorthand for writing Roman numerals, called today the "medieval Roman numerals." This system used almost every other letter of the Roman alphabet to stand as abbreviations for more longhand numbers (usually those that consisted of repetitions of the same symbol). They are still listed today in most dictionaries, although through disfavor are primarily out of use.[5]


Modern
number
Medieval
abbreviation
Notes


5
A
Resembles an upside-down V. Also said to equal 500.


6
ↅ
Either a ligature of VI, or the Greek letter stigma (Ϛ), having the same numerical value.[6]


7
S, Z
Presumed abbreviation of septem, Latin for 7.


11
O
Presumed abbreviation of (e.g.) onze, French for 11.


40
F
Presumed abbreviation of English forty.


70
S
Also could stand for 7, and has same etymology.


80
R



90
N
Presumed abbreviation of nonaginta, Latin for 90.


150
Y
Possibly derived from the lowercase y's shape.


151
K
This unusual abbreviation's origin is unknown; it has also been said to stand for 250.


160
T
Possibly derived from Greek tetra, as 4 x 40 = 160.


200
H



250
E



300
B



400
P, G



500
Q
Redundant with D, abbreviation for quingenti, Latin for 500.


800
W
More properly, the Greek ω, as W was a fairly new creation.


900
ĵ, ↑
Resembled a crooked up arrow.


2000
Z




[edit] Modern Roman numerals
Some "modern" Roman numerals, post-Victorian era, are shown below:


Standard
Arabic
Notes


none
0
N was used at least once (by Bede about 725).


I
1



II
2



III
3



IV
4
IIII is still used on clock and Tarot card faces. See Calendars and clocks above.


V
5
IIIII was used rarely in the Middle Ages.


VI
6



VII
7



VIII
8
IIX was used rarely in the Middle Ages.


IX
9
10-1


X
10
VV was used rarely in the Middle Ages.


XI
11



XII
12



XIII
13



XIV
14



XV
15



XVI
16



XVII
17



XVIII
18



XIX
19



XX
20



XXI
21



XXV
25



XXX
30



XL
40
50−10


XLV
45



XLIX
49
Per rule above, IL would not be generally accepted.


L
50



LX
60



LXIX
69



LXX
70
The abbreviation for the Septuagint


LXXX
80



XC
90
100−10


XCIX
99
As opposed to the "shortcut" way IC seen above.


C
100
This is the origin of using the slang term "C-bill" or "C-note" for "$100 bill".


CL
150



CC
200



CCC
300



CD
400
500−100


D
500



DC
600



DCLXVI
666
Using every symbol except M in descending order gives the beast number.


DCC
700



DCCC
800



CM
900
1000−100


M
1000



MCDXLIV
1444
Smallest pandigital number (each symbol is used)


MDCLXVI
1666
Largest efficient pandigital number (each symbol occurs exactly once)


MCMXLV
1945



MCMXCVII
1997


MCMXCIX
1999
Shortcuts like IMM and MIM disagree with the rule stated above


MM
2000



MMI
2001



MMII
2002



MMIII
2003



MMIV
2004



MMVIII
2008



MMIX
2009



MMD
2500



MMM
3000



IV
4000
5000−1000, sometimes MMMM[citation needed]


V
5000



VMDCLXVI
6666
This number uses every symbol up to V once.


X
10000



L
50000



C
100000



D
500000



M
1000000



An accurate way to write large numbers in Roman numerals is to handle first the thousands, then hundreds, then tens, then units.
Example: the number 1988.
One thousand is M, nine hundred is CM, eighty is LXXX, eight is VIII.
Put it together: MCMLXXXVIII.

[edit] Unicode
Unicode has a number of characters specifically designated as Roman numerals, as part of the Number Forms[7] range from U+2160 to U+2188. For example, MCMLXXXVIII could alternatively be written as ⅯⅭⅯⅬⅩⅩⅩⅧ. This range includes both upper- and lowercase numerals, as well as pre-combined glyphs for numbers up to 12 (Ⅻ or XII), mainly intended for the clock faces for compatibility with large East-Asian character sets such as JIS X 0213 that provide these characters. The pre-combined glyphs should only be used to represent the individual numbers where the use of individual glyphs is not wanted, and not to replace compounded numbers. Additionally, glyphs exist for archaic[7] forms of 1000, 5000, 10,000, large reversed C (Ɔ), late 6 (ↅ, similar to Greek Stigma: Ϛ), early 50 (ↆ, similar to down arrow ↓⫝⊥[6]), 50,000, and 100,000. Note that the small reversed c, ↄ is not intended to be used in roman numerals, but as lower case Claudian letter Ↄ,

Table of Roman numerals in Unicode

Code
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
A
B
C
D
E
F


Value[8]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
50
100
500
1,000


U+2160
Ⅰ
Ⅱ
Ⅲ
Ⅳ
Ⅴ
Ⅵ
Ⅶ
Ⅷ
Ⅸ
Ⅹ
Ⅺ
Ⅻ
Ⅼ
Ⅽ
Ⅾ
Ⅿ


U+2170
ⅰ
ⅱ
ⅲ
ⅳ
ⅴ
ⅵ
ⅶ
ⅷ
ⅸ
ⅹ
ⅺ
ⅻ
ⅼ
ⅽ
ⅾ
ⅿ


Value
1000
5000
10,000
–
–
6
50
50,000
100,000



U+2160! U+2180
ↀ
ↁ
ↂ
Ↄ
ↄ
ↅ
ↆ
ↇ
ↈ



The characters in the range U+2160–217F are present only for compatibility with other character set standards which provide these characters. For ordinary uses, the standard Latin letters are preferred. Displaying these characters requires a program that can handle Unicode and a font that contains appropriate glyphs for them.

[edit] Games
After the Renaissance, the Roman system could also be used to write chronograms. It was common to put in the first page of a book some phrase, so that when adding the I, V, X, L, C, D, M present in the phrase, the reader would obtain a number, usually the year of publication. The phrase was often (but not always) in Latin, as chronograms can be rendered in any language that utilises the Roman alphabet.

[edit] Mnemonic devices





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)


There are several mnemonics that can be useful in remembering the Roman numeral system.
The following mnemonics recall the order of Roman numeral values above ten, with L being 50, C being 100, D being 500, and M being 1000.

Let Caesar Destroy Mountains
Lucky Cows Drink Milk
Lucy Can't Drink Milk
Lazy Cows Don't Moo
Little Cats Drink Milk
LCD Monitor
Lucky Charlie Dates Mum

A longer mnemonic helps to recall the order of Roman numerals from large to small.

My Dear Cat Loves eXtra Vitamins Intensely


[edit] References


^ Or more precisely, "a decimal system in which the number 5 is an auxiliary base" (Ifrah 200:193)
^ Roman numerals: How they work: Larger numbers
^ Georges Ifrah, The Universal History of Numbers: From Prehistory to the Invention of the Computer. Translated by David Bellos, E. F. Harding, Sophie Wood, Ian Monk. John Wiley & Sons, 2000.
^ W.I. Milham, Time & Timekeepers (New York: Macmillan, 1947) p. 196
^ Capelli, A. Dictionary of Latin Abbreviations. 1912.
^ a b Perry, David J. Proposal to Add Additional Ancient Roman Characters to UCS.
^ a b Unicode Number Forms
^ For the first two rows



Menninger, Karl (1992). Number Words and Number Symbols: A Cultural History of Numbers. Dover Publications. ISBN 0-486-27096-3. 


[edit] See also

Kharoṣṭhī numerals
Urnfield culture numerals








v • d • e

Ancient Rome topics





Timeline





Epochs

Foundation · Monarchy · Republic · Empire · (Principate and Dominate) · Decline · Western Empire / Eastern Empire









Constitution

History · Constitution of the Kingdom / the Republic / the Empire / the Late Empire · Senate · Legislative assemblies (Curiate, Century, Tribal, Plebeian)  · Executive magistrates






Government

Curia · Forum · Cursus honorum · Collegiality · Emperor · Legatus · Dux · Officium · Praefectus · Vicarius · Vigintisexviri · Lictor · Magister militum · Imperator · Princeps senatus · Pontifex Maximus · Augustus · Caesar · Tetrarch · Province






Magistrates





Ordinary


Tribune · Quaestor · Aedile · Praetor · Consul · Censor · Promagistrate · Governor







Extraordinary


Dictator · Magister Equitum · Decemviri · Consular Tribune · Triumvir · Rex









Law

Twelve Tables · Roman citizenship · Auctoritas · Imperium · Status · Litigation






Military

Borders · Establishment · Structure · Campaigns · Technology · Political control · Frontiers and fortifications (Castra) · Strategy · Engineering · Army (Legion • Infantry tactics • Personal equipment • Siege engines) · Navy (Fleet) · Auxiliaries · Decorations and punishments






Society

Theatre · Social class · Cuisine · Education · Literature · Art · Music · Architecture · Religion (Funeral • Persecution • Imperial cult) · Mythology · Forum · SPQR · Technology · Engineering · Calendar · Clothing · Festivals · Circus · Wine · Women · Marriage · Prostitution · Slavery · Deforestation






Economy

Agriculture · Commerce · Finance · Currency · Republican currency  · Imperial currency






Language
(Latin)





History · Romance languages







(Versions)


Old · Classical · Vulgar · Medieval · Renaissance · New · Recent · Ecclesiastical









Writers

Apuleius · Catullus · Cicero · Curtius Rufus · Horace  · Julius Caesar · Juvenal · Livy · Lucretius · Ovid · Petronius · Plautus  · Pliny the Elder · Pliny the Younger · Propertius · Sallust · Seneca · Suetonius · Tacitus · Virgil · Vitruvius






Lists

Topics · Wars · Battles · Generals · Legions · Emperors · Geographers · Institutions · Laws · Consuls · Distinguished women






Portal






[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Roman numerals 



Conversion algorithm and demonstration program (with java source code) for numbers up to 3,999
Conversion program (with javascript source code) for numbers up to 3,999,999
FAQ #1 Why do clocks with Roman numerals use "IIII" instead of "IV"?:
Minor history of the rules of Roman Numerals and an Arabic to Roman Numeral Converter
Online Converter for Decimal/Roman Numerals (JavaScript, GPL)
Roman Numeral Conversion Exercises (Java)
Romance in Numbers by Paul Niquette
Simple Roman Numeral Converter in C (C)
Web Based Converter - Decimal to Roman Numerals
French book with 841 chapters, numbered up to DCCCXLI



The Basic modern Latin alphabet


Aa
Bb
Cc
Dd
Ee
Ff
Gg
Hh
Ii
Jj
Kk
Ll
Mm
Nn
Oo
Pp
Qq
Rr
Ss
Tt
Uu
Vv
Ww
Xx
Yy
Zz




history • palaeography • derivations • diacritics • punctuation • numerals • Unicode • list of letters • ISO/IEC 646






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roman_numerals"
Categories: Numerals | Numeration | Roman mathematics | Latin alphabetHidden categories: Articles containing Latin language text | Articles in need of internal merging | Articles containing non-English language text | Articles containing Dutch language text | Articles containing Polish language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008 | Articles needing additional references from March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Azərbaycan
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Gaeilge
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Kiswahili
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Lietuvių
Latviešu
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Русский
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
ייִדיש
中文









 This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 00:03.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
