













Quebec French lexicon - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Quebec_French_lexicon";
		var wgTitle = "Quebec French lexicon";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "913334";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 285761306;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Quebec French lexicon

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2007)







This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details. (August 2007)


There are various lexical differences between Quebec French and Metropolitan French in France. These are distributed throughout the registers, from slang to formal usage.
Notwithstanding Acadian French in the Maritime Provinces, Quebec French is the dominant form of French throughout Canada, with only very limited interregional variations. The terms Quebec French and Canadian French are therefore often used interchangeably.




Contents


1 Standardization

1.1 Non-sexist usage
1.2 Morphology (word formation)


2 Preservation of forms

2.1 Prepositions


3 Nautical terms
4 Political terms
5 Quebec specialties
6 Informality
7 Idioms
8 Slang terms
9 Words from aboriginal languages
10 Use of anglicisms

10.1 Colloquial and slang registers
10.2 Standard register
10.3 Jargons and slangs
10.4 Perception


11 Other differences
12 See also
13 References





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Standardization
The Office québécois de la langue française believes that neither morphology nor syntax should be different between Québécois and Metropolitan French, and even that phonetic differences should be kept to a minimum. However, starting in the 1960s, it agreed to the use of words then called "well-formed Canadianisms (canadianismes de bon aloi)," that either are regional in nature (such as names of plants and animals), have been used since before the Conquest, or are justified in their origin and are considered to be equivalent or "better" than the standard equivalent.
A small list of words was published in 1969, mainly containing words that were archaic in France but still common in Quebec. This list especially contained imperial units and words from aboriginal languages. Subsequent lists have been published regularly since then.
There are a number of lexical differences between Quebec French and the French of France; these are distributed throughout the registers, from slang to formal usage.
Many differences that exist between Quebec French and European French arise from the preservation of certain forms that are today archaic in Europe. Obviously new words were also created for Quebec specialties that do not exist in Europe.
As with any two regional variants, there is an abundance of slang terms found in Quebec that are not found in France. Quebec French profanity uses references to Catholic liturgical terminology, rather than the references to prostitution that are more common in France. Many English words and calques have also been integrated in Quebec French, although less than in France. Borrowing from English is politically sensitive in Quebec and tends to be socially discouraged.

[edit] Non-sexist usage
Formal Quebec French also has a very different approach to non-sexist language than Metropolitan French. There is a much greater tendency to generalize feminine markers among nouns referring to professions. This is done in order to avoid having to refer to a woman with a masculine noun, and thereby seeming to suggest that a particular profession is primarily masculine. Forms that would be seen as highly unusual or stridently feminist in France are commonplace in Quebec, such as la docteure, l'avocate, la professeure, la présidente, la première ministre, la gouverneure générale, and so forth. Many of these have been formally recommended by the Office québécois de la langue française and adopted by society at large. The French government has lately moved in the same direction for official usage (madame la ministre).
Also, rather than following the rule that the masculine includes the feminine, it is relatively common to create doublets, especially in polemical speech: Québécoises et Québécois, tous et toutes, citoyens et citoyennes.
As an isolated anecdote, a Quebec labour union once decided to promulgate an epicene neologism on the model of fidèle, calling itself the Fédération des professionnèles, rather than use either professionnels (masculine only) or professionnels et professionnelles (masculine and feminine). This sparked a fair amount of debate and is rather on the outer edge of techniques for nonsexist writing in Quebec French.

[edit] Morphology (word formation)
Some suffixes are more productive in Quebec than in France, in particular the adjectival suffix -eux, which has a somewhat pejorative meaning: téter → téteux (thick, dumb, nitpicking, nerd), niaiser → niaiseux (foolish, irritating); obstiner → ostineux (stubborn); pot → poteux (a user or dealer of marijuana). This originates in the Norman language.
The adjectival suffix -euse is added to verbal stems to form "the machine that verbs." For example laver → laveuse "washing machine"; balayer → balayeuse "vacuum cleaner" (but "streetsweeper" in France). In France "vacuum cleaner" is "aspirateur".


Quebec French
English
Metropolitan French
Note


abatis





achigan
black bass
perche noire



acre
acre
arpent
In Louisiana, an arpent is still a legal unit of measurement, and is not the same as an acre. Here, arpent is used both as a measure of length as well as space. Land was traditionally surveyed to either 40 or 80 arpents back from a river or bayou (1.5 or 3 miles). For measuring area, a square (English) mile contains 640 acres, but 512 arpents.


pinotte / arachide
peanut
cacahuète



atoca
cranberry
canneberge



avionnerie
aircraft manufacturing plant




banc de neige
snowdrift
congère



barrer
to lock
verrouiller



débarrer
to unlock
déverrouiller



bebitte / bibitte
bug
bestiole / insecte



biculturalisme
bicultural tradition




bleuet
blueberry
airelle à feuilles étroites / myrtille
see Quebec specialities section


bleuetière
blueberry field
bleuetterie (theoretically)



bordages


Ice stuck to the bank of a river


bouscueil


Jostling of ice under the effect of winds, tides, or streams


brûlot


A type of cranefly


brunante
nightfall/dusk
crépuscule



cabane à sucre
sugar shack




cacaoui
oldsquaw
harelde boréale
A type of wild duck


canot
boat (not canoe)

Not the same as canoé or canoë


carcajou
wolverine (Am.), glutton (Br.)
glouton



calèche
sleigh




ceinture fléchée
Assumption sash




chopine
pint
pinte
Pinte is used but refers to a quart



comté
riding

A type of administrative territorial division


coureur de(s) bois
backwoodsman, fur trader




débarbouillette
facecloth
gant de toilette (glove)



demiard/Demi
half-pint
demi



dépanneur
convenience store/corner store




doré
walleye/blue pike perch/sauger/doré




épluchette


To husk corn; also designates a social gathering where people husk and eat corn


érablière
maple grove




la fin de semaine
weekend
le week-end



frasil
fragile ice




huard (huart)
loon
plongeon



Le magasinage/ Magasiner
Shopping/To go shopping
Les courses/Faire des courses / Faire les magasins
The word for "shop" or "store" in all varieties of French is le magasin. In Quebec, the verb magasiner, meaning "to shop," has been created naturally by the people, doing a simple conversion from the noun. In France, the expression is either faire des courses, faire des achats, or faire du shopping. No single verb exists.


Maringouin
Mosquito
Moustique



maskinongé
muskellunge, muskie




millage
mileage
kilométrage



mille
statute mile




orignal
moose (Am.), elk (Br.)
élan



ouananiche
freshwater salmon
saumon atlantique d'eau douce



ouaouaron
bullfrog
grenouille-taureau



outarde
Canada goose
bernache du Canada



poudrerie
blowing snow
rafale de (neige) poudreuse



pruche
Eastern hemlock
tsuga du Canada



raquetteur
snowshoer




souffleuse
snowblower
chasse-neige



suisse
eastern chipmunk
tamia rayé
Also sometimes, it is called "petit suisse" (tiny chipmunk) because when compared, it is smaller than a squirrel.


tire d'érable
maple taffy




transcanadien
Trans-Canada




traversier
ferryboat
ferry/bac/transbordeur



tuque
tuque
bonnet



verge / cours
yard




salon
living-room
(salle de)séjour/salon




[edit] Preservation of forms
Many differences that exist between Quebec French and Metropolitan French arise from the preservation of certain forms that are today archaic in Europe. For example, espérer for "to wait" (attendre in France).
Cour in Quebec is a backyard (jardin in French), whereas in France cour has dropped this meaning and primarily means a courtyard (as well as other meanings like court). However, in some areas of France, such as in the mining regions of northern France, cour still means backyard.
The word breuvage is used for "[a] drink" in addition to boisson; this is an old French usage (bevrage) from which the English "beverage" originates. Breuvage may be used in European French, but generally indicates some nuance, possibly pejorative.
The word piastre or piasse, a slang term for a dollar (equivalent to "buck" or the English "quid"), was in fact the term originally used in French for the American or Spanish dollar (they had the same value for a long period).
The word couple is used in standard French as a masculine noun (a couple, married or unmarried), but in Quebec it is also used as a feminine noun in phrases like une couple de semaines (a couple of weeks). This is often thought to be an anglicism, but is in fact a preservation of an archaic French usage. This confusion is not as wrong-headed as might be thought, though, given that English itself includes French or Norman archaicisms (e.g. the pronunciation of an initial "ch" as /tʃ/).
It's also quite common in Quebec French to describe something positive using a double negative form, such as pas laid (not ugly) for beautiful when standard French would suggest using the positive equivalent instead. However, everyday Metropolitan French has its own double negatives: pas bête or pas con (smart); pas mal (fine); pas dégueu(lasse) (tasty); and pas top, pas super or pas génial (bad).

[edit] Prepositions
The preposition à is often used in possessive contexts, where the French of France uses de; le char à Pierre ("Pierre's car") instead of la voiture de Pierre. This is also found in the informal French of France, such as "Hier j'ai vu la copine à Bruno" ("Yesterday I saw Bruno's girlfriend").
In a number of cases, Quebec speakers prefer to use the preposition à instead of using a non-prepositional phrase with ce ("this"); for example à matin or à soir instead of ce matin and ce soir ("this morning" and "this evening"). Note also à cette heure, pronounced and sometimes spelt asteure or astheure (literally "at this time") for maintenant ("now") and désormais ("henceforth"), which is also found in Queneau. These usages of à are considered colloquial (non-written).

[edit] Nautical terms
A number of terms that in other French-speaking regions are exclusively nautical are used in wider contexts in Quebec. This is often attributed to the original arrival of French immigrants by ship. An example is the word débarquer, which in Quebec means to get off any conveyance (a car, a train); in Europe, this word means only to disembark from a ship or aircraft (on descend from other vehicles), plus some colloquial uses.

[edit] Political terms
Main article: French terms in Canadian politics
Since Canada uses the Westminster system, unlike republican France, many political terms devised in English have had to be imported or new terms created. This is not always easily, and can lead to awkward constructions, the most famous example being Dominion, for which there is no French translation. As well in Canadian English the first minister of the federation is called the Prime Minister and the first minister of a province is called colloquially a Premier (the official title being Prime Minister, also). However French makes no distinction and both are called Premier ministre in all cases.

[edit] Quebec specialties
There are also words for Quebec specialties that do not exist in Europe, for example poutine, CEGEP, tuque (a Canadianism in both official languages), and dépanneur (a corner store/small grocery; dépanneur in France is a mechanic who comes in to repair a car or a household appliance).
Blueberries, abundant in the Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean, are called bleuets; in France, they are lumped together with myrtilles (bilberries) and bleuet means cornflower. (Bleuet is also slang for someone from Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean.) Though it should be noted that while very similar, these are not the same plants (i.e. myrtilles are Vaccinium myrtillus and bleuets are Vaccinium angustifolium).

[edit] Informality
French speakers of Quebec use the informal second-person pronoun tu more often and in more contexts than speakers in France do. In certain contexts it may be perfectly appropriate to address a stranger or even the customer of a store using tu, whereas the latter would be considered very impolite in France. The split often runs across generations in Quebec: Persons between 40 and 60 years of age often feel that sales persons, or service personnel giving them a tu instead of a vous are uncouth or uncivilised. Persons 60 years of age and more will sometimes feel deeply insulted if a stranger uses the tu on them. Government employees (such as policemen or bureaucrats with some contact with the public) as well as employees of large stores or large chains in Quebec are usually instructed to use vous on everybody, unless some kind of camaraderie or "instant bonding" circumstance is in play. Sometimes the split is also across social or educational lines. For instance, young academics are usually hesitant in using tu with slightly older colleagues who have just a few more years of seniority.
A similar distinction in English, where, since the second person singular "thou" went out of use 200 years ago, might be whether to address or respond to someone on a "first-name basis". For example, one might say to a man that one has just met, "Thank you, Mr. Gibson" -- equivalent to using "vous". If Mr Gibson wants to maintain formality -- that is, similar to using "vous" -- he might say, "You're welcome", but if he wants to be more relaxed and familiar, he would say, "Call me Jim". This is similar to using "tu".
Metropolitan French speech and public speakers such as politicians can occasionally come across as stuffy or snobbish to some Quebec francophones. This is also true for people from southern France, who pronounce French differently from how Parisians do. Those from southern France who move temporarily to Paris and pick up the local Parisian accent may be derided by their friends who have remained in the south. It is similar to the perception North American English-speakers may have of British English ("upper-class" or "fancy").

[edit] Idioms
There is a huge variety of idioms in Quebec that do not exist in France, such as fait que ("so"); en masse ("a lot"); s'en venir (for arriver and venir ici); ben là! or voyons donc! ("oh, come on!"), de même (for comme ça).
Entire reference books have been written about idioms specific to Quebec. A handful of examples among many hundreds:

J'ai mon voyage = J'en ai marre = I'm fed up
C'est de valeur = C'est dommage = It's a pity

Dialog in sitcoms on Quebec television uses such idioms extensively, which can make some dialog rather incomprehensible to speakers of European French.

[edit] Slang terms
As with any two regional variants, there are an abundance of slang terms found in Quebec that are not found in France. Quebec French profanity uses references to Catholic liturgical equipment, rather than the references to prostitution that are more common in France.
The expression "you're welcome" is bienvenue in Quebec, de rien in France; and the expression bonjour can be used for "goodbye" in Quebec, which it cannot in France (although it is more common to say au revoir or bye).
One of the more hazardous differences is the fact that gosses ("kids" in France) means "testicles" in Quebec. (Gosser means "to annoy.") This brought many hilarious situations involving French tourists making remarks about kids to their Quebecer parents. And boules, which means testicles in Europe, means breasts in Quebec.
Some slang terms unique to Quebec:


Ben
very
Used informally for "Well...," on both sides. Ben, tu te souviens de cette encyclopédie sur Internet?. It is derived from the formal form Eh bien.


Bibitte
Small insect
Derived from bébête for small creature.


Blonde
Girlfriend
NB, the girlfriend in question could be a brunette!


Bobette(s)
Underwear
In Europe, it's "sous-vetements".


Brailler
To weep, to whine
In Europe, to scream, to speak very loudly (colloquial)


Char
Car
In Europe, a char is an army tank or a chariot.


Chum
Boyfriend; male friend
chum de fille = female friend


Crosser
To masturbate; to cheat
Verb is "To masturbate" in reflexive form only. Crosseur = wanker, swindler. In Europe = (se) branler, un branleur


Crier
To obtain
In Europe, to cry. See also pogner


Déguidine
stop procrastinating, get on with it, hurry up
Note that the second "d" is pronounced "dz". See also déniaise, envoye, enweye, awaye


Écœurant
Wonderful (ironically)
Literally "nauseating", used ironically to mean something is overwhelmingly good, as an English speaker might say "so sweet I got a tooth ache". Note, someone calling you mon écœurant is not a term of endearment.


Envoye (enweye)(awaye)
Let's go, hurry up, come on
Often pronounced with a "w" sound, not with "v"


Faque
That said, so, that means
Contraction of "Fait que" or "Ça fait que". Also, in Europe, "Ce qui fait que...".


Fin / Fine
Nice, sweet (of a person)
In Europe = gentil, gentille


Flo
A kid (perhaps 10 years old or so)
Might possibly be an anglicism from "fellow"; European French = môme


Foufounes
Buttocks
Une foufoune (Eu) is an impolite sexual slang word for a vagina. Compare fanny.


Fret(te)
cold
Denotes something colder than merely froid


Le fun
fun, amusing (adjective, not noun, despite the le)
C'est très le fun; des jeux pas mal le fun


Gale or Galle
Scab
Possibly related to the disease.


Garrocher
To throw without caution



Genre
like
This slang is used as a parallel to the "like" word used by some American slang; the French word for like, comme, may also be used. These words appear often in the same sentence as the word tsé (tu sais = you know) as a form of slipped words within spoken structure. The use of voilà in this manner, although common in France, is not found in Canada.


Gollé
trench or ditch; from English gully



Grouiller
hurry up or move
This verb is often used in "grouille-toé", meaning "hurry up". Also used to mean that you move as in "grouille pas" (ne bouge pas), meaning "don't move". Same thing in Europe: Grouille-toi, Grouille tes puces (literally, Shake your fleas)


Guidoune
Prostitute, badly dressed woman



Jaser
To chat
Slandering chat is Eu., unusual.


Lutter
Hit with a car
Can be used as follows: "J'ai lutté un orignal" meaning "I hit a moose". Lutter in proper French means to wrestle.


Magané
Deteriorated, used, wrecked
Can also mean tired, sick or exhausted.


Mets-en
Totally, For sure, I'll say
Used in to agree with a statement.


Pantoute
Not at all
Contraction of pas en tout (pas du tout)


Paqueté
Drunk



Pitoune
babe/chick (good looking girl); or floating log.
Depends on the context, from Occitan pichona [pi'tʃuno], meaning young girl


Plate
Boring, unfortunate
plat with the t pronounced


Pleumer
To vomit or used instead of "plumer"
To vomit when having nausea; "J'ai trop bu hier, j'ai pleumé partout".


Plotte
Vagina or promiscuous woman
Very vulgar, similar to the English "cunt"


Plumer
To pluck (literally, as plume = feather).
Secondly, it can be used as a verb to describe a beating in a game; "Je vais te plumer aux cartes" in the sense of plucking one's opponent's feathers; similar to the English expression to lose one's shirt. Finally, as a verb meaning to peel, as in "J'ai plumé quelques légumes".


Poche
stupid, untalented
Can also mean "unfortunate" (C'est poche ça as in C'est plate ça)


Pogner
get, grab
Can also mean to be sexually attractive, successful, or to have a loud argument with someone ("j'me suis pogné avec mon voisin")


Quétaine
kitsch, tacky, not in a good way



Tanné
Fed up, tired of



Taper, tomber sur les nerfs
To irritate someone
Only taper sur les nerfs in France.


Tête(s) carrée(s)
English-Canadians
Used only in Quebec, this term can be considered pejorative or even a racial slur. Literally square head(s) in English (possibly a back-formation from blockhead, and/or the British term bloke).


Toé (Toi)
You



Tsé (Tu Sais)
You know
Used in the same way the French use vous savez and corresponds to the English version "you know" or the American version "y'know" (abbreviated structure). Often heard in the same sentence as the word genre as slang representing lack of clarity.


Se tasser
Move over
Eu: S'entasser: to be jammed in together. Ça se tasse: situation where spirits settle down after a scandal or quarrel



[edit] Words from aboriginal languages


Word
Meaning


Achigan
Black bass


Atoca
Cranberry


Boucane
Smoke


Carcajou
Wolverine


Manitou
Important individual


Maskinongé
Muskellunge (a pike)


Micouène
Large wooden spoon


Mocassin
Moccasin


Ouananiche
Land-locked variety of salmon



[edit] Use of anglicisms
Loanwords from English, as well as calques or loan of syntaxic structures, are known as anglicisms[1] (French: anglicisme).

[edit] Colloquial and slang registers
The use of anglicisms in colloquial and Quebec French slang is commonplace, but varies from a place to another, depending on the English presence in the area. These words cannot be used in official documents or in French writing for scholastic use, etc. Some examples of long-standing Anglicisms include:


Anglicism
Meaning
English word (cognate)


anyway
Anyway



all-dressed
With all the toppings [pizza, etc]



bécosse
Outhouse, washroom
backhouse


bines
Pork and beans
beans


blood
(adj.) nice, generous [of a person]



chum
Male friend; boyfriend



checker
To check
check


chiffe/chiffre
A shift [work period at factory, etc]
shift


cool
Agreeable, interesting



cruiser
Make a pass at
cruise


cute
Cute (good-looking)



domper
To dump (a boyfriend or girlfriend)
dump


faker
To simulate, pretend (eg, orgasm)
fake


fan
A fan (of a band, a sports team), a ceiling fan



filer
To feel [guilty, etc]; when unmodified, to feel good; negated, to feel bad (j'file pas astheure)
feel


flusher
To flush (toilet); get rid of; dump [boyfriend/girlfriend]
flush


flyé
Extravagant, far out, over the top
fly


frencher
To French kiss
French


fucké
Broken, crazy
fucked up


full
Very much (je l'aime full'), full (Le réservoire est full')



game
Game, sports match or, used as an adjective, meaning having the courage to do something; "Je suis game".



good
Good! [expressing approval; not as an adjective]



hot
Hot (excellent, attractive)



hot-chicken
Hot chicken sandwich
hot chicken


lousse
Loose, untied, released
loose


moppe
Mop
mop


pâte à dents
Toothpaste
calque of "toothpaste"


peanut
Peanut



pitcher
throw/pitch
to pitch


party
Party, social gathering



scramme
Scram! Get lost!



scrapper
Scrap, ruin, break, destroy, nullify
scrap


slacker
slacken, loosen; slack off, take it easy; fire [employee]
slack


smatte
Smart; wise-guy (either good or bad, as in smart ass); likeable [person]; cool;
smart


smoke meat
Montreal smoked meat (like pastrami)
smoked meat


toast
toast
Can be used as the verb for toasting ("Toast mes tranches de pain" or "Tu as bien trop fait toasté mon pain"). Québécois can also use the word "toaster" instead of "grille-pain".


tof
Difficult, rough
tough


toffer
Withstand, endure
tough it out


toune
Song
tune


tripper
To be high, to be aroused, to enjoy
trip


whatever
(Indicating dismissal)
whatever


It is also very commonplace for an English word to be used as a nonce word, for example when the speaker temporarily cannot remember the French word. This is particularly common with technical words; indeed, years ago before technical documentation began to be printed in French in Quebec, an English word might be the most common way for a French-speaking mechanic or other technical worker to refer to the mechanisms he or she had to deal with.
It is often difficult or impossible to distinguish between such a nonce Anglicism and an English word quoted as such for effect.
There are some anglicisms that have no obvious connection to any currently existing modern Canadian English idiom. For example, être sur le party ("to be on the 'party,'" to be partying or to be in the mood for a party).

[edit] Standard register
A number of Quebecisms used in the standard register are also derived from English forms, especially as calques, such as prendre une marche (from "take a walk," in France, se promener, also used in Quebec) and banc de neige (from English "snowbank;" in France, congère, a form unknown in Quebec.) However, in standard and formal registers, there is a much stronger tendency to avoid English borrowings in Quebec than in France.
As a result, especially with regard to in modern items, Quebec French often contains forms designed to be more "French" than an English borrowing that may be used anyway in European French, like fin de semaine which is week-end in France, or courriel (from courrier électronique) for France's mail or mel.
Some are calques into French of English phrases that Continental French borrowed directly, such as un chien chaud for European French hot dog. In Quebec, the spelling gai to mean homosexual is standard. Note that in France, gai has kept the original meaning of "happy", "cheerful" while "gay" is used to mean "homosexual" but specifically in reference to mass gay-American subculture and by those usually over 35 who identify as gay. Gay men in France 35 and under usual label themselves as "homo", not "gay".
Although many (not all) of these forms were promulgated by the Office québécois de la langue française (OLF) of Quebec, they have been accepted into everyday use. Indeed, the French government has since adopted the word courriel (in 2003). The term has been gaining acceptance as it is now used in respected newspapers such as Libération.

[edit] Jargons and slangs
Several social groups, tied together by either a profession or an interest, use a part or all of the corresponding English jargon or slang in their domains, instead of that used in other French-speaking countries. English terms are, for example, very widely used in typically male jobs like engineering (notably mechanical engineering), carpentry, and computer programming. This situation was caused historically by a lack of properly translated technical manuals and documentation. Recent translation efforts in targeted domains such as the automotive industry and environmental engineering are yielding some encouraging results. The most English-ridden Quebec slang is without question used among members in the gamers community, who are also for the most part generation Y frequent computer users, where computer gaming slang is used as well as an enormous number of normal terms commonly found in computer applications and games (save, map, level, etc.).

[edit] Perception
The perceived overuse of anglicisms in the colloquial register is a cause of the stigmatization of Quebec French. Both the Québécois and the French accuse each other (and themselves) of using too many anglicisms. A joke runs that the difference between European French and Quebec French is that in Europe, on se gare dans un parking (one parks in a carpark) and in Quebec, on se parque dans un stationnement (one parks in a parking lot).
Quebec and France tend to have entirely different anglicisms because in Quebec they are the gradual result of two and a half centuries of living among English speakers, whereas in Europe they are much more recent and result from the increasing international dominance of American English. Statistically, though, and rather counter-intuitively, the French use more anglicisms than the Québécois.
See also Franglais.

[edit] Other differences
Like most world reaching languages there are regional differences. Even within Québec there are regional uses of words or expression. Here are some other differences between standard Quebec French and European French:


Quebec term
Translation
Meaning of term in Europe
European term
Note


Auto or Char
Car
car (childish or archaic)
Voiture



Abreuvoir
Water fountain
Watering place for animals
Fontaine
Used only for animals in Europe (or for comical effect)


Achalandage
Traffic (of a store, street, public transit)
Stock, merchandise, clientele (archaic)
Circulation, Embouteillage, bouchon



Arrêt
A stop or command to stop

Stop
Used on all stop signs. Also used as arrêt d'autobus, "prochain arrêt", etc.


Aubaine
Sale
Opportunity
Promotion
An item is une aubaine but en promotion


Baccalauréat
Bachelor's degree
High school leaving exam or diploma
Licence



Barrer
To lock
To block or to strike through
Fermer à clé, verrouiller
Quebec usage archaic in Europe


Bête
Disagreeable (person)
Stupid
Désagréable, impoli
European usage also used in Quebec


Bienvenue
"You're welcome"
Welcome here
De rien
European usage also used in Quebec, as well as De rien


Blé d'Inde
Corn (North American usage)

Maïs
Maïs also standard in Quebec when referring to the kernels, aka Mais éclatée (or soufflée) → popped corn. Blé d'Inde is always used to refer to the whole stalk, aka corn on the cob.


Brosse
Drinking binge
Brush
Cuite



Cartable
Binder
School bag, Satchel
Classeur
See also classeur


Cédule
Schedule
Tax bracket (archaic)
Emploi du temps



Chandail
T-shirt, sweater, sweatshirt
Knit sweater
T-shirt, pull



Choquer
To anger
To shock
Fâcher



Classeur
Filing cabinet
Binder
Armoire à dossier
See also cartable


Correct
Good, sufficient, kind, O.K.
corrected
bon, beau, etc.



Coupe glacée
Ice cream sundae

de la glace au chocolat, de la glace aux fraises, etc.
An ice cream stand is known as a bar laitier (in France, a glacier)


Croche
Crooked; strange, dishonest
Eighth note
crochu; bizarre, biscornu, de travers, de traviole



Crème glacée
Ice cream

de la glace
An ice cream stand is known as a bar laitier (in France, a glacier)


Débarbouillette
Dishrag, washcloth

Serviette, torchon



Débarquer
Get out of (a car, etc.)
Disembark (from a boat)
Descendre



Débrouiller
To figure things out by onself, to get out of a jam
To clear up (from brouillard i.e. fog) as in one's thoughts




Déjeuner
Breakfast
Lunch
Petit déjeuner
See also dîner, souper. Qc. usage same as in Belgium and Occitania (Occitan dejunar [dedʒu'na]).


Déniaiser
To get ones act together, sexually to loosen up
To clear up (from brouillard i.e. fog) as in one's thoughts




Dîner
Lunch
Dinner
Déjeuner
Qc. usage same as in Belgium and Occitania (Occitan dinnar [din'na]). Dîner as "dinner/evening meal" is standard in formal settings and upscale milieux, such as business, military, diplomatic circles, society dinner party, or an upscale restaurant. In Quebec, the evening meal is "le souper".


Efface
Eraser

Gomme
Gomme is used for chewing-gum


Épais
Dumb, slow-witted
Thick
Con
Con is also in usage in Quebec with the same meaning.


Espadrilles
Running shoes
Rope-soled sandal
Baskets



Être plein
To be full (from eating)
pleine: to be pregnant; to be drunk
Avoir trop mangé



Familiale
Station wagon
Estate car
Break



Fesser
To hit
To spank
Frapper



Fête
Birthday
Saint's day
Anniversaire



Football
Canadian football (can also mean American football, depending on context)
Association football
Football canadien; football américain or foot US
This usage of football to mean the local code is so uniform throughout Canada that the governing body for association football in Québec is officially the Fédération de soccer du Québec.


Innocent
Stupid [person]
Innocent, naive
Imbécile



Insignifiant
Stupid [person]
Insignificant, unremarkable
Imbécile



Linge
Clothes
Linen
Vêtements



Liqueur
Carbonated beverage
Liquor, liqueur
Soda



Magasiner
To go shopping

Faire des courses, du lèche-vitrine, faire les magasins



Maringouin
Mosquito

Moustique



Mouiller
To rain
To wet
Pleuvoir



Niaiser
Annoy, tease, kid, act up
(doesn't exist as a verb; niais="stupid")
Se moquer or (hum) dire des niaiseries
Déniaiser (Eu) is to make a man lose his virginity. J'avais juste vingt ans et je me déniaisais/ Au bordel ambulant d'une armée en campagne (Brel)


Niaiseux (niaiseuse)
An idiot, a fool, an annoying and childish person

niais="stupid", "simpleton"
Can be said to describe a thing too, like : "C'est donc ben niaiseux ce film là!"(this movie is really dumb!).


Niaiserie, Niaisage
Something that is dumb, childish, frivolous and a waste of time

Connerie
Usually used to describe things that a "Niaiseux" does.


Patate
Potato
Potato (informal term)
Pomme de terre
Tu es dans les patates!, told to someone who acts out of, or makes a statement while being unaware of what is going on. Europe = Être à côté de la plaque


Peser sur
Press (a button)
Weigh
Appuyer, enfoncer, pousser sur



La plaque (d'immatriculation)
License plate
License plate
Les plaques (mineralogiques)
The French license plate codes are based on a system developed by the mining authorities; Quebec requires only a rear plate on cars and pickup trucks. ("Les plaques d'immatriculation" is used on both sides, especially when speaking of vehicles registered in Switzerland, Ontario, Belgium, the Maritimes...)


Poudrerie
Blizzard, blowing snow
Gunpowder factory
Blizzard, tempête de neige, rafales de (neige) poudreuse



Rentrer
Enter
Re-enter
Entrer
In Quebec, "re-enter" is rerentrer. Note that colloquial French also uses "rentrer" and "rerentrer" with the same meanings as in Quebec.


Sans-cœur
Mean
Heartless
Méchant



Soccer
Association football
Originally British slang for association football (see Oxford "-er"), but now considered an Americanism
Football
See note on Football above.


Souper
Dinner
Late-night dinner
Dîner
Quebec usage same as in Belgium and Occitania (Occitan sopar [su'pa]). See also déjeuner, dîner. In formal and upscale settings, the international practice is followed i.e. dîner is the evening meal while "souper" is a late-night, informal meal.


Suçon
Lollipop
Hickey
Sucette
and vice-versa: a sucette is a hickey or fellatio in Quebec


Téléroman
Soap opera
A soap opera or a continuing series
Feuilleton



Valise
Trunk of a car
Suitcase (also in QC)
Coffre



Vidanges
Garbage
Act of emptying
Ordures
Vidange in France is an oil change for the car (auto), and also an empty bottle in Belgium


Many, but not all, of the European equivalents for the words listed above are also used or at least understood in Quebec.

[edit] See also

Quebec French profanity








v • d • e

Varieties of the French language





Europe



Meridional / Standard (France) · Belgian (Belgium) · Swiss (Switzerland) · Jersey Legal (Channel Islands)








North America



Canadian / Quebec / Acadian (Chiac) / Newfoundland / Métis French (Canada) · Cajun / Colonial (United States)








Africa



African French · Maghreb French (Maghreb)









[edit] References

^ http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/anglicism




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quebec_French_lexicon"
Categories: Quebec French | TerminologyHidden categories: Articles lacking sources from August 2007 | All articles lacking sources | Articles that may contain original research since August 2007 | All articles that may contain original research 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Français









 This page was last modified on 24 April 2009, at 00:39 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
