













Jean-Paul Sartre - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Jean-Paul_Sartre";
		var wgTitle = "Jean-Paul Sartre";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "16340";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281691096;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Jean-Paul Sartre

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"Sartre" redirects here. For the main-belt asteroid, see 11384 Sartre.

Jean-Paul Sartre

Western Philosophy
20th-century philosophy





Full name
Jean-Paul Sartre


Born
21 June 1905
Paris, France


Died
15 April 1980 (aged 74)
Paris, France


School/tradition
Existentialism, Marxism


Main interests
Metaphysics, Epistemology, Ethics, Politics, Phenomenology, Ontology


Notable ideas
"Existence precedes essence"
"Bad faith"
"Nothingness"




Influenced by
Kant, Hegel, Schopenhauer, Marx, Mao, Dostoyevsky, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Husserl, Heidegger, Jaspers, De Beauvoir, Camus, Kojève, Flaubert, Céline, Merleau-Ponty, Dos Passos






Influenced
De Beauvoir, Merleau-Ponty, Frantz Fanon, R.D. Laing, Iris Murdoch, André Gorz, Alain Badiou, Fredric Jameson, Michael Jackson, Albert Camus, Kenzaburo Oe, Doris Lessing, William Burroughs, Emmanuel Lévinas




Jean-Paul Charles Aymard Sartre (21 June 1905 – 15 April 1980), commonly known simply as Jean-Paul Sartre (pronounced [ʒɑ̃ pol saʁtʁə]), was a French existentialist philosopher, playwright, novelist, screenwriter, political activist, biographer, and literary critic. He was one of the leading figures in 20th century French philosophy.




Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Early life and thought
1.2 Sartre and World War II
1.3 Politics
1.4 Late life and death


2 Thought

2.1 La Nausée and existentialism
2.2 Sartre and literature
2.3 Sartre as a public intellectual


3 Selected bibliography
4 See also
5 Sources
6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links

8.1 By Sartre
8.2 On Sartre







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography

[edit] Early life and thought
Jean-Paul Sartre was born and raised in Paris to Jean-Baptiste Sartre, an officer of the French Navy, and Anne-Marie Schweitzer. His mother was of Alsatian origin, and was a cousin of German Nobel prize laureate Albert Schweitzer.[1] When Sartre was 15 months old, his father died of a fever. Anne-Marie raised him with help from her father, Charles Schweitzer, a high school professor of German, who taught Sartre mathematics and introduced him to classical literature at a very early age.[2]
As a teenager in the 1920s, Sartre became attracted to philosophy upon reading Henri Bergson's Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness.[3] He studied and earned a doctorate in philosophy in Paris at the elite École Normale Supérieure, an institution of higher education which was the alma mater for several prominent French thinkers and intellectuals.[4] Sartre was influenced by many aspects of Western philosophy, absorbing ideas from Immanuel Kant, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger among others. In 1929 at the École Normale, he met Simone de Beauvoir, who studied at the Sorbonne and later went on to become a noted philosopher, writer, and feminist. The two, it is documented, became inseparable and lifelong companions, initiating a romantic relationship,[5] though they were not monogamous. Sartre served as a conscript in the French Army from 1929 to 1931 and he later argued in 1959 that each French person was responsible for the collective crimes during the Algerian War of Independence.[6]
Together, Sartre and de Beauvoir challenged the cultural and social assumptions and expectations of their upbringings, which they considered bourgeois, in both lifestyle and thought. The conflict between oppressive, spiritually-destructive conformity (mauvaise foi, literally, "bad faith") and an "authentic" way of "being" became the dominant theme of Sartre's early work, a theme embodied in his principal philosophical work L'Être et le Néant (Being and Nothingness) (1943).[7] Sartre's introduction to his philosophy is his work Existentialism is a Humanism (1946), originally presented as a lecture.

[edit] Sartre and World War II
In 1939 Sartre was drafted into the French army, where he served as a meteorologist.[8] He was captured by German troops in 1940 in Padoux,[9] and he spent nine months as a prisoner of war — in Nancy and finally in Stalag 12D, Trier, where he wrote his first theatrical piece, Barionà, fils du tonnerre, a drama concerning Christmas. It was during this period of confinement that Sartre read Heidegger's Sein und Zeit later to become a major influence on his own essay on phenomenological ontology. Due to poor health (he claimed that his poor eyesight affected his balance) Sartre was released in April 1941. Given civilian status, he recovered his position as a teacher of Lycée Pasteur near Paris, settled at the Hotel Mistral near Montparnasse at Paris and was given a new position at Lycée Condorcet, replacing a Jewish teacher who had been forbidden to teach by Vichy law.
After coming back to Paris in May 1941, he participated in the founding of the underground group Socialisme et Liberté with other writers Simone de Beauvoir, Merleau-Ponty, Jean-Toussaint, Dominique Desanti, Jean Kanapa, and École Normale students. In August, Sartre and Beauvoir went to the French Riviera seeking the support of André Gide and André Malraux. However, both Gide and Malraux were undecided, and this may have been the cause of Sartre's disappointment and discouragement. Socialisme et liberté soon dissolved and Sartre decided to write, instead of being involved in active resistance. He then wrote Being and Nothingness, The Flies and No Exit, none of which was censored by the Germans, and also contributed to both legal and illegal literary magazines.
After August 1944 and the Liberation of Paris, he wrote Anti-Semite and Jew. In the book he tries to explain the etiology of hate by analyzing antisemitic hate. Sartre was a very active contributor to Combat, a newspaper created during the clandestine period by Albert Camus, a philosopher and author who held similar beliefs. Sartre and Beauvoir remained friends with Camus until he turned away from communism, a schism that eventually divided them in 1951, after the publication of Camus' The Rebel. Later, while Sartre was labelled by some authors as a resistant, the French philosopher and resistant Vladimir Jankelevitch criticized Sartre's lack of political commitment during the German occupation, and interpreted his further struggles for liberty as an attempt to redeem himself. According to Camus, Sartre was a writer who resisted, not a resistor who wrote.
When the war ended Sartre established Les Temps Modernes (Modern Times), a monthly literary and political review, and started writing full-time as well as continuing his political activism. He would draw on his war experiences for his great trilogy of novels, Les Chemins de la Liberté (The Roads to Freedom) (1945–1949).

[edit] Politics




Jean Paul Sartre (middle) and Simone de Beauvoir (left) meeting with Che Guevara (right) in 1960


The first period of Sartre's career, defined in large part by Being and Nothingness (1943), gave way to a second period as a politically engaged activist and intellectual. His 1948 work Les Mains Sales (Dirty Hands) in particular explored the problem of being both an intellectual at the same time as becoming "engaged" politically. He embraced communism, denied the purgings of Stalin, had an affair with a KGB-agent[10] and defended existentialism, though never officially joining the Communist Party, and took a prominent role in the struggle against French rule in Algeria. He became perhaps the most eminent supporter of the FLN in the Algerian War and was one of the signatory of the Manifeste des 121. Furthermore, he had an Algerian mistress, Arlette Elkaïm, who became his adopted daughter in 1965. He opposed the Vietnam War and, along with Bertrand Russell and others, organized a tribunal intended to expose U.S. war crimes, which became known as the Russell Tribunal in 1967. Its effect was limited.
As a fellow-traveller, Sartre spent much of the rest of his life attempting to reconcile his existentialist ideas about free will with communist principles, which taught that socio-economic forces beyond our immediate, individual control play a critical role in shaping our lives. His major defining work of this period, the Critique de la raison dialectique (Critique of Dialectical Reason) appeared in 1960 (a second volume appeared posthumously). In Critique, Sartre set out to give Marxism a more vigorous intellectual defense than it had received up until then; he ended by concluding that Marx's notion of "class" as an objective entity was fallacious. Sartre's emphasis on the humanist values in the early works of Marx led to a dispute with the leading Communist intellectual in France in the 1960s, Louis Althusser, who claimed that the ideas of the young Marx were decisively superseded by the "scientific" system of the later Marx.
Sartre went to Cuba in the '60s to meet Fidel Castro and spent a great deal of time philosophizing with Ernesto "Che" Guevara. After Guevara's death, Sartre would declare him to be "not only an intellectual but also the most complete human being of our age"[11] and the "era's most perfect man."[12] Sartre would also compliment Che Guevara by professing that "he lived his words, spoke his own actions and his story and the story of the world ran parallel."[13]
Following the Munich massacre in which eleven Israeli Olympians were killed by the Palestinian organization Black September in Munich 1972, Sartre said terrorism "is a terrible weapon but the oppressed poor have no others." Sartre also found it "perfectly scandalous that the Munich attack should be judged by the French press and a section of public opinion as an intolerable scandal."[14] However, Sartre was generally supportive of Israel and Zionism.[15]
During a collective hunger strike in 1974, Sartre visited Red Army Faction leader Andreas Baader in Stammheim Prison and criticized the harsh conditions of imprisonment.[16]

[edit] Late life and death
In 1964, Sartre renounced literature in a witty and sardonic account of the first ten years of his life, Les mots (Words). The book is an ironic counterballast to Marcel Proust, whose reputation had unexpectedly eclipsed that of André Gide (who had provided the model of littérature engagée for Sartre's generation). Literature, Sartre concluded, functioned as a bourgeois substitute for real commitment in the world. He was the first Nobel Laureate to voluntarily decline the Nobel Prize,[17] and he had previously refused the Légion d'honneur, in 1945. The prize was announced 1964 22 October; on 14 October, Sartre had written a letter to the Nobel Institute, asking to be removed from the list of nominees, and that he would not accept the prize if awarded, but the letter went unread;[18] on 23 October, Le Figaro published a statement by Sartre explaining his refusal.
However, Lars Gyllensten, long time member of the Nobel prize committee has claimed in his autobiography that Sartre later tried to access the prize money, but was subsequently turned down.[19] Allegedly, the French philosopher in 1975 wrote a letter to the Nobel Prize committee saying that he had changed his mind about the prize, at least when it came to the money. At which point the prize committee is said to have declined the request, stating that the funds had been reinvested in the Nobel institute.
Though his name was then a household word (as was "existentialism" during the tumultuous 1960s), Sartre remained a simple man with few possessions, actively committed to causes until the end of his life, such as the student revolution strikes in Paris during the summer of 1968 during which he was arrested for civil disobedience. President De Gaulle intervened and pardoned him, commenting that "you don't arrest Voltaire."[20]
In 1975, when asked how he would like to be remembered, Sartre replied: "I would like [people] to remember Nausea, [my plays] No Exit and The Devil and the Good Lord, and then my two philosophical works, more particularly the second one, Critique of Dialectical Reason. Then my essay on Genet, Saint Genet...If these are remembered, that would be quite an achievement, and I don't ask for more. As a man, if a certain Jean-Paul Sartre is remembered, I would like people to remember the milieu or historical situation in which I lived,...how I lived in it, in terms of all the aspirations which I tried to gather up within myself." Sartre's physical condition deteriorated, partially due to the merciless pace of work (and using drugs for this reason, e.g., amphetamine) he put himself through during the writing of the Critique and the last project of his life, a massive analytical biography of Gustave Flaubert (The Family Idiot), both of which remained unfinished. He died 15 April 1980 in Paris from an oedema of the lung.




Sartre's grave in the Cimetière de Montparnasse


Sartre's atheism was foundational for his style of existentialist philosophy. In March 1980, about a month before his death, he was interviewed by his assistant, Benny Lévy, and within these interviews he expressed his interest in Judaism which was inspired by Levy's renewed interest in the faith. Through Sartre's study of Jewish history he became particularly interested in the messianic idea of the faith. Some people apparently took this to indicate a deathbed conversion; however, the text of the interviews makes it clear that he did not consider himself a Jew, and was interested in the ethical and "metaphysical character" of the Jewish religion, while continuing to reject the idea of an existing God.[citation needed] In a separate 1974 interview with Simone de Beauvoir, Sartre said that "I do not feel that I am the product of chance, a speck of dust in the universe, but someone who was expected, prepared, prefigured. In short, a being whom only a Creator could put here; and this idea of a creating hand refers to God." But immediately adds that "this is not a clear, exact idea..."[citation needed]
During his life, Sartre tried to draw all possible conclusions from the idea that there is no God. "Man," he wrote in 1943, "is a useless passion." He also wrote "everything that exists is born for no reason, carries on living through weakness, and dies by accident."
Sartre lies buried in Cimetière de Montparnasse in Paris. His funeral was attended by 20,000 mourners.

[edit] Thought
The basis of Sartre's existentialism can be found in The Transcendence of the Ego. To begin with, the thing-in-itself is infinite and overflowing. Sartre refers to any direct consciousness of the thing-in-itself as a "pre-reflective consciousness." Any attempt to describe, understand, historicize etc. the thing-in-itself, Sartre calls "reflective consciousness." There is no way for the reflective consciousness to subsume the pre-reflective, and so reflection is fated to a form of anxiety, i.e. the human condition. The reflective consciousness in all its forms, (scientific, artistic or otherwise) can only limit the thing-in-itself by virtue of its attempt to understand or describe it. It follows, therefore, that any attempt at self-knowledge (self-consciousness - a reflective consciousness of an overflowing infinite) is a construct that fails no matter how often it is attempted. Consciousness is consciousness of itself insofar as it is consciousness of a transcendent object.
The same holds true about knowledge of the "Other." The "Other" (meaning simply beings or objects that are not the self) is a construct of reflective consciousness. One must be careful to understand this more as a form of warning than as an ontological statement. However, there is an implication of solipsism here that Sartre considers fundamental to any coherent description of the human condition.[21] Sartre overcomes this solipsism by a kind of ritual. Self consciousness needs "the Other" to prove (display) its own existence. It has a "masochistic desire" to be limited, i.e. limited by the reflective consciousness of another subject. This is expressed metaphorically in the famous line of dialogue from No Exit, "Hell is other people."
The main idea of Jean-Paul Sartre is that we are, as humans, "condemned to be free."[22] This theory relies upon his atheism, and is formed using the example of the paper-knife. Sartre says that if one considered a paper-knife, one would assume that the creator would have had a plan for it: an essence. Sartre said that human beings have no essence before their existence because, there is no Creator. Thus: "existence precedes essence".[23] So, and just for that, the sartrian man with his freedom will became a god, but he remain always only a bankrupt god.

[edit] La Nausée and existentialism
As a junior lecturer at the Lycée du Havre in 1938, Sartre wrote the novel La Nausée (Nausea) which serves in some ways as a manifesto of existentialism and remains one of his most famous books. Taking a page from the German phenomenological movement, he believed that our ideas are the product of experiences of real-life situations, and that novels and plays can well describe such fundamental experiences, have as much value as do discursive essays for the elaboration of philosophical theories. With such purpose, this novel concerns a dejected researcher (Roquentin) in a town similar to Le Havre who becomes starkly conscious of the fact that inanimate objects and situations remain absolutely indifferent to his existence. As such, they show themselves to be resistant to whatever significance human consciousness might perceive in them.
This indifference of "things in themselves" (closely linked with the later notion of "being-in-itself" in his Being and Nothingness) has the effect of highlighting all the more the freedom Roquentin has to perceive and act in the world; everywhere he looks, he finds situations imbued with meanings which bear the stamp of his existence. Hence the "nausea" referred to in the title of the book; all that he encounters in his everyday life is suffused with a pervasive, even horrible, taste — specifically, his freedom. The book takes the term from Friedrich Nietzsche's Thus Spoke Zarathustra, where it is used in the context of the often nauseating quality of existence. No matter how much Roquentin longs for something else or something different, he cannot get away from this harrowing evidence of his engagement with the world. The novel also acts as a terrifying realization of some of Kant's fundamental ideas; Sartre uses the idea of the autonomy of the will (that morality is derived from our ability to choose in reality; the ability to choose being derived from human freedom; embodied in the famous saying "Condemned to be free") as a way to show the world's indifference to the individual. The freedom that Kant exposed is here a strong burden, for the freedom to act towards objects is ultimately useless, and the practical application of Kant's ideas prove to be bitterly rejected.
The stories in Le Mur (The Wall) emphasize the arbitrary aspects of the situations people find themselves in and the absurdity of their attempts to deal rationally with them. A whole school of absurd literature subsequently developed.

[edit] Sartre and literature
During the 1940s and 1950s, Sartre's existentialism became a favoured philosophy of the beatnik generation.[24] Sartre's views were counterposed to those of Albert Camus in the popular imagination. In 1948, the Roman Catholic Church placed his complete works on the Index of prohibited books. Most of his plays are richly symbolic and serve as a means of conveying his philosophy. The best-known, Huis-clos (No Exit), contains the famous line "L'enfer, c'est les autres", usually translated as "Hell is other people".
Aside from the impact of Nausea, Sartre's major contribution to literature was the The Roads to Freedom trilogy which charts the progression of how World War II affected Sartre's ideas. In this way, Roads to Freedom presents a less theoretical and more practical approach to existentialism.

[edit] Sartre as a public intellectual
While the broad focus of Sartre's life revolved around the notion of human freedom, he began a sustained intellectual participation in more public matters in 1945. Prior to this -- before the Second World War -- he was content with the role of an apolitical liberal intellectual: "Now teaching at a lycée in Laon [...] Sartre made his headquarters the Dome café at the crossing of Montparnasse and Raspail boulevards. He attended plays, read novels, and dined [with] women. He wrote. And he was published" (Gerassi 1989: 134). Sartre and his lifelong companion, Simone de Beauvoir, existed, in her words, where "the world about us was a mere backdrop against which our private lives were played out" (de Beauvoir 1958: 339).
Sartre portrayed his own pre-war situation in the character Mathieu, chief protagonist in the The Age of Reason, which was completed during Sartre's first year as a soldier in the Second World War. By forging Mathieu as an absolute rationalist, analyzing every situation, and functioning entirely on reason, he removed any strands of authentic content from his character and as a result, Mathieu could "recognize no allegiance except to [him]self" (Sartre 1942: 13), though he realized that without "responsibility for my own existence, it would seem utterly absurd to go on existing" (Sartre 1942: 14). Mathieu's commitment was only to himself, never to the outside world. Mathieu was restrained from action each time because he had no reasons for acting. Sartre then, for these reasons, was not compelled to participate in the Spanish Civil War, and it took the invasion of his own country to motivate him into action and to provide a crystallization of these ideas. It was the war that gave him a purpose beyond himself, and the atrocities of the war can be seen as the turning point in his public stance.
The war opened Sartre's eyes to a political reality he had not yet understood until forced into continual engagement with it: "the world itself destroyed Sartre's illusions about isolated self-determining individuals and made clear his own personal stake in the events of the time" (Aronson 1980: 108). Returning to Paris in 1941 he formed the "Socialisme et Liberté" resistance group. In 1943, after a lack of Communist support forced the disbandment of the group, Sartre joined a writers' Resistance group[25], in which he remained an active participant until the end of the war. He continued to write ferociously, and it was due to this "crucial experience of war and captivity that Sartre began to try to build up a positive moral system and to express it through literature" (Thody 1964: 21).
The symbolic initiation of this new phase in Sartre’s work is packaged in the introduction he wrote for a new journal, Les Temps Modernes, in October 1945. Here he aligned the journal, and thus himself, with the Left and called for writers to express their political commitment (Aronson 1980: 107). Yet, this alignment was indefinite, directed more to the concept of the Left than a specific party of the Left.
Sartre's philosophy lent itself to his being a public intellectual. He envisaged culture as a very fluid concept; neither pre-determined, nor definitely finished; instead, in true existential fashion, "culture was always conceived as a process of continual invention and re-invention". This marks Sartre, the intellectual, as a pragmatist, willing to move and shift stance along with events. He did not dogmatically follow a cause other than the belief in human freedom, preferring to retain a pacifist's objectivity. It is this over-arching theme of freedom that means his work "subverts the bases for distinctions among the disciplines" (Kirsner 2003: 13). Therefore, he was able to hold knowledge across a vast array of subjects: "the international world order, the political and economic organisation of contemporary society, especially France, the institutional and legal frameworks that regulate the lives of ordinary citizens, the educational system, the media networks that control and disseminate information. Sartre systematically refused to keep quiet about what he saw as inequalities and injustices in the world" (Scriven 1999: xii).
Moreover, his views were divergent from the prevailing political situation. The most clear example of this is in his post-war attitude to the French Communist Party (PCF), who, following Liberation were infuriated by Sartre's philosophy and opposition, which appeared to lure young French men and women away from the ideology of Marxism and into Sartre’s own existentialism (Scriven 1999: 13). Here we see Sartre telling his own truths to the establishment, a fundamental role of the public intellectual. His troubled and varied relationship with Communism -- and Marxism in particular -- was a consequence of their doctrines that would have prevented his notion of radical freedom. And to align himself too rigidly with any political movement would have circumscribed the very freedom he was searching for. This search is most evident in his earlier writings and, especially after the Second World War, in his public activities, which he had begun to regard as more significant upon recognition of the futility of words in contrast to action. (Kirsner 2003: 60).
In the aftermath of a war that had for the first time properly engaged Sartre in political matters, he set forth a body of work which "reflected on virtually every important theme of his early thought and began to explore alternative solutions to the problems posed there" (Aronson 1980: 121). The greatest difficulties that he and all public intellectuals of the time faced were the increasing technological aspects of the world that were outdating the printed word as a form of expression. In Sartre's opinion, the "traditional bourgeois literary forms remain innately superior", but there is "a recognition that the new technological 'mass media' forms must be embraced if Sartre's ethical and political achievements as an authentic, committed intellectual are to be achieved: the demystification of bourgeois political practices and the Sartre's raising of the consciousness, both political and cultural, of the working class" (Scriven 1993: 8). The struggle for Sartre was against the monopolising moguls who were beginning to take over the media and destroy the role of the intellectual. His attempts to reach a public were mediated by these powers, and it was often these powers he had to campaign against. He was skilled enough, however, to circumvent some of these issues by his interactive approach to the various forms of media, advertising his radio interviews in a newspaper column for example, and vice versa. (Scriven 1993: 22).
The role of a public intellectual can lead to the individual placing himself in danger as he engages with disputed topics. In Sartre's case, this was witnessed in June 1961, when a plastic bomb exploded in the entrance of his apartment building. His public support of Algerian self-determination at the time had led Sartre to become a target of the right-wing campaign of terror that mounted as the colonists' position deteriorated. A similar occurrence took place the next year and he had begun to receive threatening letters from Oran. (Aronson 1980: 157).
Sartre clearly held himself and his kind in high regard, pronouncing the intellectuals to be the moral conscience of their age, their task being to observe the political and social situation of the moment, and to speak out freely in accordance with their consciences. (Scriven 1993: 119).

[edit] Selected bibliography

L'Imagination (Imagination: A Psychological Critique), 1936
La Transcendence de l'égo (The Transcendence of the Ego), 1937
La Nausée (Nausea), 1938
Le Mur (The Wall), 1939
Esquisse d'une théorie des émotions (Sketch for a Theory of the Emotions), 1939
L'Imaginaire (The Imaginary), 1940, lit. "The Unconscious"
Les Mouches (The Flies), 1943 - a modern version of the Oresteia
L'Être et le néant (Being and Nothingness), 1943
Réflexions sur la question juive (Anti-Semite and Jew; literally, Reflections on the Jewish Question), 1943
Huis-clos (No Exit), 1944
Les Chemins de la liberté (The Roads to Freedom) trilogy, comprising:

L'Âge de raison (The Age of Reason), 1945
Le Sursis (The Reprieve), 1947
La Mort dans l'Âme (Troubled Sleep, title formerly translated as Iron in the Soul, literally "Death in Spirit"), 1949


Morts sans sépulture (Deaths without burial; aka The Victors; Men Without Shadows in English), 1946
L'Existentialisme est un humanisme (Existentialism is a Humanism), 1946
La Putain respectueuse (The Respectful Prostitute) 1946
Qu'est ce que la littérature? (What is literature?), 1947
Baudelaire, 1947
Situations, 1947 –1965
Les Mains sales (Dirty Hands), 1948
"Orphée Noir" (Black Orpheus), introduction to Anthologie de la nouvelle poésie nègre et malgache. edited by Léopold Sédar Senghor, 1948
Le Diable et le bon dieu (The Devil and the Good Lord), 1951
Les Jeux sont faits (The Game is Up), 1952
Saint Genet, Actor and Martyr, 1952
Kean (adaptation of Alexandre Dumas, père's play) 1953, produced Paris 1954, revived London 2007 [1]
Nekrassov, 1955
Existentialism and Human Emotions, 1957
The Problem of Method, 1957
Les Séquestrés d'Altona (The Condemned of Altona), 1959
Critique de la raison dialectique (Critique of Dialectical Reason), 1960
"Preface" to Frantz Fanon's The Wretched of the Earth, 1961
Search for a Method (English translation of preface to Critique, Vol. I), 1962
Colonialism and Neocolonialism, 1964
Les Mots (The Words), 1964, autobiographical
L'Idiot de la famille (The Family Idiot), 1971–1972 - on Gustave Flaubert
Cahiers pour une morale (Notebooks for Ethics), 1983, 1947-48 notes on ethics
Les Carnets de la drôle de guerre: Novembre 1939 - Mars 1940 (War Diaries: Notebooks from a Phony War 1939-1940), 1984, notebooks from Sartre's time in the Phony War of 1939-1940


[edit] See also

Existentialism
Wilfrid Desan


[edit] Sources

Aronson, Ronald (1980) Jean-Paul Sartre - Philosophy in the World. London: NLB
Gerassi, John (1989) Jean-Paul Sartre: Hated Conscience of His Century. Volume 1: Protestant or Protester? Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Kirsner, Douglas (2003) The Schizoid World of Jean-Paul Sartre and R.D. Lang. New York: Karnac
Scriven, Michael (1993) Sartre and The Media. London: MacMillan Press Ltd
Scriven, Michael (1999) Jean-Paul Sartre: Politics and Culture in Postwar France. London: MacMillan Press Ltd
Thody, Philip (1964) Jean-Paul Sartre. London: Hamish Hamilton


[edit] References


^ Hayman, Ronald (1987). Sartre: A Life. Simon and Schuster. pp. 31. ISBN 0-6714-5442-0. 
^ Brabazon, James (1975). Albert Schweitzer: A Biography. Putnam. pp. 28. 
^ Jean-Paul, Sartre; Arlette Elkaïm-Sartre, Jonathan Webber (2004) [1940]. The Imaginary: A Phenomenological Psychology of the Imagination. Routledge. pp. viii. ISBN 0-4152-8755-3. 
^ Schrift, Alan D. (2006). Twentieth-century French Philosophy: Key Themes and Thinkers. Blackwell Publishing. pp. 174. ISBN 1-4051-3217-5. 
^ Humphrey, Clark. "The People magazine approach to a literary supercouple". The Seattle Times. http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/living/2002648627_teteatete28.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-20. 
^ Le Sueur, James D.; Pierre Bourdieu. Uncivil War: Intellectuals and Identity Politics During the Decolonization of Algeria. University of Nebraska Press. pp. 178. ISBN 0-8032-8028-9. 
^ McCloskey, Deirdre N. (2006). The Bourgeois Virtues: Ethics for an Age of Commerce. University of Chicago Press. pp. 297. ISBN 0-2265-5663-8. 
^ Van den Hoven, Adrian; Andrew N. Leak (2005). Sartre Today: A Centenary Celebration. Andrew N. Leak. Berghahn Books. pp. viii. ISBN 1-8454-5166-X. 
^ Boulé, Jean-Pierre (2005). Sartre, Self-formation, and Masculinities. Berghahn Books. pp. 114. ISBN 1-5718-1742-5. 
^ New studies agree that Beauvoir is eclipsing Sartre as a philosopher and writer The Independent May 25, 2008. Retrieved on January 4, 2009.
^ "Remembering Che Guevara", 9 October 2006, The International News, by Prof Khwaja Masud
^ Amazon Review of: The Bolivian Diary: Authorized Edition
^ HeyChe.org - People about Che Guevara
^ Sartre: The Philosopher of the Twentieth Century, Bernard-Henri Lévy, p.343).
^ Said, Edward, "My Encounter with Sartre," London Review of Books 1 June 2000.
^ The Slow Death of Andreas Baader
^ "Nobel Prize in Literature 1964 - Press Release". nobelprize.org. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/1964/press.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-11. 
^ Histoire de lettres Jean-Paul Sartre refuse le Prix Nobel en 1964, Elodie Bessé
^ Gyllensten, Lars (2000), Minnen, bara minnen, Stockholm: Albert Bonniers förlag, p. 282, ISBN 9100571407 
^ "Superstar of the Mind", by Tom Bishop in New York Times 7 June 1987
^ Sartre, 1936 Transcendence of the Ego, Williams and Kirkpatrick, 1957 pp. 98-106 translation from "La transcendence de l"ego...
^ Existentialism and Humanism
^ Existentialism and Humanism, page 27
^ This is debatable. In Desolation Angels, Kerouac implies that his fantasy of Parisian life had been tarnished by Sartre and existentialism.
^ Aronson, Ronald (2004). Camus & Sartre: The Story of a Friendship and the Quarrel That Ended It. University of Chicago Press. p. 30. ISBN 0226027961, 9780226027968.



[edit] Further reading

Annie Cohen-Solal, Sartre 1905-80, 1985.
Simone de Beauvoir, Adieux: A Farewell to Sartre, New York: Pantheon Books, 1984.
Thomas Flynn, Sartre and Marxist Existentialism: The Test Case of Collective Responsibility, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984.
John Gerassi, Jean-Paul Sartre: Hated Conscience of His Century, Volume 1: Protestant or Protester?, University of Chicago Press, 1989. ISBN 0226287971.
R. D. Laing and D. G. Cooper, Reason and Violence: A Decade of Sartre's Philosophy, 1950-1960, New York: Pantheon, 1971.
Suzanne Lilar, A propos de Sartre et de l'amour, Paris: Grasset, 1967.
Axel Madsen, Hearts and Minds: The Common Journey of Simone de Beauvoir and Jean-Paul Sartre, William Morrow & Co, 1977.
Heiner Wittmann, L'esthétique de Sartre. Artistes et intellectuels, translated from the German by N. Weitemeier and J. Yacar, Éditions L'Harmattan (Collection L'ouverture philosophique), Paris 2001.
Jean-Paul Sartre and Benny Levy, Hope Now: The 1980 Interviews, translated by Adrian van den Hoven, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996.
P.V. Spade, Class Lecture Notes on Jean-Paul Sartre's Being and Nothingness. 1996.
H. Wittmann, Sartre und die Kunst. Die Porträtstudien von Tintoretto bis Flaubert, Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag, 1996.
Wilfrid Desan, The Tragic Finale: An Essay on the philosophy of Jean-Paul Sartre (1954)


[edit] External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Jean-Paul Sartre



[edit] By Sartre

Full Ebooks in french on the website 'La philosophie'
Americans and Their Myths Sartre's essay in The Nation (18 October 1947 issue)
Sartre Internet Archive on Marxists.org
French Audiobook (mp3), incipit of The Words (1964), read aloud in French by IncipitBlog.


[edit] On Sartre

Groupe d'études sartriennes, Paris
Sartre’s Critique of Dialectical Reason essay by Andy Blunden
Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980): Existentialism Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Jean-Paul Sartre (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)
Sartre.org Articles, archives, and forum
Texts on Sartre Sartre Rubric on the website of the Sorbonne Marx Seminar
"The Second Coming Of Sartre", John Lichfield, The Independent, 17 June 2005
The World According to Sartre essay by Roger Kimball
Reclaiming Sartre A review of Ian Birchall, Sartre Against Stalinism
Biography and quotes of Sartre
Living with Mother. Sartre and the problem of maternity, Benedict O'Donohoe, International WebjournalSens Public.
L’image de la femme dans le théâtre de Jean-Paul Sartre - Jean-Paul Sartre:sexiste? by Stephanie Rupert
Pierre Michel, Jean-Paul Sartre et Octave Mirbeau.
Listen to Radio 4's In Our Time programme on Sartre - RealAudio
Sartre: philosophy, literature, politics (articles), International Webjournal Sens Public








v • d • e

Nobel Laureates in Literature








Pär Lagerkvist (1951) · François Mauriac (1952) · Winston Churchill (1953) · Ernest Hemingway (1954) · Halldór Laxness (1955) · Juan Ramón Jiménez (1956) · Albert Camus (1957) · Boris Pasternak (1958) · Salvatore Quasimodo (1959) · Saint-John Perse (1960) · Ivo Andrić (1961) · John Steinbeck (1962) · Giorgos Seferis (1963) · Jean-Paul Sartre (declined award) (1964) · Michail Sholokhov (1965) · Shmuel Yosef Agnon / Nelly Sachs (1966) · Miguel Ángel Asturias (1967) · Yasunari Kawabata (1968) · Samuel Beckett (1969) · Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn (1970) · Pablo Neruda (1971) · Heinrich Böll (1972) · Patrick White (1973) · Eyvind Johnson / Harry Martinson (1974) · Eugenio Montale (1975)








Complete roster · 1901–1925 · 1926–1950 · 1951–1975 · 1976–2000 · 2001–present












v • d • e

Metaphysics





Topics



Time  · Experience  · Causality  · Principle  · Will  · Quality  · Value  · Self  · Action  · Intention  · Matter  · Meaning  · Essence  · Subject  · Object  · Unity  · Truth  · Mind  · Necessity  · Pattern  · Type  · Motion  · Freedom  · Form  · Idea  · Modality  · Substance  · Properties  · more...  ·








Ontology



Being  · Category of being  · Change  · Cogito ergo sum  · Dualism  · Embodied philosophy  · Entity  · Existence  · Existentialism  · Identity  · Physical object  · Properties  · Reality  · Relativism  · Scientific realism  · Subjectivism  · Substance theory  · Universal  · Unobservables  · Teleology








Big Questions



What is the nature of the universe?  · What is the meaning of life?  · What is being?  · What is time?  · What is experience?  · What is causality?  · What are principles?  · What is value?  · What is the self?  · What is action?  · What is will?  · Whats is matter?  · What is meaning?  · What are types?  ·








Metaphysical theories



Platonic idealism  · Hindu idealism  · Scientific materialism  · Cartesian dualism  · Phenomenalism  · Existentialism  · Nihilism  · Realism  · Anti-realism  · Determinism  · Solipsism  · Physicalism  · MOQ








Metaphysicians



Aristotle · Thomas Aquinas · George Berkeley · Donald Davidson · René Descartes · Georg W. F. Hegel · Martin Heidegger · Immanuel Kant · Saul Kripke · Gottfried Leibniz · John Locke · George Edward Moore · Isaac Newton · Plato · Plotinus · Hilary Putnam · Willard V. O. Quine · Bertrand Russell · Parmenides · Jean-Paul Sartre · Arthur Schopenhauer · John Duns Scotus · Baruch Spinoza · Alfred N. Whitehead · Ludwig Wittgenstein ·









Portal · Category · Task Force · Stubs · Discussion








Persondata


NAME
Sartre, Jean Paul


ALTERNATIVE NAMES



SHORT DESCRIPTION
French philosopher


DATE OF BIRTH
21 June 1905(1905-06-21)


PLACE OF BIRTH
Paris


DATE OF DEATH
15 April 1980


PLACE OF DEATH
Paris






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean-Paul_Sartre"
Categories: 20th-century French philosophers | Alumni of the École Normale Supérieure | Continental philosophers | Deaths from edema | Existentialists | French anti-war activists | French atheists | French Communist Party members | French dramatists and playwrights | French Marxists | French meteorologists | French military personnel of World War II | French Nobel laureates | French novelists | French philosophers | French prisoners of war | French Resistance members | Freudians | Lycée Louis-le-Grand alumni | Marxist humanists | Marxist writers | Metaphysicians | Nobel laureates in Literature | People from Paris | Polyamory | Psychedelic drug advocates | Scholars of antisemitism | World War II prisoners of war held by Germany | 1905 births | 1980 deathsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ქართული
Kiswahili
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
O'zbek
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Volapük
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 12:51.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
