













History of the United States - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "History_of_the_United_States";
		var wgTitle = "History of the United States";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "63876";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281618655;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); History of the United States

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"American history" redirects here. For the history of the continents, see History of the Americas.


History of the United States



This article is part of a series



Timeline


Pre-Columbian period


Colonial period


1776 – 1789


1789 – 1849


1849 – 1865


1865 – 1918


1918 – 1945


1945 – 1964


1964 – 1980


1980 – 1991


since 1991


Topic


Westward expansion


Overseas expansion


Diplomatic history


Military history


Technological and industrial history


Economic history


Cultural history


History of the South


Civil Rights (1896–1954)


Civil Rights (1955–1968)


Women's history


LGBT rights in the United States




United States Portal
 v • d • e 


The first known inhabitants of modern-day United States territory are believed to have arrived over a period of several thousand years beginning sometime prior to 15,000 - 50,000 years ago by crossing Beringia into Alaska.[1][2] Solid evidence of these cultures settling in what would become the US is dated to around 14,000 years ago.[3]
Research has revealed much about the early Native American settlers of North America as indicated by Cyrus Thomas.[4] Columbus' men were the first documented Old Worlders to land in the territory of what is now the United States when they arrived in Puerto Rico during their second voyage in 1493.[5] Juan Ponce de León, who arrived in Florida in 1513,[6] is credited as being the first European to land in what is now the continental United States, although some evidence suggests that John Cabot might have reached what is presently New England in 1498.[7][8]
In its beginnings, the United States of America consisted only of the Thirteen Colonies, which consisted of states occupying the same lands as when they were British colonies. American colonists fought off the British army in the American Revolutionary War of the 1770s and issued a Declaration of Independence in 1776. Seven years later, the signing of the Treaty of Paris officially recognized independence from Britain.[9] In the nineteenth century, westward expansion of United States territory began, upon the belief of Manifest Destiny, in which the United States would occupy all the North American land east to west, from the Atlantic to the Pacific Oceans. By 1912, with the admission of Arizona to the Union, the U.S. reached that goal. The outlying states of Alaska and Hawaii were both admitted in 1959.
Ratified in 1788, the Constitution serves as the supreme American law in organizing the government; the Supreme Court is responsible for upholding Constitutional law. Many forms of social progress started in the nineteenth century; those advancements have been widely reflected in the Constitution. Slavery was abolished in 1865 by the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution; the following Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments respectively guaranteed citizenship for all persons naturalized within U.S. territory and voting for people of all races. In later years, civil rights were extended to women and black Americans, following effective lobbying from social activists. The Nineteenth Amendment prohibited gender discrimination in voting rights; later, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 outlawed racial segregation in public places.
The Progressive Era marked a time of economic growth for the United States, advancing to the Roaring Twenties. However, the Wall Street Crash of 1929 led to the Great Depression, a time of economic downturn and mass unemployment. Consequently, the U.S. government established the New Deal, a series of reform programs that intended to assist those affected by the Depression. The New Deal had varied success. However, once the U.S. entered World War II in December 1941, the economy quickly recovered, so much that the U.S. became a world superpower by the dawn of the Cold War. During the Cold War, the U.S. and the Soviet Union were the world's two superpowers, but with the end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union, United States became the world's only superpower.





Contents


1 Pre-Columbian period

1.1 North America's Moundbuilder Culture


2 Colonial period

2.1 Spanish colonization
2.2 Dutch colonization
2.3 French colonization
2.4 British colonization


3 Formation of the United States of America (1776–1789)

3.1 Foundations for American government


4 Westward expansion (1789–1849)
5 Civil War era (1849–1865)
6 Reconstruction and the rise of industrialization (1865–1890)
7 Progressivism, imperialism, and World War I (1890–1918)
8 Post-World War I and the Great Depression (1918–1940)
9 World War II (1940–1945)

9.1 Battle against Germany
9.2 Battle against Japan


10 Cold War beginnings and the Civil Rights Movement (1945–1964)
11 Cold War (1964–1980)
12 End of the Cold War (1980–1991)
13 1991-Present
14 References
15 Notes
16 Further reading
17 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Pre-Columbian period
Main article: Pre-Columbian
The earliest known inhabitants of what is now the United States are thought to have arrived in Alaska by crossing the Bering land bridge, at least 14,000 – 30,000 years ago.[10] Some of these groups migrated south and east, and over time spread throughout the Americas. These were the ancestors to modern Native Americans in the United States and Alaskan Native peoples, as well as all indigenous peoples of the Americas.
Many indigenous peoples were semi-nomadic tribes of hunter-gatherers; others were sedentary and agricultural civilizations. Many formed new tribes or confederations in response to European colonization. Well-known groups included the Huron, Apache Tribe, Cherokee, Sioux, Delaware, Algonquin, Choctaw, Mohegan, Iroquois (which included the Mohawk nation, Oneida tribe, Seneca nation, Cayuga nation, Onondaga and later the Tuscarora tribe) and Inuit. Though not as technologically advanced as the Mesoamerican civilizations further south, there were extensive pre-Columbian sedentary societies in what is now the US. The Iroquois had a politically advanced and unique social structure that was at the very least inspirational if not directly influential to the later development of the democratic United States government, a departure from the strong monarchies from which the Europeans came.[citation needed]

[edit] North America's Moundbuilder Culture




A Mississippian priest, with a ceremonial flint mace. Artist Herb Roe, based on a repousse copper plate.


Mound Builder is a general term referring to the American Indians who constructed various styles of earthen mounds for burial, residential and ceremonial purposes. These included Archaic, Woodland period (Adena and Hopewell cultures), and Mississippian period Pre-Columbian cultures dating from roughly 3000 BC to the 16th century AD, and living in the Great Lakes region, the Ohio River region, and the Mississippi River region.
Mound builder cultures can be divided into roughly three eras:

Archaic era

Poverty Point in what is now Louisiana is perhaps the most prominent example of early archaic mound builder construction (c. 2500 – 1000 BC). An even earlier example, Watson Brake, dates to approximately 3400 BC and coincides with the emergence of social complexity worldwide.

Woodland period

The Archaic period was followed by the Woodland period (c. 1000 BC). Some well-understood examples would be the Adena culture of Ohio and nearby states and the subsequent Hopewell culture known from Illinois to Ohio and renowned for their geometric earthworks. The Adena and Hopewell were not, however, the only mound building peoples during this time period. There were contemporaneous mound building cultures throughout the Eastern United States.

Mississippian culture

Main article: Mississippian Culture
Around 900 – 1450 AD the Mississippian culture developed and spread through the Eastern United States, primarily along the river valleys. The location where the Mississippian culture is first clearly developed is located in Illinois, and is referred to today as Cahokia.

[edit] Colonial period
Main article: Colonial history of the United States




The Mayflower, which transported Pilgrims to the New World


After a period of exploration by people from various European countries, Spanish, Dutch, English, French, Swedish, and Portuguese settlements were established.[11] Christopher Columbus was the first European to set foot on what would one day become U.S. territory when he came to Puerto Rico on November 19, 1493, during his second voyage. In the 15th century, Europeans brought horses, cattle, and hogs to the Americas and, in turn, took back to Europe corn, potatoes, tobacco, beans, and squash.[11]

[edit] Spanish colonization




Coronado Sets Out to the North (1540) by Frederic Remington, oil on canvas, 1905.


See also: New Spain
Spanish explorers came to what is now the United States beginning with Christopher Columbus' second expedition, which reached Puerto Rico on November 19, 1493.[12] The first confirmed landing in the continental US was by a Spaniard, Juan Ponce de León, who landed in 1513 on a lush shore he christened La Florida.[6]
Within three decades of Ponce de León's landing, the Spanish became the first Europeans to reach the Appalachian Mountains, the Mississippi River, the Grand Canyon[13] and the Great Plains. In 1540, De Soto undertook an extensive exploration of the present US and, in the same year, Francisco Vázquez de Coronado led 2,000 Spaniards and Mexican Indians across the modern Arizona-Mexico border and traveled as far as central Kansas.[14] Other Spanish explorers include Lucas Vásquez de Ayllón, Pánfilo de Narváez, Sebastián Vizcaíno, Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo, Gaspar de Portolà, Pedro Menéndez de Avilés, Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca, Tristán de Luna y Arellano and Juan de Oñate.[15]
The Spanish sent some settlers, creating the first permanent European settlement in the continental United States at St. Augustine, Florida in 1565.[16] Later Spanish settlements included Santa Fe, Albuquerque, San Antonio, Tucson, San Diego, Los Angeles and San Francisco. Most Spanish settlements were along the California coast or the Santa Fe River in New Mexico.

[edit] Dutch colonization
Main article: New Netherland
Nieuw-Nederland, or New Netherland, was the seventeenth century Dutch colonial province on the eastern coast of North America. The claimed territory were the lands from the Delmarva Peninsula to Buzzards Bay, while the settled areas are now part of New Jersey, New York, Connecticut, Delaware, and Pennsylvania. Its capital, New Amsterdam, was located at the southern tip of the island of Manhattan on the Upper New York Bay.

[edit] French colonization
See also: New France and Fort Caroline
New France was the area colonized by France in North America during a period extending from the exploration of the Saint Lawrence River, by Jacques Cartier in 1534, to the cession of New France to Spain and Britain in 1763. At its peak in 1712 (before the Treaty of Utrecht), the territory of New France extended from Newfoundland to the Rocky Mountains and from Hudson Bay to the Gulf of Mexico. The territory was divided in five colonies, each with its own administration: Canada, Acadia, Hudson Bay, Newfoundland and Louisiana.
Also during this period, French Huguenots, sailing under Jean Ribault, attempted to found a colony in what became the southeastern coast of the United States. Arriving in 1562, they established the ephemeral colony of Charlesfort on Parris Island in what is now South Carolina. When this failed, most of the colonists followed René Goulaine de Laudonnière and moved south, founding the colony of Fort Caroline at the mouth of the St. Johns River in what is now Jacksonville, Florida on June 22, 1564. Fort Caroline was destroyed in 1565 by the Spanish under Pedro Menéndez de Avilés, who moved in from St. Augustine, founded to the south earlier in the year.

[edit] British colonization




In 1607, the Virginia Company of London established the Jamestown Settlement on the James River, both named after King James I


Main article: Colonial America
The strip of land along the eastern seacoast was settled primarily by English colonists in the 17th century, along with much smaller numbers of Dutch and Swedes. Colonial America was defined by a severe labor shortage that gave birth to forms of unfree labor such as slavery and indentured servitude,[17] and by a British policy of benign neglect (salutary neglect) that permitted the development of an American spirit distinct from that of its European founders.[18] Over half of all European migrants to Colonial America arrived as indentured servants.[19]
The first successful English colony was established in 1607, on the James River at Jamestown. It languished for decades until a new wave of settlers arrived in the late 17th century and established commercial agriculture based on tobacco. Between the late 1610s and the Revolution, the British shipped an estimated 50,000 convicts to its American colonies.[20] One example of conflict between Native Americans and English settlers was the 1622 Powhatan uprising in Virginia, in which Native Americans had killed hundreds of English settlers. The largest conflict between Native Americans and English settlers in the 17th century was King Philip's War in New England,[21] although the Yamasee War may have been bloodier.[22]
The Plymouth Colony was established in 1620. The area of New England was initially settled primarily by Puritans who established the Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1630.[16] The Middle Colonies, consisting of the present-day states of New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Delaware, were characterized by a large degree of diversity. The first attempted English settlement south of Virginia was the Province of Carolina, with Georgia Colony the last of the Thirteen Colonies established in 1733.[23] Several colonies were used as penal settlements from the 1620s until the American Revolution.[24] Methodism became the prevalent religion among colonial citizens after the First Great Awakening, a religious revival led by preacher Jonathan Edwards in 1734.[16]

[edit] Formation of the United States of America (1776–1789)
Main article: History of the United States (1776–1789)




Washington's crossing of the Delaware River, one of America's first successes in the Revolutionary war


The Thirteen Colonies began a rebellion against British rule in 1775 and proclaimed their independence in 1776. They subsequently constituted the first thirteen states of the United States of America, which became a nation in 1781 with the ratification of the Articles of Confederation. The 1783 Treaty of Paris represented Great Britain's formal acknowledgement of the United States as an independent nation.[9]
The United States defeated the Kingdom of Great Britain with help from France and Spain in the American Revolutionary War. The colonists' victory at Saratoga in 1777 led the French into an open alliance with the United States. In 1781, a combined American and French Army, acting with the support of a French fleet, captured a large British army led by General Charles Cornwallis at Yorktown, Virginia. The surrender of General Cornwallis ended serious British efforts to find a military solution to their American problem.[9] Seymour Martin Lipset points out that "The United States was the first major colony successfully to revolt against colonial rule. In this sense, it was the first 'new nation'."[25]




Trumbull's Declaration of Independence


Side by side with the states' efforts to gain independence through armed resistance, a political union was being developed and agreed upon by them. The first step was to formally declare independence from Great Britain. On July 4, 1776, the Second Continental Congress, still meeting in Philadelphia, declared the independence of "the United States of America" in the Declaration of Independence. Although the states were still independent entities and not yet formally bound in a legal union, July 4 is celebrated as the nation's birthday. The new nation was dedicated to principles of republicanism, which emphasized civic duty and a fear of corruption and hereditary aristocracy.[9]
The Continental Congress that convened on September 5, 1774 played an important coordinating role among the thirteen colonies in dealing with Great Britain, including the American Revolutionary War from 1775.[9] A Union of the states with a constitutional government, the Congress of the Confederation first became possible with the ratification of the Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union on March 1, 1781.[26] Samuel Huntington became the first President of the United States in Congress Assembled.[27] However, it became apparent early on that the new constitution was inadequate for the operation of the new government and efforts soon began to improve upon it.[28]




The territory of the newly formed USA was much smaller than it is today. A French map showing Les Etats Unis in 1790


A series of attempts to organize a movement to outline and press reforms culminated in the Congress calling the Philadelphia Convention in 1787. The structure of the national government was profoundly changed on March 4, 1789, when the American people replaced the confederation type government of the Articles with a federation type government of the Constitution. The new government reflected a radical break from the normative governmental structures of the time, favoring representative, elective government with a weak executive, rather than the existing monarchical structures common within the western traditions of the time. The system of republicanism borrowed heavily from the Enlightenment ideas and classical western philosophy: a primacy was placed upon individual liberty and upon constraining the power of government through a system of separation of powers.[28] Additionally, the United States Bill of Rights was ratified on December 15, 1791 to guarantee individual liberties such as freedom of speech and religious practice and consisted of the first ten amendments of the Constitution.[29] John Jay was the first Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, whose membership was established by the Judiciary Act of 1789; the first Supreme Court session was held in New York City on February 1, 1790.[30] In 1803, the Court case Marbury v. Madison made the Court the sole arbiter of constitutionality of federal law.[31]

[edit] Foundations for American government




Treaty of Penn with Indians by Benjamin West painted in 1827.


Native American societies reminded Europeans of a golden age only known to them in folk history.[32] The idea of freedom and democratic ideals was born in the Americas because "it was only in America" that Europeans from 1500 to 1776 knew of societies that were "truly free."[32]


“
Natural freedom is the only object of the policy of the [Native Americans]; with this freedom do nature and climate rule alone amongst them ... [Native Americans] maintain their freedom and find abundant nourishment . . . [and are] people who live without laws, without police, without religion.
”



—- Jean Jacques Rousseau, Jesuit and Savage in New France[32]



The Iroquois nations' political confederacy and democratic government has been credited as one of the influences on the Articles of Confederation and the United States Constitution.[33][34] However, there is heated debate among historians about the importance of their contribution. Although Native American governmental influence is debated, it is a historical fact that several founding fathers had contact with the Iroquois, and prominent figures such as Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Franklin were involved with their stronger and larger native neighbor-- the Iroquois.


“
As powerful, dense [Mound Builder] populations were reduced to weakened, scattered remnants, political readjustments were necessary. New confederacies were formed. One such was to become a pattern called up by Benjamin Franklin when the thirteen colonies struggled to confederate: "If the Iroquois can do it so can we," he said in substance.
”



—- Bob Ferguson, Choctaw Government to 1830[35]




[edit] Westward expansion (1789–1849)
Main article: History of the United States (1789–1849)




Economic growth in America per capita income






Territorial expansion of the United States, omitting Oregon and other claims.


George Washington—a renowned hero of the American Revolutionary War, commander in chief of the Continental Army, and president of the Constitutional Convention—became the first President of the United States under the new U.S. Constitution. The Whiskey Rebellion in 1794, when settlers in the Pennsylvania counties west of the Allegheny Mountains protested against a federal tax on liquor and distilled drinks, was the first serious test of the federal government.[36] He announced his resignation from the presidency in his farewell address, which was published in the newspaper Independent Chronicle on September 26, 1796. In his address, Washington triumphed the benefits of federal government and importance of ethics and morality while warning against foreign alliances and formation of political parties.[37] His vice president John Adams succeeded him in presidency; Adams was a member of the Federalist Party. However, the Federalists became divided after Adams sent a peace mission to France despite ongoing disputes with that nation. Thomas Jefferson, a Democratic-Republican, defeated Adams for the presidency in the 1800 election.[38]
The Louisiana Purchase, in 1803, removed the French presence from the western border of the United States and provided U.S. settlers with vast potential for expansion west of the Mississippi River.[39] Slave importation from Africa became illegal beginning in 1808, despite a growing plantation system in many southern states such as North Carolina and Georgia.[40] In response to continued British impressment of American sailors into the British Navy, the Congress declared war on Britain in 1812.[41] The United States and Britain came to a draw in the War of 1812 after bitter fighting that lasted until January 8, 1815, during the Battle of New Orleans. The Treaty of Ghent, officially ending the war, essentially resulted in the maintenance of the status quo ante bellum;[42] however, crucially for the U.S., some Native American tribes had to sign treaties with the U.S. government in response to their losses in the war.[41] During the later course of the war, the Federalists held the Hartford Convention in 1814 over concerns that the war would weaken New England. There, they proposed seven constitutional amendments meant to strengthen the region politically, but once the Federalists delivered them to Washington, D.C., the recent American victories in New Orleans and the signing of the Treaty of Ghent undermined the Federalists' arguments and contributed to the downfall of the party.[43]
The Monroe Doctrine, expressed in 1823, proclaimed the United States' opinion that European powers should no longer colonize or interfere in the Americas. This was a defining moment in the foreign policy of the United States.[16] The Monroe Doctrine was adopted in response to American and British fears over Russian and French expansion into areas of the Western Hemisphere. It was not until the Presidential Administration of Teddy Roosevelt that the Monroe Doctrine became a central tenet of American foreign policy. The Monroe Doctrine was then invoked in the Spanish-American War as well as later in the proxy wars between the United States and Soviet Union in Central America and has also essentially given developing nations in the Americas support from the United States and warned the powers in Europe to steer clear of far western affairs.[44]
In 1830, Congress passed the Indian Removal Act, which authorized the president to negotiate treaties that exchanged Indian tribal lands in the eastern states for lands west of the Mississippi River. This established Andrew Jackson, a military hero and President, as a cunning tyrant in regards to native populations. The act resulted most notably in the forced migration of several native tribes to the West, with several thousand Indians dying en route, and the Creeks' violent opposition and eventual defeat. The Indian Removal Act also directly caused the ceding of Spanish Florida and subsequently led to the many Seminole Wars.[45]




Pioneers Crossing the Plains of Nebraska.


In its mission to end slavery, the abolitionist movement also gained a larger following of participants from both black and white races. The American Anti-Slavery Society was politically active from 1833 to 1839 for the government to abolish slavery, but Congress imposed a "gag rule" that rejected any citizen's request against slavery.[46] William Lloyd Garrison, formerly associated with the Society, then began publication of the anti-slavery newspaper The Liberator in Boston, Massachusetts in 1831, and Frederick Douglass, a black ex-slave, began writing for that newspaper around 1840 and started his own abolitionist newspaper North Star in 1847.[47]
The Republic of Texas was annexed by president John Tyler in 1845.[48] The U.S., using regulars and large numbers of volunteers, defeated Mexico in 1848 during the Mexican-American War. Public sentiment in the U.S. was divided as Whigs[49] and anti-slavery forces[50] opposed the war. The 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ceded California, New Mexico, and adjacent areas to the United States, which composed about thirty percent of former Mexican land. Westward expansion was enhanced further by the California Gold Rush following the discovery of gold in that state in 1848. Numerous "forty-niners" trekked to California in pursuit of gold; land-demanding European immigrants also contributed to the rising Western population.[16]

[edit] Civil War era (1849–1865)




The Battle of Gettysburg, the bloodiest battle and turning point of the American Civil War


Main article: History of the United States (1849–1865)
In the middle of the 19th century, white Americans of the North and South were unable to reconcile fundamental differences in their approach to government, economics, society and African American slavery. The issue of slavery in the new territories was settled by the Compromise of 1850 brokered by Whig Henry Clay and Democrat Stephen Douglas; the Compromise included admission of California as a free state and the passage of the Fugitive Slave Act to make it easier for masters to reclaim runaway slaves.[48] In 1854, the proposed Kansas-Nebraska Act abrogated the Missouri Compromise by providing that each new state of the Union would decide its stance on slavery.[51] After Abraham Lincoln won the 1860 Election, eleven Southern states seceded from the union between late 1860 and 1861, establishing a rebel government, the Confederate States of America, on February 8, 1861.[52]
By 1860, there were nearly four million slaves residing in the United States, nearly eight times as many from 1790; within the same time period, cotton production in the U.S. boomed from less than a thousand tons to nearly one million tons per year. There were some slave rebellions - including by Gabriel Prosser (1800), Denmark Vesey (1822), and Nat Turner (1831) - but they all failed and led to tighter slave oversight in the south.[53] White abolitionist John Brown tried and failed to free a group of black slaves held in Harpers Ferry, Virginia and was therefore executed for his actions.[54] Harriet Beecher Stowe, daughter of minister Lyman Beecher, published her novel Uncle Tom's Cabin in 1852 in response to the passage of the Fugitive Slave Act. The novel intended to express her views of the cruelty of slavery and sold nearly 300,000 copies during its first year of publication.[48] Numerous slaves also escaped their masters through the Underground Railroad, a term defining secret routes where abolitionists confidentially transported runaway slaves to "free state" territory; its most famous leader was Harriet Tubman.[55]




The Union: blue, yellow, gray; The Confederacy: brown


The Civil War began when Confederate General Pierre Beauregard opened fire upon Fort Sumter, in the Confederate state of South Carolina.[56] Along with the northwestern portion of Virginia, four of the five northernmost "slave states" did not secede and became known as the Border States.[52] Emboldened by Second Bull Run, the Confederacy made its first invasion of the North when General Robert E. Lee led 55,000 men of the Army of Northern Virginia across the Potomac River into Maryland.[57] The Battle of Antietam near Sharpsburg, Maryland, on September 17, 1862, was the bloodiest single day in American history.[58] At the beginning of 1864, Lincoln made General Ulysses S. Grant commander of all Union armies. General William Tecumseh Sherman marched from Chattanooga, Tennessee, to Atlanta, Georgia, defeating Confederate Generals Joseph E. Johnston and John Bell Hood.[52] Sherman's army laid waste to about 20% of the farms in Georgia in his "March to the Sea", and reached the Atlantic Ocean at Savannah in December 1864.[59] Lee surrendered his Army of Northern Virginia on April 9, 1865, at Appomattox Court House.[52] Based on 1860 census figures, 8% of all white males aged 13 to 43 died in the war, including 6% in the North and an extraordinary 18% in the South.[60]

[edit] Reconstruction and the rise of industrialization (1865–1890)
Main article: History of the United States (1865–1918)




Completion of the Transcontinental Railroad (1869) at First Transcontinental Railroad, by Andrew J. Russell


Reconstruction took place for most of the decade following the Civil War. During this era, the "Reconstruction Amendments" were passed to expand civil rights for black Americans. Those amendments included the Thirteenth Amendment, which outlawed slavery, the Fourteenth Amendment that guaranteed citizenship for all people born or naturalized within U.S. territory, and the Fifteenth Amendment that granted the vote for all men regardless of race. While the Civil Rights Act of 1875 forbade discrimination in the service of public facilities, the Black Codes denied blacks certain privileges readily available to whites.[61] In response to Reconstruction, the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) emerged around the late 1860s as a white-supremacist organization opposed to black civil rights. Increasing hate-motivated violence from groups like the Klan influenced both the Ku Klux Klan Act of 1870 that classified the KKK as a terrorist group[62] and an 1883 Supreme Court decision nullifying the Civil Rights Act of 1875; however, in the Supreme Court case United States v. Cruikshank the Court interpreted the Fourteenth Amendment as regulating only states' decisions regarding civil rights.[63] The case defeated any protection of blacks from terrorist attacks, as did the later case United States v. Harris.[64] During the era, many regions of the southern U.S. were military-governed and often corrupt; Reconstruction ended after the disputed 1876 election between Republican candidate Rutherford B. Hayes and Democratic candidate Samuel J. Tilden. Hayes won the election, and the South soon re-entered the national political scene,[16] firmly under white control.
Following was the Gilded Age, a term that author Mark Twain used to describe the period of the late nineteenth century when there had been a dramatic expansion of American industry. Reform of the Age included the Civil Service Act, which mandated a competitive examination for applicants for government jobs. Other important legislation included the Interstate Commerce Act, which ended railroads' discrimination against small shippers, and the Sherman Antitrust Act, which outlawed monopolies in business. Twain believed that this age was corrupted by such elements as land speculators, scandalous politics, and unethical business practices. By century's end, American industrial production and per capita income exceeded those of all other world nations and ranked only behind Great Britain. In response to heavy debts and decreasing farm prices, farmers joined the Populist Party.[65] Later, an unprecedented wave of immigration served both to provide the labor for American industry and create diverse communities in previously undeveloped areas. Abusive industrial practices led to the often violent rise of the labor movement in the United States.[66] Influential figures of the period included John D. Rockefeller and Andrew Carnegie.

[edit] Progressivism, imperialism, and World War I (1890–1918)
Main article: Progressive Era




Mulberry Street, along which Manhattan's Little Italy is centered. Lower East Side, circa 1900.


After the Gilded Age came the Progressive Era, whose followers called for reform over perceived industrial corruption. Viewpoints taken by progressives included greater federal regulation of anti-trust laws and the industries of meat-packing, drugs, and railroads. Four new constitutional amendments—the Sixteenth through Nineteenth—resulted from progressive activism.[67] The era lasted from 1900 to 1918, the year marking the end of World War I.[68]
U.S. Federal government policy, since the James Monroe Administration, had been to move the indigenous population beyond the reach of the white frontier into a series of Indian reservations. Tribes were generally forced onto small reservations as White farmers and ranchers took over their lands.




Ellis Island in 1902, the main immigration port for immigrants entering the United States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.


The United States began its rise to international power in this period with substantial population and industrial growth domestically and numerous military ventures abroad, including the Spanish-American War, which began when the United States blamed the sinking of the USS Maine (ACR-1) on Spain. Also at stake were U.S. interests in acquiring Cuba, an island nation fighting for independence from Spanish occupation; Puerto Rico and the Philippines were also two former Spanish colonies seeking liberation. In December 1898, representatives of Spain and the U.S. signed the Treaty of Paris to end the war, with Cuba becoming an independent nation and Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines becoming U.S. territories.[16][69] In 1900, Congress passed the Open Door Policy that at the time required China to grant equal trading access to all foreign nations.[16]
President Woodrow Wilson declared U.S. entry into World War I in April 1917 following a yearlong neutrality policy; the U.S. had previously shown interest in world peace by participating in the Hague Conferences. American participation in the war proved essential to the Allied victory. Wilson also implemented a set of propositions titled the Fourteen Points to ensure peace, but they were denied at the 1919 Paris Peace Conference. Isolationist sentiment following the war also blocked the U.S. from participating in the League of Nations, an important part of the Treaty of Versailles.[16]

[edit] Post-World War I and the Great Depression (1918–1940)
Main article: History of the United States (1918–1945)
Following World War I, the U.S. grew steadily in stature as an economic and military world power. The United States Senate did not ratify the Treaty of Versailles imposed by its Allies on the defeated Central Powers; instead, the United States chose to pursue unilateralism, if not isolationism.[70] The aftershock of Russia's October Revolution resulted in real fears of communism in the United States, leading to a three-year Red Scare and the U.S. lost 675,000 people to the Spanish flu pandemic in 1918.[71]




Prohibition agents destroying barrels of alcohol in Chicago, 1921


In 1920, the manufacture, sale, import and export of alcohol was prohibited by the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Prohibition encouraged illegal breweries and dealers to make substantial amounts of money selling drugs illegally. The Prohibition ended in 1933, a failure. Additionally, the KKK re-formed during that decade and gathered nearly 4.5 million members by 1924, and the U.S. government passed the Immigration Act of 1924 restricting foreign immigration.[72] The 1920s were also known as the Roaring Twenties, due to the great economic prosperity during this period. Jazz became popular among the younger generation, and thus was also called the Jazz Age.
During most of the 1920s, the United States enjoyed a period of unbalanced prosperity: farm prices and wages fell, while new industries, and industrial profits grew. The boom was fueled by an inflated stock market, which later led to the a crash on October 29, 1929.[73] The Hawley-Smoot Tariff, the Dust Bowl, and the ensuing Great Depression led to government efforts to restart the economy and help its victims with Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal. The recovery was rapid in all areas except unemployment, which remained fairly high until 1940.

[edit] World War II (1940–1945)





This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (September 2008)


Main articles: World War II and Homefront-United States-World War II
As with World War I, the United States did not enter World War II until after the rest of the active Allied countries had done so. The United States's first contribution to the war was simultaneously to cut off the oil and raw material supplies desperately needed by Japan to maintain its offensive in Manchuria, and to increase military and financial aid to China. Its first contribution to the Allies came in September 1940 in the form of the Lend-Lease program with Britain.
On December 7, 1941 Japan launched a surprise attack on the American naval base in Pearl Harbor, citing America's recent trade embargo as justification. The following day, Franklin D. Roosevelt successfully urged a joint session of Congress to declare war on Japan, calling December 7, 1941 "a date which will live in infamy". Four days after the attack on Pearl Harbor, on December 11, Nazi Germany declared war on the United States, drawing the country into a two-theater war.

[edit] Battle against Germany
Further information: Europe first
Upon entering the war, the United States and its allies decided to concentrate the bulk of their efforts on fighting Hitler in Europe, while maintaining a defensive position in the Pacific until Hitler was defeated. The United States's first step was to set up a large airforce in Britain to concentrate on bombing raids into Germany itself. The American Air force relied on the B-17 Flying Fortress as its primary heavy bomber. Britain had ceased its daylight bombing raids, due to heavy casualties inflicted by the Luftwaffe. The USAAF suffered similar high losses until the introduction of the P-51 Mustang as a long range escort fighter for the bombers.




Landing at Normandy at Battle of Normandy, by Robert F. Sargent, United States Army


The American army's first ground action was fighting alongside the British, Australian and New Zealand armies in North Africa. By May 1943, the British 8th Army had expelled the Germans from North Africa and the Allies controlled this vital link until the end of the war. The American navy also played an active role in the Atlantic protecting the convoys bringing vital American war material to Britain. By midway through 1943, the Allies were fighting the war from Britain with unbroken supply lines, while at the same time Hitler's armies were very much on the back foot, with heavy bombing taking its toll on production.
By early 1944, a planned invasion of Western Europe was underway. What followed on June 6, 1944, was Operation Overlord, or D-Day. The largest war armada ever assembled landed on the beaches of Normandy and began the penetration of Western Europe that eventually overthrew Hitler and Nazi Germany. Following the landing at Normandy, the Americans contributed greatly to the outcome of the war, with dogged fighting in the Battle of the Ardennes and the Battle of the Bulge resulting in Allied victories against the Germans. The battles took a heavy toll on the Americans, who lost 19,000 men during the Battle of the Bulge alone. The allied bombing raids on Germany increased to unprecedented levels after the D-Day invasion, with over 70% of all bombs dropped on Germany occurring after this date. On April 30, 1945, with Berlin completely overrun with Russian forces and his country in tatters, Adolf Hitler committed suicide. On May 8, 1945, the war with Germany was over, following its unconditional surrender to the Allied forces.

[edit] Battle against Japan
Main article: Pacific War
Due to the United States commitment to defeating Hitler in Europe, the first years of the war against Japan was largely a defensive battle with the United States Navy attempting to prevent the Japanese Navy from asserting dominance of the Pacific region. Initially, Japan won the majority of its battles in a short period of time. Japan quickly defeated and created military bases in Guam, Thailand, Malaya, Hong Kong, Papua New Guinea, Indonesia and Burma. This was done virtually unopposed and with quicker speed than that of the German Blitzkrieg during the early stages of the war. This was important for Japan, as it had only 10% of the homeland industrial production capacity of the United States.




Douglas MacArthur lands at the Battle of Leyte, by U.S. Army Signal Corps


The turning point of the war was the Battle of Midway in June 1942. Following this, the Americans began fighting towards China where they could build an airbase suitable to commence bombing of mainland Japan with its B-29 Superfortress fleet. The Americans began by selecting smaller, lesser defended islands as targets as opposed to attacking the major Japanese strongholds. During this period, they inadvertently triggered what would become their most comprehensive victory in the entire war.
The Pacific war became the largest naval conflict in history. The American Navy emerged victorious after at one point being stretched to almost breaking point with almost complete destruction of the Japanese Navy. The American forces were then poised for an invasion of the Japanese mainland, to force the Japanese into unconditional surrender. On April 12, 1945, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt died and Vice President Harry S. Truman was sworn in as the 33rd President of the United States. The decision to use nuclear weapons to end the conflict has been one of the most controversial decisions of the war. Supporters of the use of the bombs argue that an invasion would have cost enormous numbers of lives, while opponents argue that the large number of civilian casualties resulting from the bombings were still unjustified. The first bomb was dropped on Hiroshima on August 6, 1945, and the second bomb was dropped on Nagasaki on August 9. On August 15, 1945, the Japanese surrendered unconditionally.

[edit] Cold War beginnings and the Civil Rights Movement (1945–1964)




President Kennedy's address on Civil Rights, June 11, 1963.







This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (September 2008)


Main article: History of the United States (1945–1964)




Martin Luther King gives his I Have a Dream speech at the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom


Following World War II, the United States emerged as one of the two dominant superpowers. The U.S. Senate, on December 4, 1945, approved U.S. participation in the United Nations (UN), which marked a turn away from the traditional isolationism of the U.S. and toward more international involvement. The post-war era in the United States was defined internationally by the beginning of the Cold War, in which the United States and the Soviet Union attempted to expand their influence at the expense of the other, checked by each side's massive nuclear arsenal and the doctrine of mutual assured destruction. The result was a series of conflicts during this period including the Korean War and the tense nuclear showdown of the Cuban Missile Crisis. Within the United States, the Cold War prompted concerns about Communist influence, and also resulted in government efforts to encourage math and science toward efforts like the space race.
In the decades after World War II, the United States became a global influence in economic, political, military, cultural and technological affairs. At the center of middle-class culture since the 1950s has been a growing obsession with consumer goods.
John F. Kennedy was elected President in 1960. Known for his charisma, he is so far the only Roman Catholic to be President. The Kennedys brought a new life and vigor to the atmosphere of the White House. During his time in office, the Cold War reached its height with the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962. He was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963.
Meanwhile, the American people completed their great migration from the farms into the cities and experienced a period of sustained economic expansion. At the same time, institutionalized racism across the United States, but especially in the American South, was increasingly challenged by the growing Civil Rights movement and African American leaders such as Martin Luther King, Jr. During the 1960s, the Jim Crow laws that legalized racial segregation between Whites and Blacks came to an end.

[edit] Cold War (1964–1980)
Main article: History of the United States (1964–1980)
Amid the Cold War, the United States entered the Vietnam War, whose growing unpopularity fed already existing social movements, including those among women, minorities and young people. President Lyndon B. Johnson's Great Society social programs and the judicial activism of the Warren Court added to the wide range of social reform during the 1960s and 1970s. Feminism and the environmental movement became political forces, and progress continued toward civil rights for all Americans. The Counterculture Revolution swept through the nation and much of the western world in the late sixties, dividing the already hostile environment but also bringing forth more liberated social views.




United States Navy F-4 Phantom II intercepts a Soviet Tu-95 Bear D aircraft in the early 1970s


Johnson was succeeded by President Richard Nixon in 1969, who intitially escalated the Vietnam War but soon was able to negotiate a peace treaty in 1973, effectively ending American involvement in the war. The war had cost the lives of 58,000 American troops and millions of Vietnamese. Nixon used a conflict in the Eastern Bloc between the Soviet Union and China to the advantage of the United States, bolstering relations with the People's Republic of China.[74] A new era of Cold War relations known as détente (cooperation) was begun.[75] The OPEC oil embargo led to a period of slow economic growth in 1973. Nixon's administration was brought to an ignominious close with the political scandal of Watergate in August 1974. During the years of his successor, Gerald Ford, the American-backed South Vietnamese government collapsed.
Jimmy Carter was elected in 1976 on the notion that he was not a part of the Washington political establishment.[76] The U.S. was afflicted with a recession, an energy crisis, slow economic growth, high unemployment, and high inflation coupled with high interest rates (the term stagflation was coined). On the world stage, Carter brokered the Camp David Accords between Israel and Egypt. In 1979, Iranian students stormed the U.S. embassy in Tehran and took 52 Americans hostage. Carter lost the 1980 election to Republican Ronald Reagan, whose campaign message advertised that his presidency would bring "Morning in America."[77]

[edit] End of the Cold War (1980–1991)
Main article: History of the United States (1980–1991)




In the 1984 election, Ronald Reagan won 49 states in one of the largest ever election victories.






Ronald Reagan at the Brandenburg Gate challenges Gorbachev to tear down the Berlin Wall in 1987, shortly before the end of the Cold War


Ronald Reagan produced a major realignment with his 1980 and 1984 landslides. In 1980, the Reagan coalition was possible because of Democratic losses in most social-economic groups. "Reagan Democrats" were those who usually voted Democratic, but were attracted by Reagan's policies, personality and leadership, notably his social conservatism and hawkish foreign policy. Widely regarded as a hard-line conservative, Reagan's economic policies (dubbed "Reaganomics") and the implementation of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 lowered income taxes from 70% to 28% over the cource of seven years. Reagan continued to downsize government taxation, spending, and regulation.[78] The U.S. experienced a recession in 1982; unemployment and business failures soon entered rates close to Depression-era levels. These negative trends reversed the following year, when the inflation rate decreased from 11% to 2%, the unemployment rate decreased to 7.5%, and the economic growth rate increased from 4.5 to 7.2%.[79]
Reagan took a hard line against the Soviet Union, proclaiming it to be the Evil Empire. Reagan ordered a massive buildup of the U.S. military, incurring a costly budget deficit. Reagan introduced a complicated missile defense system known as the Strategic Defense Initiative (dubbed "Star Wars" by opponents) in which the U.S. could, in theory, shoot down missiles by means of laser systems in space. Though it was never fully developed or deployed,[80] the Soviets were genuinely concerned about the possible effects of the program[81] and the research and technologies of SDI paved the way for the anti-ballistic missile systems of today.[82] The Reagan administration also provided covert funding and assistance to anti-Communist resistance movements worldwide. Reagan's interventions against Grenada and Libya were popular in the U.S., though his backing of the Contra rebels was mired in controversy.[83] The arms-for-hostages scandal led to the convictions of such figures as Oliver North and John Poindexter.[84] He shared many common views and goals with friend and ally Margaret Thatcher, the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.[85]
Reagan met with Soviet Leader Mikhail Gorbachev, who ascended to power in 1985, four times, and their summit conferences led to the signing of the INF Treaty. Gorbachev tried to save Communism in the Soviet Union first by ending the expensive arms race with America,[86] then by shedding the East European empire in 1989. The Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, ending the US-Soviet Cold War.

[edit] 1991-Present
Main article: History of the United States (1991 - present)
After the fall of the Soviet Union, the United States emerged as the world's sole remaining superpower and continued to involve itself in military action overseas, including the 1991 Gulf War. Following his election in 1992, President Bill Clinton oversaw unprecedented gains in securities values, a side effect of the digital revolution and new business opportunities created by the Internet (see Internet bubble). The 1990s saw one of the longest periods of economic expansion. Under Clinton an attempt to universalize health care, led by First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton failed after almost two years of work on the controversial plan.[87]
In 1993, Ramzi Yousef, a Kuwaiti national, planted explosives in the underground garage of One World Trade Center and detonated them, killing six people and injuring thousands, in what would become the beginning of an age of terrorism. Yousef would be subsequently captured.[88] In 1995, a domestic terrorist bombing at the federal building in Oklahoma City killed 168 people.
During the 1990s, the United States and allied nations found themselves under attack from Islamist terrorist groups, chiefly Al-Qaida. The regime of Saddam Hussein in Iraq proved a continuing problem for the UN and Iraq’s neighbors in its refusal to account for previously known stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons, its violations of UN resolutions, and its support for terrorism against Israel and other countries. After the 1991 Gulf War, the US, French, and British militaries began patrolling the Iraqi no-fly zones to protect Iraq’s Kurdish minority and Shi’ite Arab population – both of which suffered attacks from the Hussein regime before and after the 1991 Gulf War – in Iraq’s northern and southern regions, respectively.[89] In the aftermath of Operation Desert Fox during December 1998, Iraq announced that it would no longer respect the no-fly zones and resumed its efforts in shooting down Allied aircraft.[90]
The 1993 World Trade Center bombing by Al-Qaida was the first of many terrorist attacks upon Americans during the same period. Later that year in the Battle of Mogadishu, US Army Rangers engaged Somali militias supported by Al Qaeda in an extended firefight that cost the lives of 19 soldiers. President Clinton subsequently withdrew US combat forces from Somalia (there originally to support UN relief efforts),[91] a move described by Al-Qaida leader Osama bin Laden as evidence of American weakness. These attacks were followed by others including the 1996 Khobar Towers bombing in Saudi Arabia, and the 1998 United States embassy bombings in Tanzania and Kenya. Next came the 2000 millennium attack plots which included an attempted bombing of Los Angeles International Airport, followed by the USS Cole bombing in Yemen in October 2000, which the government associated with Osama bin Laden's al-Qaeda terrorist network.[92]
US responses to these attacks included limited Cruise missile strikes on Afghanistan and Sudan (August 1998), which failed to stop Al-Qaida’s leaders and their Taliban supporters. Also in 1998, President Clinton signed the Iraq Liberation Act which called for regime change in Iraq on the basis of Saddam Hussein’s possession of weapons of mass destruction, oppression of Iraqi citizens and attacks upon other Middle Eastern countries.[93]
In 1998, Clinton was impeached for charges of perjury and obstruction of justice that arose from an inappropriate sexual relationship with White House intern Monica Lewinsky and a sexual harassment lawsuit from Paula Jones. He was the second president to have been impeached. The House of Representatives voted 228 to 206 on December 19 to impeach Clinton,[94] but on February 12, 1999, the Senate voted 55 to 45 to acquit Clinton of the charges.[95]
The presidential election in 2000 between George W. Bush (R) and Al Gore (D) was one of the closest in the U.S. history, and helped lay the seeds for political polarization to come. Although Bush won the majority of electoral votes, Gore won the majority of the popular vote. In the days following Election Day, the state of Florida entered dispute over the counting of votes due to technical issues over certain Democratic votes in some counties.[96] The Supreme Court case Bush v. Gore was decided on December 12, 2000, ending the recount with a 5-4 vote and certifying Bush as president.[97]




New York under attack in the September 11, 2001 attacks






George W. Bush in a televised address from the USS Abraham Lincoln thanking members of the US armed services.


At the beginning of the new millennium, the United States found itself attacked by Islamic terrorism, with the September 11, 2001 attacks in which 19 extremists hijacked four transcontinental airliners and intentionally crashed two of them into the twin towers of the World Trade Center and one into the Pentagon. The passengers on the fourth plane, United Airlines Flight 93, revolted causing the plane to crash into a field in Somerset County, PA. According to the 9/11 Commission Report, that plane was intended to hit the US Capitol Building in Washington. The twin towers of the World Trade Center collapsed, destroying the entire complex. The United States soon found large amounts of evidence that suggested that a terrorist group, al-Qaeda, spearheaded by Osama bin Laden, was responsible for the attacks.
In response to the attacks, under the administration of President George W. Bush, the United States (with the military support of NATO and the political support of some of the international community) launched Operation Enduring Freedom which overthrew the Taliban regime which had protected and harbored bin Laden and al-Qaeda. With the support of large bipartisan majorities, the US Congress passed the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002. With a coalition of other countries including Britain, Spain, Australia, Japan and Poland, in March 2003 President Bush ordered an invasion of Iraq dubbed Operation Iraqi Freedom which led to the overthrow and capture of Saddam Hussein. Using the language of 1998 Iraq Liberation Act and the Clinton Administration, the reasons cited by the Bush administration for the invasion included the spreading of democracy, the elimination of weapons of mass destruction[98] (a key demand of the UN as well, though later investigations found parts of the intelligence reports to be inaccurate)[99] and the liberation of the Iraqi people.[100] This second invasion fueled protest marches in many parts of the world.
In August 2005, Hurricane Katrina flooded parts of the city of New Orleans and heavily damaged other areas of the gulf coast, including major damage to the Mississippi coast. The preparation and the response of the government were criticized as ineffective and slow.[101]
By 2006, rising prices saw Americans become increasingly conscious of the nation's extreme dependence on steady supplies of inexpensive petroleum for energy, with President Bush admitting a U.S. "addiction" to oil.[102] The possibility of serious economic disruption, should conflict overseas or declining production interrupt the flow, could not be ignored, given the instability in the Middle East and other oil-producing regions of the world. Many proposals and pilot projects for replacement energy sources, from ethanol to wind power and solar power, received more capital funding and were pursued more seriously in the 2000s than in previous decades. The 2006 midterm elections saw Congresswoman Nancy Pelosi become Speaker of the United States House of Representatives and the highest ranking woman in the history of the U.S. government.[103]
In addition to military efforts abroad, in the aftermath of 9/11 the Bush Administration increased domestic efforts to prevent future attacks. A new cabinet level agency called the United States Department of Homeland Security was created to lead and coordinate federal counterterrorism activities. The USA PATRIOT Act removed legal restrictions on information sharing between federal law enforcement and intelligence services and allowed for the investigation of suspected terrorists using means similar to those in place for other types of criminals. A new Terrorist Finance Tracking Program monitored the movements of terrorist’s financial resources but was discontinued after being revealed by The New York Times.[104] Telecommunication usage by known and suspected terrorists was studied through the NSA electronic surveillance program.
Since 9/11, Islamic extremists made various attempts to attack the US homeland, with varying levels of organization and skill. For example, in 2001 vigilant passengers aboard a transatlantic flight to Miami prevented Richard Reid (shoe bomber) from detonating an explosive device. Other terrorist plots have been stopped by federal agencies using new legal powers and investigative tools, sometimes in cooperation with foreign governments. Such thwarted attacks include a plan to crash airplanes into the U.S. Bank Tower (aka Library Tower) in Los Angeles; the 2003 plot by Iyman Faris to blow up the Brooklyn Bridge in New York City; the 2004 Financial buildings plot which targeted the International Monetary Fund and World Bank buildings in Washington, DC, the New York Stock Exchange and other financial institutions; the 2004 Columbus Shopping Mall Bombing Plot; the 2006 transatlantic aircraft plot which was to involve liquid explosives; the 2006 Sears Tower plot; the 2007 Fort Dix attack plot; and the 2007 John F. Kennedy International Airport attack plot.
After months of brutal violence against Iraqi civilians by Sunni and Shi’ite terrorist groups and militias -- including Al-Qaeda in Iraq –- in January 2007 President Bush presented a new strategy for Operation Iraqi Freedom based upon Counter-insurgency theories and tactics developed by General David Petraeus. The Iraq War troop surge of 2007 was part of this "new way forward"[105] and has been credited by some[who?] with a dramatic decrease in violence and an increase in political and communal reconciliation in Iraq.
As of 2009, debates continue over abortion, gun control, same-sex marriage, immigration reform, and the ongoing war in Iraq. Although the new Democratic Congressional majority promised to withdraw U.S. forces from Iraq, Congress continues to fund efforts in both Iraq and Afghanistan, a withdrawal agreement has been agreed upon between the US and Iraqi government. In the area of foreign policy, the U.S. maintains ongoing talks with North Korea over its nuclear weapons program, as well as with Israel and the Palestinian Authority over a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict; the Palestinian-Israeli talks began in 2007, an effort spearheaded by United States Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice.[106] The George W. Bush administration has also stepped up rhetoric implicating Iran and more recently Syria in the development of weapons of mass destruction.
In the presidential election of 2008, Senator Barack Obama ran on a platform of "Change". This, coupled with the September 2008 economic crisis, helped aid his victory against Senator John McCain. On November 4, Obama became the first African American to be elected President of the United States; he was sworn into office as the 44th President on January 20, 2009.

[edit] References

Athearn, Robert G. (1988), American Heritage Illustrated History of the United States, 1: The New World, New York, New York, U.S.: Choice Publishing, Inc., ISBN 0945260016 
Beard, Charles A.; Mary Beard (1934). History of the United States, a study in American civilization. New York, New York, U.S.: The Macmillan company. http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/16960. 
Dallek, Robert (2007). Nixon and Kissinger: Partners in Power. New York, New York, U.S.: HarperCollins. 
Irons, Peter (2006), A People's History of the Supreme Court, New York, New York, U.S.: Penguin Books, ISBN 0143037382 
Shlaes, Amity (2008), The Forgotten Man: A New History of the Great Depression, New York, New York, U.S.: HarperPerennial, ISBN 0060936426 
Wilentz, Sean (2008), The Age of Reagan: A History, 1974-2008, New York, New York, U.S.: Harper, ISBN 0060744809 
Zinn, Howard (2003), A People's History of the United States, New York, New York, U.S.: HarperPerennial Modern Classics, ISBN 0060838655, http://books.google.com/books?id=9-FtlblxbLgC&printsec=frontcover 


[edit] Notes


^ http://www.cyberwest.com/cw09/v9scwst1.html
^ http://www.nps.gov/bela/html/history.htm
^ Wilford, John Noble (2008-04-04). "Evidence Supports Earlier Date for People in North America". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/04/science/04fossil.html. 
^ Jon Muller, Department of Anthropology (1996). "Cyrus Thomas, 19th Century Synthesis and Antithesis" (HTML). Southern Illinois University. http://www.siu.edu/~anthro/muller/Thomas/Thomas.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-07. 
^ "Christopher Columbus". The Columbia Encyclopedia (6th ed.). 2007. http://www.bartleby.com/65/co/ColumbusC.html. 
^ a b "Ponce de Leon, Juan". The Columbia Encyclopedia (6th ed.). 2007. http://www.bartleby.com/65/po/PoncedeL.html. 
^ "Cabot, John". The Columbia Encyclopedia (6th ed.). 2007. http://www.bartleby.com/65/ca/Cabot-Jo.html. 
^ Athearn 1988, p. 19
^ a b c d e "Chapter 3: The Road to Independence". Outline of U.S. History. America.gov. November 2005. http://usinfo.state.gov/products/pubs/histryotln/road.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-21. 
^ Wilford, John Noble (2008-04-04). "Evidence Supports Earlier Date for People in North America". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/04/science/04fossil.html. 
^ a b "Chapter 1: Early America". Outline of U.S. History. America.gov. November 2005. http://usinfo.state.gov/products/pubs/histryotln/index.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-22. 
^ "Give Me Liberty!" - History. 
^ Pyne, Stephen J. (1998). How the Canyon Became Grand. New York, New York: Penguin Books. p. 4-7. ISBN 0670881104. 
^ "Coronado, Francisco Vasquez de". The Columbia Encyclopedia (6th ed.). 2007. http://www.bartleby.com/65/co/CoronadoF.html. 
^ "Spanish Explorers". Elizabethan Era. http://www.elizabethan-era.org.uk/spanish-explorers.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-22. 
^ a b c d e f g h i "United States". The Columbia EncGAYyclopedia (6th ed.). 2007. http://www.bartleby.com/65/us/US.html. 
^ Zinn 2003, p. 24
^ Henretta, James A. (2007). "History of Colonial America". Encarta Online Encyclopedia. http://encarta.msn.com/text_1741502191___0/History_of_Colonial_America.html. 
^ Indentured Servitude in Colonial America, Deanna Barker, Frontier Resources
^ "British Convicts Shipped to American Colonies". American Historical Review 2. Smithsonian Institution, National Museum of Natural History. October 1896. http://www.dinsdoc.com/butler-1.htm. Retrieved on 2007-06-21. 
^ Tougias, Michael (1997). "King Philip's War in New England". HistoryPlace.com. http://www.historyplace.com/specials/calendar/docs-pix/aug-king-philip.htm. 
^ Oatis, Steven J. (2004). A Colonial Complex: South Carolina's Frontiers in the Era of the Yamasee War, 1680-1730. University of Nebraska Press. pp. 167. ISBN 0-8032-3575-5.  Online at Google Books
^ "Chapter 1: Early America". Outline of U.S. History. America.gov. November 2005. http://usinfo.state.gov/products/pubs/histryotln/index.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-20. 
^ "Penal colony". Britannica Concise Encyclopedia. 2008. http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1B1-374825.html. 
^ Lipset, The First New Nation (1979) p. 2
^ "The First Constitution - The Articles of Confederation". The Charters of Freedom. National Archives and Records Administration. http://www.archives.gov/exhibits/charters/charters_of_freedom_4.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-21. 
^ "About Samuel Huntington". The Huntington Homestead. http://huntingtonhomestead.org/about_samuel.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-21. 
^ a b "Chapter 4: The Formation of a National Government". Outline of U.S. History. America.gov. November 2005. http://usinfo.state.gov/products/pubs/histryotln/national.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-21. 
^ Irons 2006, pp. 80-82
^ Irons 2006, pp. 85-87
^ Irons 2006, pp. 105-107
^ a b c Jean Jacques Rousseau (1700s). "Ennobling 'Savages'" (HTML). http://www.ratical.org/many_worlds/6Nations/EoL/chp4.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-05. 
^ "The Six Nations: Oldest Living Participatory Democracy on Earth". Ratical.com. http://www.ratical.org/many_worlds/6Nations/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-27. 
^ Armstrong, Virginia Irving. I Have Spoken: American History Through the Voices of the Indians. Pocket Books. p. 14. SBN 671-78555-9. 
^ Bob Ferguson (1980). Choctaw Government to 1830. 
^ "The Whiskey Rebellion". Archiving Early America. 2008. http://www.earlyamerica.com/earlyamerica/milestones/whiskey/. Retrieved on 2008-04-24. 
^ "George Washington's Farwell Address". Archiving Early America. http://www.earlyamerica.com/earlyamerica/milestones/farewell/. Retrieved on 2008-06-07. 
^ "John Adams". The White House. http://www.whitehouse.gov/history/presidents/ja2.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-07. 
^ "Louisiana Purchase". The Columbia Encyclopedia (6th ed.). 2007. http://www.bartleby.com/65/lo/LouisianP.html. 
^ Zinn 2003, p. 172
^ a b "War of 1812". The Columbia Encyclopedia (6th ed.). 2007. http://www.bartleby.com/65/wa/War1812.html. 
^ Coleman, Aaron Nathaniel. "Status Quo Ante Bellum: American Victory over English". University of the Cumberlands. http://www.ucumberlands.edu/academics/history/upsilonian/files/vol12/aaroncoleman00.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-24. 
^ "James Madison and the War of 1812". SAT U.S. History. SparkNotes. 2006. http://www.sparknotes.com/testprep/books/sat2/history/chapter7section4.rhtml. Retrieved on 2008-06-07. 
^ "Monroe Doctrine". The Columbia Encyclopedia (6th ed.). 2007. http://www.bartleby.com/65/mo/MonroeDo.html. 
^ "Indian removal". Africans in America. PBS. 1998. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/aia/part4/4p2959.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-24. 
^ "American Anti-Slavery Society". Ohio History Central. 2008. http://www.ohiohistorycentral.org/entry.php?rec=832. 
^ Zinn 2003, p. 184
^ a b c "Chapter 6: Sectional Conflict". Outline of U.S. History. America.gov. November 2005. http://usinfo.state.gov/products/pubs/histryotln/conflict.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-28. 
^ "Mexican War Lithograph". Smithsonian Source. http://www.smithsoniansource.org/display/primarysource/viewdetails.aspx?PrimarySourceId=1099. Retrieved on 2008-04-24. 
^ Pletcher, David M. (2006). "Manifest Destiny". The U.S.-Mexican War. PBS. http://www.pbs.org/kera/usmexicanwar/prelude/md_an_ideal_or_a_justification.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-24. 
^ "Kansas-Nebraska Act". The History Place. 1996. http://www.historyplace.com/lincoln/kansas.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-24. 
^ a b c d "Chapter 7: The Civil War and Reconstruction". Outline of U.S. History. America.gov. November 2005. http://usinfo.state.gov/products/pubs/histryotln/civil.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-28. 
^ Zinn 2003, pp. 171-172
^ Zinn 2003, pp. 185-187
^ Zinn 2003, p. 175
^ "Civil War, in U.S. history". The Columbie Encyclopedia (6th ed.). 2007. http://www.bartleby.com/65/ci/CivilWarUS.html. 
^ Dugdale-Pointon, T. (2006-05-09). "General Robert E. Lee (1807-70)". HistoryofWar.org. http://www.historyofwar.org/articles/people_lee_robert.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-28. 
^ "Casualties at Antietam". National Parks Service. 2001-10-03. http://www.nps.gov/archive/anti/casualty.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-28. 
^ "Sherman's March to the Sea". The New Georgia Encyclopedia. 2002-09-05. http://www.georgiaencyclopedia.org/nge/Article.jsp?id=h-641. 
^ The Deadliest War
^ Zinn 2003, pp. 198-200
^ Irons 2006, p. 197
^ Zinn 2003, pp. 203-204
^ Irons 2006, pp. 204-205, 213
^ Mintz, Steven (2008-06-05). "Learn About the Gilded Age". Digitla History. University of Houston. http://www.digitalhistory.uh.edu/modules/gilded_age/index.cfm. Retrieved on 2008-06-05. 
^ Woloch, Nancy; Johnson, Paul E. (2008). "United States History". Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia. http://encarta.msn.com/text_1741500823___0/United_States_History.html. 
^ Mintz, Steven (2006). "Learn About the Progressive Era". Digital History. University of Houston. http://www.digitalhistory.uh.edu/modules/progressivism/index.cfm. Retrieved on 2008-02-06. 
^ "Progressive Era". Eagleton Digital Archive of American Politics. Eagleton Institute of Politics. 2004. http://www.eagleton.rutgers.edu/e-gov/e-politicalarchive-Progressive.htm. Retrieved on 2008-02-06. 
^ "Introduction". The World of 1898: The Spanish-American War. Library of Congress, Hispanic Division. 2007-07-23. http://www.loc.gov/rr/hispanic/1898/intro.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-02. 
^ "Feature: World War I and isolationism, 1913-33". US Department of State. 1991-04-29. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1584/is_n17_v2/ai_11173912/print?tag=artBody;col1. 
^ Pandemics and Pandemic Threats since 1900, U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
^ Zinn 2003, p. 382
^ Shlaes 2008, pp. 85, 90
^ Dallek, Robert (2007), p. 144
^ http://www.cambridge.org/catalogue/catalogue.asp?ISBN=9780521338349
^ http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/carter/peopleevents/e_1976.html
^ http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2004/06/09/BUGBI72U8O1.DTL
^ Wilentz
^ Wilentz 2008, p. 170
^ Wilentz 2008, pp. 163-164
^ "Foreign Affairs: Ronald Reagan". PBS. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/presidents/40_reagan/reagan_foreign.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-06. 
^ http://science.howstuffworks.com/missile-defense3.htm
^ Williams, William Appleman. "Expansion, Continental and Overseas". Foner, Eric; Garraty, John Arthur, ed (1991). The Reader's companion to American history. Houghton Mifflin Books. p. 368. ISBN 0395513723. http://books.google.com/books?id=KrWDw-_devcC. 
^ Wilentz 2008, p. 241
^ Wilentz 2008, p. 250
^ Wilentz 2008, pp. 243-244
^ "Clinton, Hillary (1947 - )". Biography.com. 2008. http://www.biography.com/search/article.do?id=9251306&page=print. Retrieved on 2008-06-20. 
^ Ramzi Yousef captured
^ "Containment: The Iraqi no-fly zones". BBC News. 1998-12-29. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/events/crisis_in_the_gulf/forces_and_firepower/244364.stm. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ Conversino, Mark J. (2005-07-13). "Operation Desert Fox: Effectiveness With Unintended Effects". Air and Space Power Journal. http://www.airpower.maxwell.af.mil/airchronicles/cc/conversino.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ Wilentz 2008, p. 337
^ Wilentz 2008, p. 406
^ Clinton, William Jefferson (1998-10-31). "Statement on Signing the Iraq Liberation Act of 1998". The American Presidency Project. http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=55205. Retrieved on 2008-08-14. 
^ Baker, Peter; Eilperin, Juliet (1998-12-20). "Clinton Impeached". The Washington Post: p. A1. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/politics/special/clinton/stories/impeach122098.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-14. 
^ Wilentz 2008, p. 400
^ Wilentz 2008, pp. 420-422
^ Wilentz 2008, pp. 425-427
^ "Blair and Bush 'to discuss Iraq action'". BBC News. 2002-02-24. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/middle_east/1838294.stm. Retrieved on 2008-04-22. 
^ "CIA’s final report: No WMD found in Iraq". MSNBC.com (Associated Press). 2005-04-25. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7634313/. Retrieved on 2008-04-22. 
^ Galbraith, Peter W. (2003-02-19). "Flashback For the Kurds". The New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9C07E3DB163DF93AA25751C0A9659C8B63&sec=&spon=&pagewanted=all. Retrieved on 2008-04-22. 
^ Wilentz 2008, pp. 446-447
^ Bush, George W. (2006-01-31), President Bush Delivers State of the Union Address, The White House, http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2006/01/20060131-10.html 
^ Walsh, Deirdre (2007-01-04). "Pelosi becomes first woman House speaker". CNN. http://www.cnn.com/2007/POLITICS/01/04/congress.rdp/index.html. 
^ "Roberts Wants Damage Assessment Caused by New York Times Report". Fox News. 2006-06-27. http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,201259,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "Fact Sheet: The New Way Forward in Iraq". The White House. 2007-01-10. http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2007/01/20070110-3.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-21. 
^ "Rice warns Israel on peace talks". BBC News. 2007-10-14. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/middle_east/7043664.stm. Retrieved on 2008-06-20. 



[edit] Further reading

Marcus, Greil (2007), The Shape of Things to Come: Prophecy and the American Voice, Macmillan, ISBN 0312426429, http://books.google.com/books?id=iALd6WoGtPEC&printsec=frontcover 


[edit] External links

Find more about History of the United States on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Historical maps of U.S. Maps to be combined and compared
Outline of U.S. History by the U. S. Department of State
U.S. National Archives
American Historical Association
American History Calendar Interactive calendar of events and people in American history
Journal of American History
Colored Timeline of American History broken down by theme








v • d • e

U.S. territorial growth maps





Animated

large · small






Years

1775 · 1790 · 1800 · 1810 · 1820 · 1830 · 1840 · 1850 · 1860 · 1870 · 1880 · 1900 · 1920













v • d • e

History of the United States by political division





States

Alabama · Alaska · Arizona · Arkansas · California · Colorado · Connecticut · Delaware · Florida · Georgia · Hawaii · Idaho · Illinois · Indiana · Iowa · Kansas · Kentucky · Louisiana · Maine · Maryland · Massachusetts · Michigan · Minnesota · Mississippi · Missouri · Montana · Nebraska · Nevada · New Hampshire · New Jersey · New Mexico · New York · North Carolina · North Dakota · Ohio · Oklahoma · Oregon · Pennsylvania · Rhode Island · South Carolina · South Dakota · Tennessee · Texas · Utah · Vermont · Virginia · Washington · West Virginia · Wisconsin · Wyoming






Federal district

Washington, D.C. (District of Columbia)






Insular areas

American Samoa · Guam · Northern Mariana Islands · Puerto Rico · U.S. Virgin Islands






Outlying islands

Bajo Nuevo Bank · Baker Island · Howland Island · Jarvis Island · Johnston Atoll · Kingman Reef · Midway Atoll · Navassa Island · Palmyra Atoll · Serranilla Bank · Wake Island













v • d • e

History of the United States





Timeline

Pre-Columbian · Colonial · 1776–1789 · 1789–1849 · 1849–1865 · 1865–1918 · 1918–1945 · 1945–1964 · 1964–1980 · 1980–1991 · 1991–present






Topics

African American · Diplomatic · Economic · Expansion (continental) · Expansion (overseas) · Immigration · Technological and industrial · Jewish · Maritime · Military · Musical · Stamps · Religious · Southern · Women






Category · Portal












v • d • e

United States topics





History





Timeline


Pre-Columbian · Colonial era (Thirteen Colonies) · Declaration of Independence · American Revolution · Territorial changes · American Civil War · Reconstruction era · African-American Civil Rights Movement (1896–1954) · World War I · Great Depression · World War II (Home front) · Cold War · Korean War · African-American Civil Rights Movement (1955–1968) · Feminist Movement · Vietnam War  · Post-Cold War (1991-present) · War on Terrorism (War in Afghanistan · Iraq War)







By topic


Demographic · Economic · Military · Postal · Technological and industrial · Inventions and discoveries









Federal
government








   


Law
U.S. Constitution
Bill of Rights
Civil liberties
Federalism
Separation of powers
Law Enforcement
Department of Justice (DOJ)
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)




Legislature - Congress
House of Representatives
Senate
Vice President
Executive - President
Executive Office of the President
Cabinet/Executive departments
Independent agencies
Policies




Judiciary - Supreme Court
Federal courts
Courts of appeal
District courts
Intelligence
U.S. Intelligence Community
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA)
National Security Agency (NSA)




Military
Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard














Politics

State governments  · Local governments  · Elections (Electoral College) · Political divisions · Political ideologies · Political parties (Democratic Party · Republican Party · Third parties) · Political scandals · Political status of Puerto Rico · Red states and blue states · Uncle Sam






Geography

Cities, towns and villages · Counties · Extreme points · Islands · Mountains (Appalachian · Rocky) · National Park System · Regions (New England · Mid-Atlantic · Southern · Midwestern · Great Plains · Northwestern · Southwestern) · Rivers (Mississippi · Missouri · Colorado) · States · Territory · Water supply and sanitation






Economy

Banking · Communications · Companies · Federal Reserve System · Insurance · Standard of living (Personal income · Household income · Homeownership · Income inequality) · Tourism · Transportation (Airports · Highways · Interstate Highway System · Passenger vehicles · Railroads · Trucking industry) · U.S. dollar · Wall Street  · Total debt






Society

Adolescent sexuality · Crime · Demographics · Education · Health care · Health insurance · Incarceration · Languages (American English · Spanish) · Media · People · Public holidays · Religion · Social class (Affluence · American Dream · American middle class · Educational attainment · Poverty · Professional and working class conflict) · Sports






Culture

American literature (Beat Generation · Folklore · Harlem Renaissance · Poetry · Transcendentalism) · Architecture · Cuisine · Dance · Fashion · Flag · Music (American classical music · American folk music · American popular music · Country music · Blues · Jazz · Rock and roll) · Radio · Television / Cinema (Hollywood) · Visual arts (Abstract expressionism)






Issues

Abortion · Affirmative action · American exceptionalism · Anti-Americanism · Capital punishment · Drug policy / Prohibition · Energy policy · Environmental movement · Gun politics · Health care reform · Human rights · Immigration (United States–Mexico barrier · Third Border Initiative) · Obesity · Racism · Same-sex marriage






Portal












v • d • e

History of North America





Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda · Bahamas · Barbados · Belize · Canada · Costa Rica · Cuba · Dominica · Dominican Republic · El Salvador · Grenada · Guatemala · Haiti · Honduras · Jamaica · Mexico · Nicaragua · Panama1 · Saint Kitts and Nevis · Saint Lucia · Saint Vincent and the Grenadines · Trinidad and Tobago1 · United States









Dependencies and
other territories



Anguilla · Aruba1 · Bermuda · British Virgin Islands · Cayman Islands · Greenland · Guadeloupe · Martinique · Montserrat · Navassa Island · Netherlands Antilles1 · Puerto Rico · Saint Barthélemy · Saint Martin · Saint Pierre and Miquelon · Turks and Caicos Islands · United States Virgin Islands








1 Territories also in or commonly considered to be part of South America.









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_the_United_States"
Categories: History of the United StatesHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008 | Articles lacking in-text citations | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Bosanski
Български
Català
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Shqip
Slovenčina
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 02:05.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
