













Ambrose Bierce - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Ambrose_Bierce";
		var wgTitle = "Ambrose Bierce";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "18951309";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281404032;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Ambrose Bierce

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate.




Ambrose Bierce



Ambrose Bierce, ca. 1866


Born
June 24, 1842(1842-06-24)
Meigs County, Ohio, United States


Died
1914(?)
Chihuahua, Chihuahua, Mexico (?)


Occupation
Journalist, Writer


Genres
Satire


Literary movement
Realism


Notable work(s)
"An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge," The Devil's Dictionary







Influences






Jonathan Swift, Voltaire, Edgar Allan Poe















Influenced






H.L. Mencken, William March, Jorge Luis Borges, Julio Cortázar, Stephen Crane, Ernest Hemingway










Ambrose Gwinnett Bierce (June 24, 1842 – 1914?) was an American editorialist, journalist, short-story writer and satirist. Today, he is best known for his short story, An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge and his satirical dictionary, The Devil's Dictionary.
The sardonic view of human nature that informed his work – along with his vehemence as a critic – earned him the nickname, "Bitter Bierce." Despite his reputation as a searing critic, however, Bierce was known to encourage younger writers, including poet George Sterling and fiction writer W. C. Morrow. He is known for his distinctive style of writing, which his stories often share. This includes a cold open, use of dark imagery, vague references to time, limited description, war-themed pieces and use of impossible events.
In 1913, Bierce traveled to Mexico to gain a firsthand perspective on that country's ongoing revolution. While traveling with rebel troops, the elderly writer disappeared without a trace.




Contents


1 Early life and military career
2 Personal life
3 Journalism

3.1 Railroad Refinancing Bill
3.2 McKinley accusation


4 Literary works
5 Disappearance
6 Legacy and influence
7 Bibliography

7.1 Books
7.2 Short stories


8 See also
9 References
10 Research resources
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early life and military career




Ambrose Bierce. Portrait by J.H.E. Partington.


Bierce was born in Meigs County, Ohio, and grew up in Kosciusko County, Indiana, attending high school at the county seat of Warsaw. He was the tenth of 13 children, whose father, Marcus Aurelius Bierce (1799–1876), gave all of them names beginning with the letter "A". In order of birth, the Bierce siblings were Abigail, Amelia, Ann, Addison, Aurelius, Augustus, Almeda, Andrew, Albert, Ambrose, Arthur, Adelia, and Aurelia. His mother, née Laura Sherwood, was a descendant of William Bradford.
At the outset of the American Civil War, Bierce enlisted in the Union Army's 9th Indiana Infantry Regiment. In February 1862 he was commissioned first lieutenant, and served on the staff of General William Babcock Hazen as a topographical engineer, making maps of likely battlefields. Bierce fought at the Battle of Shiloh (April 1862), a terrifying experience that became a source for several later short stories and the memoir, "What I Saw of Shiloh."
He continued fighting in the Western theater, at one point receiving newspaper attention for his daring rescue, under fire, of a gravely wounded comrade at the Battle of Rich Mountain, West Virginia. In June 1864, he sustained a serious head wound at the Battle of Kennesaw Mountain, and spent the rest of the summer on furlough, returning to active duty in September. He was discharged from the army in January 1865. His military career resumed, however, when in the summer of 1866 he rejoined General Hazen as part of the latter's expedition to inspect military outposts across the Great Plains. The expedition proceeded by horseback and wagon from Omaha, Nebraska, arriving toward year's end in San Francisco, California.

[edit] Personal life
Bierce married Mary Ellen ("Mollie") Day on Christmas Day, 1871. They had three children; two sons, Day (1872–1889) and Leigh (1874–1901), and a daughter, Helen (1875–1940). Both of Bierce's sons predeceased him: Day was shot in a brawl over a woman, and Leigh died of pneumonia related to alcoholism. Bierce separated from his wife in 1888 after discovering compromising letters to her from an admirer, and the couple finally divorced in 1904. Mollie Day Bierce died the following year.
Bierce suffered from lifetime asthma as well as complications arising from his war wounds.[citation needed]

[edit] Journalism
In San Francisco, Bierce received the rank of brevet major before resigning from the Army. He remained in San Francisco for many years, eventually becoming famous as a contributor and/or editor for a number of local newspapers and periodicals, including The San Francisco News Letter, The Argonaut, the Overland Monthly, The Californian and The Wasp.
Bierce lived and wrote in England from 1872 to 1875, contributing to Fun magazine. Returning to the United States, he again took up residence in San Francisco. From 1879 to 1880, he travelled to Rockerville and Deadwood, South Dakota in the Dakota Territory, to try his hand as local manager for a New York mining company, but when the company failed he returned to San Francisco and resumed his career in journalism.
In 1887, he published a column called "Prattle" and became one of the first regular columnists and editorialists to be employed on William Randolph Hearst's newspaper, the San Francisco Examiner, eventually becoming one of the most prominent and influential among the writers and journalists of the West Coast. He remained associated with Hearst Newspapers until 1906.

[edit] Railroad Refinancing Bill
The Union Pacific and Central Pacific railroad companies had received massive loans from the U.S. government to build the First Transcontinental Railroad—on gentle terms, but Collis P. Huntington persuaded a friendly member of Congress to introduce a bill excusing the companies from repaying the money, amounting to $130 million (nearly 3 billion dollars in 2007 money).
In January 1896 Hearst dispatched Bierce to Washington, D.C. to foil this attempt. The essence of the plot was secrecy; the railroads' advocates hoped to get the bill through Congress without any public notice or hearings. When the angered Huntington confronted Bierce on the steps of the Capitol and told Bierce to name his price, Bierce's answer ended up in newspapers nationwide: "My price is one hundred thirty million dollars. If, when you are ready to pay, I happen to be out of town, you may hand it over to my friend, the Treasurer of the United States". Bierce's coverage and diatribes on the subject aroused such public wrath that the bill was defeated. Bierce returned to California in November.

[edit] McKinley accusation
Because of his penchant for biting social criticism and satire, Bierce's long newspaper career was often steeped in controversy. On several occasions his columns stirred up a storm of hostile reaction which created difficulties for Hearst. One of the most notable of these incidents occurred following the assassination of President William McKinley when Hearst's opponents turned a poem Bierce had written about the assassination of Governor Goebel in 1900 into a cause célèbre.
Bierce meant his poem, written on the occasion of the assassination of Governor William Goebel of Kentucky, to express a national mood of dismay and fear, but after McKinley was shot in 1901 it seemed to foreshadow the crime:

"The bullet that pierced Goebel's breast
Can not be found in all the West;
Good reason, it is speeding here
To stretch McKinley on his bier."

Hearst was thereby accused by rival newspapers—and by then Secretary of State Elihu Root—of having called for McKinley's assassination. Despite a national uproar that ended his ambitions for the presidency (and even his membership in the Bohemian Club), Hearst neither revealed Bierce as the author of the poem, nor fired him.

[edit] Literary works




Bierce in 1892


His short stories are held among the best of the 19th century, providing a popular following based on his roots. He wrote realistically of the terrible things he had seen in the war in such stories as "An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge", "Killed at Resaca", and "Chickamauga".
Bierce was considered a master of "Pure" English by his contemporaries, and virtually everything that came from his pen was notable for its judicious wording and economy of style. He wrote in a variety of literary genres.
In addition to his ghost and war stories, he also published several volumes of poetry and verse. His Fantastic Fables anticipated the ironic style of grotesquerie that turned into a genre in the 20th century.
One of Bierce's most famous works is his much-quoted book, The Devil's Dictionary, originally an occasional newspaper item which was first published in book form in 1906 as The Cynic's Word Book. It consists of satirical definitions of English words which lampoon cant and political double-talk.
Under the entry "leonine", meaning a single line of poetry with an internal rhyming scheme, he included an apocryphal couplet written by the apocryphal Bella Peeler Silcox (Ella Wheeler Wilcox) in which an internal rhyme is achieved in both lines only by mispronouncing the rhyming words:
The electric light invades the dunnest deep of Hades.
Cries Pluto, 'twixt his snores: "O tempora! O mores!"
Bierce's twelve-volume Collected Works were published in 1909, the seventh volume of which consists solely of The Devil's Dictionary, the title Bierce himself preferred to The Cynic's Word Book.

[edit] Disappearance
In October 1913 Bierce, then in his seventies, departed Washington, D.C., for a tour of his old Civil War battlefields. By December he had proceeded on through Louisiana and Texas, crossing by way of El Paso into Mexico, which was in the throes of revolution. In Ciudad Juárez he joined Pancho Villa's army as an observer, and in that role he witnessed the battle of Tierra Blanca.
Bierce is known to have accompanied Villa's army as far as the city of Chihuahua. After a last letter to a close friend, sent from there December 26, 1913, he vanished without a trace, becoming one of the most famous disappearances in American literary history.[citation needed]
Several writers have speculated that he headed north to the Grand Canyon, found a remote spot there and shot himself, though no evidence exists to support this view. All investigations into his fate have proved fruitless, and despite an abundance of theories his end remains shrouded in mystery. The date of his death is generally cited as "1914?".
In one of his last letters, Bierce wrote the following to his niece, Lora:

"Good-bye — if you hear of my being stood up against a Mexican stone wall and shot to rags please know that I think that a pretty good way to depart this life. It beats old age, disease, or falling down the cellar stairs. To be a Gringo in Mexico—ah, that is euthanasia!"


[edit] Legacy and influence
At least three films have been made of Bierce's story, "An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge." A silent film version was made in the 1920s. A French version called La Rivière du Hibou, directed by Robert Enrico, was released in 1962. This black-and-white film faithfully recounts the original narrative using voice-over. Another version, directed by Brian James Egan, was released in 2005.
The 1962 film was also used for an episode of the television series The Twilight Zone: "An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge". A copy of "An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge" appeared in the ABC television series Lost ("The Long Con", airdate February 8, 2006). Prior to The Twilight Zone, the story had been adapted as an episode of Alfred Hitchcock Presents.
Carlos Fuentes's novel The Old Gringo is a fictionalized account of Bierce's disappearance which was later adapted into the film Old Gringo, starring Gregory Peck in the title role.[1]
American composer Rodney Waschka II composed an opera, Saint Ambrose, based on Bierce's life.[2]
He is briefly mentioned in the first volume of Joel Rosenberg's Guardians of the Flame series
Bierce's disappearance and trip to Mexico provide the background for the vampire horror film, Dusk till Dawn 3, where Bierce's character plays a central role.
Ambrose Bierce, his works and his disappearance are mentioned often throughout the 2007 sci-fi/fantasy novel The Unreals by Donald Jeffries. Bierce even appears briefly as a character.

[edit] Bibliography

[edit] Books

The Fiend's Delight (1873)
Cobwebs from an Empty Skull (1874)
The Dance of Death (with Thomas A. Harcourt and William Rulofson, as William Herman) (1877)
Tales of Soldiers and Civilians (also known as In the Midst of Life) (1891)
Black Beetles in Amber (1892)
The Monk and the Hangman's Daughter (1892)
Can Such Things Be? (1893)
Fantastic Fables (1899)
The shadow on the dial, and other essays (1909)
The Devil's Dictionary (1911) (first published in book form as The Cynic's Wordbook, 1906)
Collected Works (1909)
Write It Right (1909)
A Horseman in the Sky, A Watcher by the Dead, The Man and the Snake (1920)??
A Vision of Doom: Poems by Ambrose Bierce (1980)


[edit] Short stories




The Haunted Valley (1871)
An Unfinished Race (1873)
An Inhabitant of Carcosa (1887)
One of the Missing (1888)
The Boarded Window (1891)
Chickamauga (1891)
The Eyes of the Panther (1891)
Haita the Shepherd (1891)
The Man and the Snake (1891)
The Middle Toe of the Right Foot (1891)
An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge (1891)
The Suitable Surroundings (1891)
A Tough Tussle (1891)
A Watcher by the Dead (1891)
An Adventure at Brownville (1893)
A Baby Tramp (1893)
Bodies of the Dead (1893)
The Death of Halpin Frayser (1893)
The Famous Gilson Bequest (1893)
John Bartine's Watch (1893)
The Night-Doings at 'Deadman's' (1893)
A Psychological Shipwreck (1893)
The Realm of the Unreal (1893)
The Secret of Macarger's Gulch (1893)
The Damned Thing (Short Story)(1894)
A Vine on a House (1905)
The Moonlit Road (1907)
The time, The moon fought back (1911)




Beyond the Wall (1909)
A Diagnosis of Death (1909)
A Jug of Syrup (1909)
Moxon's Master (1909)
Staley Fleming's Hallucination (1909)
The Stranger (1909)
The Way of Ghosts (1909)
The Affair at Coulter's Notch
An Affair of Outposts
The Applicant
The Baptism of Dobsho
A Bottomless Grave
The City of the Gone Away
The Coup de Grace
Curried Cow
The Failure of Hope and Wandel
George Thurston
A Holy Terror
A Horseman in the Sky
The Hypnotist
An Imperfect Conflagration
The Ingenious Patriot
John Mortonson's Funeral
Jupiter Doke, Brigadier-General
Killed at Resaca
A Lady from Redhorse




The Little Story
The Major's Tale
The Man Out of the Nose
The Mocking-Bird
The Monk and the Hangman's Daughter
Three and One are One
Mr Swiddler's Flip-Flap
My Favourite Murder
Mysterious Disappearances
Oil of Dog
One Kind of Officer
One of Twins
One Officer, One Man
One Summer Night
Parker Adderson, Philosopher
Perry Chumly's Eclipse
A Providential Intimation
The Race at Left Bower
A Resumed Identity
A Revolt of the Gods
Some Haunted Houses
A Son of the Gods
The Story of a Conscience
The Tail of the Sphinx
Visions of the Night
The Widower Turmore
An Arrest





Revenge


[edit] See also




American Civil War portal




Bolesław Prus (career similarities).
List of horror fiction authors
List of people who have mysteriously disappeared
List of atheists





United States Army portal




[edit] References


^ Carlos Fuentes, Gringo Viejo (Planeta, 2004) ISBN 9686941673
^ Capstone Records:Rodney Waschka II - Saint Ambrose



Bleiler, Everett (1948). The Checklist of Fantastic Literature. Chicago: Shasta Publishers. pp. 32, 147. 
Adolphe de Castro, Portrait of Ambrose Bierce (New York and London: Century, 1929).
Carey McWilliams, Ambrose Bierce: A Biography, 1929 (reprinted 1967), Archon Books.
Richard O'Connor, Ambrose Bierce: a Biography, with illustrations, Boston, Little, Brown and Company, 1967.


[edit] Research resources

Ambrose Bierce Papers, 1872-1913 (2 linear ft.) are housed in the Department of Special Collections and University Archives at Stanford University Libraries


[edit] External links





This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links.




Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Ambrose Bierce





Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Ambrose Bierce





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Ambrose Bierce 



Poems by Ambrose Bierce at PoetryFoundation.org
The Ambrose Bierce Site
The Ambrose Bierce Appreciation Society
The Ambrose Bierce Project
Laika Poetry Review article
Ambrose Bierce Quotes
"Ambrose Bierce, 'the Old Gringo': Fact, Fiction and Fantasy"
One of Bierce's last letters
Biography and quotes of Ambrose Bierce
Ambrose Bierce
Works by Ambrose Bierce at Project Gutenberg
Ambrose Bierce Stories
Short Stories by Ambrose Bierce
Memorial in the cemetery of Sierra Mojada, Coahuila, México.
Ambrose Bierce stories read in the Mister Ron's Basement Podcast, now indexed for convenience



Persondata


NAME
Bierce, Ambrose


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Bierce, Ambrose Gwinnett


SHORT DESCRIPTION
American journalist and writer


DATE OF BIRTH
June 24, 1842


PLACE OF BIRTH
Meigs County, Ohio


DATE OF DEATH
after 1913


PLACE OF DEATH
Chihuahua, Mexico





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ambrose_Bierce"
Categories: American satirists | American short story writers | American columnists | American horror writers | American journalists | American poets | Aphorists | Fabulists | Hearst Corporation people | American atheists | People of Indiana in the American Civil War | People of the Mexican Revolution | San Francisco Examiner people | Union Army officers | People from Meigs County, Ohio | People from San Francisco, California | 1842 births | Unexplained disappearancesHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008 | Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Asturianu
Bosanski
Català
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Français
Hrvatski
Íslenska
Italiano
Latina
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Slovenčina
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 00:33.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
