













Eschatology - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Eschatology";
		var wgTitle = "Eschatology";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "9760";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281655603;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Eschatology

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 




Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, by Albrecht Dürer.


Eschatology (from the Greek ἔσχατος, Eschatos meaning "last" and -logy meaning "the study of") is a part of theology and philosophy concerned with what is believed to be the final events in the history of the world, or the ultimate destiny of humanity, commonly referred to as the end of the world. While in mysticism the phrase refers metaphorically to the end of ordinary reality and reunion with the Divine, in many traditional religions it is taught as an actual future event prophesied in sacred texts or folklore. More broadly, eschatology may encompass related concepts such as the Messiah or Messianic Age, the end time, and the end of days.
The Greek word αἰών (aeon), meaning "century" (connotation "age"), may be translated as "end of the age (or historical period[1])" instead of "end of the world". The time distinction also has theological significance; while the end of time in mystical traditions relates to escaping confinement in the "given" reality, some religions believe and fear it to be the literal destruction of the planet (or of all living things) – with the human race surviving in some new form, ending the current "age" of existence.
Most modern eschatology and apocalypticism, both religious and secular, involves the violent disruption or destruction of the world, whereas Christian and Jewish eschatologies view the end times as the consummation or perfection of God's creation of the world.
For example, according to ancient Hebrew belief, life takes a linear (and not cyclical) path; the world began with God and is constantly headed toward God’s final goal for creation.




Contents


1 Eschatology in Philosophy
2 Eschatology in various Religions

2.1 Judaism and Christianity
2.2 Islamic eschatology
2.3 Hindu eschatology


3 See also
4 External links
5 Selected bibliography

5.1 General (alphabetical by author)
5.2 'Code'-type books
5.3 The Book of Daniel compared to the Book of Revelation
5.4 Dispensationalist school of thought (listed alphabetically by author)
5.5 Post-Tribulation school of thought
5.6 Amillenial school of thought


6 References





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Eschatology in Philosophy
Eschatology has also been a belief shared, sometimes theorized on, by philosophers. Saint Augustine stressed the allegorical method of interpretation. He was greatly influenced by Origen.[2] He was followed by Ibn al-Nafis[3] and Hegel with their philosophy of history, and, some (such as the author Albert Camus in 'The Rebel') have argued, Karl Marx. Theodicy has gathered together most Enlightenment thinkers, among whom are Kant and Rousseau.
More recently, many involved in futures studies and transhumanism have noted the accelerating rate of scientific progress and anticipate a technological singularity in the 21st century that would profoundly and unpredictably change the course of human history.[4] Artist/futurist Michael E. Arth, for example, speculates about the emergence of a hive-like distributed being that would be self-conscious, integrated into a future version of the Internet, and also able to exhibit any individualized form, or speak any language. This collective intelligence, UNICE: Universal Network of Intelligent Conscious Entities, would connect everyone on the planet before it spreads outward into space.[5]

[edit] Eschatology in various Religions
For the eschatological beliefs of various religions, see: End Times.

[edit] Judaism and Christianity
Judaism addresses the End times in the Book of Daniel and in the Talmud, particularly Tractate Avodah Zarah. For Christianity, in addition to the Old Testament Book of Daniel, see New Testament Book of Revelation.

[edit] Islamic eschatology
Islamic eschatology has been very distinctly and vividly documented in the sayings of its prophet, Muhammad, regarding "the signs of the Hour". Prophesies of Mohammed have been traditionally divided into major and minor signs. He spoke about several minor signs of the approach of the Hour; that is, the ending days of the life on earth. Describing the minor signs he said, "People would follow a way of life other than mine and give guidance other than mine”, “I fear for my people only the leaders who lead men astray”, “Before the Last Hour there will be great liars, so beware of them”, “When the most wicked member of a tribe becomes its ruler, and the most worthless member of a community becomes its leader, and a man is respected through fear of the evil he may do, and leadership is given to people who are unworthy of it, expect the Last Hour”[6]
Regarding the major signs, we have a Companions narrating: Once we were sitting together and talking amongst ourselves when the Prophet appeared. He asked us what it was we were discussing. We said it was the Hour. He said: It will not be called until ten signs have appeared: "Smoke, Dajjal, the Animal (that will speak to the people), rising of the sun from the West, descending down of Isa (Jesus), appearance of Yajuj and Majuj, and three sinkings (or caving in of the earth): one in the East, another in the West and a third in the Arabian Peninsula.

[edit] Hindu eschatology
Contemporary Hindu eschatology is linked in the Vaishnavite tradition to the figure of Kalki, or the tenth and last avatar of Vishnu before the age draws to a close, and Shiva simultaneously dissolves and regenerates the universe.
Most Hindus acknowledge as part of their cosmology that we are living in the Kali Yuga literally "age of darkness", the last of four periods (Yuga) that make up the current age. Each period has seen a successive degeneration in the moral order and character of human beings, to the point that in the Kali Yuga where quarrel and hypocrisy are prevalent. Often, the invocation of Kaliyuga denotes a certain helplessness in the face of the horrors and suffering of the human condition and a nostalgia for a golden past or a future salvation.
However, Hindu conceptions of time, like those found in other non-Western traditions, is cyclical in that one age may end but another will always begin. As such, the cycle of birth, growth, decay, death, and renewal at the individual level finds its echo in the cosmic order of all things, yet affected by the vagaries of the comings and goings of divine interventions in the Vaishnavite belief.
Most Hindus believe that Shiva will destroy the world at the end of the kalpa. Some Shaivites hold the view that he is incessantly destroying and creating the world.

[edit] See also




Philosophy portal






Look up eschatology in
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.






Abomination of Desolation
Amillennialism
Ancient Aztec eschatology
Antichrist
Apocalypse
Apocalypticism
Armageddon
Bible prophecy
Christian apologetics
Dispensationalism
Death and Eternal Life, by John Hick
The End Is Nigh, a magazine looking at the end of the world
End time
End of the world




Eschatology (religious movement)
Eschaton
Götterdämmerung
Hindu eschatology
Historicism
Immanentize the eschaton
Islamic eschatology
Judgment day
Millennialism
Millenarianism
Messianism and Messiah
New Jerusalem
Oracle of Damascus
The Pocket Guide to the Apocalypse, by Jason Boyett
Postmillennialism




Premillennialism
Preterism
Prophecy of Seventy Weeks
Ragnarök
Realized eschatology
Second Coming
Six Ages of the World
The Two Witnesses
Universal Network of Intelligent Conscious Entities
Whore of Babylon
Scientific views:

Futurology
Risks to civilization, humans and planet Earth
Technological singularity
Ultimate fate of the universe







[edit] External links

Karl Marx: Communist as Religious EschatologistPDF (3.68 MiB)
Christian Cyclopedia article on Last Things


[edit] Selected bibliography



This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards.



[edit] General (alphabetical by author)

The Invisible War (1965) by Donald Grey Barnhouse; Zondervan Publishing House (Ministry Resources Library).
How to Recognize the Antichrist (1975) by Arthur E. Bloomfield; Bethany Fellowship
The Hidden Dangers of the Rainbow (1983) by Constance Cumbey; Huntington House Inc.
Number in Scripture (1967) by Ethelbert W. Bullinger; Kregel Publications, Grand Rapids, Michigan 49501 Library of Congress Catalog Card No. 67-26498; ISBN 0-8254-2204-3
A Planned Deception: The Staging of A New Age 'Messiah' (1985) by Constance Cumbey; Pointe Publishers, Inc.
Hidden Prophecies in the Psalms (1986) by J.R. Church; Prophecy Publications, Oklahoma City, OK 73153; ISBN 0-941241-00-9
Gorbachev: Has the Real Antichrist Come? (1988) by Robert W. Faid; Victory House Publishers.
The Man The False Prophet and The Harlot, subtitled The Name of the Antichrist Finally Revealed (1991) by Dr. Anthony M. Giliberti; Published by This Is The Generation Library of Congress Catalog Number 90-93451 ISBN 0-9628419-0-0.
Have A Nice Doomsday - Why Millions Of Americans Are Looking Forward To The End Of The World by Nicholas Guyatt. ISBN 9780091910877
Send This Message to My Church: Christ's Words to the Seven Churches of Revelation (1984) by Terence Kelshaw; Thomas Nelson Publishers.
The Truth About Armageddon (1982) by William Sanford Lasor; Harper & Row Publishers.
A Survey of Bible Prophecy (1951) by R. Ludwigson; (1973, 1975; The Zondervan Corporation).
Thy Kingdom Come: The Eschatology of the Kingdom (2009) by Harold L. Patterson; Xulon Press, ISBN 978-1-60791-229-3. 484 Pages.


[edit] 'Code'-type books

The Bible Code (1997) by Michael Drosnin; Published by Simon & Schuster, 1230 Ave. of the Americas, New York, NY 10020. ISBN 0-684-81079-4.
Bible Code II: The Countdown (2002) by Michael Drosnin; One Honest Man, Inc. Published by Penguin Books Ltd., Registered Offices, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0R1, England.


[edit] The Book of Daniel compared to the Book of Revelation

Daniel and Revelation subtitled A Study of Two Extraordinary Visions (1978) by James M. Efird; Judson Press, Valley Forge, PA 19481 ISBN 0-8170-0797-0
Daniel's Prophecy of the 70 Weeks (1940, 1969) by Alva J. McClain; Academie Books/Zondervan House.


[edit] Dispensationalist school of thought (listed alphabetically by author)

A Cup of Trembling (1995) by Dave Hunt; Harvest House Publishers, Eugene, Oregon 97402; ISBN 1-56507-334-7.
Global Peace and the Rise of Antichrist (1990) by Dave Hunt; Harvest House Publishers Library of Congress Cataloging in Publishing Data; ISBN 0-89081-831-2.
How Close Are We? (1993) by Dave Hunt; Harvest House Publishers. (NOTE: The author has a new, updated book titled When will Jesus Come?.
Peace, Prosperity, and the Coming Holocaust (1983) by Dave Hunt; Harvest House Publishers.
Whatever Happened to Heaven? (1988) by Dave Hunt; Harvest House Publishers. ISBN 0-89081-698-0 (pbk.)
Not Wrath but Rapture! by H.A. Ironside; NO DATE; published by Loizeaux Brothers, Inc.
Armageddon, Oil and the Middle East Crisis Revised (1974) by John F. Walvoord; Zondervan Publishing House, 1415 Lake Drive, S.E., Grand Rapids, Michigan 49506; ISBN 0-310-53921-8
Satan is Alive and Well on Planet Earth (1972) by Hal Lindsey with C.C. Carlson; Zondervan House.
The Late, Great Planet Earth (1970) by Hal Lindsey with C.C. Carlson; Zondervan House.
The Liberation of Planet Earth (1974) by Hal Lindsey; The Zondervan Corporation.
There's a New World Coming (1973) by Hal Lindsey; Vision House.
The Rapture (1983) by Hal Lindsey; The Aorist Corporation Bantam Books.
The Terminal Generation (1976) by Hal Lindsey with C.C. Carlson; Fleming Revell.
The Revelation Record (1985) by Henry M. Morris; Tyndale House Inc. and Creation Life Publishers.
Things to Come (1958) by J. Dwight Pentecost; Zondervan Publishing House, Grand Rapids, Michigan 49506.
The World's Collision (1956) by Charles E. Pont; W.A. Wilde, Boston.
Dispensationalism Today (1965) by Charles C. Ryrie; The Moody Bible Institute of Chicago.
Israel In Prophecy (1962) by John F. Walvoord; Zondervan Publishing House.
The Church in Prophecy (1964) by John F. Walvoord; Zondervan Publishing House.
The Millennial Kingdom (1959) by John F. Walvoord; Dunham Publishing Co. Academie Books published by Zondervan Publishing House, 1415 Lake Drive. S.E., Grand Rapids Michigan 49506. (NOTE: See Millennium on Wikipedia).
The Nations in Prophecy (1967) by John F. Walvoord; Zondervan Publishing House. (NOTE: this book may have been combined with other similar titles by Walvoord into one new volume).
The Return of the Lord (1955) by John F. Walvoord; Zondervan Publishing House Library of Congress Cat. #77-106423.
The Rapture Question (1974) by John F. Walvoord (Revised & Enlarged); The Zondervan Corporation.


[edit] Post-Tribulation school of thought

The Church and the Tribulation (subtitled: A Biblical Examination of Post-tribulationism) (1973) by Robert H. Gundry; Zondervan Corporation.
The Tribulation People (1975) by Arthur Katterjohn with Mark Faculer; Publisher - Creation House.
Lord, When? (1976) by Arthur Katterjohn with Mark Faculer; Publisher - Creation House (Can be used independently or in conjunction with The Tribulation People by the same authors.
The Incredible Cover-Up (1975) by Dave MacPherson; by Logos Internation.
Christians Will Go Through the Tribulation (1978) by Jim McKeever; Alpha Omega Publishing Company.
Now You Can Understand the Book of Revelation (1980) by Jim McKeever; Omega Publications.
City of Revelation subtitled A Book of Forgotten Wisdom (1972) by John Michell; Ballantine Books (first printing: 11/73 Library of Congress Cat. No. 72-88116 SBN 345-23607-6-150. (NOTE: this book contains information on Gematria, a mathematical science).
The Secret Book of Revelation (subtitled: The Last Book of the Bible) ©1979; by Gilles
Quispel, Collins St. James Place, Comdon, 1979.
The Pre-Wrath Rapture of The Church (1990) by Marvin Rosenthal; Thomas Nelson, Inc. ISBN 0-8407-3160-4.


[edit] Amillenial school of thought

1994? (1992) by Harold Camping;; Published by Vantage Press, Inc., 516 West 34th Street, NY, NY 10001. ISBN 0-533-10368-1; Library of Congress Cat. Number is Unknown.
Christ Will Come Again: Hope for the Second Coming of Jesus by Stephen Travis. 2004 Toronto: Clements Publishing. ISBN 1-894667-33-6
In God's Time: The Bible and the Future by Craig C. Hill. 2002 Grand Rapids: Eerdmans. ISBN 0-802860-90-7
Shock Wave 2000! subtitled The Harold Camping 1994 Debacle; (1994) by Robert Sungenis, Scott Temple, and David Allen Lewis; New Leaf Press, Inc., P.O. Box 311, Green Forest AR 72638; ISBN 0-89221-269-1; Library of Congress: 94-67493.


[edit] References


^ Achtemeier, P. J., Harper & Row, P., & Society of Biblical Literature, Harper's Bible Dictionary, San Francisco: HarperCollins Publishers, 1985, ISBN, s.v. "eschatology"
^ J. Dwight Pentecost. Things to Come. Zondervan Publishing House, Grand Rapids, Michigan 49506. ISBN -10: 0310308909 and ISBN-13: 9780310308904. 
^ Dr. Abu Shadi Al-Roubi, Ibnul-Nafees As a Philosopher, Encyclopedia of Islamic World.
^ "The Law of Accelerating Returns"
^ Information about UNICE
^ Bukhari










v • d • e

Time in religion and mythology





Major subjects

Time — Cosmology · Religion · Mythology — Eternity · Arguments for eternity · Immortality

Ritual · Religious festival — Destiny and fate · Predestination · Prophecy · Oracle · Divination · Eschatology




Time Portal





Time and fate deities
of antiquity

Egyptian — Hemsut · Huh
Ancient Near East — Ashima · Ishtar · Mamitu · Mammetun · Manah · Manu the Great · Meni
Greek — The Fates: Moirae — Atropos · Clotho · Lachesis





Ananke · Geras · Horae · Kairos · Khronos · Tyche





Roman — The Fates: Parcae — Decima · Morta · Nona





Camenae: Antevorte/Porrima · Carmenta · Egeria · Postverta
Aeternitas · Anna Perenna · Caerus · Chronos · Fortuna · Vertumnus





Etruscan — Nortia · Tinia
Norse — Norns (Urðr · Verðandi · Skuld)





Day: (Dagr · Skinfaxi) · Night: (Nótt · Hrímfaxi) · Seasons: (Sumarr and Vetr) · Old age: Elli





Baltic — Dalia · Lauma
Polish — Sudz
Romanian — Fates: Ursitoare
Other European — Matres and Matrones · Father Time · Beten
Philippine — Kan-Laon






Hinduism

Kalpa · Manvantara · Yuga · Kāla (time)
Hindu calendar · Hindu units of measurement  · Kali






Buddhism

Wheel of time · Kalachakra · Maitreya






Judaism

Ancient of Days · Ein Sof (Kabbalah)
Hebrew calendar · Missing years · Jewish holidays · Passover · Shabbat






Christianity

Gregorian calendar · Liturgical year · Sabbath in Christianity
Easter · Computus · Moveable feast · Easter controversy · Quartodecimanism · Reform of the date of Easter






Islam

Islamic calendar · Muslim holidays · Predestination in Islam






Other traditions

Dreamtime / The Dreaming · Oracle bone · Maya calendar






Related topics

Week-day names













v • d • e

House of Yahweh





Leadership

Yisrayl Hawkins






Background

Abilene, Texas  · J. G. Hawkins  · Kenya  · New religious movement  · Thisisaknife






Beliefs

613 Laws  · Eschatology  · Nuclear catastrophe  · Nuclear shelters  · Prophecy  · Yahweh  · Yahshua






Books

Apocalypse Pretty Soon













v • d • e

Doomsday








Apocalypse · Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction · Armageddon · Big Crunch · Big Rip · Doomsday argument · Doomsday cult · Doomsday Clock · Doomsday device · Doomsday event · Doomsday film · End of planet Earth · End time · Eschatology · Human extinction · Last Judgement · Planetary Phase of Civilization · Ragnarök · Risks to civilization, humans and planet Earth · Societal collapse · Ten Threats · World War III











Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eschatology"
Categories: Eschatology | Prophecy | Philosophical terminology | Mythemes | Mythology | Greek loanwords | TheologyHidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | Cleanup from June 2008 | All pages needing cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Français
한국어
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 07:03.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
