













Latin - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Latin";
		var wgTitle = "Latin";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "17730";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281373188;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Latin

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Latins and Latin (disambiguation).


Latin
Lingua Latina  



Pronunciation:
/laˈtiːna/


Spoken in:
western Mediterranean






Total speakers:
—


Language family:
Indo-European
Latin


Language codes


ISO 639-1:
None


ISO 639-2:
–


ISO 639-3:
–


Note: This page may contain IPA phonetic symbols in Unicode.


Latin (lingua Latīna, pronounced [laˈtiːna]) is an Italic language, historically spoken in Latium and Ancient Rome. Through the Roman conquest, Latin spread throughout the Mediterranean and a large part of Europe. Languages such as Italian, French, Romanian, Spanish, and Portuguese are descended from Latin, while many others, including English, have inherited and acquired much of their vocabulary from Latin. It was the international language of science and scholarship in central and western Europe until the 17th century. There are two varieties of Latin: Classical Latin, the literary dialect used in poetry and prose, and Vulgar Latin, the form of the language spoken by ordinary people. Vulgar Latin was preserved as a spoken language in much of Europe after the decline of the Roman Empire, and by the 9th century diverged into the various Romance languages.
After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, Latin survived as the lingua franca of educated classes in the West, and this survival was reinforced by the adoption of Latin by the Catholic Church. In this milieu, it survived as a mother tongue at least into the second millennium A.D. and is referred to as Medieval Latin. The Renaissance briefly reinforced the position of Latin as a spoken language, through its adoption by the Renaissance Humanists. After the 16th century, the popularity of Medieval Latin began to decline.
Latin lives on in the form of Ecclesiastical Latin used for edicts and papal bulls issued by the Catholic Church. Much Latin vocabulary is used in science, academia, and law. Classical Latin, the literary language of the late Republic and early Empire, is still taught in many primary, grammar, and secondary schools, often combined with Greek in the study of Classics, though its role has diminished since the early 20th century. The Latin alphabet, together with its modern variants such as the English, Spanish and French alphabets, is the most widely used alphabet in the world.




Contents


1 History

1.1 Orthography
1.2 Legacy


2 Pronunciation
3 Grammar

3.1 Nouns
3.2 Verbs


4 Instruction in Latin
5 Modern use of Latin
6 See also

6.1 Latin language
6.2 Latin culture
6.3 Historical periods


7 Notes
8 References
9 External links

9.1 Learn Latin
9.2 Contemporary usage







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Main article: History of Latin




The Duenos inscription, from the 6th century BC, is the earliest known Old Latin text.


Latin is a member of the Italic languages. In the 9th or 8th century BC, the Italic languages were brought to the Italian peninsula by migrating tribes, and the dialect spoken in Latium around the River Tiber, where Roman civilization would develop, evolved into Latin.
Although surviving Roman literature consists almost entirely of Classical Latin, the actual spoken language of the Western Roman Empire among ordinary people was what is known as Vulgar Latin, which differed from Classical Latin in grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation.[citation needed]
Although Latin long remained the legal and governmental language of the Roman Empire, Greek was the secondary language of the well-educated elite, as much of the literature and philosophy studied by upper class Romans was written in Greek. In the eastern half of the Roman Empire, which would become the Byzantine Empire after the final split of the Eastern and Western Roman Empires in 395, Greek eventually supplanted Latin as the legal and governmental language; and it had long been the lingua franca of Eastern citizens of all classes.

[edit] Orthography
Main article: Latin alphabet




A replica of the Old Roman Cursive inspired by the Vindolanda tablets






The language of Rome has had a profound impact on later cultures, as demonstrated by this Latin Bible from 1407


To write Latin, the Romans used the Latin alphabet, derived from the Old Italic alphabet, which itself was derived from the Greek alphabet. The Latin alphabet flourishes today as the writing system for the Romance, Celtic, Germanic (including English), and some Slavic (such as Polish) languages, among others.
The ancient Romans did not use punctuation; macrons (although they did use apices to distinguish between long and short vowels); the letters j, u or w; lowercase letters (although they did have a cursive script); or interword spacing (though dots were occasionally placed between words that would otherwise be difficult to distinguish). So, a sentence originally written as:

LVGETEOVENERESCVPIDINESQVE

would be rendered in a modern edition as

Lugete, O Veneres Cupidinesque

or with macrons

Lūgēte, Ō Venerēs Cupīdinēsque.

and translated as

Mourn, O you loves and desires.

The Roman cursive script is commonly found on the many wax tablets excavated at sites such as forts, an especially extensive set having been discovered at Vindolanda on Hadrian's Wall in Britain. Curiously enough, most of the Vindolanda tablets show spaces between words, though spaces were avoided in monumental inscriptions from that era.

[edit] Legacy
The expansion of the Roman Empire spread Latin throughout Europe, and, eventually, Vulgar Latin began to diverge into various dialects. Vulgar Latin gradually evolved into a number of distinct Romance languages by the 9th century. These were, for many centuries, only oral languages, Latin still being used for writing.
For example, Latin was still the official language of Portugal until 1296 when Portuguese replaced it. Many of these "daughter" languages, including Italian, French, Spanish, Portuguese, Catalan, Occitan, Romansh and Romanian flourished, the differences between them growing greater and more formal over time.
Out of the Romance languages, Italian is the most conservative descendant of Latin in terms of vocabulary,[1] and Sardinian is the most conservative in terms of phonology.[2]
Some of the differences between Classical Latin and the Romance languages have been used in attempts to reconstruct Vulgar Latin. For example, the Romance languages have distinctive stress on certain syllables, whereas Latin had this feature in addition to distinctive length of vowels. In Italian and Sardo logudorese, there is distinctive length of consonants as well as stress; in Spanish and Portuguese, only distinctive stress; while in French length (for most speakers) and stress are no longer distinctive. Another major distinction between Romance and Latin is that all Romance languages, excluding Romanian, have lost grammatical case.[3]
There has also been a major Latin influence in English. In the medieval period, much of this borrowing occurred through ecclesiastical usage established by Saint Augustine of Canterbury in the 6th century, or indirectly after the Norman Conquest, through the Anglo-Norman language.
From the 16th to the 18th centuries, English writers cobbled together huge numbers of new words from Latin and Greek roots. These words were dubbed "inkhorn" or "inkpot" words, as if they had spilled from a pot of ink. Many of these words were used once by the author and then forgotten, but some were so useful that they survived. Imbibe and extrapolate are inkhorn terms created from Latin words. Many of the most common polysyllabic "English" words are simply adapted Latin forms, in a large number of cases adapted by way of Old French.
Latin mottos are adopted by many organizations.

[edit] Pronunciation
Main article: Latin spelling and pronunciation

[edit] Grammar
Main article: Latin grammar
Latin is a synthetic, fusional language: affixes (often suffixes, which usually encode more than one grammatical category) are attached to fixed stems to express gender, number, and case in adjectives, nouns, and pronouns—a process called declension. Affixes are attached to fixed stems of verbs, as well, to denote person, number, tense, voice, mood, and aspect—a process called conjugation.

[edit] Nouns
Main article: Latin declension
There are six main Latin noun cases. These play a major part in determining a noun's syntactic role in the sentence, so word order is not as important in Latin as it is in some other languages, such as English. Because of noun cases, words can often be moved around in a sentence without significantly altering its meaning, though the emphasis will have been altered. The cases, with their most important uses, are these:

Nominative: used when the noun is the subject of the sentence or phrase, or when functioning as a predicative of the subject. The thing or person acting (e.g., The boy runs. Puer currit.)
Genitive: used when the noun is the possessor of an object (example: "the horse of the man", or "the man's horse"—in both of these cases, the word man would be in the genitive case when translated into Latin). Also indicates material of which something greater is made (example: "a group of people"; "a number of gifts"—people and gifts would be in the genitive case). Some nouns are genitive with special verbs and adjectives too. (e.g., The cup is full of wine. Poculum plenum vini est. The master of the slave had beaten him. Dominus servi eum verberaverat.)
Dative: used when the noun is the indirect object of the sentence, with special verbs, with certain prepositions, and if used as agent, reference, or even possessor. (e.g., The merchant hands over the stola to the woman. Mercator feminae stolam tradit.)
Accusative: used when the noun is the direct object of the sentence/phrase, with certain prepositions, or as the subject of an infinitive. The thing or person having something done to them. (e.g., The slave woman carries the wine. Ancilla vinum portat.)
Ablative: used when the noun demonstrates separation or movement from a source, cause, agent, or instrument, or when the noun is used as the object of certain prepositions; adverbial.
Vocative: used when the noun is used in a direct address. The vocative form of a noun is the same as the nominative except for second declension nouns ending in -us. The -us becomes an -e or if it ends in -ius (such as filius) then the ending is just -i (fili) (as opposed to the plural nominative (filii). (e.g., "Master!" shouted the slave. "Domine!" servus clamavit.)

There is also a seventh case, called the Locative case, used to indicate a location (corresponding to the English "in" or "at"). This is far less common than the other six cases of Latin nouns and usually applies to cities, small towns, and small islands, along with a few common nouns. In the first and second declension singular, its form coincides with the genitive (Roma becomes Romae, "in Rome"). In the plural, and in the other declensions, it coincides with the dative and ablative (Athenae becomes Athenis, "at Athens").
Latin lacks definite and indefinite articles; thus puer currit can mean either "the boy runs" or "a boy runs".

[edit] Verbs
Main article: Latin conjugation
Verbs in Latin are usually identified by four main conjugations, groups of verbs with similarly inflected forms. The first conjugation is typified by active infinitive forms ending in -āre, the second by active infinitives ending in -ēre, the third by infinitives ending in -ere, and the fourth by active infinitives ending in -īre. However, there are exceptions to these rules. Further, there is a subset of the 3rd conjugation, the -iō verbs, which behave somewhat like the 4th conjugation. There are six general tenses in Latin (present, imperfect, future, perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect), three grammatical moods (indicative, imperative and subjunctive, in addition to the infinitive, participle, gerund, gerundive and supine), three persons (first, second, and third), two numbers (singular and plural) , two voices (active and passive), and a few aspects. Verbs are described by four principal parts:

The first principal part is the first person singular, present tense, indicative mood, active voice form of the verb (or passive voice for verbs lacking an active voice).
The second principal part is the present infinitive active (or passive, as above) form.
The third principal part is the first person singular, perfect indicative active (or passive when there is no active) form.
The fourth principal part is the supine form, or alternatively, the nominative singular, perfect passive participle form of the verb. The fourth principal part can show either one gender of the participle, or all three genders (-us for masculine, -a for feminine, and -um for neuter). It can also be the future participle when the verb cannot be made passive.


[edit] Instruction in Latin
Main article: Instruction in Latin




A multi-volume Latin dictionary in the University Library of Graz


The linguistic element of Latin courses offered in secondary schools and in universities is primarily geared toward an ability to translate Latin texts into modern languages, rather than using the language for the purpose of oral communication, as many modern concepts, such as those encountered in technology, have no accepted modern linguistic equivalents, and no formal organization for adopting new words. Thus the skills of reading and writing are heavily emphasized, while speaking and listening skills are de-emphasized (usually passively, through omission).
However, there is a growing movement, sometimes known as the Living Latin movement, whose supporters believe that Latin can be taught in the same way that modern "living" languages are taught, i.e., as a means of both spoken and written communication. This approach to learning the language assists speculative insight into how ancient authors spoke and incorporated sounds of the language stylistically; patterns in Latin poetry and literature can be difficult to identify without an understanding of the sounds of words.
Living Latin instruction is provided in the Vatican, and some institutions in the U.S. like the University of Kentucky. In Great Britain, the Classical Association encourages this approach, and Latin language books describing the adventures of a mouse called Minimus have been published. In the United States, the National Junior Classical League (with more than 50,000 members) encourages high school students to pursue the study of Latin, and the National Senior Classical League encourages college students to continue their studies of the language.
Many international auxiliary languages have been heavily influenced by Latin. Interlingua, which lays claim to a sizeable following, is sometimes considered a simplified, modern version of the language. Latino sine Flexione, popular in the early 20th century, is a language created from Latin with its inflections dropped.
Latin translations of modern literature such as Paddington Bear, Winnie the Pooh, Olivia, Tintin, Asterix, Harry Potter, Le Petit Prince, Max und Moritz, How the Grinch Stole Christmas, and The Cat in the Hat are intended to bolster interest in the language.

[edit] Modern use of Latin
Main article: Recent Latin




The signs at Wallsend Metro station are in English and Latin as a tribute to Wallsend's role as one of the outposts of the Roman empire.


Today, Latin terminology is widely used, among other fields, in philosophy, medicine, biology, and law, in terms and abbreviations such as subpoena duces tecum, q.i.d. (quater in die: "four times a day"), and inter alia (among other things). The Latin terms are used in isolation, as technical terms.
The largest organization that still uses Latin in official contexts is the Roman Catholic Church (particularly in the Latin Rite). Although the Mass of Paul VI is usually said in the local vernacular language, it can be and often is said in Latin, particularly in the Vatican. Indeed, Latin is still the official standard language of the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church, and the Second Vatican Council merely authorized that the liturgical books be translated and optionally used in the vernacular languages.
Latin is the official language of the Holy See.
In situations when lingual neutrality is preferred, such as in scientific names for organisms, Latin is typically the language of choice.
Some films of relevant ancient settings, such as Sebastiane and The Passion of the Christ, have been made with dialogue in Latin for purposes of realism. Occasionally, Latin dialogues are used due to its association with religion or philosophy, in such film/TV series as the Exorcist and Lost (Jughead). Subtitles are usually employed for the benefit of audiences who do not understand Latin. There are also songs written with Latin lyrics.
Many organizations today have Latin mottos, such as "Semper Paratus" (always ready), the motto of the United States Coast Guard, and "Semper fidelis" (always faithful), the motto of the United States Marine Corps. Several of the states of the United States also have Latin mottos, such as "Montani Semper Liberi" (Mountaineers are always free), the state motto of West Virginia, and "Esse Quam Videri" (To be rather than to seem), that of North Carolina.
The University Orator at the University of Cambridge makes a speech in Latin marking the achievements of each of the honorands at the annual Honorary Degree Congregations. These degree ceremonies as well as the formal proceedings of other degree ceremonies are conducted in Latin. Harvard also holds a portion of its graduation ceremonies in Latin.[citation needed]
In 2009, CBS News reported that Bournemouth, England, had ordered all of its staff to stop using Latin. [4]

[edit] See also

[edit] Latin language


AP Latin Literature
Latin alphabet

Alphabets derived from the Latin
Latin characters in Unicode

Latin-1
Western Latin character sets (computing)


List of Latin letters


Latin encyclopedia

Latin Wikipedia (Vicipaedia)


Latin grammar

Latin conjugation
Latin declension
Latin mnemonics
Latin school
Golden line


Latin literature

Latin poetry
List of Latin language poets
Panegyrici Latini


Latin profanity
Latin spelling and pronunciation

Latin regional pronunciation
Traditional English pronunciation of Latin


Latinism

Greek and Latin roots in English
Latin honors
Latin influence in English
Latinisation
List of Germanic and Latinate equivalents in English
List of Latin abbreviations
List of Latin and Greek words commonly used in systematic names
List of Latin phrases
List of Latin words with English derivatives
List of Latinised names
List of legal Latin terms
List of songs with Latin lyrics


List of Latin place names in Europe



[edit] Latin culture

Ancient Rome

Culture of ancient Rome
Romanization (cultural)


Brocard
Carmen Possum
Dog Latin
pig Latin
Hiberno-Latin
Interlingua
Internationalism
Judeo-Latin
Latin liturgy

Latin Mass
Latin Rite


Macaronic Latin
Latino sine Flexione
Loeb Classical Library
Romance languages
Romance peoples


[edit] Historical periods




Ages of Latin
v • d • e





—75 BC   
75 BC – 200   
200 – 900   
900 – 1300   
1300 – 1500   
1500 – present  
1900 – present



Old Latin   
Classical Latin   
Late Latin   
Medieval Latin   
Renaissance Latin  
New Latin   
Contemporary Latin


See also: History of Latin, Latin literature, Vulgar Latin, Ecclesiastical Latin, Romance languages, Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum




[edit] Notes


^ Grimes, Barbara F. (October 1996). Barbara F. Grimes. ed. Ethnologue: Languages of the World. Consulting Editors: Richard S. Pittman & Joseph E. Grimes (thirteenth ed.). Dallas, Texas: Summer Institute of Linguistics, Academic Pub. ISBN 1-55671-026-7. 
^ Foreign Languages: Italian, specifically, "Sardinian in fact conserves many archaic features from Latin which disappeared in Italian, such as the hard k-sound in words like chelu, where Italian has cielo."
^ Columbia University Language Resource Center
^ The Death Of Latin, CBS News, March 26, 2009



Clackson, James, and Geoffrey Horrocks, The Blackwell History of the Latin Language (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2007), Pp. viii, 324.


[edit] References


Bennett, Charles E., Latin Grammar (Allyn and Bacon, Chicago, 1908)
N. Vincent: "Latin", in The Romance Languages, M. Harris and N. Vincent, eds., (Oxford Univ. Press. 1990), ISBN 0-19-520829-3
Waquet, Françoise, Latin, or the Empire of a Sign: From the Sixteenth to the Twentieth Centuries (Verso, 2003) ISBN 1-85984-402-2; translated from the French by John Howe.
Wheelock, Frederic, Latin: An Introduction (Collins, 6th ed., 2005) ISBN 0-06-078423-7
Frank Palmer]. Grammar



[edit] External links




Latin edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia




Latin edition of Wiktionary, the free dictionary/thesaurus





Wikibooks has a book on the topic of
Latin







Latin edition of Wikisource, the free-content library




Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Latin proverbs



English - Latin A search engine for English to Latin translations
Open Latin Dictionary English-Latin dictionary with wiki-like user editable vocabulary
Dictionary of Latin phrases
LATdict Online Latin Dictionary currently contains 39,225 Latin word entries, and 229,345 searchable English words
Latin language history and Classical Latin texts translated into English.
Latin dictionary access to thousands of Latin terms, Latin phrases, Latin expressions and Latin words.
Latin dictionary plugin for Mac OS X's Dictionary.app.
Latin-English dictionary and Latin grammar, from the University of Notre Dame
Latin Etymology, An Etymological Dictionary of the Latin Language
Latin for Beginners at Publicliterature.org
Latin Language, origin and history, grammar, vocabulary, texts, etc.
Latin Online from the University of Texas at Austin
Latinum — Anglice et Latine — Extensive Latin language learning podcast.
National Latin Exam
Omniamundamundis, Latin texts from fourteen ancient Roman authors
Online Latin Community Web forum for discussion of Latin language both in Latin and in [1] (English)
Schola Latina Universalis, a version of Comenius's Orbis Sensualium Pictus
The Latin Library A collection of Latin texts: classical, Christian, medieval, and modern. See also The Latin Library
The Perseus Project, a resource for classical languages and literature
Understanding Anatomical Latin, explaining common medical/anatomical forms


[edit] Learn Latin

Academia Thules offers online courses on Roman History, Philosophy, Archaeology, Religion, Language, Military Arts, Law.
Advanced Latin - covers the next stages.
Beginners' Latin - UK Government website for learning Latin (UK National Archives)
Classical Latin course - a free online course
Free public domain Latin textbooks - from TextKit.com
Latin for Beginners - an ebook of a 1911 Latin textbook
Latin grammar - interactive (Java)
MP3 Audio of the Latin Text 1962 Ordo Missae
Simplicissimus - free Ecclesiastical Latin course
Robinson Crusoe in Latin


[edit] Contemporary usage

An Drouizig - Latin Spell-checker
Classical Academic Press, online Latin vocabulary review
Ephemeris, a Latin newspaper online
Latin Google, Latin version of Google
Memoria Press, editorial articles about the benefits of the study of Latin
Nuntii Latini, weekly world news in Classical Latin published by Radio Finland
Schola - social network where only Latin is used
Vita Latina by the University of Montpellier








v • d • e

Ancient Rome topics





Timeline





Epochs

Foundation · Monarchy · Republic · Empire · (Principate and Dominate) · Decline · Western Empire / Eastern Empire









Constitution

History · Constitution of the Kingdom / the Republic / the Empire / the Late Empire · Senate · Legislative assemblies (Curiate, Century, Tribal, Plebeian)  · Executive magistrates






Government

Curia · Forum · Cursus honorum · Collegiality · Emperor · Legatus · Dux · Officium · Praefectus · Vicarius · Vigintisexviri · Lictor · Magister militum · Imperator · Princeps senatus · Pontifex Maximus · Augustus · Caesar · Tetrarch · Province






Magistrates





Ordinary


Tribune · Quaestor · Aedile · Praetor · Consul · Censor · Promagistrate · Governor







Extraordinary


Dictator · Magister Equitum · Decemviri · Consular Tribune · Triumvir · Rex









Law

Twelve Tables · Roman citizenship · Auctoritas · Imperium · Status · Litigation






Military

Borders · Establishment · Structure · Campaigns · Technology · Political control · Frontiers and fortifications (Castra) · Strategy · Engineering · Army (Legion • Infantry tactics • Personal equipment • Siege engines) · Navy (Fleet) · Auxiliaries · Decorations and punishments






Society

Theatre · Social class · Cuisine · Education · Literature · Art · Music · Architecture · Religion (Funeral • Persecution • Imperial cult) · Mythology · Forum · SPQR · Technology · Engineering · Calendar · Clothing · Festivals · Circus · Wine · Women · Marriage · Prostitution · Slavery · Deforestation






Economy

Agriculture · Commerce · Finance · Currency · Republican currency  · Imperial currency






Language
(Latin)





History · Romance languages







(Versions)


Old · Classical · Vulgar · Medieval · Renaissance · New · Recent · Ecclesiastical









Writers

Apuleius · Catullus · Cicero · Curtius Rufus · Horace  · Julius Caesar · Juvenal · Livy · Lucretius · Ovid · Petronius · Plautus  · Pliny the Elder · Pliny the Younger · Propertius · Sallust · Seneca · Suetonius · Tacitus · Virgil · Vitruvius






Lists

Topics · Wars · Battles · Generals · Legions · Emperors · Geographers · Institutions · Laws · Consuls · Distinguished women






Portal








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latin"
Categories: Latin language | Ancient languages | Fusional languages | Languages of Italy | Languages of Vatican City | Latino-Faliscan languagesHidden categories: Articles containing Latin language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
Arpetan
Asturianu
Avañe'ẽ
Azərbaycan
Bamanankan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bikol Central
Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Chavacano de Zamboanga
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Fiji Hindi
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
贛語
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ქართული
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Kongo
Kurdî / كوردی
Ladino
ລາວ
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lingála
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
Malagasy
മലയാളം
मराठी
مصرى
Bahasa Melayu
Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
नेपाल भाषा
日本語
Nnapulitano
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
O'zbek
Tok Pisin
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Словѣ́ньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Українська
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
Walon
吴语
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
粵語
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 21:35.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
