











Norway - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Norway";
		var wgTitle = "Norway";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "21241";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281081445;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Norway

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Norway (disambiguation).
"Nords" redirects here. For other uses, see Nord.








This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)




Kingdom of Norway
Kongeriket Norge










Flag
Coat of arms





Motto: 
Royal: Alt for Norge / Alt for Noreg
("Everything for Norway")

1814 Eidsvoll oath:
Enig og tro til Dovre faller
("United and loyal until the mountains of Dovre crumble")



Anthem: Ja, vi elsker dette landet
Yes, we love this country
Royal anthem: Kongesangen
Song of the King







Location of  Norway  (orange)
on the European continent  (white)





Capital
(and largest city)
Oslo
59°56′N 10°41′E﻿ / ﻿59.933°N 10.683°E﻿ / 59.933; 10.683


Official languages
Norwegian (Bokmål and Nynorsk)1


Ethnic groups 
90.3% Norwegian, Sami, 9.7% other[1] (2009)


Demonym
Norwegian


Government
Parliamentary democracy under constitutional monarchy


 - 
Monarch
Harald V


 - 
Prime Minister
Jens Stoltenberg (Ap)


 - 
Storting President
Thorbjørn Jagland (Ap)


 - 
Current coalition
Red-Green Coalition


Establishment



 - 
Unification
872 


 - 
Constitution
17 May 1814 


 - 
Independence from union with Sweden

declared 7 June 1905 


Area


 - 
Total
385,252 km2 (61st2)
148,746 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
7.0


Population


 - 
2009 estimate
4,805,437 (as of January 29, 2009) (115th)


 - 
Density
12/km2 (202nd)
31/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2008 estimate


 - 
Total
$259.049 billion[2] (43rd)


 - 
Per capita
$55,198[2] (IMF) (2nd)


GDP (nominal)
2008 estimate


 - 
Total
$481.148 billion[2] (23rd)


 - 
Per capita
$102,524[2] (IMF) (2nd)


Gini (2000)
25.8 (low) (6th)


HDI (2008)
▬ 0.968 (high) (1st)


Currency
Norwegian krone (NOK)


Time zone
CET (UTC+1)


 - 
Summer (DST)
CEST (UTC+2)


Drives on the
right


Internet TLD
.no, .sj and .bv


Calling code
47


1
Northern Sami is used in the municipal administration of six municipalities, Lule Sami in one, Finnish/Kven in one, and Southern Sami in one.


2
Includes Svalbard and Jan Mayen.


3
This percentage is for the mainland and also includes glaciers[3]


4
Statistics Norway estimation (5 September 2006) using variant MMMM from Table 10[4]


5
Two more TLDs have been assigned, but to date not used: .sj for Svalbard and Jan Mayen; .bv for Bouvet Island.


Norway  /ˈnɔrweɪ/ (help·info) (Norwegian: Norge (Bokmål) or Noreg (Nynorsk)), officially the Kingdom of Norway, is a constitutional monarchy in Northern Europe that occupies the western portion of the Scandinavian Peninsula. The majority of the country shares a border to the east with Sweden; its northernmost region is bordered by Finland to the south and Russia to the east. The United Kingdom and the Faroe Islands lie to its west across the North Sea, and Denmark lies south of its southern tip across the Skagerrak Strait. Norway's extensive coastline, facing the North Atlantic Ocean and the Barents Sea, is home to its famous fjords.
In the 1920s, Norway annexed Jan Mayen and was given the sovereignty over the Arctic archipelago of Svalbard under the Spitsbergen Treaty. The polar territories of Bouvet Island, Peter I Island and Queen Maud Land are external dependencies, but not parts of Norway. Norwegian claim for a sector of Antarctic mainland called Queen Maud Land is not recognised by the international community.
Since World War II Norway has experienced rapid economic growth, and is now amongst the wealthiest countries in the world.[5][6][7] Norway is the world's fourth largest oil exporter[8] and the petroleum industry accounts for around a quarter of GDP.[9]
Norway also has rich resources of gas fields, hydropower, fish, forests, and minerals. Norway was the second largest exporter of seafood (in value, after China) in 2006.[10] Other main industries include food processing, shipbuilding, metals, chemicals, mining, fishing and pulp and paper products. Norway has a Scandinavian welfare model and the largest capital reserve per capita of any nation.
Norway was ranked highest of all countries in human development from 2001 to 2006, and shares first place with Iceland from 2007 to 2008.[11] It was also rated the most peaceful country in the world in a 2007 survey by Global Peace Index.[12] It is a founding member of NATO and member of the EEA.




Contents


1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Pre-historic and Viking period
2.2 Kalmar Union, union with Denmark
2.3 Union with Sweden (19th century)
2.4 Modern history
2.5 Post war history


3 Geography, climate and environment
4 Politics and government
5 Foreign relations and military
6 Subdivisions and cities
7 Economy

7.1 Resources


8 Education
9 Demography

9.1 Religion
9.2 Languages


10 Culture

10.1 Literature
10.2 Music


11 See also
12 References
13 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Etymology





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)


Norway is officially called Kongeriket Norge in the Bokmål written norm, and Kongeriket Noreg in the Nynorsk written norm. In other languages spoken in Norway, the country is known as:

Northern Sami: Norga, or Norgga gonagasriika
Lule Sami: Vuodna or Vuona gånågisrijkka
Southern Sami: Nøørje or Nøørjen gånkarijhke
Finnish/Kven: Norja or Norjan kuningaskunta

The usual Old Norse form of Norway is Noregr and the usual medieval Latin form Nor(th)vegia, though the earliest known written occurrence of the name is English (in the late-ninth-century account of the travels of Ohthere of Hålogaland), in the form norðweg.[13][14] Although some medieval texts attribute the name to a mythical King Nórr, it is conventionally derived today from Old Norse *norðvegr, meaning "the northern route" (the way northwards). There is, however, some possibility that medieval forms in norð-, north- are folk-etymologisations, and that the name has other origins.[14]
The Old Norse and nynorsk forms are quite similar to a Sami word that means "along the coast" or "along the sea" — realized as nuorrek in contemporary Lule Sami. The presence of the archaic prosecutive case marker (sometimes also called prolative in Finno-Ugric language research) supports the claim that the Sami word is indigenous and not a borrowing from North Germanic languages.[citation needed] Either way, competition over the linguistic origins of the name can be seen to reflect cultural tension between Sami ethnic groups and the dominant culture of Norway, which derives its identity from an Old Norse-speaking past.

History
Main article: History of Norway





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)



Pre-historic and Viking period
Archaeological findings indicate that Norway was inhabited at least since early in the 6th millennium BC. Most historians agree that the core of the populations colonizing Scandinavia came from the present-day Germany.[15] In the first centuries AD, Norway consisted of a number of petty kingdoms. According to tradition, Harald Fairhair (Harald Hårfagre) unified them into one, in 872 AD after the Battle of Hafrsfjord in Stavanger, thus becoming the first king of a united Norway.




Rock carvings at Alta.


The Viking age, 8-11th centuries AD, was characterized by expansion and emigration. Many Norwegians left the country to live in Iceland, the Faroe Islands, Greenland and parts of Britain and Ireland. The modern-day Irish cities of Limerick, Dublin, and Waterford were founded by Norwegian settlers.[16] Norse traditions were slowly replaced by Christianity in the 10th and 11th centuries. This is largely attributed to the missionary kings Olav Tryggvasson and St. Olav. Haakon the Good was Norway's first Christian king, in the mid tenth century, though his attempt to introduce the religion was rejected.

Kalmar Union, union with Denmark
In 1319, Sweden and Norway were united under King Magnus Eriksson. In 1349, the Black Death killed between 50% and 60% of the population,[17] resulting in a period of decline, both socially and economically. Ostensibly, royal politics at the time resulted in several personal unions between the Nordic countries, eventually bringing the thrones of Norway, Denmark, and Sweden under the control of Queen Margrethe I of Denmark when the country entered into the Kalmar Union. Although Sweden broke out of the union in 1521, Norway remained until 1814, a total of 436 years. During the national romanticism of the 19th century, this period was by some referred to as the "400-Year Night", since all of the kingdom's royal, intellectual, and administrative power was centred in Copenhagen, Denmark. Other factors also contributed to Norway's decline in this period[citation needed]. With the introduction of Protestantism in 1536, the archbishopric in Trondheim was dissolved, and the church's incomes were distributed to the court in Copenhagen in Denmark instead. Norway lost the steady stream of pilgrims to the relics of St. Olav at the Nidaros shrine, and with them, much of the contact with cultural and economic life in the rest of Europe. Additionally, Norway saw its land area decrease in the 17th century with the loss of the provinces Båhuslen, Jemtland, and Herjedalen to Sweden, as a result of wars between Denmark–Norway and Sweden.

Union with Sweden (19th century)




The 1814 constitutional assembly, painted by Oscar Wergeland.


After Denmark–Norway was attacked by Great Britain, it entered into an alliance with Napoleon, with the war leading to dire conditions and mass starvation in 1812. As the Danish kingdom found itself on the losing side in 1814 it was forced to cede Norway to the kingdom of Sweden, while the old Norwegian provinces of Iceland, Greenland and the Faroe Islands remained with the Danish crown.[18] Norway took this opportunity to declare independence, adopted a constitution based on American and French models, and elected the Danish crown prince Christian Fredrik as king on 17 May 1814. This caused the Norwegian-Swedish War to break out between Sweden and Norway but as Sweden's military was not strong enough to defeat the Norwegian forces outright and Norway's treasury was not large enough to support a protracted war, and as British and Russian navies blockaded the Norwegian coast,[19] Norway agreed to enter a personal union with Sweden. Under this arrangement, Norway kept its liberal constitution and independent institutions, except for the foreign service.
This period also saw the rise of the Norwegian romantic nationalism, as Norwegians sought to define and express a distinct national character. The movement covered all branches of culture, including literature (Henrik Wergeland, Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson, Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Jørgen Moe, Henrik Ibsen), painting (Hans Gude, Edvard Munch, Adolph Tidemand), music (Edvard Grieg), and even language policy, where attempts to define a native written language for Norway led to today's two official written forms for Norwegian: Bokmål and Nynorsk.

Modern history
Main article: Occupation of Norway by Nazi Germany
Christian Michelsen, a Norwegian shipping magnate and statesman, Prime Minister of Norway from 1905 to 1907 played a central role in the peaceful separation of Norway from Sweden on 7 June 1905. After a national referendum confirmed the people's preference for a monarchy over a republic, the Norwegian government offered the throne of Norway to the Danish Prince Carl and Parliament unanimously elected him king. He took the name of Haakon VII, after the medieval kings of independent Norway. In 1898, all men were granted universal suffrage, followed by all women in 1913.




Scenes from the Norwegian Campaign in 1940.


During World War I, Norway was a neutral country. In reality, however, Norway had been pressured by Great Britain to hand over increasingly large parts of its massive merchant fleet to Britain at low rates, as well as to join the trade blockade against Germany. Norway also claimed neutrality during World War II, but was invaded by German forces on 9 April 1940. Norway was unprepared for the German surprise attack, so military resistance only lasted for two months. The armed forces in the north launched an offensive against the German forces in the Battles of Narvik, until they were forced to surrender on June 10 after losing allied help following the fall of France. King Haakon and the Norwegian government continued the fight from exile in Rotherhithe, London. On the day of the invasion, the collaborative leader of the small National-Socialist party Nasjonal Samling — Vidkun Quisling — tried to seize power, but was forced by the German occupiers to step aside. Real power was wielded by the leader of the German occupation authority, Reichskommissar Josef Terboven. Quisling, as minister president, later formed a collaborationist government under German control. During the five years of Nazi occupation, Norwegians built a resistance movement which fought the German occupation forces with both armed resistance and civil disobedience. More important to the Allied war effort, however, was the role of the Norwegian merchant navy. At the time of the invasion, Norway had the fourth largest merchant marine in the world. It was led by the Norwegian shipping company Nortraship under the Allies throughout the war and took part in every war operation from the evacuation of Dunkirk to the Normandy landings.

Post war history
From 1945 to 1961, the Labour Party held an absolute majority in the parliament. The government, lead by prime minster Einar Gerhardsen embarked on a program inspired by Keynesian economics, emphasizing state financed industrialization, cooperation between trade unions and employers' organizations. Many measures of state control of the economy imposed during the war were continued, although the rationing of dairy products were lifted in 1949, while price control and rationing of housing and cars continued as long as until 1960.
The war time alliance with Britain and the US was continued in the post war years. Although pursuing the goal of a socialist economy, the Labour Party distanced itself from the communists (especially after Soviet seizure of power in Czechoslovakia in 1948), and strengthened its foreign policy and defence policy ties with the US. Norway received Marshall aid from 1947, joined the OEEC one year later and NATO in 1949.
Around 1975, both the proportion and absolute number of workers in industry peaked. Since then labour intensive industries and services like factory mass production and shipping have largely been off sourced. In 1969 Philips Petroleum discovered petroleum resources at the Ekofisk field. In 1973 the government founded the State oil company, Statoil. Oil production didn't become a net income before the early 1980s due to the heavy investments in the petroleum industry required.
Norway was one of the founding members of European Free Trade Area (EFTA). Two referendums to join the European Union failed by narrow margins in 1972 and 1994. In 1981 a conservative government lead by Kåre Willoch replaced Labour with a policy of stimulating the stagflated economy by tax cuts, economic liberalization, deregulation of markets and measures to curbing of the record high inflation (13,6 % 1981).
Norway's first woman prime minister, Gro Harlem Brundtland of the Labour party, continued many of the reforms of her right wing predecessor, while backing traditional Labour issues like social security, environmentalism and gender equality. By the late 1990s, Norway had paid off foreign debt and started accumulating a sovereign wealth fund. Since the 1990s, one of the dividing issues of politics has been the level of spending of petroleum income.

Geography, climate and environment
Main article: Geography of Norway
See also: Geology of Norway




A satellite image of continental Norway in winter






Typical Norwegian lowland landscape near the Trondheimsfjord






Some of the larger islands along the coastline of northern Norway.


Norway comprises the western part of Scandinavia in Northern Europe. The rugged coastline, broken by huge fjords and thousands of islands, stretches over 2,500 km and over 83,000 km including the fjords and islands. Norway shares a 2,542 km land border with Sweden, Finland, and a short border line to Russia at the east. To the west and south, Norway is bordered by the Norwegian Sea, the North Sea, and Skagerak. The Barents Sea washes on Norway's northern coasts.
At 385,252 km² (including Svalbard and Jan Mayen), Norway is slightly larger than Germany, but, unlike Germany, much of the country is dominated by mountainous or high terrain, with a great variety of natural features caused by prehistoric glaciers and varied topography. The most noticeable of these are the fjords: deep grooves cut into the land flooded by the sea following the end of the Ice Age. The longest is Sognefjorden. Norway also contains many glaciers and waterfalls.
The land is mostly made of hard granite and gneiss rock, but slate, sandstone and limestone are also common, and the lowest elevations contain marine deposits. Due to the Gulf Stream and prevailing westerlies, Norway experiences warmer temperatures and more precipitation than expected at such northern latitudes, especially along the coast. The mainland experiences four distinct seasons, with colder winters and less precipitation inland. The northernmost part has a mostly maritime Subarctic climate, while Svalbard has an Arctic tundra climate. The southern and western parts of Norway experiences more precipitation, and have milder winters than the south-eastern part. The lowlands around the capital Oslo has the warmest and sunniest summers, but also cold weather and snow in wintertime (especially inland). Average temperatures have risen the last decades, decreasing the amount of days with snow cover in the lowlands.
Due to Norway's high latitude, there are large seasonal variations in daylight. From late May to late July, the sun never completely descends beneath the horizon in areas north of the Arctic Circle (hence Norway's description as the "Land of the Midnight Sun") and the rest of the country experiences up to 20 hours of daylight per day. Conversely, from late November to late January, the sun never rises above the horizon in the north, and daylight hours are very short in the rest of the country. Throughout Norway, one will find stunning and dramatic scenery and landscape. The west coast of southern Norway and the coast of North Norway are among the most impressive coastlines anywhere in the world.
The 2008 Environmental Performance Index put Norway in second place, after Switzerland, based on the environmental performance of the country's policies.[20]





The Hardangerfjord, one of the many fjords for which Norway is famous




Politics and government
Main article: Politics of Norway




Harald V, the current King of Norway






Jens Stoltenberg, the current Prime Minister of Norway.


Norway is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary system of government. Oslo is the capital city.
The Royal Family of Norway is a branch of the princely family of House of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg, originally from Schleswig-Holstein in Germany. Since 1991 the king has been Harald V.
The Constitution of Norway was adopted in 1814. It grants important executive powers to the King, but these are effectively always exercised by the Norwegian Council of State (the cabinet) in the name of the King. The king does act as ceremonial head of state and a symbol of national unity and retains some reserve powers, which were used in World War II during the German occupation, when Haakon VII said he would abdicate rather than appoint a collaborationist government led by Vidkun Quisling. The King also opens the Parliament every October, receives ambassadors to the Norwegian court, and acts as the symbolic supreme commander of the Norwegian Defence Force and the High Protector of the Church of Norway, the established Lutheran church.
The Council of State consists of a Prime Minister (the head of government) and other ministers, formally appointed by the King. Parliamentarism has evolved since 1884 and entails that the cabinet must not have the parliament against it, and that the appointment by the King is a formality when there is a clear majority in Parliament for a party or a coalition of parties. After elections resulting in no clear majority to any party or coalition, the leader of the party most likely to be able to form a government is appointed Prime Minister by the King. Norway has often been ruled by minority governments.
The King has government meetings every Friday at the Royal Palace (Council of State), but the government decisions are decided in advance in government conferences headed by the Prime Minister every Tuesday and Thursday. In order to form a government, more than half the membership of the Council of State is required to belong to the Church of Norway. Currently, this means at least ten out of 19 members. After the negotiations of looser ties between the church and the state, it was decided that this requirement will be abolished in the near future.
The Norwegian parliament is the Storting (Stortinget). It currently has 169 members (an increase from 165 effective in the September 2005 elections). The members are elected from the 19 counties for four-year terms according to a system of proportional representation. An additional 19 seats ("levelling seats") are allocated on a nationwide basis to make the representation in parliament correspond better with the popular vote. There is a 4 percent election threshold to gain levelling seats.
The Storting is a qualified unicameral body. After elections it elects a quarter of its membership to form the Lagting, a sort of upper house, with the remaining three quarters forming the Odelsting, a lower house. When voting the two chambers divide, and this division of chambers is also used on very rare occasions such as impeachment. The original idea in 1814 was probably to have the Lagting act as an actual upper house, and the senior and more experienced members of the Storting were placed here. Laws are in most cases proposed by the government through a Member of the Council of State, or in some cases by a member of the Odelsting in case of repeated disagreement in the joint Storting. In modern times the Lagting rarely disagrees, effectively rubber-stamping the Odelsting's decisions.




The Norwegian parliament; Stortinget


Impeachment cases are very rare and may be brought against Members of the Council of State, of the Supreme Court (Høyesterett), or of the Storting for criminal offenses which they may have committed in their official capacity. The last case was in 1927, when Prime Minister Abraham Berge was acquitted.
Constitutional amendments of 20 February 2007 provide for:

The abolition of division after the 2009 general election (making the Storting fully unicameral). Legislation will go through two readings, or three in case of dissent, before being passed and sent to the King for assent.
Changes in impeachment procedures. The current system (indictments raised by the Odelsting and judged by the Lagting and the Supreme Court justices as part of the High Court of the Realm) will be replaced by new system (indictments raised by the Storting in plenary session; impeachment cases will be heard by the five highest-ranking Supreme Court justices and six lay members in one of the Supreme Court courtrooms, instead of the Lagting chamber; Storting representatives no longer perform as lay judges).

The judiciary is referred to as the Courts of Justice of Norway. It consists of a Supreme Court of 18 permanent judges and a chief justice, appellate courts, city and district courts, and conciliation councils. Judges attached to regular courts are appointed by the king-in-council.
Each December Norway gives a Christmas tree to the United Kingdom in thanks for the UK's assistance during World War II. A ceremony takes place to erect the tree in Trafalgar Square.[21]
In its 2007 Worldwide Press Freedom Index, Reporters Without Borders ranked Norway at a shared 1st place (with Iceland) out of 169 countries.[22]

Foreign relations and military
Main articles: Foreign relations of Norway and Norwegian Armed Forces
Norway maintains embassies in 86 countries around the world.[23] 60 countries maintain an embassy in Norway, all of them in the capital, Oslo.[24]
Norway is a founding member of the United Nations, NATO and the Council of Europe. The Norwegian electorate has twice rejected treaties of accession to the European Union (EU). Most legislation made by the EU is however implemented in the country due to Norway's membership in the European Economic Area (EEA). This ensures Norway's access to the EU's internal market. See also: Norway and the European Union.




HNoMS Fridtjof Nansen


The Norwegian Armed Forces currently numbers about 30,000 personnel, including civilian employees.[citation needed] According to the current (as of 2006) mobilization plans, the strength during full mobilization is approximately 130,000 combatant[citation needed]. Norway has mandatory military service for males (6–12 months of training) and voluntary service for females.[citation needed]
Because of the effect of the failed neutrality of Norway during World War II and their subsequent surrender to Germany in June 1940,[25] Norway was one of the founding nations of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on 4 April 1949, thus abandoning the neutrality policy first imposed. It is interesting to note that Norway claims to have never formally surrendered to the German invasion. Their monarchy and some government officials fled to the United Kingdom.
Norway contributes with forces in international missions organised by NATO, the United Nations (UN) and the European Union (EU),[26] notably in:[citation needed]

Kosovo: Kosovo Force (KFOR) and United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
Afghanistan: International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
Bosnia: (in NATO/EUFOR HQ and Liaison Observer Team in Cazin)
Sudan: United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS)


Subdivisions and cities
Main articles: Subdivisions of Norway and Cities of Norway
Norway is divided into nineteen first-level administrative regions known as fylker ("counties", singular fylke) and 430 second-level kommuner ("municipalities", singular kommune). The fylke is the intermediate administration between state and municipality. The King is represented in every county by a Fylkesmann.




A geopolitical map of Norway, showing the 19 fylker, the Svalbard (Spitsbergen) and Jan Mayen islands, which are part of the Norwegian kingdom.


The counties of Norway are:




Akershus
Aust-Agder
Buskerud
Finnmark
Hedmark
Hordaland
Møre og Romsdal
Nord-Trøndelag
Nordland
Oppland




Oslo
Østfold
Rogaland
Sogn og Fjordane
Sør-Trøndelag
Telemark
Troms
Vest-Agder
Vestfold





The 10 most populous municipalities in Norway

Municipality
Population
Area
Density


Oslo
&0000000000568809.000000568,809
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"453 km²
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"1,256/km²


Bergen
&0000000000250985.000000250,985
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"465 km²
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"540/km²


Trondheim
&0000000000166708.000000166,708
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"341 km²
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"489/km²


Stavanger
&0000000000120798.000000120,798
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"71 km²
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"1,701/km²


Bærum
&0000000000108967.000000108,967
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"191 km²
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"571/km²


Kristiansand
&0000000000079498.00000079,498
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"276 km²
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"288/km²


Fredrikstad
&0000000000072388.00000072,388
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"290 km²
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"250/km²


Tromsø
&0000000000066003.00000066,003
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"2,557 km²
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"26/km²


Sandnes
&0000000000062832.00000062,832
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"302 km²
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"208/km²


Drammen
&0000000000060878.00000060,878
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"137 km²
&Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"Expression error: Unrecognised word "km".Expression error: Unrecognised word "km"444/km²


There are 96 settlements with city status in Norway. In most cases, the city borders are coterminous with the borders of their respective municipalities. Often, Norwegian city municipalities include large non-built up areas; for example, Oslo municipality contains large forests, located north and south-east of the city, and over half of Bergen municipality consists of mountaineous areas. The ten largest municipalities with city status in Norway are (as of 1 January 2008):[27] Sandvika in Bærum municipality (population of 108,144 as of 2008) declared itself a city in 2003 (permitted since 1996), but the "city border" of Sandvika is usually not considered to be coterminous with the municipality border. As Sandvika and most of Bærum in general is included in the Oslo urban area, as defined by Statistics Norway, its population is not possible to estimate.

Economy
Main article: Economy of Norway




GDP and GDP growth






Norway is among the world leaders in offshore petroleum technology. Norway's oil-capital is Stavanger.


Norwegians enjoy the second highest GDP per-capita (after Luxembourg) and third highest GDP (PPP) per-capita in the world. Norway has maintained first place in the world in the UNDP Human Development Index (HDI) for six consecutive years (2001-2006). However, in 2007 Iceland very narrowly beat Norway as the #1 place according to the Human Development Index.
The Norwegian economy is an example of a mixed economy, featuring a combination of free market activity and large government ownership. The government has large ownership positions in key industrial sectors, such as the strategic petroleum sector (StatoilHydro), hydroelectric energy production (Statkraft), aluminum production (Norsk Hydro), the largest Norwegian bank (DnB NOR) and telecommunication provider (Telenor). The government controls 31.6% of publicly-listed companies. When non-listed companies are included the state has even higher share in ownership (mainly from direct oil license ownership).




Bryggen in Bergen is on the list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites.


Referendums in 1972 and 1994 indicated that the Norwegian people wished to remain outside the European Union (EU). However, Norway, together with Iceland and Liechtenstein, participates in the European Union's single market via the European Economic Area (EEA) agreement. The EEA Treaty between the European Union countries and the EFTA countries – transposed into Norwegian law via "EØS-loven"[28] – describes the procedures for implementing European Union rules in Norway and the other EFTA countries. This makes Norway a highly integrated member of most sectors of the EU internal market. However, some sectors, such as agriculture, oil and fish, are not wholly covered by the EEA Treaty. Norway has also acceded to the Schengen Agreement and several other intergovernmental agreements between the EU member states.
The country is richly endowed with natural resources including petroleum, hydropower, fish, forests, and minerals. Large reserves of petroleum and natural gas were discovered in the 1960s, which led to a continuing boom in the economy. Norway has obtained one of the highest standards of living in the world in part by having a large amount of natural resources compared to the size of the population. The income from natural resources includes a significant contribution from petroleum production and the substantial and well-managed income related to this sector. Norway also has a very low unemployment rate, currently below 2% (June 2007). The hourly productivity levels, as well as average hourly wages in Norway are among the highest in the world. The egalitarian values of the Norwegian society[citation needed] ensure that the wage difference between the lowest paid worker and the CEO of most companies is much smaller than in comparable western economies. This is also evident in Norway's low Gini coefficient.
Cost of living is about 30% higher in Norway than in the United States and 25% higher than the United Kingdom. The standard of living in Norway is high, and oil exports lead to a conclusion that Norway will remain wealthy through the foreseeable future.

Resources
Export revenues from oil and gas have risen to 45% of total exports and constitute more than 20% of the GDP.[29] Only Russia and OPEC member Saudi Arabia export more oil than Norway, which is not an OPEC member. To reduce over-heating from oil money and the uncertainty from the oil income volatility, and to save money for an aging population, the Norwegian state started in 1995 to save petroleum income (taxes, dividends, licensing, sales) in a sovereign wealth fund ("Government Pension Fund — Global"). This also reduces the boom and bust cycle associated with raw material production and the marginalization of non-oil industry (see also Dutch Disease).
The control mechanisms over petroleum resources are a combination of state ownership in major operators in the Norwegian oil fields (StatoilHydro approx. 62% in 2007) and the fully state-owned Petoro (market value of about twice Statoil) and SDFI. Finally the government controls licensing of exploration and production of fields. The fund invests in developed financial markets outside Norway. The budgetary rule ("Handlingsregelen") is to spend no more than 4% of the fund each year (assumed to be the normal yield from the fund ).




Norwegian oil production


By January 2006, the Government Pension Fund of Norway fund had reached a value of USD 200 billion. During the first half of 2007, the pension fund became the largest fund in Europe, with assets of about USD 300 billion (equivalent to over USD 62,000 per capita). The savings equal the Norwegian GDP and are the largest capital reserve per capita of any nation as of April 2007. Projections indicate that the Norwegian pension fund may become the largest capital fund in the world. Currently it is the second-largest state-owned sovereign wealth fund, second only to the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority; Conservative estimates tell that the fund may reach USD 800-900 billion by 2017.
Other natural resource-based economies, such as Russia, are trying to learn from Norway by establishing similar funds. The investment choices of the Norwegian fund are directed by ethical guidelines; for example, the fund is not allowed to invest in companies that produce parts for nuclear weapons. The highly transparent investment scheme is lauded by the international community.
The future size of the fund is of course closely linked to the price of oil and to developments in international financial markets. At an average oil price of USD 100 per barrel, the trade surplus for 2008 is expected to reach USD 80 billion. At June 2008 oil prices, the trade surplus for 2008 is expected to reach USD 90 billion.
In 2000, the government sold one-third of the then 100% state-owned oil company Statoil in an IPO. The next year, the main telecom supplier, Telenor, was listed on Oslo Stock Exchange. The state also owns significant shares of Norway's largest bank, DnB NOR and the airline SAS. Since 2000, economic growth has been rapid, pushing unemployment down to levels not seen since the early 1980s (unemployment: 1.3%).
Norway is also the world's second largest exporter of fish (in value, after China).[10] Hydroelectric plants generate roughly 98-99% of Norways electric power.[30]

Education
Main article: Education in Norway
See also: Higher education in Norway





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)


Higher education in Norway is offered by a range of seven universities, five specialised colleges, 25 university colleges as well as a range of private colleges. Education follows the Bologna process involving Bachelor (3 years), Master (2 years) and Doctor (4 years) degrees. Acceptance is offered after finishing upper secondary school with general study competence.
Public education is virtually free, with an academic year with two semesters, from August to December and from January to June. The ultimate responsibility for the education lies with the Norwegian Ministry of Education and Research.

Demography
Main article: Demography of Norway




Demographics in Norway


As of 2009, Norway's population numbered 4.8 million. Most Norwegians are ethnic Norwegians, a North Germanic people. The Sami people traditionally inhabit central and northern parts of Norway and Sweden, as well as in northern Finland and in Russia on the Kola Peninsula. Another national minority are the Kven people who are the descendants of Finnish speaking people that moved to northern Norway in the 18th up to the 20th century. Both the Sami and the Kven were subjected to a strong assimilation policy by the Norwegian government from the 19th century up to the 1970s.[31] Because of this "Norwegianisation process", many families of Sami or Kven ancestry now self-identify as ethnic Norwegian.[32] This, combined with a long history of co-habitation of the Sami and North Germanic peoples on the Scandinavian peninsula, makes claims about ethnic population statistics less straightforward than is often suggested[original research?] — particularly in central and northern Norway. Other groups recognized as national minorities of Norway are Jews, Forest Finns, Roma/Gypsies and Romani people/Travellers.
In recent years, immigration has accounted for more than half of Norway's population growth. According to Statistics Norway (SSB), a record 61,200 immigrants arrived in the country in 2007 — 35% higher than 2006. At the beginning of 2008, there were 459,600 persons in Norway with an immigrant background (i.e. immigrants, or born of immigrant parents), comprising 9.7% of the total population. 350,000 of these were from a non-Western background, which includes the formerly Communist countries according to the definition used by Statistics Norway. The largest immigrant groups by country of origin, in order of size, are Poles, Pakistanis, Swedes, Iraqis, Somalis, Vietnamese, Danes, and Germans.[33] Norwegians of Pakistani descent are the largest visible minority group in Norway, with most of its 59,000 members living around Oslo. The Iraqi immigrant population has shown a large increase in recent years. After the enlargement of the EU in 2004, there has also been an influx of immigrants from Central and Eastern Europe, particularly Poland. The largest increase in 2007 was of immigrants from Poland, Germany, Sweden, Lithuania and Russia.[34][35]

Religion
Main article: Religion in Norway




Borgund stave church.






Nidaros Cathedral in Trondheim.


In common with other Scandinavian countries, the Norse followed a form of native Germanic paganism known as Norse paganism. By the end of the eleventh century, when Norway had been Christianised, the indigenous Norse religion and practices were prohibited. Anti-heathenry laws, however, were removed early in the twentieth century.[citation needed] Many remnants of the native religion and beliefs of Norway exist today, including names, referential names of cities and locations, the days of the week, and other parts of the everyday language.
Parts of the Sami minority retained their shamanistic religion well into the 18th century when they were converted to Christianity by Dano-Norwegian missionaries.
Nearly 83% of Norwegians are members of the state Church of Norway, to which they are registered at baptism. Many remain in the state church to be able to use services such as baptism, confirmation, marriage and burial, rites which have strong cultural standing in Norway. Up to 40% of the membership attends church or religious meetings during a year,[36] with fewer attending regularly.
According to the most recent Eurobarometer Poll 2005, 32% of Norwegian citizens responded that "they believe there is a god," whereas 47% answered that "they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force" and 17% that "they do not believe there is any sort of spirit, god, or life force."[37]
Other Christian denominations total about 4.5% of the population. These include the Evangelical Lutheran Free Church, the Roman Catholic Church, Pentecostal congregations, the Methodist Church, Adventists, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and Jehovah's Witnesses and others. Among non-Christian religions, Islam is the largest, representing about 1.5% of the population: It is practiced mainly by Somali, Arab, Albanian, and Turkish immigrants, as well as Norwegians of Pakistani descent. Other religions comprise less than 1% each, including Judaism (see Jews in Norway). Indian immigrants introduced Hinduism to Norway, but account for fewer than 5,000 people, or 1% of non-Lutheran Norwegians.[38] There are eleven Buddhist organizations, grouped under the Buddhistforbundet organisation, which make up 0.42% of the population. Around 1.5% of Norwegians adhere to the secular Norwegian Humanist Association. About 5% of the population is unaffiliated.[38]

Languages
Main article: Languages of Norway
See also: Norwegian language and Sami languages
The North Germanic Norwegian language has two official written forms, Bokmål and Nynorsk. They have officially equal status, i.e. they are both used in public administration, in schools, churches, radio and television, but Bokmål is used by the vast majority, about 85-90%. Around 95% of the population speak Norwegian as their native tongue, although many speak dialects that may differ significantly from the written language. In general Norwegian dialects are inter-intelligible, though some may require significant effort. Several Finno-Ugric Sami languages are spoken and written throughout the country, especially in the north, by the Sami people. The state recognises these languages as official, and speakers have a right to get education in Sami language no matter where they are living, and receive communications from government in various Sami languages. The Kven minority speak the Finno-Ugric Kven language/Finnish. There is advocacy for making Norwegian Sign Language an official Norwegian language.
Norwegian is highly similar to the other languages in Scandinavia, Swedish and Danish. All three languages are mutually intelligible and can be – and commonly are – employed in communication between inhabitants of the Scandinavian countries. As a result of the cooperation within the Nordic Council, inhabitants of all Nordic countries, including Iceland and Finland, have the right to communicate with the Norwegian authorities in their own language.
Any Norwegian student who is a child of immigrant parents is encouraged to learn the Norwegian language. The Norwegian government offers language instructional courses for immigrants wishing to obtain Norwegian citizenship.
The main foreign language taught in Norwegian elementary school is English. The majority of the population is fluent in English, especially those born after World War II. German, French and Spanish are also commonly taught as a second or, more often, third language. Russian, Japanese, Italian, Latin and rarely Chinese (Mandarin) are available in some schools, mostly in the cities.

Culture
Main article: Culture of Norway

Literature
Main article: Norwegian literature
Further information: List of Norwegian writers





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)


History of Norwegian literature starts with the pagan Eddaic poems and skaldic verse of the 9th and 10th centuries with poets such as Bragi Boddason and Eyvindr Skáldaspillir. The arrival of Christianity around the year 1000 brought Norway into contact with European medieval learning, hagiography and history writing. Merged with native oral tradition and Icelandic influence this was to flower into an active period of literature production in the late 12th and early 13th centuries. Major works of that period include Historia Norwegie, Thidreks saga and Konungs skuggsjá.
Little Norwegian literature came out of the period of the Scandinavian Union and the subsequent Dano-Norwegian union (1387—1814), with some notable exceptions such as Petter Dass and Ludvig Holberg. In his play Peer Gynt, Ibsen characterized this period as "Twice two hundred years of darkness/brooded o'er the race of monkeys", although the latter line is not as frequently quoted as the former. During the union with Denmark, written Norwegian was replaced by Danish.
Two major events precipitated a major resurgence in Norwegian literature. In 1811 a Norwegian university was established in Christiania Seized by the spirit of revolution following the American and French Revolutions, the Norwegians signed their first constitution in 1814. Soon, the cultural backwater that was Norway brought forth a series of strong authors recognized first in Scandinavia, and then worldwide; among them were Henrik Wergeland, Peter Asbjørnsen, Jørgen Moe and Camilla Collett.
By the late 19th century, in the Golden Age of Norwegian literature, the so-called Great Four emerged: Henrik Ibsen, Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson, Alexander Kielland, and Jonas Lie. Bjørnson's "peasant novels", such as "En glad gutt" (A Happy Boy) and "Synnøve Solbakken" are typical of the national romanticism of their day, whereas Kielland's novels and short stories are mostly realistic. Although an important contributor to early Norwegian romanticism (especially the ironic Peer Gynt), Henrik Ibsen's fame rests primarily on his pioneering realistic dramas such The Wild Duck and A Doll's House, many of which caused moral uproar because of their candid portrayals of the middle classes.
In the twentieth century, three Norwegian novelists were awarded the Nobel prize in literature: Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson in 1903, Knut Hamsun for the book "Markens grøde" ("Growth of the Soil") in 1920, and Sigrid Undset in 1928. In the 20th century writers like Dag Solstad, Jostein Gaarder, Erik Fosnes Hansen, Jens Bjørneboe, Kjartan Fløgstad, Lars Saabye Christensen, Johan Borgen, Herbjørg Wassmo, Jan Erik Vold, Rolf Jacobsen, Olaf Bull, Jan Kjærstad, Georg Johannesen, Tarjei Vesaas, Sigurd Hoel, Arnulf Øverland and Johan Falkberget have made important contributions to Norwegian literature.








Ludvig Holberg (1684-1754)









Henrik Ibsen (1828-1906)









Alexander Kielland (1849-1906), one of the best known Norwegian writers of the 19th century






Music
Main article: Music of Norway

See also




Norway portal




Public holidays in Norway
Regions of Norway
Tourism in Norway
Architecture of Norway
Edvard Grieg
Cuisine of Norway
Football in Norway
Energy in Norway
Telecommunications in Norway
Transport in Norway


References


^ "Statistics Norway — Immigration and immigrants". Statistics Norway. http://www.ssb.no/english/subjects/00/00/10/innvandring_en/. Retrieved on 2009-03-08. 
^ a b c d "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". Imf.org. 2006-09-14. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2004&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=142&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&grp=0&a=&pr.x=87&pr.y=10. Retrieved on 2009-02-14. 
^ "Areal". SSB. http://www.ssb.no/areal/. 
^ "Befolkning". SSB. http://www.ssb.no/english/subjects/02/befolkning_en/. 
^ List of countries by GDP (nominal) per capita
^ List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita
^ List of countries by current account balance
^ "CIA — The World Factbook — Rank Order — Oil — exports". Cia.gov. 2009-02-10. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2176rank.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-14. 
^ "UPDATE 1-Statistics Norway raises '07 GDP outlook, cuts '08". Uk.reuters.com. 2007-09-06. http://uk.reuters.com/article/oilRpt/idUKL0674675920070906. Retrieved on 2009-03-08. 
^ a b "FAO Globefish global trends 2006". http://www.globefish.org/filedownload.php?fileId=560. Retrieved on 2009-03-08. 
^ Human Development Index.
^ "World Norway rated most peaceful nation". BBC News. 2007-05-30. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/in_depth/6704767.stm. Retrieved on 2009-02-14. 
^ Thorpe, B., The Life of Alfred The Great Translated From The German of Dr. R. Pauli To Which Is Appended Alfred's Anglo-Saxon Version of Orosius, Bell, 1900, p. 253.
^ a b Jan de Vries, Altnordisches etymologisches Wörterbuch, 2nd revised edn (Leiden: Brill, 1962), s.v. Noregr
^ http://hpgl.stanford.edu/publications/EJHG_2002_v10_521-529.pdf
^ RF Foster: "The Oxford History of Ireland", Oxford University Press, 1989
^ "The Black Death in Norway". Ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. 2008-12-03. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=2197762&dopt=Abstract. Retrieved on 2009-03-08. 
^ Treaty of Kiel, January 14, 1814.
^ Nicolson, Harold (1946). The Congress of Vienna; a study in allied unity, 1812-1822. Constable & co. ltd. , page 295: "The British Government sought to overcome this reluctance by assisting Russia in blockading the coast of Norway [...]"
^ Yale Center for Environmental Law & Policy / Center for International Earth Science Information Network at Columbia University. "Environmental Performance Index 2008". http://epi.yale.edu/Home. Retrieved on 2008-01-25. 
^ (English) PM to light London tree, Aftenposten.
^ (English) Worldwide Press Freedom Index 2007, Reporters Without Borders.
^ List of Norwegian embassies at the website of the Norwegian ministry of foreign affairs[dead link]
^ List of foreign embassies in Norway at the website of the Norwegian ministry of foreign affairs[dead link]
^ Dagre, Tor. "The Second World War (Norway — the official site in the United States)". Norway. http://www.norway.org/history/after1814/ww2/ww2.htm. Retrieved on 2009-02-14. 
^ "Forsvarsnett: Norwegian forces abroad" (in English). www.mil.no. http://www.mil.no/languages/english/start/general/. Retrieved on 2008-09-02. 
^ "Kvartalsvise befolkningsendringer" (in Norwegian). Statistics Norway. http://www.ssb.no/folkendrkv/. Retrieved on 10-09-2008. 
^ "EØS-loven — EØSl. Lov om gjennomføring i norsk rett av hoveddelen i avtale om Det europeiske økonomiske samarbeidsområde (EØS) m.v. (EØS-loven)". Lovdata.no. http://www.lovdata.no/all/nl-19921127-109.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-14. 
^ "This is Norway — Secondary Industries" (PDF). Norway's Bureau of Statistics. http://www.ssb.no/english/subjects/00/norge_en/sekundaer_en.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-06-20. 
^ "Binge and purge". The Economist. 2009. http://www.economist.com/displaystory.cfm?story_id=12970769. Retrieved on 2009-01-30.  "98-99% of Norway’s electricity comes from hydroelectric plants." 
^ Eivind Bråstad Jensen. 1991. Fra fornorskningspolitikk mot kulturelt mangfold. Nordkalott-Forlaget.
^ I. Bjørklund, T. Brantenberg, H. Eidheim, J.A. Kalstad and D. Storm. 2002. Australian Indigenous Law Reporter (AILR) 1 7(1)
^ "Immigrant population". Ssb.no. http://www.ssb.no/english/subjects/02/01/10/innvbef_en/. Retrieved on 2009-03-08. 
^ "Population statistics". Ssb.no. http://www.ssb.no/english/subjects/02/02/folkendrkv_en/. Retrieved on 2009-02-14. 
^ "Foreign citizens, 1st January 2004". Ssb.no. 2004-01-01. http://www.ssb.no/english/subjects/02/01/10/utlstat_en/. Retrieved on 2009-03-08. 
^ "Andel personer i alderen 9-79 år som har brukt forskjellige kulturtilbud siste 12 måneder. Prosent — Statistisk årbok 2007, tabell 234" (in (Norwegian)). Ssb.no. http://www.ssb.no/aarbok/tab/tab-234.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-14. 
^ "Eurobarometer on Social Values, Science and technology 2005" (PDF). p.11. http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/ebs_225_report_en.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-05-05. 
^ a b "''More members in religious and philosophical communities''". Ssb.no. http://www.ssb.no/english/subjects/07/02/10/trosamf_en/. Retrieved on 2009-03-08. 



External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Norway 





Wikinews has related news: Norway



Norway.no, Norway's official portal
Statistics Norway
Norway from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Norway.info, official foreign portal of the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Wikimedia Atlas of Norway
VisitNorway.com, official travel guide to Norway.
Norway travel guide from Wikitravel








v • d • e

Norway topics





History

Timeline • Stone Age • Bronze Age • Viking Age • High Middle Ages • Kalmar Union • Denmark–Norway • Sweden–Norway • Dissolution of the union between Norway and Sweden in 1905 • World War II • History of Norway since 1945






Geography

Topography • Mountains • Islands • Rivers • Lakes • Climate • Protected areas • Flora • Fauna • Extreme Points






Law

Courts • Constitution • Law enforcement • Agencies • Nationality law






Politics

Constitution • Counties • Elections • European Union relations • Foreign relations • Government • Monarchy • Municipalities • Political parties • Prime Minister (List) • Romantic nationalism • Sámi Parliament • Parliament






Economy

Norwegian krone • National Bank • Oslo Stock Exchange • Science and technology • Education • Agriculture • Industry • Services • Mining • Energy • Communications • Tourism • Transport • Healthcare • Companies






Military

History • Ground Forces • Air Force • Naval Forces • Coast Guard • Home Guard






Symbols

National Flag • Flags • Coat of arms • Anthem • Motto • Name






Demographics

Administrative divisions • Cities • Postal codes • Languages • Religion • Minorities • Immigration • Norwegians • List of Norwegians






Culture

Architecture • Art • Cinema (Actors) • Music (Composers) • Cuisine • Norwegian language • Literature (Writers • Poets) • Philosophy • Bunad • Jul • Constitution Day • Media • Sport • Public holidays






Other topics

Human rights






WikiProject • Portal











 
Geography














v • d • e

Countries of Europe








Albania · Andorra · Armenia2 · Austria · Azerbaijan1 · Belarus · Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus2 · Czech Republic · Denmark3 · Estonia · Finland · France1 · Georgia1 · Germany · Greece  · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy1 · Kazakhstan1 · Kosovo5 · Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Macedonia4 · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands3 · Norway3 · Poland · Portugal3 · Romania · Russia1 · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia · Slovenia · Spain1 · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey1 · Ukraine · United Kingdom3 · Vatican City
1 Has part of its territory outside Europe.  2 Entirely in West Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe.  3 Has dependencies or similar territories outside Europe. 4 Name disputed by Greece; see Macedonia naming dispute. 5 Declared independence from Serbia on February 17, 2008 and is recognised by 56 United Nations member states.





















 
International organizations














v • d • e

Member states of the Council of Europe






Albania · Andorra · Armenia · Austria · Azerbaijan · Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus · Czech Republic · Denmark · Estonia · Finland · France · Georgia · Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Macedonia1 · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands · Norway · Poland · Portugal · Romania · Russia · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia · Slovenia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey · Ukraine · United Kingdom







Observer member status: Argentina · Canada · Chile · Israel · Japan · Mexico · Morocco · United States of America · Vatican City
1 Provisionally referred to by the Council of Europe as the "former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia"; see Macedonia naming dispute.














v • d • e

Nordic Council





Members

Denmark · Finland · Iceland · Norway · Sweden






Associates

Åland · Faroe Islands · Greenland













v • d • e

Members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)






Albania · Belgium · Bulgaria · Canada · Croatia · Czech Republic · Denmark · Estonia · France · Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Italy · Latvia · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Netherlands · Norway · Poland · Portugal · Romania · Slovakia · Slovenia · Spain · Turkey · United Kingdom · United States














v • d • e

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)








Australia · Austria · Belgium · Canada · Czech Republic · Denmark · Finland · France · Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Japan · South Korea · Luxembourg · Mexico · Netherlands · New Zealand · Norway · Poland · Portugal · Slovakia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey · United Kingdom · United States















v • d • e

Members of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA)








Iceland · Liechtenstein · Norway · Switzerland















v • d • e

Members of the World Trade Organization (WTO)








Albania · Angola · Antigua and Barbuda · Argentina · Armenia · Australia · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Barbados · Belize · Benin · Bolivia · Botswana · Brazil · Brunei · Burkina Faso · Burma · Burundi · Cambodia · Cameroon · Canada · Cape Verde · Central African Republic · Chad · Chile · PR China · Colombia · Democratic Republic of the Congo · Republic of the Congo · Costa Rica · Côte d'Ivoire · Croatia · Cuba · Djibouti · Dominica · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · Egypt · El Salvador · European Union¹ · Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) · Fiji · Gabon · The Gambia · Georgia · Ghana · Grenada · Guatemala · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Guyana · Haiti · Honduras · Hong Kong² · Iceland · India · Indonesia · Israel · Jamaica · Japan · Jordan · Kenya · South Korea · Kuwait · Kyrgyzstan · Lesotho · Liechtenstein · Macau² · Madagascar · Malawi · Malaysia · Maldives · Mali · Mauritania · Mauritius · Mexico · Moldova · Mongolia · Morocco · Mozambique · Namibia · Nepal · New Zealand · Nicaragua · Niger · Nigeria · Norway · Oman · Pakistan · Panama · Papua New Guinea · Paraguay · Peru · Philippines · Qatar · Rwanda · St. Kitts and Nevis · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · Saudi Arabia · Senegal · Sierra Leone · Singapore · Solomon Islands · South Africa · Sri Lanka · Suriname · Swaziland · Switzerland · Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, and Matsu³ · Tanzania · Thailand · Togo · Tonga · Trinidad and Tobago · Tunisia · Turkey · Uganda · Ukraine · United Arab Emirates · United States · Uruguay · Venezuela · Vietnam · Zambia · Zimbabwe


All twenty-seven member states of the European Union are also members of the WTO in their own right: Austria • Belgium • Bulgaria • Cyprus • Czech Republic • Denmark • Estonia • Finland • France • Germany • Greece • Hungary • Ireland • Italy • Latvia • Lithuania • Luxembourg • Malta • Netherlands and Netherlands Antilles • Poland • Portugal • Romania • Slovakia • Slovenia • Spain • Sweden • United Kingdom.
Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China.
Designated name for the Republic of China (Commonly Known as Taiwan)





















 
Other related topics














v • d • e

Monarchies





Geography

Africa · Americas · Europe · Oceania









Absolute

Brunei · Saudi Arabia · Swaziland · Vatican City






Constitutional

Antigua and Barbuda · Australia · Andorra · Bahamas · Bahrain · Barbados · Belize · Belgium · Bhutan · Cambodia · Canada · Denmark · Grenada · Jamaica · Japan1 · Jordan · Kuwait · Liechtenstein · Lesotho · Luxembourg · Malaysia · Monaco · Morocco · Netherlands · New Zealand · Norway · Oman2 · Papua New Guinea · Qatar2 · Spain · Saint Kitts and Nevis · Saint Lucia · Saint Vincent and the Grenadines · Solomon Islands · Sweden · Thailand · Tonga · Tuvalu · United Arab Emirates3 · United Kingdom






Elective

Andorra · Cambodia · Kuwait · Malaysia · Swaziland · United Arab Emirates3 · Vatican City






Subnational





Ghana


Ashanti · Dagbon







Malaysia


Johor · Kedah · Kelantan · Negeri Sembilan · Pahang · Perak · Perlis · Selangor · Terengganu







Nigeria


Ibadan · Nri · Kano · Sokoto Caliphate · Lagos







Uganda


Ankole · Buganda · Bunyoro · Busoga · Toro







United Arab Emirates


Abu Dhabi · Ajman · Dubai · Fujairah · Ras al-Khaimah · Sharjah · Umm al-Qaiwain







Wallis and Futuna


Alo · Sigave · Uvea







Others


Māori (New Zealand) · Yogyakarta (Indonesia) · Zululand (South Africa) · Barotseland (Zambia)









Italics indicate Commonwealth realms, which each share the same monarch as head of state.
1 Monarch debatable as Head of State.   2 Technically constitutional, but effectively absolute.   3 Uses the title President.
















Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norway"
Categories: Norway | Scandinavia | Constitutional monarchies | Liberal democraciesHidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead external links since March 2009 | Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism | Articles needing additional references from March 2009 | Articles including recorded pronunciations | Articles containing Norwegian language text | Articles containing Sami language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2007 | All articles that may contain original research | Articles that may contain original research since November 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
Arpetan
Asturianu
Avañe'ẽ
Azərbaycan
Bamanankan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Boarisch
བོད་ཡིག
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Dolnoserbski
ཇོང་ཁ
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Эрзянь
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺
文言
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Hawai`i
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kalaallisut
Kapampangan
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
कश्मीरी - (كشميري)
Kaszëbsczi
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Коми
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Ladino
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lingála
Lojban
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
Malagasy
മലയാളം
मराठी
مصرى
Bahasa Melayu
Мокшень
Монгол
Nāhuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
नेपाली
日本語
Нохчийн
Norfuk / Pitkern
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
Oromoo
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
O'zbek
پښتو
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Ποντιακά
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Ripoarisch
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
संस्कृत
Sardu
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Словѣ́ньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Soomaaliga
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Tetun
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Тоҷикӣ
Tok Pisin
Türkçe
Удмурт
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
Volapük
Walon
Winaray
Wolof
吴语
Xitsonga
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
粵語
Zazaki
Zeêuws
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 14:28.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
