













7 July 2005 London bombings - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "7_July_2005_London_bombings";
		var wgTitle = "7 July 2005 London bombings";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "2185939";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281279982;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); 7 July 2005 London bombings

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"7/7" redirects here. For the calendar date, see 7 July.





7 July 2005 London bombings



Emergency vehicles at Russell Square following the bombings.


Location
London, United Kingdom


Date
7 July 2005
8:50 am – 9:47 am (UTC+1)


Attack type
Suicide bombings


Deaths
56 (including the 4 perpetrators)


Injured
≈700


Perpetrator(s)
Hasib Hussain, Mohammad Sidique Khan, Germaine Lindsay and Shehzad Tanweer




2005 London bombings



Timeline
Rumours



7 July 2005


Response · Memorials


Locations


Liverpool St. to Aldgate
Circle Line


King's X to Russell Sq.
Piccadilly Line


Edgware Road
Circle Line


Tavistock Square
Bus route 30



21 July 2005



Details


Locations


Shepherd's Bush
H&C Line


Warren Street
Victoria Line


Oval
Northern Line


Bethnal Green
Bus route 26
view • talk • edit



The 7 July 2005 London bombings (also called the 7/7 bombings) were a series of coordinated suicide bomb attacks on London's public transport system during the morning rush hour. Carried out by British Muslims, the suicide bombings were motivated by Britain's involvement in the Iraq War and other conflicts.
At 08:50, three bombs exploded within fifty seconds of each other on three London Underground trains. A fourth bomb exploded on a bus nearly an hour later at 09:47 in Tavistock Square. The bombings killed 52 commuters and the four suicide bombers, injured 700, and caused disruption of the city's transport system (severely for the first day) and the country's mobile telecommunications infrastructure. The series of suicide-bomb explosions constituted the largest and deadliest terrorist attack on London's transit system in history.




Contents


1 Incidents

1.1 Attacks on the Underground
1.2 Attack on a double-decker bus
1.3 Initial reports
1.4 Incidents of 21 July
1.5 Memorial event


2 Investigation

2.1 Initial results
2.2 Suicide bombings
2.3 No public inquiry
2.4 Rumours and conspiracy theories


3 The bombers

3.1 Identification of bombers
3.2 Raids
3.3 Bombers' profiles
3.4 Luton cell
3.5 March 2007 arrests
3.6 May 2007 arrests
3.7 Deportation of Sheikh Abdullah el-Faisal


4 Motivation

4.1 Videotape Statements
4.2 Official Speculation


5 Claims of responsibility

5.1 Translated statement
5.2 Abu Hafs al-Masri Brigades


6 Effects

6.1 Security alerts
6.2 Transport and telecoms disruption
6.3 Economic impact


7 Response

7.1 Media response
7.2 Leaked report in The Observer
7.3 Criticism of the leaked Observer report
7.4 Investigation of the ringleader, Mohammad Sidique Khan


8 Victims

8.1 King's Cross bomb
8.2 Edgware Road bomb
8.3 Aldgate bomb
8.4 Tavistock Square bus bomb


9 Historical comparisons
10 Contacts
11 See also
12 References
13 External links

13.1 Support
13.2 Official reports
13.3 Police statements
13.4 Medical report
13.5 News articles
13.6 Radio broadcasts
13.7 Memoirs
13.8 Tributes and obituaries
13.9 Remembrance
13.10 Photos and videos







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Incidents

[edit] Attacks on the Underground




Locations of the bombings, overlaid onto a "real-path" map of the London Underground


08:50 — Three bombs on the London Underground exploded within fifty seconds of each other:

The first bomb exploded on an eastbound Circle Line sub-surface Underground train, number 204, travelling between Liverpool Street and Aldgate. The train had left King's Cross St. Pancras about eight minutes earlier. At the time of the explosion, the third carriage of the train was approximately 100 yards (90 m) down the tunnel from Liverpool Street. The parallel track of the Hammersmith and City Line from Liverpool Street to Aldgate East was also damaged.
The second bomb exploded on the second carriage of a westbound Circle Line sub-surface Underground train, number 216. The train had just left platform 4 at Edgware Road and was heading for Paddington. The train had left King's Cross St. Pancras about eight minutes earlier. There were several other trains nearby at the time of the explosion. An eastbound Circle Line train (arriving at platform 3 at Edgware Road from Paddington) was passing next to the train and was damaged,[1] along with a wall that later collapsed. There were two other trains at Edgware Road: an unidentified train on platform 2, and an eastbound Hammersmith & City Line train that had just arrived at platform 1.
The third bomb exploded on a southbound Piccadilly Line deep-level Underground train, number 311 (C4 TV Show said 346), travelling between King's Cross St. Pancras and Russell Square. The bomb exploded about one minute after the train left King's Cross, by which time it had travelled about 500 yards (450 m). The explosion took place at the rear of the first carriage of the train, causing severe damage to the rear of that carriage, as well as the front of the second one.[2] The surrounding tunnel also sustained damage.





People trapped in the London underground after the bombings.


It was originally thought that there had been six, rather than three, explosions on the Underground. The bus bombing brought the reported total to seven; however, this error was corrected later that day. This was because the blasts occurred on trains that were between stations, causing the wounded to emerge from both stations, giving the impression that there was an incident at each station. Police also revised the timings of the tube blasts: initial reports had indicated that they occurred over a period of almost half an hour. This was due to initial confusion at London Underground, where the explosions were initially thought to be due to a power surge. One initial report, in the minutes after the explosions, involved a person under a train, while another concerned a derailment (both of which did actually occur, but only as a result of the explosions). A Code Amber Alert was declared at 09:19, and London Underground began to shut down the network, bringing trains into stations and suspending all services.[3] The effects of the bombs are thought to have varied due to the differing characteristics of the tunnels.[4]

The Circle Line is a "cut and cover" sub-surface tunnel, about 7 m (21 ft) deep. Because the tunnel contains two parallel tracks, it is relatively wide. The two explosions on this line were probably able to vent their force into the tunnel, reducing their destructive force.
The Piccadilly Line is a deep tunnel, up to 30 m (100 ft) underground, with narrow (3.5 m, or 11 ft) single-track tubes and just 15 cm (6 in) clearances. This narrow space reflected the blast force, concentrating its effect.


[edit] Attack on a double-decker bus

09:47 — An explosion occurred in Tavistock Square on a No. 30 Dennis Trident 2 double-decker bus, registration LX03BUF, two years in service at the time, operated by Stagecoach London travelling its route from Marble Arch to Hackney Wick.

Earlier, the bus had passed through the King's Cross area as it travelled from Hackney Wick to Marble Arch. At Marble Arch, the bus turned around and started the return route from Marble Arch to Hackney Wick. It left Marble Arch at 09:00 a.m. and arrived at Euston bus station at 09:35 a.m., where crowds of people had been evacuated from the tube and were boarding buses.
The explosion ripped the roof off the top deck of the vehicle and destroyed the back of the bus. Witnesses reported seeing "half a bus flying through the air".
The detonation took place close to the British Medical Association building on Upper Woburn Place, and a number of doctors in or near the building were able to provide immediate emergency medical assistance. BBC Radio 5 and The Sun newspaper later reported that two injured bus passengers said that they saw a man exploding in the bus. News reports have identified Hasib Hussain as the person with the bomb on the bus.[5]
The bus bomb exploded towards the rear of the vehicle's top deck, totally destroying that portion of it but leaving the front of the bus intact. Most of the passengers at the front of the top deck are believed to have survived, as did those on the front of the lower deck including the driver, but those at the top and lower rear of the bus took the brunt of the explosion. The extreme physical damage caused to the victims' bodies resulted in a lengthy delay in announcing the death toll from the bombing while the police determined how many bodies were present and whether the bomber was one of them. A number of passers-by were also injured by the explosion and surrounding buildings were damaged by fragments.
Two more suspicious packages were found on underground trains and were destroyed using controlled explosions. Police later said they were not bombs.

[edit] Initial reports
Coincidentally Visor Consultants were running an exercise based on a similar scenario to what actually happened, according to Peter Power in a radio interview with BBC Radio Five Live: [6]

Today we were running an exercise for a company - bear in mind now that I'm in the private sector - and we sat everybody down in the city - 1000 people involved in the whole organization - with the crisis team. And the most peculiar thing was it was we based on a scenario of simultaneous attacks on a underground and mainline station. So we had to suddenly switch an exercise from fictional to real. And one of the first things is, get that bureau number, when you have a list of people missing, tell them. And it took a long time -.

BBC Radio - Drills Ran on day of london bombings 7-7-05: [7]

POWER: At half past nine this morning we were actually running an exercise for a company of over a thousand people in London based on simultaneous bombs going off precisely at the railway stations where it happened this morning, so I still have the hairs on the back of my neck standing up right now.[8]

The first reports suggested that a power surge in the Underground power grid had caused explosions in power circuits. This was later ruled out by the National Grid, the power suppliers. Commentators suggested that the explanation had arisen because of bomb damage to power lines along the tracks; the rapid series of power failures caused by the explosions (or power being cut off by means of switches at the locations to permit evacuation) looked similar, from the point of view of a control room operator, to a cascading series of circuit breaker operations that would result from a major power surge.
Metropolitan Police Commissioner Sir Ian Blair stated within a couple of hours of the explosions that he believed that they were "probably a major terrorist attack." He also indicated that police had found indications of explosives at one of the blast sites, though he would not speculate on who might have carried out the attack. The investigation thus concentrated on possible terrorist suspects.
A couple of hours after the bombings, the then Home Secretary Charles Clarke told the House of Commons of the incidents as terrorist attacks.[9]

[edit] Incidents of 21 July
Main article: 21 July 2005 London bombings
On 21 July 2005, a second series of four explosions took place on the London Underground and a London bus. The detonators of all four bombs exploded, but none of the main explosive charges detonated, and there were no casualties: the single injury reported at the time was later revealed to be an asthma sufferer. All suspected bombers from this failed attack escaped from the scenes but were later arrested.

[edit] Memorial event
On 7 July 2006, the country held a two-minute silence at midday to remember those who died in the bombings a year before. Plaques were unveiled at the tube stations where the bombs exploded and memorial services were held at each scene to pay tribute to the lives lost.

[edit] Investigation

[edit] Initial results
There was initially a great deal of confused information from police sources as to the origin, method, and even timings of the explosions. Forensic examiners had initially thought that military grade plastic explosives were used, and, as the blasts were thought to have been simultaneous, that synchronised timed detonators were employed. This all changed as further information became available. Home-made organic peroxide-based devices were used, according to a May 2006 report from the British government's Intelligence and Security Committee[10].The explosive used by the bombers was later found to be Chapatti flour powder mixed with liquid hydrogen peroxide,detonated by a booster charge.[11][12]
Fifty-six people, including the four suicide bombers, were killed in the attacks[13] and about 700 were injured, of whom about 100 required overnight hospital treatment or more. The incident was the deadliest single act of terrorism in the United Kingdom since Lockerbie (the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 which killed 270), and the deadliest bombing in London since the Second World War. More people were killed in the bombings than in any single Provisional IRA attack (in Great Britain or Ireland) during the Troubles.
Police examined about 2,500 items of CCTV footage and forensic evidence from the scenes of the attacks. The bombs were probably placed on the floors of the trains and bus.
Police investigators identified four men whom they alleged had in fact been suicide bombers. This would make the 7 July incident the first suicide bombings in Western Europe.[14] The then French Interior Minister (Later to become French President) Nicolas Sarkozy caused consternation at the British Home Office when he briefed the press that one of the names had been described the previous year at an Anglo-French security meeting as an asset of British Intelligence. The then Home Secretary Charles Clarke later said that this was "not his recollection, to say the least".
Vincent Cannistraro, former head of the CIA's anti-terrorism centre, told The Guardian that "two unexploded bombs" were recovered as well as "mechanical timing devices", although this claim was explicitly rejected by the Metropolitan Police.[15]
It has been reported that the intention was to have four explosions on the Underground forming a cross of fire with arms in the four cardinal directions, possibly centered symbolically at King's Cross. It was said that one bomber was turned away from the Underground as the explosions had already started, and took a bus instead. It is also speculated that the fourth bomber meant to take the Northern Line. Whilst it has been widely reported that the Northern line was suspended, it was in fact serving all destinations at the time of the attacks, having previously been part suspended because of a faulty train. Northern Line trains were, however, extremely crowded as a result of the earlier disruption.
The Underground bombs exploded when trains were crossing, thus affecting two trains with each explosion. This is one of the features which led rapidly to the suspicion of a terrorist attack by suicide bombers as the cause of the explosions.

[edit] Suicide bombings
The four explosions were widely reported as suicide bombings, but at the time the police would only confirm that they believed the bombers died in the bombings. However in the aftermath of the subsequent 21 July 2005 London bombings and the shooting of Jean Charles de Menezes, Sir Ian Blair publicly confirmed that they did believe they were dealing with suicide bombers.[16]
It is not clear why the bombers carried identifying items, which led to the discovery of the bomb factory in Leeds. The bomb factory appears to have been intended for future use and a number of other explosive devices are said to have been found in the bombers' car at Luton station. In addition, the bombers bought return tickets to London from Luton.[17] This has led to speculation that the bombers may have expected to survive the attacks, perhaps having been misled about the time that they had to escape or the nature of the devices that they were carrying.[17]
The first three bombs exploded within 50 seconds of each other, suggesting that a timing device or remote activation was used.[18] It is believed that mobile phones were used to remotely detonate the Madrid train bombs, either by using the phones' alarm function or by calling the phone.[19] The former method would work in the London Underground, but the bombs could not have been detonated by calling the phones as mobile phone signals are not available. As of 19 July 2005, no forensic evidence of either of these mechanisms had been made public, making a manual detonation likely.[20]

[edit] No public inquiry
The government has refused to hold a public inquiry, stating that... "it would be a drain on resources and tie up key officials and police officers". Former Prime Minister Tony Blair said an independent inquiry would undermine support for the security service[21] A group of survivors and relatives of those killed are now pursuing legal action in the High Court and European Courts for a full Public Inquiry to clear up conflicting accounts of this day. The Shadow Home Secretary, David Davis said "It is becoming more and more clear that the story presented to the public and Parliament is at odds with the facts." [22]

[edit] Rumours and conspiracy theories
Main article: Rumours and conspiracy theories about the July 2005 London bombings

[edit] The bombers

[edit] Identification of bombers
A police press conference on 12 July provided further details on the progress of the investigation. Investigators focused on a group of four men, three of whom were from Leeds, West Yorkshire, and were reported as being primarily cleanskins, meaning previously unknown to authorities. On 7 July 2005, all four travelled to Luton in Bedfordshire by car, then to London by train. They were recorded on CCTV arriving at King's Cross station at about 08:30 a.m. Property associated with the men was found at the site of the explosions. On 12 July the BBC reported that Deputy Assistant Commissioner Peter Clarke, Metropolitan Police counter-terrorism chief, had said that the property of one of the bombers had been found at both the Aldgate and Edgware Road blasts.

[edit] Raids
Police raided six properties in the Leeds area on 12 July: two houses in Beeston, two houses in Thornhill, one house in Holbeck and one house in 18 Alexandra Grove, Hyde Park. One man was arrested.
According to West Yorkshire police, a significant amount of explosive material was found in the raids in Leeds and a controlled explosion was carried out at one of the properties. Explosives were also found in the vehicle associated with one of the bombers Shehzad Tanweer at Luton railway station and subjected to controlled explosions.[23][24][25][26]
The police also raided a residential property on Northern Road in the Buckinghamshire town of Aylesbury on 13 July.

[edit] Bombers' profiles
The following men are stated to have carried out the attacks:




The bombers caught on CCTV at Luton railway station at 07:21 a.m. on 7 July. From left to right, Hasib Hussain, Germaine Lindsay, Mohammad Sidique Khan, and Shehzad Tanweer.[27] (Image: Crown copyright)



Mohammad Sidique Khan (30) - Edgware Road Tube 8:50 a.m. Lived in Dewsbury with his heavily pregnant wife and young child. (Hasina Patel miscarried August 2005).
Shehzad Tanweer (22) - Aldgate Tube 8:50 a.m. Lived in Leeds with his mother and father working in a fish-and-chip shop.
Germaine Lindsay (19) - Russell Square 8:50 a.m. Lived in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire with his pregnant wife.
Hasib Hussain (18) - Tavistock Square 9:47 a.m. Lived in Leeds with his brother Imran and sister-in-law Shazia.


[edit] Luton cell
There has been speculation regarding links between the bombers and another alleged Islamist cell in Luton, Bedfordshire, which was broken up in August 2004. That group was uncovered after Muhammad Naeem Noor Khan was arrested in Lahore, Pakistan. His laptop computer was said to contain plans for tube attacks in London, as well as attacks on financial buildings in New York and Washington. The group was placed under surveillance, but on 2 August 2004 the New York Times published his name, citing Pakistani sources. The leak caused police in Britain and Canada to make arrests before their investigations were complete. The U.S. government later said they had given the name to some journalists as background, for which Tom Ridge, the U.S. homeland security secretary, apologised.
When the Luton cell was broken up, one of the London bombers, Mohammad Sidique Khan (no known relation), was briefly scrutinised by MI5 who determined that he was not a likely threat and he was not put under surveillance.[28]

[edit] March 2007 arrests
On 22 March 2007, three men were arrested in connection with the 7 July bombings. Two men were arrested at 1 pm at Manchester Airport, attempting to board a plane due to depart for Pakistan at around 4.30 pm that afternoon. They were apprehended by undercover officers who had been following the men as part of a surveillance operation. They had not intended to arrest the men that day, but felt they could not risk letting the suspects leave Britain. The other man was arrested in the Beeston area of Leeds, West Yorkshire, at an address on the street where one of the suicide bombers had lived before the attacks.[29]

[edit] May 2007 arrests
On 9 May 2007 police made four further arrests, three in Yorkshire and one in Selly Oak, Birmingham. Hasina Patel, widow of the presumed ringleader Mohammed Sidique Khan, was among those arrested for "commissioning, preparing or instigating acts of terrorism".[30]
Three of those arrested, including Patel, were released on 15 May 2007.[31] The fourth, Khalid Khaliq, an unemployed single father of three, was charged with possessing an al-Qaeda training manual on 17 July 2005, but this charge was not related to the 7 July bombing. The possession of a document containing information likely to be useful to a person committing or preparing an act of terrorism carries a maximum 10-year jail sentence.[32]

[edit] Deportation of Sheikh Abdullah el-Faisal
Sheikh Abdullah el-Faisal was deported to his country of origin, Jamaica, from Britain on Friday 25 May 2006 after reaching the parole date in his prison sentence. He was found guilty of three charges of soliciting the murder of Jews, Americans and Hindus and two charges of using threatening words to stir up racial hatred in 2003 and after his appeal was sentenced to seven years in prison. In 2006 John Reid alleged, to MPs, that el-Faisal had influenced Jamaican-born Briton Germaine Lindsay. [33][34]

[edit] Motivation

[edit] Videotape Statements
Two of the bombers made videotapes describing their reasons for becoming what they called "soldiers". In a videotape aired by Al Jazeera on 1 September 2005, Mohammad Sidique Khan, described his motivation. (The tape had been edited and also featured Al Qaeda number two, Ayman al-Zawahiri, in a way intended to suggest a direct link between Khan and Al Qaeda; however, there has been no report that Khan said anything linking the bombing to Al Qaeda.)

"I and thousands like me are forsaking everything for what we believe. Our drive and motivation doesn't come from tangible commodities that this world has to offer. Our religion is Islam, obedience to the one true God and following the footsteps of the final prophet messenger. Your democratically elected governments continuously perpetuate atrocities against my people all over the world. And your support of them makes you directly responsible, just as I am directly responsible for protecting and avenging my Muslim brothers and sisters. Until we feel security you will be our targets and until you stop the bombing, gassing, imprisonment and torture of my people we will not stop this fight. We are at war and I am a soldier. Now you too will taste the reality of this situation."

On 6 July 2006, a video statement by Shehzad Tanweer was broadcast by Al-Jazeera. In the video, which also included remarks by al-Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahiri, Tanweer said:

"What have you witnessed now is only the beginning of a string of attacks that will continue and become stronger until you pull your forces out of Afghanistan and Iraq. And until you stop your financial and military support to America and Israel." Tanweer argued that the non-Muslims of Britain deserve such attacks because they voted for a government which "continues to oppress our mothers, children, brothers and sisters in Palestine, Afghanistan, Iraq and Chechnya" [35] [36]


[edit] Official Speculation
Before the release of these tapes, it had been already speculated that the Iraq War was a motivation for the bombers. Soon after the attacks, 28 July 2005, the Defence Editor for the Times Online, Michael Evans reported that MI5 analysts were admitting links between the Iraq war and the London Transport bombings[37]:

...under the heading “Threat to the UK from international terrorism”, a team of MI5 analysts concludes: “Though they have a range of aspirations and ‘causes’, Iraq is a dominant issue for a range of extremist groups and individuals in the UK and Europe.”


[edit] Claims of responsibility
The attacks bear similarities to the 11 March 2004 Madrid train bombings and suggest an attack in the style of al-Qaeda. Budapest-based security analyst Sebestyén Gorka told the Reuters wire service that "the first thing that's very obvious is the synchronised nature of the attacks, and that's pretty classic for al-Qaeda or organisations related to al-Qaeda".
In the opinion of former Metropolitan Police Commissioner Lord Stevens of Kirkwhelpington, before the identity of the bombers became known, the bombers were almost certainly born or based in Britain.[38] The attacks would have required extensive preparation and prior reconnaissance efforts, and a familiarity with bomb-making and the London transport network as well as access to significant amounts of bomb-making equipment and chemicals.
Some newspaper editorials in Iran have blamed the bombing on British or American authorities seeking to further justify their War on Terrorism, and have claimed that the plan that included the bombings also involved increasing harassment of Muslims in Europe.[39]
On 13 August 2005 The Independent newspaper reported, quoting police and MI5 sources, that the 7 July bombers acted independently of an al-Qaeda terror mastermind someplace abroad.[40]
On 1 September 2005, it was reported that al-Qaeda officially claimed responsibility for the attacks in a videotape aired on the Arab television network al Jazeera. But an official inquiry by the British government reported that the tape claiming responsibility had been edited after the attacks, and that the bombers had no direct support from al Qaeda.[41] Zabi uk-Taifi, an al-Qaeda commander arrested in Pakistan in January 2009, may have had connections to the 7 July 2005 bombings, according to Pakistani intelligence sources.[42]

[edit] Translated statement
Within hours after the attack, someone using the name "Nur al-Iman" and identified as a "new guest", posted a statement on the Qal3ah website which claimed responsibility on behalf of "The Secret Organisation Group of al-Qaeda of Jihad Organisation in Europe". The following is a translation of the statement:

In the name of God, the merciful, the compassionate, may peace be upon the cheerful one and undaunted fighter, Prophet Muhammad, Allah's peace be upon him.


Nations of Islam and Arab nations: Rejoice, for it is time to take revenge against the British Zionist crusader government in retaliation for the massacres Britain is committing in Iraq and Afghanistan. The heroic Mujahideen [holy warriors] have carried out a blessed raid [ghazw] in London. Britain is now burning with fear, terror and panic in its northern, southern, eastern, and western quarters.


We have repeatedly warned the British government and people. We have fulfilled our promise and carried out our blessed military raid in Britain after our Mujahideen exerted strenuous efforts over a long period of time to ensure the success of the raid.


We continue to warn the governments of Denmark and Italy and all the crusader governments that they will be punished in the same way if they do not withdraw their troops from Iraq and Afghanistan. He who warns is excused.


Allah says: "If ye will aid (the cause of) Allah, He will aid you, and plant your feet firmly"

The quotation at the end of the statement is from the Qur'an, in Sura 47:7. The translation of the quotation given here is by Abdullah Yusuf Ali.
The term ghazw, here translated as "raid", has historically often been used in Islamic contexts with the connotations of an attack on the enemies of an Islamic state seen as a meritorious act; those who carry out such attacks (ghazawat) are called ghazis.
This anonymous post has come under dispute as MSNBC TV translator Jacob Keryakes noted that the claim of responsibility contained an error in one of the Quranic verses it cited. That suggests that the claim may be phony, he said. "This is not something al-Qaida would do," he said.[43]

[edit] Abu Hafs al-Masri Brigades
A second claim of responsibility was posted on the Internet on 9 July, claiming the attacks for another Al Qaeda-linked group, Abu Hafs al-Masri Brigades. The group has previously falsely claimed responsibility for events that were the result of technical problems, such as the 2003 London blackout and Northeast Blackout of 2003.[44]

[edit] Effects

[edit] Security alerts
Although there were security alerts at many locations, no other terrorist incidents occurred outside central London. Suspicious packages were destroyed in controlled explosions in Edinburgh, Brighton, Coventry, Southampton, Portsmouth, Darlington and Nottingham. Security across the UK was raised to the highest alert level.
Many other countries raised their own terror alert status (for example: Canada, United States, France, and Germany), especially for public transport. For a time US commanders ordered troops based in the UK to avoid London.
Police sniper units were reported to be following as many as a dozen Al Qaeda suspects in Britain. The covert armed teams were under orders to shoot to kill if surveillance suggested that a terror suspect was carrying a bomb and he refused to surrender if challenged.[45]

[edit] Transport and telecoms disruption




Sign on M25 ring road reads:
  AVOID LONDON
  AREA CLOSED
  TURN ON RADIO


Vodafone reported that its mobile phone network reached capacity at about 10:00 a.m. on the day of the incident, and it was forced to initiate emergency procedures to prioritise emergency calls (ACCOLC, the "access overload control scheme"). Other mobile phone networks also reported failures. The BBC speculated that the phone system was closed by the security services to prevent the possibility of mobile phones being used to trigger bombs. Although this option was considered, it later became clear that the intermittent unavailability of both mobile and landline phone systems was due to excessive usage.
For most of the day, central London's public transport system was effectively crippled because of the complete closure of the underground system, the closure of the Zone 1 bus networks, and the evacuation of Russell Square. Bus services restarted at 4 p.m. the same day, and most mainline train stations reopened shortly after. Tourist river vessels were pressed into service to provide a free alternative to the overcrowded trains and buses. Local Lifeboats were called in to act as safety boats, including the Sheerness Lifeboat from the Isle of Sheppey in Kent. Thousands of people chose to walk home or make their way to the nearest Zone 2 bus or train station. Most of the Underground apart from the affected stations restarted the next morning, though some commuters chose to stay at home.
Much of King's Cross station was also closed, with the ticket hall and waiting area being used as a makeshift hospital to treat casualties on the spot. Although the station reopened later in the day, only suburban rail services were able to use it, with GNER trains terminating at Peterborough (the service was fully restored on 9 July). King's Cross St. Pancras tube station remained open only to Metropolitan Line services in order to facilitate the ongoing recovery and investigation effort for a week, though Victoria Line services were restored on 15 July and Northern Line services on 18 July. St. Pancras Station, located next to King's Cross, was shut on Thursday afternoon with all Midland Mainline trains terminating in Leicester disrupting services to Sheffield, Nottingham and Derby.
By 25 July there were still disruptions to the Piccadilly Line (which was not running between Arnos Grove and Hyde Park Corner in either direction), the Hammersmith & City Line (which was only running a shuttle service between Hammersmith and Paddington) and the Circle Line (which was suspended in its entirety). The Metropolitan line resumed services between Moorgate and Aldgate on 25 July. The Hammersmith and City was also operating a peak hours service between Whitechapel and Baker Street. Most of the tube network was however running normally.
On 2 August the Hammersmith & City Line resumed normal service; the Circle Line service was still suspended, though all Circle Line stations are also served by other lines. The Piccadilly Line service resumed on 4 August.

[edit] Economic impact
There were limited immediate reactions to the attack in the world economy as measured by financial market and exchange rate activity. The pound fell 0.89 cents to a 19-month low against the U.S. dollar. The FTSE 100 Index fell by about 200 points in the two hours after the first attack. This was its biggest fall since the start of the war in Iraq, and it triggered the London Stock Exchange's special measures, restricting panic selling and aimed at ensuring market stability. However, by the time the market closed it had recovered to only 71.3 points (1.36%) down on the previous day's three-year closing high. Markets in France, Germany, the Netherlands and Spain also closed about 1% down on the day.
US market indexes rose slightly, in part because the dollar index rose sharply against the pound and the euro. The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 31.61 to 10,302.29. The Nasdaq Composite Index rose 7.01 to 2075.66. The S&P 500 rose 2.93 points to 1197.87 after declining up to 1%. Every benchmark gained 0.3%.[46]
The markets picked up again on 8 July as it became clear that the damage caused by the bombings was not as great as initially thought. By close of trading the market had fully recovered to above its level at start of trading on 7 July. Insurers in the UK tend to re-insure their terrorist liabilities in excess of the first £75,000,000 with Pool Re, a mutual insurer set up by the government with leading insurers. Pool Re has substantial reserves and newspaper reports indicated that claims would easily be covered.
On 9 July, the Bank of England, HM Treasury and the Financial Services Authority revealed that they had instigated contingency plans immediately after the attacks to ensure that the UK financial markets could keep trading. This involved the activation of a "secret chatroom" on the British Government's Financial Sector Continuity website, which allowed the institutions to communicate with the country's banks and market dealers.[47]

[edit] Response
Main article: Response to the 2005 London bombings

[edit] Media response




TV news gazebo at King's Cross railway station.


Rolling news coverage of the attacks was broadcast throughout 7 July, by both BBC One and ITV1 uninterrupted until 7pm. Sky News did not carry any advertisements for 24 hours. ITN later confirmed that its coverage on ITV1 was its longest uninterrupted on-air broadcast in its 50 year history. Television coverage was notable for the use of mobile phone video sent in from members of the public and live shots from traffic CCTV cameras. Local and national radio also generally either suspended regular programming for news reports, or provided regular updates as part of scheduled shows.
Many films and drama broadcasts were cancelled or postponed on grounds of taste. For example, BBC Radio 4 pulled its scheduled Classic Serial without explanation; it was to have been John Buchan's Greenmantle, about the revolt of Muslims against British interests abroad. ITV replaced the movies The X Files, in which a building is partly destroyed by a bomb, with Stakeout; and replaced The Siege, where a bomb destroys a bus full of passengers, with Gone in 60 Seconds.
Even the BBC flagship soap EastEnders was forced to re-edit that night's episode, which contained a sequence involving a house explosion, ambulances and survivors choking from smoke inhalation. Big Brother 2005 that was going on at the time decided against telling the housemates of the day's attacks after the producers found out that all relatives and friends of the housemates were well. Sky One broadcast an episode of Star Trek: The Next Generation in place of Terror Attacks: Could You Survive ...?.
Also, Viacom-owned music channels MTV, VH1, TMF and all their sub-channels broadcasted a 'sombre' music playlist for the rest of the day, and into some of the next (the MTV studios were situated in Camden Town, close to some of the bomb sites). A two-part episode of CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, directed by Quentin Tarantino and concerning a suicide bomber, and being trapped underground, due to be shown on 12 July on Five, was postponed for a week.
The BBC Online website recorded an all time bandwidth peak of 11 Gb/s at 12:00 on 7 July. BBC News received some 1 billion total hits on the day of the event (including all images, text and HTML), serving some 5.5 terabytes of data. At peak times during the day there were 40,000 page requests per second for the BBC News website. The previous day's announcement of the 2012 Olympics being awarded to London caused a peak of around 5 Gb/s. The previous all time high at bbc.co.uk was caused by the announcement of the Michael Jackson verdict, which used 7.2 Gb/s.[48]
On Tuesday 12 July it was reported that the far-right political party, the British National Party, released leaflets showing images of the "Number 30 Bus" after it was blown up. The slogan "Maybe now it's time to start listening to the BNP" was printed beside the photo. Then Home Secretary Charles Clarke described it as an attempt by the BNP to, "cynically exploit the current tragic events in London to further their spread of hatred".[49]
In several countries outside the United Kingdom, governments and media outlets perceived that the UK government was lenient towards radical Islamist militants (as long as they were involved in activities outside of the UK), as well as the UK's refusal to extradite or prosecute suspects of terror acts committed outside of the UK, led to London being sometimes called Londonistan, and have called these purported policies into question.[50] Such policies were believed to be a cynical attempt of quid pro quo: the UK allegedly exchanged an absence of attacks on its soil against toleration.

[edit] Leaked report in The Observer
On 9 April 2006 The Observer newspaper published leaked details of the first draft of a forthcoming Home Office report on the bombings, compiled for the then Home secretary Charles Clarke by a senior civil servant.[51] This section includes only information about a forthcoming report gleaned from a newspaper article, and should be read as such rather than as verified fact.
The article reports that the attack was planned probably with a budget of only a few hundred pounds by four men using information from the internet. While they had visited Pakistan, there was no direct support or planning by al-Qaeda; meetings in Pakistan were ideological, rather than practical. All four bombers died in the suicide bombings. While there was a search for a fifth suspect after police found an unused rucksack of explosives in the bombers' abandoned car at Luton station, there was no fifth bomber.
While the videotape of Mohammed Sidique Khan released after the attacks had footage of Osama bin Laden's deputy, Ayman al-Zawahiri, the Home Office believes the tape was edited after the suicide attacks and dismisses it as evidence of al-Qaeda's involvement in the attacks.
Khan was the ringleader. Links to other suspected terrorists are not discussed for legal reasons. The bombers-to-be followed an extreme interpretation of Islam, and they, in particular Jermaine Lindsay, were happy to enjoy a Western lifestyle. The attacks were largely motivated by concerns over British foreign policy, seen as deliberately anti-Muslim, and the promise of immortality.
The report does not say why no action was taken against the suspect bombers beforehand, although Mohammed Sidique Khan was identified by intelligence officers months before the attack. A separate report into the attacks by the Commons intelligence and security committee will ask why MI5 did not maintain surveillance of Khan.

[edit] Criticism of the leaked Observer report
Conservative spokesman Patrick Mercer said 'A series of reports such as this narrative simply does not answer questions such as the reduced terror alert before the attack, the apparent involvement of al-Qaeda and links to earlier or later terrorist plots.'

[edit] Investigation of the ringleader, Mohammad Sidique Khan
The Guardian Unlimited in its 3 May 2007 edition said the that police investigated ringleader Mohammad Sidique Khan twice in 2005. The paper said it "learned that on 27 January 2005, police took a statement from the manager of a garage in Leeds which had loaned Khan a courtesy car while his vehicle was being repaired. It also said that "On the afternoon of 3 February an officer from Scotland Yard's anti-terrorism branch carried out inquiries with the company which had insured a car in which Khan was seen driving almost a year earlier". Nothing about these inquiries appeared in the report by parliament's intelligence and security committee after it investigated the 7 July attacks. Scotland Yard described the 2005 inquiries as "routine", while security sources said they were related to the fertiliser bomb plot.

[edit] Victims
The 52 known victims of the 7 July bombings are listed below (around 30% of whom were foreign nationals). The complete list of victims can be found here.

[edit] King's Cross bomb

 James Adams, 32, a mortgage broker who was travelling from his home in Peterborough to London through King's Cross from where he called his mother.
 Samantha Badham, 35, had taken the Tube with her partner, Lee Harris. The couple usually cycled to work but caught the Tube because they were planning a romantic dinner to celebrate their 14th anniversary.[52]
 Lee Harris, 30, an architect who died after receiving treatment at the Royal London Hospital in Whitechapel, east London. His partner, Samantha Badham, also died in the attacks.
 Phil Beer, 22, a hair stylist, was on his way to work at the Sanrizz salon in Knightsbridge with his best friend, Patrick Barnes, who was injured.
 Anna Brandt, 41, a Polish cleaner living in Wood Green. She had 2 daughters.[53]
 Ciaran Cassidy, 24, of Upper Holloway, north London, on his way to his job as a shop assistant for a printing company in Chancery Lane. He was a keen Arsenal fan.[54]
 Elizabeth Daplyn, 26, an administrator at University College Hospital in London, left home in Highgate with her partner, Rob Brennan, before taking a Piccadilly Line train.
 Arthur Edlin Frederick, 60, from Grenada, living in Seven Sisters, north London, on his way to work at the Victoria and Albert Museum.
 Karolina Gluck, 29, from Poland, said goodbye to boyfriend, Richard Deer, 28, at 08:30. The IT consultant was travelling from Finsbury Park to Russell Square.
 Gamze Günoral, 24, a Turkish student, left her aunt’s house in north London to catch the tube to go to her language college in Hammersmith.
 Ojara Ikeagwu, 55, a married mother-of-three from Luton, was on her way to Hounslow where she worked as a social worker.
 Emily Jenkins, 24, from Richmond. Having just returned to the UK from Australia, she was waiting to hear whether she had been successful in her application to become a midwife, on the day she was killed.
 Adrian Johnson, 37, a keen golfer and hockey-player with two young children. He was on his way to work at the Burberry fashion house in Haymarket where he was a product technical manager.
 Helen Jones, 28, a Scottish (London-based) accountant who had previously escaped death in 1988 when wreckage of Pan Am Flight 103 crashed upon Lockerbie. Her family, from Chapelknowe, Dumfries and Galloway, said: "Helen will live on in the hearts of her family and her many, many friends".
 Susan Levy, 53, from Cuffley in Hertfordshire, the mother of Daniel, 25, and James, 23. She had just said goodbye to her younger son.
 Shelley Mather, 26, from New Zealand
 Michael Matsushita, 37, left his fiancee, Rosie Cowen, 28, at the couple's flat in Islington for his second day at work as a tour guide. He had lived in New York at the time of the 9/11 attack.[55]
 James Mayes, 28, worked as an analyst for the Healthcare Commission and had just returned from a holiday in Prague. He was heading from his home in Barnsbury to an ‘away day’ at Lincoln’s Inn and was thought to be travelling by Tube via King's Cross.
 Behnaz Mozakka, 47, an Iranian biomedical records officer from Finchley who worked at Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital.
 Mihaela Otto, 46, from Romania, known as Michelle. A dental technician of Mill Hill, north London.
 Atique Sharifi, 24, an Afghan national who was living in Hounslow, Middlesex.
 Ihab Slimane, a 24-year-old I.T. graduate from Lyon, France, who was working as a waiter at a restaurant near Piccadilly Circus, was said by friends to have caught a Tube from Finsbury Park.
 Christian 'Njoya' Small, 28, an advertising salesman from Walthamstow, east London.
 Monika Suchocka, 23, originally from Dabrowka Malborska, in northern Poland, arrived in London two months earlier to start work as a trainee accountant in West Kensington. A flatmate named Kim Phillip said whilst she was still missing: "This is her first time in London and she is really enjoying the excitement of it all".
 Mala Trivedi, 51, from Wembley was manager of the X-ray department at Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital.
 Rachelle Chung For Yuen, 27, an accountant from Mill Hill, north London, who was originally from Mauritius.


[edit] Edgware Road bomb

 Michael Stanley Brewster, 52, a father of two who was travelling to work from Derby. He died in the arms of fellow passengers who tried to help.
 Jonathan Downey, 34, an HR systems development officer with the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea from Milton Keynes, had just said goodbye to his wife at Euston .
 David Foulkes, 22, a media sales worker from Oldham, Greater Manchester, was on his way to meet a colleague. It was his first ever journey on the London Tube network.
 Colin Morley, 52, of Finchley, marketing consultant.
 Jenny Nicholson, 24, daughter of a Bristol vicar, who had just started work at a music company in London
 Laura Webb, 29, from Islington, a PA.


[edit] Aldgate bomb

 Lee Baisden, 34, an accountant from Romford who was going to work at the London Fire Brigade.
 Benedetta Ciaccia, 30, an Italian-born business analyst from Norwich.
 Richard Ellery, 21, was travelling from his home in Ipswich to his job in the Jessops store in Kensington, via Liverpool Street Station. He texted his parents, Beverley and Trevor, at 8.30am to say he was on his way to work.
 Richard Gray, 41, a father of two young children, who worked as a tax manager. He was from Ipswich.
 Anne Moffat, 48, from Harlow in Essex, who was head of marketing and communications for Girlguiding UK.
 Fiona Stevenson, 29, a solicitor who lived at the Barbican, London. Her parents, Ivan and Eimar, of Little Baddow, Essex, described her as "irreplaceable".
 Carrie Taylor, a 24-year-old graduate from Billericay, Essex. June Taylor, her mother, said: "We have a little farewell ritual. Carrie gives me a kiss goodbye". The day before the bombings, she had written on the bare plastered wall of her parents kitchen (which was about to be redecorated) 'Carrie Louise Taylor, 6/7/05, we got the 2012 Olympic Games on this day'.


[edit] Tavistock Square bus bomb

 Anthony Fatayi-Williams, 26, a Nigerian-born executive with an oil and gas company based in Old Street, had been living in the UK for eight years.
 Jamie Gordon, 30, from Enfield, worked for City Asset Management and was engaged to be married to his girlfriend Yvonne Nash.
 Giles Hart, 55, a BT engineer from Hornchurch and father-of-two, was travelling to Angel via Aldgate.
 Marie Hartley, 34, from Oswaldtwistle, Lancashire, was in London on a course. She was a mother of two young sons.
 Miriam Hyman, 32, from Barnet, North London, a picture researcher. She had spoken to her father by phone after being evacuated from King's Cross station and reassured him that she was all right.
 Shahara Akther Islam, 20, from Plaistow, East London, a bank cashier who lived with her parents, and was both fully Westernised and a devout Muslim.
 Neetu Jain, 37, was evacuated from Euston and caught the bus to take her to work as a computer analyst. Ms Jain was planning to move in with her Muslim boyfriend, Gous Ali.
 Sam Ly, 28, from Melbourne, died at the National Hospital of Neurology - the only fatality of ten Australians caught in the bombing.
 Shyanuja Parathasangary, 30, a Post Office worker travelling from Kensal Rise to Alder Street.
 Anat Rosenberg, 39, an Israeli-born charity worker who called her boyfriend to tell him she was on the Number 30 bus moments before the blast. John Falding, 62, her boyfriend, said: "She was afraid of going back to Israel because she was scared of suicide bombings on buses".
 Philip Russell, a 28-year-old finance worker at JP Morgan who lived at Kennington in South-East London.
 William Wise, 54 , an IT specialist at Equitas Holdings in St Mary Axe.
 Gladys Wundowa, 50, from Ilford in Essex, a cleaner at University College London. She had finished her shift and was heading to a college course in Shoreditch. Her body was taken to her homeland of Ghana for burial.


[edit] Historical comparisons
The bombings were the deadliest attack in London since a V2 rocket killed 131 people in Stepney on 27 March 1945, near the end of World War II. They were the deadliest post-World War II incident in the capital since the Great Smog of 1952 that killed 4,000 people.
They were the second-deadliest terrorist attack in the UK, after the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland (270 dead). Other terrorist bombings in recent history include the 1998 Omagh bombing (29 dead) and the 1974 Birmingham pub bombings (21 dead). The 2005 attacks are the first coordinated suicide bombings perpetrated by Islamic Extremists in the history of London. The three train bombings, with a total of 39 dead, constitute one of the deadliest incidents in the peacetime history of the London Underground, with more casualties than the King's Cross fire of November 1987 (31 dead), but fewer than the Moorgate tube crash of February 1975 (43 dead) and the wartime bombings of Balham station (14 October 1940) - 65 dead, and Bank station (11 January 1941) - 56 dead, or the panic crush during an air raid at Bethnal Green station on 3 March 1943 when 173 people lost their lives.
Main article: Attacks on the London Underground
The London Underground had been targeted by bombers before. In January 1885 a bomb exploded on a Metropolitan Line train at Gower Street (now Euston Square) station, and in February 1913 a crude bomb - probably the work of Suffragettes - was discovered at Westbourne Park station. Bombs planted by the Irish Republican Army (IRA) exploded at Tottenham Court Road and Leicester Square station on 3 February 1939. In August and December 1973 the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) left several explosive devices in the tube network, and again in February and March 1976. On 4 March 1976, eight people were injured by a bomb in Cannon Street; 11 days later, nine people were injured by a premature explosion at West Ham tube station. Seconds after that incident, Julius Stephen, the driver of the train, was shot dead when he attempted to pursue the fleeing bomber. On the same day, a further device found at Oxford Circus station was defused, while on 18 March another bomb exploded on an empty train at Wood Green station as it was preparing to enter the reversing siding there.[56]
The 2005 attack featured the most explosions in a single terrorist incident in a UK city since Bloody Friday in Belfast in July 1972 (22 bombs planted). They were the world's deadliest attack on a public transport system since the Madrid train bombings of 11 March 2004 (191 dead), although the March 1995 Sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway injured far more people (12 dead, 1,000+ injured).
There has only been one other bomb explosion on a London bus in recent times: on 18 February 1996 at Wellington Street near Aldwych, in which the only fatality was the IRA member transporting the device. This was thought to have been the result of the accidental detonation of a bomb that he intended to plant elsewhere, rather than a suicide attack.
The 2005 attacks were the first terrorist (i.e. politically motivated) killings in London since 30 April 1999, when the neo-Nazi David Copeland nailbombed the Admiral Duncan pub in Soho in a homophobic attack, killing three people. They were also the first suicide bombings carried out anywhere in Western Europe.
In 1995, the GIA Islamist militant group staged a series of attacks against the French public, targeting public transportation. These attacks killed 8 and injured more than 100. The attacks were apparently designed to be a broadening of the civil war in Algeria, a former French colony.

[edit] Contacts




'One week anniversary' bombings appeal.



People with information regarding the bombings were asked to report it to the Home Office anti-terrorist hotline 0800 789 321 (UK).[57]
Scotland Yard requested that members of the public with video or images on mobile phones or otherwise send them to images@met.police.uk.
British Red Cross website for donations to the victims relief fund.
The police force with responsibility for London Underground is the British Transport Police.


[edit] See also

7 July 2005 London bombings memorials and services
Rumours and conspiracy theories about the July 2005 London bombings
Jean Charles de Menezes
21 July 2005 London bombings
COBRA
1995 Paris Metro bombing
2004 Madrid train bombings
11 July 2006 Mumbai train bombings
2006 transatlantic aircraft plot
2007 London car bombs
2007 Glasgow International Airport attack
September 11 attacks
Islamabad Marriott Hotel bombing
2002 Bali bombings


[edit] References


^ "I'm lucky to be here, says driver". BBC. 2005-07-11. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/4671767.stm. Retrieved on 2006-11-12. 
^ North, Rachel (2005-07-15). "Coming together as a city". BBC. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/4670099.stm. Retrieved on 2006-11-12. 
^ "Tube log shows initial confusion". BBC. 2005-07-12. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/london/4674469.stm. Retrieved on 2006-11-12. 
^ Bbc News Indepth London Attacks
^ Duncan Campbell and Sandra Laville (2005-07-13). "British suicide bombers carried out London attacks, say police". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/attackonlondon/story/0,16132,1527404,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-11-15. 
^ Peter Power 7/7 Terror Rehearsal
^ "BBC Radio - Drills Ran on day of london bombings 7-7-05". BBC. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sEbUQiYOGjU&feature=related. Retrieved on 2008-07-30. 
^ Peter Power 7/7 Terror Exercise
^ "Incidents in London". United Kingdom Parliament. http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/cm200506/cmhansrd/cm050707/debtext/50707-11.htm#column_465. Retrieved on 2008-07-30. 
^ Intelligence and Security Committee (May 2006). "Report into the London Terrorist Attacks on 7 July 2005" (PDF). p. 11. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/shared/bsp/hi/pdfs/11_05_06_isc_london_attacks_report.pdf. 
^ http://www.nefafoundation.org/miscellaneous/FeaturedDocs/nefa721bombings.pdf
^ http://itn.co.uk/news/3967b7a45c8a1847f5ba6d060069a0ec.html
^ "List of the bomb blast victims". BBC News. 2005-07-20. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/4668245.stm. Retrieved on 2007-07-07. 
^ Eggen, Dan; Scott Wilson (2005-07-17). "Suicide Bombs Potent Tools of Terrorists". The Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2005/07/16/AR2005071601363.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ Muir, Hugh; Rosie Cowan (2005-07-08). "Four bombs in 50 minutes - Britain suffers its worst-ever terror attack". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk_news/story/0,,1523819,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ "Transcript: Interview with Sir Ian Blair". Sunday with Adam Boulton. Sky News. 2005-07-24. http://www.skynewstranscripts.co.uk/transcript.asp?id=117. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ a b Edwards, Jeff (2005-07-16). "Exclusive: Was It Suicide?". The Daily Mirror. http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/tm_objectid=15742951%26method=full%26siteid=94762%26headline=was%2dit%2dsuicide%2d%2d-name_page.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ "Tube bombs "almost simultaneous"". BBC News. 2005-07-09. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/4666591.stm. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ "La bolsa bomba que no explotó". Elmundo. http://www.elmundo.es/documentos/2004/03/espana/atentados11m/grafico_bolsa.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ Bennetto, Jason (2005-07-19). "Revealed: suicide bombers flew together to Karachi". The Independent. http://news.independent.co.uk/uk/crime/article300076.ece. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ 7/7 leader: more evidence reveals what police knew The Guardian May 3 2007
^ Dodd, Vikram (2007-05-03). "7/7 leader: more evidence reveals what police knew". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/attackonlondon/story/0,,2071225,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-20. 
^ "London bombers "were all British"". BBC News. 2005-07-12. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/4676577.stm. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ "One London bomber died in blast". BBC News. 2005-07-12. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/4674463.stm. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ Campbell, Duncan; Sandra Laville (2005-07-13). "British suicide bombers carried out London attacks, say police". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/attackonlondon/story/0,16132,1527404,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ Bennetto, Jason; Ian Herbert (2005-07-13). "The suicide bomb plot hatched in Yorkshire". The Independent. http://news.independent.co.uk/uk/crime/article298807.ece. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ "Image of bombers' deadly journey". BBC News. 2005-07-17. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/politics/4689739.stm#. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ Leppard, David (2005-07-17). "MI5 judged bomber "no threat"". The Times Online. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/article/0,,2087-1697562,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ "Three held over 7 July bombings". http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/6481495.stm. 
^ "Three held over 7 July bombings". http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/6637917.stm. 
^ "Police release 7/7 bomber's widow". http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/6660003.stm. 
^ BBC NEWS UK Man bailed over 'al-Qaeda manual'
^ BBC NEWS UK Race hate cleric Faisal deported
^ BBC NEWS England London | 'Hate preacher' loses his appeal
^ "Video of London suicide bomber released". Times Online. 2006-07-06. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/uk/article683824.ece. Retrieved on 2007-03-03. 
^ "Video of 7 July bomber released". BBC News. 2006-07-06. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/5154714.stm. Retrieved on 2007-03-03. 
^ Times Online MI5 analysts admit link between Iraq war and bombings
^ "Police appeal for bombing footage". BBC News. 2005-07-10. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/4668675.stm. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ "Iran press blames West for blasts". BBC News. 2005-07-11. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/4672037.stm. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ Bennetto, Jason; Ian Herbert (2005-08-13). "London bombings: the truth emerges". The Independent. http://news.independent.co.uk/uk/crime/article305547.ece. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ Leak reveals official story of London bombings UK news The Observer
^ "Al-Qaeda commander linked to 2005 London bombings led attacks on Nato convoys". The Telegraph. 2009-01-22. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/pakistan/4313740/Al-Qaeda-commander-linked-to-2005-London-bombings-led-attacks-on-Nato-convoys.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-05. 
^ "Islamic group claims London attack". MSNBC. 2005-07-07. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/8496293. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ Johnston, Chris (2005-07-09). "Tube blasts "almost simultaneous"". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/attackonlondon/story/0,,1524884,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ "Police snipers track al-Qaeda suspects". The Times Online. 2005-07-17. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/article/0,,2087-1697326,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ Lawrence, Dune (2005-07-07). "U.S. Stocks Rise, Erasing Losses on London Bombings; Gap Rises". Bloomberg. http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=10000103&sid=aflPCIrU37Ns&refer=us. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ "Banks talked via secret chatroom". BBC News. 2005-07-08. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/4666225.stm. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ "Statistics on BBC Webservers 7th July 2005". BBC Online. http://www.bbc.co.uk/feedback/07July_Statistics.shtml. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ BBC NEWS Politics BNP campaign uses bus bomb photo
^ "For a Decade, London Thrived as a Busy Crossroads of Terror". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2005/07/10/international/europe/10qaeda.html?ei=5090&en=03dee04dd2987f2b&ex=1278648000&partner=rssuserland&pagewanted=all. Retrieved on 2008-07-08. 
^ Townsend, Mark (2006-04-09). "Leak reveals official story of London bombings". The Guardian. http://observer.guardian.co.uk/politics/story/0,,1750279,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ Obituary: Samantha Badham
^ Obituary: Anna Brandt
^ Guardian.co.uk - Ciaran Cassidy
^ Obituary: Michael Matsushita
^ Jenkins, Brian Michael (December 1997). "Protecting Surface Transportation Systems and Patrons from Attacks - A Chronology of Attacks" (PDF). International Institute for Surface Transportation Policy Studies. p.118. http://www.cutr.usf.edu/bussafety/documents/terrorism2.pdf. 
^ ""One week anniversary" bombings appeal". 2005-07-14. http://cms.met.police.uk/news/major_operational_announcements/terrorist_attacks/one_week_anniversary_bombings_appeal. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 



[edit] External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: 7 July 2005 London bombings




Wikinews has news coverage of the London bombings:


Possible 'mastermind' of London bombings captured in Egypt
Metropolitan Police release photographs of one of the London bombers
Two-minute silence for London bombings marked across the EU
London bombing suspects are all British nationals
Police make significant progress in London bombings investigation





Complete coverage →
Other London news →








Wikimedia Commons has media related to: London bombing, July 2005 



[edit] Support

Official 7 July Support Website


[edit] Official reports

Greater London Authority report (PDF)
House of Commons report (PDF)
Intelligence and Security Committee report (PDF)


[edit] Police statements

London Metropolitan Police Police investigation continues into the 7/7 bombings. Retrieved 18 July 2005
London Metropolitan Police press conference. Retrieved 14 July 2005


[edit] Medical report

The account of the doctor leading the team at the scene of the Tavistock Square bus bomb. Retrieved 11 August 2005


[edit] News articles

BBC In-depth report. Retrieved 12 July 2005.
BBC Animated overview of events. Retrieved July 2005.
BBC London blasts: At a glance. Retrieved 12 July 2005.
BBC BBC News - 'Long-term scars' of London bombs - 30/11/06
The Cambridge Evening News London terror attack: The CEN Online blog. 7 July 2005.
The London News Review A Letter To The Terrorists, From London. Retrieved 7 July 2005.
The Times Online Controlled explosion at home raided by anti-terror police. Retrieved 12 July 2005.
BBC Online UK Holds two minutes silence to remember the victims. Retrieved 7 July 2006.
Fire Brigade operations - London Fire Journal
Archive of Newspaper Front Pages World Wide Following Attack


[edit] Radio broadcasts

The Jon Gaunt show originally broadcast live at 9:00 a.m. on 7 July 2005 on BBC London. First mention of events at approximately 27 minutes into the broadcast.


[edit] Memoirs

Memoirs of the Subway Bombings - From MemoryWiki.


[edit] Tributes and obituaries

Tributes to those who died with portrait photographs
Obituaries


[edit] Remembrance

National Day of Tolerance Petition from Tolerance International UK to make 7 July National Day of Tolerance in Britain.
Department for Culture, Media and Sport Two minutes of silence on the first anniversary of 7 July 2005.


[edit] Photos and videos

http://www.abuhamza.org.uk video about 7/7 by al-qaeda
Video statement by the bomber Shehzad Tanweer
Images of the victims
Swedish newspaper Aftonbladet writes about posters honouring the terrorists [1]








v • d • e

War on Terrorism





Timeline · Casualties · Theaters · Criticism · ISAF





Participants





Operational


ISAF · Operation Enduring Freedom participants · Multinational force in Iraq · Afghanistan · Northern Alliance · Iraq (Iraqi Army) · NATO · Pakistan · United Kingdom · United States · Philippines · Ethiopia







Targets


al-Qaeda · Osama bin Laden · Abu Sayyaf · Iraqi insurgency · Hamas · Islamic Courts Union · Jemaah Islamiyah · Taliban · Pattani Separatists · Jaish-e-Mohammed · Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami · Hizbul Mujahideen · Kurdistan Workers' Party · Hezbollah · Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan · Lashkar-e-Taiba









Conflicts





Operation
Enduring Freedom


War in Afghanistan · OEF - Philippines · Georgia Train and Equip Program · Georgia Sustainment and Stability · OEF - Horn of Africa · OEF - Trans Sahara · Missile strikes in Pakistan







Other


Insurgency in the Maghreb · Iraq insurgency and operations · Insurgency in Saudi Arabia · War in North-West Pakistan · South Thailand insurgency · Lebanon War · War in Somalia · Lebanon-Fatah al-Islam conflict









Islamist
attacks





2001–2002


September 11 attacks · 2001 Indian Parliament attack · Shoe bomb plot · Terrorism in Pakistan · Ghriba synagogue bombing · 1st Bali bombing







2003–2004


Riyadh compound bombings · Casablanca bombings · 2003 Mumbai bombings · Jakarta Marriott Hotel bombing · Istanbul bombings · SuperFerry 14 bombing · Madrid train bombings · Beslan school hostage crisis · Jakarta Australian embassy bombing







2005–2006


1st London bombings · 2nd London bombings · Sharm el-Sheikh attacks · 2nd Bali bombing · 1st Delhi bombings · Amman bombings · 2006 Varanasi bombings · 2006 Mumbai train bombings · Transatlantic aircraft plot · Toronto terrorism plot







2007–2008


1st Algiers bombings · Fort Dix attack plot · Ankara bombing · London car bomb plot · Glasgow Airport attack · Hyderabad bombings · Qahtaniya bombings · Karachi bombing · Baghlan bombing · Philippine Congress bombing · 2nd Algiers bombings · Assassination of Benazir Bhutto · Jaipur bombings · Danish embassy · Indian embassy · United States consulate · Istanbul bombings · Bangalore bombings-Ahmedabad · 2nd Delhi bombings · American embassy · Islamabad bombing · 3rd Delhi bombing · 2008 Assam bombings · 2008 Mumbai attacks







2009–current


Attack on Sri Lankan cricket team · Yemeni tourist attack









See also

Abu Ghraib prison · Axis of evil · Bush Doctrine · CIA run Black sites · Combatant Status Review Tribunal · Enhanced interrogation techniques · Extrajudicial prisoners of the US · Extraordinary rendition · Guantanamo Bay detention camp · Military Commissions Act · NSA electronic surveillance program · Protect America Act of 2007 · Unitary executive theory · Unlawful combatant · USA PATRIOT Act






Terrorism · War












v • d • e

History of London





Evolution

Londinium · Lundenwic · City of London · City of Westminster · Middlesex · County of London · Greater London






Local government

Metropolitan Board of Works · London County Council · Greater London Council · Greater London Authority · London Assembly · Mayor of London






Events

Peasants' Revolt · Black Death · Great Plague · Great Fire · 1854 cholera outbreak · Great Stink · Great Exhibition · 1908 Franco-British Exhibition · The Battle of Cable Street · The Blitz · Swinging London · London Plan · 7/7 bombings · Olympic Games (1908 · 1948 · 2012) · Paralympic Games (2012)






Structures

St Paul's Cathedral · Tower of London · Palace of Whitehall · Westminster Hall · London Bridge · Tower Bridge · Westminster Abbey · Big Ben · The Monument · Fortifications · Shard London Bridge






City of London

City of London Corporation · Lord Mayor of the City of London · Guildhall · Livery Companies · Lord Mayor's Show · Bank of England






Services

Bow Street Runners · Metropolitan Police Service · London Ambulance Service · London Fire Brigade · London sewerage system · London Underground






History of London category









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/7_July_2005_London_bombings"
Categories: July 2005 London bombings | Islamist terrorism in England | Terrorism in London | Terrorism in the United KingdomHidden categories: Wikipedia pages move-protected due to vandalism 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Galego
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Lietuvių
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
中文









 This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 12:33.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
