













Isle of Man - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Isle_of_Man";
		var wgTitle = "Isle of Man";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "14727";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282312201;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Isle of Man

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 

For a topic outline on this subject, please see list of basic Isle of Man topics.



Isle of Man
Ellan Vannin










Flag
Coat of arms





Motto: Quocunque Jeceris Stabit  (Latin)
Withersoever you throw it, it will stand.


Anthem: "O Land of Our Birth"
"Arrane Ashoonagh dy Vannin" (Manx)
Royal anthem: "God Save the Queen"







Location of  Isle of Man  (Green)




Capital
(and largest city)
Douglas (Doolish)
54°09′N 4°29′W﻿ / ﻿54.15°N 4.483°W﻿ / 54.15; -4.483


Official languages
English, Manx


Demonym
Manx


Government
Crown dependency (UK) Parliamentary democracy (Constitutional monarchy) 


 - 
Lord of Mann
Elizabeth II


 - 
Lieutenant Governor
Sir Paul Haddacks


 - 
First Deemster
Michael Kerruish


 - 
President of Tynwald
Noel Cringle


 - 
Chief Minister
Tony Brown


Status
Crown dependency 


 - 
Revested in British crown
1765 


Area


 - 
Total
572 km2 (188th)
221 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
0


Population


 - 
 estimate
80,058 (194th)


 - 
Density
131.2/km2 (75th)
339.6/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2003 estimate


 - 
Total
$2.113 billion (162nd)


 - 
Per capita
$35,000 (11/12th)


HDI (n/a)
n/a (unranked) (n/a)


Currency
Pound sterling1 (GBP)


Time zone
GMT (UTC+0)


 - 
Summer (DST)
 (UTC+1)


Internet TLD
.im


Calling code
+44 (UK area code 01624)


1
The Isle of Man Treasury issues its own sterling notes and coins (see Manx pound).


The Isle of Man (/ˈmæn/; Manx: Ellan Vannin,[1] pronounced [ˈɛlʲən ˈvanɪn]), or Mann (Manx: Mannin, [ˈmanɪn]), is a self-governing Crown dependency, located in the Irish Sea at the geographical centre of the British Isles. The head of state is Queen Elizabeth II, who holds the title of Lord of Mann. The Crown is represented by a Lieutenant Governor. The island is not part of the United Kingdom but foreign relations, defence, and ultimate good-governance of the Isle of Man are the responsibility of the government of the United Kingdom.
Inhabited for millennia, the island gradually became a Celtic-Norse community as the Norse settled there, starting about AD 850. This has left a legacy ranging from the Tynwald parliament to many local place names. After a period of alternating rule by the kings of England and Scotland, the Manx came under the feudal over-lordship of the English Crown. The lordship revested into the British Crown in 1764 but the island never became part of the United Kingdom and retained its status as an internally self-governing jurisdiction.
The Isle of Man is not a part of the European Union, but has a limited relationship concerning the free movement of goods.




Contents


1 History

1.1 Ancient times to present
1.2 Tynwald


2 Geography

2.1 Population

2.1.1 Census




3 Government

3.1 Structure
3.2 External relations and security

3.2.1 Citizenship
3.2.2 European Union
3.2.3 Commonwealth of Nations


3.3 Politics
3.4 Local government


4 Economy

4.1 Communications
4.2 Transport


5 Culture

5.1 Etymology of name
5.2 Language
5.3 Symbols
5.4 Religion
5.5 Myth, legend and folklore
5.6 Cuisine
5.7 Sports

5.7.1 Motorcycle racing
5.7.2 Cammag




6 Famous residents

6.1 Born or brought up on the island
6.2 Moved to the island


7 See also
8 References

8.1 Notes
8.2 Bibliography


9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Main article: History of the Isle of Man

[edit] Ancient times to present
The earliest traces of people on the Isle of Man can be found as far back as the Mesolithic Period, also known as the Middle Stone Age. The first residents lived in small natural shelters, hunting, fishing and gathering for their food. They used small tools made of flint or bone, which have been found near the coast. Representatives of these artifacts are kept at the Manx Museum.
The Neolithic Period marked the coming of knowledge of farming, better stone tools and pottery. It was during this period that Megalithic Monuments began to appear around the island. Examples from this period can be found at Cashtal yn Ard near Maughold, King Orry's Grave in Laxey, Meayll Circle near Cregneash, and Ballaharra Stones in St. John's. The Megaliths were not the only culture during this time, there were also the local Ronaldsway and Bann cultures.
During the Bronze Age, the large communal tombs of the Megaliths were replaced with smaller burial mounds. Bodies were put in stone lined graves along with ornamental containers. The Bronze Age burial mounds created long lasting markers about the countryside.
The Iron Age marked the beginning of Celtic cultural influence. Large hill forts appeared on hill summits, and smaller promontory forts along the coastal cliffs, while large timber-framed roundhouses were built. It is likely that the first Celtic tribes to inhabit the Island were of the Brythonic variety. Around AD 700 it is assumed that Irish invasion or immigration formed the basis of the early Manx population. This is evident in the change in language used in Ogham inscriptions. Manx Gaelic remains closely related to Irish and Scots Gaelic.
Viking settlement of the Isle of Man began at the end of the 8th century. The Vikings established Tynwald and introduced many land divisions that still exist. They also left the Manx Runestones. Although the Manx language does contain Norse influences, they are few. The Norse Kingdom of Mann and the Isles was created by Godred Crovan in 1079 after the Battle of Skyhill. During Viking times, the islands of this kingdom were called the Súðreyjar or Sudreys ("southern isles") in contrast to the Norðreyjar ("northern isles") of Orkney, Shetland and the Hebrides. This later became Anglicised as Sodor. The Church of England diocese is still called the Diocese of Sodor and Man although it only covers Mann. (When the Rev. W.V. Awdry wrote The Railway Series, he invented the island of Sodor as an imaginary island located between the Isle of Man and the Cumbrian coast.)
In 1266, as dictated in the Treaty of Perth, Norway's King Magnus VI ceded the isles to Scotland. The Isle of Man came under English control in the 14th century. During this period the Isle was dominated by the Stanley family, who also held the title of Earl of Derby, who had been given possession of Man by King Henry IV. In 1703 the Act of Settlement secured peasant rights and marked the beginning of a move away from feudal government. In 1765, however, the British Crown secured a greater control over the island, without incorporating it into Great Britain, laying the grounds for the island's status as a Crown dependency.
In 1866 greater autonomy was restored to the island's parliament and a full transition to democracy began. The Isle quickly developed as a finance centre and tourist destination, becoming increasingly prosperous during the 20th century. During both the First and Second World Wars the island was used as a location for internment camps for Axis citizens and suspected sympathisers.

[edit] Tynwald
Main article: Tynwald
Tynwald, the island's parliament, was nominally founded in AD 979. It is arguably the oldest continuous parliament in the world.[2] The annual ceremonial meeting in July on Tynwald Day, the island's national day, continues to be held at Tynwald Hill, where titles are announced and a brief description of the new laws enacted by Tynwald during the previous year is given.

[edit] Geography




Map of the Isle of Man






Isle of Man /Ramsey/ seen from the air






The Calf of Man seen from Cregneash.


Main article: Geography of the Isle of Man
See also: List of islands of the Isle of Man
See also: Biota of the Isle of Man
As well as the main island of Man itself, the Isle of Man includes some nearby small islands: the partially inhabited Calf of Man, and the uninhabited Chicken Rock and St. Patrick's Isle.
The Isle of Man is located geographically in the middle of the northern Irish Sea, close to the geographical centre of the British Isles. The island lies closest to Scotland followed by England, Ireland and Wales.
Approximately 32 miles (51 km) long and between 8 miles (13 km) and 15 miles (24 km) wide, the island has an area of around 221 square miles (570 km2).
Hills in the north and south are bisected by a central valley. The extreme north is exceptionally flat, consisting mainly of deposits built up by deposition from glacial advances from western Scotland during colder times. There are more recently deposited shingle beaches at the Point of Ayre. It has only one mountain higher than 2,000 feet (610 m), Snaefell, with a height of 2,036 feet (621 m). According to an old saying, from the summit one can see six kingdoms: those of Mann, Scotland, England, Ireland, Wales, and Heaven.[3][4][5] Some versions add a seventh kingdom, that of Neptune or the Sea.[6][7]

[edit] Population
Further information: Manx people
According to the 2006 interim census,[8] the Isle of Man is home to 80,058 people, of whom 26,218 reside in the island's capital Douglas. Most of the population were born in the British Isles, with 47.6% born in the Isle of Man, 37.2% born in England, 3.4% in Scotland, 2.1% in Northern Ireland, 2.1% in the Republic of Ireland, 1.2% in Wales and 0.3% born in the Channel Islands.

[edit] Census
The Isle of Man Full Census, most recently held in 2001, has been a ten yearly occurrence since 1821, with interim censuses being introduced from 1966. It is separate from, but closely related to, the Census in the United Kingdom.
The 2001 Census was conducted by the Economic Affairs Division of the Isle of Man Treasury, under the authority of the Census Act 1929.

[edit] Government




A satellite image of the Isle of Man.


Main article: Isle of Man Government
The United Kingdom is responsible for the island's defence and ultimately for good governance, and for representing the island in international forums, while the island's own parliament and government have competence over all domestic matters.

[edit] Structure
See also: Manx law
The island's parliament is Tynwald, which dates from at least AD 979 and is said to be the oldest continuously existing parliament in the world. Tynwald is a bicameral legislature, comprising the House of Keys (directly elected by universal suffrage) and the Legislative Council (consisting of indirectly elected and ex-officio members). These two bodies meet together in joint session as Tynwald.
The executive branch of government is the Council of Ministers, which is composed of members of Tynwald. It is headed by the Chief Minister, currently Tony Brown MHK.
Vice-regal functions of the Head of State are performed by a Lieutenant Governor.

[edit] External relations and security
Main article: External relations of the Isle of Man

See also Isle of Man Constabulary.

Under British law, the Isle of Man is not part of the United Kingdom. However, the UK takes care of its external and defence affairs, and retains paramount power to legislate for the island. There are no independent military forces on the Isle of Man. There is an independent Isle of Man police force, which is controlled directly by the Isle of Man Government, but which nonetheless voluntarily submits to inspection by the UK inspectorate of police.

[edit] Citizenship
Citizenship in the Isle of Man is governed by UK law. Passports issued by the Isle of Man Passport Office say "British Islands - Isle of Man" on the cover but the nationality status stated on the passport is simply "British Citizen". However, although Manx passport holders are British citizens, because the Isle of Man is not part of the European Union, those without a grandparent born in the UK (or who have not lived continuously for a period of five or more years in the UK) do not have the same rights as other British citizens with regard to employment and establishment in the EU. Isle of Man passports can be issued to any British citizen in the Isle of Man (whether or not that person has "Manx status" under the local Isle of Man employment laws). They can also be issued to Manx-connected British citizens residing in the UK or any of the other Crown Dependencies.

[edit] European Union
The Isle of Man holds neither membership nor associate membership of the European Union. Protocol 3 of the UK's Act of Accession to the Treaty of Rome permits trade for Manx goods without tariffs.[9][10] In conjunction with the Customs and Excise agreement with the UK, this facilitates free trade with the UK. While Manx goods can be freely moved within the EU, people, capital and services cannot. EU citizens are entitled to travel and reside in the island without restriction.

[edit] Commonwealth of Nations
The Isle of Man is not itself a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. By virtue of its relationship with the United Kingdom, it takes part in several Commonwealth institutions, including the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and the Commonwealth Games.

[edit] Politics




Isle of Man local authorities and sheadings


Main article: Politics of the Isle of Man
See also: List of political parties in the Isle of Man and Elections in the Isle of Man
Most Manx politicians stand for election as independents rather than as representatives of political parties. Though political parties do exist, their influence is not nearly as strong as in the United Kingdom.
The largest political party is the recently established Liberal Vannin Party, which promotes greater Manx independence and more accountability in Government. The LibVannin party has, however, only one member of Tynwald, Peter Karran MHK.
A nationalist pressure group Mec Vannin advocates the establishment of a sovereign republic.

[edit] Local government
Main article: Local government in the Isle of Man
Local government on the Isle of Man is based around the concept of ancient parishes. There are two types of local authorities: a corporation for the Borough of Douglas, and bodies of 'commissioners' for the town districts of Castletown, Peel and Ramsey, the village districts of Michael, Laxey, Onchan, Port Erin and Port St Mary, and the 15 'parish districts' (those parishes or parts of parishes which do not fall within the districts previously mentioned). Local authorities are under the supervision of the Isle of Man Government's Department of Local Government and the Environnment (DOLGE).

[edit] Economy
Main article: Economy of the Isle of Man
The Isle of Man is a "low tax economy" with no capital gains tax, wealth tax, stamp duty or inheritance tax[11] and a top rate of income tax of 18%. A "tax cap" is in force. The maximum amount of tax payable by an individual is £100,000 or £200,000 for couples if they choose to have their incomes jointly assessed. The £100,000 tax cap equates to an assessable income of approximately £570,000. Personal income is assessed and taxed on a total 'worldwide' income basis rather than a remittance basis. This means that all income earned throughout the world is assessable for Manx tax rather than only income earned in or brought into the Island.
The rate of corporation tax is 0% for almost all types of income, the only exceptions are that the profits of banks are taxed at 10%, as is rental (or other) income from land and buildings situated on the Isle of Man.[12][13]
Offshore banking, manufacturing, and tourism form key sectors of the economy. Agriculture and fishing, once the mainstays of the economy, now make declining contributions to the Island's Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
Trade takes place mostly with the United Kingdom.
The Manx government promotes island locations for making films by contributing to the production costs. Since 1995 over eighty films have been made on the island.

[edit] Communications
Main article: Communications on the Isle of Man
The main telephone provider on the Isle of Man is Manx Telecom. The island has three mobile operators: Manx Telecom, Cloud9 and Sure. Broadband internet services are available through four local providers which are Domicilium, Manx Computer Bureau, Wi-Manx and Manx Telecom. The island does not have its own ITU country code, but is accessed via the UK's code (+44) and the island's telephone numbers are part of the UK telephone numbering plan with local dialling codes 01624 (landlines) and 07624/07924 (mobiles).
In 1996 the Isle of Man Government obtained permission to use the .im national top-level domain (TLD) and has ultimate responsibility for its use. The domain is managed on a daily basis by Domicilium, an island based internet service provider.
In December 2007 the Manx Electricity Authority and its telecommunications subsidiary, e-llan Communications commissioned the lighting of a new fibre-optic link that connects the island to a worldwide fibre optic network.
The Isle of Man has three radio stations: Manx Radio, Energy FM and 3 FM.
There is no insular television service and local transmitters retransmit analogue broadcasts of BBC 1 and BBC 2 (with BBC North West regional programmes), ITV Border Television and Channel 4. Five and Freeview are not available via the island's relay transmitters. However, in areas where local geography is favourable, terrestrial television (including digital terrestrial) can be received direct from transmitters located in the United Kingdom or Republic of Ireland.
Analogue television transmissions will cease by the end of 2009 and a limited local service of digital terrestrial television will then commence.
Many TV services are available by satellite, such as Sky Digital, and Freesat from the Astra 2/Eurobird 1 group, as well as services from a range of other satellites around Europe such as Astra 1 and Hotbird.
The Isle of Man has three newspapers, all weeklies, and all owned by Isle of Man Newspapers. The Isle of Man Courier (distribution 36,318) is free and distributed to homes on the island. The other two newspapers are Isle of Man Examiner (circulation 13,276) and the Manx Independent (circulation 12,255).[14]
Postal services are the responsibility of Isle of Man Post, which took over from the UK General Post Office in 1973.

[edit] Transport
Main article: Transport on the Isle of Man
The island has a total of 688 miles (1,107 km)[15] of public roads, all of which are paved. Many of the roads on the island have no speed limit.
Douglas is served by frequent ferries to and from England and more limited summer-only services from Ireland. All ferries are operated by the Isle of Man Steam Packet Company.
The only commercial airport on the island is the Isle of Man Airport at Ronaldsway.
The island used to have an extensive narrow-gauge railway system, both steam-operated and electric, but the majority of the steam railway tracks have been taken out of service and the track removed. Currently there is a steam railway which runs between Douglas and Port Erin, an electric railway which runs between Douglas and Ramsey and an electric mountain railway which climbs Snaefell. The lines are mostly operated for the benefit of tourists, though some people use them for commuting.
There is a comprehensive bus network, operated by Isle of Man Transport.

[edit] Culture
Further information: Music of the Isle of Man
The culture of the Isle of Man is influenced by its Celtic and to a lesser extent its Norse origins, though its close proximity to the UK, period as a UK tourist destination and recent mass immigration by British migrant workers has meant that British influence has been dominant since the Revestment period. Recent revival campaigns have attempted to preserve the surviving vestiges of Manx culture after a long period of Anglicisation, and significant interest in the Manx language, history and musical tradition have been the result.

[edit] Etymology of name
The origin of the name Isle of Man is unclear. In the Manx Gaelic language the Isle of Man is known as Ellan Vannin, where ellan is a Gaelic word meaning 'island'. The earliest form of 'Man' is Manu or Mana[16] giving the genitive name Manann leading to the word Mannin, to which a 'h' is added when used after the feminine word Ellan, giving Mhannin. As 'mh' is pronounced like a 'v' in Goidelic languages, in modern Manx the name becomes Ellan Vannin.
During the period of Julius Caesar as proconsul and his visit to Britain during 55 and 54 BC Caesar referred to the Isle of Man in his Commentarii de Bello Gallico to 'an island called Mona which lies midway across the sea separating Britain from Ireland.'[17]

[edit] Language
Main article: Manx language




A bilingual sign in the Isle of Man featuring Manx Gaelic and English.


The official languages of the Isle of Man are Manx Gaelic and English. A dialect of English known as Manx English is spoken.
The Manx Gaelic language is a Goidelic Celtic language and is one of a number of insular Celtic languages spoken in the British Isles. Manx Gaelic has been officially recognised as a legitimate autochthonous regional language under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, ratified by the United Kingdom on 27 March, 2001 on behalf of the Isle of Man government.
The Manx language is closely related to the Irish language and Scottish Gaelic. By the middle of the 20th century only a few elderly native speakers remained: the last of them, Ned Maddrell, died on 27 December, 1974. By then a scholarly revival had begun to spread to the populace and many had learned Manx as a second language. The first native speakers of Manx (bilingual with English) in many years have now appeared: children brought up by Manx-speaking parents. Primary immersion education in Manx is provided by the Manx government: since 2003, the former St John's School building has been used by the Bunscoill Gaelgagh (Manx language-medium school). Degrees in Manx are available from the Isle of Man College and the Centre for Manx Studies. Manx-language playgroups also exist and Manx language classes are available in island schools. In the 2001 census, 1,689 out of 76,315, or 2.2% of the population, claimed to have knowledge of Manx, although the degree of knowledge in these cases was presumably varied.
In common use are the greetings moghrey mie and fastyr mie which mean 'good morning' and 'good afternoon' respectively. The Manx language knows no 'evening' as it is 'afternoon'. Another frequently heard Manx expression is traa dy liooar meaning 'time enough', and represents a stereotypical view of the Manx attitude to life.

[edit] Symbols




Manx triskelion.


For centuries, the island's symbol has been its ancient triskelion, a device similar to Sicily's Trinacria: three bent legs, each with a spur, joined at the thigh. The Manx triskelion does not appear to have an official design; government publications, currency, flags, the tourist authority and others all use different variants. Most, but not all, preserve rotational symmetry, some running clockwise, others anti-clockwise. Some have the uppermost thigh at 12:00, others at 11:30 or 10:00, etc. Some have the knee bent at 90°, some at 60°, some at closer to 120°. Also the degree of ornamentation of the leg wear and spur varies considerably.
The three legs refer to the island's motto (adopted late in the symbol's history): Quocunque Jeceris Stabit, traditionally translated from Latin as 'Whithersoever you throw it, it will stand', or 'Whichever way you throw it, it will stand'.
The origin of the 'Three Legs of Man' (as they are usually called) is explained in the Manx legend that Manannan repelled an invasion by transforming into the three legs and rolling down the hill and defeating the invaders.
Variations on the Manx triskelion are still in use on the coats of arms belonging to the different branches of the ancient Norwegian noble family that ruled Mann until the 13th century. This particular version belongs to the Skancke branch of the Skanke family. The name stems from skank, the Norwegian version of the word 'shank', or 'leg'. The Norse royal family of Man stayed on the island for some years after the death of Magnus III and the beginning of Scottish rule. The family's emigration only came after the final attempt on the part of the Manx at restoring the old Sudreyar dynasty in the 1275 uprising against the Scots. This revolt failed disastrously, ending in the deaths of hundreds of rebels, including the last Norse King of Mann, Godred VI Magnuson when the Manx suffered defeat in the decisive Battle of Ronaldsway, near Castletown. When the Norse-Manx royals arrived in Norway they took service as nobles of the Norwegian king, quickly becoming knights, landlords, and clergy under the Norwegian Crown.

[edit] Religion

See also Diocese of Sodor and Man

The predominant religious tradition of the island is Christianity, and the ancient Christian Church of the island is today part of the Anglican Communion. The diocese has an unbroken history from 1154 to the present day, during which there have been many changes in tradition and detail. As with all ancient Anglican churches, the diocese was once (and until the reformation) part of the then mainstream of western Christian tradition, the Roman Catholic Church. The diocese has been part of the national churches of Norway, Scotland, and England,[18] and within the latter has been part of both the Province of Canterbury and the Province of York of the Church of England at different times. It has also come under the influence of Irish religious tradition. Today its bishop and 45 parish churches[19] are formally part of the Province of York.[20]
Other Christian churches also operate on the Isle of Man. The second largest denomination is the Methodist Church, which is close in size to the Anglican diocese. There are eight Roman Catholic parish churches, under the authority of the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Liverpool. Additionally there are five Baptist churches, four Pentecostal churches, and two United Reformed churches.[21]
There is a small Jewish community on the island, with a synagogue in Douglas.

[edit] Myth, legend and folklore




Peel Castle.


In Manx mythology, the island was ruled by Manannán mac Lir, a Celtic sea god, who would draw his misty cloak around the island to protect it from invaders. One of the principal theories about the origin of the name Mann is that it is named after Manannan.
In the Manx tradition of folklore, there are many stories of mythical creatures and characters. These include the Buggane, a malevolent spirit who according to legend blew the roof off St Trinian's Church in a fit of pique; the Fenodyree; the Glashtyn; and the Moddey Dhoo, a ghostly black dog who wandered the walls and corridors of Peel Castle.
The Isle of Man is also said to be home to fairies, known locally as 'the little folk' or 'themselves'. There is a famous Fairy Bridge and it is said to be bad luck if one fails to wish the fairies good morning or afternoon when passing over it. It used to be a tradition to leave a coin on the bridge to ensure good luck. Other types of fairies are the Mi'raj and the Arkan Sonney.
An old Irish story tells how Lough Neagh was formed when Ireland's legendary giant Fionn mac Cumhaill (sometimes known as Finn McCool) scooped up a portion of the land and tossed it at a Scottish rival. He missed, and the chunk of earth landed in the Irish Sea, thus creating the island.

[edit] Cuisine




Manx Loaghtan Sheep are bred for their meat on the island and have an important place in Manx cuisine.


Traditionally the national dish of the island is 'Spuds and Herrin', boiled potatoes and herring. This plain dish is chosen because of its role supporting the subsistence farmers of the island, who crofted the land and fished the sea for centuries.
A more recent claim for the title of national dish would the ubiquitous chips, cheese and gravy. This analog of poutine is found in most of the island's fast-food outlets, and consists of thick cut chips, covered in shredded Manx cheddar cheese and topped with a thick gravy.[22]
Seafood has traditionally accounted for a large proportion of the local diet. Although commercial fishing has declined in recent years, local delicacies include Manx kippers (smoked herring) which are produced by the smokeries in Peel on the west coast of the island, albeit mainly from North Sea herring these days. The smokeries also produce other specialities including smoked salmon and bacon.
Crab, lobster and scallops are commercially fished, and the Queen Scallop ('Queenies') is regarded as a particular delicacy, with a light, sweet flavour. Cod, ling and mackerel are often angled for the table, and freshwater trout and salmon can be taken from the local rivers and lakes, supported by the Government fish hatchery at Cornaa.
Cattle, sheep, pigs and poultry are all commercially farmed, Manx lamb from the hill-farms being a popular dish. The Loaghtan, the indigenous breed of Manx sheep, has a rich, dark meat that has found favour with chefs, featuring in dishes on the BBC's Masterchef series.
Milk and cheese are produced by IOM Creameries. Manx cheese has been a particular success, featuring smoked and herb-flavoured varieties and is stocked by many of the UK's supermarket chains. Manx cheese took bronze medals in the 2005 British Cheese Awards, and sold 578 tonnes over the year.
Beer is brewed on a commercial scale by Okells Brewery (established in 1850) and Bushy's Brewery.

[edit] Sports
Main article: Sport in the Isle of Man
The Isle of Man is represented as a nation in the Commonwealth Games and the Island Games and will be hosting the IV Commonwealth Youth Games in 2011. The island started the Island Games in 1985, and also hosted the Island Games in 2001.
Isle of Man teams and individuals participate in many sports both on and off the island including rugby union, football, gymnastics, hockey, netball, bowling and cricket. Being an island, many types of watersports are also popular with residents.
Mark Cavendish, a professional cyclist, was the first Manxman to win a stage of the Tour de France[23] He then went on to win three additional stages, becoming the first Briton to win four stages of the same Tour.

[edit] Motorcycle racing
For more details on this topic, see Isle of Man TT.
The main international motorcycle event associated with the island is the Isle of Man TT, which began in 1907 and takes place in late May and early June. It is now an international road racing event for motorbikes and used to be part of the World Championship. The Manx Grand Prix is a motorcycle event for amateurs and private entrants that uses the same 37.73 miles (60.72 km) Snaefell Mountain Course in late August and early September.

[edit] Cammag
Main article: Cammag
Cammag is the national sport of the Isle of Man. It is similar to the Scottish game of shinty, and Irish hurling. Once the most popular sport on the island, it ceased to be played by the start of the 20th century. It has more recently been revived with an annual match at St John's.

[edit] Famous residents
Main article: List of notable residents of the Isle of Man

[edit] Born or brought up on the island

Mark Cavendish, professional cyclist
The Bee Gees, pop music group
Illiam Dhone or William Christian led an uprising against English rule over the island and was executed in 1663
Frank Kermode, literary critic
Charles Kerruish became, in 1961, the first Manxman to be head of government
Nigel Kneale, science fiction and horror screenwriter
Archibald Knox, arts and crafts designer
David Knight, professional enduro dirtbike rider


[edit] Moved to the island

Jeremy Clarkson, Top Gear presenter
John Rhys Davies, actor
George MacDonald Fraser, author
Andy Kershaw, disc jockey
Nigel Mansell, 1992 Formula One and 1993 Indy Car World Champion
Sir Norman Wisdom, comedian and actor


[edit] See also




Main list: List of basic Isle of Man topics


Anglo-Manx
Biota of the Isle of Man
Coins of the Manx pound
Isle of Man Incinerator




List of not fully sovereign nations
Manx cat
Peel Engineering Company
Towns in the Isle of Man
Windmills in the Isle of Man
Raad ny Foillan, long distance footpath





[edit] References

[edit] Notes


^ Ellan is Manx for "island"; Vannin is the genitive case of Mannin, and means "of Man(n)".
^ Both the Icelandic parliament and the Faroese parliament are older, but were abolished from 1800 to 1845 and 1816 to 1852, respectively.
^ "Snaefell Mountain Railway". Isle of Man Guide. Maxima Systems Ltd. http://www.iomguide.com/mountainrailway.php. Retrieved on 2008-06-05.  "From the top on a clear day it is said one can see the six kingdoms. The kingdom of Scotland, England, Wales, Ireland, Mann and Heaven." 
^ "Snaefell Mountain Railway". visitisleofman.com. Isle of Man Government. http://www.gov.im/tourism/culture/attractions/snaefell_attract.xml. Retrieved on 2008-06-05. 
^ "Snaefell Mountain Railway". Best Loved Hotels. http://www.bestloved.com/attractions/snaefell-mountain-railway-in-douglas-isle-of-man-the-north-england-uk.php. Retrieved on 2008-06-05. 
^ "Snaefell Summit". isle-of-man.com. http://www.isle-of-man.com/manxnotebook/tourism/pcards/snaefell.htm. Retrieved on 2008-06-05.  "It is the answer to the often posed question as to where can one see seven kingdoms at the same time ? The seven Kingdoms being the four mentioned by Earl James, the Kingdom of Man, of Earth (in some answers that of Neptune) and of Heaven." 
^ Ian O'Leary Lecture
^ "Isle of Man Census 2006 - Summary Results" (PDF). Isle of Man Treasury. Isle of Man Government. December 2006. http://www.gov.im/lib/docs/treasury/economic/census/isleofmancensusreport2006.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-06-05. 
^ http://www.gov.im/lib/docs/ebusiness/advantages/protocol3.pdf
^ http://www.bmdf.co.uk/ukaccessiontreaty.pdf
^ Direct Tax - Isle of Man Government
^ New Assessor of Income Tax - Isle of Man Government
^ Forget Monaco: Isle of Man cuts tax to tempt super-rich - Tax, Money - Independent.co.uk
^ "Isle of Man Newspapers". Isle of Man Newspapers. http://www.iomtoday.co.im/newspaper.aspx. Retrieved on 2008-09-04. 
^ Isle of Man - About the Island
^ The Isle of Man. A Social, Cultural and Political History. by R.H. Kinvig pp18 (1975) (3rd Edition) Liverpool University Press ISBN 0-85323-391-8
^ The Isle of Man. A Social, Cultural and Political History. by R.H. Kinvig pp18-19 (1975) (3rd Edition) Liverpool University Press ISBN 0-85323-391-8
^ Full details in A Moore's comprehensive history which is available on-line in full.
^ A full list is given on the diocesan website.
^ See official entry in the Anglican Communion directory.
^ All churches on the island are listed on this website.
^ Isle of Man - Factfile - Daily Life
^ Allen, R. Cavendish wins Tour de France stage Isle of Man Today, July 8, 2008.



[edit] Bibliography

Russel, G. 1988. Distribution and development of some Manx epiphyte populations. Helgolander Meeresunters. 42: 477 - 492.



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Isle of Man 



isleofman.com The Isle of Man online.
Manx Government A comprehensive site covering many aspects of Manx life from fishing to financial regulation
CIA World Factbook listing for the Isle of Man
Isle of Man Guide
Manx Wiki







 
International membership














v • d • e

The British Isles





Terminology · Naming dispute · Islands of the North Atlantic (IONA)





Politics





Sovereign states and
constituent countries


Ireland · United Kingdom (England · Northern Ireland · Scotland · Wales)







British Crown
dependencies


Guernsey · Jersey · Isle of Man







Political cooperation


British-Irish Council · British-Irish Inter-Parliamentary Body · Common Travel Area · North/South Ministerial Council









Geography





Island groups


Channel Islands · Islands of the Clyde · Great Britain · Hebrides · Ireland · Isle of Man · Isles of Scilly · Northern Isles (Orkney · Shetland)







Lists of islands of


Ireland · Isle of Man · United Kingdom (England · Scotland · Wales)









History





Current states and
dependencies


Ireland · United Kingdom (England · Northern Ireland · Scotland · Wales)
Guernsey · Jersey · Isle of Man







Former states


Kingdom of England · Kingdom of Scotland · Kingdom of Ireland · Principality of Wales · Kingdom of Great Britain · United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland · Irish Free State









Society





Modern languages


Auregnais · BSL · Cornish · English · French · Guernésiais · Irish · ISL · Jèrriais · Manx · NISL · Scots (Ulster) · Scottish Gaelic · Sercquiais · Welsh







People


British · Celts · Cornish · English · English Gypsies · Irish · Irish Traveller · Kale · Manx · Scottish · Ulster-Scots · Welsh
















v • d • e

Celtic nations and their culture





Nations





Celtic League definition


Brittany · Cornwall · Ireland · Isle of Man · Scotland · Wales







Other claimants


Asturias · England · Galicia · Padania












Languages

Brythonic: Breton · Cornish · Welsh
Goidelic: Irish · Manx · Scottish Gaelic
Mixed: Shelta · Bungee






Culture

Brittany · Cornwall · Ireland · Isle of Man · Scotland · Wales · Celtic art






Music

Brittany · Cornwall · Ireland · Isle of Man · Scotland · Wales






Sport

Cammag · Cornish hurling · Cornish wrestling · Curling · Gaelic football · Gaelic handball · Golf · Gouren · Rounders · Highland games · Hurling · Road bowls · Shinty






Peoples

Breton · Cornish · Irish · Irish Traveller · Manx · Scottish · Ulster-Scots · Welsh













v • d • e

British overseas territories and Crown dependencies





Overseas territories

Anguilla · Bermuda · British Antarctic Territory · British Indian Ocean Territory · British Virgin Islands · Cayman Islands · Falkland Islands · Gibraltar · Montserrat · Pitcairn Islands · St. Helena1 · South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands · Turks and Caicos Islands







Crown dependencies

Guernsey · Jersey · Isle of Man






Sovereign base areas

Akrotiri and Dhekelia






1 includes Ascension Island · Tristan da Cunha · Gough Island












v • d • e

Non-sovereign territories of Europe










 
Autonomous regions









Russia



Adygea · Bashkortostan · Chechnya · Chuvashia · Dagestan · Ingushetia · Kabardino-Balkaria · Kalmykia · Karachay-Cherkessia · Karelia · Komi Republic · Mari El · Mordovia · Nenets Autonomous Okrug · North Ossetia-Alania · Tatarstan · Udmurtia








Elsewhere



Adjara, Georgia · Åland Islands, Finland · Azores, Portugal · Crimea, Ukraine · Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Italy · Gagauzia, Moldova · Madeira,1 Portugal · Mount Athos, Greece · Nakhchivan,1 Azerbaijan · Sardinia, Italy · Sicily, Italy · Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol, Italy · Valle d'Aosta, Italy · Vojvodina, Serbia



















 
Dependent territories








Akrotiri and Dhekelia,1 UK · Faroe Islands, Denmark · Gibraltar, UK · Guernsey, UK · Isle of Man, UK · Jersey, UK
















 
Unrecognised or partially recognised republics, territories or regions








Abkhazia, Georgia1, 2 · Kosovo, Serbia3 · Nagorno-Karabakh Republic, Azerbaijan1 · Northern Cyprus, Cyprus1, 4 South Ossetia, Georgia1, 2 · Transnistria, Moldova ·











1 Entirely on another continent but having sociopolitical connexions with Europe.  2 Recognised by Russia and Nicaragua.  3 Recognised by 56 UN member states.  4 Recognised only by Turkey.












v • d • e

States with an Anglophone majority – the English-speaking world





Europe

Guernsey • Ireland • Isle of Man • Jersey • United Kingdom • Malta






Americas

Antigua and Barbuda • The Bahamas • Barbados • Canada • Dominica • Guyana • Saint Kitts and Nevis • Saint Vincent and the Grenadines • Trinidad and Tobago • United States






Oceania

Australia • Marshall Islands • Federated States of Micronesia • Nauru • New Zealand • Palau






Asia

Singapore













v • d • e

The English-speaking world








Dark blue: Countries and territories where English is spoken natively by a significant population.
Light blue: Countries where English is an official language but not native. English is also one of the official languages of the European Union. Click on the coloured regions to view the related article.













































































Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isle_of_Man"
Categories: National censuses | Celtic culture | Isle of Man | Islands of Isle of Man | Former Norwegian colonies | English-speaking countries and territoriesHidden categories: Articles containing Manx language text | Articles containing Latin language text | Articles containing Norwegian language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
Arpetan
Asturianu
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ქართული
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Magyar
Македонски
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Occitan
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Scots
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
Winaray
吴语
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 10:30.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
