













List of Nip/Tuck episodes - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "List_of_Nip/Tuck_episodes";
		var wgTitle = "List of Nip/Tuck episodes";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "3369976";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 284424239;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); List of Nip/Tuck episodes

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This is an episode list for Nip/Tuck, an American drama television series on FX Networks. It is currently in its fifth season, and so far 81 episodes have aired. With the exception of the pilot, each episode is named after the character(s) that will undergo plastic surgery in that particular episode.
The series returned January 6, 2009, airing the 8-episode remainder of season five. Season six will also be split into two parts, with part one (10 episodes) airing in January 2010, and part two (9 episodes) airing in January 2011, bringing the grand total to 100 episodes.[1]





Contents


1 Series overview
2 Season 1: 2003
3 Season 2: 2004
4 Season 3: 2005
5 Season 4: 2006
6 Season 5: 2007-2009
7 Season 6: 2010-2011
8 References





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Series overview


Season
Episodes
Originally
aired
DVD release date
(Region 1)
DVD release date
(Region 2)



1
13
2003
June 15, 2004
2004-09-20



2
16
2004
August 30, 2005
2005-05-30



3
15
2005
August 29, 2006
2006-05-08



4
15
2006
September 4, 2007
2007-08-13



5 (Part 1)
14
2007-2008
December 30, 2008
January 13, 2009



5 (Part 2)
8
2009
December 29, 2009
TBA



6 (Part 1)
10
2010
TBA
TBA



6 (Part 2)
9
2011
TBA
TBA



[edit] Season 1: 2003


#
Title
Patient Portrayer(s)
Surgery Music
Original airdate
Production code


1
"Pilot"
Geoffrey Rivas
Paint It Black—The Rolling Stones
July 22, 2003
101


Christian's unethical acceptance of $300,000 from a mobster desperate for a new face put his partnership with Sean in jeopardy and their lives in peril. 


2
"Mandi/Randi"
Caitlin and Melinda Dahl
Genetic World—Télépopmusik
You Make Me Feel So Young—Frank Sinatra
July 29, 2003
102


Gorgeous identical twins come to the clinic seeking different looks. Grace Santiago rejects Sean's romantic pass, but accepts his offer for a psychological profiler position. 


3
"Nanette Babcock"
Lindsay Hollister
The Blue Danube—Johann Strauss
August 5, 2003
103


A woman's mental instability makes her an inappropriate candidate for the surgery she wants. Christian seduces an older, rich widow to discourage her from filing a malpractice suit. 


4
"Sophia Lopez"
Jonathan Del Arco
none
August 12, 2003
104


Christian's plan to seek porn stars as clients backfires. A transsexual's plight awakens new compassion and activism in Sean. 


5
"Kurt Dempsey"
Vincent Angell
Lovefool—The Cardigans
August 19, 2003
105


Julia discovers she is pregnant. Christian confronts his sexual addiction and a Caucasian man wants his eyes to look Asian. 


6
"Megan O'Hara"
Julie Warner
Tighten Up—Archie Bell & the Drells
September 2, 2003
106


Christian's decision to end his torrid but inappropriate romance with a patient collapses when he witnesses Sean displaying affection for a patient. 


7
"Cliff Mantegna"
Alex Carter
Emerge—Fischerspooner
September 9, 2003
107


Christian attends a glitzy party for swingers and discovers he's not the only one from the clinic there. Matt's threesome becomes the topic of a three-family intervention. 


8
"Cara Fitzgerald"
Keri Lynn Pratt
Clair de Lune—Claude Debussy
September 16, 2003
108


Matt hides the fact that he's responsible for horribly disfiguring a girl by visiting her in the hospital. Grace suspects that Sean and Megan are lovers. A priest conceals his identity by having the doctors remove an incriminating birthmark. 


9
"Sophia Lopez II"
Jonathan Del Arco
A Sorta Fairytale—Tori Amos
September 23, 2003
109


An impromptu romance makes Sophia reluctant to have sexual-reassignment surgery. Christian swaps Kimber for Merril Bobolit's Lamborghini. 


10
"Adelle Coffin"
Nan Martin
Sunshine Superman—Donovan
September 30, 2003
110


Sean imagines that a cadaver head he operates on for his 10-year recertification is talking to him. It tells him about cancer-stricken Megan's desire to commit suicide. 


11
"Montana / Sassy / Justice"
Cheryl White
Hot Legs—Rod Stewart
October 7, 2003
111


An aggressive male who's one of a female patient's multiple personalities demands a procedure for one of the other personalities. Christian finds himself preparing to be a father when Gina tells him she's pregnant. 


12
"Antonia Ramos"
Marisol Nichols
Poison Arrow—ABC
Sunglasses at Night—Corey Hart
October 14, 2003
112


For months druglord Escobar Gallardo has known the doctors' deepest secret. Now he uses it for blackmail, forcing the two men to remove liquid-heroin implants of Escobar's female drug couriers. 


13
"Escobar Gallardo"
Robert LaSardo
She Blinded Me With Science—Thomas Dolby
October 21, 2003
113


A man offers $150,000 for an operation on his show dog. Sean gives Escobar a new face. Christian faces a startling truth in the delivery room. 



[edit] Season 2: 2004


#
Title
Patient Portrayer(s)
Surgery Music
Original airdate
Production code


14
"Erica Noughton"
Vanessa Redgrave
Eyes Without a Face - Billy Idol
Bach's Overture - Zigo
June 22, 2004
201


Sean turns 40, and has begun to experience spasms in his hand which affect his surgical skills. Gina tries to keep baby Wilber away from Christian, who later discovers that Wilber's nanny (Portia Dawson) has been drugging him to keep him asleep. Julia's mother, Erica, comes to Miami wanting a face lift just before she starts promoting her new book. Erica and Christian have a history: they slept together at Sean and Julia's wedding. A middle-aged woman (Romy Rosemont) and her gay best friend (Chris Diamantopoulos) come to McNamara/Troy, the woman seeking corrective surgery after being shot in the face nine months ago. But their friendship harbors a dark secret... 


15
"Christian Troy"
Julian McMahon
Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov: Flight of the Bumblebee - J-Radical
Just Let Go - Fischerspooner
Step Aside - Clawfinger
Force - Dog
June 29, 2004
202


Christian breaks his nose on a woman's vagina after she sneezes during oral sex, but is worried about Sean correcting it due to his hand spasms. Matt discovers that Henry has been arrested for raping Cara Fitzgerald, and has informed the authorities about the hit-and-run Matt was involved in. 


16
"Manya Mabika"
Aisha Tyler
Collective for Changuito - Amampondo
More Than This - Roxy Music
July 6, 2004
203


Sean discovers that Julia has been faking her orgasms, and asks Christian for sex advice. He also encounters Ava Moore (Famke Janssen), a life coach, and recommends she talk to Julia about her recent stress. Ava suggests that Erica is at the root of Julia's problems and should be cut out of her life. Gina tells Christian she wants another baby, and wants him to be the birth father. A Somalian woman wants a clitoral reconstruction after undergoing genital mutilation. The operation is a success, and Christian decides he's the best person to give her an orgasm. A young man, Elias (Michael Robert Brandon), who cannot produce hair follicles on his body, requests hair implants. 


17
"Mrs. Grubman"
Ruth Williamson
Mother's Little Helper - The Rolling Stones
Moonlight Sonata - Dakesh York
July 13, 2004
204


Sean and Julia are shocked when Annie enters early puberty. Christian discovers that Gina is recruiting character witnesses for the custody trial, including Kimber. Christian takes her out to dinner to try and stop her from testifying against him and discovers she has become addicted to cocaine. Mrs Grubman returns, requesting a knee lift. 


18
"Joel Gideon"
Doug Savant
Ain't No Mountain High Enough - Diana Ross
July 20, 2004
205


A car accident provokes Sean into risking his life in dangerous activities. The custody trial begins, with James Sutherland (Georg Stanford Brown) wanting full custody of Wilber. Julia reveals the identity of Matt's real father. A mountain climber requests surgery to fix his face, after his latest expedition caused him to lose skin from his nose. 


19
"Bobbi Broderick"
Jill Clayburgh
Lies - Thompson Twins
Filthy/Gorgeous - Scissor Sisters
July 27, 2004
206


Ava is hired to treat Matt, and offers him sex in return for good grades. Matt becomes obsessed with Ava, and is arrested for masturbating outside her window. Christian discovers Ava's games and threatens her, until she blackmails him with the truth about Matt's paternity. Liz reveals that she wants to have a baby, and Christian offers her his sperm. A middle-aged woman requests liposuction in order to get a job as a saleswoman at Saks Fifth Avenue but is unhappy with the results, stalking Sean in frustration. A woman, Allegra Calderello (Elaine Hausman), needs surgery to fix her lips, which were burnt off in a kitchen accident. Sean and Christian suggest replacing her lips with skin from her labia. 


20
"Naomi Gaines"
Leslie Bibb
Skin Trade - Duran Duran
August 3, 2004
207


Sean is provoked into performing pro-bono surgery on a beautiful model who was raped and horrifically scarred across her face by a serial attacker dubbed The Carver. Julia invites Ava and her son Adrian (Seth Gabel) over for dinner, where Ava's relationship with Matt is revealed, creating conflict between the two women. Bobbi Broderick continues to try and destroy Sean's reputation. 


21
"Agatha Ripp"
Sarah Paulson
Sympathy for the Devil - The Rolling Stones
August 10, 2004
208


Julia experiences panic attacks and shingles, a sign of stress or guilt. She eventually confesses to Sean that he isn't Matt's father. Liz reveals that she is pregnant, but is concerned about the health of the baby. Sean and Christian treat a woman who claims to be a victim of stigmata. 


22
"Rose and Raven Rosenberg"
Lori and Reba Schappell
Flower Duet - Léo Delibes
Can We Still Be Friends - Todd Rundgren
August 17, 2004
209


Sean and Christian prepare to separate as partners following the revelations about Matt's paternity. They are temporarily forced to work together on a special surgery involving the separation of two adult conjoined twins (Lori and Reba Schappell). While staying at a hotel, Sean and Christian have a threesome with a hooker (Jennifer O'Dell) who bears an uncanny resemblance to Julia. convinces the doctors of their symbolic need for each other. 


23
"Kimber Henry"
Kelly Carlson
A Boy Named Sue - Johnny Cash
August 24, 2004
210


Kimber returns, revealing she is now a successful porn star. So popular that sex doll is being produced in her image, but Kimber is unhappy with the doll's vagina and wants McNamara/Troy to surgically alter it before the doll starts production. Living at home alone, Sean has sex with the doll. Julia meets a handsome man (Jeffrey Nordling) at a singles bar, but is disturbed by his unusual fetish. A male writer (J.K. Simmons) requests breast implants to understand his wife's (Jessica Steen) pain following her battle with breast cancer. 


24
"Natasha Charles"
Rebecca Gayheart
I'll Be Seeing You - Rickie Lee Jones
August 31, 2004
211


Christian finds himself attracted to an alluring blind woman who requests new eyes. After seeing Sean with his new lover Kimber, Julia gets breast implants. Erica learns that Julia is living in a small apartment since the separation, and tries to get Sean to understand her daughter's pain. 


25
"Julia McNamara"
Joely Richardson
Our Lips Are Sealed - The Go-Go's
Promises, Promises - Naked Eyes
Haven't Got Time For The Pain - Carly Simon
You're So Vain - Carly Simon
You Can't Always Get What You Want - The Rolling Stones
September 7, 2004
212


After falling through a glass door, Julia undergoes surgery to fix her scarred face and asks for her breast implants to be removed at the same time. While under anesthesia, Julia is guided through an alternate universe by Ava and is shown how her life would be if she married Christian after college instead of Sean. Finding herself attracted to the alternate Sean just like she is to Christian in the real world, Julia finally comes to terms with what she really wants from life. 


26
"Oona Wentworth"
Brooks Almy
Everybody Got Their Something - Nikka Costa
Key West - Village People
Goodbye Stranger - Supertramp
September 14, 2004
213


Christian discovers that his former rival, Dr Merrill Bobolit, has been working as a cheap plastic surgeon and performing dangerous operations on desperate clients with few safety precautions, with the backroom of a nail salon as his base of operations. Matt and Adrian clash at school, and both face punishment after Adrian's stash of drugs are found on school premises. Ava suggests that Christian bribe the school principal with free plastic surgery. 


27
"Trudy Nye"
Lisa Waltz
Piano Mass No. 6 - Le D
Breaking Up Is Hard To Do - Neil Sedaka
September 21, 2004
214


Christian decides to end his relationship with Natasha. Similarly, Sean and Kimber's relationship crumbles after she requests surgery to change the "love lines" on her hand. Julia and Sean put their differences aside to separate Matt and Ava. Adrian begins to unravel as his jealousy of Matt and Ava's relationship reaches breaking point. Sean and Christian fix the nose of an abused housewife, whose husband (Andrew Borba) is in prison for killing their child. 


28
"Sean McNamara"
Dylan Walsh
Lucky With Disease - Elbow
September 28, 2004
215


Sean continues operating on victims of The Carver, and is attacked by the masked rapist himself. Gina reveals that she is HIV+, forcing Christian to track down Wilber and his father and his own ex-lovers. Kimber starts directing porn movies, and tells Christian that she'll always be there for him. 


29
"Joan Rivers"
Joan Rivers
Concierto de Aranjuez - Tangerine D
All I Know - Art Garfunkel
October 5, 2004
216


Ava and Matt plot to run away to Paris together, but not before Matt gets hold of pills for her from his father's office. Christian discovers the couple's plans, and then an all together more shocking secret about Ava. Investigating her past, Sean, Christian and Julia team up to push Ava out of Matt's life once and for all. A vision of Escobar Gallardo provokes Sean into taking down The Carver himself. Comedian Joan Rivers comes to McNamara/Troy requesting all her previous surgeries undone. 



[edit] Season 3: 2005


#
Title
Patient Portrayer(s)
Surgery Music
Original airdate
Production code


30
"Momma Boone"
Kathy Lamkin
Stuck in the Middle With You—Stealers Wheel
Any Day Now—Elbow
September 20, 2005
301


Christian deals with emotional scars and McNamara/Troy sees the repercussions. A morbidly obese woman's life is in danger, and she needs to be surgically removed from a couch. 


31
"Kiki"
Kiki (gorilla)
The Tracks of My Tears—Smokey Robinson & The Miracles
September 27, 2005
302


Christian hires a temporary employee. Matt returns to Ava's house to find a surprise. Christian and Liz operate on a gorilla. 


32
"Derek, Alex, and Gary"
Adam Henderson, Aaron Moody and Graham Miller
Stuck on You—Elvis Presley
Stuck On You—Lionel Richie
October 4, 2005
303


Sean and Julia are divorced and Quentin invites Sean to a frat party where Sean discovers a startling secret about his new co-worker. Christian's three-way relationship with Kimber and Kit begins to lose its luster. 


33
"Rhea Reynolds"
Tara Buck
Those Were the Days—Susan Lainey
Numb-Sia
October 11, 2005
304


A woman wants to look like her younger self to remedy her Alzheimer-stricken husband's memory. Christian operates on a suspicious Carver victim. 


34
"Granville Trapp"
Erik Passoja
Brother Where Are You—Oscar Brown
October 18, 2005
305


The Carver commits his first murder and Christian is the prime suspect. A homosexual HIV positive man with a hollow face wants it repaired so he can begin dating again. 


35
"Frankenlaura"
Valentin Siroon
Season of the Witch—Donovan
Everything in Its Right Place—Radiohead
John Wayne Gacy, Jr.—Sufjan Stevens
October 25, 2005
306


Sean and Christian dismember a corpse composed of body parts from multiple people. Sean advertises in a retirement home. Julia and Gina start a business. 


36
"Ben White"
John Billingsley
Instrumental/Score—James S. Levine
November 1, 2005
307


Sean leaves McNamara/Troy. Christian and Quentin differ when deciding on whether or not to amputate a healthy leg. Julia and Gina discover a skin care product with a secret and Joan Rivers wants in. 


37
"Tommy Bolton"
Blair Williamson
Family Affair—Sly & The Family Stone
November 8, 2005
308


Christian and Quentin operate on a Down's Syndrome patient. Sean endangers his life and the life of his patients when he has feelings for one of them. 


38
"Hannah Tedesco"
Uncredited
Faith in Me—Pole Folder
As the Rush Comes—Motorcycle
November 15, 2005
309


Christian and Quentin are offered an operation that could change the face of their medical careers. Sean contemplates leaving his old life behind and starting over again. 


39
"Madison Berg"
Hallee Hirsh
Wishin’ and Hopin'—Ani DiFranco
November 22, 2005
310


Christian and Kimber have doubts about their future together. Matt's new girlfriend Ariel turns him against Sean and Christian when they need him most. 


40
"Abby Mays"
Rebecca Metz
Fat Bottomed Girls—Queen
War—Frankie Goes to Hollywood
November 29, 2005
311


Sean and Quentin butt heads. Christian deals with being left at the altar in a big way. The Carver claims another victim. 


41
"Sal Perri"
Louis Mustillo
none
December 6, 2005
312


A plane crashes in Miami. While Sean, Christian, and Liz try to save lives, Julia searches for her mother among the survivors. 


42
"Joy Kringle"
Elizabeth Ruscio
Messiah- Handel
December 13, 2005
313


The wife of a department store Santa comes to Sean and Christian for liposuction and Julia discovers she's pregnant. Matt goes to great lengths to help his girlfriend alter her appearance. 


43
"Cherry Peck (1)"
Willam Belli
none
December 20, 2005
314


Christian discovers the truth about Kimber, Quentin Costa becomes a suspect in The Carver attacks, and Detective Kit McGraw brings him in for questioning. 


44
"Quentin Costa (2)"
Bruno Campos
Santa Maria—Gotan Project
December 20, 2005
315


The Carver attacks a sorority house, and his identity is revealed. Sean, Christian, and Matt undergo torture that tests their character. 



[edit] Season 4: 2006


#
Title
Patient Portrayer
Surgery Music
Original airdate
Production code


45
"Cindy Plumb"
Kathleen Turner
Boogie Oogie Oogie - A Taste of Honey
You Sexy Thing - Hot Chocolate
Diferente - Gotan Project
September 5, 2006
401


Sean and Christian celebrate their 5,000th surgery together. Christian visits a therapist (Brooke Shields) who, after learning of his fear of intimacy, suggests that he is secretly in love with Sean. Julia investigates the genetic disorder her unborn child is suffering from, and is nervous about telling Sean. Burt Landau (Larry Hagman), a wealthy venture capitalist, purchases McNamara/Troy, while Christian finds himself immediately attracted to his much younger wife Michelle (Sanaa Lathan). A phone sex operator requests a voice lift. 


46
"Blu Mondae"
Angela Little
none
September 12, 2006
402


Sean, still affected by the revelations about his unborn child, offers to perform pro-bono surgery on a young man (Nate Mooney) with severe facial deformities. In an effort to prove his masculinity, Christian sets out to bring a young "gay-for-pay" hustler (Thad Luckinbill) back to heterosexuality. Matt runs into Kimber and discovers that she has become a follower of Scientology since her attack at the hands of The Carver. Inspired by the changes in Kimber's outlook on life, Matt embraces the religion himself. Liz witnesses Michelle's encounter with a mysterious woman from her past: James (Jacqueline Bisset). Christian abuses the pro-bono surgery quota in Burt Landau's new company guidelines by performing a breast reduction on a lap dancer. 


47
"Monica Wilder"
Jennifer Hall
Wonderwall - Oasis
September 19, 2006
403


Sean and Julia interview nannies for their unborn baby, including a young woman named Monica who Sean has sex with after driving her home. Scared of Monica telling Julia about their night together, he offers to fix her deviated septum for free. Christian requests liposuction after an unflattering sex tape with an old flame is leaked onto the internet and an encounter with a physically perfect rival surgeon (Mario Lopez) in the gym showers leaves him feeling out of shape. Julia goes into labor. Michelle threatens to sue Liz for sexual harassment after she makes assumptions about her encounter with James. 


48
"Shari Noble"
Melissa Gilbert
Domingo - Gotan Project
The Mating Game - Bittersweet
Brother Louie - The Stories
September 26, 2006
404


Sean has visions of both Escobar Gallardo and Megan O'Hara after eating pot brownies made by Monica, who continues to make advances toward him. James, Michelle's former madam, requests surgery for one of her "girls". After discovering her past, Christian blackmails Michelle into having sex with him. Conor's nanny, Marlowe Sawyer (Peter Dinklage), supports Julia as she struggles to breast feed. A beautiful young woman (Monica Dean) at a lesbian bar lures Liz into a dangerous trap. The wife of a soldier about to return from Iraq requests immediate surgery, claiming that her dog bit off one of her nipples. 


49
"Dawn Budge"
Rosie O'Donnell
Money (That's What I Want) - The Flying Lizards
October 3, 2006
405


Sean proposes to Julia in an effort to prove his fidelity. White trash Dawn Budge and her family win $381 million on the Powerball lottery, and request plastic surgery to improve their physical appearance. Desperate for money after being blackmailed by James over photographs showing his affair with Michelle, Christian volunteers his advice in improving Dawn's lifestyle... but at a price. Sean buys Matt a Porsche in hopes of getting him to quit Scientology, but Kimber sees through the scheme and encourages him to move out of the McNamara home. 


50
"Faith Wolper, Ph.D"
Brooke Shields
Macho Man - Village People
As Tears Go By - The Rolling Stones
October 10, 2006
406


Sean grows disturbed by Monica's insanity, until help arrives in an unexpected form. Christian's therapist reveals that she is a diagnosed sexual compulsive, and their sexual encounter on her desk has proved that she is not yet cured. She requests that a sadomasochistic tattoo is surgically removed from her lower back. Christian and Michelle's affair is exposed. 


51
"Burt Landau"
Larry Hagman
Vincent - Don McLean
October 17, 2006
407


Christian has enough of sex with Michelle in front of the the incapacitated Burt, who later suffers a stroke. Desperate for companionship, Christian manipulates a fragile Kimber into sleeping with him. Liz is told she requires a kidney transplant, but Sean has concerns over donating one of his own despite being a match. Matt comes on to Kimber. Newly divorced Dawn Budge has an ear torn off by thieves, and requires a replacement. 


52
"Conor McNamara"
Spencer Roberts
This Girl's In Love With You - Burt Bacharach
Jesus to a Child - George Michael
October 24, 2006
408


Sean prepares for Conor's surgery, while having flashbacks to his own painful childhood scarred by a physical deformity. Julia has last-minute fears of having her son undergo surgery, and finally acts on her unexpected attraction to Marlowe. Mrs Grubman is dying, and requests surgery in order to leave a good-looking corpse. 


53
"Liz Cruz"
Roma Maffia
Just the Way You Are - Billy Joel
October 31, 2006
409


Liz requests liposuction after feeling out of shape next to her new fitness-obsessed girlfriend Poppy (Alanis Morissette). Julia and Marlowe act on their feelings for one another, and Marlowe later requests a leg-lengthening procedure in order to make them look more like an ordinary couple. James is threatened by her bosses into getting hold of another kidney, and sets her sights on Christian. 


54
"Merrill Bobolit"
Joey Slotnick
Don't Worry Be Happy - Bobby McFerrin
How Deep Is Your Love - Bee Gees
Relax - Frankie Goes to Hollywood
November 7, 2006
410


Sean tries to remove any trace of Marlowe from the McNamara home after discovering Julia's affair. Matt and Kimber reveal that they are married and expecting a baby. Christian doesn't trust Kimber, so secretly performs a DNA test to prove the baby is his. Merrill Bobolit returns, requesting anal surgery after being repeatedly raped in prison by his cellmate "husband": Escobar Gallardo. Later, Escobar requests Sean and Christian give him back his old face. 


55
"Conor McNamara, 2026"
Stark Sands
Cello Concerto in B Minor - Antonin Dvořák
November 14, 2006
411


In the present day, a hurricane heads toward Miami, while Julia plans to leave Sean for Marlowe. Meanwhile, in 2026, the adult Conor McNamara recounts the events leading up to his parent's separation while preparing for surgery on his hand, bringing together the now estranged McNamara family. 


56
"Diana Lubey"
Catherine Deneuve
Un Jour Tu Verras - Marcel Mouloudji
Que Será Será - Pink Martini
November 21, 2006
412


Christian proposes to Michelle, and decides to move out of his apartment to be with her. As he packs up his things, he is haunted by the ghosts of former girlfriends, including Kimber, Natasha and Abby. Dr Faith Wolper returns, breaching doctor/patient confidentiality by informing Sean of Christian's homosexual dreams about him. James tries to blackmail Michelle into letting her use the McNamara/Troy offices after hours to remove kidneys. A French woman wants her late husband's ashes placed inside her breast implants. 


57
"Reefer"
Charles Haid
Joy to the World - Stephen Metcalf
Santa Baby - Eartha Kitt
November 28, 2006
413


Christian regains custody of Wilber after his birth father and adoptive mother are killed in a car accident, but Michelle is unsure whether she wants a child in her life. Sean turns to drink following Julia's departure, and embarrasses himself while working as a department store Santa with Liz and Poppy. Desperate for some salvation, he offers pro-bono surgery and a bed to sleep in to a homeless man. James needs to fill her holiday kidney quota. 


58
"Willy Ward"
Ronn Lucas
Up, Up and Away - The Fifth Dimension
I'm Your Puppet - James & Bobby Purify
December 5, 2006
414


Just as Christian and Michelle begin legal proceedings to adopt Wilber, Gina returns, claiming to have turned over a new leaf. Sean operates on a puppet master who wants to look like his puppet. Matt turns to Kimber's former friends in the porn industry to spice up their sex life. Liz ends her relationship with Poppy. James targets Wilber as her next victim, leading to a fatal confrontation with Michelle. 


59
"Gala Gallardo"
Idalis DeLeon
The Good Night - The Submarines
Brighter Discontent - The Submarines
Modern Inventions - The Submarines
Hollywood Swinging - Kool & the Gang
December 12, 2006
415


Sean announces his plans to sell his share of McNamara/Troy to Christian and Michelle and leave for Los Angeles. Escobar Gallardo is back, and requests surgery for his scarred wife. Michelle, threatened by Escobar for her part in the organ harvesting ring, is forced to come clean to Christian, driving them apart in the process. Kimber reveals to Sean the truth behind her relationship with Matt. 



[edit] Season 5: 2007-2009


#
Title
Patient Portrayer(s)
Surgery Music
Original airdate
Production code


Part 1


60
"Carly Summers"
Daphne Zuniga
Love Hurts - Nazareth
October 30, 2007
501


After relocating McNamara/Troy to Los Angeles, Sean and Christian are forced to cope with being small fish in a big pond. With the help of an influential Hollywood publicist (Lauren Hutton), the two are hired as medical consultants for a night-time medical soap opera called Hearts 'n' Scalpels. Christian becomes involved with an aging actress looking to save her career while Sean crosses paths with a Hollywood studio executive (Craig Bierko) and the dominatrix (Tia Carrere) who inflicted horrific wounds on him. 


61
"Joyce & Sharon Monroe"
Susan Griffiths (Joyce)
Merilee Brasch (Sharon)
I Wanna Be Loved by You - Marilyn Monroe
Can't Stand Losing You - The Police
November 6, 2007
502


Julia visits Los Angeles and introduces Sean and Christian to her new lover: Olivia Lord (Portia de Rossi). Meanwhile, Christian poses for Playgirl in an effort to eclipse Sean's newfound fame, Sean dates his Hearts 'n' Scalpels co-star (Paula Marshall), and the doctors operate on rival Marilyn Monroe impersonators. 


62
"Everett Poe"
Michael Des Barres
I Know What Boys Like - The Waitresses
November 13, 2007
503


Sean grows disturbed by Olivia's promiscuous daughter Eden (AnnaLynne McCord), in particular her influence on Annie, after she comes to McNamara/Troy requesting a hymen restoration. Matt shows up in Los Angeles with baby Jenna in tow, desperate for cash and claiming he has left Kimber. Sean discovers Kate's secret. Christian hits a new low. Liz questions Julia and Olivia's relationship. 


63
"Dawn Budge II"
Rosie O'Donnell
Come Fly With Me - Frank Sinatra
November 20, 2007
504


Christian encounters a nun (Tamara Craig Thomas) requesting a breast reduction, and a disturbed woman (Claudia Christian) who requests his services as an escort to fulfill her dangerous fantasies. Sean tries to make Julia see Eden's manipulation of Annie. Dawn Budge returns and requires surgery after an eagle attacks her face while hang-gliding. Sean and Christian are unwilling to fulfill her dream of visiting the Hearts 'n Scalpels set until she falls victim to a serial sex attacker (Jack Plotnick) known as The Ass Bandit and worry about her suing them. 


64
"Chaz Darling"
Jai Rodriguez
The Lost Art of Keeping a Secret - Queens Of The Stone Age
November 27, 2007
505


Eden blackmails Christian into performing surgery on her friend. Sean acts out his sexual desires on Kate, but can't deal with her own fantasies. Kimber appeals for help from her old porn manager Ram (John Schneider) when she and Matt fall on hard times and can't afford the crystal meth they're craving. 


65
"Damien Sands"
Ian Buchanan
Midnight Swinger - Mel Torme
December 4, 2007
506


Christian encourages Sean to film a reality show pilot entitled Plastic Fantastic, allowing cameras to film their every move. But both soon realize that audiences would be more interested in their crazy personal lives than their surgical cases. Meanwhile, Julia and Liz face off against one another when Liz's romantic interest in Olivia is revealed. 


66
"Dr. Joshua Lee"
George Coe
Total Eclipse Of The Heart - Bonnie Tyler
December 11, 2007
507


Sean rediscovers his youth through his relationship with Eden and his friendship with Hearts 'n' Scalpels star Aidan Stone (Bradley Cooper). Julia and Olivia question their relationship after they are both kidnapped by a carjacker (Gary Basaraba). Kimber promises to dump Matt in return for surgery to repair her meth-destroyed face. An elderly doctor (George Coe) comes to McNamara/Troy requesting surgery to remove an alien chip from his back. 


67
"Duke Collins"
Joel McKinnon Miller
O Tannenbaum - Christmas Carol and the Carolers
December 18, 2007
508


As Christmas approaches, Sean finally discovers the truth about Christian and Julia's relationship. Matt bonds with his burns counselor (Maggie Siff) in hospital following the explosion. Kimber and Ram announce their marital plans. Eden plots revenge on Julia. A mall Santa comes to McNamara/Troy requesting surgery on the bullet wound in his face. A group of Christmas carollers offer their services to the doctors in return for surgery. 


68
"Rachel Ben Natan"
Maggie Siff
Dunya - Niyaz
La Serena - Azam Ali
January 15, 2008
509


Sean hires Gina as McNamara/Troy's new receptionist to get back at Christian. Christian finds his fidelity tested when Julia falls sick. Matt accompanies Rachel through surgery to remove body debris of the terrorist who blew up near her years ago. Sean finds himself haunted by Rachel's suicide bomber (Dylan Ramsey). Dawn Budge is angered when her lover Freddy (Oliver Platt) makes plans to ride on a float at Gay Pride with the cast of Hearts 'n' Scalpels, and she later requires surgery when a lesbian biker rides into her face. 


69
"Magda and Jeff"
Selma Stern
Robert Gant
The Devil - Tears For Fears
Tubular Bells - Book Of Love
January 22, 2008
510


With help from his over-friendly new agent Colleen (Sharon Gless), Sean finds himself promoted to the lead character in Hearts 'n' Scalpels after a sex tape scandal forces Aidan to enter rehab. Christian rejects Gina's advances as she guides him through a new form of sex. An elderly woman comes to McNamara/Troy requesting surgery on her much-younger husband. 


70
"Kyle Ainge"
Jeff Hephner
I Eat Cannibals, Pt. 1 - Total Coelo
These Boots Are Made for Walkin' - Nancy Sinatra
Flesh for Fantasy - Billy Idol
January 29, 2008
511


Christian pieces together his and Wilber's lives following Gina's death, and faces off against Wilber's kindergarten teacher (Kathleen Rose Perkins), who has a fetish for biting the children in her care. Colleen reveals her true colors when a rival agent shows interest in representing Sean. A couple comes to McNamara/Troy for skin reconstruction following an accident on honeymoon which drove them to cannibalism in an effort to survive. 


71
"Lulu Grandiron"
Donna Mills
What's New Pussycat - Tom Jones
Cat Scratch Fever - Ted Nugent
Man Eater - Hall & Oates
February 5, 2008
512


Christian becomes involved with a group of society women who all request surgery, including one who wishes to look like a cat. Sean worries about Colleen's sanity, and Bliss (Leslie Grossman) exposes her for who she really is. Kimber and Ram invite another person into their marriage: Eden. 


72
"August Walden"
Stephen J. Oliver
Ugly Duckling - Danny Kaye
El Capitalismo Foraneo - Gotan Project
February 12, 2008
513


Sean confronts a television critic who criticized his acting in a magazine. Olivia returns from New York and helps Julia work out what is wrong with her, leading Julia to confront Eden. Matt and Rachel's relationship falls apart, and Matt seeks solace with a young woman (Jeannine Kaspar) with a devastating reason for visiting Los Angeles. 


73
"Candy Richards"
Jennifer Coolidge
Fame - Irene Cara
Fame - David Bowie
Fame - God Lives Underwater
February 19, 2008
514


Sean fears for his life when Colleen escapes from the psych ward and threatens to kill him. Christian reunites with an old flame. Matt tries to come to terms with sleeping with his own sister. Julia is rushed to hospital following the shooting. A deluded starlet comes to McNamara/Troy requesting surgery to fix her botched makeover. 


Part 2


74
"Ronnie Chase"

Back Stabbers - O'Jays
Stop Me - Mark Ronson
Everybody's Got to Learn Sometime - Beck
January 6, 2009
515


Sean is confined to a wheelchair following his brutal stabbing at the hands of Colleen. Four months on from the attack, he is lecturing at a medical school, where one of his students is an arrogant child prodigy (Adhir Kalyan). Liz undergoes a check-up for breast cancer, only for Christian to end up receiving life-altering news instead. Matt decides to take college premed courses. A young man with stretched ears undergoes earlobe reconstruction to pursue employment after being fired from his band. 


75
"Gene Shelly"
John Fleck
I'm Not The Man I Used To Be - Fine Young Cannibals
January 13, 2009
516


After being rejected by Kimber on account of his post-surgery scars and with his chemotherapy making him sick, Christian seeks support from Liz, which leads to a surprising sexual encounter between them. Sean discovers his new lover (Jaime Ray Newman) has a disturbing fetish, and further alienates Julia and Matt when they learn that he has been faking his need for a wheelchair. Raj has a life-altering sexual encounter with the wife (Beth Gargan) of McNamara/Troy's latest patient. 


76
"Roxy St. James"
Dina Meyer
Yo Stank - Jennifer Coolidge
The Move - Piece Of My Heart
One - Tao Of Groove
January 27, 2009
517


Sean discovers that Julia is planning to leave for New York with Olivia. Meanwhile, Olivia requests surgery to erase signs of aging on her face, but the procedure goes awry when Sean hallucinates during surgery, leading to a fatal accident that is possibly his fault, and a messy confrontation with Eden. Christian attends a breast cancer support group, and connects with a troubled woman who wants both a double mastectomy as a precaution after the disease takes the lives of her mother and sister. Liz, still questioning her sexuality following her night with Christian, goes on a date with a man (Anthony Cistaro). Candy Richards returns, only this time calling herself "Coco" as a tribute to her newly-discovered African-American heritage. As she is releasing her own rap CD, she wants surgery that will give her an authentic black woman's behind. 


77
"Ricky Wells"
Brando Eaton
I Am Superman - R.E.M.
Dreamsville - Henry Mancini
February 3, 2009
518


Sean's appreciation of Raj further strains his relationship with Matt. Christian returns to womanizing after his pectoral reconstruction, causing an irrevocable rift with Liz that has long-term ramifications for the future of McNamara/Troy. Raj's father, the esteemed doctor Vijay Paresh (Iqbal Theba), wants his son to perform his penis enlargement surgery, but is disappointed to discover his lack of surgery skills. 18-year-old Ricky requests surgery to make him look older after marrying his former elementary school teacher (Suzanne Cryer), who spent time in prison for statutory rape. 


78
"Manny Skerritt"
Misha Collins
Oh Yeah - Yello
Suspicious Character - The Blood Arm
Hercules Theme - Hercules and Love Affair
February 10, 2009
519


Sean hires a new anesthesiologist, the wild Teddy Rowe (Katee Sackhoff). Soon after Teddy starts work, Sean finds himself drawn to the dark side of life, flirting with her and risking his career. Kimber asks Christian to administer collagen injections into daughter Jenna's lips in order to get rid of the one flaw preventing her from becoming a baby model. Former "Hearts 'n Scalpels" actor Aidan Stone returns, wanting Sean to sign over his life story for a proposed TV movie entitled "The Deadly Tightrope: The Sean McNamara Story" starring himself and Morgan Fairchild. A yoga instructor comes to McNamara/Troy requesting a penis reduction, as he has become addicted to performing oral sex on himself. 


79
"Budi Sabri"
Chi Muoi Lo
Human - The Human League
February 17, 2009
520


Sean continues to let loose with Teddy, having sex in an open house and getting high on tea made from ayahuasca. Christian's cancer has spread, and with a bleak prognosis, he seeks out Liz in order to propose to her. Kimber requests more collagen for Jenna's lips. A man suffering from tree-like growths on his entire body undergoes pro-bono treatment at McNamara/Troy. 


80
"Allegra Calderello"
Elaine Hausman
You're Nobody till Somebody Loves You - Dean Martin
February 24, 2009
521


Sean is reunited with one of his former patients from Miami, Allegra Calderello aka "pussy lips". Allegra's dying husband (Richard Portnow) requests surgery on his wife so she can attract handsome suitors after his death. Christian looks to hire his replacement at McNamara/Troy and sets his sights on Logan Taper (Richard Burgi), a stylish doctor who appears to have a lot in common with the Christian of old, until his unusual fetish is uncovered. Liz's mother Mariela (Lillian Hurst) is in town in preparation for her daughter's wedding day, but her attitude and comments only help in making Liz feel inadequate. At the same time, Liz discovers that she can't fit into her mother's old wedding dress and decides to undergo a breast reduction. 


81
"Giselle Blaylock & Legend Chandler"
Wendy Glenn
Graham Shiels
My Vampire - Sohodolls
March 3, 2009
522


Christian reveals his plans to survive his cancer through cryogenic freezing. Sean worries about his relationship with Teddy, while simultaneously preparing himself for Christian's death. Kimber's marriage to Ram falls apart, and she finds her entire outlook on her life changed when she discovers Christian's upcoming nuptials with Liz and the reasons behind them. Teddy is revealed to be living a double life. A woman comes to McNamara/Troy requesting surgery to fix the bloody wound on her neck, suffered after a vampiric bite from her boyfriend went awry. Christian makes a shocking discovery. 



[edit] Season 6: 2010-2011
Guest stars this season include Vanessa Redgrave, Melanie Griffith, Rose McGowan, Kathy Griffin, Mario Lopez, Linda Hunt, Frances Conroy, Gilles Marini, Candis Cayne, Neil Hopkins and George Newbern.


#
Title
Patient Portrayer(s)
Surgery Music
Original airdate
Production code


Part 1


82
"Andy Hoberman"
Barry Bostwick

January, 2010
601


 


83
"TBA"


2010
602


 


84
"Briggite Reinhart"


2010
603


 


85
"Jenny Juggs"
Kiersten Warren

2010
604


 


86
"Abigail Sullivan"


2010
605


 


87
"Alexis Stone"


2010
606


 


88
"Alexis Stone II"


2010
607


 


89
"Lola Wagner"
Danica Sheridan

2010
608


 


90
"Benny Anderson"


2010
609


 


91
"Wesley Clovis"


2010
610


 


Part 2


92
"Dan Daly"


January, 2011
611


 


93
"Willow Banks"


2011
612


 


94
"Joel Seabrook"


2011
613


 


95
"Suzanna Carlton"


2011
614


 


96
"Virginia Hayes"


2011
615


 


97
"TBA"


2011
616


 


98
"TBA"


2011
617


 


99
"TBA"


2011
618


 


100
"TBA"


2011
619


The final chapter in the saga of the McNamara/Troy family. 



[edit] References


^ [1]











v • d • e

Nip/Tuck





Main characters

Sean McNamara • Christian Troy • Julia McNamara • Matt McNamara • Liz Cruz • Kimber Henry






Minor characters

Annie McNamara • Grace Santiago • Gina Russo • Quentin Costa • Kit McGraw • Burt Landau • Michelle Landau • Marlowe Sawyer • Olivia Lord • Nurse Linda






Antagonists

Escobar Gallardo • Ava Moore • The Carver • James • Eden Lord • Colleen Rose






Other

List of Nip/Tuck episodes • Issues addressed in Nip/Tuck









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Nip/Tuck_episodes"
Categories: Nip/Tuck | Lists of comedy-drama television series episodes 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Български
Français
Nederlands









 This page was last modified on 17 April 2009, at 14:36 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
