













Ojibwa - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Ojibwa";
		var wgTitle = "Ojibwa";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "219064";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282059282;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Ojibwa

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the native North American people.  For other uses of "Ojibwa", "Ojibway", or "Ojibwe", see Ojibway (disambiguation).
"Chippewa" redirects here. For other uses, see Chippewa (disambiguation).


Ojibwa



Badge of the Ojibwa people





Total population



219,711



Regions with significant populations


United States, Canada


Languages


English, Ojibwe


Religion


Catholicism, Methodism, Midewiwin


Related ethnic groups


Ottawa, Potawatomi and other Algonquian peoples





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Ojibwa 


The Ojibwa (also Ojibway or Ojibwe) or Chippewa (also Chippeway) is the largest group of Native Americans-First Nations north of Mexico, including Métis. They are the third largest in the United States, surpassed only by Cherokee and Navajo[citation needed]. They are equally divided between the United States and Canada. Because they were formerly located mainly around Sault Ste. Marie, at the outlet of Lake Superior, the French referred to them as Saulteurs. Ojibwa who subsequently moved to the prairie provinces of Canada have retained the name Saulteaux. Ojibwa who were originally located about the Mississagi River and made their way to southern Ontario are known as the Mississaugas.
As a major component group of the Anishinaabe peoples—which includes the Algonquin, Nipissing, Oji-Cree, Odawa and the Potawatomi—the Ojibwe peoples number over 56,440 in the U.S., living in an area stretching across the north from Michigan to Montana. Another 77,940 of main-line Ojibwa, 76,760 Saulteaux and 8,770 Mississaugas, in 125 bands, live in Canada, stretching from western Quebec to eastern British Columbia. They are known for their birch bark canoes, sacred birch bark scrolls, the use of cowrie shells, wild rice, copper points, and for their use of gun technology from the British to defeat and push back the Dakota nation of the Sioux (1745). The Ojibwe Nation was the first to set the agenda for signing more detailed treaties with Canada's leaders before many settlers were allowed too far west. The Midewiwin Society is well respected as the keeper of detailed and complex scrolls of events, history, songs, maps, memories, stories, geometry, and mathematics. [1]




Contents


1 Name
2 Language
3 History

3.1 Pre-contact and spiritual beliefs
3.2 Post-contact with Europeans


4 Culture

4.1 Kinship and clan system
4.2 Spiritual beliefs
4.3 Popular culture


5 Bands
6 Other tribes known by their Ojibwa/Ottawa names
7 Notable people
8 Ojibwa treaties
9 Gallery
10 Notes
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Name
The autonym for this group of Anishinaabeg is "Ojibwe" (plural: Ojibweg). This name is commonly anglicized as "Ojibwa." The name "Chippewa" is an anglicized version of "Ojibwa." Although many variations exist in literature, "Chippewa" is more common in the United States and "Ojibwa" predominates in Canada, but both terms do exist in both countries. The exact meaning of the name "Ojibwe" is not known; the most common explanations on the name derivations are:

from ojiibwabwe (/o/ + /jiibw/ + /abwe/), meaning "those who cook\roast until it puckers", referring to their fire-curing of moccasin seams to make them water-proof[1], though some sources instead say this was a method of torture the Ojibwe implemented upon their enemies.[2]
from ozhibii'iwe (/o/ + /zhibii'/ + /iwe/), meaning "those who keep records [of a Vision]", referring to their form of pictorial writing, and pictographs used in Midewiwin rites[3]
from ojiibwe (/o/ + /jiib/ + /we/), meaning "those who speak-stiffly"\"those who stammer", referring to how the Ojibwe sounded to the Cree[4]

However, in many Ojibwa communities throughout Canada and the U.S., the more generalized name "Anishinaabe(-g)" is becoming more common.

[edit] Language
Main article: Anishinaabe language
The Ojibwe language is known as Anishinaabemowin or Ojibwemowin, and is still widely spoken. The language belongs to the Algonquian linguistic group, and is descended from Proto-Algonquian. Its sister languages include Blackfoot, Cheyenne, Cree, Fox, Menominee, Potawatomi, and Shawnee. Anishinaabemowin is frequently referred to as a "Central Algonquian" language; however, Central Algonquian is an area grouping rather than a genetic one. Ojibwemowin is the fourth most spoken Native language in North America (US and Canada) after Navajo, Cree, and Inuit. Many decades of fur trading with the French established the language as one of the key trade languages of the Great Lakes and the northern Great Plains.
The Ojibwe presence was made highly visible among non-Native Americans and around the world by the popularity of the epic poem The Song of Hiawatha, written by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow in 1855. The epic contains many toponyms that originate from Ojibwa words.

[edit] History

[edit] Pre-contact and spiritual beliefs
According to their tradition, and from recordings in birch bark scrolls, many Ojibwe came from the eastern areas of North America, or Turtle Island, and from along the east coast. They traded widely across the continent for thousands of years and knew of the canoe routes west and a land route to the west coast. According to the oral history, seven great miigis (radiant/iridescent) beings appeared to the peoples in the Waabanakiing (Land of the Dawn, i.e. Eastern Land) to teach the peoples of the mide way of life. However, one of the seven great miigis beings was too spiritually powerful and killed the peoples in the Waabanakiing when the people were in its presence. The six great miigis beings remained to teach while the one returned into the ocean. The six great miigis beings then established doodem (clans) for the peoples in the east. Of these doodem, the five original Anishinaabe doodem were the Wawaazisii (Bullhead), Baswenaazhi (Echo-maker, i.e., Crane), Aan'aawenh (Pintail Duck), Nooke (Tender, i.e., Bear) and Moozoonsii (Little Moose), then these six miigis beings returned into the ocean as well. If the seventh miigis being stayed, it would have established the Thunderbird doodem.
At a later time, one of these miigis beings appeared in a vision to relate a prophecy. The prophecy stated that if more of the Anishinaabeg did not move further west, they would not be able to keep their traditional ways alive because of the many new settlements and European immigrants that would arrive soon in the east. Their migration path would be symbolized by a series of smaller Turtle Islands, which was confirmed with miigis shells (i.e., cowry shells). After receiving assurance from the their "Allied Brothers" (i.e., Mi'kmaq) and "Father" (i.e., Abnaki) of their safety in having many more of the Anishinaabeg move inland, they advanced along the St. Lawrence River to the Ottawa River to Lake Nipissing, and then to the Great Lakes. First of these smaller Turtle Islands was Mooniyaa, which Mooniyaang (Montreal, Quebec) now stands. The "second stopping place" was in the vicinity of the Wayaanag-gakaabikaa (Concave Waterfalls, i.e. Niagara Falls). At their "third stopping place" near the present-day city of Detroit, Michigan, the Anishinaabeg divided into six divisions, of which the Ojibwa was one of these six. The first significant new Ojibwa culture-centre was their "fourth stopping place" on Manidoo Minising (Manitoulin Island). Their first new political-centre was referred as their "fifth stopping place", in their present country at Baawiting (Sault Ste. Marie).
Continuing their westward expansion, the Ojibwa divided into the "northern branch" following the north shore of Lake Superior, and "southern branch" following the south shore of the same lake. In their expansion westward, the "northern branch" divided into a "westerly group" and a "southerly group". The "southern branch" and the "southerly group" of the "northern branch" came together at their "sixth stopping place" on Spirit Island (46°41′15″N 092°11′21″W﻿ / ﻿46.6875°N 92.18917°W﻿ / 46.6875; -92.18917) located in the St. Louis River estuary of Duluth/Superior region where the people were directed by the miigis being in a vision to go to the "place where there is food (i.e. wild rice) upon the waters." Their second major settlement, referred as their "seventh stopping place", was at Shaugawaumikong (or Zhaagawaamikong, French, Chequamegon) on the southern shore of Lake Superior, near the present La Pointe near Bayfield, Wisconsin. The "westerly group" of the "northern branch" continued their westward expansion along the Rainy River, Red River of the North, and across the northern Great Plains until reaching the Pacific Northwest. Along their migration to the west they came across many miigis, or cowry shells, as told in the prophecy.

[edit] Post-contact with Europeans
The first historical mention of the Ojibwe occurs in the Jesuit Relation of 1640. Through their friendship with the French traders, they were able to obtain guns and thus successfully end their hereditary wars with the Sioux and Fox on their west and south. The Sioux were driven out from the Upper Mississippi region, and the Fox were forced down from northern Wisconsin and compelled to ally with the Sauk. By the end of the 18th century, the Ojibwa were the nearly unchallenged owners of almost all of present-day Michigan, northern Wisconsin, and Minnesota, including most of the Red River area, together with the entire northern shores of Lakes Huron and Superior on the Canadian side and extending westward to the Turtle Mountains of North Dakota, where they became known as the Plains Ojibwa or Saulteaux.
The Ojibwa were part of a long term alliance with the Ottawa and Potawatomi peoples, called the Council of Three Fires and which fought with the Iroquois Confederacy and the Sioux. The Ojibwa expanded eastward, taking over the lands alongside the eastern shores of Lake Huron and Georgian Bay. The Ojibwa allied with the French in the French and Indian War, and with the British in the War of 1812.
In the U.S., the government attempted to remove all the Ojibwa to Minnesota west of Mississippi River, culminating in the Sandy Lake Tragedy and several hundred deaths. Through the efforts of Chief Buffalo and popular opinion against Ojibwa removal, the bands east of the Mississippi were allowed to return to reservations on ceded territory. A few families were removed to Kansas as part of the Potawatomi removal.
In British North America, the cession of land by treaty or purchase was governed by the Royal Proclamation of 1763, and subsequently most of the land in Upper Canada was ceded to Great Britain. Even with the Jay Treaty signed between the Great Britain and the United States, the newly formed United States did not fully uphold the treaty, causing illegal immigration into Ojibwa and other Native American lands, which culminated in the Northwest Indian War. Subsequently, much of the lands in Ohio, Indiana, Michigan, parts of Illinois and Wisconsin, and northern Minnesota and North Dakota were ceded to the United States. However, provisions were made in many of the land cession treaties to allow for continued hunting, fishing and gathering of natural resources by the Ojibwe even after the land sales. In northwestern Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Alberta, the numbered treaties were signed. British Columbia had no signed treaties until the late 20th century, and most areas have no treaties yet. There are ongoing treaty land entitlements to settle and negotiate. The treaties are constantly being reinterpreted by the courts because many of them are vague and difficult to apply in modern times. However, the numbered treaties were some of the most detailed treaties signed for their time. The Ojibwa Nation set the agenda and negotiated the first numbered treaties before they would allow safe passage of many more settlers to the prairies.
Often, earlier treaties were known as "Peace and Friendship Treaties" to establish community bonds between the Ojibwa and the European settlers. These earlier treaties established the groundwork for cooperative resource sharing between the Ojibwa and the settlers. However, later treaties involving land cessions were seen as territorial advantages for both the United States and Canada, but the land cession terms were often not fully understood by the Ojibwa because of the cultural differences in understanding of the land. For the governments of the US and Canada, land was considered a commodity of value that could be freely bought, owned and sold. For the Ojibwa, land was considered a fully-shared resource, along with air, water and sunlight; concept of land sales or exclusive ownership of land was a foreign concept not known to the Ojibwa at the time of the treaty councils. Consequently, today in both Canada and the US, legal arguments in treaty-rights and treaty interpretations often bring to light the differences in cultural understanding of these treaty terms in order to come to legal understanding of the treaty obligations.[2].
During Indian Removal, US government attempted to relocate tribes from to west of the Mississippi River as the white pioneers colonized the areas. But in the late 19th century, the government instead moved the tribes onto reservations. The government attempted to do this to the Anishinabe in the Keweenaw Peninsula in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan.

[edit] Culture




Details of Ojibwe Wigwam at Grand Portage by Eastman Johnson


The Ojibwa live in groups (otherwise known as "bands"). Most Ojibwa, except for the Plains bands, lived a sedentary lifestyle, engaging in fishing, hunting, the farming of maize and squash, and the harvesting of Manoomin (wild rice). Their typical dwelling was the wiigiwaam (wigwam), built either as a waginogaan (domed-lodge) or as a nasawa'ogaan (pointed-lodge), made of birch bark, juniper bark and willow saplings. They also developed a form of pictorial writing used in religious rites of the Midewiwin and recorded on birch bark scrolls and possibly on rock. The many complex pictures on the sacred scrolls communicate a lot of historical, geometrical, and mathematical knowledge. Ceremonies also used the miigis shell (cowry shell), which is naturally found in far away coastal areas; this fact suggests that there was a vast trade network across the continent at some time. The use and trade of copper across the continent is also proof of a very large area of trading that took place thousands of years ago, as far back as the Hopewell culture. Certain types of rock used for spear and arrow heads were also traded over large distances. The use of petroforms, petroglyphs, and pictographs was common throughout their traditional territories. Petroforms and medicine wheels were a way to teach the important concepts of four directions, astronomical observations about the seasons, and as a memorizing tool for certain stories and beliefs.
During the summer months, the people attend jiingotamog for the spiritual and niimi'idimaa for a social gathering (pow-wows or "pau waus") at various reservations in the Anishinaabe-Aki (Anishinaabe Country). Many people still follow the traditional ways of harvesting wild rice, picking berries, hunting, making medicines, and making maple sugar. Many of the Ojibwa take part in sun dance ceremonies across the continent. The sacred scrolls are kept hidden away until those that are worthy and respect them are given permission to see them and interpret them properly.
The Ojibwa would bury their dead in a burial mound; many erect a jiibegamig or a "spirit-house" over each mound. Instead of a headstone with the deceased's name inscribed upon it, a traditional burial mound would typically have a wooden marker, inscribed with the deceased's doodem. Because of the distinct features of these burials, Ojibwa graves have been often looted by grave robbers. In the United States, many Ojibwa communities safe-guard their burial mounds through the enforcement of the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act.
The Ojibwa viewed the world in two genders: animate and inanimate, rather than male and female. As an animate a person could serve the society as a male-role or a female-role. John Tanner and anthropologist Hermann Baumann have documented that Ojibwa peoples do not fall into the European ideas of gender and its gender-roles, called egwakwe (or Anglicised to "agokwa"). Though these egwakweg may contribute to their community in whatever way brings out their best character, sometimes these documented male-to-female transsexual Midew among the Ojibwa were more readily noticed by the non-Anishinaabe documenters.[5] A well-known egwakwe warrior and guide in Minnesota history was Ozaawindib.
Several Ojibwa bands in the United States cooperate in the Great Lakes Indian Fish & Wildlife Commission, which manages their treaty hunting and fishing rights in the Lake Superior-Lake Michigan areas. The commission follows the directives of U.S. agencies to run several wilderness areas. Some Minnesota Ojibwa tribal councils cooperate in the 1854 Treaty Authority, which manages their treaty hunting and fishing rights in the Arrowhead Region. In Michigan, the 1836 Chippewa-Ottawa Resource Authority manages the hunting, fishing and gathering rights about Sault Ste. Marie, and the waters of Lake Michigan and Lake Huron. In Canada, the Grand Council of Treaty #3 manages the Treaty 3 hunting and fishing rights around Lake of the Woods.

[edit] Kinship and clan system
Main article: Anishinaabe clan system
Ojibwa understanding of kinship is complex, and includes not only the immediate family but also the extended family. It is considered a modified bifurcate merging kinship system. As with any bifurcate merging kinship system, siblings generally share the same term with parallel-cousins, because they are all part of the same clan. But the modified system allows for younger siblings to share the same kinship term with younger cross-cousins. Complexity wanes further from the speaker's immediate generation, but some complexity is retained with female relatives. For example, ninooshenh is "my mother's sister" or "my father's sister-in-law"—i.e., my parallel-aunt—but also "my parent's female cross-cousin". Great-grandparents and older generations, as well as great-grandchildren and younger generations are collectively called aanikoobijigan. This system of kinship speaks of the nature of the Anishinaabe's philosophy and lifestyle, that is of interconnectedness and balance between all living generations and all generations of the past and of the future.
The Ojibwe people were divided into a number of odoodeman (clans; singular: odoodem) named primarily for animal totems (pronounced doodem). The five original totems were Wawaazisii (Bullhead), Baswenaazhi ("Echo-maker", i.e., Crane), Aan'aawenh (Pintail Duck), Nooke ("Tender", i.e., Bear) and Moozwaanowe ("Little" Moose-tail). The Crane totem was the most vocal among the Ojibwa, and the Bear was the largest — so large, in fact, that it was sub-divided into body parts such as the head, the ribs and the feet.
Traditionally, each band had a self-regulating council consisting of leaders of the communities' clans or odoodeman, with the band often identified by the principle doodem. In meeting others, the traditional greeting among the Ojibwe peoples is "What is your doodem?" (Aaniin odoodemaayan?) in order to establish a social conduct between the two meeting parties as family, friends or enemies. Today, the greeting has been shortened to "Aaniin."

[edit] Spiritual beliefs
Main article: Anishinaabe traditional beliefs
The Ojibwa have a number of spiritual beliefs passed down by oral tradition under the Midewiwin teachings. These include a creation myth and a recounting of the origins of ceremonies and rituals. Spiritual beliefs and rituals were very important to the Ojibwa because spirits guided them through life. Birch bark scrolls and petroforms were used to pass along knowledge and information, as well as used for ceremonies. Pictographs were also used for ceremonies. The sweatlodge is still used during important ceremonies about the four directions and to pass along the oral history of the people. Teaching lodges are still common today to teach the next generations about the language and ancient ways of the past. These old ways, ideas, and teachings are still preserved today with these living ceremonies.

[edit] Popular culture
The legend of the Ojibwa "Wendigo", in which tribesmen identify with a cannibalistic monster and prey on their families, is a story with many meanings, one of them points to the consequences of greed and the destruction that results from it. It is mentioned in the fiction of Thomas Pynchon. In his story Of Father's and Sons, Ernest Hemingway uses two Ojibway as secondary characters.
Novelist Louise Erdrich is Anishinabe and has written about characters from her culture in Tracks, Love Medicine, and The Bingo Palace. Medicine woman Keewaydinoquay Peschel has written books on ethnobotany and books for children. Winona LaDuke is a popular political and intellectual voice for the Anishinabe people.
Literary theorist and writer Gerald Vizenor has drawn extensively on Anishinabe philosophies of language.

[edit] Bands
Warren, in his History of the Ojibway People, records 10 major divisions of the Ojibwa in the United States, omitting the Ojibwa located in Michigan, western Minnesota and westward, and all of Canada; if major historical bands located in Michigan and Ontario are added, the count becomes 14:


English Name
Ojibwa Name
(in Double-vowel spelling)
Location


Saulteaux
Baawitigowininiwag
about Sault Ste. Marie


Border-Sitters
Biitan-akiing-enabijig
northern Wisconsin


Lake Superior Band
Gichi-gamiwininiwag
south shore of Lake Superior


Mississippi River Band
Gichi-ziibiwininiwag
upper Mississippi River in Minnesota


Rainy Lake Band
Goojijiwininiwag
Rainy Lake and River, about the northern boundary of Minnesota


Ricing-Rails
Manoominikeshiinyag
along headwaters of St. Croix River in Wisconsin and Minnesota


Pillagers
Mekamaadwewininiwag
Leech Lake, Minnesota


Mississaugas
Misi-zaagiwininiwag
north of Lake Erie


Algonquins (Nipissing )
Odishkwaagamiig
Quebec-Ontario border, about Lake Nipissing


Dokis Band
N/A
Along French River region in Ontario, near Lake Nipissing


Ottawa Lake (Lac Courte Oreilles) Band
Odaawaa-zaaga'iganiwininiwag
Lac Courte Oreilles, Wisconsin


Bois Forte Band
Zagaakwaandagowininiwag
north of Lake Superior


Torch (Flambeau) Band
Waaswaaganiwininiwag
head of Wisconsin River


Muskrat Portage Band
Wazhashk-Onigamininiwag
northwest side of Lake Superior at the Canadian border


These 10 major divisions and other major groups that Warren did not record developed into these Ojibwa Bands and First Nations of today. Bands are listed under their respective tribes where possible. See also the listing of Saulteaux communities.




Aamjiwnaang First Nation
Batchewana First Nation of Ojibways [3]
Bay Mills Indian Community
Biinjitiwabik Zaaging Anishnabek First Nation
Chapleau Ojibway First Nation
Chippewas of Kettle and Stony Point
Chippewas of Lake Simcoe and Huron (Historical)

Beausoleil First Nation
Chippewas of Georgina Island First Nation
Chippewas of Rama First Nation (formerly known as Chippewas of Mnjikaning First Nation)


The Chippewas of Nawash Unceded First Nation
Chippewa of the Thames First Nation
Chippewas of Saugeen Ojibway Territory (Historical)

Chippewas of Nawash Unceded First Nation
Saugeen First Nation


Chippewa Cree Tribe of Rocky Boys Indian Reservation
Curve Lake First Nation
Cutler First Nation
Dokis First Nation
Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians
Garden River First Nation
Grassy Narrows First Nation (Asabiinyashkosiwagong Nitam-Anishinaabeg)
Islands in the Trent Waters
Keeseekoowenin Ojibway First Nation
Koocheching First Nation
Lac des Mille Lacs First Nation
Lac La Croix First Nation
Lac Seul First Nation
Lake Nipigon Ojibway First Nation
Lake Superior Chippewa Tribe

Bad River Chippewa Band
Lac Vieux Desert Band of Lake Superior Chippewa
Keweenaw Bay Indian Community

L'Anse Band of Chippewa Indians
Ontonagon Band of Chippewa Indians


Lac Courte Oreilles Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians

Bois Brule River Band of Lake Superior Chippewa
Chippewa River Band of Lake Superior Chippewa
Lac Courte Oreilles Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians
Removable St. Croix Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin


Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa
Red Cliff Band of Lake Superior Chippewa [4]
Sokaogon Chippewa Community
St. Croix Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin


Magnetawan First Nation
Minnesota Chippewa Tribe
Mississaugi First Nation [5]

Bois Forte Band of Chippewa Indians

Bois Forte Band of Chippewa Indians
Muskrat Portage Band of Chippewa Indians


Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa
Grand Portage Band of Chippewa
Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe

Cass Lake Band of Chippewa
Lake Winnibigoshish Band of Chippewa
Leech Lake Band of Pillagers
Removable Lake Superior Bands of Chippewa of the Chippewa Reservation
White Oak Point Band of Mississippi Chippewa


Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe

Mille Lacs Indians
Sandy Lake Band of Mississippi Chippewa
Rice Lake Band of Mississippi Chippewa
St. Croix Band of Chippewa Indians of Minnesota

Kettle River Band of Chippewa Indians
Snake and Knife Rivers Band of Chippewa Indians




White Earth Band of Chippewa

Gull Lake Band of Mississippi Chippewa
Otter Tail Band of Pillagers
Rabbit Lake Band of Mississippi Chippewa
Removable Mille Lacs Indians
Removable Sandy Lake Band of Mississippi Chippewa
Rice Lake Band of Mississippi Chippewa








North Caribou Lake First Nation
Ojibway Nation of Saugeen First Nation
Ojibways of the Pic River First Nation
Osnaburg House Band of Ojibway (Historical)

Cat Lake First Nation
Mishkeegogamang First Nation (formerly known as New Osnaburgh First Nation)
Slate Falls First Nation


Pembina Band of Chippewa Indians (Historical)
Pikangikum First Nation
Red Lake Band of Chippewa Indians

Lac des Bois Band of Chippewa Indians


Sandy Bay Ojibway First Nation
Sagamok Anishnawbek First Nation
Saginaw Chippewa Tribal Council
Sault Tribe of Chippewa Indians
Saulteau First Nation
Shawanaga First Nation
Southeast Tribal Council

Berens River First Nation
Bloodvein First Nation
Brokenhead First Nation
Buffalo Point First Nation (Saulteaux)
Hollow Water First Nation
Black River First Nation
Little Grand Rapids First Nation
Pauingassi First Nation (Saulteaux)
Poplar River First Nation


Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians
Wabasseemoong Independent Nation
Wabauskang First Nation
Wabun Tribal Council [6]

Beaverhouse First Nation
Brunswick House First Nation
Chapleau Ojibwe First Nation
Matachewan First Nation
Mattagami First Nation
Wahgoshig First Nation


Wabigoon Lake Ojibway Nation
Wahnapitae First Nation
Washagamis Bay First Nation
Whitefish Bay First Nation
Whitefish Lake First Nation
Whitefish River First Nation
Whitesand First Nation
Whitewater Lake First Nation
Wikwemikong Unceded First Nation





[edit] Other tribes known by their Ojibwa/Ottawa names


Known
Name
Ojibwa
Name
Ojibwa
Meaning
Own
Name


Arkansas
Aakaanzhish
Damn little Kansas
Quapaw


Assiniboine
Asiniibwaan
Stoney 'Asp' (i.e. the Sioux)
Nakota


Blackfoot
Makadewanazid
Black-foot
Siksikawa


Chipewyan
Ojiibwayaan
Pointed Skin
Dënesųłiné


Eskimo
Ashki-amaw
Eats It Raw
Inuit


Flathead
Nebagindibe
Flat-head
Salish


Kansas
Aakaans
[Lives at the] Little Hell-hole
Kaw


Kaskaskia
Gaaskaaskeyaa
Hide-scraper



Kickapoo
Giiwigaabaw
Stands here-and-there



Menominee
Omanoominii
Wild Rice People
Omāēqnomenew


Miami
Omaamii
Downstream people
Myaamia


Micmac
Miigimaa
Allied-Brothers
Mi'kmaq


Moingwena
Moowiingwenaa
Have a Filthy Face



Ottawa
Odaawaa
Trader
Odawa


Potawatomi
Boodewaadamii
Fire Keeper
Bodéwadmi


Sauk/Sac
Ozaagii
[Lives at the] Outlet
Asakiwaki


Shawnee
Zhaawanoog
Southerners
Chowanoc


Sioux
Naadawensiw
Little like the 'Adders' (i.e. the Iroquois)
Aioe-Dakota-Lakota-Nakota


Snake
Ginebig
Snake
Shoshoni


Winnebago
Wiinibiigoo
[Lives at the] Murky Waters
Ho-čąk



[edit] Notable people

Ah-shah-way-gee-she-go-qua (Aazhawigiizhigokwe/Hanging Cloud) (Warrioress)
David Wayne "Famous Dave" Anderson (Business Entrepreneur)
Edward Benton Banai (Writer)
Dennis Banks (Political Activist)
James Bartleman (Diplomat, Author)
Adam Beach (Actor, Writer)
Jason Behr (Writer)
Archibald "Grey Owl" Belaney (Naturalist and Writer) - English, but presented himself an Ojibwa
Clyde Bellecourt (Social Activist)
Vernon Bellecourt (Social Activist)
Chief Bender (Baseball player)
Benjamin Chee Chee (Artist)
Carl Beam (Artist)
George Copway (Missionary and Writer)
Eddy Cobiness (Artist)
Patrick DesJarlait (Commercial Artist)
Louise Erdrich (Writer)
William Gardner - (One of the Untouchables)
Carl Gawboy (Artist, Historian)
Gordon Henry Jr. (Writer)
Drew Hayden Taylor (Playwright, Author and Journalist)
Virgil Hill (Boxer)
Basil Johnston (Historian and Cultural Essayist)
Peter Jones (Missionary and Writer)
Ke-che-waish-ke (Gichi-Weshkiinh/Buffalo) (Chief)
Maude Kegg (Author, Cultural Embassidor)
Winona LaDuke (Activist and Writer)
Carole LaFavor (Writer)
Joe Lumsden (Chairman, Sault Tribe of Chippewa Indians)
Loma Lyns (Singer, Songwriter)
Cody McCormick (Canadian professional ice hockey player for the Colorado Avalanche)
Rod Michano (AIDS Activist/Educator)
Norval Morrisseau (Artist)
Ted Nolan (Canadian former professional ice hockey player and coach, Jack Adams Award winner)
Jim Northrup (Columnist)
O-zaw-wen-dib (Ozaawindib/Yellow Head) (Warrioress, Guide)
Francis Pegahmagabow, warrior
Leonard Peltier (Political Activist, Prisoner)
Po-go-ne-gi-shik (Bagonegiizhig/Hole in the Day) (Chief)
Tommy Prince (Soldier)
Buffy Sainte-Marie (Singer)
Keith Secola (Rock and Blues Singer)
Chris Simon (Canadian professional ice hockey player, Stanley Cup winner w/ 1996 Colorado Avalanche)
Roy Thomas (Artist)
David Treuer (Writer)
Shania Twain (Singer) - non-Ojibwa of Cree heritage adopted by her Ojibwa stepfather
E. Donald Two-Rivers (Poet, Playwright)
Gerald Vizenor (Writer)
Wawatam (Chief)
William Whipple Warren (Historian)
Henry Boucha (American former professional ice hockey player, United States Hockey Hall of Fame)
Arron Asham (Canadian professional ice hockey player for the Philadelphia Flyers)


[edit] Ojibwa treaties




Tribal Treaty Administrants


1854 Authority - 1854CT
Chippewa Ottawa Resource Authority - 1836CT fisheries
Grand Council of Treaty 3 - Treaty 3
Grand Council of Treaty 8 - Treaty 8
Great Lakes Indian Fish & Wildlife Commission - 1837CT, 1836CT, 1842CT and 1854CT
Nishnawbe Aski Nation - Treaty 5 and Treaty 9
Red Lake Band of Chippewa - 1886CT and 1889CT
Union of Ontario Indians - RS, RH1, RH2, misc. pre-confederation treaties


Treaties with France


La Grande Paix de Montréal (1701)


Treaties with Great Britain


Treaty of Fort Niagara (1764)
Treaty of Fort Niagara (1781)
Indian Officers' Land Treaty (1783)
The Crawford Purchases (1783)
Between the Lakes Purchase (1784)
The McKee Purchase (1790)
Between the Lakes Purchase (1792)
Chenail Ecarte (Sombra Township) Purchase (1796)
London Township Purchase (1796)
Land for Joseph Brant (1797)
Penetanguishene Bay Purchase (1798)
St. Joseph Island (1798)
Toronto Purchase (1805)
Head-of-the-Lake Purchase (1806)
Lake Simcoe-Lake Huron Purchase(1815)
Lake Simcoe-Nottawasaga Purchase (1818)
Ajetance Purchase (1818)
Rice Lake Purchase (1818)
The Rideau Purchase (1819)
Long Woods Purchase (1822)
Huron Tract Purchase (1827)
Saugeen Tract Agreement (1836)
Manitoulin Agreement (1836)
The Robinson Treaties

Ojibewa Indians Of Lake Superior (1850)
Ojibewa Indians Of Lake Huron (1850)


Manitoulin Island Treaty (1862)


Treaties with Canada


Treaty No. 1 (1871) - Stone Fort Treaty
Treaty No. 2 (1871)
Treaty No. 3 (1873) - Northwest Angle Treaty
Treaty No. 4 (1874) - Qu'Appelle Treaty
Treaty No. 5 (1875)
Treaty No. 6 (1876)
Treaty No. 8 (1899)
Treaty No. 9 (1905-1906) - James Bay Treaty
Treaty No. 5, Adhesions (1908-1910)
The Williams Treaties (1923)

The Chippewa Indians
The Mississauga Indians


Treaty No. 9, Adhesions (1929-1930)




Treaties with the United States


Treaty of Fort McIntosh (1785)
Treaty of Fort Harmar (1789)
Treaty of Greenville (1795)
Fort Industry (1805)
Treaty of Detroit (1807)
Treaty of Brownstown (1808)
Treaty of Spring Wells (1815)
Treaty of St. Louis (1816) - Ottawa, Ojibwa, and Potawatomi
Treaty of Miami Rapids (1817)
St. Mary's Treaty (1818)
Treaty of Saginaw (1819)
Treaty of Saúlt Ste. Marie (1820)
Treaty of L'Arbre Croche and Michilimackinac (1820)
Treaty of Chicago (1821)
Treaty of Prairie du Chien (1825)
Treaty of Fond du Lac (1826)
Treaty of Butte des Morts (1827)
Treaty of Green Bay (1828)
Treaty of Prairie du Chien (1829)
Treaty of Chicago (1833)
Treaty of Washington (1836) - Ottawa & Chippewa
Treaty of Washington (1836) - Swan Creek & Black River Bands
Treaty of Detroit (1837)
Treaty of St. Peters (1837) - White Pine Treaty
Treaty of Flint River (1837)
Saganaw Treaties

Treaty of Saganaw (1838)
Supplimental Treaty (1839)


Treaty of La Pointe (1842) - Copper Treaty

Isle Royale Agreement (1844)


Treaty of Potawatomi Creek (1846)
Treaty of Fond du Lac (1847)
Treaty of Leech Lake (1847)
Treaty of La Pointe (1854)
Treaty of Washington (1855)
Treaty of Detroit (1855) - Ottawa & Chippewa
Treaty of Detroit (1855) - Sault Ste. Marie Band
Treaty of Detroit (1855) - Swan Creek & Black River Bands
Treaty of Sac and Fox Agency (1859)
Treaty of Washington (1863)
Treaty of Old Crossing (1863)
Treaty of Old Crossing (1864)
Treaty of Washington (1864)
Treaty of Isabella Reservation (1864)
Treaty of Washington (1866)
Treaty of Washington (1867)





[edit] Gallery








A-na-cam-e-gish-ca (Aanakamigishkaa/"[Traces of] Foot Prints [upon the Ground]"), Ojibwa chief, painted by Charles Bird King









Bust of Aysh-ke-bah-ke-ko-zhay (Eshkibagikoonzhe or "Flat Mouth"), a Leech Lake Ojibwa chief









Chief Beautifying Bird (Nenaa'angebi), by Benjamin Armstrong, 1891









Bust of Beshekee, war chief, modeled 1855, carved 1856











Caa-tou-see, an Ojibwa, painted by Charles Bird King









Hanging Cloud, a female Ojibwa warrior









Jack-O-Pa (Shák'pí/"Six"), an Ojibwa/Dakota chief, painted by Charles Bird King









Kay be sen day way We Win, by Eastman Johnson, 1857











Kei-a-gis-gis, a Plains Ojibwa woman, painted by George Catlin









Leech Lake Ojibwa delegation to Washington, 1899









Milwaukee Ojibwa woman and baby, courtesy of the Wisconsin Historical Society









Ne-bah-quah-om, Ojibwa chief











"One Called From A Distance" (Midwewinind) of the White Earth Band, 1894.









Pee-Che-Kir, Ojibwa chief, painted by Thomas Loraine McKenney, 1843









Ojibwa chief Rocky Boy









Ojibwa woman and child, painted by Charles Bird King











Tshusick, an Ojibwa woman, painted by Charles Bird King






[edit] Notes


^ Multilingual Dictionary for Multifaith and Multicultural Mediation and Education
^ Warren, William W. (1885; reprint: 1984) History of the Ojibway People. ISBN 087351162X.
^ L. Erdrich, Books and Islands in Ojibwe Country (2003)
^ Johnston, Basil. (2007) Anishinaubae Thesaurus ISBN-10: 0870137530
^ Feinberg, Leslie: Transgender Warriors, page 40. Beacon Press, 1996.



[edit] References

F. Densmore, Chippewa Customs (1929, repr. 1970)
H. Hickerson, The Chippewa and Their Neighbors (1970)
R. Landes, Ojibwa Sociology (1937, repr. 1969)
R. Landes, Ojibwa Woman (1938, repr. 1971)
F. Symington, The Canadian Indian (1969)


[edit] Further reading

Bento-Banai, Edward (2004). Creation- From the Ojibwa. The Mishomis Book.
Danziger, E.J., Jr. (1978). The Chippewa of Lake Superior. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Densmore, F. (1979). Chippewa customs. St. Paul: Minnesota Historical Society Press. (Ursprünglich 1929 veröffentlicht)
Grim, J.A. (1983). The shaman: Patterns of religious healing among the Ojibway Indians. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Gross, L.W. (2002). The comic vision of Anishinaabe culture and religion. American Indian Quarterly, 26, 436-459.
Howse, Joseph. A Grammar of the Cree Language; With Which Is Combined an Analysis of the Chippeway Dialect. London: J.G.F. & J. Rivington, 1844.
Johnston, B. (1976). Ojibway heritage. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart.
Long, J. Voyages and Travels of an Indian Interpreter and Trader Describing the Manners and Customs of the North American Indians, with an Account of the Posts Situated on the River Saint Laurence, Lake Ontario, & C., to Which Is Added a Vocabulary of the Chippeway Language ... a List of Words in the Iroquois, Mehegan, Shawanee, and Esquimeaux Tongues, and a Table, Shewing the Analogy between the Algonkin and the Chippeway Languages. London: Robson, 1791.
Nichols, J.D., & Nyholm, E. (1995). A concise dictionary of Minnesota Ojibwe. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Vizenor, G. (1972). The everlasting sky: New voices from the people named the Chippewa. New York: Crowell-Collier Press.
Vizenor, G. (1981). Summer in the spring: Ojibwe lyric poems and tribal stories. Minneapolis: The Nodin Press.
Vizenor, G. (1984). The people named the Chippewa: Narrative histories. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Warren, William W. (1851). History of the Ojibway People.
White, Richard (July 31, 2000). Chippewas of the Sault. The Sault Tribe News.
Wub-e-ke-niew. (1995). We have the right to exist: A translation of aboriginal indigenous thought. New York: Black Thistle Press.


[edit] External links

Great Lakes Indian Fish & Wildlife Commission
Ojibwe culture and history, a lengthy and detailed discussion
Kevin L. Callahan's An Introduction to Ojibway Culture and History
Ojibwe Song Pictures, recorded by Frances Desmore
Digital recreation of the 'Chippewa' entry from Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico, edited by Frederick Webb Hodge
Ojibwa migration through Manitoba
video: The Making of an Ojibwe Hand Drum
Nindoodemag: The Significance of Algonquian Kinship Networks in the Eastern Great Lakes Region, 1600–1701

 



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ojibwa"
Categories: Ojibwa | Anishinaabe peoples | Anishinaabe lands | Algonquian ethnonyms | Algonquian peoples | First Nations in Alberta | First Nations in Ontario | First Nations in Manitoba | First Nations in Saskatchewan | First Nations in Quebec | Native American tribes in Michigan | Native American tribes in Minnesota | Native American tribes in Montana | Native American tribes in North Dakota | Native American tribes in Wisconsin | Upper Peninsula of MichiganHidden categories: "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Català
Deutsch
Esperanto
Français
Hrvatski
Italiano
Lietuvių
Malagasy
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 07:19.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
