













Epinephrine - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Epinephrine";
		var wgTitle = "Epinephrine";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "10250";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281687958;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Epinephrine

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"Adrenaline" redirects here. For other uses, see Adrenaline (disambiguation).









(R)-(−)-L-Epinephrine or (R)-(−)-L-adrenaline



Systematic (IUPAC) name


(R)-4-(1-hydroxy-
2-(methylamino)ethyl)benzene-1,2-diol


Identifiers


CAS number
51-43-4


ATC code
A01AD01 B02BC09 C01CA24 R01AA14 R03AA01 S01EA01


PubChem
838


DrugBank
APRD00450


ChemSpider
5611


Chemical data


Formula
C9H13NO3 


Mol. mass
183.204 g/mol


Pharmacokinetic data


Bioavailability
Nil (oral)


Metabolism
adrenergic synapse (MAO and COMT)


Half life
2 minutes


Excretion
Urine


Therapeutic considerations


Pregnancy cat.

A(AU) C(US)



Legal status

Prescription Only (S4)(AU) POM(UK) ℞-only(US)



Routes
IV, IM, endotracheal


Epinephrine (also referred to as adrenaline; see Terminology) is a hormone and neurotransmitter.
Epinephrine increases the "fight or flight" response of the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system.
It is a catecholamine, a sympathomimetic monoamine derived from the amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine. The Latin roots ad-+renes and the Greek roots epi-+nephros both literally mean "on/to the kidney" (referring to the adrenal gland, which sits atop the kidneys and secretes epinephrine). Epinephrine is often shortened to E or to EPI in Medical jargon.




Contents


1 History
2 Triggers
3 Actions in the body
4 Mechanism of action
5 Regulation
6 Side effects and drug interactions
7 Terminology
8 Isomers
9 Autoinjectors
10 Pharmaceutical Preparations
11 See also
12 References

12.1 Notes
12.2 General references







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Epinephrine was isolated and identified in 1895 by Napoleon Cybulski, a Polish physiologist. In May 1896, William Bates reported the discovery of a substance produced by the adrenal gland in the New York Medical Journal.[1] The discovery was repeated in 1897 by John Jacob Abel.[2]
Jokichi Takamine, a Japanese chemist, independently discovered the same hormone in 1900.[3][4] In 1901 he isolated and purified the hormone epinephrine from cow glands.
Epinephrine was first artificially synthesized in 1904 by Friedrich Stolz.




Epinephrine ampule, 1 mg (Suprarenin)



[edit] Triggers
Epinephrine is a "fight or flight" hormone, and plays a central role in the short-term stress reaction. It is released from the adrenal glands when danger threatens or in an emergency, hence an Adrenaline rush. Such triggers may be threatening, exciting, or environmental stressor conditions such as high noise levels, or bright light and high ambient temperature (see Fight-or-flight response).

[edit] Actions in the body
When in the bloodstream, it rapidly prepares the body for action in emergency situations. The hormone boosts the supply of oxygen and glucose to the brain and muscles, while suppressing other non-emergency bodily processes (digestion in particular).
It increases heart rate and stroke volume, dilates the pupils, and constricts arterioles in the skin and gastrointestinal tract while dilating arterioles in skeletal muscles. It elevates the blood sugar level by increasing catabolism of glycogen to glucose in the liver, and at the same time begins the breakdown of lipids in fat cells. Like some other stress hormones, epinephrine has a suppressive effect on the immune system.[5]
Although epinephrine does not have any psychoactive effects, stress or arousal also releases norepinephrine in the brain. Norepinephrine has similar actions in the body, but is also psychoactive.
The type of action in various cell types depends on their expression of adrenergic receptors.

[edit] Mechanism of action




β-adrenergic receptors



Further reading: adrenergic receptor

Epinephrine's actions are mediated through adrenergic receptors. Epinephrine is a non-selective agonist of all adrenergic receptors. It activates α1, α2, β1, and β2 receptors to different extents.[6] Specific functions include:

It binds to α1 receptors of liver cells, which activate inositol-phospholipid signaling pathway, signaling the phosphorylation of glycogen synthase and phosphorylase kinase (inactivating and activating them, respectively), leading to the latter activating another enzyme—glycogen phosphorylase—which catalises breakdown of glycogen (glycogenolysis) so as to release glucose to the bloodstream. Simultaneously protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) is inactivated, as in the active state PP1 would reverse all the previous phosphorylations.


Epinephrine also activates β-adrenergic receptors of the liver and muscle cells, thereby activating the adenylate cyclase signaling pathway, which will in turn increase glycogenolysis.

β2 receptors are found primarily in skeletal muscle blood vessels where they trigger vasodilation. However, α-adrenergic receptors are found in most smooth muscles and splanchnic vessels, and epinephrine triggers vasoconstriction in those vessels.

Epinephrine is used as a drug to treat cardiac arrest and other cardiac dysrhythmias resulting in diminished or absent cardiac output; its action is to increase peripheral resistance via α1-adrenoceptor vasoconstriction, so that blood is shunted to the body's core, and the β1-adrenoceptor response which is increased cardiac rate and output (the speed and pronouncement of heart beats). This beneficial action comes with a significant negative consequence—increased cardiac irritability—which may lead to additional complications immediately following an otherwise successful resuscitation. Alternatives to this treatment include vasopressin, a powerful antidiuretic which also increases peripheral vascular resistance leading to blood shunting via vasoconstriction, but without the attendant increase in myocardial irritability.[5]
Due to its suppressive effect on the immune system, epinephrine is the drug of choice for treating anaphylaxis. It is also useful in treating sepsis. Allergy patients undergoing immunotherapy may receive an epinephrine rinse before the allergen extract is administered, thus reducing the immune response to the administered allergen. It is also used as a bronchodilator for asthma if specific beta2-adrenergic receptor agonists are unavailable or ineffective.
Because of various expression of α1 or β2-receptors, depending on the patient, administration of epinephrine may raise or lower blood pressure, depending whether or not the net increase or decrease in peripheral resistance can balance the positive inotropic and chronotropic effects of epinephrine on the heart, effects which respectively increase the contractility and rate of the heart.
Epinephrine can also be found in some brands of nasal spray. Its use in this form is to open air passages, however short-term this use may be.





Epinephrine is synthesized from norepinephrine in a synthetic pathway shared by all catecholamines.


Epinephrine is synthesized from norepinephrine in a synthetic pathway shared by all catecholamines, including L-dopa, dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine.
Epinephrine is synthesized via methylation of the primary distal amine of norepinephrine by phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT) in the cytosol of adrenergic neurons and cells of the adrenal medulla (so-called chromaffin cells). PNMT is only found in the cytosol of cells of adrenal medullary cells. PNMT uses S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) as a cofactor to donate the methyl group to norepinephrine, creating epinephrine.
For norepinephrine to be acted upon by PNMT in the cytosol, it must first be shipped out of granules of the chromaffin cells. This may occur via the catecholamine-H+ exchanger VMAT1. VMAT1 is also responsible for transporting newly synthesized epinephrine from the cytosol back into chromaffin granules in preparation for release.

[edit] Regulation
Epinephrine synthesis is solely under the control of the central nervous system (CNS). Several levels of regulation dominate epinephrine synthesis.
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and the sympathetic nervous system stimulate the synthesis of epinephrine precursors by enhancing the activity of enzymes involved in catecholamine synthesis. The specific enzymes are tyrosine hydroxylase in the synthesis of dopa and enzyme dopamine-β-hydroxylase in the synthesis of norepinephrine.
ACTH also stimulates the adrenal cortex to release cortisol, which increases the expression of PNMT in chromaffin cells, enhancing epinephrine synthesis. This is most often done in response to stress.
The sympathetic nervous system, acting via splanchnic nerves to the adrenal medulla, stimulates the release of epinephrine. Acetylcholine released by preganglionic sympathetic fibers of these nerves acts on nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, causing cell depolarization and an influx of calcium through voltage-gated calcium channels. Calcium triggers the exocytosis of chromaffin granules and thus the release of epinephrine (and norepinephrine) into the bloodstream.
Epinephrine (as with norepinephrine) does exert negative feedback to down-regulate its own synthesis at the presynaptic alpha-2 adrenergic receptor.
A pheochromocytoma is a tumor of the adrenal gland (or, rarely, the ganglia of the sympathetic nervous system), which results in the uncontrolled secretion of catecholamines, usually epinephrine.
In liver cells, epinephrine binds to the β-Adrenergic receptor which changes conformation and helps Gs, a G protein, exchange GDP to GTP. This trimeric G protein dissociates to Gs alpha and Gs beta/gamma subunits. Gs alpha binds to adenyl cyclase thus converting ATP into Cyclic AMP. Cyclic AMP binds to the regulatory subunit of Protein Kinase A: Protein kinase A phosphorylates Phosphorylase Kinase. Meanwhile, Gs beta/gamma binds to the calcium channel and allows calcium ions to enter the cytoplasm. Calcium ions bind to calmodulin proteins, a protein present in all eukaryotic cells, which then binds to Phosphorylase Kinase and finishes its activation. Phosphorylase Kinase phosphorylates Phosphorylase which then phosphorylates glycogen and converts it to glucose-6-phosphate.

[edit] Side effects and drug interactions
Adverse reactions to epinephrine include palpitations, tachycardia, arrhythmia, anxiety, headache, tremor, hypertension, and acute pulmonary edema.[7]
Use is contraindicated for patients on non-selective β-blockers because severe hypertension and even cerebral hemorrhage may result.[6]

[edit] Terminology
This chemical is widely referred to as adrenaline outside of the US; however, the USAN and INN for this chemical is epinephrine because adrenaline bore too much similarity to the Parke, Davis & Co trademark Adrenalin (without the "e") which was registered in the U.S. The BAN and EP term for this chemical is adrenaline, and is indeed now one of the few differences between the INN and BAN systems of names.
Amongst U.S. health professionals, the term epinephrine is used over adrenaline. However, it should be noted that universally, pharmaceuticals that mimic the effects of epinephrine are called adrenergics, and receptors for epinephrine are called adrenoceptors.
It can also be spelled epinephrin (without the "e").

[edit] Isomers
Natural epinephrine is the (R)-(−)-L-epinephrine stereoisomer.

[edit] Autoinjectors
Epinephrine is now also used in EpiPens and Twinjects. EpiPens are long narrow autoinjectors that administer epinephrine, Twinjects are similar but contain two doses of epinephrine. It is also used in medicines and usually the Epinephrine is extracted from adrenal glands of hogs, cattle, and sheep.
Though both EpiPen and Twinject are trademark names, common usage of the terms are drifting toward the generic context of any epinephrine autoinjector.

[edit] Pharmaceutical Preparations
Aqueous preparations of adrenaline are obtained by use of hydrochloric acid or tartaric acid, because in the absence of acid medium, it undergoes oxidation.
Borate salt is used in ophthalmology.

[edit] See also

Anaphylaxis
Adrenochrome
Catechol-O-methyl transferase
Adrenergic receptor


[edit] References

[edit] Notes


^ "The Use of Extract of Suprarenal Capsule in the Eye - www.Central-Fixation.com". http://www.central-fixation.com/bates-medical-articles/use-of-extract-of-suprarenal-capsule.php. 
^ Aronson JK (2000). "Where name and image meet" - the argument for "adrenaline". British Medical Journal 320, 506-9.
^ Yamashima T (2003). "Jokichi Takamine (1854–1922), the samurai chemist, and his work on adrenalin". J Med Biogr 11 (2): 95–102. PMID 12717538. 
^ Bennett M (1999). "One hundred years of adrenaline: the discovery of autoreceptors". Clin Auton Res 9 (3): 145–59. doi:10.1007/BF02281628. PMID 10454061. 
^ a b Epinephrine - Online Medical Dictionary
^ a b Shen, Howard (2008). Illustrated Pharmacology Memory Cards: PharMnemonics. Minireview. pp. 4. ISBN 1-59541-101-1. 
^ About.com - "The Definition of Epinephrine"



[edit] General references

Walter F. Boron, Emile L. Boulpaep (2005). Medical Physiology: A Cellular And Molecular Approach. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders. ISBN 1-4160-2328-3. OCLC 56191776. 


Voet D. and J. (2004). Biochemistry, 3rd ed. USA: Wiley. ISBN 0-471-19350-x. OCLC 154657578. 








v • d • e

Phenethylamines






2C-B • 2C-C • 2C-D • 2C-E • 2C-I • 2C-N • 2C-T-2 • 2C-T-21 • 2C-T-4 • 2C-T-7 • 2C-T-8 • 3C-E • 4-FMP • Alfetamine • Amphetamine • Bupropion • Cathine • Cathinone • Clenbuterol • DESOXY • Dextroamphetamine • Methamphetamine • Diethylcathinone • Dimethylcathinone • DOC • DOB • DOI • DOM • bk-MBDB • Dopamine • Br-DFLY • Ephedrine • Epinephrine • Escaline • Etafedrine • Fenfluramine • Levosalbutamol • Levomethamphetamine • MBDB • MDA • MDMA • MDMC • MDEA • MDPV • Mescaline • Methcathinone • Norepinephrine • Phentermine • Salbutamol • Tyramine • Venlafaxine













v • d • e

Endocrine system: hormones (Peptide hormones · Steroid hormones)





Endocrine
glands





Hypothalamic-
pituitary






Hypothalamus


GnRH · TRH · Dopamine · CRH · GHRH/Somatostatin







Posterior pituitary


Vasopressin · Oxytocin







Anterior pituitary


α (FSH FSHB, LH LHB, TSH TSHB, CGA) · Prolactin · POMC (ACTH, MSH, Endorphins, Lipotropin) · GH










Adrenal axis


Adrenal cortex: aldosterone · cortisol · DHEA
Adrenal medulla: epinephrine · norepinephrine







Thyroid axis


Thyroid: thyroid hormone (T3 and T4) · calcitonin
Parathyroid: PTH







Gonadal axis


Testis: testosterone · AMH · inhibin
Ovary: estradiol · progesterone · inhibin/activin · relaxin (pregnancy)
Placenta: hCG · HPL · estrogen · progesterone







Other end.
glands


Pancreas: glucagon · insulin · somatostatin
Pineal gland: melatonin
Thymus: Thymosin · Thymopoietin · Thymulin









Non-end.
glands

digestive system: Stomach: gastrin · ghrelin · Duodenum: CCK · GIP · secretin · motilin · VIP · Ileum: enteroglucagon · Liver/other: Insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1, IGF-2)
Adipose tissue: leptin · adiponectin · resistin
Skeleton: Osteocalcin
Kidney: JGA (renin) · peritubular cells (EPO) · calcitriol · prostaglandin
Heart: Natriuretic peptide (ANP, BNP)






Target-derived

NGF · BDNF · NT-3













v • d • e

Cardiac stimulants excluding cardiac glycosides (C01C)





Adrenergic and
dopaminergic agents





Adrenergic agonists






α


Metaraminol • Phenylephrine • Methoxamine • Norfenefrine • Oxedrine • Midodrine • Mephentermine







β


Dobutamine • Arbutamine • Isoprenaline • Prenalterol







mixed


Epinephrine # • Norepinephrine • Etilefrine










Dopamine agonists


Fenoldopam







Both


Dopamine # • Dopexamine • Ibopamine • Octopamine







Unknown/ungrouped


Dimetofrine • Gepefrine • Cafedrine • Theodrenaline









Phosphodiesterase inhibitors (PDE3I)

Amrinone • Milrinone • Enoximone • Bucladesine






Other cardiac stimulants

Angiotensinamide • Xamoterol • Levosimendan







# = WHO-EM













v • d • e

Drugs for obstructive airway diseases: asthma/COPD (R03)





Adrenergics, inhalants





Short acting β2-agonists


Salbutamol/Levosalbutamol • Fenoterol • Terbutaline • Pirbuterol • Procaterol • Bitolterol • Rimiterol • Carbuterol • Tulobuterol • Reproterol







Long acting β2-agonists (LABA)


Arformoterol • Bambuterol • Clenbuterol • Formoterol • Salmeterol Ultra LABA: Indacaterol







other


Epinephrine • Hexoprenaline • Isoprenaline (Isoproterenol) • Orciprenaline (Metaproterenol)









Glucocorticoids

Beclometasone • Budesonide • Ciclesonide • Fluticasone • Mometasone






Anticholinergics/
muscarinic antagonist

Ipratropium • Tiotropium






Mast cell stabilizers

Cromoglicate • Nedocromil






Xanthines

Doxofylline • Theobromine • Theophylline/Aminophylline






Eicosanoid inhibition





Leukotriene antagonists


Montelukast • Pranlukast • Zafirlukast







Lipoxygenase inhibitor


Zileuton







Thromboxane receptor antagonists


Ramatroban • Seratrodast









Combination products

Budesonide/formoterol • Fluticasone/salmeterol • Ipratropium/salbutamol













v • d • e

Antihemorrhagics (B02)





Hemostatics
(coagulation)





Systemic






Vitamin K


Phytomenadione/K1 · Menadione/K3







Coagulation factors


intrinsic: IX/Nonacog alfa · VIII
extrinsic: VII/Eptacog alfa
common: X · II/Thrombin · I/Fibrinogen







Other systemic


Etamsylate · Carbazochrome · Batroxobin · thrombopoietin receptor agonist (Romiplostim, Eltrombopag)










Local


Absorbable gelatin sponge · Oxidized cellulose · Tetragalacturonic acid hydroxymethylester · Thrombin · Collagen · Calcium alginate · Epinephrine/Adrenalone









Antifibrinolytics

amino acids (Aminocaproic acid, Tranexamic acid, Aminomethylbenzoic acid)
serpins (Aprotinin, Alfa1 antitrypsin, C1-inhibitor, Camostat)













v • d • e

Health Science > Medicine > Emergency medicine





Procedures

Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) · Advanced life support (ALS) · Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) · Basic life support (BLS) · Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) · First aid · Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS) · Wilderness first aid






Equipment

Ambulance · Bag valve mask (BVM) · Chest tube · Defibrillation (AED, ICD) · Electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG) · Intraosseous infusion (IO) · Intravenous therapy (IV) · Intubation · Litter · Nasopharyngeal airway (NPA) · Oropharyngeal airway (OPA) · Pocket mask · Stretcher






People

Certified first responder (CFR) · Emergency medical responder (EMR) · Emergency medical technician (EMT) · Paramedic · Emergency physician · Wilderness First Responder · Wilderness EMT






Drugs

Atropine · Amiodarone · Epinephrine/Adrenaline · Magnesium · Bicarbonate  · Naloxone






Other

Ambulance station  · Golden hour · Emergency department · Emergency medical services · Emergency psychiatry · Medical emergency · Search and rescue · Trauma center · Triage













v • d • e

Adrenergic agonists (models/most important in small caps)





α





α1


METHOXAMINE · Methylnorepinephrine · Oxymetazoline · PHENYLEPHRINE · Metaraminol







α2


4-NEMD · CLONIDINE · Guanfacine · Guanabenz · Guanoxabenz · Guanethidine · Xylazine · METHYLDOPA · Apraclonidine · Brimonidine · Detomidine · Dexmedetomidine · Lofexidine · Romifidine · Tizanidine · Xylometazoline







Undetermined/
unsorted


Amidephrine · Amitraz · Anisodamine · Ergotamine · Indanidine · Medetomidine · Mephentermine · Midodrine · Mivazerol · Naphazoline · Norfenefrine · Octopamine · Phenylpropanolamine · Rilmenidine · Synephrine · Talipexole · Tetrahydrozoline · Xylometazoline









β





β1


DOBUTAMINE · Dopamine · Denopamine · Xamoterol







β2


Short acting β2-agonists: SALBUTAMOL (ALBUTEROL)/Levosalbutamol · Fenoterol · TERBUTALINE · Pirbuterol · Procaterol · Bitolterol · Rimiterol · Carbuterol · Tulobuterol · Reproterol · Dopexamine
Long acting β2-agonists (LABA): Arformoterol · Bambuterol · Clenbuterol · Formoterol · Salmeterol
Orciprenaline (metaproterenol) · Ritodrine · Hexoprenaline · Indacaterol







β3


Amibegron · Solabegron







Undetermined/
unsorted


Arbutamine · Befunolol · Isoetarine · Isoxsuprine · Nylidrin · Oxyfedrine · Prenalterol · Ractopamine · Bromoacetylalprenololmenthane · Broxaterol · Cimaterol · Higenamine · Mabuterol · Methoxyphenamine · Tretoquinol · Zinterol







Nonselective β


ISOPRENALINE (ISOPROTERENOL)









α and β

Epinephrine (α1+2, β1+2) · Norepinephrine (α1+2, β1) · Cirazoline · Etilefrine · Ephedrine · Pseudoephedrine






Indirect

presynaptic norepinephrine release: Amphetamine · Tyramine · Ephedrine  · Pseudoephedrine
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor: Cocaine







see also monoamine oxidase inhibitor









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epinephrine"
Categories: Aromatic compounds | Hormones | Catecholamines | Neurotransmitters | Bronchodilators | Stress | Anxiety | World Health Organization essential medicines 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Azərbaycan
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Français
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Ido
Italiano
עברית
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Occitan
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 12:25.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
