













Music of India - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Music_of_India";
		var wgTitle = "Music of India";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "14535";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281800488;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Music of India

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





The neutrality of this article is disputed. Please see the discussion on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until the dispute is resolved. (February 2009)







This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2007)




Music of India



Bhajan · Filmi · Folk · Hip hop · Ghazal
Pop · Qawwali · Rock



Timeline · Samples


Genres

Classical (Carnatic · Hindustani)



Awards

Bollywood · Punjabi  · Tamil



Festivals

Sangeet Natak Akademi
Thyagaraja Aradhana
Cleveland Thyagaraja Aradhana



Media

Sruti
The Music Magazine



National
anthem

"Jana Gana Mana"



National
song

"Vande Mataram"



By state/territory



Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Andhra Pradesh · Arunachal Pradesh · Assam
Bihar · Chhattisgarh · Goa · Gujarat · Haryana
Himachal Pradesh · Jammu · Jharkhand
Karnataka · Kashmir · Kerala
Madhya Pradesh · Maharashtra · Manipur
Meghalaya · Mizoram · Nagaland · Orissa
Punjab · Rajasthan · Sikkim · Tamil Nadu
Tripura · Uttar Pradesh · Uttaranchal
West Bengal



The music of India includes multiple varieties of folk, popular, pop, classical music and R&B. India's classical music tradition, including Carnatic and Hindustani music, has a history spanning millennia and, developed over several eras, it remains fundamental to the lives of Indians today as sources of religious inspiration, cultural expression and pure entertainment. India is made up of several dozen ethnic groups, speaking their own languages and dialects, having very distinct cultural traditions.




Contents


1 Classical music

1.1 Hindustani music (hindusthānī)
1.2 Carnatic music (karnātic)


2 Folk music

2.1 Bauls
2.2 Bhangra
2.3 Bhavageete
2.4 Dandiya
2.5 Lavani
2.6 Popular music
2.7 Qawwali
2.8 Rabindra Sangeet
2.9 Rajasthan
2.10 Interaction with non-Indian music


3 Modern music

3.1 Indi-pop music
3.2 Rock & Metal music
3.3 Dance music


4 Western classical music
5 Further reading
6 See also
7 References
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Classical music
Main article: Indian classical music
The two main traditions of classical music which have been Carnatic music, found predominantly in the peninsular regions and Hindustani music, found in the northern and central parts. While both traditions claim Vedic origin, history indicates that the two traditions diverged from a common musical root since c. 13th century.
Further information: Indian classical music, Hindustani music, and Carnatic music

[edit] Hindustani music (hindusthānī)
Main article: Hindustani classical music
Hindustani music is an Indian classical music tradition that goes back to Vedic times, and further developed circa the 13th and 14th centuries AD with Persian influences and from existing religious and folk music. The practice of singing based on notes was popular even from the Vedic times where the hymns in Sama Veda, a sacred text, was sung as Samagana and not chanted. Developing a strong and diverse tradition over several centuries, it has contemporary traditions established primarily in India but also in Pakistan and Bangladesh. In contrast to Carnatic music, the other main Indian classical music tradition (originating from the South), Hindustani music was not only influenced by ancient Hindu musical traditions, Vedic philosophy and native Indian sounds but also enriched by the Persian performance practices of the Mughals. Besides pure classical, there are also several semi-classical forms such as thumri and tappa.

[edit] Carnatic music (karnātic)
Main article: Carnatic music
The present form of Carnatic music is based on historical developments that can be traced to the 15th - 16th centuries AD and thereafter. From the ancient Sanskrit works available, and the several epigraphical inscriptional evidences, the history of classical musical traditions can be traced back to about 2500 years. Carnatic music is completely melodic, with improvised variations. The main emphasis is on vocal music; most compositions are written to be sung, and even when played on instruments, they are meant to be performed in a singing style (known as gāyaki). Like Hindustani music, Carnatic music rests on two main elements: rāga, the modes or melodic formulæ, and tāḷa, the rhythmic cycles.[1]
Purandara Dasa is credited with having founded today's Carnatic Music. He systematized the teaching method by framing a series of graded lessons such as swaravalis, janta swaras, alankaras, lakshana geetas, prabandhas, ugabhogas, thattu varase, geetha, sooladis and kritis. He introduced the Mayamalavagaula as the basic scale for music instruction. These are followed by teachers and students of Carnatic music even today. Another of his important contributions was the fusion of bhava, raga and laya in his compositions.
Purandara Dasa was the first composer that started commenting on the daily life of the people in compositions. He incorporated in his songs popular folk language and introduced folk ragas in the mainstream. The most important contribution he made was the fusion of bhava, raga and laya into organic units.
He also composed a large number of lakshya and lakshana geetas, many of which are sung to this day. His sooladis exhibit his mastery of the techniques of music, and are considered an authority for raga lakshana. Scholars attribute the standardization of varna mettus entirely to Purandaradasa.
Purandaradasa's era was probably the beginning of Carnatic music's movement towards krithi based classical music (one of its distinguishing characteristics compared to Hindustani). The peripatetic dasas who followed him are believed to have followed the systems he devised, as well as orally passing down his compositions.
Purandaradasa was a performer, a musicologist and the father of Carnatic musical pedagogy. He is credited with having elevated Carnatic music from religious and devotional music into the realm of a performing art. For all these reasons and the enormous influence that he had on Carnatic music, musicologists call him the "Sangeeta Pitamaha" or the grandfather of Carnatic music.
Popular Carnatic vocalists of today include M. Balamuralikrishna, Nithyashree Mahadevan, Sudha Ragunathan, P. Unni Krishnan, Aruna Sairam, Priya Sisters, S. Sowmya, Sanjay Subrahmanyan, Sreevalsan J. Menon, Bombay Jayashri Ramnath, Ranjani & Gayatri, Vijay Siva, O. S. Arun, O. S. Thyagarajan, T. M. Krishna, Malladi Brothers - Sriram Prasad & Ravikumar, Sriram Parasuram & Anuradha Parasuram, Sikkil C. Gurucharan, Vishakha Hari, S. Kasthurirangan and Singapore V.S.Hari.

[edit] Folk music




A pair of Indian folk musicians performing in a rural village


Main article: Indian folk music

[edit] Bauls
The Bauls of Bengal were an order of musicians in 18th, 19th and early 20th century India who played a form of music using a khamak, ektara and dotara. The word Baul comes from Sanskrit batul meaning divinely inspired insanity. They are a group of mystic minstrels. They are thought to have been influenced greatly by the Hindu tantric sect of the Kartabhajas as well as by Sufi sects. Bauls travel in search of the internal ideal, Maner Manush (Man of the Heart).

[edit] Bhangra
Main article: Bhangra
Bhangra is a lively form of music and dance that originated in the Punjab region. As many Bhangra lyrics reflect the long and often tumultuous history of the Punjab, knowledge of Punjabi history offers important insights into the meaning of the music. While Bhangra began as a part of harvest festival celebrations, it eventually became a part of such diverse occasions as weddings and New Year celebrations. Moreover, during the last thirty years, Bhangra has enjoyed a surge in popularity worldwide, both in traditional form and as a fusion with genres such as hip-hop, house, and reggae, and in such forms it has become a pop sensation in the United Kingdom and North America.

[edit] Bhavageete
Main article: Bhavageete
Bhavageete (literally "emotion(al) song") is a form of expressionist poetry and light music. Some notable Bhavageete performers include Gantasala, P. Kalinga Rao, Mysore Ananthaswamy, C. Aswath, Shimoga Subbanna, Archana Udupa, and Raju Ananthaswamy.

[edit] Dandiya
Main article: Dandiya
Dandiya is a form of dance-oriented folk music that has also been adapted for pop music. The present musical style is derived from the traditional musical accompaniment to the folk dance.

[edit] Lavani
Main article: Lavani
Lavani comes from the word Lavanya which means beauty. This is one of the most popular forms of dance and music that is practiced all over Maharashtra. It has in fact become a necessary part of the Maharashtrian folk dance performances. Traditionally, the songs are sung by female artistes, but male artistes may occasionally sing Lavanis. The dance format associated with Lavani is known as Tamasha. Lavani is a combination of traditional song and dance, which particularly performed to the enchanting beats of 'Dholak', an drum like instrument. Dance performed by attractive women wearing nine-yard saris. They are sung in a quick tempo. The verve, the enthusiasm, the rhythm and above all the very beat of India finds an expressive declaration amidst the folk music of India, which has somewhat, redefined the term "bliss". Lavani originated in the arid region of Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh.

[edit] Popular music
The biggest form of Indian popular music is filmi, or songs from Indian musical films. The film industry of India supported music by according reverence to classical music while utilizing the western orchestration to support Indian melodies. Music composers like Naushad, Vasant Desai, Shankar Jaikishan, C. Ramchandra, Salil Chowdhary and S.D. Burman employed the principles of harmony while retaining classical and folk flavor. Reputed names in the domain of Indian classical music like Pt. Ravi Shankar, Ustad Vilayat Khan, Ustad Ali Akbar Khan and Pt. Ramnarayan have also composed music for films. Independent pop acts such as Asha Bhosle, Alisha Chinai, Shaan, Madhushree, Shreya Ghoshal, Nihira Joshi, Kavita Krishnamurthy, Sonu Nigam, Sukhwinder Singh, Kunal Ganjawala, Sunidhi Chauhan, Alka Yagnik and rock bands like Indus Creed, Indian Ocean, and Euphoria exist and have gained mass appeal with the advent of cable music television.

[edit] Qawwali
Main article: Qawwali
Qawwali is a Sufi form of devotional music based on the principles of classical music. It is performed with one or two lead singers, several chorus singers, harmonium, tabla, and dholak.

[edit] Rabindra Sangeet
Rabindranath Tagore was a towering figure in Indian music. Writing in Bengali, he created a library of over 2,000 songs now known by Bengalis as 'rabindra sangeet' whose form is primarily influenced by Hindustani classical, sub-classicals, Karnatic, western, bauls, bhatiyali and different folk songs of India. Many singers in West Bengal, and Bangladesh base their entire careers on the singing of Tagore musical masterpieces. The national anthem of India and national song of Bangladesh are Rabindra Sangeets.

[edit] Rajasthan
Rajasthan has a very diverse cultural collection of musician castes, including Langas, Sapera, Bhopa, Jogi and Manganiyar. Rajasthan Diary quotes it as a soulful, full-throated music with Harmonious diversity. The haunting melody of Rajasthan evokes from a variety of delightfully primitive looking instruments. The stringed variety include the Sarangi, Rawanhattha, Kamayacha, Morsing and Ektara. Percussion instruments come in all shapes and sizes from the huge Nagaras and Dhols to the tiny Damrus. The Daf and Chang are a big favourite of Holi (the festival of colours) revellers. Flutes and bagpipers come in local flavours such as Shehnai, Poongi, Algoza, Tarpi, Been and Bankia.
The essence of Rajasthani music is derived from the creative symphony of string instruments, percussion instruments and wind instruments accompanied by melodious renditions of folk singers. It enjoys a respectable presence in Bollywood music as well.

[edit] Interaction with non-Indian music
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, rock and roll fusions with Indian music were well-known throughout Europe and North America. Ali Akbar Khan's 1955 performance in the United States was perhaps the beginning of this trend.
Jazz pioneers such as John Coltrane—who recorded a composition entitled 'India' during the November 1961 sessions for his album Live At The Village Vanguard (the track was not released until 1963 on Coltrane's album Impressions)—also embraced this fusion. George Harrison (of the Beatles) played the sitar on the song "Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)" in 1965, which sparked interest from Shankar, who subsequently took Harrison as his apprentice. Jazz innovator Miles Davis recorded and performed with musicians like Khalil Balakrishna, Bihari Sharma, and Badal Roy in his post-1968 electric ensembles. Virtuoso jazz guitarist John McLaughlin spent several years in Madurai learning Carnatic music and incorporated it into many of his acts including Shakti which featured prominent Indian musicians. Other Western artists such as the Grateful Dead, Incredible String Band, the Rolling Stones, the Move and Traffic soon incorporated Indian influences and instruments, and added Indian performers. Legendary Grateful Dead frontman Jerry Garcia joined guitarist Sanjay Mishra on his classic cd "Blue Incantation" (1995). Mishra also wrote an original score for French Director Eric Heumann for his film Port Djema (1996) which won best score at Hamptons film festival and The Golden Bear at Berlin. in 2000 he recorded Rescue with drummer Dennis Chambers (Carlos Santana, John McLaughlin et al) and in 2006 Chateau Benares with guests DJ Logic and Keller Williams (guitar and bass).
Though the Indian music craze soon died down among mainstream audiences, diehard fans and immigrants continued the fusion. In the late 1980s, Indian-British artists fused Indian and Western traditions to make the Asian Underground. Since the 90's, Canadian born musician Nadaka who has spent most of his life in India, has been creating music that is an acoustic fusion of Indian classical music with western styles. One such singer who has merged the Bhakti sangeet tradition of India with the western non-India music is Krishna Das and sells music records of his musical sadhana.
In the new millennium, American hip-hop has featured Indian Filmi and Bhangra. Mainstream hip-hop artists have sampled songs from Bollywood movies and have collaborated with Indian artists. Examples include Timbaland's "Indian Flute", Erick Sermon and Redman's "React", Slum Village's "Disco", and Truth Hurts' hit song "Addictive", which sampled a Lata Mangeshkar song, and the Black Eyed Peas sampled Asha Bhosle's song "Yeh Mera Dil" in their hit single "Don't Phunk With My Heart". In 1997, the British band Cornershop paid tribute to Asha Bhosle with their song Brimful of Asha, which became an international hit. British-born Indian artist Panjabi MC also had a Bhangra hit in the U.S. with "Mundian To Bach Ke" which featured rapper Jay-Z. Asian Dub Foundation are not huge mainstream stars, but their politically-charged rap and punk rock influenced sound has a multi-racial audience in their native UK. Recently international star Snoop Dogg appeared in a song in the film Singh Is Kinng.
Sometimes, the music of India will fuse with the traditional music of other countries. For example, Delhi 2 Dublin [1], a band based in Canada, is known for fusing Indian and Irish music, and Bhangraton is a fusion of Bhangra music with reggaeton, which itself is a fusion of hip hop, reggae, and traditional Latin American music. [2]

[edit] Modern music

[edit] Indi-pop music
Main article: Indian pop
Indian pop music, often known as Indipop or Indi-pop, is based on an amalgamation of Indian folk and classical music, and modern beats from different parts of the world. Indian popular music began initially with root-grass efforts made by Pakistani famous singers Nazia Hassan and Zohaib Hassan.The indian pop music is largely catered by indian filmy music and the Pakistani famous pop music.In fact almost all Pakistani artists and bands are extremely popular among indians like Vital sign, Junoon, fusion, strings, Reath, Jal are some famous bands from Pakistan while famouse pop artists are Junaid jamshed, Nazia and Zohaib Hassan, Ali Hyder, Sajjad Ali, Atif Aslam, Shehzad Roy, Ali Azmat, Ali Zafar, Hadiqa Kiani, Najum Sheraz, Saleem Javed and many more.
Much of Indian Pop music comes from the Indian Film Industry, and until the 1990s, few singers like Usha Uthup, Sharon Prabhakar, and Peenaz Masani outside it were popular. Since then, pop singers in the latter group have included Baba Sehgal, Alisha Chinai, Shantanu Mukherjee aka Shaan, Sagarika, Colonial Cousins (Hariharan, Leslie Lewis), Lucky Ali, and Sonu Nigam, and music composers like Jawahar Wattal, who made top selling albums with, Daler Mehndi, Shubha Mudgal, Baba Sehgal, Swetha Shetty and Hans Raj Hans [2]
Besides those listed above, popular Indi-Pop singers include Zubeen Garg,Daler Mehndi, Raghav Sachar Rageshwari, Devika Chawla, Bombay Vikings, Asha Bhosle, Sunidhi Chauhan, Bombay Rockers, Anu Malik, Jazzy B, Malkit Singh, Hans Raj Hans, Raghav, Jay Sean, Juggy D, Rishi Rich, Sheila Chandra, Bally Sagoo, Punjabi MC, Bhangra Knights, Mehnaz, and Sanober.
Recently, Indian pop has taken an interesting turn with the "remixing" of songs from past Indian movie songs, new beats being added to them.

[edit] Rock & Metal music
Main article: Indian rock
The rock music "scene" in India is extremely small when compared to filmi or fusion music "scenes" but has of recent years come into its own, achieving a cult status of sorts. Rock music in India has its origins in 1960s and 70's when international stars such as The Beatles visited India and brought their music with them. These artistes' collaboration with Indian musicians such as Ravi Shankar and Zakir Hussain have led to the development of Raga Rock. However Indian Rock Bands began to gain prominence only much later, around the late 1980s. It was around this time that the rock band Indus Creed formerly known as The Rock Machine got itself noticed on the international stage with hits like Rock N Roll Renegade. Other bands quickly followed. As of now, the rock music scene in India is quietly growing day by day and gathering more support. With the introduction of MTV in the early 1990s, Indians began to be exposed to various forms of rock such as grunge and speed metal. This influence can be clearly seen in many Indian bands today. The cities of Kolkata, Chennai, Delhi, Mumbai and Bangalore have emerged as major melting pots for rock and metal enthusiasts. Some prominent bands include Indian Ocean,Parikrama, Pentagram, Hologram, Thermal and a Quarter,No Idea(indian band), Zero, Half step down, Scribe, Indus Creed, Demonic Resurrection, PRITHVI, Agni, Exiled, Cassini's Division, The Supersonics, Span, Camouflage, Five Little Indians and Nexus. The future looks encouraging thanks to entities such as DogmaTone Records, Eastern Fare Music Foundation, that are dedicated to promoting and supporting Indian Rock.
One of the most famous rock musicians in the world is the late Freddie Mercury of Queen. Born Farrokh Bomi Bulsara to Indian parents in Zanzibar, he was raised in Panchgani near Mumbai. Mercury was influenced early on by the Bollywood playback singer Lata Mangeshkar along with western influences such as Led Zeppelin, Jimi Hendrix, John Lennon and The Beatles.

[edit] Dance music
Main article: Goa Trance

[edit] Western classical music
The spread and following of Western Classical Music in India is almost entirely non-existent. It is mainly patronized by the Indian Zoroastrian community and small esoteric groups with historical exposure to Western Classical Music. There are practically no conservatories, opera companies or working symphonies that cater to Western Classical music. Western Music education is also severely neglected and pretty rare in India. Western piano education being an exception as it has found some interest; mainly in an effort to create pianists for contemporary popular Indian music. Also, the difficulty in importing Western Musical instruments and their rarity has also contributed to the obscurity of Classical Western music. Many reasons have been citied for the obscurity of Western Classical Music in India, a country rich in its musical heritage by its own right, however the two main reasons are an utter lack of exposure and a passive disinterest in what is considered esoteric at best.
Despite more than a century of exposure to Western classical music and two centuries of British colonialism, classical music in India never gained more than a 'fringe' popularity. Many attempts to popularize Western Classical Music in India have failed in the past due to disinterest, most notably the setting up of the Bombay Symphony Orchestra by Mehli Mehta in the 1930s. In 2006 at Mumbai (Bombay), the National Centre for the Performing Arts was established with a grant of Rs 4 million from the Sir Dorabji Tata Trust (an eminent Indian-Zoroastrian entrepreneur) and the collaboration of other corporate houses to promote Western Classical music and visual arts. It was designed to accommodate performance of symphony orchestras and Operas. However, there are still no schools of repute that train musicians in Western classical music or vocalists in Opera to this day. Most Indians in Western classical music reside outside India in countries with adequate training and performance opportunities.
Some prominent Indians in Western classical music are:

A. R. Rahman, Music Director, Composer, Singer. Specialized in Western Classical from Trinity University(OXFORD).
Zubin Mehta, Renowned music conductor.
Mehli Mehta, Father of Zubin, violinist and founding conductor of the Bombay Symphony Orchestra.
Naresh Sohal, British Indian-born composer.
Param Vir, British Indian-born composer.
Sandee Bhagwati, German Indian-born composer.


[edit] Further reading

Killius, Rolf. Ritual Music and Hindu Rituals of Kerala. New Delhi: B.R. Rhythms, 2006.. 
Manuel, Peter.. Thumri in Historical and Stylistic Perspectives. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1989.. 
Manuel, Peter.. Cassette Culture: Popular Music and Technology in North India. University of Chicago Press, 1993. ISBN 0-226-50401-8. 
Maycock, Robert and Hunt, Ken. "How to Listen - a Routemap of India". 2000. In Broughton, Simon and Ellingham, Mark with McConnachie, James and Duane, Orla (Ed.), World Music, Vol. 2: Latin & North America, Caribbean, India, Asia and Pacific, pp 63-69. Rough Guides Ltd, Penguin Books. ISBN 1-85828-636-0
Hunt, Ken. "Ragas and Riches". 2000. In Broughton, Simon and Ellingham, Mark with McConnachie, James and Duane, Orla (Ed.), World Music, Vol. 2: Latin & North America, Caribbean, India, Asia and Pacific, pp 70-78. Rough Guides Ltd, Penguin Books. ISBN 1-85828-636-0.


[edit] See also

Indian musical instruments
List of regional genres of music


[edit] References


^ http://www.carnatic.com What is Carnatic Music
^ Music man with a golden touch The Hindu, December 9, 2002."..Daler Mehndi's "Dardi Rab Rab" and "Ho Jayegi Balle Balle", Shubha Mudgal's "Ali More Angana", Shweta Shetty's "Deewane To Deewane Hain", Hans Raj Hans' "Jhangar", Bhupi Chawla's "Jogiya Khalli Balli", Ila Arun's "Haule Haule", Malkit Singh's "Paaro", Ali Haider's "Mahi O Mahi" and Sujat Khan's "Lajo Lajo".



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Music of India 



SoorSangam Online Indian music lessons from the Indian teachers
Indian video songs
Sunoh.fm offers comprehensive social discovery platform for contemporary and independent music in India.
Uhooroo an online community for Indian Musicians.
TempoStand offers the biggest collection of Indian Independent Music
dmoz.org Indian music websites
[easternfare.googlepages.com Indian music]
Zansam Indian Music Band








v • d • e

 India topics





Basic topics · Alphabetical index of topics





History





Overviews


Timeline · Economics · Linguistics · Maritime · Military · Science and technology · Mathematics · Astronomy · Metallurgy · Postage







Pre-colonial


Stone Age · Indus Valley Civilization · Indo-Aryan migration · Vedic period · Mahajanapadas · Magadha · Middle kingdoms · Islamic sultanates · Hoysala · Cholas · Kakatiya · Vijayanagara · Mughals · Marathas · European trade







Colonial


East India Company · Plassey · 1857 Rebellion · British Raj · Railways · Economy · Army · Zamindari · Social changes · Political reforms · Princely states · Partition of Bengal · Independence movement · 1943 famine · World War II · Partition







Republic


Integration · Non-Aligned Movement · Five-Year Plan · Sino-Indian War · Indo-Pakistani wars · Green Revolution · White Revolution · Naxal Insurgency · Smiling Buddha · Space program · The Emergency · Khalistan movement · Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) · Economic Reforms · Pokhran-II









Government








   


Law
Constitution
Fundamental Rights & Duties
Administrative Divisions
Law Enforcement
National Investigations Agency
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
Criminal Investigation Department (CID)
Indian Police Service (IPS)
Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
Home Guard
State Police
Federal Police




Legislature
Lok Sabha
Rajya Sabha
Executives
President
Vice President
Deputy Prime Minister
Prime Minister
Cabinet Ministers
Government Agencies




Judiciary
Supreme Court • Chief Justice
High Courts
District Courts
Policy
Foreign policy
Energy policy




Military
Indian Army
Indian Navy
Indian Air Force
Indian Coast Guard
Indian Paramilitary
Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF)
Border Security Force (BSF)
Indo-Tibetan Border Police
Special Forces
Intelligence
Research and Analysis Wing(RAW)
Intelligence Bureau (IB)
Joint Intelligence Committee














Politics

Censorship · Elections · Human rights · Nationalism · Political parties (Congress • BJP • BSP • CPI • CPM • NCP) · Reservations · Scandals · Scheduled groups · Secularism






Geography





Landforms


Mountains · Glaciers · Volcanoes · Valleys · Rivers · Lakes · Desert · Islands · Extreme Points · Waterfalls · Beaches
Plains (Gangetic Plains · Eastern coastal · Western coastal)







Regions


East India · West India · North India · South India · North East India







Subdivisions


States and territories · Cities · Districts · Autonomous regions · Municipalities









Environment

Climate · Climatic regions · Geology · Ecoregions · Sanctuaries · National Parks  · Biosphere Reserves · Protected Areas · Wildlife · Fauna · Flora






Economy

Agriculture · Communications · Companies · Education · Exchanges (BSE • NSE) · Healthcare · Income · Poverty · Standard of living · Reserve Bank · Rupee · Tourism · Labour · Forestry  · Fishing · Livestock · Transport · Energy (Solar • Wind • Nuclear)






Culture

Arts and entertainment · Architecture · Cinema · Cuisine · Dance · Demographics · Dress · Folklore · Holidays · Languages · Literature · Media · Martial arts · Music · Religion · Sport · Wine






Education

Literacy · Department of Higher Education · Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) · Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations (CISCE) · Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan · University Grants Commission · All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) · Institutes of Technology / Management / Science · more






Portal












v • d • e

Music of Asia





Central

Afghanistan · Badakhshan · Buryatia · Gansu · Inner Mongolia · Kazakhstan · Khakassia · Kyrgyzstan · Mongolia · Qinghai · Tajikistan · Tibet · Turkmenistan · Tuva · Uzbekistan · Xinjiang






East

China (Hong Kong • Macau • Tibet) · Korea (North • South) · Mongolia · Taiwan






Southeast

Brunei · Cambodia · East Timor · Indonesia · Laos · Malaysia · Myanmar · Philippines · Singapore · Thailand · Vietnam






South

Bangladesh · Bhutan · India · Maldives · Nepal · Pakistan · Sri Lanka · Tibet









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Music_of_India"
Categories: Indian musicHidden categories: NPOV disputes from February 2009 | All NPOV disputes | Articles lacking sources from November 2007 | All articles lacking sources 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Català
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
Français
한국어
हिन्दी
עברית
Latina
Nederlands
Português
Русский
Suomi
Svenska
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 00:06.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
