













Clothing - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Clothing";
		var wgTitle = "Clothing";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "38180";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281053520;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Clothing

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
A feature of all human societies, except perhaps the most primitive, is the wearing of clothing or clothes, especially in public. The primary purpose of clothing is functional, as a protection from the elements. In hot climates the functional need for clothing is minimal, while in very cold climates it is very high. Shelter usually reduces the functional need for clothing. For example, coats, gloves, etc. would normally be removed when entering a warm home. Clothes also have other functional purposes, such as safety during an activity, such as work or sport. But even within these contexts, clothes also perform social and cultural functions. They generally conform with modesty and religious standards of the time and place, and act as social and cultural indicators such as status, wealth and the like. Within these contexts, they also function as a form of adornment and an expression of personal taste! Clothes nowadays, including functional clothes, have a fashion context.

In history, clothes have been from many materials - ranging from grasses to furs to much more elaborate and exotic materials. Based on scientific research into lice it is estimated that humans have been wearing clothing for 650,000 years.[1]
People also decorate their bodies with makeup or cosmetics, scented perfume, and other ornamentation; they also cut, dye, and arrange the hair on their heads, faces, and bodies (see hairstyle), and sometimes also mark their skin (by tattoos, scarifications, and piercings). All these decorations may contribute to the overall effect and message of clothing, but do not constitute clothing.
Articles carried rather than worn (such as purses, canes, and umbrellas) are normally considered fashion accessories rather than clothing, but hats and small dress sweaters can be called clothing or accessories.[citation needed] Jewelry and eyeglasses are usually considered as accessories as well,[citation needed] even though in common speech these particular items are described as being worn rather than carried.




Contents


1 Functions of clothing
2 Origin and history of clothing
3 Cultural aspects

3.1 Social status
3.2 Marital status
3.3 Religious aspects


4 Sport and activity
5 Clothing maintenance

5.1 Laundry, ironing, storage
5.2 Mending


6 The life cycle of clothing
7 Early 21st-century clothing styles
8 Political issues

8.1 Working conditions
8.2 Fur


9 See also
10 References
11 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Functions of clothing




A baby wearing many items of winter clothing: headband, cap, fur-lined coat, shawl and sweater


The primary purpose of clothing is to keep the wearer warm. In hot climates this function is minimal, while in very cold climates it is very high. Shelter usually reduces this functional need for clothing. For example, coats, gloves, etc. would normally be removed when entering a warm home.
Clothing at times is worn as protection from specific environmental hazards, such as insects, noxious chemicals, weapons, and contact with abrasive substances. Clothing can protect against many things that might injure the uncovered human body. Clothes act as protection from the elements, including rain, snow and wind and other weather conditions, even from the sun. Clothes also reduce the level of risk during an activity, such as work or sport. Conversely, clothing may protect the environment from the clothing wearer, as for example wearing of medical scrubs.
Humans have shown extreme inventiveness in devising clothing solutions to environmental hazards and the distinction between clothing and other protective equipment is not always clear-cut; examples include space suit, air conditioned clothing, armor, diving suit, swimsuit, bee-keeper's protective clothing, motorcycle leathers, high-visibility clothing, and protective clothing in general.

[edit] Origin and history of clothing
Main article: History of clothing
According to archaeologists and anthropologists, the earliest clothing probably consisted of fur, leather, leaves or grass, draped, wrapped or tied about the body for protection from the elements. Knowledge of such clothing remains inferential, since clothing materials deteriorate quickly compared to stone, bone, shell and metal artifacts. Archeologists have identified very early sewing needles of bone and ivory from about 30,000 BC, found near Kostenki, Russia in 1988.[citation needed]
Ralf Kittler, Manfred Kayser and Mark Stoneking, anthropologists at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, have conducted a genetic analysis of human body lice that indicates that they originated about 107,000 years ago. Since most humans have very sparse body hair, body lice require clothing to survive, so this suggests a surprisingly recent date for the invention of clothing. Its invention may have coincided with the spread of modern Homo sapiens from the warm climate of Africa, thought to have begun between 50,000 and 100,000 years ago. However, a second group of researchers used similar genetic methods to estimate that body lice originated about 540,000 years ago (Reed et al. 2004. PLoS Biology 2(11): e340). For now, the date of the origin of clothing remains unresolved.[citation needed]
Some human cultures, such as the various people of the Arctic Circle, until recently made their clothing entirely of prepared and decorated furs and skins. Other cultures have supplemented or replaced leather and skins with cloth: woven, knitted, or twined from various animal and vegetable fibers.
See also: weaving, knitting, and twining
Although modern consumers take clothing for granted, making the fabrics that go into clothing is not easy. One sign of this is that the textile industry was the first to be mechanized during the Industrial Revolution; before the invention of the powered loom, textile production was a tedious and labor-intensive process.
One approach simply involves draping the cloth. Many people wore, and still wear, garments consisting of rectangles of cloth wrapped to fit — for example, the dhoti for men and the saree for women in the Indian subcontinent, the Scottish kilt or the Javanese sarong. The clothes may simply be tied up, as is the case of the first two garments; or pins or belts hold the garments in place, as in the case of the latter two. The precious cloth remains uncut, and people of various sizes or the same person at different sizes can wear the garment.
Another approach involves cutting and sewing the cloth, but using every bit of the cloth rectangle in constructing the clothing. The tailor may cut triangular pieces from one corner of the cloth, and then add them elsewhere as gussets. Traditional European patterns for men's shirts and women's chemises take this approach.
Modern European fashion treats cloth much more prodigally, typically cutting in such a way as to leave various odd-shaped cloth remnants. Industrial sewing operations sell these as waste; home sewers may turn them into quilts.
In the thousands of years that humans have spent constructing clothing, they have created an astonishing array of styles, many of which we can reconstruct from surviving garments, photos, paintings, mosaics, etc., as well as from written descriptions. Costume history serves as a source of inspiration to current fashion designers, as well as a topic of professional interest to costumers constructing for plays, films, television, and historical reenactment.
See also: History of Western fashion and Category:History of clothing

[edit] Cultural aspects

[edit] Social status




Alim Khan's bemedaled robe is a social message


In some societies, clothing may be used to indicate rank and status. In ancient Rome, for example, only senators were permitted to wear garments dyed with Tyrian purple. In Hawaiian society only high-ranking chiefs wore feather cloaks and palaoa or carved whale teeth. Under the Travancore kingdom of Kerala (India), lower caste women had to pay a tax for the right to cover their upper body. In China before the establishment of the republic, only the emperor could wear yellow. There are numerous examples throughout history of elaborate systems of sumptuary laws regulating who could wear what. In societies without such laws, including most modern societies, the high cost of status garments may effectively limit their purchase and display to those who can afford them. Social group pressure may also impact on garment choice.

[edit] Marital status
See also: Visual markers of marital status
Traditionally Hindu women, once married, would wear sindoor, a red powder, in the parting of their hair. If widowed, they would abandon sindoor and jewelry and wear simple white clothing. Men and women of the Western world may wear wedding rings to indicate their marital status.
Observant Jewish women cover their hair if they are married. There is a sect of Judaism in which girls who are old enough to be looking for a husband wear their hair in two braids as opposed to the one braid they wore before they were of a marriagable age.[citation needed] For their wedding, women in the United States and Europe, depending on their heritage and/or religion, will usually wear white gowns, although some movie stars have been known to wear black party dresses for their weddings.[citation needed]

[edit] Religious aspects
Religious clothing might be considered a special case of occupational clothing. Sometimes it is worn only during the performance of religious ceremonies. However, it may also be worn everyday as a marker for special religious status.
For example, Jains wear unstitched cloth pieces when performing religious ceremonies. The unstitched cloth signifies unified and complete devotion to the task at hand, with no digression.[citation needed].Sikhs wear a turban as it is a part of their religion.
The cleanliness of religious dresses in Eastern Religions like Hinduism,Sikhism, Buddhism and Jainism is of paramount importance, which indicates purity.
Clothing figures in prominently in the Bible where it appears in numerous contexts, the more prominent ones being: the story of Adam and Eve, Joseph's cloak, Judah and Tamar, Mordechai and Esther. Furthermore the priests officiating in the Temple had very specific garments, the lack of which would make one liable to death.
Jewish ritual also requires rending of one's upper garment as a sign of mourning. This practice is found in the Bible when Jacob hears of the apparent death of his son Joseph.[2]

See also: Category:Religious vesture.


[edit] Sport and activity
Most sports and physical activities are practiced wearing special clothing, for practical, comfort or safety reasons. Common sportswear garments include short pants, T-shirts, tennis shirts, tracksuits, and trainers. Specialized garments include wet suits (for swimming, diving or surfing), salopettes (for skiing) and leotards (for gymnastics). Also, spandex materials are often used as base layers to soak up sweat. Spandex is also preferable for active sports that require form fitting garments, such as wrestling, track & field, dance, gymnastics and swimming.

[edit] Clothing maintenance




Clothes drying in the sun.


Clothing suffers assault both from within and without. The human body sheds skin cells and body oils, and exudes sweat, urine, and feces. From the outside, sun damage, moisture, abrasion and dirt assault garments. Fleas and lice may hide in seams. Worn clothing, if not cleaned and refurbished, will itch, look scruffy, and lose functionality (as when buttons fall off and zippers fail).
In some cases, people wear an item of clothing until it falls apart. Cleaning leather presents difficulties, and bark cloth (tapa) cannot be washed without dissolving it. Owners may patch tears and rips, and brush off surface dirt, but old leather and bark clothing will always look old.
But most clothing consists of cloth, and most cloth can be laundered and mended (patching, darning, but compare felt).

[edit] Laundry, ironing, storage
Humans have developed many specialized methods for laundering, ranging from the earliest "pound clothes against rocks in running stream" to the latest in electronic washing machines and dry cleaning (dissolving dirt in solvents other than water).
Many kinds of clothing are designed to be ironed before they are worn to remove wrinkles. Most modern formal and semi-formal clothing is in this category (for example, dress shirts and suits). Ironed clothes are believed to look clean, fresh, and neat. Much contemporary casual clothing is made of knit materials that do not readily wrinkle, and do not require ironing. Some clothing is permanent press, having been treated with a coating (such as polytetrafluoroethylene) that suppresses wrinkles and creates a smooth appearance without ironing.
Once clothes have been laundered and possibly ironed, they are usually hung on clothes hangers or folded, to keep them fresh until they are worn. Clothes are folded to allow them to be stored compactly, to prevent creasing, to preserve creases or to present them in a more pleasing manner, for instance when they are put on sale in stores.
Many kinds of clothes are folded before they are put in suitcases as preparation for travel. Other clothes, such as suits, may be hung up in special garment bags, or rolled rather than folded. Many people use their clothing as packing material around fragile items that might otherwise break in transit.

[edit] Mending
In past times, mending was an art. A meticulous tailor or seamstress could mend rips with thread raveled from hems and seam edges so skillfully that the darn was practically invisible. When the raw material — cloth — was worth more than labor, it made sense to expend labor in saving it. Today clothing is considered a consumable item. Mass-manufactured clothing is less expensive than the labor required to repair it. Many people will buy a new piece of clothing rather than expend time mending. The thrifty still replace zippers and buttons and sew up ripped hems. chase is eric dressed up

[edit] The life cycle of clothing
Used, unwearable clothing was once used for quilts, rag, rugs, bandages, and many other household uses. It could also be recycled into paper. Now it is usually thrown away. Used but still wearable clothing can be sold at consignment shops, flea markets, online auction, or donated to charity. Charities usually skim the best of the clothing to sell in their own thrift stores and sell the rest to merchants, who bale it up and ship it to Third World countries, where vendors bid for the bales, then sell the used clothing.
There are many concerns about the life cycle of synthetics which come primarily from petrochemicals. Unlike natural fibers, their source is not renewable (in less than millions of years) and they are not biodegradable.

[edit] Early 21st-century clothing styles




A rave style, 2007







Please help improve this article or section by expanding it. Further information might be found on the talk page. (February 2009)


Western fashion has, to some extent, become international fashion, as Western media and styles penetrate all parts of the world. Fast fashion clothing is widespread worldwide. These garments are less expensive, mass-produced Western clothing. Used clothing from Western countries also reach people in poor countries.
People may wear ethnic or national dress on special occasions or in certain roles or occupations. For example, most Korean men and women have adopted Western-style dress for daily wear, but will still wear traditional hanboks on special occasions, like weddings and cultural holidays. Items of Western dress may also appear worn or accessorized in distinctive, non-Western ways. A Tongan man may combine a used T-shirt with a Tongan wrapped skirt, or tupenu.
There is a very diverse range of styles in Western fashions, ranging from expensive haute couture to thrift store grunge.

[edit] Political issues

[edit] Working conditions



This section requires expansion.


Garment workers often have to labor under poor conditions. Mass-produced clothing is often manufactured in Sweatshop conditions, typified by long work hours, lack of benefits, and lack of worker representation. While most sweatshops are found in developing countries, clothes made in industrialized nations may also be manufactured in sweatshops, most often staffed by undocumented immigrants.
Coalitions of NGOs, designers (Katharine Hamnett, American Apparel, Veja, Quiksilver, eVocal, Edun,...) and campaign groups like the Clean Clothes Campaign (CCC) seek to improve these conditions as much as possible by sponsoring awareness-raising events, which draw the attention of both the media and the general public to the workers' conditions.
Outsourcing production to low wage countries like Bangladesh, China, India and Sri Lanka became possible when the Multi Fibre Agreement (MFA) was abolished. The MFA was deemed a protectionist measure which placed quotas on the exports of textiles.[citation needed] Globalization is often quoted as the single most contributing factor to the poor working conditions of garment workers. Although many countries recognize treaties like the ILO, many have also made exceptions to certain parts of the treaties. India for example has not ratified sections 87 and 92 of the treaty.[citation needed]

[edit] Fur
Main article: Fur clothing
The use of animal fur in clothing dates to prehistoric times. It is currently associated in the West with expensive, designer clothing. Once uncontroversial, it has recently been the focus of campaigns on the grounds that it is cruel and unnecessary. PETA, along with other animal rights and animal liberation groups have called attention to fur farming and other practices they consider cruel.

[edit] See also

Find more about clothing on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Blouse
Clothes hanger
Clothes valet
Clothing material
Clothing terminology
Costume
Dress
Jumpsuit
Pajamas
Shirt
Skirt
Trousers


[edit] References


^ John Travis (2003-08-23) ([dead link] – Scholar search). The naked truth? Lice hint at a recent origin of clothing. 164. Science News. pp. 118. http://www.sciencenews.org/articles/20030823/fob7.asp. 
^ http://www.divreinavon.com/pdf/BegedSimlaJBQ.pdf



[edit] External links

International Textile and Apparel Association, scholarly publications
German Hosiery Museum (English language)
Molecular Evolution of Pediculus humanus and the Origin of Clothing by Ralf Kittler, Manfred Kayser and Mark Stoneking (.PDF file)








v • d • e

Clothing





Materials

Cloth · Denim · Down · Fur · Leather · Lycra · Nylon · Polyester · Spandex · Silk






Tops

Blouse · Crop top · Dress shirt · Halterneck · Henley shirt · Hoodie · Jersey · Polo shirt · Shirt · Sleeveless shirt · Sweater · T-shirt · Turtleneck






Trousers / Pants

Bell-bottoms · Bermuda shorts · Bondage pants · Boxer shorts · Capri pants · Cargo pants · Culottes · Cycling shorts · Jeans · Jodhpurs · Overall · Parachute pants · Shorts · Sweatpants · Windpants






Skirts

Ballerina skirt · Hobble skirt · Jean skirt · Job skirt · Leather skirt · Kilt · Poodle skirt · Prairie skirt · Miniskirt · Slip · Skort · Train






Dresses

Ball gown · Cocktail dress · Evening gown · Gown · Jumper dress · Little black dress · Petticoat · Sari · Sundress · Tea gown · Wedding dress






Suits / Uniforms

Academic dress · Black tie · Clerical clothing · Court dress · Gymslip · Morning dress · Pantsuit · Red Sea rig · Scrubs · Stroller · Tuxedo · Lab coat · White tie · Tang suit · Mao suit






Outerwear

Abaya · Academic gown · Anorak · Apron · Blazer · Cloak · Coat · Duffle coat · Frock coat · Jacket · Hoodie · Men's undergarments · Opera coat · Overcoat · Pea coat · Poncho · Raincoat · Redingote · Robe · Shawl · Shrug · Sleeved blanket · Top coat · Trench coat · Greatcoat · Vest · Waistcoat · Windbreaker






Accessories

Belt · Bow tie · Handbag · Chaps · Gaiters · Gloves · Earring · Sunglasses · Necklace · Belly chain · Leg warmer · Leggings · Stocking  · Necktie · Scarf · Suspenders · Tights






Footwear

Athletic shoe · Boot · Dress shoe · Hosiery · Pump  · Sandal · Shoe · Slipper · Sock






Headwear

Balaclava · Cap · Hat · Helmet · Hijab · Hood · Mantilla · Niqab · Sombrero · Turban  · Veil  · Fascinator






Nightwear

Babydoll · Blanket sleeper · Negligee · Nightgown · Nightshirt · Nightcap · Peignoir · Pajamas · Slip nightgown






Special needs

Adaptive clothing · Adult diaper · Locking clothing · Bathrobe






Clothing parts

Back closure · Buckle · Button · Collar · Cuff · Fly · Neckline - Waistline - Hemline · Hook-and-eye · Lapel · Pocket · Shoulder pad · Sleeve · Snap · Strap - Shoulder strap · Zipper  · Elastic  · Velcro






National costume

Abaya · Aboyne dress · Áo bà ba · Áo dài · Áo tứ thân · Barong Tagalog · Bunad · Cheongsam · Dashiki · Dhoti · Dirndl · Djellaba · Han Chinese clothing · Hanbok · Jellabiya · Jilbāb · Kente cloth · Kilt · Kimono · Lederhosen · Sampot · Sarafan · Sari · Sarong · Scottish dress






Historical garments

Banyan · Bedgown · Bodice · Braccae · Breeching · Breeches · Brunswick · Chemise · Chiton · Chlamys · Doublet · Exomis · Farthingale · Frock · Himation · Hose · Houppelande · Jerkin · Justacorps · Palla · Peplos · Polonaise · Smock-frock · Stola · Toga · Tunic






History and surveys

Africa · Ancient Greece · Ancient Rome · Ancient world · Anglo-Saxon · Byzantine · Clothing terminology · Dress code · Early Medieval Europe · Formal wear · Hanfu · History of clothing and textiles · History of Western fashion series (1100s-2000s) · Sumptuary law · Timeline of clothing and textiles technology · Undergarments · Vietnam · Women wearing pants






See also

Lingerie · Costume · Fashion









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clothing"
Categories: ClothingHidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead external links since June 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 | Articles to be expanded since February 2009 | All articles to be expanded | Articles to be expanded since June 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Asturianu
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deitsch
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Gàidhlig
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Кыргызча
Kiswahili
Latina
Lietuvių
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Polski
Português
Ripoarisch
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sicilianu
Simple English
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
Winaray
ייִדיש
粵語
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 10:39.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
