













Prometheus - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Prometheus";
		var wgTitle = "Prometheus";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "23250";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282411990;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Prometheus

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
In Greek mythology, Prometheus (Ancient Greek: Προμηθεύς, "forethought")[1] is a Titan, or the son of a Titan, and brother to Atlas and Epimetheus (afterthought). He was a champion of human-kind known for his wily intelligence, who stole fire from Zeus and gave it to mortals.[2] Zeus then punished him for his crime by having him bound to a rock while a great eagle ate his liver every day only to have it grow back to be eaten again the next day. His myth has been treated by a number of ancient sources, in which Prometheus is credited with--or blamed for, but credited nonetheless--playing a pivotal role in the early history of humankind.




Contents


1 Hesiod
2 Aeschylus
3 Other authors
4 Comparative myths

4.1 The creation of man from clay
4.2 The theft of fire


5 Prometheus in other arts
6 Cults of Prometheus
7 Prometheus and liver regeneration
8 Promethean myth in modern culture
9 See also
10 Notes
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Hesiod




Prometheus having his liver eaten out by an eagle. Painting by Jacob Jordaens, c. 1640, Wallraf-Richartz-Museum, Cologne, Germany.


The Prometheus myth first appeared in the Greek epic poet Hesiod's (ca. 700 BCE) Theogony (lines 507-616). He was a son of the Titan, Iapetus by Themis or Clymene, one of the Oceanids. He was brother to Menoetius, Atlas, and Epimetheus. In the Theogony, Hesiod introduces Prometheus as a lowly challenger to Zeus' omniscience and omnipotence. At Sicyon, a sacrificial meal marking the "settling of accounts" between mortals and immortals, Prometheus played a trick against Zeus (545-557). He placed two sacrificial offerings before the Olympian: a selection of bull meat hidden inside an ox's stomach (nourishment hidden inside a displeasing exterior), and the bull's bones wrapped completely in "glistening fat" (something inedible hidden inside a pleasing exterior). Zeus chose the latter, setting a precedent for future sacrifices; henceforth, humans would keep the meat for themselves and burn the bones wrapped in fat as an offering to the gods. This angered Zeus, who hid fire from humans in retribution. Prometheus at once went to Athena with a plea for admittance to Olympus, and this she granted. On his arrival, he lit a torch at the fiery chariot of the Sun from which he broke at once a fragment of glowing charcoal, which he thrust into the pithy hollow of a giant fennel-stalk. Then, extinguishing his torch, he stole away, and gave fire to mankind. This further enraged Zeus, who sent Epimetheus, brother of Prometheus, Pandora, the first woman,[3] fashioned by Hephaestus out of clay and brought to life by the four winds, with all the goddesses of Olympus assembled to adorn her. "From her is the race of women and female kind," Hesiod writes; "of her is the deadly race and tribe of women who live amongst mortal men to their great trouble, no helpmeets in hateful poverty, but only in wealth."
Prometheus, in eternal punishment, is chained to a rock in the Caucasus, where his liver is eaten out daily by an eagle[4] or vulture,or in some cases, a crow only to be regenerated by night.[5] Years later, periods of which vary from thirty years, to four hundred thousand years, to 3 million years, [6][7] the Greek hero Heracles (Hercules) would shoot the vulture and free Prometheus from his chains.[8] Hesiod revisits the story of Prometheus in the Works and Days (lines 42-105). Here, the poet expands upon Zeus' reaction to the theft of fire. Not only does Zeus withhold fire from men, but "the means of life," as well (42). Had Prometheus not provoked Zeus' wrath (44-47), "you would easily do work enough in a day to supply you for a full year even without working; soon would you put away your rudder over the smoke, and the fields worked by ox and sturdy mule would run to waste." Hesiod also expands upon the Theogony's story of the first woman, now explicitly called Pandora ("all gifts"). After Prometheus' theft of fire, Zeus sent Pandora to Prometheus' brother Epimetheus. Pandora carried a jar with her, supposedly the gods' wedding gift, from which were released (91-92) "evils, harsh pain and troublesome diseases which give men death"[9]. Pandora hastily shut the lid as soon as she realized what had happened, too late to contain all the evil plights that escaped, but capturing the one true gift in it: hope.


Greek deities
series


Primordial deities


Olympians


Aquatic deities


Chthonic deities


Personified concepts


Other deities


Titans


The Twelve Titans:


Oceanus and Tethys,


Hyperion and Theia,


Coeus and Phoebe,


Cronus and Rhea,


Mnemosyne, Themis,


Crius, Iapetus


Children of Hyperion:


Eos, Helios, Selene


Daughters of Coeus:


Leto and Asteria


Sons of Iapetus:


Atlas, Prometheus,


Epimetheus, Menoetius


Sons of Crius:


Astraeus, Pallas,


Perses


Angelo Casanova[10] finds in Prometheus a reflection of an ancient, pre-Hesiodic trickster-figure, who served to account for the mixture of good and bad in human life, and whose fashioning of men from clay was an Eastern motif familiar in Enuma Elish; as an opponent of Zeus he was an analogue of the Titans, and like them was punished. As an advocate for humanity he gains semi-divine status at Athens, where the episode in Theogony in which he is liberated[11] is interpreted by Casanova as a post-Hesiodic interpolation.[12]

[edit] Aeschylus
Perhaps the most famous treatment of the myth can be found in the Greek tragedy Prometheus Bound – traditionally attributed to the 5th-century BC Greek tragedian Aeschylus. At the center of the drama are the results of Prometheus' theft of fire and his current punishment by Zeus; the playwright's dependence on the Hesiodic source material is clear, though Prometheus Bound also includes a number of changes to the received tradition.[13] Before his theft of fire, Prometheus played a decisive role in the Titanomachy, securing victory for Zeus and the other Olympians. Zeus's torture of Prometheus thus becomes a particularly harsh betrayal. The scope and character of Prometheus' transgressions against Zeus are also widened. In addition to giving humankind fire, Prometheus claims to have taught them the arts of civilization, such as writing, mathematics, agriculture, medicine, and science. The Titan's greatest benefaction for humankind seems to have been saving them from complete destruction. In an apparent twist on the myth of the so-called Five Ages of Man found in Hesiod's Works and Days (wherein Cronus and, later, Zeus created and destroyed five successive races of mortal men), Prometheus asserts that Zeus had wanted to obliterate the human race, but that he somehow stopped him. Moreover, Aeschylus anachronistically and artificially injects Io, another victim of Zeus' violence and ancestor of Heracles, into Prometheus' story. Finally, just as Aeschylus gave Prometheus a key role in bringing Zeus to power, he also attributed to him secret knowledge that could lead to Zeus' downfall: Prometheus had been told by his mother Gaia of a potential marriage that would produce a son who would overthrow Zeus. Fragmentary evidence indicates that Heracles, as in Hesiod, frees the Titan in the trilogy's second play, Prometheus Unbound. It is apparently not until Prometheus reveals this secret of Zeus' potential downfall that the two reconcile in the final play, Prometheus the Fire-Bringer.
Prometheus Bound also includes two mythic innovations of omission. The first is the absence of Pandora's story in connection with Prometheus' own. Instead, Aeschylus includes this one oblique allusion to Pandora and her jar that contained Hope (252): "[Prometheus] caused blind hopes to live in the hearts of men." Second, Aeschylus makes no mention of the sacrifice-trick played against Zeus in the Theogony.[14]
These innovations reflect the play's thematic reversal of the Hesiodic myth. In Hesiod, the story of Prometheus (and, by extension, of Pandora) serves to reinforce the theodicy of Zeus: he is a wise and just ruler of the universe, while Prometheus is to blame for humanity's unenviable existence. In Prometheus Bound, this dynamic is transposed: Prometheus becomes the benefactor of humanity, while every character in the drama (except for Hermes, a virtual stand-in for Zeus) decries the Olympian as a cruel, vicious tyrant.

[edit] Other authors
Some two dozen other Greek and Roman authors would retell and further embellish the Prometheus myth into the 4th century AD. The most significant detail added to the myth found in, e.g., Sappho, Plato, Aesop and Ovid — was the central role of Prometheus in the creation of the human race. According to these sources, Prometheus fashioned humans out of clay. In his dialogue Protagoras, Plato asserts that the gods created humans and all the other animals, but it was left to Prometheus and his brother Epimetheus to give defining attributes to each. As no physical traits were left when the pair came to humans, Prometheus decided to give them fire and other civilizing arts.[15]
Although perhaps made explicit in the Prometheia, later authors such as Hyginus, Apollodorus, and Quintus of Smyrna would confirm that Prometheus warned Zeus not to marry the sea nymph Thetis. She is consequently married off to the mortal Peleus, and bears him a son greater than the father — Achilles, Greek hero of the Trojan War. Apollodorus moreover clarifies for us a cryptic statement (1026-29) made by Hermes in Prometheus Bound, identifying the centaur Cheiron as the one who would take on Prometheus' suffering and die in his place.[15]
Reflecting a myth attested in Greek vase paintings from the Classical period, Apollodorus places the Titan (armed with an axe) at the birth of Athena, thus explaining how the goddess sprang forth from the forehead of Zeus.[15]
Other minor details attached to the myth include: the origin of the eagle that ate the Titan's liver (found in Apollodorus and Hyginus); myths surrounding the life of Prometheus' son, Deucalion (found in Ovid and Apollonius of Rhodes); and Prometheus' marginal role in the myth of Jason and the Argonauts (found in Apollonius of Rhodes and Valerius Flaccus).[15]
Anecdotally, the Roman fabulist Phaedrus attributes to Aesop a simple etiology for homosexuality, in Prometheus' getting drunk while creating the first humans and misapplying the genitalia.[16]

[edit] Comparative myths





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2008)


The two most prominent aspects of the Prometheus myth – the creation of man from clay and the theft of fire – have found their expression in numerous cultures throughout history and around the world:

[edit] The creation of man from clay

In the Babylonian creation epic Enuma Elish, the goddess Ninhursag created humans from clay.


In Africa, the Yoruba culture holds that the god Obatala likewise created the human race.


In Egyptian mythology, the ram-headed god Khnum made people from clay in the waters of the Nile.


In Chinese myth, the goddess Nuwa created the first humans from mud and clay.


According to Genesis 2:7 "And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul."


According to Qur'an[23:12–15], Allah created man from clay. See the Quranic science of Embryology for full details.


Mayan myth holds that Tepeu and Kukulkán (Quetzalcoatl) made the first humans from clay, but they were unsatisfactory.


The Navajo attributed the creation of humans to Spider Grandmother.


[edit] The theft of fire

In Georgian mythology Amirani challenged the chief god and for that was chained on Caucasian mountains where birds would eat his organs.
According to the Rig Veda (3:9.5), the hero Mātariśvan recovered fire, which had been hidden from mankind.


In Cherokee myth, after Possum and Buzzard had failed to steal fire, Grandmother Spider used her web to sneak into the land of light. She stole fire, hiding it in a clay pot.[17]


Among various Native American tribes of the Pacific Northwest, fire was stolen and given to humans by Coyote, Beaver or Dog.[18]


According to the Creek Indians, Rabbit stole fire from the Weasels.[19]


In Algonquin myth, Rabbit stole fire from an old man and his two daughters.[20]


In Ojibwa myth, Nanabozho the hare stole fire and gave it to humans.


In Polynesian myth, Māui stole fire from the Mudhens.[21]


In the Book of Enoch, the fallen angels and Azazel teach early mankind to use tools and fire.


[edit] Prometheus in other arts
The mythic Prometheus is the lyrical I of the poem "Prometheus" by Johann Wolfgang Goethe, in which the character addresses God (as Zeus) in misotheist accusation and defiance.
Beethoven wrote a ballet called "The Creatures of Prometheus."
Prometheus: Poem of Fire, Opus 60 (1910) by Alexander Scriabin.
Prometheus, Symphonic Poem No. 5 (S.99) by Franz Liszt.
Prometheus, opera using Aeschylus's original Greek by Carl Orff, 1968.
Prometheus' torment by the eagle and his rescue by Heracles were popular subjects in vase paintings of the 6th-4th c. BC. He also sometimes appears in depictions of Athena's birth from Zeus' forehead.
There was a relief sculpture of Prometheus with Pandora on the base of Athena's cult statue in the Athenian Parthenon of the 5th century BC.

[edit] Cults of Prometheus
Prometheus had a small shrine in the Kerameikos, or potter's quarter, of Athens, not far from the Academy. The Academy had its own altar dedicated to Prometheus. According to the 2nd-century AD Greek traveler Pausanias, this site was central to a torch race dedicated to Prometheus.
Pausanias also wrote that the Greek cities of Argos and Opous both claimed to be Prometheus' final resting place, each erecting a tomb in his honor.
Finally, Pausanias attested that in the Greek city of Panopeus there was a cult statue claimed by some to depict Prometheus, for having created the

[edit] Prometheus and liver regeneration
The mythological story that Prometheus was chained to a rock in the Caucasus mountain and his liver was eaten every day by an eagle only to "regenerate" in the night has been used by scientists studying liver regeneration as an indication that ancient Greeks knew that liver can regenerate if surgically removed or injured[22]. Because of the association of Prometheus with liver regeneration, his name has also been associated with biomedical companies involved in regenerative medicine.[23]

[edit] Promethean myth in modern culture





Lists of miscellaneous information should be avoided. Please relocate any relevant information into appropriate sections or articles. (December 2008)






Sculpture of Prometheus in front of the GE Building at the Rockefeller Center (New York City, New York, United States).



Industrial band Prometheus Burning, an act from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, is named as a clear reference to Greek mythology.


On the American Thrash metal band Trivium's new album, Shogun, a song entitled " Of Prometheus and the Crucifix" describes the events of Prometheus giving fire to mankind.


The cloned horse Prometea, and Prometheus, a moon of Saturn, are named after this Titan, as is the asteroid 1809 Prometheus. The story of Prometheus has inspired many authors through the ages, and the Romantics saw Prometheus as a prototype of the natural daemon or genius.


The name of the sixty-first element, promethium, is derived from Prometheus.


Mary Shelley's 1818 novel Frankenstein is subtitled "The Modern Prometheus". This is a reference to the novel's themes of the over-reaching of modern man into dangerous areas of knowledge.


In Herman Melville's Moby-Dick, Prometheus is used in a metaphor describing Captain Ahab's intense obsession with Moby-Dick: "God help thee, old man, thy thoughts have created a creature in thee; and he whose intense thinking thus makes him a Prometheus; a vulture feeds upon that heart for ever; that vulture the very creature he creates."


Percy Bysshe Shelley's Prometheus Unbound rewrites the lost play of Aeschylus so that Prometheus does not submit to Zeus (Shelley's Jupiter), but supplants him instead in a triumph of the human heart and intellect over tyrannical religion. Lord Byron's poem "Prometheus" also portrays the titan as unrepentant. For the Romantics, Prometheus was the rebel who resisted all forms of institutional tyranny epitomized by Zeus — church, monarch, and patriarch. They drew comparisons between Prometheus and the spirit of the French Revolution, Christ, Milton's Satan, and the divinely inspired poet or artist.


Prometheus is the main protagonist in 1973 novel A Prométheusz-rejtély (An enigma of Prometheus) by Hungarian writer Lajos Mesterházi which plot intertwines Classical Greece of Aeschylus with reality of Hungary in sixties.


In the game Timesplitters: Future Perfect, One of the robot drones you fight is named Prometheus SK-8.


Prometheus is a minor character in the novel The Big Over Easy, where he is a lodger in the home of the protagonist, Jack Spratt. Prometheus later marries Spratt's daughter Pandora, despite the 4,000 year difference in their ages.


Prometheus and other gods feature in the novel Ye God! by Tom Holt. It is set in the 20th Century but Prometheus is still chained to the rock, even though he and the eagle are now friends and it keeps him up-to-date with events.


In the game Age of Mythology: The Titans, Prometheus is a near Indestructible Titan, whom the Heroes will have to face and kill to save humanity from destruction. In the game, he is seen in two different levels.


In Diana Wynne Jones's fantasy novel, The Homeward Bounders, Prometheus, as a character, plays a significant role.


Prometheus Books, a publishing company for scientific, educational, and popular books, especially those relating to secular humanism or scientific skepticism, takes its name from the myth.


In Ayn Rand's work, Anthem, the protagonist renames himself Prometheus at the end of the novella.


Bristol England's The Pop Group included studio and live versions of a song called "Thief of Fire," on two of their albums.


"Prometheus the Fallen One" is the seventh track of Virgin Steele's album "The Marriage of Heaven and Hell Part II".


The Black metal band Emperor recorded an album inspired by the story of Prometheus entitled Prometheus: The Discipline of Fire & Demise.


In the television series Stargate SG-1, the first battle cruiser built with technology taken from aliens was called Prometheus.


In the television series Smallville, Lex Luthor has a project called Prometheus which is the creation of his battle suit, an in Superman Returns, he references the story as part of his motivations and plans.


In the television series Star Trek: Voyager, a Federation starship called Prometheus is stolen by Romulans.


In the television series Xena, Prometheus is bound by the Greek gods, causing mankind to lose his gifts of fire and the ability to heal ourselves.


In rap group Jedi Mind Tricks's song "I Against I" rapper Jus Allah rhymes "Beast deceiving us ways devious possessing my peeps to walk the streets with stolen heat like Prometheus."


Swedish symphonic metal band Therion has a song called "Feuer Overtüre/Prometheus Entfesselt" ("Fire Overture/Prometheus Unleashed") on their 2004 album Lemuria.


In the video game God of War 2, the player encounters Prometheus. He is bound in chains as a huge bird eviscerates his torso. Prometheus begs the player to kill him (and thus end his eternal torment) by throwing him into the Fires of Olympus.


In the video game Bioshock, the penultimate level of the game is called Point Prometheus


In the MegaMan ZX series, Prometheus is one of the antagonists along with his partner, Pandora.


In the video game Chrono Trigger, Prometheus is the true name of one of the main characters, a robot from the Year 2300 AD known otherwise as Robo.


In Nickelodeon, there is a series of short animated episodes called Prometheus and Bob, wherein Bob is a primitive caveman and Prometheus is a skinny purple alien who tries to teach Bob about technology.


The Prometheus Award is given by the Libertarian Futurist Society for Libertarian science fiction."


The Doug Anthony All Stars; an Australian musical comedy trio, make reference to Prometheus in their song "Bless me Father" stating 'Like Prometheus in the morning, I'm bound to come around' used to allude to regret.


The band Of Montreal references Prometheus in Heimdalsgate Like a Promethean Curse, in which the Promethean curse pertains to "the burdens of consciousness and creativity" inflicted upon mankind when, against the demands of Zeus, Prometheus brought fire to earth.


Prometheus is the mascot of the Technische Universiteit Delft in Holland, where his statue stands in front of the main building; the fire of Prometheus can be seen on the T on the logo of the University. The Minho University in Portugal also features a prominent statue of Prometheus in the main entrance.


Prometheus is the main character in the comic strip The Miserable Life of Prometheus by Mark Weinstein. The strip appears in "Athens Plus" and online at prometheuscomic.wordpress.com/


Michel Faber's book 'The Fire Gospel' is loosely inspired by the Prometheus myth. It tells of a scholar named Theo who steals an ancient manuscript from a bombed Iraqi museum; the manuscript is an eye-witness account of the death of Jesus. Theo is made to suffer (including being shot in the liver) for threatening the foundations of Christianity.


In the series The Fire Thief, by Terry Deary, Prometheus escapes the eagle one day. Zeus makes a bet with him. If he can find a human hero, he can go free. Prometheus travels to the future (our past), to settle his bet.


In Gradius IV, one of the game's soundtracks is titles Prometheus; possibly a reference to the self-regenerating entity and antagonist Bacterion.










Prometheus by Gustave Moreau, (1868).









Prométhée enchaîné (Prometheus Bound) by Nicolas-Sébastien Adam, (1762). Prometheus chained to a rock having his liver torn out by the eagle.









Prometheus Bound, by Scott Eaton, (2006).









Prometheus Being Chained by Vulcan, by Dirck van Baburen, (1623).







[edit] See also
Other figures in Greek mythology punished by the gods include:

Heracles
Medusa
Sisyphus
Tantalus


[edit] Notes


^ The derivation of Prometheus' name from the Greek pro (before) + manthano (learn) is actually a folk etymology. In truth, the name comes from the PIE word that produces the Vedic pra math, which means, "to steal." This verb produces pramathyu-s, "thief", whence "Prometheus." The Vedic yee myth of fire's theft by Mataricvan is an analog to the account found in Greek myth. To these etymological cognates, we may add pramantha, the tool used to create fire. Thus Fortson 2004, 27; Williamson 2004, 214-15.
^ There is scholarly thought that man already had fire, and it was taken away by Zeus. Prometheus then, in stealing it it for man. cf. M.L. West commentaries on Hesiod, W.J. Verdenius commentaries on Hesiod, and R. Lamberton's Hesiod, pp.95-100.
^ Hesiod, Theogony 590-93.
^ THE AETOS KAUKASIOS (or Caucasian Eagle) in the Prometheus Myth
^ The liver is one of the rare human organs to regenerate itself spontaneously in the case of lesion. The ancient Greeks seem to have been aware of this, since the Greek word for the liver -- hêpar -- apparently derives from the verb hêpaomai, which means: mend, repair. Hence, hêpar roughly translates as, "repairable."
^ | 30 Years
^ | 30,000 Years
^ Hesiod, Theogony
^ [ http://www.theoi.com/Text/HesiodWorksDays.html Hesiod, WORKS AND DAYS] Translation By H. G. Evelyn-White
^ Casanova, La famiglia di Pandora: analisi filologica dei miti di Pandora e Prometeo nella tradizione esiodea (Florence) 1979.
^ Hesiod, Theogony, 526-33.
^ In this Casanova is joined by some editors of Theogony.
^ Some of these changes are rather minor. For instance, rather than being the son of Iapetus and Clymene Prometheus becomes the son of Gaea. In addition, the chorus makes a passing reference (561) to Prometheus' wife Hesione, whereas a fragment from Hesiod's Catalogue of Women calls her by the name of Pronoea. (Theoi Project: Pronoia).
^ Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound
^ a b c d PROMETHEUS
^ Dionysos
^ Erdoes/Ortiz 1984.
^ Judson 1912.
^ Swanton 1929.
^ Alexander 1916.
^ Westervelt 1910, Ch. 5.
^ Michalopoulos and DeFrances, in Science 276(5309):60-66, 1997.
^ Michalopoulos, George K., and DeFrances, Marie C., "Liver regeneration:, Science, 4 April 1997: Vol. 276. no. 5309, pp. 60 - 66: "The ancient Greeks recognized liver regeneration in the myth of Prometheus. Having stolen the secret of fire from the gods of Olympus, Prometheus was condemned to having a portion of his liver eaten daily by an eagle. His liver regenerated overnight, t



[edit] References

Alexander, Hartley Burr. The Mythology of All Races. Vol 10: North American. Boston, 1916.
Beall, E.F., Hesiod's Prometheus and Development in Myth, Journal of the History of Ideas, Vol. 52, No. 3 (Jul. - Sep., 1991), pp. 355–371
Erdoes, Richard and Alfonso Ortiz, edds. American Indian Myths and Legends. New York, 1984.
Fortson, Benjamin. Indo-European Language and Culture: An Introduction. Blackwell Publishing, 2004.
Judson, Katharine B. Myths and Legends of the Pacific Northwest. Chicago, 1912.
Lamberton, Robert. Hesiod, Yale University Press, 1988. ISBN 0300040687
Swanton, John. "Myths and Tales of the Southeastern Indians." Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 88: 1929.
Verdenius, Willem Jacob, "A Commentary on Hesiod: Works and Days, Vv. 1-382", Brill, 1985, ISBN 9004074651
West, M.L., "Hesiod, Theogony, ed. with prolegomena and commentary", Oxford: Clarendon Press 1966
West, M.L., "Hesiod, Works and Days, ed. with prolegomena and commentary", Oxford: Clarendon Press 1978
Westervelt, W.D. Legends of Maui – a Demigod of Polynesia, and of His Mother Hina. Honolulu, 1910.
Williamson, George S. The Longing for Myth in Germany: Religion and Aesthetic Culture from Romanticism to Nietzsche (Chicago, 2004).


[edit] Further reading

Fernandes, Ângela, "Human values and spiritual values: Traces of Prometheus in Portuguese literature and criticism", in journal Neohelicon, Akadémiai Kiadó, co-published with Springer Science+Business Media B.V., Volume 34, Number 1 / June, 2007, pp. 41–49
Kerényi, Carl, (Translated by Ralph Manheim) "Prometheus: Archetypal Image of Human Existence", Princeton University Press, 1997. ISBN 069101907X


[edit] External links



Look up prometheus in
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Prometheus 



Theoi Text, Theogony
Theoi Text, Works and Days
Theoi Text, Prometheus Bound
Theoi Mythology, Prometheus
Theoi Mythology, Pronoea
GML, Prometheus
Encyclopedia Mythica, Prometheus
Messagenet, Prometheus
Prometheus, a poem by Noevel (French)
Prometheus, a poem by Byron
Book "Prometheus Bound" (for free download - two volumes about 600 pages)
O fogo e as chamas dos mitos (text in Portuguese) by Betty Mindlin (Essay about the origin of fire, the stealing of fire, the keeping of fire in different South-American indigenous cultures).








v • d • e

Greek mythology (deities)





Primordial deities

Chaos  · Aether  · Gaia  · Uranus  · Hemera  · Chronos  · Eros  · Erebus  · Nyx  · Ophion  · Tartarus






Titans

Titanes: Oceanus  · Hyperion  · Coeus  · Cronus  · Crius  · Iapetus
Titanides: Tethys  · Theia  · Phoebe  · Rhea  · Mnemosyne  · Themis
Sons of Iapetus: Atlas  · Prometheus  · Epimetheus  · Menoetius






Twelve Olympians

Zeus  · Poseidon  · Hermes  · Apollo  · Ares  · Hephaestus  · (sometimes: Dionysus  · Hades)
Hera  · Demeter  · Aphrodite  · Artemis  · Athena  · Hestia






Aquatic deities

Poseidon  · Oceanus  · Ceto  · Nereus  · Glaucus  · Thetis  · Amphitrite  · Tethys  · Triton  · Proteus  · Phorcys  · Pontus  · Oceanids  · Nereids  · Naiads






Chthonic deities

Hades  · Persephone  · Gaia  · Demeter  · Hecate  · Iacchus  · Trophonius  · Triptolemus  · Erinyes









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prometheus"
Categories: Greek deities | Greek mythology | Titans | Primordial TeachersHidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | Articles needing additional references from December 2008 | Articles with trivia sections from December 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Alemannisch
العربية
বাংলা
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
فارسی
Français
한국어
Hrvatski
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latina
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 20:22.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
