











John F. Kennedy - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "John_F._Kennedy";
		var wgTitle = "John F. Kennedy";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "5119376";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281601716;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 


wgOggPlayer.msg = {"ogg-play": "Play", "ogg-pause": "Pause", "ogg-stop": "Stop", "ogg-no-player": "Sorry, your system does not appear to have any supported player software.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload a player\x3c/a\x3e.", "ogg-player-videoElement": "Native browser support", "ogg-player-oggPlugin": "Browser plugin", "ogg-player-cortado": "Cortado (Java)", "ogg-player-vlc-mozilla": "VLC", "ogg-player-vlc-activex": "VLC (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-quicktime-mozilla": "QuickTime", "ogg-player-quicktime-activex": "QuickTime (ActiveX)", "ogg-player-totem": "Totem", "ogg-player-kaffeine": "Kaffeine", "ogg-player-kmplayer": "KMPlayer", "ogg-player-mplayerplug-in": "mplayerplug-in", "ogg-player-thumbnail": "Still image only", "ogg-player-selected": "(selected)", "ogg-use-player": "Use player:", "ogg-more": "More…", "ogg-download": "Download file", "ogg-desc-link": "About this file", "ogg-dismiss": "Close", "ogg-player-soundthumb": "No player", "ogg-no-xiphqt": "You do not appear to have the XiphQT component for QuickTime.\nQuickTime cannot play Ogg files without this component.\nPlease \x3ca href=\"http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OggHandler/Client_download\"\x3edownload XiphQT\x3c/a\x3e or choose another player."};
wgOggPlayer.cortadoUrl = "http://upload.wikimedia.org/jars/cortado.jar";
wgOggPlayer.extPathUrl = "/w/extensions/OggHandler";


.ogg-player-options {
	border: solid 1px #ccc;
	padding: 2pt;
	text-align: left;
	font-size: 10pt;
}
 <!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); John F. Kennedy

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 



For other uses, see John Kennedy (disambiguation).
For other uses, see JFK (disambiguation).



John F. Kennedy








35th President of the United States



In office
January 20, 1961 – November 22, 1963


Vice President
Lyndon B. Johnson


Preceded by
Dwight D. Eisenhower


Succeeded by
Lyndon B. Johnson




United States Senator
from Massachusetts



In office
January 3, 1953 – December 22, 1960


Preceded by
Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr.


Succeeded by
Benjamin A. Smith




Member of the U.S. House of Representatives
from Massachusetts's 11th district



In office
January 3, 1947 – January 3, 1953


Preceded by
James Michael Curley


Succeeded by
Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr.






Born
May 29, 1917(1917-05-29)
Brookline, Massachusetts


Died
November 22, 1963 (aged 46)
Dallas, Texas


Birth name
John Fitzgerald "Jack" Kennedy


Political party
Democratic


Spouse
Jacqueline Lee Bouvier Kennedy


Children
Caroline Bouvier Kennedy
John Fitzgerald Kennedy, Jr.
Patrick Bouvier Kennedy


Alma mater
Harvard University


Religion
Roman Catholic


Signature



Military service


Allegiance
United States of America


Service/branch
United States Navy


Years of service
1941–1945


Rank
 Lieutenant


Unit
Motor Torpedo Boat PT-109


Battles/wars
World War II


Awards
Navy and Marine Corps Medal, Purple Heart, Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal, World War II Victory Medal


John Fitzgerald "Jack" Kennedy (May 29, 1917 – November 22, 1963), often referred to by his initials JFK, was the 35th President of the United States, serving from 1961 until his assassination in 1963.
After Kennedy's military service as commander of the Motor Torpedo Boat PT-109 during World War II in the South Pacific, his aspirations turned political. With the encouragement and grooming of his father, Joseph P. Kennedy, Sr., Kennedy represented Massachusetts's 11th congressional district in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1947 to 1953 as a Democrat, and in the U.S. Senate from 1953 until 1960. Kennedy defeated then Vice President and Republican candidate Richard Nixon in the 1960 U.S. presidential election, one of the closest in American history. To date, he is the only Catholic to be president. He was the second-youngest President (after Theodore Roosevelt), and the youngest elected to the office, at the age of 43.[1][2] Kennedy is also the only president to have won a Pulitzer Prize.[3] Events during his administration include the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the Cuban Missile Crisis, the building of the Berlin Wall, the Space Race, the African American Civil Rights Movement and early events of the Vietnam War.
Kennedy was assassinated on November 22, 1963, in Dallas, Texas. Lee Harvey Oswald was charged with the crime but was murdered two days later by Jack Ruby before he could be put on trial. The Warren Commission and the 1979 House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that Oswald was the assassin, with the HSCA allowing for the probability of conspiracy. The event proved to be an important moment in U.S. history because of its impact on the nation and the ensuing political repercussions. Today, Kennedy continues to rank highly in public opinion ratings of former U.S. presidents.[4]




Contents


1 Early life and education
2 Military service
3 Early political career
4 1960 presidential election
5 Presidency

5.1 Foreign policy

5.1.1 Cuba and the Bay of Pigs Invasion
5.1.2 Cuban Missile Crisis
5.1.3 Latin America and communism
5.1.4 Peace Corps
5.1.5 Vietnam
5.1.6 West Berlin speech
5.1.7 Nuclear Test Ban Treaty
5.1.8 Ireland
5.1.9 Iraq


5.2 Domestic policy

5.2.1 Economy
5.2.2 Federal and military death penalty
5.2.3 Civil rights
5.2.4 Civil liberties
5.2.5 Immigration
5.2.6 Space program
5.2.7 Native American relations
5.2.8 Federal Reserve relations




6 Assassination

6.1 Burial


7 Administration, Cabinet and judicial appointments 1961-1963

7.1 Judicial appointments

7.1.1 Supreme Court
7.1.2 Other courts




8 Image, social life and family
9 Legacy

9.1 Memorials


10 See also
11 References
12 Footnotes
13 Media
14 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Early life and education
Kennedy was born at 83 Beals Street in Brookline, Massachusetts on Tuesday, May 29, 1917, at 3:00 p.m.,[5] the second son of Joseph P. Kennedy, Sr, and Rose Fitzgerald; Rose, in turn, was the eldest child of John "Honey Fitz" Fitzgerald, a prominent Boston political figure who was the city's mayor and a three-term member of Congress. Kennedy lived in Brookline for his first ten years of life. He attended Brookline's public Edward Devotion School from kindergarten through the beginning of 3rd grade, then Noble and Greenough Lower School and its successor, the Dexter School, a private school for boys, through 4th grade. In September 1927, Kennedy moved with his family to a rented 20-room mansion in Riverdale, Bronx, New York City, then two years later moved five miles (8 km) northeast to a 21-room mansion on a six-acre estate in Bronxville, New York, purchased in May 1929. He was a member of Scout Troop 2 at Bronxville from 1929 to 1931 and was to be the first Scout to become President.[6] Kennedy spent summers with his family at their home in Hyannisport, Massachusetts, also purchased in 1929, and Christmas and Easter holidays with his family at their winter home in Palm Beach, Florida, purchased in 1933. In his primary school years, he attended Riverdale Country School, a private school for boys in Riverdale, for 5th through 7th grade.
For 8th grade in September 1930, the 13-year old Kennedy was sent fifty miles away to Canterbury School, a lay Roman Catholic boarding school for boys in New Milford, Connecticut. In late April 1931, he had appendicitis requiring an appendectomy, after which he withdrew from Canterbury and recuperated at home. In September 1931, Kennedy was sent to the Choate School, a private university preparatory boarding school for boys in Wallingford, Connecticut for 9th through 12th grades, following his elder brother, Joe Jr., who was two years ahead of him. In January 1934 during his junior year at Choate, Jack Kennedy became ill, lost a lot of weight, was hospitalized at Yale-New Haven Hospital until Easter, and spent most of June 1934 hospitalized at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota for evaluation of colitis.
He graduated from Choate in June 1935. Kennedy's superlative in his yearbook was "Most likely to become President". In September 1935, he sailed on the SS Normandie on his first trip abroad with his parents and his sister Kathleen to London with the intent of studying for a year with Professor Harold Laski at the London School of Economics (LSE) as his elder brother Joe had done. After less than a week at LSE and a brief hospitalization with jaundice, Kennedy sailed back to America only three weeks later. In October 1935, Kennedy enrolled late and spent six weeks at Princeton University. He was then hospitalized for two months' observation for possible leukemia at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital in Boston in January and February 1936. He recuperated at the Kennedy winter home in Palm Beach in March and April, spent May and June working as a ranch hand on a 40,000-acre (160 km²) cattle ranch outside Benson, Arizona, and in July and August raced sailboats at the Kennedy summer home in Hyannisport.
In September 1936 he enrolled as a freshman at Harvard College, where he produced that year's annual Freshman Smoker, called by a reviewer "an elaborate entertainment, which included in its cast outstanding personalities of the radio, screen and sports world."[7] He resided in Winthrop House during his sophomore through senior years, again following two years behind his elder brother, Joe. In early July 1937, Kennedy took his convertible, sailed on the SS Washington to France, and spent ten weeks driving with a friend through France, Italy, Germany, Holland and England. In late June 1938, Kennedy sailed with his father and his brother Joe on the SS Normandie to spend July working with his father, recently appointed U.S. Ambassador to the Court of St. James by President Roosevelt, at the American embassy in London, and August with his family at a villa near Cannes. From February through September 1939, Kennedy toured Europe, the Soviet Union, the Balkans and the Middle East to gather background information for his Harvard senior honors thesis. He spent the last ten days of August in Czechoslovakia and Germany before returning to London on September 1, 1939, the day Germany invaded Poland. On September 3, 1939, Kennedy and his family were in attendance at the Strangers Gallery of the House of Commons to hear speeches in support of the United Kingdom's declaration of war on Germany. Kennedy was sent as his father's representative to help with arrangements for American survivors of the SS Athenia, before flying back to the U.S. on Pan Am's Dixie Clipper from Foynes, Ireland to Port Washington, New York on his first transatlantic flight at the end of September.
In 1940, Kennedy completed his thesis, "Appeasement in Munich," about British participation in the Munich Agreement. He initially intended his thesis to be private, but his father encouraged him to publish it as a book. He graduated cum laude from Harvard with a degree in international affairs in June 1940, and his thesis was published in July 1940 as a book entitled Why England Slept, and became a bestseller.[8] From September to December 1940, Kennedy was enrolled and audited classes at the Stanford Graduate School of Business. In early 1941, he helped his father complete the writing of a memoir of his three years as an American ambassador. In May and June 1941, Kennedy traveled throughout South America.

Military service
Main article: Motor Torpedo Boat PT-109




President Kennedy had the coconut made into a paperweight. It sat on his desk in the Oval Office. The message reads: "NAURO ISL…COMMANDER…NATIVE KNOWS POS'IT…HE CAN PILOT…11 ALIVE…NEED SMALL BOAT…KENNEDY"


In the spring of 1941, Kennedy volunteered for the U.S. Army, but was rejected, mainly because of his troublesome back.[clarification needed] Nevertheless, in September of that year, the U.S. Navy accepted him, because of the influence of the director of the Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI), a former naval attaché to the Ambassador, his father. As an ensign, Kennedy served in the office which supplied bulletins and briefing information for the Secretary of the Navy. It was during this assignment that the attack on Pearl Harbor occurred. He attended the Naval Reserve Officers Training School and Motor Torpedo Boat Squadron Training Center before being assigned for duty in Panama and eventually the Pacific theater. He participated in various commands in the Pacific theater and earned the rank of lieutenant, commanding a patrol torpedo (PT) boat.[9]




Lt. Kennedy on his navy patrol boat, the PT-109


On August 2, 1943, Kennedy's boat, the PT-109, was taking part in a nighttime patrol near New Georgia in the Solomon Islands. It was rammed by the Japanese destroyer Amagiri.[10][11] Kennedy was thrown across the deck, injuring his already-troubled back. Nonetheless, Kennedy swam, towing a badly-burned man by using a life jacket strap he clenched in his mouth. He towed the wounded man to an island and later to a second island from where his crew was subsequently rescued. For these actions, Kennedy received the Navy and Marine Corps Medal under the following citation:

For extremely heroic conduct as Commanding Officer of Motor Torpedo Boat 109 following the collision and sinking of that vessel in the Pacific War Theater on August 1–2, 1943. Unmindful of personal danger, Lieutenant (then Lieutenant, Junior Grade) Kennedy unhesitatingly braved the difficulties and hazards of darkness to direct rescue operations, swimming many hours to secure aid and food after he had succeeded in getting his crew ashore. His outstanding courage, endurance and leadership contributed to the saving of several lives and were in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service.

Kennedy's other decorations in World War II included the Purple Heart, Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal and the World War II Victory Medal. He was honorably discharged in early 1945, just a few months before Japan surrendered. The incident was popularized when he became president and would be the subject of several magazine articles, books, comic books, TV specials and a feature length movie, making the PT-109 one of the most famous U.S. Navy ships of the war. Scale models and even G.I. Joe figures based on the incident were still being produced in the 2000s. The coconut which was used to scrawl a rescue message given to Solomon Islander scouts who found him was kept on his presidential desk and is still at the John F. Kennedy Library.
During his presidency, Kennedy privately admitted to friends that he didn't feel that he deserved the medals he had received, because the PT-109 incident had been the result of a botched military operation that had cost the lives of two members of his crew. When later asked by a reporter how he became a war hero, Kennedy (known for a sense of humor) joked: "It was involuntary. They sank my boat."
In May 2002, a National Geographic expedition found what is believed to be the wreckage of the PT-109 in the Solomon Islands.[12]

Early political career
After World War II, Kennedy had considered the option of becoming a journalist before deciding to run for political office. Prior to the war, he had not strongly considered becoming a politician as a career, because his family, especially his father, had already pinned its political hopes on his elder brother. Joseph, however, was killed in World War II, giving John seniority. When in 1946 U.S. Representative James Michael Curley vacated his seat in an overwhelmingly Democratic district to become mayor of Boston, Kennedy ran for the seat, beating his Republican opponent by a large margin. He was a congressman for six years but had a mixed voting record, often diverging from President Harry S. Truman and the rest of the Democratic Party. In 1952, he defeated incumbent Republican Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. for the U.S. Senate.
Kennedy married Jacqueline Lee Bouvier on September 12, 1953. Charles L. Bartlett, a journalist, introduced the pair at a dinner party.[13] Kennedy underwent several spinal operations over the following two years, nearly dying (in all he received the Roman Catholic Church's last rites four times during his life) and was often absent from the Senate. During his convalescence in 1956, he published Profiles in Courage, a book describing eight instances in which U.S. Senators risked their careers by standing by their personal beliefs. The book was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Biography in 1957.[14] From the time of publication, there have been rumors that this work was actually coauthored by his close adviser Ted Sorensen, who had joined his Senate office staff in 1953 and would serve as a speechwriter for Kennedy until his death. In May 2008, Sorensen confirmed these rumors in his autobiography.[15]
In the 1956 presidential election, presidential nominee Adlai Stevenson left the choice of a Vice Presidential nominee to the Democratic convention, and Kennedy finished second in that balloting to Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee. Despite this defeat, Kennedy received national exposure from that episode that would prove valuable in subsequent years. His father, Joseph Kennedy, Sr., pointed out that it was just as well that John did not get that nomination, as some people sought to blame anything they could on Roman Catholics, even though it was privately known that any Democrat would have trouble running against Eisenhower in 1956.
John F. Kennedy voted for final passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1957 after having earlier voted for the "Jury Trial Amendment", which effectively rendered the Act toothless because convictions for violations could not be obtained. Staunch segregationists such as senators James Eastland and John McClellan and Mississippi Governor James P. Coleman were early supporters of Kennedy's presidential campaign.[16] In 1958, Kennedy was re-elected to a second term in the United States Senate, defeating his Republican opponent, Boston lawyer Vincent J. Celeste, by a wide margin.
Years later, it was revealed that in September 1947 when he was 30 years old and during his first term as a congressman, Kennedy had been diagnosed by Sir Daniel Davis at The London Clinic with Addison's disease, a rare endocrine disorder. The nature of this and other medical problems were kept secret from the press and public throughout Kennedy's lifetime and Presidential tenure.[17]
Senator Joseph McCarthy was a friend of the Kennedy family: Joseph Kennedy, Sr. was a leading McCarthy supporter; Robert F. Kennedy worked for McCarthy's subcommittee, and McCarthy dated Patricia Kennedy. In 1954, when the Senate was poised to condemn McCarthy, John Kennedy drafted a speech calling for McCarthy's censure, but never delivered it. When on December 2, 1954, the Senate rendered its highly publicized decision to censure McCarthy, Senator Kennedy was in the hospital. Though absent, Kennedy could have "paired" his vote against that of another senator, but chose not to; neither did he ever indicate then nor later how he would have voted The episode seriously damaged Kennedy's support in the liberal community, especially with Eleanor Roosevelt, as late as the 1956 and 1960 elections.[18]

1960 presidential election
Main article: United States presidential election, 1960
On January 2, 1960, Kennedy officially declared his intent to run for President of the United States. In the Democratic primary election, he faced challenges from Senator Hubert Humphrey of Minnesota and Senator Wayne Morse of Oregon. Kennedy defeated Humphrey in Wisconsin and West Virginia and Morse in Maryland and Oregon, although Morse's candidacy is often forgotten by historians. He also defeated token opposition (often write-in candidates) in New Hampshire, Indiana and Nebraska. In West Virginia, Kennedy visited a coal mine and talked to mine workers to win their support; most people in that conservative, mostly Protestant state were deeply suspicious of Kennedy's Roman Catholicism. His victory in West Virginia cemented his credentials as a candidate with broad popular appeal. At the Democratic Convention, he gave the well-known "New Frontier" speech, which represented the changes America and the rest of the world would be going through.




John and Jackie Kennedy campaigning in Appleton, Wisconsin, March 1960


With Humphrey and Morse out of the race, Kennedy's main opponent at the convention in Los Angeles was Senator Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas. Adlai Stevenson, the Democratic nominee in 1952 and 1956, was not officially running but had broad grassroots support inside and outside the convention hall. Senator Stuart Symington of Missouri was also a candidate, as were several favorite sons. On July 13, 1960, the Democratic convention nominated Kennedy as its candidate for President. Kennedy asked Johnson to be his Vice Presidential candidate, despite opposition from many liberal delegates and Kennedy's own staff, including Robert Kennedy. He needed Johnson's strength in the South to win what was considered likely to be the closest election since 1916. Major issues included how to get the economy moving again, Kennedy's Roman Catholicism, Cuba, and whether the Soviet space and missile programs had surpassed those of the U.S. To address fears that his Roman Catholicism would impact his decision-making, he famously told the Greater Houston Ministerial Association on September 12, 1960, "I am not the Catholic candidate for President. I am the Democratic Party's candidate for President who also happens to be a Catholic. I do not speak for my Church on public matters — and the Church does not speak for me."[19] Kennedy also brought up the point of whether one-quarter of Americans were relegated to second-class citizenship just because they were Roman Catholic.
In September and October, Kennedy debated Republican candidate and Vice President Richard Nixon in the first televised U.S. presidential debates in U.S. history. During these programs, Nixon, nursing an injured leg and sporting "five o'clock shadow", looked tense and uncomfortable, while Kennedy appeared relaxed, leading the huge television audience to deem Kennedy the winner. Radio listeners, however, either thought Nixon had won or that the debates were a draw.[20] Nixon did not wear make-up during the initial debate, unlike Kennedy. The debates are now considered a milestone in American political history—the point at which the medium of television began to play a dominant role in national politics.[14] After the first debate Kennedy's campaign gained momentum and he pulled slightly ahead of Nixon in most polls. On Tuesday, November 8, Kennedy defeated Nixon in one of the closest presidential elections of the twentieth century. In the national popular vote Kennedy led Nixon by just two-tenths of one percent (49.7% to 49.5%), while in the Electoral College he won 303 votes to Nixon's 219 (269 were needed to win). Another 14 electors from Mississippi and Alabama refused to support Kennedy because of his support for the civil rights movement; they voted for Senator Harry F. Byrd, Sr. of Virginia.

Presidency


Wikisource has original text related to this article:
John F. Kennedy's Inaugural Address


John F. Kennedy was sworn in as the 35th President at noon on January 20, 1961. In his inaugural address he spoke of the need for all Americans to be active citizens, famously saying, "Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country." He also asked the nations of the world to join together to fight what he called the "common enemies of man: tyranny, poverty, disease, and war itself." In closing, he expanded on his desire for greater internationalism: "Finally, whether you are citizens of America or citizens of the world, ask of us the same high standards of strength and sacrifice which we ask of you."[21]

Foreign policy
President Kennedy's foreign policy was this to an extent: "Do not supply those armies of countries that plan to do us harm, do not give weapons to the Communists, do not supply bombs to the middle east."

Cuba and the Bay of Pigs Invasion
Main article: Bay of Pigs Invasion
Prior to Kennedy's election to the presidency, the Eisenhower Administration created a plan to overthrow the Fidel Castro regime in Cuba. Central to such a plan, which was structured and detailed by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) with minimal input from the United States Department of State, was the arming of a counter-revolutionary insurgency composed of anti-Castro Cubans.[22] U.S.-trained Cuban insurgents were to invade Cuba and instigate an uprising among the Cuban people in hopes of removing Castro from power. On April 17, 1961, Kennedy ordered the previously planned invasion of Cuba to proceed. With support from the CIA, in what is known as the Bay of Pigs Invasion, 1,500 U.S.-trained Cuban exiles, called "Brigade 2506," returned to the island in the hope of deposing Castro. However, Kennedy ordered the invasion to take place without U.S. air support. By April 19, 1961, the Cuban government had captured or killed the invading exiles, and Kennedy was forced to negotiate for the release of the 1,189 survivors. The failure of the plan originated in a lack of dialog among the military leadership, a result of which was the complete lack of naval support in the face of organized artillery troops on the island who easily incapacitated the exile force as it landed on the beach.[22] After twenty months, Cuba released the captured exiles in exchange for $53 million worth of food and medicine. Furthermore, the incident made Castro wary of the U.S. and led him to believe that another invasion would occur.[23]

Cuban Missile Crisis










Address on the Buildup of Arms in Cuba









Kennedy addressing the nation on October 22, 1962 about the buildup of arms on Cuba









Problems listening to this file? See media help.






Meeting Nikita Khrushchev in 1961


Main article: Cuban Missile Crisis
The Cuban Missile Crisis began on October 14, 1962, when American U-2 spy planes took photographs of a Soviet intermediate-range ballistic missile site under construction in Cuba. The photos were shown to Kennedy on October 16, 1962. The United States would soon be posed with a serious nuclear threat. Kennedy faced a dilemma: if the U.S. attacked the sites, it might lead to nuclear war with the U.S.S.R., but if the U.S. did nothing, it would endure the threat of nuclear weapons being launched from close range. Because the weapons were in such proximity, the U.S. might have been unable to retaliate if they were launched pre-emptively. Another consideration was that the U.S. would appear to the world as weak in its own hemisphere.
Many military officials and cabinet members pressed for an air assault on the missile sites, but Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine in which the U.S. Navy inspected all ships arriving in Cuba. He began negotiations with the Soviets and ordered the Soviets to remove all defensive material that was being built on Cuba. Without doing so, the Soviet and Cuban peoples would face naval quarantine. A week later, he and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev reached a basically cordial, lasting agreement. Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles subject to U.N. inspections if the U.S. publicly promised never to invade Cuba and quietly removed US missiles stationed in Turkey. Following this crisis, which brought the world closer to nuclear war than at any point before or since, Kennedy was more cautious in confronting the Soviet Union.

Latin America and communism
Main article: Kennedy and Latin America
Arguing that "those who make peaceful revolution impossible, will make violent revolution inevitable,"[24] Kennedy sought to contain communism in Latin America by establishing the Alliance for Progress, which sent foreign aid to troubled countries in the region and sought greater human rights standards in the region. He worked closely with Puerto Rican Governor Luis Muñoz Marín for the development of the Alliance of Progress, as well as developments in the autonomy of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.

Peace Corps
As one of his first presidential acts, Kennedy asked Congress to create the Peace Corps.[2] Through this program, Americans volunteer to help underdeveloped nations in areas such as education, farming, health care and construction.

Vietnam
The extent of Kennedy's involvement in Vietnam remained classified until the release of The Pentagon Papers in 1971.[25] In Southeast Asia, Kennedy followed Eisenhower's lead by using limited military action as early as 1961 to fight the Communist forces ostensibly led by Ho Chi Minh. Proclaiming a fight against the spread of Communism, Kennedy enacted policies providing political, economic, and military support for the unstable French-installed South Vietnamese government, which included sending 16,000 military advisors and U.S. Special Forces to the area. Kennedy's administration also agreed to the use of free-fire zones, napalm, defoliants, and jet planes. U.S. involvement in the area escalated until regular U.S. forces were directly deployed for fighting the Vietnam War by the next administration of Lyndon Johnson. The Kennedy Administration increased military support, but the South Vietnamese military was unable to make headway against the pro-independence Viet-Minh and Viet Cong forces.
By July 1963, Kennedy faced a crisis in Vietnam. The Administration's response was to assist in the coup d'état of the Roman Catholic President of South Vietnam, Ngo Dinh Diem.[26] In 1963, South Vietnamese generals overthrew the Diem government, arresting Diem and later killing him (though the exact circumstances of his death remain unclear).[27] Kennedy sanctioned Diem's overthrow.[28] One reason for the support was a fear that Diem might negotiate a neutralist coalition government which included Communists, as had occurred in Laos in 1962. Dean Rusk, Secretary of State, remarked "This kind of neutralism…is tantamount to surrender."
Kennedy increased the number of U.S. military in Vietnam from 800 to 16,300. It remains a point of some controversy among historians whether or not Vietnam would have escalated to the point it did had Kennedy served out his full term and possibly been re-elected in 1964.[29] Fueling this speculation are statements made by Kennedy's and Johnson's Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara that Kennedy was strongly considering pulling out of Vietnam after the 1964 election. In the film "The Fog of War", not only does McNamara say this, but a tape recording of Lyndon Johnson confirms that Kennedy was planning to withdraw from Vietnam, a position Johnson states he disapproved of.[30] Additional evidence is Kennedy's National Security Action Memorandum (NSAM) #263 on October 11, 1963 that gave the order for withdrawal of 1,000 military personnel by the end of 1963. Nevertheless, given the stated reason for the overthrow of the Diem government, such action would have been a policy reversal, but Kennedy was generally moving in a less hawkish direction in the Cold War since his acclaimed speech about World Peace at American University the previous June 10, 1963.
After Kennedy's assassination, new President Lyndon B. Johnson immediately reversed his predecessor's order to withdraw 1,000 military personnel by the end of 1963 with his own NSAM #273 on November 26, 1963.

West Berlin speech










Ich bin ein Berliner Speech









Speech from the Berlin Wall by John F. Kennedy, June 26, 1963. Duration 9:22.









Problems listening to this file? See media help.






Kennedy meeting with West Berlin governing mayor Willy Brandt, March 1961




Wikisource has original text related to this article:
JFK's Ich bin ein Berliner speech


Under simultaneous and opposing pressures from the Allies and the Soviets, Germany was divided. The Berlin Wall separated West and East Berlin, the latter being under the control of the Soviets. On June 26, 1963, Kennedy visited West Berlin and gave a public speech criticizing communism. Kennedy used the construction of the Berlin Wall as an example of the failures of communism: "Freedom has many difficulties and democracy is not perfect, but we have never had to put a wall up to keep our people in." The speech is known for its famous phrase "Ich bin ein Berliner". Nearly five-sixths of the population was on the street when Kennedy said the famous phrase[citation needed]. He remarked to aides afterwards: "We'll never have another day like this one."[31]

Nuclear Test Ban Treaty
Troubled by the long-term dangers of radioactive contamination and nuclear weapons proliferation, Kennedy pushed for the adoption of a Limited or Partial Test Ban Treaty, which prohibited atomic testing on the ground, in the atmosphere, or underwater, but did not prohibit testing underground. The United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union were the initial signatories to the treaty. Kennedy signed the treaty into law in August 1963.

Ireland
Further information: The Ireland Funds




President Kennedy in motorcade in Ireland on June 27, 1963


On the occasion of his visit to Ireland in 1963, President Kennedy joined with Irish President Éamon de Valera to form The American Irish Foundation. The mission of this organization was to foster connections between Americans of Irish descent and the country of their ancestry. Kennedy furthered these connections of cultural solidarity by accepting a grant of armorial bearings from the Chief Herald of Ireland. Kennedy had near-legendary status in Ireland, due to his ancestral ties to the country. Irish citizens who were alive in 1963 often have very strong memories of Kennedy's momentous visit.[32] He also visited the original cottage at Dunganstown, near New Ross, where previous Kennedys had lived before emigrating to America, and said: "This is where it all began …" On December 22, 2006, the Irish Department of Justice released declassified police documents that indicated that Kennedy was the subject of three death threats during this visit. Though these threats were determined to be hoaxes, security was heightened.[33]

Iraq
In 1963, the Kennedy administration backed a coup against the government of Iraq headed by General Abdel Karim Kassem, who five years earlier had deposed the Western-allied Iraqi monarchy. The CIA helped the new Baath Party government led by Abdul Salam Arif in ridding the country of suspected leftists and Communists. In a Baathist bloodbath, the government used lists of suspected Communists and other leftists provided by the CIA, to systematically murder untold numbers of Iraq's educated elite — killings in which Saddam Hussein himself is said to have participated. The victims included hundreds of doctors, teachers, technicians, lawyers and other professionals as well as military and political figures.[34][35][36] According to an op-ed in the New York Times, the U.S. sent arms to the new regime, weapons later used against the same Kurdish insurgents the U.S. supported against Kassem and then abandoned. American and UK oil and other interests, including Mobil, Bechtel and British Petroleum, were conducting business in Iraq.[34]

Domestic policy
Kennedy called his domestic program the "New Frontier". It ambitiously promised federal funding for education, medical care for the elderly,[citation needed] and government intervention to halt the recession. Kennedy also promised an end to racial discrimination. In 1963, he proposed a tax reform which included income tax cuts, but this was not passed by Congress until 1964, after his death. Few of Kennedy's major programs passed Congress during his lifetime, although, under his successor Johnson, Congress did vote them through in 1964–65.

Economy
Kennedy ended a period of tight fiscal policies, loosening monetary policy to keep interest rates down and encourage growth of the economy.[37] This policy was later blamed in part for the economic problems of the 1970s, as greater government spending helped lead to inflation.[37] Kennedy presided over the first government budget to top the $100 billion mark, in 1962, and his first budget in 1961 led to the country's first non-war, non-recession deficit.[38]

Federal and military death penalty
As President, Kennedy oversaw the last pre-Furman federal execution,[39] and, as of 2008, the last military execution. Governor of Iowa Harold Hughes, a death penalty opponent, personally contacted Kennedy to request clemency for Victor Feguer,[40] who was sentenced to death by a federal court in Iowa, but Kennedy turned down the request[41] and Feguer was executed on March 15, 1963. Kennedy commuted a death sentence imposed by military court on seaman Jimmie Henderson on February 12, 1962, changing the penalty to life in prison.[42]

Civil rights
The turbulent end of state-sanctioned racial discrimination was one of the most pressing domestic issues of Kennedy's era. The United States Supreme Court had ruled in 1954 in Brown v. Board of Education that racial segregation in public schools was unconstitutional. However, many schools, especially in southern states, did not obey the Supreme Court's judgment. Segregation on buses, in restaurants, movie theaters, bathrooms, and other public places remained. Kennedy supported racial integration and civil rights, and during the 1960 campaign he telephoned Coretta Scott King, wife of the jailed Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr., which perhaps drew some additional black support to his candidacy. John and Robert Kennedy's intervention secured the early release of King from jail.[43]
In 1962, James Meredith tried to enroll at the University of Mississippi, but he was prevented from doing so by white students. Kennedy responded by sending some 400 federal marshals and 3,000 troops to ensure that Meredith could enroll in his first class. Kennedy also assigned federal marshals to protect Freedom Riders.
As President, Kennedy initially believed the grassroots movement for civil rights would only anger many Southern whites and make it even more difficult to pass civil rights laws through Congress, which was dominated by Southern Democrats, and he distanced himself from it. As a result, many civil rights leaders viewed Kennedy as unsupportive of their efforts.
On June 11, 1963, President Kennedy intervened when Alabama Governor George Wallace blocked the doorway to the University of Alabama to stop two African American students, Vivian Malone and James Hood, from enrolling. George Wallace moved aside after being confronted by federal marshals, Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach and the Alabama National Guard. That evening Kennedy gave his famous civil rights address on national television and radio.[44] Kennedy proposed what would become the Civil Rights Act of 1964.[45]
Kennedy signed the executive order creating the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women in 1961.[46] Commission statstics revealed that women were also experiencing discrimination. Their final report documenting legal and cultural barriers was issued in October 1963, a month before Kennedy's assassination.

Civil liberties
Responding to allegations that Martin Luther King, Jr. was a communist, the Kennedy's administration agreed to let the Federal Bureau of Investigation wiretap private individuals, including Martin Luther King, Jr.[47][48] The source of the original allegations was none other than J. Edgar Hoover, who had a burning hatred for King, whom he viewed as an upstart troublemaker. Although Robert Kennedy, as Attorney General, only gave written approval for limited wiretapping, the Bureau, as was common under Hoover's leadership, extended the clearance to encompass whichever areas of King's life they deemed worthy of examination—without Kennedy's knowledge. In Lyndon Johnson's 1967 State of the Union speech, he referred to the "snooping" and "bugging" of the past, meaning Kennedy's administration,[47] although Johnson continued to allow the wiretapping of King and others.[48]
Kennedy also used the power of federal agencies to influence US Steel not to institute a price increase.[49] The Wall Street Journal wrote that the administrtion had set prices of steel "by naked power, by threats, by agents of the state security police."[50] Yale law professor Charles Reich wrote in The New Republic that the administration had violated civil liberties by calling a grand jury to indict US Steel so quickly.[50]

Immigration
John F. Kennedy initially proposed an overhaul of American immigration policy that later was to become the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, sponsored by Kennedy's brother Senator Edward Kennedy. It dramatically shifted the source of immigration from Northern and Western European countries towards immigration from Latin America and Asia and shifted the emphasis of selection of immigrants towards facilitating family reunification.[51] Kennedy wanted to dismantle the selection of immigrants based on country of origin and saw this as an extension of his civil rights policies.[52]

Space program


Wikisource has original text related to this article:
We choose to go to the moon


Kennedy was eager for the United States to lead the way in the space race. Sergei Khrushchev says Kennedy approached his father, Nikita, twice about a "joint venture" in space exploration—in June 1961 and autumn 1963. On the first occasion, the Soviet Union was far ahead of America in terms of space technology. Kennedy first announced the goal for landing a man on the Moon in speaking to a Joint Session of Congress on May 25, 1961, saying

"First, I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him back safely to the earth. No single space project in this period will be more impressive to mankind, or more important for the long-range exploration of space; and none will be so difficult or expensive to accomplish."[53]

Kennedy later made a speech at Rice University on September 12, 1962, in which he said

"No nation which expects to be the leader of other nations can expect to stay behind in this race for space."

and

"We choose to go to the Moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard."[54]

On the second approach to Khrushchev, the Russian was persuaded that cost-sharing was beneficial and American space technology was forging ahead. The U.S. had launched a geostationary satellite and Kennedy had asked Congress to approve more than $25 billion for the Apollo Project.
Khrushchev agreed to a joint venture in late 1963, but Kennedy was assassinated before the agreement could be formalized. On July 20, 1969, almost six years after JFK's death, Project Apollo's goal was finally realized when men landed on the Moon.

Native American relations
Further information: Kinzua Dam#Native Americans and Seneca nation#Land claims
Construction of the Kinzua Dam forced the relocation of the Seneca nation from 10,000 acres of land that they had occupied under the Treaty of 1794. They were relocated to Salamanca, New York, on the northern shores of land flooded by the dam. Dam construction was approved by Kennedy in 1960 after he was elected, breaking a campaign promise to the Senecas.[55]

Federal Reserve relations
On June 4, 1963, John F Kennedy signed Executive Order No. 11110. This gave the U.S. Treasury the power "to issue silver certificates against any silver bullion, silver, or standard silver dollars in the Treasury." This meant that for every ounce of silver in the U.S. Treasury's vault, the government could introduce new money into circulation. This gave the U.S. government back its power to issue currency, while stripping the Federal Reserve's power to loan money to the government at interest.[56] If enough of those silver certificates were to come into circulation they would have eliminated the demand for Federal Reserve notes. Executive Order No. 11110 is still valid.[57]

Assassination




JFK, Jackie, and the Connallys in the Presidential limousine before the assassination


Main article: John F. Kennedy assassination
President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, at 12:30 p.m. Central Standard Time on November 22, 1963, while on a political trip to Texas. He was shot twice, in the neck and head, and was pronounced dead at 1:00 p.m. Only 46 when assassinated, less than half the age of Gerald Ford (the longest living president) at his passing, President Kennedy died younger than any U.S. president to date. Lee Harvey Oswald, the principal suspect, was arrested at a movie theater at about 1:50 p.m. He denied shooting anyone, claiming he was a patsy, but was killed by Jack Ruby on November 24, before he could be indicted or tried. Ruby was then arrested and convicted of murder. He successfully appealed his conviction and death sentence but grew ill and himself passed away while the date for his new trial was being set.
President Johnson created the Warren Commission — chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren — to investigate the assassination, which concluded that Oswald was the lone assassin.

Burial
On March 14, 1967, Kennedy's body was moved to a permanent burial plot and memorial at Arlington National Cemetery. The funeral was said by Father John J Cavanaugh. Kennedy's wife, Jacqueline and their two deceased minor children were buried with him later. His brother, the late Senator Robert Kennedy, was buried nearby in 1968. His grave is lit with an "Eternal Flame." Kennedy and William Howard Taft are the only two U.S. Presidents buried at Arlington.[58]

Administration, Cabinet and judicial appointments 1961-1963





The Kennedy Cabinet


OFFICE
NAME
TERM





President
John F. Kennedy
1961–1963


Vice President
Lyndon B. Johnson
1961–1963





State
Dean Rusk
1961–1963


Treasury
C. Douglas Dillon
1961–1963


Defense
Robert S. McNamara
1961–1963


Justice
Robert F. Kennedy
1961–1963


Postmaster General
J. Edward Day
1961–1963


 
John A. Gronouski
1963


Interior
Stewart L. Udall
1961–1963


Agriculture
Orville L. Freeman
1961–1963


Commerce
Luther H. Hodges
1961–1963


Labor
Arthur J. Goldberg
1961–1962


 
W. Willard Wirtz
1962–1963


HEW
Abraham A. Ribicoff
1961–1962


 
Anthony J. Celebrezze
1962–1963










The official White House portrait of John F. Kennedy by Aaron Shikler




Judicial appointments

Supreme Court
Main article: John F. Kennedy Supreme Court candidates
Kennedy appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States:

Byron Raymond White – 1962
Arthur Joseph Goldberg – 1962

Further information: List of nominations to the Supreme Court of the United States

Other courts
Main article: John F. Kennedy judicial appointments
In addition to his two Supreme Court appointments, Kennedy appointed 21 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, and 102 judges to the United States district courts.




Image, social life and family




The Kennedy family in 1963.


Further information: Kennedy family
John Kennedy met his future wife, Jacqueline Bouvier, when he was a congressman. They were married a year after he was elected senator, on September 12, 1953. Kennedy and his wife were younger in comparison to presidents and first ladies that preceded them, and both were popular in ways more common to pop singers and movie stars than politicians, influencing fashion trends and becoming the subjects of numerous photo spreads in popular magazines. Although Eisenhower had allowed presidential press conferences to be filmed for television, Kennedy was the first president to ask for them to be broadcast live and made good use of the medium.[59] Jacqueline brought new art and furniture to the White House, and directed a restoration. They invited a range of artists, writers and intellectuals to rounds of White House dinners, raising the profile of the arts in America. The Kennedy family is one of the most established political families in the United States, having produced a President, three senators, and multiple other Representatives, both on the federal and state level. Jack Kennedy's father, Joseph P. Kennedy was a prominent American businessman and political figure, serving in multiple roles, including Ambassador to the United Kingdom, from 1938-1940.
Outside the White House lawn, the Kennedys established a swimming pool and tree house, while Caroline attended a preschool along with 10 other children inside.
The president was closely tied to popular culture, emphasized by songs such as "Twisting at the White House." Vaughn Meader's First Family comedy album—an album parodying the President, First Lady, their family and administration—sold about four million copies. On May 19, 1962, Marilyn Monroe sang for the president at a large birthday party in Madison Square Garden. The charisma of Kennedy and his family led to the figurative designation of "Camelot" for his administration, credited by his wife to his affection for the contemporary Broadway musical of the same name.[60]
Behind the glamorous facade, the Kennedys also experienced many personal tragedies. Jacqueline had a miscarriage in 1955 and a stillbirth in 1956. Their newborn son, Patrick Bouvier Kennedy, died in August 1963. Kennedy had two children who survived infancy. One of the fundamental aspects of the Kennedy family is a tragic strain which has run through the family, as a result of the deaths of many of its members. Jack's eldest brother, Joseph P. Kennedy, Jr., died in World War II, at the age of 29. It was Joe Jr. who was originally to carry the family's hopes for the Presidency. Then of course both Jack himself and his brother Robert died as a result of assassination. Edward had brushes with death, the first in a plane crash and the second as a result of a car accident, known as the Chappaquiddick incident.
Caroline Bouvier Kennedy was born in 1957 and is the only surviving member of JFK's immediate family. John F. Kennedy, Jr. was born in 1960, just a few weeks after his father was elected. John died in 1999 when the small plane he was piloting crashed en route to Martha's Vineyard, killing him, his wife and his sister-in-law.[61] Kennedy's first child, a daughter, was stillborn in 1956 and his last child, Patrick Bouvier Kennedy, was born on August 7, 1963, and died two days later of infant respiratory distress syndrome.
In October 1951, during his third term as Massachusetts 11th district congressman, the then 34-year-old Kennedy embarked on a seven-week Asian trip to India, Japan, Vietnam, and Israel with his then 25-year-old brother Robert (who had just graduated from law school four months earlier) and his then 27-year-old sister Patricia. Because of their eight-year separation in age, the two brothers had previously seen little of each other. This 25,000-mile (40,000 km) trip was the first extended time they had spent together and resulted in their becoming best friends in addition to being brothers. Robert was campaign manager for Kennedy's successful 1952 Senate campaign and later successful 1960 presidential campaign. The two brothers worked closely together from 1957 to 1959 on the Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in the Labor and Management Field when Robert was its chief counsel. During Kennedy's presidency, Robert served in his cabinet as Attorney General and was his closest advisor.
Kennedy came in third (behind Martin Luther King, Jr. and Mother Teresa) in a Gallup list of the most admired people of the twentieth century.[62][63]

Legacy
Television became the primary source by which people were kept informed of events surrounding John F. Kennedy's assassination. Newspapers were kept as souvenirs rather than sources of updated information. All three major U.S. television networks suspended their regular schedules and switched to all-news coverage from November 22 through November 25, 1963, being on the air for not more than 70 hours (The New York Times reported in its September 15, 2001 editions that the TV networks covered the assassination and funeral for more than 70 straight hours), and it was the longest uninterrupted news event until just before 13:00 UTC, September 14, 2001, when the networks were on for 72 hours straight, covering the the terror attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon. Kennedy's state funeral procession and the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald were all broadcast live in America and in other places around the world. The state funeral was the first of three in a span of 12 months: The other two were for General Douglas MacArthur and Herbert Hoover.
The assassination had an effect on many people, not only in the U.S. but also among the world population. Many vividly remember where they were when first learning of the news that Kennedy was assassinated, as with the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941 before it and the September 11, 2001 attacks after it. U.N. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson said of the assassination: "all of us… will bear the grief of his death until the day of ours."
Ultimately, the death of President Kennedy and the ensuing confusion surrounding the facts of his assassination are of political and historical importance insofar as they marked a decline in the faith of the American people in the political establishment — a point made by commentators from Gore Vidal to Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr.
Kennedy's continuation of Presidents Harry S. Truman's and Dwight D. Eisenhower's policies of giving economic and military aid to the Vietnam War preceded President Johnson's escalation of the conflict. This contributed to a decade of national difficulties and disappointment on the political landscape.
Many of Kennedy's speeches (especially his inaugural address) are considered iconic; and despite his relatively short term in office and lack of major legislative changes during his term, Americans regularly vote him as one of the best presidents, in the same league as Abraham Lincoln, George Washington, Franklin D. Roosevelt, and Ronald Reagan. Some excerpts of Kennedy's inaugural address are engraved on a plaque at his grave at Arlington.
He was posthumously awarded the Pacem in Terris Award. It was named after a 1963 encyclical letter by Pope John XXIII that calls upon all people of goodwill to secure peace among all nations. Pacem in Terris is Latin for 'Peace on Earth.'
President Kennedy is the only president to have predeceased both his mother and father. He is also the only president to have predeceased a grandparent. His grandmother, Mary Josephine Hannon Fitzgerald, died in 1964, just over eight months after his assassination.

Memorials
Main article: Memorials to John F. Kennedy

See also




United States Navy portal






Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: John F. Kennedy




History of the United States (1945–1964)
Jesuit Ivy
Peace Corps
Kennedy Doctrine
Operation Northwoods
Abraham Zapruder, photographer of the primary film of assassination, the Zapruder film.
Orville Nix, photographer of the second film of assassination
Robert F. Kennedy assassination
Kennedy Curse
List of assassinated American politicians
List of United States Presidents who died in office
"Senator, you are no Jack Kennedy" retort by Senator Lloyd Bentsen, 1988 VP debate
JFK Reloaded, a video game
JFK (Clone High)



References

Brauer, Carl. John F. Kennedy and the Second Reconstruction (1977)
Burner, David. John F. Kennedy and a New Generation (1988)
Casey, Shaun. The Making of a Catholic President: Kennedy vs. Nixon 1960 (2009)
Dallek, Robert (2003). An Unfinished Life : John F. Kennedy, 1917–1963. Brown, Little. ISBN 0-316-17238-3. 
Collier, Peter & Horowitz, David. The Kennedys (1984)
Cottrell, John. Assassination! The World Stood Still (1964)
Fay, Paul B., Jr. The Pleasure of His Company (1966)
Freedman, Lawrence. Kennedy's Wars: Berlin, Cuba, Laos and Vietnam (2000)
Fursenko, Aleksandr and Timothy Naftali. One Hell of a Gamble: Khrushchev, Castro and Kennedy, 1958–1964 (1997)
Giglio, James. The Presidency of John F. Kennedy (1991), standard scholarly overview of policies
Goldzwig, Steven R. and Dionisopoulos, George N., eds. In a Perilous Hour: The Public Address of John F. Kennedy, text and analysis of key speeches (1995)
Harper, Paul, and Joann P. Krieg eds. John F. Kennedy: The Promise Revisited (1988), scholarly articles on presidency
Harris, Seymour E. The Economics of the Political Parties, with Special Attention to Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy (1962)
Heath, Jim F. Decade of Disillusionment: The Kennedy–Johnson Years (1976), general survey of decade
Hellmann, John. The Kennedy Obsession: The American Myth of JFK (1997), negative assessment
Hersh, Seymour. The Dark Side of Camelot (1997), highly negative assessment
House Select Committee on Assassinations. Final Assassinations Report (1979)
Kunz, Diane B. The Diplomacy of the Crucial Decade: American Foreign Relations during the 1960s (1994)
Manchester, William. Portrait of a President: John F. Kennedy in Profile (1967)
Manchester, William. The Death of a President: November 20-November 25 (1967)
O'Brien, Michael. John F. Kennedy: A Biography (2005), the most detailed biography
Parmet, Herbert. Jack: The Struggles of John F. Kennedy (1980)
Parmet, Herbert. JFK: The Presidency of John F. Kennedy (1983)
Piper, Michael Collins. Final Judgment (2004: sixth edition). American Free Press
Reeves, Richard. President Kennedy: Profile of Power (1993), balanced assessment of policies
Reeves, Thomas. A Question of Character: A Life of John F. Kennedy (1991) hostile assessment of his character flaws
Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr. A Thousand Days: John F. Kennedy in the White House (1965), by a close advisor
Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr. Robert Kennedy And His Times (2002)
Smith, Jean Edward. Kennedy and Defense: The Formative Years. Air University Review (March–April 1967)
Sorensen, Theodore. Kennedy (1966), by a close advisor
Walsh, Kenneth T. Air Force One: A History of the Presidents and Their Planes (2003)


Footnotes


^ Theodore Roosevelt was 9 months younger when he first assumed the presidency on September 14, 1901, but he was not elected to the presidency until 1904, when he was 46.
^ a b "The Sixties". Junior Scholastic. 1994-02-11. 
^ Pulitzer.org FAQ
^ American Experience: John F. Kennedy, PBS. Retrieved on February 25, 2007.
^ "John Fitzgerald Kennedy National Historic site" (HHTML). http://www.nps.gov/jofi/faqs.htm. Retrieved on 2008-02-08. 
^ "John F. Kennedy Miscellaneous Information". JFK library. http://www.jfklibrary.org/Historical+Resources/Archives/Reference+Desk/John+F.+Kennedy+Miscellaneous+Information.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-17. 
^ "Memorial Hall Auditorium Filled to Capacity at Annual Freshman Smoker," The Harvard Crimson, May 5, 1937
^ Kennedy, John F. (1981-10-16). Why England Slept. Greenwood Press Reprint. ISBN 9780313228742. http://www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&d=24144268. ; Jean Edward Smith, "Kennedy and Defense: The Formative Years", Air University Review, (Mar-Apr, 1967)
^ "Lieutenant John F. Kennedy, USN". Naval Historical Center. 2002-06-18. http://www.history.navy.mil/faqs/faq60-2.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-17. 
^ Hove, Duane (2003) American Warriors: Five Presidents in the Pacific Theater of World War II Bard Street Press ISBN 1-57249-307-0
^ Hove, Duane T. "Five Presidents in the Pacific Theater of World War II". http://www.americanwarriorsfivepresidents.com/. Retrieved on 2007-09-17. 
^ Ted Chamberlain (July 11, 2002) JFK's PT-109 Found, U.S. Navy Confirms (National Geographic News).
^ Cover story, Time magazine, January 20, 1961
^ a b Edward Smith, Dr. Jean (1967-03). "Kennedy and Defense The formative years". Air University Review. http://www.airpower.maxwell.af.mil/airchronicles/aureview/1967/mar-apr/smith.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-18. 
^ Wall Street Journal, May 9, 2008, p W3, review of Counselor, by Ted Sorensen.
^ T. Reeves, A Question of Character, p.140.
^ Online NewsHour with Senior Correspondent Ray Suarez and physician Jeffrey Kelman, Pres. Kennedy's Health Secrets, The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer transcript, November 18, 2002
^ O'Brien (2005) 274–79, 394–99.
^ Kennedy, John F. (2002-06-18). "Address to the Greater Houston Ministerial Association". American Rhetoric. http://www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/jfkhoustonministers.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-17. 
^ Tyner Allen, Erika. "The Kennedy-Nixon Presidential Debates, 1960". museum.tv. http://www.museum.tv/archives/etv/K/htmlK/kennedy-nixon/kennedy-nixon.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-18. 
^ "Inaugural Address of President John F. Kennedy". JFK library. 1961-01-20. http://www.jfklibrary.org/Historical+Resources/Archives/Reference+Desk/Speeches/JFK/003POF03Inaugural01201961.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-18. 
^ a b Schlesinger, Robert Kennedy and His Times
^ Jean Edward Smith, "Bay of Pigs: The Unanswered Questions", The Nation, April 13, 1964
^ JFK's "Address on the First Anniversary of the Alliance for Progress," White House reception for diplomatic cors of the Latin American republics, March 13, 1962. Public Papers of the Presidents - John F. Kennedy (1962), p. 223.
^ Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. pp. 40–41. ISBN 0465041957. 
^ LeFeber, "America, Russia and the Cold War", p.233)
^ "Press Version of How Diem and Nhu Died" (PDF). Central Intelligence Agency Office of current intelligence. Central Intelligence Agency. 1963-11-12. http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB101/vn28.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-09-18. 
^ Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. pp. 43–46. ISBN 0465041957. 
^ Joseph Ellis, "Making Vietnam History ", Reviews in American History 28.4 (2000) 625–629
^ The Fog of War: Eleven Lessons from the Life of Robert S. McNamara
^ Jean Edward Smith, The Defense of Berlin, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1963; Jean Edward Smith, The Wall as Watershed, Arlington, Virginia: Institute for Defense Analysis, 1966.
^ "1963: Warm welcome for JFK in Ireland". BBC. http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/june/27/newsid_4461000/4461115.stm. Retrieved on 2007-10-04. 
^ JFK faced 3 death threats during '63 visit to Ireland| Deseret News (Salt Lake City)| Find Articles at BNET.com
^ a b "A Tyrant 40 Years in the Making". New York Times. 2003-12-15. http://readthese.blogspot.com/2003_12_15_readthese_archive.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-18. 
^ "The Old Social Classes and the Revolutionary Movements of Iraq", Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978; Peter and Marion Sluglett, "Iraq Since 1958" London, I.B. Taurus, 1990
^ Regarding the CIA's "Health Alteration Committee's work in Iraq, see U.S. Senate's Church Committee Interim Report on Assassination, page 181, Note 1
^ a b Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. p. 293. ISBN 0465041957. 
^ Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. p. 324. ISBN 0465041957. 
^ Executions 1790 to 1963
^ Carey Goldberg (May 6, 2001). "Federal Executions Have Been Rare but May Increase". The New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9800E3DF1F38F935A35756C0A9679C8B63&sec=&spon=&pagewanted=2. 
^ Letter from Kennedy to the Attorney General
^ Bush: Former Army cook's crimes warrant execution ABC News. Deb Riechmann, AP. July 29, 2008. Accessed July 29, 2008.
^ Brown, Mitchell. "Martin Luther King, Jr. Chronology". Louisiana State University. http://www.lib.lsu.edu/hum/mlk/srs216.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-20. 
^ Kennedy, John F.. "Civil Rights Address". AmericanRhetoric.com. http://www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/jfkcivilrights.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-20. 
^ "Nation Celebrates Anniversary Of Landmark Civil Rights Law". US Department of State. http://www.america.gov/st/washfile-english/2004/June/20040624160152jmnamdeirf0.1434442.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-214. 
^ Davis, F. (1999). Moving the mountain: The women's movement in America since 1960. Chicago: University of Illinois. See also: Martin, J. M. (2003). The presidency and women: Promise, performance, and illusion. College Station, Texas: Texas A&M.
^ a b Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. p. 41. ISBN 0465041957. 
^ a b Greenberg, David (2001-10-22). "Civil Rights: Let 'Em Wiretap!". History News Network. http://hnn.us/articles/366.html. 
^ "Smiting the Foe". TIME. 1962-04-20. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,873526-3,00.html. 
^ a b O'Brien, Michael. John F. Kennedy. Macmillan. http://books.google.com/books?id=gFRzBSBmGaIC&pg=PA645&lpg=PA645&dq=kennedy+steel+price+increase+fbi&source=web&ots=NAVCuXPhhp&sig=9esGMVdDa19Iz-pvv2FSn4b5fnk&hl=en&sa=X&oi=book_result&resnum=5&ct=result. 
^ Ludden, Jennifer. "Q&A: Sen. Kennedy on Immigration, Then & Now". NPR. http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=5393857. Retrieved on 2007-09-20. 
^ "From Press Office: Senator John F. Kennedy, Immigration and Naturalization Laws, Hyannis Inn Motel, Hyannis, MA". americanpresidency.org. 1960-08-06. http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=60440. Retrieved on 2007-09-20. 
^ Kennedy, John F. (1961-05-25). "Special Message to the Congress on Urgent National Needs Page 4". John F. Kennedy Library. http://www.jfklibrary.org/Historical+Resources/Archives/Reference+Desk/Speeches/JFK/Urgent+National+Needs+Page+4.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-20. 
^ Kennedy, John F. (1962-09-12). "President John F. Kennedy". Rice University. http://webcast.rice.edu/speeches/19620912kennedy.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-20. 
^ 320 - Letter to the President of the Seneca Nation of Indians Concerning the Kinzua Dam on the Allegheny River
^ http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=59049&st=&st1=
^ http://www.archives.gov/federal-register/executive-orders/1963-kennedy.html
^ This Day in History 1967: JFK’s body moved to permanent gravesite, History.com. Retrieved on April 8, 2008.
^ Rouse, Robert (March 15, 2006). "Happy Anniversary to the first scheduled presidential press conference - 93 years young!". American Chronicle. http://www.americanchronicle.com/articles/6883. 
^ The Personal Papers of Theodore H. White (1915–1986): Series 11. Camelot Documents, John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum
^ Washingtonpost.com: Kennedy Plane Found to Be Fully Functional
^ The Gallup Poll 1999. Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources Inc.. 1999. pp. 248–249. 
^ "Greatest of the Century". Gallup/CNN/USA Today Poll. 1999-12-20 and 1999-12-21. http://www.pollingreport.com/20th.htm. Retrieved on 2007-01-05. 



Media










Newsreel footage of the inauguration ceremony and speeches













Kennedy comments on the possible prevention of the Cold War









President Kennedy comments on the possible prevention of the Cold War






Kennedy's message to Turkey









Kennedy's message to Turkish President Cemal Gursel and The Turkish People on the Anniversary of the Death of Kemal Ataturk, November 10, 1963 (accompanying text)






Announcement to go to the moon









Announcement by John F. Kennedy to go to the moon (0:11m)









Problems listening to these files? See media help.



The White House Situation Room reports on the assassination to an airplane with several Cabinet members as it flies to Hawaii, Nov 22,1963 (MP3 format 7.5 MB 33-Min.)



External links

Find more about John F. Kennedy on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Works by or about John F. Kennedy in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
John F. Kennedy at the Internet Movie Database
John F. Kennedy at Find A Grave
New video footage released of JFK's last moments
Video of Vincent Bugliosi discussing JFK assassination
Kennedy's Secret White House Recordings via the Miller Center of Public Affairs (UVa)
Video, Audio, Text of John F. Kennedy's Inaugural Address
Kennedy discusses Cuban Missile Crisis with former President Eisenhower
John F. Kennedy Library
The White House Biography
JFK at the Avalon Project
The Kennedys museum in Berlin, Germany with special exhibit on Kennedy's visit
Historical TV Footage from Dallas TV Station KDFW Exclusive television coverage -- most from the KRLD -TV/KDFW Collection at the Sixth Floor Museum at Dealey Plaza
Birthplace of John F. Kennedy: Home of the Boy Who Would Be President, a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places (TwHP) lesson plan
Extensive essay on John F. Kennedy (with shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs)
Kennedy Administration Official Documentary Historical Record of Major Foreign Policy Decisions from The Foreign Relations of the United States Series, United States Department of State, Office of the Historian, United States Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.



United States House of Representatives


Preceded by
James Michael Curley
Member of the U.S. House of Representatives
from Massachusetts's 11th congressional district
January 3, 1947 – January 3, 1953
Succeeded by
Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr.


United States Senate


Preceded by
Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr.
United States Senator (Class 1) from Massachusetts
January 3, 1953 – December 22, 1960
Served alongside: Leverett Saltonstall
Succeeded by
Benjamin A. Smith


Political offices


Preceded by
Dwight D. Eisenhower
President of the United States
January 20, 1961 – November 22, 1963
Succeeded by
Lyndon B. Johnson


Party political offices


Preceded by
David I. Walsh
Democratic Party nominee for United States Senator from Massachusetts
(Class 1)
1952, 1958
Succeeded by
Ted Kennedy


Preceded by
Adlai Stevenson
Democratic Party Presidential nominee
1960
Succeeded by
Lyndon B. Johnson


Honorary titles


Preceded by
Unknown Soldiers of World War II
and the Korean War
Persons who have lain in state or honor
in the United States Capitol rotunda
November 24, 1963 – November 25, 1963
Succeeded by
Douglas MacArthur









v • d • e

John F. Kennedy





Life

Motor Torpedo Boat PT-109 · Motor Torpedo Boat PT-59 · Biuku Gasa and Eroni Kumana









Politics

Electoral history · Presidential election, 1960 · New Frontier · Inaugural address · Kennedy Doctrine · Alliance for Progress · Bay of Pigs Invasion · Cuban Missile Crisis · Partial Test Ban Treaty · Kennedy and Latin America






Events

Happy Birthday, Mr. President · Assassination · Reaction · State funeral






Legacy

Memorial · Library · In popular culture · Ich bin ein Berliner · Profile in Courage Award






Books authored

Why England Slept · Profiles in Courage · A Nation of Immigrants






Family

Kennedy family · Jacqueline Lee Bouvier Kennedy Onassis (spouse) · Caroline Bouvier Kennedy (daughter) · John F. Kennedy, Jr. (son) · Patrick Bouvier Kennedy (son) · Joseph P. Kennedy, Sr. (father) · Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy (mother)













v • d • e

Presidents of the United States






George Washington · John Adams · Thomas Jefferson · James Madison · James Monroe · John Quincy Adams · Andrew Jackson · Martin Van Buren · William Henry Harrison · John Tyler · James K. Polk · Zachary Taylor · Millard Fillmore · Franklin Pierce · James Buchanan · Abraham Lincoln · Andrew Johnson · Ulysses S. Grant · Rutherford B. Hayes · James A. Garfield · Chester A. Arthur · Grover Cleveland · Benjamin Harrison · Grover Cleveland · William McKinley · Theodore Roosevelt · William Howard Taft · Woodrow Wilson · Warren G. Harding · Calvin Coolidge · Herbert Hoover · Franklin D. Roosevelt · Harry S. Truman · Dwight D. Eisenhower · John F. Kennedy · Lyndon B. Johnson · Richard Nixon · Gerald Ford · Jimmy Carter · Ronald Reagan · George H. W. Bush · Bill Clinton · George W. Bush · Barack Obama














v • d • e

United States Democratic Party Presidential Nominees






Andrew Jackson · Martin Van Buren · James K. Polk · Lewis Cass · Franklin Pierce · James Buchanan · Stephen A. Douglas/John C. Breckinridge (SD) · George B. McClellan · Horatio Seymour · Horace Greeley · Samuel J. Tilden · Winfield Scott Hancock · Grover Cleveland · William Jennings Bryan · Alton B. Parker · William Jennings Bryan · Woodrow Wilson · James M. Cox · John W. Davis · Al Smith · Franklin D. Roosevelt · Harry S. Truman · Adlai Stevenson · John F. Kennedy · Lyndon B. Johnson · Hubert Humphrey · George McGovern · Jimmy Carter · Walter Mondale · Michael Dukakis · Bill Clinton · Al Gore · John Kerry · Barack Obama













v • d • e

United States Senators from Massachusetts





Class 1

Dalton • Cabot • Goodhue • Mason • Adams • Lloyd • Gore • Ashmun • Mellen • Mills • Webster • Choate • Webster • Winthrop • Rantoul • Sumner • Washburn • Dawes • Lodge, Sr. • Butler • Walsh • Lodge, Jr. • J. Kennedy • Smith • E. Kennedy







Class 2

Strong • Sedgwick • Dexter • Foster • Pickering • Varnum • Otis • Lloyd • Silsbee • Davis • Bates • Davis • Everett • Rockwell • Wilson • Boutwell • Hoar • Crane • J. Weeks • Walsh • Gillett • Coolidge • Lodge, Jr. • S. Weeks • Saltonstall • Brooke • Tsongas • Kerry













v • d • e

Cold War






Participants   NATO · Non-Aligned Movement · People's Republic of China · Warsaw Pact





1940s

Yalta Conference · Operation Unthinkable · Potsdam Conference · Gouzenko Affair · Iran crisis of 1946 · Chinese Civil War · Greek Civil War · Restatement of Policy on Germany · Truman Doctrine · Marshall Plan · Czechoslovak coup d'état of 1948 · Tito–Stalin split · Berlin Blockade · Western betrayal · Iron Curtain · Eastern Bloc






1950s

Korean War · First Indochina War · 1953 Iranian coup d'état · Uprising of 1953 in East Germany · 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état · First Taiwan Strait Crisis · Geneva Summit (1955) · Poznań 1956 protests · Hungarian Revolution of 1956 · Suez Crisis · Sputnik crisis · Second Taiwan Strait Crisis · Cuban Revolution · Kitchen Debate · Asian-African Conference · Bricker Amendment · McCarthyism · Operation Gladio · Hallstein Doctrine






1960s

Congo Crisis · Sino-Soviet split · 1960 U-2 incident · Bay of Pigs Invasion · Cuban Missile Crisis · Berlin Wall · Vietnam War · 1964 Brazilian coup d'état · U.S. invasion of the Dominican Republic · South African Border War · Transition to the New Order · Domino theory · Bangkok Declaration · Laotian Civil War · Greek military junta of 1967–1974 · Cultural Revolution · 1962 Sino-Indian War · Prague Spring · Goulash Communism · Sino-Soviet border conflict






1970s

Détente · Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty · Black September in Jordan · Cambodian Civil War · Ping Pong Diplomacy · Four Power Agreement on Berlin · 1972 Nixon visit to China · 1973 Chilean coup d'état · Yom Kippur War · Strategic Arms Limitation Talks · Angolan Civil War · Mozambican Civil War · Ogaden War · Cambodian-Vietnamese War · Sino-Vietnamese War · Iranian Revolution · Operation Condor · Bangladesh Liberation War  · Korean Air Lines Flight 902






1980s

Soviet war in Afghanistan · Olympic boycotts · History of Solidarity · Contras · Central American Crisis · RYAN · Korean Air Lines Flight 007 · Able Archer 83 · Strategic Defense Initiative · Invasion of Grenada · Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 · Singing Revolution · Invasion of Panama · Fall of the Berlin Wall · Revolutions of 1989 · Glasnost · Perestroika






1990s

Breakup of Yugoslavia · Dissolution of the USSR · Dissolution of Czechoslovakia






See also

Soviet and Russian espionage in U.S. · Soviet Union–United States relations · NATO-Russia relations






Establishments

ASEAN · Central Intelligence Agency · Comecon · European Community · KGB · Stasi






Races

Arms race · Nuclear arms race · Space Race






Ideologies

Capitalism · Liberal democracy · Communism · Stalinism · Trotskyism · Maoism






Propaganda

Pravda · Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty · Red Scare · Voice of America · Voice of Russia






Foreign policy

Truman Doctrine · Marshall Plan · Containment · Eisenhower Doctrine · Domino theory · Kennedy Doctrine · Peaceful coexistence · Ostpolitik · Johnson Doctrine · Brezhnev Doctrine · Nixon Doctrine · Ulbricht Doctrine · Carter Doctrine · Reagan Doctrine · Rollback






Timeline of events · Portal · Category












v • d • e

Notable figures of the Cold War






United States

Harry S. Truman · George Marshall (Secretary of State) · Dwight D. Eisenhower · John F. Kennedy · Lyndon B. Johnson · Richard Nixon · Henry Kissinger (Secretary of State) · Gerald Ford · Jimmy Carter · Ronald Reagan · George H. W. Bush






Soviet Union

Joseph Stalin · Nikita Khrushchev · Leonid Brezhnev · Yuri Andropov · Konstantin Chernenko · Mikhail Gorbachev · Boris Yeltsin · Andrei Gromyko (foreign minister) · Anatoly Dobrynin (ambassador to the U.S.)






United Kingdom

Winston Churchill · Clement Attlee · Ernest Bevin (foreign secretary) · Harold Macmillan · Harold Wilson · Margaret Thatcher






West Germany

Konrad Adenauer · Willy Brandt · Helmut Schmidt · Helmut Kohl






People's Republic of China

Mao Zedong · Zhou Enlai (Premier) · Hua Guofeng  · Deng Xiaoping · Zhao Ziyang (General Secretary)






France

Charles de Gaulle · Alain Poher · Georges Pompidou · Valéry Giscard d'Estaing · François Mitterrand






Eastern Europe

Enver Hoxha (Albania) · Josip Broz Tito (Yugoslavia) · Imre Nagy (Hungary) · Nicolae Ceauşescu (Romania) · Alexander Dubček (Czechoslovakia) · Erich Honecker (East Germany) · Lech Wałęsa (Poland) · Pope John Paul II (Poland/Vatican City)






Far East

Chiang Kai-shek · Chiang Ching-kuo (Republic of China) · Syngman Rhee · Park Chung-hee (South Korea) · Kim Il-sung (North Korea) · Ho Chi Minh (North Vietnam) · Ngo Dinh Diem (South Vietnam) · Pol Pot (Cambodia) · Aung San (Burma) · Indira Gandhi · Jawaharlal Nehru (India) · Sukarno · Suharto (Indonesia) · Nur Misuari · Jose Maria Sison · Ferdinand Marcos · Imelda Marcos (Philippines)






Canada

William Lyon Mackenzie King · Louis St. Laurent  · John Diefenbaker  · Lester Pearson  · Pierre Trudeau  · Joe Clark  · John Turner  · Brian Mulroney  · Kim Campbell






Latin America

Fidel Castro (Cuba) · Che Guevara (Argentina/Cuba) · Daniel Ortega (Nicaragua) · Salvador Allende · Augusto Pinochet (Chile)






Middle East

Mohammad Reza Pahlavi · Ayatollah Khomeini (Iran) · Saddam Hussein (Iraq) · Gamal Abdel Nasser · Anwar El Sadat (Egypt) · Muammar al-Gaddafi (Libya) Menachem Begin (Israel)






Africa

Patrice Lumumba · Mobutu Sese Seko (Congo/Zaire) · Kwame Nkrumah (Ghana) · Agostinho Neto · José Eduardo dos Santos · Jonas Savimbi (Angola) · Mengistu Haile Mariam (Ethiopia)






Timeline of events · Portal · Category












v • d • e

Parts of the story of John F. Kennedy's PT-109





Air and water craft

PT-109 • PT-59 • PT boat • Japanese destroyer Amagiri • Fubuki class destroyer • Tokyo Express • Nakajima A6M2-N






People

John F. Kennedy • Arthur Reginald Evans • Coastwatchers • Biuku Gasa and Eroni Kumana • Andrew Jackson Kirksey and Harold W. Marney • Max Kennedy






Places

Solomon Islands • Kolombangara • Gizo • Kennedy Island • Lumbari Island • Rendova Island • Tulagi






Battles

Battle of Blackett Strait • Solomon Islands campaign • Battle of Vella Gulf






Media

PT 109 (film) • The Search for Kennedy's PT 109 • PT-109 (comic book) • PT-109 (song) • PT-109 (model)






Museums, etc.

John F. Kennedy Library • Battleship Cove













v • d • e

Kennedy family





Ancestors





Joseph P. Kennedy


James Kennedy and Maria Kennedy • Patrick Kennedy (m.) Bridget Murphy • P. J. Kennedy (m.) Mary Augusta Hickey







Rose Fitzgerald


Philip and Mary Cox • Thomas Fitzgerald and Rosanna Cox • Michael Hannon and Mary Ann Fitzgerald • John Francis "Honey Fitz" Fitzgerald (m.) Mary Josephine Hannon









Kennedy family





Joseph P. Kennedy, Sr. &
Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy


Joseph Patrick Kennedy, Jr. • John Fitzgerald Kennedy (m.) Jacqueline Lee Bouvier • Rosemary Kennedy • Kathleen Agnes Kennedy (m.) William John Robert Cavendish, Marquess of Hartington • Eunice Mary Kennedy (m.) Robert Sargent Shriver, Jr. • Patricia Kennedy (m.) Peter Lawford • Robert Francis Kennedy (m.) Ethel Skakel • Jean Ann Kennedy (m.) Stephen Edward Smith • Edward Moore Kennedy (m.1st) Virginia Joan Bennett (m.2nd) Victoria Anne Reggie









Descendants





Joseph Patrick Kennedy, Jr. (1915–1944)


None










John Fitzgerald Kennedy (1917–1963)


Caroline Bouvier Kennedy (m.) Edwin Arthur Schlossberg • John Fitzgerald Kennedy, Jr. (m.) Carolyn Jeanne Bessette • Patrick Bouvier Kennedy







Rosemary Kennedy (1918–2005)


None







Kathleen Kennedy Cavendish (1920–1948)


None







Eunice Kennedy Shriver (1921–present)


Robert Sargent Shriver III • Maria Owings Shriver (m.) Arnold Alois Schwarzenegger • Timothy Perry Shriver • Mark Kennedy Shriver • Anthony Paul Kennedy Shriver







Patricia Kennedy Lawford (1924–2006)


Christopher Kennedy Lawford







Robert Francis Kennedy (1925–1968)


Kathleen Hartington Kennedy • Joseph Patrick Kennedy II • Robert Francis Kennedy, Jr. • David Anthony Kennedy • Mary Courtney Kennedy • Michael LeMoyne Kennedy • Mary Kerry Kennedy (m.) Andrew Mark Cuomo • Christopher George Kennedy • Matthew Maxwell Taylor Kennedy • Douglas Harriman Kennedy • Rory Elizabeth Katherine Kennedy







Jean Kennedy Smith (1928–present)


William Kennedy Smith







Edward Moore Kennedy (1932–present)


Kara Anne Kennedy • Edward Moore Kennedy, Jr. • Patrick Joseph Kennedy









See also: The Kennedy Curse • The Kennedy Compound • Hickory Hill • The Merchandise Mart • Descendants • Political line












v • d • e

United States presidential election, 1960





Democratic Party

1960 Democratic National Convention






Candidates

Barnett · Brown · DiSalle · Fisher · Humphrey · Johnson · Kennedy · Meyner · Morse · Smathers · Stevenson · Symington






VP Candidates

Jackson • Johnson • Symington






Republican Party

1960 Republican National Convention






Candidates

Goldwater · Nixon · Rockefeller






VP Candidates

Halleck • Lodge • Rockefeller













v • d • e

Cabinet of President John F. Kennedy (1961-1963)





Vice President

Lyndon B. Johnson (1961-1963)







Secretary of State

Dean Rusk (1961-1963)






Secretary of the Treasury

C. Douglas Dillon (1961-1963)






Secretary of Defense

Robert McNamara (1961-1963)






Attorney General

Robert F. Kennedy (1961-1963)






Postmaster General

J. Edward Day (1961-1963) • John A. Gronouski (1963)






Secretary of the Interior

Stewart Udall (1961-1963)






Secretary of the Agriculture

Orville Freeman (1961-1963)






Secretary of Commerce

Luther H. Hodges (1961-1963)






Secretary of Labor

Arthur Goldberg (1961-1962) • W. Willard Wirtz (1962-1963)






Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare

Abraham A. Ribicoff (1961-1962) • Anthony J. Celebrezze (1962-1963)













v • d • e

Time Persons of the Year








Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951) · Elizabeth II (1952) · Konrad Adenauer (1953) · John Foster Dulles (1954) · Harlow Curtice (1955) · Hungarian Freedom Fighter (1956) · Nikita Khrushchev (1957) · Charles de Gaulle (1958) · Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959) · U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960) · John F. Kennedy (1961) · Pope John XXIII (1962) · Martin Luther King, Jr. (1963) · Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) · William Westmoreland (1965) · The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966) · Lyndon B. Johnson (1967) · The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968) · The Middle Americans (1969) · Willy Brandt (1970) · Richard Nixon (1971) · Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972) · John Sirica (1973) · King Faisal (1974) · American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Carol Sutton / Susie Sharp / Addie L. Wyatt (1975)








Complete roster · 1927–1950 · 1951–1975 · 1976–2000 · 2001–present







Persondata


NAME
Kennedy, John Fitzgerald


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Kennedy, Jack


SHORT DESCRIPTION
35th President of the United States


DATE OF BIRTH
May 29, 1917


PLACE OF BIRTH
Brookline, Massachusetts, United States of America


DATE OF DEATH
November 22, 1963


PLACE OF DEATH
Dallas, Texas, United States of America


    



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_F._Kennedy"
Categories: 1917 births | 1963 deaths | Alumni of the London School of Economics | American anti-communists | American biographers | American military personnel of World War II | American people of the Vietnam War | American Roman Catholics | Presidents of the United States | Assassinated United States Presidents | Assassinated American politicians | Assassinated heads of state | Bouvier family | Burials at Arlington National Cemetery | Cold War leaders | Democratic Party (United States) presidential nominees | United States presidential candidates, 1960 | United States vice-presidential candidates | Filmed deaths | Harvard University alumni | History of the United States (1945–1964) | Irish-American politicians | Irish-American writers | Irish-Americans in the military | John F. Kennedy assassination | John F. Kennedy | Presidency of John F. Kennedy | Kennedy family | Massachusetts Democrats | Writers from Massachusetts | Irish-Americans | Members of the United States House of Representatives from Massachusetts | People from Boston, Massachusetts | Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients | Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography winners | Recipients of the Navy and Marine Corps Medal | Recipients of the Purple Heart medal | American Roman Catholic politicians | Irish American history | Time magazine Persons of the Year | United States Navy officers | United States Senators from Massachusetts | Barnstable, Massachusetts | People murdered in Texas | Deaths by firearm in Texas | Murdered Irish-Americans | People associated with the Boy Scouts of AmericaHidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism | Wikipedia protected pages without expiry | All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2009 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 | Articles containing video clips 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


አማርኛ
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
Arpetan
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Kapampangan
ქართული
Kiswahili
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Lingála
Magyar
Македонски
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Ripoarisch
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Tiếng Việt
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 00:03.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
