













Sun Yat-sen - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Sun_Yat-sen";
		var wgTitle = "Sun Yat-sen";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "88483";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282088249;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Sun Yat-sen

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 

This is a Chinese name; the family name is Sun (孫).




Sun Yat-sen
孫文
孫中山
孫逸仙








President of the Republic of China
provisional



In office
1 January 1912 – 1 April 1912


Vice President
Li Yuanhong


Preceded by
Office created


Succeeded by
Yuan Shikai






Born
12 November 1866(1866-11-12) or
24 November 1870(1870-11-24)
Xiangshan, Empire of Great Qing of China or
Kingdom of Hawaii


Died
12 March 1925 (aged 58) or
12 March 1925 (aged 54)
Beijing, Republic of China


Nationality
Chinese
Hawaiian (until 04-29-1900)[1]
American (since 04-30-1900)[2]


Political party
Kuomintang


Spouse
Lu Muzhen (1885 – 1915)
Soong Ching-ling (1915 – 1925)


Alma mater
Hong Kong College of Medicine for Chinese


Occupation
Physician
Politician
Revolutionary
Writer


Religion
Congregationalist[3]


Sun Yat-sen (12 November 1866 or 24 November 1870 – 12 March 1925), birth name was Sun Dixiang (also known as Sun Yixian, Sun Wen, Son Bun/Son Nakayama (Japanese) and Sun Zhongshan) (originally Sun Deming), was a Chinese revolutionary and political leader often referred to as the Father of Modern China. Sun played an instrumental role in overthrowing the Qing Dynasty in 1911. He got the name Sun Wen from his teacher Wang Lao Fu Zi. He was the first provisional president when the Republic of China (ROC) was founded in 1912 and later co-founded the Kuomintang (KMT) where he served as its first leader. Sun was a uniting figure in post-Imperial China, and remains unique among 20th-century Chinese politicians for being widely revered in both Mainland China and Taiwan.
Although Sun is considered one of the greatest leaders of modern China, his political life was one of constant struggle and frequent exile. After the success of the revolution, he quickly fell out of power in the newly-founded Republic of China, and led successive revolutionary governments as a challenge to the warlords who controlled much of the nation. Sun did not live to see his party consolidate its power over the country. His party, which formed a fragile alliance with the Communists, split into two factions after his death. Sun's chief legacy resides in his developing a political philosophy known as the Three Principles of the People (The People's Relation/Connection, The People's Power, and the People's Livelihood/Welfare, or sometimes known as nationalism, democracy/sovereignty, and socialism/populism/livelihood depending on the translation).




Contents


1 Early years
2 Transformation into a revolutionary

2.1 From exile to Wuchang Uprising
2.2 Republic of China


3 Guangzhou militarist government

3.1 Path to Northern Expedition and death


4 Legacy

4.1 Power struggle
4.2 Father of the Nation
4.3 Forerunner of the Revolution
4.4 Sun and the overseas Chinese


5 Names
6 Memorial Colleges
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early years


Sun Yat-sen (back row, fifth from left) and his family.


Sun Yat-sen had a Certificate of Hawaiian Birth, issued by the Territory of Hawaii, which substantiates that he was born in the Kingdom of Hawaii on 24 November 1870,[4] but it is commonly assumed that he was born on 12 November 1866 to a peasant family in the village of Cuiheng, Xiangshan county, Guangzhou prefecture, Guangdong province (26 km or 16 miles north of Macau). The latter claim is likely to be correct, as the Certificate of Hawaiian Birth was issued based on Sun's typewritten testimony rather than on any documentation from witnesses.
When he died in 1925, the name of Xiangshan was changed to Zhongshan, Sun's Japanese name when he was living in Japan. As a child, Sun Yat-sen listened to many stories about the Taiping Rebellion from an old Taiping soldier named Lai han-ying (賴漢英). After receiving a few years of local school, at age thirteen, Sun went to live with his elder brother, Sun Mei, in Honolulu. Sun Mei, who was fifteen years Sun Yat-sen's senior, had emigrated to Hawaii as a laborer and had become a prosperous merchant. Though Sun Mei was not always supportive of Sun's later revolutionary activities, he supported his brother financially, allowing Sun to give up his professional career. Sun Yat-sen studied at the prestigious Iolani School where he learned English, mathematics and science. Originally unable to speak the English language, Sun Yat-sen picked up the language so quickly that he received a prize for outstanding achievement in English from Prince David Kalakaua. While at Iolani, he befriended Tong Phong, who later founded the First Chinese-American Bank. After attending Iolani School in 1882,[5] Sun enrolled in Oahu College (now Punahou School) for further studies for one semester, from which he graduated.[6] He was soon sent home to China as his brother was becoming afraid that Sun Yat-sen was about to embrace Christianity, but he returned to Hawaii at least twice, in 1900 and 1901.[7] In 1904 his alleged birth in Hawaii was certified. As a consequence, he was automatically declared a citizen of the United States and was issued an American passport.[citation needed] It is unclear whether or not he maintained his original citizenship as a subject of the Qing empire.
His American experience was to be of lasting influence. Sun attached particular importance to the ideas of Alexander Hamilton and Abraham Lincoln. Sun often said that the formulation of Lincoln's Gettysburg Address, “government of the people, by the people, for the people”, had been the inspiration for the Three Principles of the People. He incorporated these ideas, later in life, in two highly influential books. One, The Vital Problem of China (1917), analyzed some of the problems of colonialism: Sun warned that “…the British treat nations as the silkworm farmer treats his worms; as long as they produce silk, he cares for them well; when they stop, he feeds them to the fish.” The second book, International Development of China (1921), presented detailed proposals for the development of infrastructure in China, and attacked the ideology of laissez-faire, as well as that of Marxism adhering more to the ideas of Henry George's, particularly land value taxation. His ideology remained flexible, however, reflecting his audience as much as his personal convictions. He presented himself as a strident nationalist to the nationalists, as a socialist to the socialists, and an anarchist to the anarchists, declaring at one point that “the goal of the Three Principles of the People is to create socialism and anarchism.” It is an open matter of debate whether this eclecticism reflected a sincere effort to incorporate ideas from the multiple competing schools of thought or was simply opportunistic posturing. In any case, his ideological flexibility allowed him to become a key figure in the Nationalist movement since he was one of very few people who had good relations with all of the movement's factions. When he returned home in 1883, he became greatly troubled by what he saw as a backward China that demanded exorbitant taxes and levies from its people. The schools maintained their ancient methods, leaving no opportunity for expression of thought or opinion. Under the influence of Christian missionaries in Hawaii, Sun had developed a disdain for traditional Chinese religious beliefs. One day, Sun and his childhood friend Lu Hao-tung passed by Beijidian (北極殿), a temple in Cuiheng Village, where they saw many villagers worshipping the Beiji (literally North Pole) Emperor-God in the temple. They broke off the hand of the statue, incurring the wrath of fellow villagers, and escaped to Hong Kong.
Sun studied English at the Anglican Diocesan Home and Orphanage (now the Diocesan Boys' School) in Hong Kong. In April 1884, Sun was transferred to the Central School of Hong Kong (later renamed Queen's College). Sun was later baptized in Hong Kong by an American missionary of the Congregational Church of the United States, to his brother's disdain. Sun pictured a revolution as similar to the salvation mission of the Christian church. His conversion to Christianity was related to his revolutionary ideals and push for advancement[3]. As a result, his baptismal name, Rixin (日新), literally means "daily renewal."




Photograph of Sun Yat-sen and his friends, the so-called "Si Da Kou" (Four Great Gangs, 四大寇) in the Hong Kong College of Medicine for Chinese (from left to right: Yang Heling, Sun Yat-sen, Chen Shaobai and You Lie. The one standing was Guan Jingliang.).


Sun studied medicine at the Guangzhou Boji Hospital under the Christian missionary John G. Kerr. Ultimately, he earned the license of Christian practice as a medical doctor from the Hong Kong College of Medicine for Chinese (the forerunner of The University of Hong Kong) in 1882. Notably, he was one of the first two graduates. He subsequently practiced Christianity in that city briefly in 1883. He had an arranged marriage with fellow villager Lu Muzhen at age twenty; she bore him a son Sun Fo, who would grow up to become a high ranking official in the Republican government, and two daughters, Sun Yan and Sun Wan.
During and after the Qing Dynasty rebellion, Sun was a leader within Tiandihui, a secret society that became associated with the rise of triad groups. His activities in Tiandihui brought about much of Sun's back pain. His protégé, Chiang Kai Shek, was also a member of Tiandihui.

[edit] Transformation into a revolutionary
Sun, who had grown increasingly annoyed by the conservative Qing government and its refusal to adopt knowledge from the more technologically advanced Western nations, quit his medical practice in order to devote his time to transforming China. At first, Sun aligned himself with the reformists Kang Youwei and Liang Qichao who sought to transform China into a Western-style constitutional monarchy. In 1894, Sun wrote a long letter to Li Hongzhang, the governor-general of Zhili and a reformer in the court, with suggestions on how to strengthen China, but he was rebuffed. Since Sun had never been trained in the classics, the gentry did not accept Sun into their circles. From then on, Sun began to call for the abolition of the monarchy and the establishment of a republic.
Sun went to Hawaii in October 1894 and founded the Revive China Society to unveil the goal of a prospering China and as the platform for future revolutionary activities. Members were drawn mainly from Cantonese expatriates and from the lower social classes.

[edit] From exile to Wuchang Uprising




Plaque in London marking the site of a house where Sun Yat-sen lived while in exile


In 1895 a coup he plotted failed, and for the next sixteen years Sun was an exile in Europe, the United States, Canada, and Japan, raising money for his revolutionary party and bankrolling uprisings in China. In 1896 he was detained at the Chinese Legation in London, where diplomats planned to kill him. He was released after twelve days through the efforts of James Cantlie, The Times and the Foreign Office, leaving Sun a hero in Britain.[8]
In Japan, where he was known as Nakayama Shō (Kanji: 中山樵, lit. 'Middle Mountain Woodsman'), he joined dissident Chinese groups (which later became the Tongmenghui) and soon became their leader. He spent, on and off, about ten years in Japan while befriending and being financially aided by a democratic revolutionary in Japan, Miyazaki Toten (1871-1922). Nanjing Historical Remains Museum of Chinese Modern History exhibits a bronze statue of Sun and Miyazaki placed alongside. Miyazaki wrote a series of articles for newspapers including nationally-circulated Asahi about Sun and his revolutionary efforts under the title "33-year dream". His last name Nakayama came from the imperial family which occupied Sun's favorite estate mansion located in central Tokyo. He eventually left Japan due to fears of the excessively large level of support he had there and went to the States. In Japan, He met and befriended Mariano Ponce, then a diplomat of the First Philippine Republic. Sun also supported the cause for Philippine Independence and even supplied the Philippine army with guns. On 10 October 1911, a military uprising at Wuchang in which Sun had no direct involvement (at that moment Sun was still in exile and Huang Xing was in charge of the revolution), began a process that ended over two thousand years of imperial rule in China. When he learned of the successful rebellion against the Qing emperor from press reports, Sun immediately returned to China from the United States. Later, on 29 December 1911 a meeting of representatives from provinces in Nanking elected Sun as the provisional President of the Republic of China and set 1 January 1912 as the first day of the First Year of the Republic. This republic calendar system is still used in Taiwan today.
The official history of the Kuomintang (and for that matter, the Communist Party of China) emphasizes Sun's role as the first provisional President, but many historians now question the importance of Sun's role in the 1911 revolution and point out that he had no direct role in the Wuchang uprising and was in fact out of the country at the time. In this interpretation, his naming as the first provisional President was precisely because he was a respected but rather unimportant figure and therefore served as an ideal compromise candidate between the revolutionaries and the conservative gentry.
However, Sun is credited for the funding of the revolutions and for keeping the spirit of revolution alive, even after a series of failed uprisings. Also, as mentioned, he successfully merged minor revolutionary groups to a single larger party, providing a better base for all those who shared the same ideals.
Sun is highly regarded as the National Father of modern China. His political philosophy, known as the Three Principles of People, was proclaimed in August 1905. In his Methods and Strategies of Establishing the Country completed in 1919, he suggested using his Principles to establish ultimate peace, freedom, and equality in the country. He devoted all efforts throughout his whole lifetime until his death for a strong and prosperous China and the well being of its people.

[edit] Republic of China


Sun Yat-sen in Guangzhou, 1924


After taking the oath of office, Sun Yat-sen sent telegrams to the leaders of all provinces, requesting them to elect and send new senators to establish the National Assembly of the Republic of China. The Assembly then declared the provisional government organizational guidelines and the provisional law of the Republic as the basic law of the nation.
The provisional government was in a very weak position. The southern provinces of China had declared independence from the Qing dynasty, but most of the northern provinces had not. Moreover, the provisional government did not have military forces of its own, and its control over elements of the New Army that had mutinied was limited, and there were still significant forces which had not declared against the Qing.
The major issue before the provisional government was gaining the support of Yuan Shikai, the man in charge of the Beiyang Army, the military of northern China. After Sun promised Yuan the presidency of the new Republic, Yuan sided with the revolution and forced the emperor to abdicate. (Eventually, Yuan proclaimed himself emperor and afterwards opposition snowballed against Yuan's dictatorial methods, leading him to renounce the throne shortly before his death in 1916.) In 1913 Sun led an unsuccessful revolt against Yuan, and he was forced to seek asylum in Japan, where he reorganized the Kuomintang. He married Soong Ching-ling, one of the Soong sisters, in Japan on 25 October 1915, without divorcing his first wife Lu Muzhen due to opposition from the Chinese community. Lu pleaded with him to take Soong as a concubine but this was also unacceptable to Sun's Christian ethics.

[edit] Guangzhou militarist government




Sun Yat-sen (middle) and Chiang Kai-shek (on stage in uniform) at the founding of the Whampoa Military Academy in 1924.


In the late 1910s, China was greatly divided by different military leaders without a proper central government. Sun saw the danger of this and returned to China in 1917 to advocate unification. He started a self-proclaimed military government in Guangzhou (Canton), Guangdong Province, southern China, in 1921, and was elected as president and generalissimo.
In a February 1923 speech presented to the Students' Union in Hong Kong University, he declared that it was the corruption of China and the peace, order and good government of Hong Kong that turned him into a revolutionary.[9][10] This same year, he delivered a speech in which he proclaimed his Three Principles of the People as the foundation of the country and the Five-Yuan Constitution as the guideline for the political system and bureaucracy. Part of the speech was made into the National Anthem of the Republic of China.
To develop the military power needed for the Northern Expedition against the militarists at Beijing, he established the Whampoa Military Academy near Guangzhou, with Chiang Kai-shek as its commandant and with such party leaders as Wang Ching-wei and Hu Han-min as political instructors. The Academy was the most eminent military school of the Republic of China and trained graduates who fought in the Second Sino-Japanese War and on both sides of the Chinese Civil War.
However, as soon as he established his government in Guangzhou, Sun Yat-sen came into conflict with entrenched local power. Sun's militarist government was not based on the Provisional Constitution of 1912, which the anti-Beiyang forces vowed to defend in the Constitutional Protection War. In addition, Sun was elected president by a parliament that did not meet quorum following its move from Beijing. Thus, many politicians and warlords alike challenged the legitimacy of Sun's militarist government. Sun's use of heavy taxes to fund the Northern Expedition to militarily unify China also came at odds with reformers such as Chen Jiongming, who advocated establishing Guangdong as a “model province” before launching a costly military campaign. In sum, Sun's military government was opposed by the internationally-recognized Beiyang government in the north, Chen's Guangdong provincial government in the south, and other provincial powers that shifted alliance according to their own benefit.

[edit] Path to Northern Expedition and death




Sun's portrait adorns Republic of China's NT$100 bill.


He again became premier of the Kuomintang from 10 October 1919 – 12 March 1925. In the early 1920s Sun received help from the Comintern for his reorganization of the Kuomintang as a Leninist Democratic-Centrist Party and negotiated the First CCP-KMT United Front. In 1924, in order to hasten the conquest of China, he began a policy of active cooperation with the Chinese Communists.
By this time, Sun was convinced that the only hope for a unified China lay in a military conquest from his base in the south, followed by a period of political tutelage that would culminate in the transition to democracy. Sun then prepared for the later Northern Expedition with help from foreign powers until his death.
On 10 November 1924, Sun traveled north and delivered another speech to suggest gathering a conference for the Chinese people and the abolition of all unequal treaties with the Western powers. Two days later, he yet again traveled to Beijing to discuss the future of the country, despite his deteriorating health and the ongoing civil war of the warlords. Although ill at the time, he was still head of the southern government. On 28 November 1924 Sun traveled to Japan and gave a remarkable speech on Pan-Asianism at Kobe, Japan. He left Guangzhou to hold peace talks with the northern regional leaders on the unification of China. Sun died of liver cancer on 12 March 1925, at the age of 58 at the Rockefeller Hospital in Beijing.[11][12]

[edit] Legacy




Sun Yat-sen tribute in Tiananmen Square, 2005.


One of Sun's major legacies was his political philosophy, the Three Principles of the People (sanmin zhuyi, 三民主義). These Principles included the principle of nationalism (minzu, 民族), democracy (minquan, 民權) and the People's Livelihood (minsheng, 民生). The Principles retained a place in the rhetoric of both the Kuomintang and the Chinese Communist Party with completely different interpretations. This difference in interpretation is due partly to the fact that Sun seemed to hold an ambiguous attitude to both capitalist and communist methods of development, as well as due to his untimely death, in 1925, before he had finished his now-famous lecture series on the Three Principles of the People. In addition, Sun is also one of the primary saints of the Vietnamese religion Cao Dai.

[edit] Power struggle
After Sun's death, a power struggle between his young protégé Chiang Kai-shek and his old revolutionary comrade Wang Jingwei split the KMT. At stake in this struggle was the right to lay claim to Sun's ambiguous legacy. In 1927 Chiang Kai-shek married Soong May-ling, a sister of Sun's widow Soong Ching-ling, and subsequently he could claim to be a brother-in-law of Sun. When the Communists and the Kuomintang split in 1927, marking the start of the Chinese Civil War, each group claimed to be his true heirs, a conflict that continued through World War II.
The official veneration of Sun's memory, especially in the Kuomintang, was a virtual cult, which centered around his tomb in Nanking. His widow, Soong Ching-ling, sided with the Communists during the Chinese Civil War and served from 1949 to 1981 as Vice President (or Vice Chairwoman) of the People's Republic of China and as Honorary President shortly before her death in 1981.

[edit] Father of the Nation
Sun Yat-sen remains unique among twentieth-century Chinese leaders for having a high reputation both in mainland China and in Taiwan. In Taiwan, he is seen as the Father of the Republic of China, and is known by the posthumous name Father of the Nation, Mr. Sun Zhongshan (Chinese: 國父　孫中山先生, where the one-character space is a traditional homage symbol). His likeness is still almost always found in ceremonial locations such as in front of legislatures and classrooms of public schools, from elementary to senior high school, and he continues to appear in new coinage and currency.

[edit] Forerunner of the Revolution




Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum in Nanjing


On the mainland, Sun is also seen as a Chinese nationalist and proto-socialist, and is highly regarded as the Forerunner of the Revolution (革命先行者). He is mentioned by name in the preamble to the Constitution of the People's Republic of China. In most major Chinese cities one of the main streets is named "Zhongshan" (中山) to memorialize him, a name even more commonly found than other popular choices such as "Renmin Lu" (人民路), or The People's Road, and "Jiefang Lu" (解放路), or Liberation Road. There are also numerous parks, schools, and geographical features named after him. The city of Zhongshan in Guangdong, where Sun was originally from, is named after Sun, and there is a hall dedicated to his memory at the Temple of Azure Clouds in Beijing.
In recent years, the leadership of the Communist Party of China has increasingly invoked Sun, partly as a way of bolstering Chinese nationalism in light of Chinese economic reform and partly to increase connections with supporters of the Kuomintang on Taiwan which the PRC sees as allies against Taiwanese independence. Sun's tomb was one of the first stops made by the leaders of both the Kuomintang and the People First Party on their trips to mainland China in 2005. A massive portrait of Sun continues to appear in Tiananmen Square for May Day and the National Day.

[edit] Sun and the overseas Chinese
Sun's notability and popularity extends beyond the Greater China region, particularly to Nanyang where a large concentration of overseas Chinese reside in Singapore and Malaysia. Sun recognised the contributions that the large number of overseas Chinese could make, beyond the sending of remittances to their ancestral homeland. He therefore made multiple visits to spread his revolutionary message to these communities around the world.
Sun made a total of eight visits to Singapore between 1900 and 1911. The first, on 7 September 1900, was to rescue Miyazaki Toten, an ardent Japanese supporter and friend of Sun's, who was arrested there, an act which resulted in his own arrest and a ban from visiting the island for five years. Upon his next visit in June 1905, he met local Chinese merchants Teo Eng Hock, Tan Chor Nam and Lim Nee Soon in a meeting which was to mark the commencement of direct support from the Nanyang Chinese. Upon hearing their reports on overseas Chinese revolutionists organising themselves in Europe and Japan, he urged them to establish the Singapore chapter of the Tongmenghui, which came officially into being on 6 April the following year upon his next visit.




Sun Yat-sen's original handwriting expressing his unchanging love to his wife Soong Ching-ling.


The chapter was housed in a villa known as Wan Qing Yuan (晚晴園) and donated for the use of revolutionalists by Teo. In 1906, the chapter grew in membership to 400, and in 1908, when Sun was in Singapore to escape the Qing government in the wake of the failed Zhennanguan Uprising, the chapter had become the regional headquarters for Tongmenghui branches in Southeast Asia. Sun and his followers travelled from Singapore to Malaya and Indonesia to spread their revolutionary message, by which time the alliance already had over twenty branches with over 3,000 members around the world.
Sun's foresight in tapping the help and resources of the overseas Chinese population was to bear fruit on his subsequent revolutionary efforts. In one particular instance, his personal plea for financial aid at the Penang Conference held on 13 November 1910 in Malaya, helped launch a major drive for donations across the Malay Peninsula, an effort which helped finance the Second Guangzhou Uprising (also commonly known as the Yellow Flower Mound revolt) in 1911.
The role that overseas Chinese in Southeast Asia played during the 1911 Revolution was so significant that Sun himself recognized "Overseas Chinese as the Mother of the Revolution".
Today, Sun's legacy is remembered in Nanyang at Wan Qing Yuan, which has since been preserved and renamed as the Sun Yat Sen Nanyang Memorial Hall, and gazetted as a national monument of Singapore on 28 October 1994.
In Penang, the Penang Philomatic Union which was founded by Sun, has embarked on a heritage project to turn its premises at 65 Macalister Road into Dr. Sun Yat-Sen Museum. The project is expected to complete in late 2006.
The old Chinatown in Calcutta (now known as Kolkata), India has a prominent street by the name of Sun Yat Sen Street.

[edit] Names
Main article: Names of Sun Yat-sen

[edit] Memorial Colleges

Sun Yat-sen University
National Sun Yat-sen University
Moscow Sun Yat-sen University


[edit] See also


Sun Yat-sen


Names (details)


Known in English as:
Sun Yat-sen


Chinese:
孫逸仙


Hanyu Pinyin:
Sūn Yìxiān


Wade-Giles:
Sun I-hsien


Cantonese:
Sun Yat-sen


Hokkien POJ:
Sun Ek-sian


Known to Chinese as:
孫中山


Hanyu Pinyin:
Sūn Zhōngshān


Wade-Giles:
Sun Chung-shan


Hokkien POJ:
Sun Tiong-soan


Family name:
Sun


Traditional Chinese:
孫


Simplified Chinese:
孙


Given
names


Register name :
Démíng (德明)


Milk name :
Dìxiàng (帝象)


School name :
Wén (文)


Courtesy name :
Zaizhi (載之)


Pseudonym :
Rìxīn (日新), later



Yìxiān (逸仙),


Alias :
Zhōngshān (中山)


Alias in Japan:
Nakayama Shō (中山樵)


Styled:
Gúofù (國父), i.e.



“Father of the Nation”









This article contains Chinese text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Chinese characters.



Three Principles of the People
Father of the Nation
Chiang Kai-shek
Kuomintang
History of the Republic of China
Politics of the Republic of China
Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum, in Nanjing
Dr. Sun Yat-sen Museum, in Hong Kong
Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hall, in Taipei
Sun Yat Sen Nanyang Memorial Hall
Sun Yat-sen House (Nanjing)
Zhongshan Park
Zhongshan Memorial Middle School
Sun Yat-sen stamps
Sun Yat-sen University, one of the top twenty universities in Mainland China; and National Sun Yat-sen University in Taiwan.
Dr. Sun Yat-Sen Classical Chinese Garden, in Vancouver, the largest classical Chinese gardens outside of Asia
Warlord era
Whampoa Military Academy
Communist Party of China
Chinese Nationalism
Chinese Anarchism
Postage stamps and postal history of China


[edit] References


^ His Hawaiian citizenship at birth was declared retroactively, since his alleged 1870 birth "in the Hawaiian Islands" was not certified before 14 March, 1904.
^ Persons who were citizens of Hawaii on 12 August, 1898, automatically received United States citizenship (cf. 8 U.S.C. § 1405: "Persons born in Hawaii").
^ a b Soong, (1997) p. 151-178
^ Facsimile, copy and transcript of Sun Yat-sen's Hawaiian birth certificate.
^ "Dr. Sun Yat-Sen (class of 1882)". Iolani School website. http://www.iolani.org/wn_aboutiolani_100305_cc.htm. 
^ Brannon, John (2007-08-16). "Chinatown park, statue honor Sun Yat-sen". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. http://the.honoluluadvertiser.com/article/2007/Aug/16/ln/hawaii708160313.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-17.  "Sun graduated from Iolani School in 182, then attended Oahu College — now known as Punahou School — for one semester." 
^ Brannon, John (2007-08-16). "Chinatown park, statue honor Sun Yat-sen". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. http://the.honoluluadvertiser.com/article/2007/Aug/16/ln/hawaii708160313.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-17.  "During a 1900 visit, Sun told The Advertiser […] He said in a 1901 interview here that "This is my Hawai'i." 
^ Contrary to popular legends, Sun entered the Legation voluntarily, but was prevented from leaving. The Legation planned to execute him, before returning his body to Beijing for ritual beheading. Cantlie, his former teacher, was refused a writ of habeas corpus because of the Legation's diplomatic immunity, but he began a campaign through The Times. The Foreign Office persuaded the Legation to release Sun through diplomatic channels.
Source: Wong, J.Y. (1986). The Origins of a Heroic Image: SunYat Sen in London, 1896-1987. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press. 
as summarized in
Clark, David J.; Gerald McCoy (2000). The Most Fundamental Legal Right: Habeas Corpus in the Commonwealth. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 162. http://books.google.com/books?id=B9rYW5xPYEwC&pg=PA162&lpg=PA162&dq=Chinese+Legation+London&source=web&ots=vgN8Sy0j5Y&sig=AXitXwpp3F6YIDZmqTSSasD45eU&hl=en&sa=X&oi=book_result&resnum=3&ct=result. 
^ Ho, Virgil K.Y. [2005] (2005). Understanding Canton: Rethinking Popular Culture in the Republican Period. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0199282714
^ Carroll, John Mark. Edge of Empires:Chinese Elites and British Colonials in Hong Kong. Harvard university press. ISBN 0674017013
^ "Lost Leader". Time (magazine). 23 March 1925. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,881448,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-03.  "A year ago his death was prematurely announced; but it was not until last January that he was taken to the Rockefeller Hospital at Peking and declared to be in the advanced stages of cancer of the liver." 
^ "Dr. Sun Yat-sen Dies in Peking. Chinese Leader Had Failed Steadily Since an Operation ? on Jan. 26 for Cancer. Helped To Oust Manchus. Headed the New Government for a Time.". New York Times. 12 March 1925. 



[edit] Further reading


Soong, Irma Tam (1997). Sun Yat-sen's Christian Schooling in Hawai'i. Hawai'i: The Hawaiian Journal of History, vol. 13. 
Sun Yat-sen's vision for China / Martin, Bernard, 1966.
Sun Yat-sen, Yang Chu-yun, and the early revolutionary movement in China / Hsueh, Chun-tu
Sun Yat-sen / Bergere, Marie-Claire. c. 1998.
Sun Yat-sen 1866-1925 / The Millennium Biographies / Hong Kong, 1999
Sun Yat-sen and the origins of the Chinese revolution Schiffrin, Harold Z. /1968.
Sun Yat-sen; his life and its meaning; a critical biography. Sharman, Lyon, / 1968, c. 1934
"Sun Yat Sen Nanyang memorial hall". http://www.wanqingyuan.com.sg/english/index.html. Retrieved on 2005-07-01. 
"Doctor Sun Yat Sen memorial hall". http://sun.yatsen.gov.tw/. Retrieved on 2005-07-01. 
"A detailed talk about Sun Zhongshan" (in Chinese). http://www.shuku.net:8080/novels/zhuanji/xsszs/xsszs01-01.html. Retrieved on September 2005. 
"Japanese activist Miyazaki Toten a middleman and financier for Sun Yat-sen". http://www.wanqingyuan.com.sg/english/onceupon/royalists.html. 
"Toten Miyazaki bio". http://www.ndl.go.jp/portrait/e/datas/339.html. 



[edit] External links

Find more about Sun Yat-sen on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

ROC Government Biography
Dr. Sun Yat-Sen Foundation of Hawaii A virtual library on Dr. Sun in Hawaii including sources for six visits
Dr. Sun Yat-sen's acquisition of U.S. citizenship with the (possibly illicit) "Certificate of Hawaiian birth": NARA Government documents (cf. also Dr. Sun Yat-sen Foundation Hawaii, 5th visit)
Sun Yat-sen in Hong Kong University of Hong Kong Libraries, Digital Initiatives
Contemporary views of Sun among overseas Chinese
National Dr. Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hall Official Website
Dr. Sun Yat Sen Middle School 131, New York City
[http://www.sysmuseum-pg.com/ Dr. Sun Yat Sen Museum, Penang, Malaysia
Who is Homer Lea? Dr. Sun's best friend. He trained Chinese soldiers and prepared the frame work for the 1911 Chinese Revolution.
Was Yung Wing Dr. Sun's supporter? The Red Dragon scheme reveals the truth!
Miyazaki Toten He devoted his life and energy to the Chinese people.
Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hall A place to commemorate Sun Yat-sen in Guangzhou
MY GRANDFATHER, DR. SUN YAT-SEN - By Lily Sui-fong Sun
浓浓乡情系中原—访孙中山先生孙女孙穗芳博士 - 我的祖父是客家人



Political offices


Preceded by
The Xuantong Emperor
(Puyi)
as Emperor of China
Head of state of China
as President of the Republic of China
Acting
1912
Succeeded by
Yuan Shih-kai
as President of the Republic of China


Preceded by
Office created
Generalissimo of the Military Government of Nationalist China
1917 – 1918
Succeeded by
Governing Committee of the Military Government of Nationalist China


Preceded by
Himself
as Generalissimo of the Military Government of Nationalist China
Member of the Governing Committee of the Military Government of Nationalist China
1918
Succeeded by
Cen Chunxuan
as Chairman of the Governing Committee of the Military Government of Nationalist China


Preceded by
Cen Chunxuan
as Chairman of the Governing Committee of the Military Government of Nationalist China
Member of the Governing Committee of the Military Government of Nationalist China
1920 – 1921
Succeeded by
Himself
as Extraordinary President of Nationalist China


Preceded by
Generalissimo of the Military Government of Nationalist China
Extraordinary President of Nationalist China
1921 – 1922
Succeeded by
Himself
as Generalissimo of the National Government of Nationalist China


Preceded by
Office created
Generalissimo of the National Government of Nationalist China
1923 – 1925
Succeeded by
Hu Hanmin
Acting


Party political offices


Preceded by
Song Jiaoren
As President of the Kuomintang
Premier of the Kuomintang
1913 – 1914
Succeeded by
Himself


Preceded by
Himself
Premier of the Kuomintang
1919 – 1925
Succeeded by
Zhang Renjie









v • d • e

Presidents of the Republic of China





Provisional Government
(1912–1913)

Sun Yat-sen · Yuan Shikai









Beiyang Government
(1913–1928)

Yuan Shikai · Li Yuanhong · Feng Guozhang · Xu Shichang · Zhou Ziqi · Li Yuanhong · Gao Lingwei · Cao Kun · Huang Fu · Duan Qirui · Hu Weide · Yan Huiqing · Du Xigui · Gu Weijun






Political Tutelage
(1928–1948)

Chiang Kai-shek · Lin Sen · Chiang Kai-shek






Constitutional Government
(since 1948)

Chiang Kai-shek · Li Zongren · Yen Chia-kan · Chiang Ching-kuo · Lee Teng-hui · Chen Shui-bian · Ma Ying-jeou






Italics indicates acting President












v • d • e

Leaders of the Kuomintang






Song Jiaoren • Sun Yat-sen • Zhang Renji • Hu Hanmin • Wang Jingwei • Chiang Kai-shek • Chiang Ching-kuo • Lee Teng-hui • Lien Chan • Ma Ying-jeou • Chiang Pin-kung (acting) • Wu Poh-hsiung














v • d • e

Warlord era in early Republic of China (1916–1930)









Main events (1916–1920)
Main events (1920–1930)
Northern Factions
Southern Factions







Empire of China (1915–1916)
National Protection War (1915-1916)
Death of Yuan Shikai (1916)
Manchu Restoration (1917)
Constitutional Protection Movement (1917-1922)
Paris Peace Conference (1919)
May Fourth Movement (1919)
Occupation of Mongolia (1919-1921)




Zhili-Anhui War (1920)
Guangdong-Guangxi War (1920–1921)
First Zhili-Fengtian War (1922)
Second Zhili-Fengtian War (1924)
Beijing coup (1924)
Yunnan-Guangxi War (1925)
May 30 Movement (1925)
Anti-Fengtian War (1925-1926)
Northern Expedition (1926–1928)
Huánggūtun Incident (1928)
Flag Replacement of the Northeast
Central Plains War (1930)




Beiyang Army:
Yuan Shikai
Anhui clique
Zhili clique
Regional:
Fengtian clique
Shanxi clique
Guominjun
Ma clique
Xinjiang clique




Yunnan clique
Old Guangxi Clique New Guangxi Clique Guandong clique Kuomintang (KMT) Sichuan clique














Persondata


NAME
Sun Yat-sen


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Sun Chung-shan, Dr. Sun Yat-sen, Dr. Sun, Gúofù (Father of the Nation)


SHORT DESCRIPTION
Chinese revolutionary and political leader, 1st Provisional President of the Republic of China


DATE OF BIRTH
12 November 1866


PLACE OF BIRTH
Xiangshan, Guangdong, China


DATE OF DEATH
12 March 1925


PLACE OF DEATH
Beijing, China





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sun_Yat-sen"
Categories: Presidents of the Republic of China | Chinese revolutionaries | Chinese philosophers | 19th-century philosophers | 20th-century philosophers | Cao Dai saints | Chinese Congregationalists | Deaths from liver cancer | 1866 births | 1925 deaths | People from Zhongshan | People of the Xinhai Revolution | Family of Sun Yatsen | Iolani School alumni | Punahou School alumni | Alumni of the University of Hong Kong | National anthem writers | Politicians of the Republic of China | Gang members | Triad members | Mob bosses | Cantonese people | Cancer deaths in ChinaHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles containing non-English language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
贛語
文言
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Magyar
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Slovenčina
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
Winaray
吴语
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 11:23.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
