













Combinatorics - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Combinatorics";
		var wgTitle = "Combinatorics";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "5170";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281082119;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Combinatorics

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
Combinatorics is a branch of pure mathematics concerning the study of discrete (and usually finite) objects. It is related to many other areas of mathematics, such as algebra, probability theory, ergodic theory and geometry, as well as to applied subjects in computer science and statistical physics. Aspects of combinatorics include "counting" the objects satisfying certain criteria (enumerative combinatorics), deciding when the criteria can be met, and constructing and analyzing objects meeting the criteria (as in combinatorial designs and matroid theory), finding "largest", "smallest", or "optimal" objects (extremal combinatorics and combinatorial optimization), and finding algebraic structures these objects may have (algebraic combinatorics).
Combinatorics is as much about problem solving as theory building, though it has developed powerful theoretical methods, especially since the later twentieth century. One of the oldest and most accessible parts of combinatorics is graph theory, which also has numerous natural connections to other areas. Combinatorics is used frequently in computer science to obtain estimates on the number of elements of certain sets.
A mathematician who studies combinatorics is often referred to as a combinatorialist or combinatorist.




Contents


1 History of combinatorics
2 Enumerative combinatorics
3 Analytic combinatorics
4 Partition theory
5 Graph theory
6 Design theory
7 Order theory
8 Matroid theory
9 Extremal combinatorics
10 Probabilistic combinatorics
11 Algebraic combinatorics
12 Combinatorics on words
13 Geometric combinatorics
14 Topological combinatorics
15 Arithmetic combinatorics
16 Infinitary combinatorics
17 Related fields

17.1 Combinatorial optimization
17.2 Coding theory
17.3 Discrete and computational geometry
17.4 Combinatorics and dynamical systems


18 See also
19 References
20 Notes
21 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History of combinatorics




An example of bell ringing (with six bells and two ringers).


Main article: History of combinatorics
Basic combinatorial concepts and enumerative results have appeared throughout the ancient world. In 6th century BC, physician Sushruta asserts in Sushruta Samhita that 63 combinations can be made out of 6 different tastes, taken one at a time, two at a time, etc., thus computing all 26-1 possibilities. Roman historian Plutarch discusses an argument between Chrysippus (3rd century BC) and Hipparchus (2nd century BC) a rather delicate enumerative problem, which later discovered to be related to Schröder numbers.[1][2] In the Ostomachion, Archimedes (3rd century BC) calculates the number of solutions of a certain tiling puzzle.
In the Middle Ages, combinatorics continued to be studied, largely outside of the European civilization. Notably, an Indian mathematician Mahavira (c. 850) provided the general formulae for the number of permutations and combinations. The philosopher and astronomer Rabbi Abraham ibn Ezra (c. 1140) established the symmetry of binomial coefficients, while a closed formula was obtained later by the talmudist and mathematician Levi ben Gerson (better known as Gersonides), in 1321. [3] Later, in Medieval England, campanology provided examples of what is now known as Hamiltonian cycles in certain Cayley graphs on permutations.
During the Renaissance, together with the rest of mathematics and the sciences, combinatorics enjoyed a rebirth. Works of Pascal, Newton, Jacob Bernoulli and Euler became foundational in the emerging field. In the modern times, the works by J. J. Sylvester (late 19th century) and Percy MacMahon (early 20th century) laid the foundation for enumerative and algebraic combinatorics. Graph theory also enjoyed an explosion of interest at the same time, especially in connection with the four color problem.

[edit] Enumerative combinatorics




Five binary trees on three vertices, an example of Catalan numbers.


Main article: Enumerative combinatorics
Enumerative combinatorics is the most classical area of combinatorics, and concentrates on counting the number of certain combinatorial objects. Although counting the number of elements in a set is a rather broad mathematical problem, many of the problems that arise in applications have a relatively simple combinatorial description. Fibonacci numbers is the basic example of a problem in enumerative combinatorics. The twelvefold way provides a unified framework for counting permutations, combinations and partitions.

[edit] Analytic combinatorics
Main article: Analytic combinatorics
Analytic combinatorics concerns the enumeration of combinatorial structures using tools from complex analysis and probability theory. In contrast with enumerative combinatorics which uses explicit combinatorial formulae and generating functions to describe the results, the analytic combinatorics aims at obtaining the asymptotic formulae.

[edit] Partition theory




A plane partition.


Main article: Partition theory
Partition theory studies various enumeration and asymptotic problems related to integer partitions, and is closely related to q-series, special functions and orthogonal polynomials. Originally a part of number theory and analysis, it is now considered a part of combinatorics or an independent field. It incorporates the bijective approach and various tools in analysis, analytic number theory, and has connections with statistical mechanics.

[edit] Graph theory




Petersen graph.


Main article: Graph theory
Graphs are basic objects in combinatorics. The questions range from counting (e.g. the number of graphs on n vertices with k edges) to structural (e.g. which graphs contain Hamiltonian cycles) to algebraic questions (e.g. given a graph G and two numbers x and y, does the Tutte polynomial TG(x,y) have a combinatorial interpretation?). It should be noted that while there are very strong connections between graph theory and combinatorics, these two are sometimes thought of as separate subjects.[4]

[edit] Design theory
Main article: Combinatorial design
Design theory is a study of combinatorial designs, which are collections of subsets with certain intersection properties. Block designs are combinatorial designs of a special type. This area is one one oldest parts of combinatorics, such as in Kirkman's schoolgirl problem proposed in 1850. The solution of the problem is a special case of Steiner system, which play an important role in the classification of finite simple groups. The area has further connections to coding theory and geometric combinatorics.

[edit] Order theory




Hasse diagram of the powerset of {x,y,z} ordered by inclusion.


Main article: Order theory
Order theory is the study of partially ordered sets, both finite and infinite. Various examples of partial orders appear in algebra, geometry, number theory and throughout combinatorics and graph theory. Notable classes and examples of partial orders include lattices and Boolean algebras.

[edit] Matroid theory
Main article: Matroid theory
Matroid theory abstracts part of geometry. It studies the properties of sets (usually, finite sets) of vectors in a vector space that do not depend on the particular coefficients in a linear dependence relation. Not only the structure but also enumerative properties belong to matroid theory. Matroid theory was introduced by Hassler Whitney and studied as a part of the order theory. It is now an independent field of study with a number of connections with other parts of combinatorics.

[edit] Extremal combinatorics
Main article: Extremal combinatorics
Extremal combinatorics studies extremal questions on set systems. The types of questions addressed in this case are about the largest possible graph which satisfies certain properties. For example, the largest triangle-free graph on 2n vertices is a complete bipartite graph Kn,n. Often it is too hard even to find the extremal answer f(n) exactly and one can only give an asymptotic estimate.
Ramsey theory is another part of extremal combinatorics. It states that any sufficiently large configuration will contain some sort of order. It is an advanced generalization of the pigeonhole principle.

[edit] Probabilistic combinatorics




Self-avoiding walk in a square grid graph.


Main article: Probabilistic combinatorics
In probabilistic combinatorics, the questions are of the following type: what is the probability of a certain property for a random discrete object, such as a random graph. For instance, what is the average number of triangles in a random graph? Probabilistic methods are also used to determine the existence of combinatorial objects with certain prescribed properties (for which explicit examples might be difficult to find), simply by observing that the probability of randomly selecting an object with those properties is greater than 0. This approach proved highly effective in applications to extremal combinatorics and graph theory. A closely related area is the study of finite Markov chains, especially on combinatorial objects. Here again probabilistic tools are used to estimate the mixing time.
Often associated with Paul Erdős, who did the pioneer work on the subject, probabilistic combinatorics was traditionally viewed as a set of tools to study problems in other parts of combinatorics. However, with the growth of applications to analysis of algorithms in computer science, as well as classical probability, additive and probabilistic number theory, the area recently grew to become an independent field of combinatorics.

[edit] Algebraic combinatorics




Young diagram of a partition (5,4,1).


Main article: Algebraic combinatorics
Algebraic combinatorics is an area of mathematics that employs methods of abstract algebra, notably group theory and representation theory, in various combinatorial contexts and, conversely, applies combinatorial techniques to problems in algebra. Within the last decade or so, algebraic combinatorics came to be seen more expansively as the area of mathematics where the interaction of combinatorial and algebraic methods is particularly strong and significant. One of the fastest developing subfields within algebraic combinatorics is combinatorial commutative algebra.

[edit] Combinatorics on words




Construction of a Thue-Morse infinite word.


Main article: Combinatorics on words
Combinatorics on words is an area of combinatorics which studies formal languages. It arose independently within several branches of mathematics, including number theory, group theory and probability. It has applications to enumerative combinatorics, fractal analysis, theoretical computer science, automata theory and linguistics. While many applications are new, the classical Chomsky–Schützenberger hierarchy of classes of formal grammars is perhaps the best known result in the field.

[edit] Geometric combinatorics




An icosahedron.


Main article: Geometric combinatorics
Geometric combinatorics is related to convex and discrete geometry, in particular polyhedral combinatorics. It asks, e.g. how many faces of each dimension can a convex polytope have. Metric properties of polytopes play an important role as well, e.g. the Cauchy theorem on rigidity of convex polytopes. Special polytopes are also considered, such as permutohedron, associahedron and Birkhoff polytope.

[edit] Topological combinatorics




Splitting a necklace with two cuts.


Main article: Topological combinatorics
Combinatorial analogs of concepts and methods in topology are used to study graph coloring, fair division, partitions, partially ordered sets, decision trees, necklace problems and discrete Morse theory.

[edit] Arithmetic combinatorics
Main article: Arithmetic combinatorics
Arithmetic combinatorics arose out of the interplay between number theory, combinatorics, ergodic theory and harmonic analysis. It is about combinatorial estimates associated with arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division). Additive combinatorics refers to the special case when only the operations of addition and subtraction are involved. One important technique in arithmetic combinatorics is the ergodic theory of dynamical systems.

[edit] Infinitary combinatorics
Main article: Infinitary combinatorics
Infinitary combinatorics, or combinatorial set theory, is an extension of ideas in combinatorics to infinite sets. It is a part of set theory, an area of mathematical logic, but uses tools and ideas from both set theory and extremal combinatorics.
Gian-Carlo Rota used the name continuous combinatorics[5] to describe probability and measure theory, since there are many analogies between counting and measure.

[edit] Related fields




Kissing spheres are connected to both coding theory and discrete geometry.



[edit] Combinatorial optimization
Combinatorial optimization is the study of optimization on discrete and combinatorial objects. It started as a part of combinatorics and graph theory, but is now viewed as a branch of applied mathematics and computer science, related to operations research, algorithm theory and computational complexity theory.

[edit] Coding theory
Coding theory started as a part of design theory with early combinatorial constructions of error-correcting codes. It is now a large field of study, part of the information theory.

[edit] Discrete and computational geometry
Discrete geometry (also called combinatorial geometry) also began a part of combinatorics, with early results on convex polytopes and kissing numbers. With the emergence of applications of discrete geometry to computational geometry, these two fields partially merged and became a separate field of study. There remain many connections with geometric and topological combinatorics, which themselves can be viewed as outgrowths of the early discrete geometry.

[edit] Combinatorics and dynamical systems
Combinatorial aspects of dynamical systems is another emerging field. Here dynamical systems can be defined on combinatorial objects. See for example graph dynamical system.

[edit] See also


Combinadic
Combinatorial auction
Combinatorial chemistry
Combinatorial data analysis
Combinatorial explosion
Combinatorial game theory
Combinatorial principles
Factoradic
Fundamental theorem of combinatorial enumeration
Inclusion-exclusion principle
List of combinatorics topics
List of combinatorists
List of publications in mathematics
Method of distinguished element
Musical set theory



[edit] References

Bjorner, A. and Stanley, R.P., A Combinatorial Miscellany
Graham, R.L., Groetschel M., and Lovász L., eds. (1996). Handbook of Combinatorics, Volumes 1 and 2. Elsevier (North-Holland), Amsterdam, and MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. ISBN 0-262-07169-X.
Lindner, Charles C. and Christopher A. Rodger (eds.) Design Theory, CRC-Press; 1st. edition (October 31, 1997). ISBN 0-8493-3986-3.
van Lint, J.H., and Wilson, R.M. (2001). A Course in Combinatorics, 2nd Edition. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-80340-3.
Stanley, Richard P. (1997, 1999). Enumerative Combinatorics, Volumes 1 and 2. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-55309-1, ISBN 0-521-56069-1.
Combinatorial Analysis – an article in Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition
Riordan, John (1958). An Introduction to Combinatorial Analysis, Wiley & Sons, New York (republished).


[edit] Notes


^ R.P. Stanley, "Hipparchus, Plutarch, Schröder, and Hough", Amer. Math. Monthly 104 (1997), no. 4, 344-350.
^ L. Habsieger, M. Kazarian, S. Lando, On the second number of Plutarch, Amer. Math. Monthly 105 (1998), no. 5, 446.
^ History of Combinatorics, chapter in a textbook.
^ 2-Digit MSC Comparison, by Daniel P. Sanders.
^ Continuous and profinite combinatorics



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Combinatorics 






Look up combinatorics in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.


Combinatorics, a MathWorld article with many references.
Combinatorics, from a MathPages.com portal.
The Hyperbook of Combinatorics, a collection of math articles links.








v • d • e

Major fields of mathematics








Arithmetic · Logic · Set theory · Category theory · Algebra (elementary – linear – abstract) · Number theory · Analysis (calculus)  · Geometry · Trigonometry · Topology · Dynamical systems · Combinatorics · Game theory · Information theory · Optimization · Computation · Probability · Statistics · Mathematical physics











Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Combinatorics"
Categories: Combinatorics | Discrete mathematics | Articles containing proofs 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Беларуская
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Հայերեն
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Саха тыла
Shqip
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 14:32.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
