













Art Bell - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Art_Bell";
		var wgTitle = "Art Bell";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "309935";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 287510478;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Art Bell

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Arthur W. Bell, III


Born
June 17, 1945 (1945-06-17) (age 63)


Occupation
Broadcaster


Spouse(s)
Sachiko Toguchi Bell Pontius (dates uncertain; divorced)
Sukiyaki Sakamoto Kyo Bell (dates uncertain; divorced)
Ramona Bell (August 1991 – January 5, 2006 †)
Airyn Ruiz Bell (April 11, 2006 – present)


Children
Vincent Pontius, Lisa Minei, Art "Scooter" Bell IV, Asia Rayne Bell


Parents
Arthur Bell Jr., Father
Jane Bell, Mother


Arthur W. "Art" Bell, III (born June 17, 1945) is an American broadcaster and author, known primarily as the founder and longtime host of the paranormal-themed radio program Coast to Coast AM.[1] He also created and formerly hosted its companion show, Dreamland. Semi-retired from Coast to Coast AM since 2003, he hosted the show many weekends for the following four years. He announced his retirement from weekend hosting on July 1, 2007, but occasionally "guest hosts." He attributed the reason for this latest retirement to a desire to spend time with his wife and new daughter, born May 30, 2007. He added that unlike his previous "retirements," this one will stand, while leaving open the option to return. Classic Bell-hosted episodes of Coast to Coast can be heard in some markets on Saturday nights under the name Somewhere in Time.
Bell founded and was the original owner of Pahrump, Nevada-based radio station, KNYE 95.1 FM. His broadcast studio and transmitter were located at his home in Pahrump while he hosted Coast to Coast AM except from June to December 2006, at which time he lived in the Philippines.




Contents


1 Early life
2 Broadcasting career

2.1 Critical reputation
2.2 Political views
2.3 Featured callers
2.4 Amateur radio
2.5 Honors
2.6 Marriages
2.7 Retirements and comebacks
2.8 Events of 2006

2.8.1 Death of Ramona Bell
2.8.2 Change in schedule
2.8.3 Remarriage
2.8.4 Relocation to the Philippines
2.8.5 Return to "the High Desert and the Great American Southwest"


2.9 Events of 2007
2.10 Events of 2008
2.11 Events of 2009


3 Books
4 Other work
5 See also
6 References
7 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early life
Bell was born to Arthur Bell, Jr., a United States Marine Corps Captain, and Jane Gumaer Bell, a Marine drill instructor. Arthur Bell, Jr. died in 2000 and Jane Bell died Decemeber 23, 2008. Art Bell III was always interested in radio and at the age of 13 became a licensed amateur radio operator with call letters W2CKS, and currently W6OBB. Bell served in the U.S. Air Force as a medic during the Vietnam War, and, in his free time, operated a pirate radio station at Amarillo Air Force Base. He would go out of his way to play anti-war music (like "Eve of Destruction" and "Fortunate Son") that was not aired on the American Forces Network.[2]
After leaving military service, he stayed in Asia, living on the Japanese island of Okinawa where he worked as a disc jockey for KSBK, the only non-military English-language station in Japan. While there, he set a Guinness record by staying on the air for 116 hours and 15 minutes. The money raised there allowed Bell to charter a DC-8, fly to Vietnam, and rescue 130 Vietnamese orphans stranded in Saigon at the war's end. They were eventually brought to the United States and adopted by American families.[3]
Bell returned to the United States and studied engineering at the University of Maryland, College Park. He dropped out and returned to radio as a board operator and chief engineer, and had opportunityto be on the air a few times. For several years he worked behind and in front of the microphone. After a period of working in cable television, in 1989 the 50,000-watt KDWN in Las Vegas, Nevada offered Bell a five-hour time slot in the middle of the night. Syndication of his program to other radio stations began in 1993.

[edit] Broadcasting career
Bell's original Las Vegas program was a political call-in talk radio show under the names West Coast AM and Coast to Coast 2000, but he tired of the format, believing there were too many such programs, especially in the wake of Rush Limbaugh's huge success.




Broadcast facilities of KNYE in Pahrump, Nevada.


Bell abandoned conventional political talk in favor of topics such as gun control and conspiracy theories, leading to a significant bump in his overnight ratings; however the show's focus shifted significantly after the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995. Many in the media did not want to be blamed for inciting anti-government or militia actions like the bombing. Subsequently, Bell discussed off-beat topics like the paranormal, the occult, UFOs, protoscience and pseudo-science. During his tenure at KDWN Bell met and married his second wife, Ramona, who later handled production and management duties for the program.
According to The Washington Post in its February 23, 1997 paper: Art Bell was at the time America's highest-rated late-night radio talk show, broadcast on 328 stations. According to The Oregonian in its June 22, 1997 paper, Coast To Coast AM with Art Bell was on 460 stations. At its initial peak in popularity, Coast To Coast AM was syndicated on more than 500 radio stations and claimed 15 million listeners nightly. Bell's studios were located in his home in the town of Pahrump, located in Nye County, Nevada, hence the catchphrase "from the Kingdom of Nye."

[edit] Critical reputation
Observers regard Bell as a master showman, noting that he calls his show "absolute entertainment"[4] and expressly says he does not necessarily accept every guest or caller's claims, but only offers a forum where they will not be openly ridiculed. Bell was one of only a few talk show hosts who do not screen calls, but began screening calls in 2006. On the October 31, 2006 edition of Coast to Coast AM, (renamed for the night to Ghost to Ghost AM), Bell was asked why he was now using call screeners. The explanation given was for him to use unscreened open lines from the Philippines would require listeners to call there directly at enormous cost to them. He subsequently returned to unscreened calls upon his return to the United States.
His calm attitude, patient questions, and ability to tease substance from nebulous statements of callers and guests gave his show a relaxed yet serious atmosphere. This earned him praise from those who declare the paranormal deserves a mature outlet of discussion in the media as well as the approval of those simply amused by the nightly parade of bizarre, typically fringe topics. Ed Dames, Richard C. Hoagland, Terence McKenna, Dannion Brinkley, David John Oates, and Robert Bigelow have all been regular guests. Some of Bell’s regular guests, particularly Hoagland, continue to be regular guests on Coast to Coast AM now hosted by George Noory.
Bell's own interests, however, extend beyond the paranormal. He has interviewed singers Crystal Gayle, Willie Nelson, Merle Haggard and Gordon Lightfoot, comedian George Carlin, writer Dean Koontz, hard science fiction writer Greg Bear, TV talk host Regis Philbin, Star Trek actor Leonard Nimoy, actor Dan Aykroyd, former Luftwaffe pilot Bruno Stolle, actress Jane Seymour, actress Ellen Muth, actor and TV host Robert Stack, human rights lawyer John Loftus, legendary disc jockey Casey Kasem and frequent guests physicist Michio Kaku and SETI astronomers Seth Shostak and H. Paul Shuch.
Beginning in late 1996, Bell was criticized for reporting rumors that Hale-Bopp comet was being trailed by a UFO. It was speculated that members of the Heaven's Gate group committed mass suicide based on rumors Bell aired, but others dismissed the idea, noting that the Heaven's Gate website stated: "Whether Hale-Bopp has a "companion" or not is irrelevant from our perspective."[5] Susan Wright notes, however, that Bell was also "one of the first to publicize expert opinions debunking the 'alien companion'" said to have been shadowing Hale-Bopp.[6]
In the Season 3 episode of Seven Days, "Sugar Mountain", when Chrononaut Frank Parker reported that the "weapon" he found was a boy capable of telekenesis and pyrokinesis, Ramsey replied, "Oh, come on! You've been listening to too much Art Bell!".

[edit] Political views
Though Art doesn't like to discuss his political views on Coast to Coast AM, he has expressed support for gun rights.
Art believes the government is innocent of any involvement in the September 11 attacks, and after the attacks he put a picture of an eagle saying "God Bless George W. Bush and the U.S.A." on his site. [7] In 2008 he noted, on-air, that he had voted for Barack Obama in that year's general election.
He is a libertarian.

[edit] Featured callers





This section needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding reliable references. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2008)



On May 23, 1997 Art interviewed a man who called himself "Victor", who claimed to have been at S-4 (near Area 51), and was responsible for the release to the public of a nearly 3 minute video commonly called the "alien interview". For almost two hours, Victor described the ebe program at S-4, verifying most of Bob Lazar's claims. The interview can be heard here. <--- fix me
J.C. Webster the Third, or "J.C." – J.C. began calling in 1996, and has since been on the air over 50 times. He features himself to be a Revival Baptist preacher, and believes Art to be "the Devil's Mouthpiece." He has continued to call George Noory and guest hosts. Although some have expressed a disbelief that someone like J.C. could exist, Art Bell and George Noory have repeated their beliefs that J.C. is real, and is neither a "put on" nor a "plant."
One of Art Bell's Coast to Coast interviews occurred in 1997 with Mel Waters, who discussed what is known as "Mel's Hole" in rural Washington, which is said to be an infinitely deep hole featuring paranormal powers. No such hole has ever been found.
In the mid to late 1990s, a regular caller named "Fritz" would call in and give his view on various matters.
In the mid to late 1990s, another regular caller known only as "Charlie Liberal" used to call with his perspectives on current events.
In April 1996, Bell received a package of what would be known as "Art's Parts". These parts were allegedly pieces of debris from the 1947 Roswell UFO crash. Extensive analysis of the metals indicated they were made of an odd Bismuth material.
In 2000 and 2001, Bell spoke with John Titor, a self proclaimed time traveler from 2036 who made all kinds of fantastic predictions and discussed time travel.
In February 2005, Bell received a call from a person calling himself "Oscar" proclaiming to be "the Son of Satan." Oscar had since also called George Noory, but disappeared after a June, 2007 on-air confrontation with J.C.
One night in 1997, Art Bell received a fax from a woman named Jill who requested he clear a line for her boyfriend, whom she claimed was determined to fly a small plane into Area 51. He cleared the "Wild Card Line," took the man's call, which he broadcast on-air. Bell warned that the U.S. government would either try to force him down or shoot him down and warned, "You'd better turn around now." The caller described military jets arriving to intercept him, then taking fire from the ground before shouting "Oh baby, I think I'm going in! Prepare for anything! Whoohoo!" and the line went dead. Bell traded follow-up faxes with the woman, but never heard again from the man. Bell allows that the call may have been a hoax, but many listeners at the time believed it was genuine.[8] Some even believe that, rather than killing the man, the personnel actually had him work for them.
At about 11 p.m. PST, Thursday, September 11, 1997, he designated one phone line for Area 51 employees who wanted to discuss the secretive base. Several callers claimed to work at Area 51, but the bizarre highlight of the night came when a seemingly distraught and terrified man claimed to be a former Area 51 employee recently discharged for "medical" reasons. He cited malevolent extraterrestrials at Area 51 ("extra-dimensional beings" who are not "what they claim to be") and an impending disaster that the government knew would take out "major population centers." Midway through this call, Bell's program went off the air for about 30 minutes. After talking to network engineers, the official explanation was that the network satellite had "lost earth lock" or forgotten where the earth was. Network officials were baffled, and the cause remains a mystery.

This incident formed the basis of the song "Faaip de Oiad" by the rock band Tool, which features said interview (with Art Bell's part cut out), over frantic drumming and buzzing static.
Another song featuring this call was "They are not what they claim to be ..." by electronic artist The serenity Vortex (previously known as The Boy Flood). It was featured on the main page of Coast to Coast AM in the listers submission section. This version is more purely musical than Tool's but still has a dark edge to it.
Yet another song featuring the call was "It's Out There and It's Gonna Get You" by experimental Texas-quartet The Paper Chase on their 2006 album Now You Are One Of Us.
And another song "Planetary Duality I : Hideous Revelation" by the Technical Death Metal band The Faceless that uses what the caller said with fast guitars, drums, and eerie noises dubbed over the callers voice.


A caller in 2000 named "Daniel Murray" claimed he was a Majestic Agent from Downey, CA.

This call served as the inspiration for the alternate reality game Majestic.[9]


In March 2005 a man also called about disturbing events on Kwajalein and Johnston Atoll about a weapon that only targeted certain people and could leave others unhurt. He indicated he had been on both islands (that are US military only) and that these weapons had been tested in 1993. Art lost the call after another voice came on the line with a click saying "Shelton, terminate the call from A-6." Art tried to call the man back but was unsuccessful.
"Bugs" - Aging farmer who has repeatedly told of his account of shooting and burying two Bigfoot creatures back in the 1970s in the Texas Panhandle, initially thinking they were bears. Bugs has mailed a map of the location of this "burial" to Art Bell, to be released to the public upon Bugs' death. During his first appearance in 1996, Bugs said he had taken a dozen Polaroid photos of the creatures he would be willing to send to Art. None of the alleged photos have yet been made available.
In 2003, Chris Clements, a freelance writer with the Washington Post, called Art Bell to tell him he had evidence of a financial connection between the Bush family and the Bin Laden's. Clements went on further to tell of how his research showed that 9/11 may have been orchestrated by the Bush family and hinted at proof of a coming police state with secret prisons and the chipping of citizens. Clements promised to forward all of his information to Bell but it was reported that Clements died in a suspicious car crash in the weeks after his call.


[edit] Amateur radio
Bell is well known in the world of amateur radio, and holds an Amateur Extra Class License issued by the Federal Communications Commission. He is also well known by his call sign, W6OBB. He and many of his ham friends could be heard nightly on the 80 meter amateur radio band at a frequency of 3840 kHz (before he moved to the Philippines). While there he could occasionally be heard on 3678 kHz via EchoLink. Art Bell has returned to the USA and can be heard on 3830 kHz. Art also runs an online amateur radio stream at Smeter.Net nightly starting from 7:00 PM Pacific time and runs until 3:00 AM in the morning. You can usually catch him on there around midnight.

[edit] Honors
In 1998, Bell was named as recipient of the less-than-prestigious Snuffed Candle Award. The Council for Media Integrity cited Bell "for encouraging credulity, presenting pseudoscience as genuine, and contributing to the public's lack of understanding of the methods of scientific inquiry."
In 2005, the City of Las Vegas renamed a portion of 11th Street in the downtown area "Art Bell Drive."
On March 10, 2007, Bell received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the trade publication Radio & Records in Los Angeles.
In July 2008, it was announced that Art Bell would be inducted into the Radio Hall of Fame. The ceremony took place on November 8, 2008, in Chicago.

[edit] Marriages

Sachiko Toguchi Bell Pontius, divorced. Children: Vincent Pontius, Lisa Pontius Minei.[10]
Sukiyaki Sakamoto Kyo Bell, divorced. Children: Art "Scooter" Bell IV.
Ramona Bell, Aug.1991 – January 5, 2006 † (see below)
Airyn Ruiz, April 11, 2006 – present. Children: Asia Rayne Bell.


[edit] Retirements and comebacks
Bell has retired and returned to Coast to Coast AM several times.
Retirement: His first retirement, highly unexpected, was announced on October 13, 1998. Bell: I told you that there was an event, a threatening terrible event occurred to my family, which I could not tell you about. Because of that event, and a succession of other events, what you're listening to right now is my final broadcast on the air. Coast To Coast AM is broadcast on more than 400 stations and is the country's most listened to overnight radio show, heard by some 15 million listeners. (That from "The Seattle Times" 10-13-98.) Hilly Rose filled in after Bell's departure.

Return: He returned on October 28, 1998, leading many to believe it was merely a publicity stunt. Bell asserted that the brief departure was brought on by threats made against his family. On May 29, 1999, Art Bell explained that this retirement was due to an allegation made by hosts of WWCR shortwave radio that Bell had paid to cover up a criminal indictment. (Announcement date from "The Washington Post" 5-29-99, where Bell's show was said to be on 460 stations.)


The actual facts of the matter became public knowledge with Art Bell's second retirement in 2000, when it was revealed that an actual criminal indictment was filed against a person who had assaulted a member of Bell's family. Due to the nature of the crime, Bell had wanted to keep the matter private. The hosts at WWCR shortwave radio had accused Bell of the crime. (Bell took legal action against the hosts and stations, which was settled in 2000.[11])

Retirement: On April 1, 2000, Bell once again announced to his audience his retirement, which would occur on April 26, 2000 (that from "The Washington Post" 4-1-00), but he offered no details other than expressing intentions to "resolve a family crisis." On April 11, 2000, Mike Siegel was introduced as the new host of Coast To Coast AM. On April 27, 2000, Siegel took over the program which at the this time had an estimated 22 million listeners. (That from "The Seattle Times" 4-12-00.) It was later explained he had left to deal with the aftermath of a sexual assault against his son. Brian Lepley, a substitute teacher, was convicted of sexual assault and attempted transmission of HIV and was sentenced to 10 to 25 years.[12]

Return: On January 24, 2001, it was announced (in Vancouver, Washington's "The Columbian" newspaper), Art Bell would return to Coast To Coast AM on February 5, 2001. Bell noted that since his departure the show had lost a number of affiliates, commercial content had risen to an unbearable level, and Siegel had taken the program in a "different direction" of which Bell disapproved. He retained some authority over the program as its creator and thus felt his return was necessary.

Retirement: On October 23, 2002, Bell announced he would be retiring because recurring back pain (the result of a fall from a telephone pole during his youth) forced yet another departure, and Bell was permanently replaced by George Noory as weekday host of Coast to Coast AM on January 1, 2003. It was also said that Barbara Simpson would host weekends and that Bell planned to be an occasional guest host for Noory. (Most information from "The Seattle Times" 10-26-02.)

Return: Bell again on September 23, 2003, announced (in Vancouver, Washington's "The Columbian" newspaper) would return as a weekend host on September 27, 2003, having missed the microphone, this time replacing Barbara Simpson and Ian Punnett as host of the Saturday and Sunday evening broadcasts. In June 2005, he scaled this schedule back a bit (a "semiretirement"), deciding to host only the last two Sundays of every month. Bell went back to hosting every weekend show as his schedule permitted after his wife Ramona’s death a few months later.

Retirement: on July 1, 2007, Bell announced his retirement again, stating that he wished to spend more time with his wife and daughter. He made it explicitly clear that, unlike the circumstances surrounding previous retirements, this one was an entirely positive and joyful decision and that he would not disappear completely--he would occasionally substitute for other hosts and host "special" shows. According to George Noory, Bell is on board to do 15 shows per year. Art Bell confirmed this fact in a post on the Fantastic Forum fan site.

[edit] Events of 2006
Bell's life took some dramatic twists in the beginning of 2006:

[edit] Death of Ramona Bell
Ramona Bell, his wife of 15 years, died unexpectedly,[13] at the age of 47, of what appeared to be an acute asthma attack on January 5, 2006 in Laughlin, Nevada, where the couple was taking a short vacation.
The events surrounding Ramona's death were described in great detail by Art Bell during the January 22 broadcast of Coast to Coast AM. For weeks thereafter, callers would express their sadness and sympathy for Art Bell to George Noory, who had taken Art Bell's place weekdays in 2002.[14]

[edit] Change in schedule
On January 21, 2006, just days after the unexpected death of his wife Ramona, Bell announced he would host Coast to Coast AM every Saturday and Sunday evening, and that former weekend host Ian Punnett would work a new live prefeed program for the four hours preceding Bell's slot on Saturday nights (9:00pm - 1:00am ET). Punnett's show was titled Coast to Coast Live with Ian Punnett. When returning to the show the following day, Bell spent the first hour recounting the death of his wife.

[edit] Remarriage
By the end of January, Bell began hinting that he was making a significant life decision, but that he would keep it a secret for at least one year, asking listeners to remind him in 2007 to let them in on it. By March, he was saying that he would soon take a "huge risk" and "do something rash." On April 15, 2006, he ended the mystery and, to the mild surprise of listeners, revealed that, after several weeks of mourning, he had recently gone to the Philippines and married Airyn Ruiz,[15] whose name is pronounced like the name "Irene," but Art likes to pronounce her name as "Arin." This is because during their Internet dating Art imprinted the spelling of her name with that pronunciation. Airyn Ruiz Bell is a recent college graduate. Ruiz — given Bell's private e-mail address by an amateur radio friend—had contacted Bell to offer condolences shortly after Ramona's death. After "dating" via Internet video conferencing for "hundreds of hours," the two married one week after Bell arrived in the Philippines to actually meet her in person . Bell also paid for his friend—who was courting Airyn's sister—to accompany him to the Philippines and marry her. The two couples wed in a double marriage ceremony on April 11, 2006.
On October 7, 2006, Bell announced on Coast to Coast that Ruiz was pregnant with the couple's first child. Art told listeners that the couple's child was indeed a girl as many listeners suspected. He noted that they had been hoping for a girl and had announced only a girl's name for their unborn child in hopes of receiving a girl.
Art and Airyn's baby girl, Asia Rayne Bell, was born on May 30, 2007.

[edit] Relocation to the Philippines
At the same time, Bell announced he would be leaving his longtime homestead in Nevada and relocating to the Philippines, near Makati, Metro Manila, intending to continue hosting Coast to Coast AM weekend editions via an ISDN connection. He departed the United States on April 29, 2006, stating an intention to remain abroad for at least a year, while maintaining ownership of his property in Nevada and of the radio station KNYE. Bell resumed hosting on June 18, 2006 but then encountered technical problems that kept him off air until July 23, 2006, when the ISDN line was finally installed.
In July 2001, the Philippine Daily Inquirer printed an email letter purportedly from Bell that made derogatory statements about Filipinos. This letter was subsequently demonstrated to be a hoax perpetrated upon Bell, who in fact had a publicly loving relationship with his Filipina wife and his previous wife Ramona, who was also Filipina, and who often spoke openly about his admiration for the Filipino people on his radio show. Subsequently, the Philippine Daily Inquirer printed a retraction and apologized for printing the statement upon their verification of the hoax. This slander against Bell's good name still periodically results in serious threats to him when this material surfaces from time to time.[16] On February 19, 2009 the Manila Times apologized and retracted when a columnist mistakenly reprinted the hoax two days before; one email the paper received attributed the original slander to a Filipino-American student at San Jose State University during the 1990s.[17]
In October 2006, Bell threatened Rogers Cadenhead with a lawsuit for some allegedly libelous comments posted on Cadenhead's blog, which Cadenhead has said he will defend himself against under Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act.[18]

[edit] Return to "the High Desert and the Great American Southwest"
Truly bringing his personal events of 2006 full circle, Bell opened his December 28 program by disclosing to his stunned listeners that he had just relocated back to Pahrump, Nevada, with Ruiz, who had obtained the necessary paperwork for immigrating to the United States. Bell had not disclosed on any previous show his plans to return to the High Desert. Despite feeling jet-lagged after a 15-hour flight from the Philippines via Vancouver, British Columbia, he did the full show. Bell was aloft returning to the States when an earthquake cut off undersea cables that would have prevented his broadcasts from the Philippines. Bell indicated on his December 30, 2006 show that among the reasons for his return were a recent recirculation of the infamous fake anti-Filipino email,[19] and his homesickness for his elaborate stateside Amateur Radio station.

[edit] Events of 2007
On May 30, 2007, at 12:51 pm PDT, daughter Asia Rayne Bell was delivered by Caesarian section. Her birth weight was 8 pounds, 5 ounces. Her height was 19 inches.
On July 1, 2007 at 10:10 pm PDT, Art Bell announced his retirement from regular hosting effective that day, expressing a desire to spend more time with his family. Bell stated that he will only host occasionally on Coast to Coast.

[edit] Events of 2008
On May 23, 2008, Bell, while hosting Coast to Coast AM, stated that there would be a change in the artbell.com Web site in July 2008. Within a few weeks the Web site was no longer responding to requests and has even dropped from DNS.
On June 12, 2008, Bell sold KNYE to Station Manager Karen Jackson for $600,000.[20][21]
On Sept. 8, 2008, Noory stated that he would be hosting the annual Ghost to Ghost AM Halloween call-in show rather than Bell, who normally returns to the Coast to Coast to host it (along with the New Year's prediction shows). On September 19, Noory explained that Bell would be unavailable due to being on a cruise during that time this year.
On Nov. 30, 2008, Bell hosted Coast to Coast AM. Michio Kaku was the guest. This was the first time Bell had hosted the show since May 23, 2008.[22] On December 23, Bell's mother, Jane, died. George Noory informed Coast to Coast listeners of her passing during that night's show, with a number of callers offering Bell their condolences regarding the passing of Bell's mother.
On Dec. 30 and 31, 2008, Bell once again hosted his annual New Year's predictions special of Coast to Coast. Bell remarked on his mother's passing and stated that he was very happy that she got to spend time with his daughter, Asia, before she passed on.

[edit] Events of 2009
Art Bell Returned to Coast to Coast AM on February 20, 2009, for a discussion on the global financial crisis with Wall St. insider Michael J. Panzner. Bell and Panzer agreed the United States was headed for an economic depression.
Art Bell was scheduled to return to Coast to Coast AM on April 24, 2009 to host an evening of open lines, but do due to engineering problems in Manila, Art will be rescheduled at a later date. [23]

[edit] Books
Bell has written, or co-written, several books. They include The Quickening: Today's Trends, Tomorrow's World; The Art of Talk (an autobiography); The Source; The Edge: Man's Mysterious Past & Incredible Future; and The Coming Global Superstorm, which became the basis for the popular movie, The Day After Tomorrow.

[edit] Other work
In 1996 Bell appeared in an episode of the NBC science fiction series Dark Skies, as William S. Paley, head of CBS.
On September 30, 1998, NBC's Today Show aired a taped segment of reporter Fred Francis interviewing Bell. Francis questioned Bell about Hale-Bopp, Area-51, eccentric callers claiming to be "six-fingered alien hybrids" as well as the UFO sighting experienced by Bell and his wife Ramona. The segment also featured members of Bell's audience reacting to topics being discussed.
In 1999, Bell appeared as himself on the Chris Carter-created series Millennium. The episode, called "Collateral Damage," aired in the third season and dealt with a former U.S. soldier who claimed the government he fought for was indeed responsible for horrendous tests on soldiers and Iraqi civilians. (This episode was broadcast on January 22, 1999. The Washington Post, 1-22-99.)
In 1999, Bell was interviewed on Larry King Live. (This was broadcast on March 5, 1999. The Washington Post, 3-5-99.)
In 2005, Bell and then-wife Ramona were featured on the ABC news special: Peter Jennings Reporting: UFOs — Seeing Is Believing, which reported on the entire scope of the UFO experience, from the first famous sighting by Kenneth Arnold in 1947 to the present day. (This was broadcast on February 24, 2005. The Washington Post, 2-20-05.)
In 2005, snippets of Bell and callers to his show were featured on the song "Conspiracy Radio" on Sean Hogan's album "Catalina Sunrise": Bell is credited for "voice overs" on this track.
Bell is also a member of the U.S. Libertarian Party. Originally, Coast to Coast AM was a conservative political talk show, but in recent years Bell has expressed both conservative and liberal views on the air. On air, Bell has shown support for same-sex marriage, immigration reform, decriminalizing marijuana, and has advocated to stop global warming. Bell has also stated that he opposes abortion, believes the U.S. should finish the job in the war in Iraq, and supports a free market economy. He said that he voted for Barack Obama in the 2008 U.S. Presidential Election.
In 2006, Bell was featured in the video game "Prey" and played himself. He hosts, as in real life, Coast to Coast AM, and the player is able to listen to the broadcast at several terminals throughout the game. The broadcasts describe what is happening on Earth as the game unfolds.
In 2007, Bell appeared as himself in the movie I Know Who Killed Me.

[edit] See also

George Noory.
Coast to Coast Topics: 9/11 Conspiracy theories, Albert Einstein, Biodiesel, Carl Sagan, Central Intelligence Agency, Chemtrail theory, Classified information in the United States, Electronic Voice Phenomena, Ghosts, Global Warming, Amateur Radio, Lucid Dreaming, Near-death experience, New World Order, Nikola Tesla, Out-of-place artifacts, Peak Oil, the Paranormal, SETI, the Solar system, String theory, Time travel, Ufology, the Undead, and the United States Department of Defense.
Coast to Coast personalities: Dannion Brinkley, Ed Dames, Richard C. Hoagland, Linda Moulton Howe, Michio Kaku, Seth Shostak, Mel Waters.
Radio: Coast to Coast AM, List of radio programs.
Other: Pahrump, Nevada, United States Libertarian Party.


[edit] References


^ "SPACE.COM: "Legal Web Heats Up Around Art Bell."". http://www.space.com/sciencefiction/phenomena/artbell.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-05. 
^ Arthur “Art” Bell, III « The Compass Blog
^ Coast to Coast AM Art Bell Bio. Retrieved on 11 January, 2007
^ Peddling the Paranormal: Late-Night Radio's Art Bell (Skeptical Briefs March 1998)
^ Genoni Jr., Thomas C.. "Peddling the Paranormal: Late-Night Radio's Art Bell". http://www.csicop.org/si/9707/art-bell.html. Retrieved on 2006-08-29. 
^ Wright, Susan: UFO Headquarters : Investigations On Current Extraterrestrial Activity In Area 51 St. Martin's Press, 1999 ISBN 0-312-97181-8, page 187
^ "God Bless George W. Bush and the U.S.A."
^ "Newsweek". July 13, 1998. http://www.newsweek.com/id/93124/output/print. Retrieved on 2008-01-20. 
^ Salon.com Technology | Paranoia for fun and profit
^ WEB EXCLUSIVE: Lost in Space - philadelphia weekly online
^ Coast to Coast AM - Art Bell Lawsuit Statement Oct 20, 2000
^ LAS VEGAS REVIEW-JOURNAL: NEWS: Ex-teacher sentenced in sex case
^ [1]
^ Coast To Coast AM. Sunday January 22nd, 2006.
^ Whitley Strieber's Unknown Country
^ Coast To Coast Am With George Noory
^ [2]
^ Art Bell Threatens Lawsuit Over Weblog Comments | Workbench
^ Art Bell’s Alleged Hate Letter to the Filipino People « The Compass Blog
^ Art Bell Sells KNYE 'Kingdom Of Nye' For $600,000
^ Radio and Record Transaction report for June 12th - See Nevada
^ Coast to Coast AM. Sunday November 30th, 2008.
^ http://www.coasttocoastam.com/show/2009/04/24




Davis, Pamela (2001-01-11). "10 years to grow, 1 snip to go". St. Petersburg Times. http://www.sptimes.com/News/011101/Artsandentertainment/10_years_to_grow__1_s.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-04-19. 


Vance, Ashlee (2006-07-31). "SETI urged to fess up over alien signals". The Register. http://www.theregister.co.uk/2006/07/31/signals_seti/. Retrieved on 2007-04-19. 


Adams, Noah (1998-10-14). "All Things Considered: Art Bell Signs Off". National Public Radio (NPR). http://www.npr.org/programs/atc/archives/1998/981014.atc.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-19. 


"Bell Tolls No More". Wired News. 1998-10-13. http://www.wired.com/culture/lifestyle/news/1998/10/15588. Retrieved on 2007-04-19. 



[edit] External links

Find more about Art Bell on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Coast to Coast AM
KNYE 95.1 FM, Pahrump's only locally based radio station
Archived edition of his page explaining the Filipino e-mail hoax
Free Coast to Coast Listen Links



Preceded by
Founder
Regular Coast to Coast AM host (M-F)
mid-1980s–April 27, 2000
Succeeded by
Mike Siegel




Preceded by
Mike Siegel
Regular Coast to Coast AM host (M-F)
February 5, 2001–January 1, 2003
Succeeded by
George Noory





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Art_Bell"
Categories: 1945 births | Living people | Amateur radio people | American libertarians | American talk radio hosts | People from Nevada | United States Air Force airmen | American military personnel of the Vietnam War | Ufologists | Coast to Coast AMHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from October 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Suomi









 This page was last modified on 2 May 2009, at 20:31 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
