













Voyager Golden Record - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Voyager_Golden_Record";
		var wgTitle = "Voyager Golden Record";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "144386";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 279743661;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Voyager Golden Record

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 




The Voyager Golden Record.






Cover of the Voyager Golden Record.


The Voyager Golden Record is a phonograph record included in the two Voyager spacecraft launched in 1977. It contains sounds and images selected to portray the diversity of life and culture on Earth. It is intended for any intelligent extraterrestrial life form, or far future humans, that may find it. The Voyager spacecrafts are not heading towards any particular star, but in about 40,000 years Voyager 1 will be within 1.6 light years of the star AC+79 3888 in the Ophiuchus constellation.[1]
As the probes are extremely small compared to the vastness of interstellar space, it is extraordinarily unlikely that they will ever be accidentally encountered. If they are ever found by an alien species, it will most likely be far in the future, and thus the record is best seen as a time capsule or a symbolic statement rather than an attempt to communicate with extraterrestrial life.




Contents


1 Background
2 Contents

2.1 Greetings
2.2 Sounds
2.3 Music
2.4 Brainwaves


3 Materials
4 Journey
5 Appearances in fiction
6 Publications in other media
7 See also
8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Background
As of 2008, the Voyager spacecrafts became the third and fourth human artifacts to escape entirely from the solar system. Pioneers 10 and 11, which were launched in 1972 and 1973 and preceded Voyager in outstripping the gravitational attraction of the Sun, both carried small metal plaques identifying their time and place of origin for the benefit of any other spacefarers that might find them in the distant future.
With this example before them, NASA placed a more comprehensive (and eclectic) message aboard Voyager 1 and 2 — a kind of time capsule, intended to communicate a story of our world to extraterrestrials.


“
This is a present from a small, distant world, a token of our sounds, our science, our images, our music, our thoughts and our feelings. We are attempting to survive our time so we may live into yours.
”


 

— U.S. President Jimmy Carter




[edit] Contents




Explanation of the Voyager record cover diagram, as provided by NASA.


The contents of the record were selected for NASA by a committee chaired by Carl Sagan of Cornell University. Dr. Sagan and his associates assembled 115 images and a variety of natural sounds, such as those made by surf, wind, and thunder, and animal sounds, including the songs of birds and whales. To this they added musical selections from different cultures and eras, spoken greetings in fifty-five languages, and printed messages from President Jimmy Carter and U.N. Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim.
After NASA had received criticism over the nudity on the Pioneer plaque (line drawings of a naked man and woman), the agency chose not to allow Sagan and his colleagues to include a photograph of a nude man and woman on the record. Instead, only a silhouette of the couple was included[2].
Here is an excerpt of President Carter's official statement placed on the Voyager spacecraft for its trip outside our solar system, June 16, 1977:

We cast this message into the cosmos… Of the 200 billion stars in the Milky Way galaxy, some — perhaps many — may have inhabited planets and space faring civilizations. If one such civilization intercepts Voyager and can understand these recorded contents, here is our message: We are trying to survive our time so we may live into yours. We hope some day, having solved the problems we face, to join a community of Galactic Civilizations. This record represents our hope and our determination and our goodwill in a vast and awesome universe.

The 115 images are encoded in analogue form. The remainder of the record is audio, designed to be played at 16⅔ revolutions per minute.

[edit] Greetings
The first audio section contains spoken greetings in the following 55 languages[3], listed here in alphabetical order:




Akkadian
Ancient Greek
Amoy (a Chinese dialect)
Arabic
Aramaic
Armenian
Bengali
Burmese
Cantonese (a Chinese dialect)
Czech
Dutch




English
French
German
Gujarati
Hebrew
Hindi
Hittite
Hungarian
Ila (Zambia)
Indonesian
Italian




Japanese
Kannada
Korean
Latin
Luganda
Mandarin (a Chinese dialect)
Marathi
Nepali
Nguni
Nyanja
Oriya




Persian
Polish
Portuguese
Punjabi
Quechua
Rajasthani
Romanian
Russian
Serbian
Sinhalese
Sotho




Spanish
Sumerian
Swedish
Tamil
Telugu
Thai
Turkish
Ukrainian
Urdu
Vietnamese
Welsh
Wu (a Chinese dialect)





[edit] Sounds
The next audio section is devoted to the "sounds of Earth" that include[4]:

Music of the Spheres
Volcanoes, Earthquake, Thunder
Mud Pots
Wind, Rain, Surf
Crickets, Frogs
Birds, Hyena, Elephant
Whale song
Chimpanzee
Wild Dog
Footsteps, Heartbeat, Laughter
The First Tools
Tame Dog
Herding Sheep, Blacksmith, Sawing
Tractor, Riveter
Morse Code, Ships (precisely, a ship's horn)
Horse and Cart
Train
Tractor, Bus, Auto
F-111 Flyby, Saturn V Lift-off
Kiss, Mother and Child
Life Signs, Pulsar

Included within the Sounds of Earth audio portion of the Golden Record is a track containing the inspirational message ad astra per aspera in Morse Code. Translated from Latin, it means, through hardships to the stars.

[edit] Music
Following the section on the sounds of Earth, there is an eclectic 90-minute selection of music from many cultures, including Eastern and Western classics. The selections include:


Country
Song
Author
Performer(s)
Recorded or collected by
Genre of music
Length


Germany
Brandenburg Concerto No. 2 in F. First Movement
Bach
Munich Bach Orchestra conducted by Karl Richter

Chamber orchestra
4:40


Indonesia
"Puspawarna" ("Kinds of Flowers")
Mangkunegara IV
Court gamelan of Pura Paku Alaman directed by K.R.T. Wasitodipuro
Robert E. Brown
Gamelan
4:43


Senegal
Senegalese percussion


Charles Duvelle
Percussion
2:08


Zaire
Pygmy girls' initiation song


Colin Turnbull

0:56


Australia
"Morning Star" and "Devil Bird"


Sandra LeBrun Holmes
Aboriginal songs
1:26


Mexico
"El Cascabel"
Lorenzo Barcelata
Antonio Maciel y Las Aguilillas with El Mariachi México de Pepe Villa


3:14


United States
"Johnny B. Goode"
Chuck Berry
Chuck Berry

Rock and roll
2:03


New Guinea
Men's house song


Robert MacLennan

1:20


Japan
"Tsuru No Sugomori" 《鶴の巣籠り》 ("Crane's Nest")

Goro Yamaguchi

Shakuhachi
4:51


Germany/Belgium
"Gavotte en rondeaux" from the Partita No. 3 in E major for Violin
Bach
Arthur Grumiaux

Violin
2:55


Austria/Germany
Die Zauberflöte, Queen of the Night aria No. 14 Der Hölle Rache kocht in meinem Herzen
Mozart
Edda Moser (soprano) from the Bavarian State Opera, conducted by Wolfgang Sawallisch

Opera
2:55


Georgia S.S.R.
"Tchakrulo"
Georgian Folk

Radio Moscow
Chorus
2:18


Peru



Casa de la Cultura, Lima
Panpipes and drum
0:52


United States
"Melancholy Blues"

Louis Armstrong and his Hot Seven

Jazz
3:05


Azerbaijan S.S.R.
"Mugam"


Radio Moscow
Balaban
2:30


Russia/France/United States
The Rite of Spring, Sacrificial Dance
Stravinsky
Columbia Symphony Orchestra conducted by Igor Stravinsky


4:35


Germany/Canada
The Well-Tempered Clavier, Book 2, Prelude and Fugue No.1 in C major
Bach
Glenn Gould
Kevin Doyle
Piano
4:48


Germany/United Kingdom
Fifth Symphony, First Movement
Beethoven
Philharmonia Orchestra conducted by Otto Klemperer


7:20


Bulgaria
"Излел е Делю хайдутин" ("Izlel je Delyo Hajdutin")

Valya Balkanska
Ethel Rain and Martin Koenig
Bulgarian traditional song
4:59


United States
Night Chant
Navajo Indians

Willard Rhodes

0:57


United Kingdom
"The Fairie Round" from Pavans, Galliards, Almains and Other Short Aeirs
Anthony Holborne
David Munrow and the Early Music Consort of London


1:17


Solomon Islands



Solomon Islands Broadcasting Service
Panpipes
1:12


Peru
Wedding song


John Cohen

0:38


China
"Liu Shui" 《流水》 ("Flowing Streams")
Bo Ya
Kuan P'ing-hu

Guqin
7:37


India
"Jaat Kahan Ho"

Surshri Kesar Bai Kerkar

Raga Bhairavi
3:30


United States
"Dark Was the Night, Cold Was the Ground"
Blind Willie Johnson
Blind Willie Johnson

Blues
3:15


Germany/Hungary
String Quartet No. 13 in B flat, Opus 130
Beethoven
Budapest String Quartet

Cavatina
6:37



Johann Sebastian Bach is the most represented artist, appearing three times, and, with the addition of two pieces by Beethoven, make Germany the most represented country with six appearances, followed by the United States.

Sagan had originally asked for permission to include "Here Comes the Sun" from the Beatles' album Abbey Road. While the Beatles favoured it, EMI opposed it and the song was not included[5].

[edit] Brainwaves
The Golden Records also carried an hour long recording of the brainwaves of Ann Druyan. In the Epilogue of the book Billions and Billions, she describes the experience:


Earlier I had asked Carl if those putative extraterrestrials of a billion years from now could conceivably interpret the brain waves of a meditator. Who knows? A billion years is a long, long time, was his reply. On the chance that it might be possible why don't we give it a try?
Two days after our life-changing phone call, I entered a laboratory at Bellevue Hospital in New York City and was hooked up to a computer that turned all the data from my brain and heart into sound. I had a one-hour mental itinerary of the information I wished to convey. I began by thinking about the history of Earth and the life it sustains. To the best of my abilities I tried to think something of the history of ideas and human social organization. I thought about the predicament that our civilization finds itself in and about the violence and poverty that make this planet a hell for so many of its inhabitants. Toward the end I permitted myself a personal statement of what it was like to fall in love[6].



[edit] Materials
The record is constructed of gold-plated copper. There is an ultra-pure sample of the isotope uranium-238 electroplated on the record's cover. Uranium-238 has a half-life of 4.51 billion years. It is possible that a civilization that encounters the record will be able to use the ratio of remaining uranium to daughter elements to determine the age of the record.
The records also had the sentence "To the makers of music — all worlds, all times" handwritten on them. Since this was not in the original disc specification, it almost caused their rejection[7].

[edit] Journey
Voyager 1 was launched in 1977, passed the orbit of Pluto in 1990, and left the solar system (in the sense of passing the termination shock) in November 2004. It is now in empty space. In about 40,000 years, it and Voyager 2 will each come to within about 1.7 light-years of two separate stars: Voyager 1 will have approached star AC+79 3888, located in the constellation Ophiuchus; and Voyager 2 will have approached star Ross 248, located in the constellation of Andromeda.
In May 2005, Voyager 1 was 14 billion km from the Sun and traveling at a speed of 3.5 AU per year (approximately 61,000 km/h, or 38,000 mph) while Voyager 2 is about 10.5 billion km away and moving at about 3.13 AU per year (approximately 53,000 km/h, or 33,000 mph).
Voyager 1 has entered the heliosheath, the region beyond the termination shock. The termination shock is where the solar wind, a thin stream of electrically charged gas blowing continuously outward from the Sun, is slowed by pressure from gas between the stars. At the termination shock, the solar wind slows abruptly from its average speed of 300 to 700 km per second (700,000–1,500,000 miles per hour) and becomes denser and hotter.[8]
As Carl Sagan has noted, "The spacecraft will be encountered and the record played only if there are advanced spacefaring civilizations in interstellar space. But the launching of this "bottle" into the cosmic "ocean" says something very hopeful about life on this planet."

[edit] Appearances in fiction

The motion picture Starman portrayed the Voyager Golden Record as having been located by an extraterrestrial intelligence who subsequently sent one of their own race to investigate intelligent life on Earth (but they exchanged "Johnny B. Goode" with "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction" by The Rolling Stones).
Voyager and its record appear in the episode entitled "Parasites Lost" of the animated television series Futurama. Turanga Leela scrapes the spacecraft off her ship's windshield while stopped at a galactic "truck stop".
In the Transformers series Beast Wars, the Golden Disk stolen by the Predacons was in fact the Voyager Record. This disk was prized by the Transformer race, as it alone told the location of Earth and thus a plentiful source of Energon. The disk also contained a secret message from the original Megatron. The record was destroyed by Dinobot to prevent the Predacon Megatron from having the ability to change the future. However, Megatron recovered a piece of the disk, so that the Decepticon-turned-Predacon Ravage would join his side after watching the message left by his former commander.
In a Saturday Night Live segment, Father Guido Sarducci announced that the first message from extraterrestrials was being received. Once decoded, the message stated, "Send more Chuck Berry."
While parts of the record cover appear in Star Trek: The Motion Picture as part of V'ger, the record itself was apparently not placed on the fictional Voyager 6 probe.
In the X-Files episode "Little Green Men", Bach's Brandenburg Concerto No. 2 can be heard whilst characters discuss the Golden Record.
In an episode of The West Wing, "The Warfare of Genghis Khan", Josh Lyman mentions the Golden Record (though not by name) through a reference to Blind Willie Johnson.
In an episode of Pinky and the Brain, Brain changes the design of the Golden Disk so that it shows his and Pinky's body as that of the leaders of Earth. When aliens intercept the disk, they capture Pinky and Brain as pets, thinking them to be the leaders of Earth.
Canadian experimental writer Darren Wershler-Henry in his poem the tapeworm foundry Andor the dangerous prevalence of imagination conceives the following avant-garde prank: "Design a faster than light spacecraft and then overtake the Voyager II probe for the sole purpose of replacing the gold LP of the second Brandenburg concerto with a copy of The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars."
In the Sci-Fi book Battlefield Earth, it is noted that the Psychlo race came to Earth after they found the valuable golden metal plate - followed by the destruction of the planet.
In Warren Fu's Kubrick-esque music video for The Strokes’ "You Only Live Once", a spacecraft leaves Earth for Sirius with a golden record containing the band's song and graphics and images of: greetings in different human languages; human evolution; human biology; the structure of DNA; and human reproduction. At the end of the film, the text "1977 A.D." precedes the end title, an allusion to Voyager's launch (August 1977) and Fu's involvement in another landmark science fiction series, Star Wars, which came to theatres May 1977.
There is also an episode of Space: 1999 entitled, "Voyager's Return". The probe is discovered hurtling toward the Moon. During an attempt to retrieve the wealth of information, an alien race traces the probe and its creators, and offers them death.


[edit] Publications in other media
Most of the images used on the record (reproduced in black and white), together with information about its compilation, can be found in the 1978 book Murmurs of Earth: The Voyager Interstellar Record by Carl Sagan, F.D. Drake, Ann Druyan, Timothy Ferris, Jon Lomberg, and Linda Salzman[9]. A CD-ROM version was issued by Warner New Media in 1992[10]. Both versions are out of print, but the 1978 edition can be found in many college or public libraries.
In July, 1983, BBC Radio 4 broadcast the 45-minute documentary Music from a Small Planet, in which Sagan and Druyan explained the process of selecting music for the record and introduced excerpts. It was not clear whether this was an original BBC documentary or an imported NPR production.
A CD-ROM was released in 1992 by Warner New Media as a companion to the book Murmurs of Earth (originally published by Random House, 1978) which documented and catalogued the creation and contents of the Golden Record. The CD-ROM was the result of Sagan's diligence in obtaining copyright clearances for many of the numerous musical passages and photographs that the original Golden Record contained, to allow for their inclusion in the Warner New Media release. Both the book and the companion CD-ROM are no longer published, although used copies may still be found. Further information is available at: http://voyager.jpl.nasa.gov/faq.html

[edit] See also

Pioneer plaque
Communication with Extraterrestrial Intelligence
Time capsule


[edit] References


^ Voyager - Mission - Interstellar Mission
^ Jon Lomberg: "Pictures of Earth". in Carl Sagan: Murmurs of Earth, 1978, New York, ISBN 0-679-74444-4
^ "Greetings to the Universe in 55 Different Languages". NASA. http://voyager.jpl.nasa.gov/spacecraft/languages/languages.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-06. 
^ "Voyager - Spacecraft - Golden Record - Sounds of Earth". NASA. http://voyager.jpl.nasa.gov/spacecraft/sounds.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-17. 
^ Sagan, Carl et al. (1978) Murmurs of Earth: The Voyager Interstellar Record. New York: Random House. ISBN 0-394-41047-5 (hardcover), ISBN 0-345-28396-1 (paperback)
^ Sagan, Carl (1997). Billions and Billions: Thoughts on Life and Death at the Brink of the Millennium. Random House. ISBN 0-679-41160-7. 
^ "The Mix Tape of the Gods". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/05/opinion/05ferris.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-11. 
^ NASA: Voyager Enters Solar System's Final Frontier
^ Sagan, Carl et al. (1978) Murmurs of Earth: The Voyager Interstellar Record. New York: Random House. ISBN 0-394-41047-5 (hardcover), ISBN 0-345-28396-1 (paperback)
^ Sagan, Carl et al. (1992) Murmurs of Earth (computer file): The Voyager Interstellar Record. Burbank: Warner New Media.




Originally based on public domain text from the NASA website, where selected images and sounds from the record can be found. However, much of the material from the Voyager records is available in compiled form only to extraterrestrials for copyright reasons.



[edit] External links

NASA JPL information on the Voyager Interstellar Record
Multimedia showcase with the contents of the Golden Record
Web site with all of the images, languages, and sounds on the Record.
CED Magic Web site information on the Record.
Cosmic Journey: The Voyager Interstellar Mission and Message
The Billion Year Portfolio by Jon Lomberg, artist on the Voyager Record
U Iowa website with Termination Shock information
To have done with the judgement of a golden record a mix-up of sounds found on the golden record.
The Next Voyager Record: A Qatsi Perspective
John Cohen and the Voyager Record from The Celestial Monochord
Article on Ithaca, NY connections to the Voyager Record, 30th anniversary, page 11
NYT 30th Anniversary OP-ED article by Timothy Ferris, who supervised the production of the disc
NPR.org: Voyagers' Records Wait for Alien Ears
David Munrow and the Voyager Golden Record
WNYC Radiolab interview with Ann Druyan on her role in the making of the Voyager Record, May 12, 2006
Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum's Voyager Record Cover
Interview with Jon Lomberg on Australia's Radio National The Science Show, November 19, 2005




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voyager_Golden_Record"
Categories: NASA programs | NASA probes | Interstellar messages | Time capsules | 1977 albums 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Български
Català
Česky
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Français
Galego
한국어
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
मराठी
Nederlands
日本語
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Русский
Slovenčina
Svenska
Tiếng Việt
中文









 This page was last modified on 26 March 2009, at 05:01.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
