













African Union - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "African_Union";
		var wgTitle = "African Union";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "10634933";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281585874;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); African Union

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 






African Union


الاتحاد الأفريقي (Arabic)
Union africaine (French)
Unión Africana (Spanish)
União Africana (Portuguese)
Umoja wa Afrika (Swahili)














Flag
Emblem





Anthem
Let Us All Unite and Celebrate Together[1]










Administrative Centres
 Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
 Midrand, South Africa


Official Languages


6 (Art.11 AU) [2]
Arabic
English
French
Spanish
Portuguese
Swahili




Member States


53
 Algeria
 Angola
 Benin
 Botswana
 Burkina Faso
 Burundi
 Cameroon
 Cape Verde
 Central African Republic
 Chad
 Comoros
 Côte d'Ivoire
 Democratic Republic of the Congo
 Republic of the Congo
 Djibouti
 Egypt
 Equatorial Guinea
 Eritrea
 Ethiopia
 Gabon
 Gambia
 Ghana
 Guinea
 Guinea-Bissau
 Kenya
 Lesotho
 Liberia
 Libya
 Madagascar
 Malawi
 Mali
 Mauritius
 Mozambique
 Namibia
 Niger
 Nigeria
 Rwanda
 Western Sahara (SADR)
 São Tomé and Príncipe
 Senegal
 Seychelles
 Sierra Leone
 Somalia
 South Africa
 Sudan
 Swaziland
 Tanzania
 Togo
 Tunisia
 Uganda




Leaders


 - 
Chairman
 Muammar al-Gaddafi


 - 
Commission Chairperson
 Jean Ping


 - 
President of the
Pan-African Parliament
 Gertrude Mongella


Establishment



 - 
as the OAU
25 May 1963 


 - 
as the African Union
9 July 2002 


Area


 - 
Total
29,757,900 km2 (1st1)
11,489,589 sq mi 


Population


 - 
2005 estimate
850 million 


 - 
Density
25.7/km2 (177th1)
66.6/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2003 estimate


 - 
Total
US$ 1.515 Trillion (16th1)


 - 
Per capita
$1,896 


GDP (nominal)
2003 estimate


 - 
Total
$514 billion 


 - 
Per capita
$643 


Time zone
(UTC-1 to +4)


1
If the African Union is considered as a single entity.





Life in the African Union





Citizenship
Culture
Demographics
Economy
Education
Enlargement
Foreign relations




Geography
History
Languages
Military
Politics
Sport
Statistics




The African Union (abbreviated AU in English, and UA in its other official languages) is an intergovernmental organisation consisting of 53 African states. Established on 9 July 2002,[3] the AU was formed as a successor to the Organisation of African Unity (OAU). The most important decisions of the AU are made by the Assembly of the African Union, a twice-yearly meeting of the heads of state and government of its member states. The AU's secretariat, the African Union Commission, is based in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. During the February 2009 Union meeting headed by Libyan leader Gaddafi, it was resolved that the African Union Commission would become the African Union Authority.[4]




Contents


1 Overview
2 Membership

2.1 Current members
2.2 Suspended members
2.3 Former members


3 Organizations of the AU
4 Role of the diaspora
5 Current issues

5.1 Union Government
5.2 Role of Regional Economic Communities
5.3 Choosing the chair of the Union
5.4 Zimbabwe
5.5 AIDS in Africa


6 Interventions in support of democracy

6.1 Togo
6.2 Mauritania


7 Regional conflicts and military interventions

7.1 Darfur, Sudan
7.2 Somalia
7.3 Anjouan, Comoros


8 Economy
9 Languages
10 Geography
11 Foreign relations
12 History of the African Union
13 Symbols
14 See also
15 References
16 Bibliography
17 External links

17.1 Other relevant sites







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Overview
Among the objectives of the AU's leading institutions are to accelerate the political and socio-economic integration of the continent; to promote and defend African common positions on issues of interest to the continent and its peoples; to achieve peace and security in Africa; and to promote democratic institutions, good governance and human rights.
The African Union is made up of both political and administrative bodies. The highest decision-making organ of the African Union is the Assembly, made up of all the heads of state or government of member states of the AU. The Assembly is currently chaired by Muammar al-Gaddafi, leader of Libya, elected at the tenth ordinary meeting of the Assembly in January 2009. The AU also has a representative body, the Pan African Parliament, which consists of 265 members elected by the national parliaments of the AU member states. The current president of the Pan African Parliament is Gertrude Mongella.
Other political institutions of the AU include the Executive Council, made up of foreign ministers, which prepares decisions for the Assembly; the Permanent Representatives Committee, made up of the ambassadors to Addis Ababa of AU member states; and the Economic, Social, and Cultural Council (ECOSOCC), a civil society consultative body.
The AU Commission, the secretariat to the political structures, is chaired by Jean Ping of Gabon.
The main administrative capital of the African Union is in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, where the African Union Commission is headquartered. Other AU structures are hosted by different member states: for example, the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights is based in Banjul, The Gambia; and the NEPAD and APRM Secretariats as well as the Pan-African Parliament are in Midrand, South Africa.
The AU covers the entire continent[5] except for Morocco, which opposes the membership of Western Sahara as the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic. However, Morocco has a special status within the AU and benefits from the services available to all AU states from the institutions of the AU, such as the African Development Bank. Moroccan delegates also participate at important AU functions, and negotiations continue to try to resolve the conflict with the Polisario Front in Tindouf, Algeria and parts of Western Sahara.
The AU's first military intervention in a member state was the May 2003 deployment of a peacekeeping force of soldiers from South Africa, Ethiopia, and Mozambique to Burundi to oversee the implementation of the various agreements. AU troops were also deployed in Sudan for peacekeeping in the Darfur conflict, before the mission was handed over to the United Nations on 1 January 2008 UNAMID. The AU has also sent a peacekeeping mission to Somalia, of which the peacekeeping troops are from Uganda and Burundi.
The AU has adopted a number of important new documents establishing norms at continental level, to supplement those already in force when it was created. These include the African Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption (2003) and the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance (2007), as well as the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) and its associated Declaration on Democracy, Political, Economic and Corporate Governance.[6]

[edit] Membership
Main articles: Member State of the African Union and Enlargement of the African Union
See also: List of African Union member states by political system and List of African Union member states by population




Map of the African Union.



[edit] Current members




 Algeria
 Angola
 Benin
 Botswana
 Burkina Faso
 Burundi
 Cameroon
 Cape Verde
 Central African Republic
 Chad
 Comoros
 Côte d'Ivoire
 Democratic Republic of the Congo
 Republic of the Congo
 Djibouti
 Egypt
 Equatorial Guinea
 Eritrea



 Ethiopia
 Gabon
 Gambia
 Ghana
 Guinea-Bissau
 Kenya
 Lesotho
 Liberia
 Libya
 Malawi
 Mali
 Mauritius
 Mozambique
 Namibia
 Niger
 Nigeria
 Rwanda
 Western Sahara (SADR)



 São Tomé and Príncipe
 Senegal
 Seychelles
 Sierra Leone
 Somalia
 South Africa
 Sudan
 Swaziland
 Tanzania
 Togo
 Tunisia
 Uganda
 Zambia
 Zimbabwe










[edit] Suspended members
 Mauritania - suspended after 2008 coup d'état.[7]
 Guinea - suspended after 2008 coup d'état[8][9]
 Madagascar - suspended after 2009 Malagasy political crisis.[10]

[edit] Former members
 Morocco left the AU's predecessor (the Organization of African Unity) in 1984.
The only African state that is not a member of the African Union is Morocco, which left the AU's predecessor, the Organization of African Unity (OAU), in 1984, when many of the other member states supported the Sahrawi nationalist Polisario Front's Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic.[11][12] Morocco's ally, Zaire, similarly opposed the OAU's admission of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, and the Mobutu regime boycotted the organisation from 1984 to 1986.[13] Some countries have since retracted their support for the Sahrawi Republic.[14]

[edit] Organizations of the AU


African Union



This article is part of the series:
Politics and government of
the African Union









Institutions
Casablanca Group
Union of African States
Organisation of African Unity
African Economic Community
African Unification Front



Executive
Assembly

Chairperson


Commission

Chairperson
Conference and Events
Peace & Sec.
Pol. Affairs
Infra. & Energy
Soc. Affairs
HR, Sci., & Tech.
Trade and Industry
Rural Econ. & Agri.
Economic
Legal Counsel


Executive Council

Rep. Committee





Legislature
Pan-African Parliament

President
Bureau
Secretariat
List of members


Permanent Committees

Rural Econ., Agri., Resources, Eviron.
Monetary & Financial
Trade, Customs, & Immigration
Cooperation, IR, & Conflict
Transport, Industry, Communications,
  Energy, Science, & Tech.
Health, Labour, & Social
Educ., Culture, Tourism, & HR
Gender, Family, Youth, Disabilities
Justice & Rights
Rules, Privileges, & Discipline





Judiciary
Sirte Declaration
Constitutive Act of the AU
Law

Charter on Rights
Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights


Court of Justice
Court on Human and Peoples' Rights

List of judges





Advisory bodies
Peace and Security Council
Economic, Social, and Cultural Council
Specialised Technical Committees

Rural Econ., Agri.
Monetary & Financial
Trade, Customs, and Immigration
Industry, Sci. & Tech., Energy...
Transport, Comm., Tourism
Health, Labor, Social
Edu., Culture, & Human Resources





Financial bodies
AEC Pillars (Abuja Treaty)

CEN-SAD
COMESA
EAC
ECCAS/CEEAC

CEMAC


ECOWAS

UEMOA
WAMZ


IGAD
SADC

SACU


AMU/UMA


African Central Bank
African Monetary Fund
African Investment Bank
New Partnership for Africa's Development

African Peer Review Mechanism





Decentralised bodies
Agencies of the AU



Related topics
Elections
Enlargement
Foreign relations






Other countries · Atlas
 Politics portal
view • talk • edit



The African Union has a number of official bodies:

Pan-African Parliament (PAP) 
To become the highest legislative body of the African Union. The seat of the PAP is at Midrand, South Africa. The Parliament is composed of 265 elected representatives from all 53 AU states, and intended to provide popular and civil-society participation in the processes of democratic governance. The current President of the Pan African Parliament is Gertrude Mongella of Tanzania.


Assembly of the African Union 
Composed of heads of state and heads of government of AU states, the Assembly is currently the supreme governing body of the African Union. It is gradually devolving some of its decision-making powers to the Pan African Parliament. It meets once a year and makes its decisions by consensus or by a two-thirds majority. The current[update] Chairman of the Assembly is Jakaya Kikwete, president of Tanzania.


African Union Commission 
The secretariat of the African Union, composed of ten commissioners and supporting staff and headquartered in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. In a similar fashion to its European counterpart, the European Commission, it is responsible for the administration and co-ordination of the AU's activities and meetings.


African Court of Justice 
The Constitutive Act provides for a Court of Justice to rule on disputes over interpretation of AU treaties. A protocol to set up the Court of Justice was adopted in 2003, but has not yet entered into force: it is likely to be superseded by a protocol creating a Court of Justice and Human Rights, which will incorporate the already established African Court of Justice and Human and Peoples' Rights (see below) and have two chambers—one for general legal matters and one for rulings on the human rights treaties. The draft protocol has been under discussion for several years and is likely to be adopted during 2008.


Executive Council
Composed of ministers designated by the governments of member states. It decides on matters such as foreign trade, social security, food, agriculture and communications, is accountable to the Assembly, and prepares material for the Assembly to discuss and approve.


Permanent Representatives' Committee
Consisting of nominated permanent representatives of member states, the Committee prepares the work for the Executive Council. (European Union equivalent: the Committee of Permanent Representatives (COREPER).)


Peace and Security Council (PSC)
Proposed at the Lusaka Summit in 2001 and established in 2004 under a protocol to the Constitutive Act adopted by the AU Assembly in July 2002. The protocol defines the PSC as a collective security and early warning arrangement to facilitate timely and effective response to conflict and crisis situations in Africa. Other responsibilities conferred to the PSC by the protocol include prevention, management and resolution of conflicts, post-conflict peace building and developing common defence policies. The PSC has fifteen members elected on a regional basis by the Assembly. Similar in intent and operation to the United Nations Security Council.


Economic, Social and Cultural Council
An advisory organ composed of professional and civic representatives, similar to the European Economic and Social Committee. The chair of ECOSOCC, elected in 2008, is Cameroonian lawyer Akere Muna of the Pan-African Lawyers Union (PALU).


Specialised Technical Committees
Both the Abuja Treaty and the Constitutive Act provide for Specialised Technical Committees to be established made up of African ministers to advise the Assembly. In practice, they have never been set up. The ten proposed themes are: Rural Economy and Agricultural Matters; Monetary and Financial Affairs; Trade, Customs, and Immigration; Industry, Science and Technology; Energy, Natural Resources, and Environment; Transport, Communications, and Tourism; Health; Labour, and Social Affairs; Education, Culture, and Human Resources.


Financial institutions
African Central Bank, African Investment Bank, African Monetary Fund. These institutions have not yet been established. Eventually, the AU aims to have a single currency (the Afro).


Human rights 
The African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights, in existence since 1986, is established under the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights (the African Charter) rather than the Constitutive Act of the African Union. It is the premier African human rights body, with responsibility for monitoring and promoting compliance with the African Charter. The African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights was established in 2006 to supplement the work of the Commission, following the entry into force of a protocol to the African Charter providing for its creation. It is planned that the African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights will be merged with the African Court of Justice (see above).


[edit] Role of the diaspora
The Constitutive Act of the AU declares that it shall "invite and encourage the full participation of the African diaspora as an important part of our Continent, in the building of the African Union". The African Union Government has defined the African diaspora as "consisting of people of African origin living outside the continent, irrespective of their citizenship and nationality and who are willing to contribute to the development of the continent and the building of the African Union".[15]

[edit] Current issues
The AU faces many challenges, including health issues such as combating malaria and the AIDS/HIV epidemic; political issues such as confronting undemocratic regimes and mediating in the many civil wars; economic issues such as improving the standard of living of millions of impoverished, uneducated Africans; ecological issues such as dealing with recurring famines, desertification, and lack of ecological sustainability; as well as the legal issues regarding Western Sahara.

[edit] Union Government
The principal topic for debate at the July 2007 AU summit held in Accra, Ghana, was the creation of a Union Government,[16] with the aim of moving towards a United States of Africa. A study on the Union Government was adopted in late 2006,[17] and proposes various options for "completing" the African Union project. There are divisions among African states on the proposals, with some (notably Libya) following a maximalist view leading to a common government with an AU army; and others (especially the southern African states) supporting rather a strengthening of the existing structures, with some reforms to deal with administrative and political challenges in making the AU Commission and other bodies truly effective.[18]
Following a heated debate in Accra, the Assembly of Heads of State and Government agreed in the form of a declaration to review the state of affairs of the AU with a view to determining its readiness towards a Union Government.[19] In particular, the Assembly agreed to:

Accelerate the economic and political integration of the African continent, including the formation of a Union Government of Africa;
Conduct an audit of the institutions and organs of the AU; review the relationship between the AU and the RECs; find ways to strengthen the AU and elaborate a timeframe to establish a Union Government of Africa.

The declaration lastly noted the ‘importance of involving the African peoples, including Africans in the Diaspora, in the processes leading to the formation of the Union Government.’
Following this decision, a panel of eminent persons was set up to conduct the ‘audit review’. The review team began its work on 1 September 2007. The review was presented to the Assembly of Heads of State and Government at the January 2008 summit in Addis Ababa. No final decision was taken on the recommendations, however, and a committee of ten heads of state was appointed to consider the review and report back to the July 2008 summit to be held in Egypt.[20] At the July 2008 summit, a decision was once again deferred, for a 'final' debate at the January 2009 summit to be held in Addis Ababa.

[edit] Role of Regional Economic Communities
One of the key debates in relation to the achievement of greater continental integration is the relative priority that should be given to integration of the continent as a unit in itself or to integration of the sub-regions. The 1980 Lagos Plan of Action for the Development of Africa and the 1991 treaty to establish the African Economic Community (also referred to as the Abuja Treaty), proposed the creation of Regional Economic Communities (RECs) as the basis for African integration, with a timetable for regional and then continental integration to follow.[21]
Currently, there are eight RECs recognised by the AU, each established under a separate regional treaty. They are:

the Arab Maghreb Union (UMA)
the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA)
the Community of Sahel-Saharan States (CEN-SAD)
the East African Community (EAC)
the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS)
the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
the Southern Africa Development Community (SADC)

The membership of many of the communities overlaps, and their rationalisation has been under discussion for several years – and formed the theme of the 2006 Banjul summit. At the July 2007 Accra summit the Assembly finally decided to adopt a Protocol on Relations between the African Union and the Regional Economic Communities.[22] This protocol is intended to facilitate the harmonisation of policies and ensure compliance with the Abuja Treaty and Lagos Plan of Action time frames.

[edit] Choosing the chair of the Union
In 2006, the AU decided to create a Committee "to consider the implementation of a rotation system between the regions" in relation to the presidency. Controversy arose at the 2006 summit when Sudan announced its candidacy for the AU's chairmanship, as a representative of the East African region. Several member states refused to support Sudan because of tensions over Darfur (see also below). Sudan ultimately withdrew its candidacy and President Denis Sassou-Nguesso of the Republic of the Congo was elected to a one-year term. At the January 2007 summit, Sassou-Nguesso was replaced by President John Agyekum Kufuor of Ghana, despite another attempt by Sudan to gain the chair. 2007 was the 50th anniversary of Ghana's independence, a symbolic moment for the country to hold the chair of the AU—and to host the mid-year summit at which the proposed Union Government was also discussed. In January 2008, President Jakaya Kikwete of Tanzania took over as chair, representing the East African region and thus apparently ending Sudan's attempt to become chair—at least till the rotation returns to East Africa. The current chari is Libya.

[edit] Zimbabwe
The political crisis in Zimbabwe has been debated both by the African Union and in particular by the Southern African Development Community. At African Union level, the situation in Zimbabwe has been a controversial focus of discussions in the Executive Council of the activity reports of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights in which human rights abuses in Zimbabwe have been a leading subject since the early 2000s. Zimbabwe formed a major focus of debate at the 11th AU Summit held in Sharm el Shaik, Egypt, in July 2008, with some states, including Senegal, Benin, Burkina Faso, Zambia, Botswana, Nigeria, Kenya and others backing strong action against Zimbabwe in light of the problematic second round presidential elections held in June. Among others, Raila Odinga, the Prime Minister of Kenya, called for suspension of Robert Mugabe and Zimbabwe from the AU.[23] However, the summit eventually adopted a resolution that did not apply any sanctions against the government of Robert Mugabe but merely urged the two main parties in Zimbabwe to negotiate a solution to their differences.[24]

[edit] AIDS in Africa
One of the most serious issues to face Africa is not a dispute between nations, but rather the rapid spread of HIV and the AIDS pandemic. Sub-Saharan Africa, especially southern Africa, is by far the most affected area in the world, and the infection is now starting to claim lives by the millions. While the measurement of HIV prevalence rates has proved methodologically challenging, more than 20% of the sexually active population of many countries of southern Africa may be infected, with South Africa, Botswana, Kenya, Namibia, and Zimbabwe all expected to have a decrease in life expectancy by an average of 6.5 years. The effects on South Africa, which constitutes 30% of the AU's economy, threatens to significantly stunt GDP growth, and thus internal and external trade for the continent.

[edit] Interventions in support of democracy

[edit] Togo
In response to the death of Gnassingbé Eyadéma, President of Togo, on 5 February 2005, AU leaders described the naming of his son Faure Gnassingbé the successor as a military coup.[25] Togo's constitution calls for the speaker of parliament to succeed the president in the event of his death. By law, the parliament speaker must call national elections to choose a new president within sixty days. The AU's protest forced Gnassingbé to hold elections. Under heavy allegations of election fraud, he was officially elected President on 4 May 2005.

[edit] Mauritania
On 3 August 2005, a coup in Mauritania led the African Union to suspend the country from all organisational activities. The Military Council that took control of Mauritania promised to hold elections within two years. These were held in early 2007, the first time that the country had held elections that were generally agreed to be of an acceptable standard.[citation needed] Following the elections, Mauritania's membership of the AU was restored. However, on 6 August 2008, a fresh coup overthrew the government elected in 2007. The AU once again suspended Mauritania from the continental body.

[edit] Regional conflicts and military interventions
One of the objectives of the AU is to "promote peace, security, and stability on the continent".[26] Among its principles is 'Peaceful resolution of conflicts among Member States of the Union through such appropriate means as may be decided upon by the Assembly'.[27] The primary body charged with implementing these objectives and principles is the Peace and Security Council. The PSC has the power, among other things, to authorise peace support missions, to impose sanctions in case of unconstitutional change of government, and to "take initiatives and action it deems appropriate" in response to potential or actual conflicts. The PSC is a decision-making body in its own right, and its decisions are binding on member states.
Article 4(h) of the Constitutive Act, repeated in article 4 of the Protocol to the Constitutive Act on the PSC, also recognises the right of the Union to intervene in member state in circumstances of war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. Any decision to intervene in a member state under article 4 of the Constitutive Act will be made by the Assembly on the recommendation of the PSC.
Since it first met in 2004, the PSC has been active in relation to the crises in Darfur, Comoros, Somalia, Democratic Republic of Congo, Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire and other countries. It has adopted resolutions creating the AU peacekeeping operations in Somalia and Darfur, and imposing sanctions against persons undermining peace and security (such as travel bans and asset freezes against the leaders of the rebellion in Comoros). The Council is in the process of overseeing the establishment of a "standby force" to serve as a permanent African peacekeeping force.[28]

[edit] Darfur, Sudan
Main article: African Union Mission in Sudan





This article may need to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information, and remove this template when finished. Please see the talk page for more information.






AMIS peacekeepers in Darfur


In response to the ongoing Darfur conflict in Sudan, the AU has deployed 7,000 peacekeepers, many from Rwanda and Nigeria, to Darfur. While a donor's conference in Addis Ababa in 2005 helped raise funds to sustain the peacekeepers through that year and into 2006, in July 2006 the AU said it would pull out at the end of September when its mandate expires.[29] Critics of the AU peacekeepers, including Dr. Eric Reeves, have said these forces are largely ineffective due to lack of funds, personnel, and expertise. Monitoring an area roughly the size of France has made it even more difficult to sustain an effective mission. In June 2006, the United States Congress appropriated US$173 million for the AU force. Some, such as the Genocide Intervention Network, have called for United Nations (UN) or NATO intervention to augment and/or replace the AU peacekeepers. The UN has considered deploying a force, though it would not likely enter the country until at least October 2007.[30] The under-funded and badly equipped AU mission was set to expire on December 31, 2006 but was extended to June 30, 2007 and will merge with the United Nations African Union Mission in Darfur.

[edit] Somalia
Main article: African Union Mission to Somalia
From the early 1990's up until recently, Somalia was without a functioning central government. A peace agreement aimed at ending the civil war that broke out following the collapse of the Siad Barre regime was signed in 2006 after many years of peace talks. However, the new government was almost immediately threatened by further violence. To temporarily shore up the government's military base, starting in March 2007, AU soldiers began arriving in Mogadishu as part of a peacekeeping force that was intended by the AU to eventually be 8,000 strong.[31]

[edit] Anjouan, Comoros
Main article: 2008 invasion of Anjouan
Mohamed Bacar, who had led the separatist government since 2001, was elected for a five-year term as President of Anjouan. His term expired the 14 April 2007, and the president of the assembly, Houmadi Caambi, became acting president from 15 April 2007 to 10 May 2007. Citing irregularities and intimidation in the run-up to voting, the African Union (AU) and the Union government postponed the polls on Anjouan, but a defiant island president Mohamed Bacar printed his own ballots, held elections anyway and claimed a landslide victory of 90 percent on 11 May 2007.[32]
In October 2007, the African Union imposed travel sanctions on Anjouan's President Mohamed Bacar and other government officials and froze their foreign assets while calling for fresh elections. Additionally, a naval blockade of the island was implemented.[33] In February 2008, the Comoros rejected the African Union's extended sanctions against Anjouan and instead opted for a military solution. In March 2008 hundreds of Union government troops began assembling on Moheli, which is closer to Anjouan than the larger island Grande Comore. Sudan and Senegal were expected to provide a total of 750 troops, while Libya has offered logistical support for the operation. In addition, 500 Tanzanian troops were due to arrive soon after.[34][35]
The forces invaded Anjouan on 25 March 2008.

[edit] Economy
Main article: Economy of the African Union
The combined states of the African Union constitute the world's 17th largest economy with a nominal GDP of $500 billion, ranking after the Netherlands. By measuring GDP by PPP, the African Union's economy totals $1.515 trillion, ranking it 11th after Brazil. At the same time, they have a combined total debt of $200 billion.
The AU future confederation's goals include the creation of a free trade area, a customs union, a single market, a central bank, and a common currency, thereby establishing economic and monetary union. The current plan is to establish an African Economic Community with a single currency by 2023.[36]

[edit] Languages
Main article: Languages of the African Union
According to the Constitutive Act of the African Union, its working languages are Arabic, English, French, and Portuguese, as well as African languages "if possible".[37] A protocol amending the Constitutive Act adopted in 2003 but (as of 2007) not yet in force added Spanish, Swahili and "any other African language" and termed all six "official" (rather than "working") languages of the African Union.[38] In practice, translation of documents of the AU into even the four current working languages causes significant delays and difficulties to the conduct of business.
Founded in 2001, the African Academy of Languages promotes the usage and perpetuation of African languages amongst African people.

[edit] Geography
Main article: Geography of the African Union
Member states of the African Union cover almost the entirety of continental Africa and several off-shore islands. Consequently, the geography of the African Union is wildly diverse, including the world's largest hot desert (the Sahara), huge jungles and savannas, and the world's longest river (the Nile).
The AU presently has an area of 29,922,059 km² (18,592,705 mi²), with 24,165 km (15,015 mi) of coastline. The vast majority of this area is on continental Africa, while the only significant territory off the mainland is the island of Madagascar (the world's fourth largest), accounting for slightly less than 2% of the total.

[edit] Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of the African Union
The individual member states of the African Union coordinate foreign policy through this agency, in addition to conducting their own international relations on a state-by-state basis. The AU represents the interests of African peoples at large in intergovernmental organizations (IGO's); for instance, it is a permanent observer at the United Nations' General Assembly. Both the African Union and the United Nations work in tandem to address issues of common concerns in various areas. The African Union Mission in United Nations aspires to serve as a bridge between the two Organizations.
Membership of the AU overlaps with other IGOs and occasionally these third-party organizations and the AU will coordinate matters of public policy. The African Union maintains special diplomatic representation with the United States and the European Union.

[edit] History of the African Union
Main article: History of the African Union
The historical foundations of the African Union originated in the Union of African States, an early confederation that was established by Kwame Nkrumah in the 1960s, as well as subsequent attempts to unite Africa, including the Organisation of African Unity (OAU), which was established on May 25, 1963, and the African Economic Community in 1981. Critics argued that the OAU in particular did little to protect the rights and liberties of African citizens from their own political leaders, often dubbing it the "Dictators' Club".[39]
The idea of creating the AU was revived in the mid-1990s under the leadership of Libyan head of state Muammar al-Gaddafi: the heads of state and government of the OAU issued the Sirte Declaration (named after Sirte, in Libya) on September 9, 1999, calling for the establishment of an African Union. The Declaration was followed by summits at Lomé in 2000, when the Constitutive Act of the African Union was adopted, and at Lusaka in 2001, when the plan for the implementation of the African Union was adopted. During the same period, the initiative for the establishment of the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD), was also established.
The African Union was launched in Durban on 9 July 2002, by its first president, South African Thabo Mbeki, at the first session of the Assembly of the African Union. The second session of the Assembly was in Maputo in 2003, and the third session in Addis Ababa on 6 July 2004.

[edit] Symbols
The emblem of the African Union consists of a gold ribbon bearing small interlocking red rings, from which palm leaves shoot up around an outer gold circle and an inner green circle, within which is a gold representation of Africa. The red interlinked rings stand for African solidarity and the blood shed for the liberation of Africa; the palm leaves, for peace; the gold, for Africa's wealth and bright future; the green, for African hopes and aspirations. To symbolise African unity, the silhouette of Africa is drawn without internal borders.
The flag of the African Union bears a broad green horizontal stripe, a narrow band of gold, the emblem of the African Union at the centre of a broad white stripe, another narrow gold band and a final broad green stripe. Again, the green and gold symbolise Africa's hopes and aspirations as well as its wealth and bright future, and the white represents the purity of Africa's desire for friends throughout the world. The flag has led to the creation of the "national colours" of Africa of gold and green (sometimes together with white). These colours are visible in one way or another in the flags of many African nations. Together the colours green, gold, and red constitute the Pan-African colours.
The African Union has adopted a new anthem, Let Us All Unite and Celebrate Together, and has the chorus O sons and daughters of Africa, flesh of the sun and flesh of the sky, Let us make Africa the tree of life.

[edit] See also




Africa portal







African Century
African Development Bank
African diaspora
African nationalism
African Renaissance
African Unification Front
Africanization





Black nationalism
Continental union


Asian Union
North American Union
Central Asian Union
European Union
Pacific Union
Union of South American Nations








Indigenous peoples of Africa
New Partnership for Africa's Development
African Peer Review Mechanism
Regional Economic Communities
Non-Aligned Movement
Pan-Africanism
United States of Africa










[edit] References


^ Africa Union Flag
^ Art.11 AU http://www.africa-union.org/root/au/Documents/Treaties/Text/Protocol%20on%20Amendments%20to%20the%20Constitutive%20Act.pdf
^ Thabo Mbeki (July 9, 2002). "Launch of the African Union, 9 July 2002: Address by the chairperson of the AU, President Thabo Mbeki". written at ABSA Stadium, Durban, South Africa (HTML). africa-union.org. http://www.africa-union.org/official_documents/Speeches_&_Statements/HE_Thabo_Mbiki/Launch%20of%20the%20African%20Union,%209%20July%202002.htm. Retrieved on 2009-02-08. 
^ BBC NEWS | Africa | AU summit extended amid divisions
^ There is the minor exception of the cities of Ceuta and Melilla, two autonomous Spanish enclaves on the Mediterranean coast.
^ AU treaties available at: http://www.africa-union.org/root/au/Documents/Treaties/treaties.htm
^ African Union suspends Mauritania following coup
^ AU Stänger av Guinea.
^ "African Union bars Guinea on coup" bbc.co.uk 29 December 2008 Link accessed 29/12/08
^ "Africa rejects Madagascar 'coup'" bbc.co.uk 20 March 2009 Link accessed 20/03/09
^ BBC News (8 July2001) - "OAU considers Morocco readmission" (accessed 9 July 2006).
^ Arabic News (9 July 2002) - "South African paper says Morocco should be one of the AU and NEPAD leaders" (Accessed 9 July 2006)
^ Zaire: A Country Study, "Relations with North Africa" (accessed 18 May 2007)
^ Togo confirms to AU withdrawal of recognition of SADR (accessed July 9, 2006).
^ Pan-Africanism and the African Union, Dallas L. Browne.
^ Decision on the Report of the 9th Extraordinary session of the executive council on the proposals for the Union Government, DOC.Assembly/AU/10 (VIII), Assembly/AU/Dec.156 (VIII).
^ Study on an African Union Government: Towards a United States of Africa, 2006. See also, Decision on the Union Government, Doc. Assembly/AU/2(VII).
^ For further discussion of this proposal see http://www.pambazuka.org/aumonitor/
^ Accra Declaration, Assembly of the Union at its 9th Ordinary session in Accra, Ghana, 1–3 July 2007.
^ Decision on the Report of the Executive Council on the Audit of the Union and the Report of the Ministerial Committee on the Union Government, Doc. Assembly/Au/8(X).
^ See note on The Role of the Regional Economic Communities (RECs) as the Building Blocks of the African Union prepared by the South African Department of Foreign Affairs.
^ Decision on the Protocol on Relations between the African Union and the Regional Economic Communities (RECs), Assembly/AU/Dec.166 (IX).
^ "Kenya urges AU to suspend Mugabe" (in English). BBC. 2008-06-30. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/7481857.stm. Retrieved on 2008-06-30. 
^ allAfrica.com: Africa: AU Summit Resolution On Zimbabwe (Page 1 of 1)
^ "AU denounces Togo 'military coup'". BBC News. 2005-02-06. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/africa/4240485.stm. Retrieved on 2006-07-10. 
^ Article 3(f) of the Constitutive Act.
^ Article 4(e) of the Constitutive Act.
^ See Jakkie Cilliers, 'The African Standby Force. An Update on Progress, Institute for Security Studies, South Africa, March 2008.
^ BBC NEWS | Africa | AU Darfur mission 'to end soon'
^ Security Council Authorizes Deployment Of United Nations-African Union ‘Hybrid’ Peace Operation In Bid To Resolve Darfur Conflict
^ BBC NEWS | Africa | African Union replaces dictators' club
^ COMOROS: Military invasion of Anjouan imminent, government warns
^ BBC NEWS | Africa | Country profiles | Timeline: Comoros
^ BBC NEWS | World | Africa | AU troops arrive in the Comoros
^ Comoros troops capture fighters on rebel island
^ "Profile: African Union". BBC News. 2006-07-01. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/country_profiles/3870303.stm. Retrieved on 2006-07-10. 
^ Article 25, Constitutive Act of the African Union.
^ Article 11, Protocol on Amendments to the Constitutive Act of the African Union [1]
^ African Union replaces dictators' club, BBC, 8 July 2002



[edit] Bibliography

Towards a People Driven African Union: Current Challenges and New Opportunities AfriMAP, AFRODAD and Oxfam GB, January 2007
The New African Initiative and the African Union: A Preliminary Assessment and Documentation by Henning Melber, Publisher: Nordiska Afrikainstitutet, Sweden; ISBN 91-7106-486-9; (October 2002)
"The African Union, NEPAD and Human Rights: The Missing Agenda" Human Rights Quarterly Vol.26, No.4, November 2004.
Bibliography on the AU at the Peace Palace Library


[edit] External links

Listen to this article (4 parts) · (info)
Part 1 • Part 2 • Part 3 • Part 4



This audio file was created from a revision dated 2006-10-20, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: African Union 





Wikinews has related news: African Union Summit ends in Accra



African Union official site
African Union Mission in the United Nations
1st African Union Summit July 2002 in Durban, South Africa, website created by SA government
2nd African Union Summit July 2003 in Maputo, Mozambique
3rd African Union Summit July 2004, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
4th African Union Summit January 2005, Abuja, Nigeria
5th African Union Summit July 2005 in Sirte, Libya.
6th African Union Summit January 2006 in Khartoum, Sudan.
7th African Union Summit July 2006 in Banjul, The Gambia.
7th African Union Summit 2006 in Banjul, The Gambia, website created by the host government.
8th AU summit January 2007, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
9th AU summit July 2007, Accra, Ghana
10th AU summit January 2008, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
11th AU summit July 2008, Sharm El Sheikh, Egypt


[edit] Other relevant sites

AU Monitor
AfriMAP The Africa Governance Monitoring and Advocacy Project of the Open Society Institute
Southern Africa Regional Poverty Network Page on the AU and NEPAD - many useful links
Institute for Security Studies (South Africa) Collection of official documents of African regional organisations
Pan-African Perspective Background on Union Government debate
BBC Profile: African Union
Open Directory Project African Union directory entry
Towards Unity: African Union







 
Links to related articles














v • d • e

African Union (AU)








Algeria · Angola · Benin · Botswana · Burkina Faso · Burundi · Cameroon · Cape Verde · Central African Republic · Chad · Comoros · Democratic Republic of the Congo · Republic of the Congo · Côte d'Ivoire · Djibouti · Egypt · Eritrea · Ethiopia · Equatorial Guinea · Gabon · The Gambia · Ghana · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Kenya · Lesotho · Liberia · Libya · Madagascar · Malawi · Mali · Mauritania · Mauritius · Mozambique · Namibia · Niger · Nigeria · Rwanda · Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic · São Tomé and Príncipe · Senegal · Seychelles · Sierra Leone · Somalia · South Africa · Sudan · Swaziland · Tanzania · Togo · Tunisia · Uganda · Zambia · Zimbabwe
















v • d • e

Africa topics





Culture

Architecture (World Heritage Sites) · Art · Cinema (Film festivals · List of films) · Cuisine · Etiquette · Languages · Literature (Writers by country) · Music (Musicians) · Religion






Demographics

People · Countries by population · Countries by population density · HIV/AIDS · Urbanization (List of most populous cities · of largest metropolitan areas)






Economy

Countries by GDP · Countries by HDI · Central banks and currencies · Education · Poverty · Renewable energy · Stock exchanges · Internet






Geography

Countries (by geographical area)  · Ecology · List of impact craters · List of islands · List of rivers · Regions






History

Colonisation (European exploration · African slave trade · Atlantic slave trade · Scramble for Africa) · Decolonization · Economic history · Empires · Military history (List of conflicts)






Politics

African Union · Elections · Human rights · Pan-Africanism






Society

African philosophy · Caste system · Media (List of radio stations · of television stations)






Sport

African Cricket Association · All-Africa Games · Australian rules football · Confederation of African Football (African Cup of Nations) · Confederation of African Rugby (Africa Cup) · FIBA Africa · Stadiums by capacity · Tour d'Afrique






Years

2004 in Africa · 2005 in Africa · 2006 in Africa · 2007 in Africa · 2008 in Africa · 2009 in Africa













v • d • e

Pan-Africanism





Proponents





Politicians: Nnamdi Azikiwe · Amílcar Cabral · Muammar al-Gaddafi · Marcus Garvey · David Comissiong · Kenneth Kaunda · Jomo Kenyatta · Patrice Lumumba · Thabo Mbeki · Abdias do Nascimento · Kwame Nkrumah · Julius Nyerere · John Nyathi Pokela · Haile Selassie I of Ethiopia · Robert Mangaliso Sobukwe · Ahmed Sékou Touré · I.T.A. Wallace-Johnson
Others: Molefi Kete Asante · Steve Biko · Onwutalobi Anthony-Claret · Francis Ohanyido · Edward Wilmot Blyden · John Henrik Clarke · Cheikh Anta Diop · W. E. B. Du Bois · Frantz Fanon · John G. Jackson · Yosef Ben-Jochannan · Sankofa Juba · Maulana Karenga · Akwatu Khenti · Bob Marley · Malcolm X · Zephania Mothopeng · George Padmore · Dr Motsoko Pheko · Runoko Rashidi · Walter Rodney · Burning Spear · Henry Sylvester-Williams · Stokely Carmichael · Omali Yeshitela









Concepts



United States of Africa · Afrocentrism · Kwanzaa · Pan-African colours · Pan-African flag · Négritude · African nationalism · African socialism · African Century · Africanization · Kawaida  · Ujamaa  · Harambee  · Ubuntu  · Zikism








Organizations



African Union (OAU) · Uhuru Movement · UNIA-ACL · African Unification Front · International African Service Bureau















v • d • e

South-South Cooperation





The Third World

Developing countries · The Global South · Emerging markets · Newly industrialized countries · Landlocked developing countries · ACP countries · Least Developed Countries · Heavily Indebted Poor Countries · Fourth World






Organizations

Non-aligned movement · G-77 · G-24 · D-8 · UNDP · Arab Monetary Fund · Asian Development Bank · African Union






Geopolitics

Decolonization · Neocolonialism · Third World debt · Cold War · BRIMC · BRIC · Next Eleven · Global digital divide · Flying Geese Paradigm · World Conference against Racism · Durban Review Conference













v • d • e

Supranationalism and World government topics





Theory

Supranationalism · Federalism · Confederation · Intergovernmentalism · Anti-nationalism · Globalization · Democratic mundialization · Pax · Cosmopolitanism  · New World Order (conspiracy theory) · Supranational union






International bodies

United Nations (UN) · Interpol · International Monetary Fund (IMF) · World Bank Group (WBG) · World Trade Organization (WTO) · Commonwealth of Nations






Regional bodies

European Union (EU) · Latin Union · Council of Europe · Arab League · African Union (AU) · Union of South American Nations (USAN) · Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) · Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) · Association of Caribbean States (ACS) · Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) · Organization of American States (OAS) · South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) · Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) · NATO






International
parliaments

United Nations General Assembly · European Parliament · Arab Parliament  · Pan-African Parliament · Latin American Parliament · South American Parliament · Mercosur Parliament · Central American Parliament · Inter-Parliamentary Union






International courts

International Criminal Court · International Court of Justice · International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia · International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda · African Court of Justice · Central American Court of Justice · Caribbean Court of Justice · Inter-American Court of Human Rights  · European Court of Justice · European Court of Human Rights






Law and treaties

International law (public · private · supranational) · United Nations Charter · Universal Declaration of Human Rights · Geneva Conventions · Rome Statute · Kyoto Protocol · European Union treaties · European Union law · Treaty of Chaguaramas






History

Holy Roman Empire · League of Nations · Permanent Court of International Justice · Nuremberg Trials · Permanent Court of Arbitration






Proposals and
concepts

World government · United Nations Parliamentary Assembly · United States of Africa · Central Asian Union · Pacific Union · North American Union · Federal Europe






Movements

Federal Union · World Federalist Movement · Global citizens movement · World Union
















Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/African_Union"
Categories: Spoken articles | African Union | International organizations | Supranational unions | Continental unions | African politics | International organizations of Africa | 2001 establishments | Addis Ababa | United Nations General Assembly observersHidden categories: Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008 | All articles containing potentially dated statements | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2007 | Wikipedia articles in need of updating 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Alemannisch
العربية
Aragonés
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Galego
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ქართული
Қазақша
Kiswahili
Kongo
Kurdî / كوردی
Lietuvių
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Piemontèis
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
Vèneto
Yorùbá
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 22:23.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
