













Ella Fitzgerald - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Ella_Fitzgerald";
		var wgTitle = "Ella Fitzgerald";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "50350";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281502491;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Ella Fitzgerald

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Ella Fitzgerald



photo by Carl Van Vechten, 1940



Background information


Birth name
Ella Jane Fitzgerald


Also known as
First Lady of Song; Lady Ella


Born
April 25, 1917(1917-04-25)
Newport News, Virginia, U.S.


Died
June 15, 1996 (aged 79)
Beverly Hills, California, U.S.


Genre(s)
Ballads, swing, traditional pop, vocal jazz


Occupation(s)
Vocalist


Years active
1934-1993


Label(s)
Capitol, Decca, Pablo, Reprise, Verve


Website
www.EllaFitzgerald.com


Ella Jane Fitzgerald (April 25, 1917 – June 15, 1996), also known as "Lady Ella" and the "First Lady of Song", is considered one of the most influential jazz vocalists of the 20th century.[1]
With a vocal range spanning three octaves, she was noted for her purity of tone, phrasing and intonation, and a "horn-like" improvisational ability, particularly in her scat singing. She is widely considered to have been one of the supreme interpreters of the Great American Songbook.[2]
Over a recording career that lasted 59 years, she was the winner of 14 Grammy Awards, and was awarded the National Medal of Art by Ronald Reagan and the Presidential Medal of Freedom by George H. W. Bush.




Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Early Life
1.2 Big-band singing
1.3 The Decca years
1.4 Move to Verve and mainstream success
1.5 Later years
1.6 Personal life


2 Film and television
3 Discography

3.1 Collaborations


4 Awards, citations and honors
5 Tributes

5.1 Albums
5.2 USPS stamp and Yonkers statue


6 Filmography
7 Further reading

7.1 Biographies
7.2 Criticism
7.3 Discographies


8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Biography

[edit] Early Life
Ella Jane Fitzgerald was born in Newport News, Virginia, the child of a common-law marriage between William and Temperance "Tempie" Fitzgerald.[3] The pair separated soon after her birth and she and her mother moved to Yonkers, New York, with Tempie's boyfriend, Joseph Da Silva. Fitzgerald's half-sister, Frances Da Silva, was born in 1923. As a child, Fitzgerald was placed in the Colored Orphan Asylum in Riverdale, the Bronx.[4]
In her youth, she wanted to be a dancer, although she loved listening to jazz recordings by Louis Armstrong, Bing Crosby and The Boswell Sisters. She idolized the lead singer Connee Boswell, later saying, "My mother brought home one of her records, and I fell in love with it....I tried so hard to sound just like her."[5]
In 1932, her mother died from a heart attack [3]. Following these traumas, Fitzgerald's grades dropped dramatically, and she frequently skipped school. At one point, she worked as a lookout at a bordello and also with a Mafia-affiliated numbers runner.[6] After getting into trouble with the police, she was taken into custody and sent to a reform school. Eventually she escaped from the reformatory, and for a time was homeless.
She made her singing debut at 17 on November 21, 1934 at the Harlem Opera House in Harlem, New York. She pulled in a weekly audience at the Apollo and she won the opportunity to compete in one of the earliest of its famous "Amateur Nights." She had originally intended to go on stage and dance but, intimidated by the Edwards Sisters, a local dance duo, she opted to sing instead, in the style of Connee Boswell. She sang Connee Boswell's "Judy" and "The Object of My Affection", a song recorded by the Boswell Sisters, and won the first prize of US$25.00.[7]

[edit] Big-band singing
In January 1935, Fitzgerald won the chance to perform for a week with the Tiny Bradshaw band at the Harlem Opera House. She met drummer and bandleader Chick Webb here for the first time. Webb had already hired singer Charlie Linton to work with the band, and was, The New York Times later wrote, "reluctant to sign her....because she was gawky and unkempt, a diamond in the rough."[5] Webb offered her the opportunity to test with his band when they played a dance at Yale University.




Ella Fitzgerald photographed by Carl Van Vechten in 1940.


She began singing regularly with Webb's Orchestra through 1935, at Harlem's Savoy Ballroom. Fitzgerald recorded several hit songs with them, including "Love and Kisses" and "(If You Can't Sing It) You'll Have to Swing It (Mr. Paganini)" but it was her 1938 version of the nursery rhyme, "A-Tisket, A-Tasket", a song she co-wrote, that brought her wide public acclaim.
Chick Webb died on June 16, 1939, and his band was renamed "Ella Fitzgerald and her Famous Orchestra" with Ella taking the role of bandleader. Fitzgerald recorded nearly 150 sides during her time with the orchestra, most of which, like "A-Tisket, A-Tasket", were "novelties and disposable pop fluff."[5]

[edit] The Decca years
In 1942, Fitzgerald left the band to begin a solo career. Now signed to the Decca label, she had several popular hits, while recording with such artists as the Ink Spots, Louis Jordan, and the Delta Rhythm Boys.
With Decca's Milt Gabler as her manager, she began working regularly for the jazz impresario Norman Granz, and appearing regularly in his Jazz at the Philharmonic concerts. Fitzgerald's relationship with Granz was further cemented when he became her manager, although it would be nearly a decade before he could record her on one of his many record labels.
With the demise of the Swing era, and the decline of the great touring big bands, a major change in jazz music occurred. The advent of bebop caused a major change in Fitzgerald's vocal style, influenced by her work with Dizzy Gillespie's big band. It was in this period that Fitzgerald started including scat singing as a major part of her performance repertoire. While singing with Gillespie, Fitzgerald recalled, "I just tried to do [with my voice] what I heard the horns in the band doing."[7]
Her 1945 scat recording of "Flying Home" would later be described by The New York Times as "one of the most influential vocal jazz records of the decade....Where other singers, most notably Louis Armstrong, had tried similar improvisation, no one before Miss Fitzgerald employed the technique with such dazzling inventiveness."[5] Her be-bop recordings of "Oh, Lady be Good!" (1947) and "How High the Moon" were similarly popular, and increased her reputation as one of the leading jazz vocalists.
Perhaps responding to criticism, and under pressure from Granz (who felt that Fitzgerald was given unsuitable material to record during this period), her last years on the Decca label saw Fitzgerald recording a series of duets with pianist Ellis Larkins, released in 1950 as Ella Sings Gershwin.

[edit] Move to Verve and mainstream success
Still performing at Granz's JATP concerts, by 1955, Fitzgerald left Decca, and Granz, now her manager, and created Verve Records around her.
Fitzgerald later described the period as strategically crucial, saying, "I had gotten to the point where I was only singing be-bop. I thought be-bop was 'it', and that all I had to do was go some place and sing bop. But it finally got to the point where I had no place to sing. I realized then that there was more to music than bop. Norman....felt that I should do other things, so he produced The Cole Porter Songbook with me. It was a turning point in my life."[5]
Ella Fitzgerald Sings the Cole Porter Songbook, released in 1956, was the first of eight multi-album "Songbook" sets Fitzgerald would record for Verve at irregular intervals from 1956 to 1964. The composers and lyricists spotlighted on each set, taken together, represent the greatest part of the cultural canon known as the Great American Songbook. Fitzgerald's song selections ranged from standards to rarities, and represented an attempt by Fitzgerald to cross over into a non-jazz audience.
Ella Fitzgerald Sings the Duke Ellington Songbook was the only Songbook on which the composer she interpreted played with her. Duke Ellington and his longtime collaborator Billy Strayhorn both appeared on exactly half the set's 38 tracks, and wrote two new pieces of music for the album: "The E and D Blues", and a four-movement musical portrait of Fitzgerald (the only "Songbook" track on which Fitzgerald does not sing).
The Songbook series ended up becoming the singer's most critically acclaimed and commercially successful work, and probably her most significant offering to American culture. The New York Times wrote in 1996, "These albums were among the first pop records to devote such serious attention to individual songwriters, and they were instrumental in establishing the pop album as a vehicle for serious musical exploration."[5]
A few days after Fitzgerald's death, New York Times columnist Frank Rich wrote that in the Songbook series Fitzgerald "performed a cultural transaction as extraordinary as Elvis's contemporaneous integration of white and African-American soul. Here was a black woman popularizing urban songs often written by immigrant Jews to a national audience of predominantly white Christians."[6] Frank Sinatra was moved out of respect for Fitzgerald to block Capitol Records from re-releasing his own recordings in a similar, single composer vein.
Ella Fitzgerald also recorded albums exclusively devoted to the songs of Porter and Gershwin in 1972 and 1983, the albums being Ella Loves Cole and Nice Work If You Can Get It, respectively. A later collection devoted to a single composer was released during her time with Pablo Records, Ella Abraça Jobim, featuring the songs of Antonio Carlos Jobim.
While recording the 'Songbooks' and the occasional studio album, Fitzgerald toured 40 to 45 weeks per year in the United States and internationally, under the tutelage of Norman Granz. Granz helped solidify her position as one of the leading live jazz performers.[5]
In the mid-1950s, Fitzgerald became the first African-American to perform at the Mocambo, after Marilyn Monroe had lobbied the owner for the booking. The booking was instrumental in Fitzgerald's career. The incident was turned into a play by Bonnie Greer in 2005.
There are several live albums on Verve that are highly regarded by critics: Ella at the Opera House shows a typical JATP set from Fitzgerald, Ella in Rome displays her vocal jazz canon, while Ella in Berlin is still one of her biggest selling albums; it includes a famous version of "Mack the Knife", on which she forgets the lyrics, but improvises magnificently to compensate.

[edit] Later years
Verve Records was sold to MGM in 1963 for $3 million, and in 1967 MGM failed to renew Fitzgerald's contract. Over the next five years, she flitted between several labels, namely Atlantic, Capitol and Reprise. A selection of her material at this time represent a departure from her typical jazz repertoire; for Capitol she recorded Brighten the Corner, an album of hymns, Ella Fitzgerald's Christmas, an album of traditional Christmas carols, Misty Blue, a country and western-influenced album, and 30 by Ella, a series of six medleys that fulfilled her obligations for the label.
During this period, she had her last US chart single with a cover of Smokey Robinson's "Get Ready", previously a hit for The Temptations, and some months later a top-five hit for Rare Earth.
The surprise success of the 1972 album Jazz at Santa Monica Civic '72 led Granz to found Pablo Records, his first record label since the sale of Verve. Fitzgerald recorded some 20 albums for the label, Ella in London recorded live in '74 with pianist Tommy Flanagan, Joe Pass on guitar, Keter Betts on bass and Bobby Durham on drums is one of her best ever. Her years on Pablo documented the decline in her voice; "She frequently used shorter, stabbing phrases, and her voice was harder, with a wider vibrato," one biographer wrote.[3] Plagued by health problems, Fitzgerald made her last recording in 1991 and her last public performances in 1993.[8]

[edit] Personal life




Ella Fitzgerald in 1968. Photo courtesy of the Fraser MacPherson estate


Fitzgerald married twice, though there is evidence that she may have married a third time. In 1941 she married Benny Kornegay, a convicted drug dealer. The marriage was annulled after two years.
Her second marriage, in December 1947, was to the famous bass player Ray Brown, whom she had met while on tour with Dizzy Gillespie's band a year earlier. Together they adopted a child born to Fitzgerald's half-sister, Frances, whom they christened Ray Brown, Jr. With Fitzgerald and Brown often busy touring and recording, the child was largely raised by her aunt, Virginia. Fitzgerald and Brown divorced in 1953, owing to the various career pressures both were experiencing at the time, though they would continue to perform together.[5]
In July 1957, Reuters reported that Fitzgerald had secretly married Thor Einar Larsen, a young Norwegian, in Oslo. She had even gone as far as furnishing an apartment in Oslo, but the affair was quickly forgotten when Larsen was sentenced to five months hard labor in Sweden for stealing money from a young woman to whom he had previously been engaged.[3]
Fitzgerald was also notoriously shy. Trumpet player Mario Bauza, who played behind Fitzgerald in her early years with Chick Webb, remembered that "She didn’t hang out much. When she got into the band, she was dedicated to her music….She was a lonely girl around New York, just kept herself to herself, for the gig."[3] When, later in her career, the Society of Singers named an award after her, Fitzgerald explained, "I don't want to say the wrong thing, which I always do. I think I do better when I sing."[7]
Already blinded by the effects of diabetes, Fitzgerald had both her legs amputated in 1993 [3]. In 1996 she died of the disease in Beverly Hills, California, at the age of 79. She is interred in the Inglewood Park Cemetery in Inglewood, California. Several of Fitzgerald's awards, significant personal possessions and documents were donated to the Smithsonian Institution, the library of Boston University, the Library of Congress, and the Schoenberg Library at UCLA.

[edit] Film and television




Fitzgerald shakes hands with President Ronald Reagan after performing in the White House, 1981


In her most notable screen role, Fitzgerald played the part of singer Maggie Jackson in Jack Webb's 1955 jazz film Pete Kelly's Blues. The film costarred Janet Leigh and singer Peggy Lee. Even though she had already worked in the movies (she had sung briefly in the 1942 Abbott and Costello film Ride 'Em Cowboy), she was "delighted" when Norman Granz negotiated the role for her, and, "at the time....considered her role in the Warner Brothers movie the biggest thing ever to have happened to her."[3] Amid The New York Times' pan of the film when it opened in August 1955, the reviewer wrote, "About five minutes (out of ninety-five) suggest the picture this might have been. Take the ingenious prologue....Or take the fleeting scenes when the wonderful Ella Fitzgerald, allotted a few spoken lines, fills the screen and sound track with her strong mobile features and voice."[9]
Similar to another African-American jazz singer, Lena Horne, Fitzgerald's race precluded major big-screen success. After Pete Kelly's Blues, she appeared in sporadic movie cameos, in St. Louis Blues (1958), and Let No Man Write My Epitaph (1960). Much later, she appeared in the 1980s television drama The White Shadow.
She also made numerous guest appearances on television shows, singing on the The Frank Sinatra Show, and alongside Nat King Cole, Dean Martin, Mel Tormé and many others. Perhaps her most unusual and intriguing performance was of the 'Three Little Maids' song from Gilbert and Sullivan's comic operetta The Mikado alongside Joan Sutherland and Dinah Shore on Shore's weekly variety series in 1963. Fitzgerald also made a one-off appearance alongside Sarah Vaughan and Pearl Bailey on a 1979 television special honoring Bailey.
Fitzgerald also appeared in TV commercials, her most memorable being an ad for Memorex. In the commercials, she sang a note that shattered a glass while being recorded on a Memorex cassette tape. The tape was played back and the recording also broke the glass, asking "Is it live, or is it Memorex?" She also starred in a number of commercials for Kentucky Fried Chicken, singing and scatting to the fast-food chain's longtime slogan, "We do chicken right!"
Her final commercial campaign was for American Express, in which she was photographed by Annie Leibovitz.

[edit] Discography
Further information: Ella Fitzgerald discography

[edit] Collaborations
Fitzgerald's most famous collaborations were with the trumpeter Louis Armstrong, the guitarist Joe Pass, and the bandleaders Count Basie and Duke Ellington.

Fitzgerald recorded three Verve studio albums with Armstrong, two albums of standards (1956's Ella and Louis and 1957's Ella and Louis Again), and a third album featured music from the Gershwin musical Porgy and Bess. Fitzgerald also recorded a number of sides with Armstrong for Decca in the early 1950s.
Fitzgerald is sometimes referred to as the quintessential swing singer, and her meetings with Count Basie are highly regarded by critics. Fitzgerald features on one track on Basie's 1957 album One O'Clock Jump, while her 1963 album Ella and Basie! is remembered as one of her greatest recordings. With the 'New Testament' Basie band in full swing, and arrangements written by a young Quincy Jones, this album proved a respite from the 'Songbook' recordings and constant touring that Fitzgerald was engaged in during this period. Fitzgerald and Basie also collaborated on the 1972 album Jazz at Santa Monica Civic '72, and on the 1979 albums Digital III at Montreux, A Classy Pair and A Perfect Match.
Fitzgerald and Joe Pass recorded four albums together toward the end of Fitzgerald's career. She recorded several albums with piano accompaniment, but a guitar proved the perfect melodic foil for her. Fitzgerald and Pass appeared together on the albums Take Love Easy (1973), Easy Living (1986), Speak Love (1983) and Fitzgerald and Pass... Again (1976).
Fitzgerald and Duke Ellington recorded two live albums, and two studio albums. Her Duke Ellington Songbook placed Ellington firmly in the canon known as the Great American Songbook, and the 1960s saw Fitzgerald and the 'Duke' meet on the Côte d'Azur for the 1966 album Ella and Duke at the Cote D'Azur, and in Sweden for The Stockholm Concert, 1966. Their 1965 album Ella at Duke's Place is also extremely well received.

Fitzgerald had a number of famous jazz musicians and soloists as sidemen over her long career. The trumpeters Roy Eldridge and Dizzy Gillespie, the guitarist Herb Ellis, and the pianists Tommy Flanagan, Oscar Peterson, Lou Levy, Paul Smith, Jimmy Rowles, and Ellis Larkins all worked with Ella mostly in live, small group settings.
Perhaps Fitzgerald's greatest unrealized collaboration (in terms of popular music) was a studio or live album with Frank Sinatra. The two appeared on the same stage only periodically over the years, in television specials in 1958 and 1959, and again on 1967's A Man and His Music + Ella + Jobim, a show that also featured Antonio Carlos Jobim. Pianist Paul Smith has said, "Ella loved working with [Frank]. Sinatra gave her his dressing room on A Man and His Music and couldn’t do enough for her." When asked, Norman Granz would cite "complex contractual reasons" for the fact that the two artists never recorded together.[3] Fitzgerald's appearance with Sinatra and Count Basie in June 1974 for a series of concerts at Caesar's Palace, Las Vegas was seen as an important impetus upon Sinatra returning from his self-imposed retirement of the early 1970s. The shows were a great success, and September of that year saw them gross $1,000,000 in two weeks on Broadway, in a triumvirate with the Count Basie Orchestra.

[edit] Awards, citations and honors
Further information: List of Ella Fitzgerald awards
Ella Fitzgerald was a quiet but ardent supporter of many charities and non-profit organizations, including the American Heart Association and the United Negro College Fund. In 1993, she established the "Ella Fitzgerald Charitable Foundation" which continues to fund programs that perpetuate Ella's ideals, visit their website at www.ellafitzgeraldfoundation.org

[edit] Tributes

[edit] Albums
Ann Hampton Callaway, Dee Dee Bridgewater, and Patti Austin have all recorded albums in tribute to Fitzgerald. Callaway's album To Ella with Love (1996) features fourteen jazz standards made popular by Fitzgerald, and the album also features the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis. Bridgewater's album Dear Ella (1997) featured many musicians that were closely associated with Fitzgerald during her career, including the pianist Lou Levy, the trumpeter Benny Powell, and Fitzgerald's second husband, the double bassist Ray Brown. Bridgewater's following album, Live at Yoshi's, was recorded live on April 25, 1998, what would have been Fitzgerald's 81st birthday. Patti Austin's album, For Ella (2002) features 11 songs most immediately associated with Fitzgerald, and a twelfth song, "Hearing Ella Sing" is Austin's tribute to Fitzgerald. The album was nominated for a Grammy.
In 2007 We All Love Ella, was released, a tribute album recorded for the 90th anniversary of Fitzgerald's birth. It featured artists such as Michael Bublé, Natalie Cole, Chaka Khan, Gladys Knight, Diana Krall, k.d. lang, Queen Latifah, Ledisi, Dianne Reeves, Linda Ronstadt, and Lizz Wright, collating songs most readily associated with the "First Lady of Song".
The folk singer Odetta's album To Ella (1998) is dedicated to Fitzgerald, but features no songs associated with her. Fitzgerald's long serving accompanist Tommy Flanagan affectionately remembered Fitzgerald on his album Lady be Good...For Ella (1994).
Fitzgerald is also referred to on the 1987 song "Ella, elle l'a" by French singer France Gall, the 1976 Stevie Wonder hit "Sir Duke" from his album Songs in the Key of Life, and the song "I Love Being Here With You", written by Peggy Lee and Bill Schluger. Sinatra's 1986 recording of "Mack the Knife" from his album L.A. Is My Lady (1984), includes a homage to some of the song's previous performers, along the lines dreamed up on by Fitzgerald on her 1960 album Ella in Berlin, he includes 'Lady Ella' herself.

[edit] USPS stamp and Yonkers statue
There is a statue of Fitzgerald in Yonkers, the city in which she grew up. It is located south of the main entrance to the Amtrak/Metro-North Railroad station. On January 10, 2007, the United States Postal Service announced that Fitzgerald would be honored with her own 39-cent postage stamp. The stamp was released in April 2007 as part of the Postal Service's Black Heritage series.

[edit] Filmography


Year
Film
Role
Notes and awards


1942
Ride 'Em Cowboy
Ruby



1955
Pete Kelly's Blues
Maggie Jackson



1958
St. Louis Blues
Singer



1960
Let No Man Write My Epitaph
Flora



[edit] Further reading

[edit] Biographies

Nicholson, Stuart. (1996) Ella Fitzgerald. Gollancz. ISBN 0575400323


[edit] Criticism

Gourse, Leslie. (1998) The Ella Fitzgerald Companion: Seven Decades of Commentary. Music Sales Ltd. ISBN 0028646258


[edit] Discographies

Johnson, J. Wilfred. (2001) Ella Fitzgerald: A Complete Annotated Discography. McFarland & Co Inc. ISBN 0786409061


[edit] References


^ Scott Yanow. "Ella Fitzgerald". allmusic.com. http://allmusic.com/cg/amg.dll?P=amg&sql=11:71r67ui0h0j3~T1. Retrieved on 2007-03-16. 
^ Vickie Smith, Jazz Vocalist. "Dedicated To Ella". VickieSmith.com. http://www.vickiesmith.com/ella.htm. Retrieved on 2007-03-16. 
^ a b c d e f g h Nicholson, Stuart (1993). Ella Fitzgerald: A Biography of the First Lady of Jazz. New York: C. Scribner's Sons. ISBN 0-575-40032-3. 
For many years Fitzgerald's birthdate was thought to be on the same date one year later in 1918 — and is still listed as such in some sources — but research by Nicholson has established 1917 as the correct year of her birth.
^ Bernstein, Nina. "Ward of the State;The Gap in Ella Fitzgerald's Life", The New York Times, June 23, 1996. Accessed May 3, 2008. "Her most recent biographer, Stuart Nicholson, has surmised that the authorities caught up with her and placed her in the Colored Orphan Asylum in Riverdale."
^ a b c d e f g h Stephen Holden (1996-06-16). "Ella Fitzgerald, the Voice of Jazz, Dies at 79". The New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9A00E4DC1E39F935A25755C0A960958260. Retrieved on 2008-04-06. 
^ a b Frank Rich (1996-06-19). "Journal; How High the Moon". The New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9800E6D81439F93AA25755C0A960958260. Retrieved on 2008-04-06. 
^ a b c Jim Moret (1996-06-15). "‘First Lady of Song’ passes peacefully, surrounded by family". CNN. http://www.cnn.com/SHOWBIZ/9606/15/fitzgerald.obit/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-30. 
^ Hugh Davies (2005-12-31). "Sir Johnny up there with the Count and the Duke". Telegraph, UK. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/main.jhtml?xml=/news/2005/12/31/nhonours931.xml. Retrieved on 2007-03-16. 
^ "Webb Plays the Blues". The New York Times. 19 August 1955. http://movies2.nytimes.com/mem/movies/review.html?res=9C00E2DB103AE73ABC4152DFBE66838E649EDE. Retrieved on 2007-01-31. 




Gourse, Leslie (1998). The Ella Fitzgerald Companion. London: Omnibus Press. ISBN 0-71196-916-7. 
Johnson, J. Wilfred (2001). Ella Fitzgerald: An Annotated Discography. McFarland. ISBN 0-78640-906-1. 



[edit] External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Ella Fitzgerald



Ella Fitzgerald Complete Discography
Ella Fitzgerald: Twelve Essential Performances by Stuart Nicholson (Jazz.com).
Ella Fitzgerald at the Library of Congress
Ella Fitzgerald's Gravesite
Official Web Site of Ella Fitzgerald
Redsugar's Ella page
'Remembering Ella' by Phillip D. Atteberry
Todd's Ella Fitzgerald Lyrics Page
Ella Swings Gently - The Ella Fitzgerald Pages
Ella Fitzgerald Tribute CD Video Footage
New York Times article on Ella's early years
Listen to Big Band Serenade podcast, episode 6 Includes complete NBC remote broadcast of "Ella Fitzgerald & her Orchestra" from the Roseland Ballroom (or download)









v • d • e

Great American Songbook





Songwriters



Adair · Adams · Adler · Ager · Ahlert · Arlen · Bacharach · Basie · A. Bergman · M. Bergman · Berlin · Bernstein · Blake · Blane · Bloom · Bock · Bricusse · Brown · Burke · Cahn · Carleton · Carmichael · Cohan · Coleman · Comden · H. David · M. David · Dennis · DeRose · DeSylva · Dietz · Donaldson · Dubin · Duke · Ebb · Eliscu · Ellington · Evans · Fain · Fields · Freed · G. Gershwin · I. Gershwin · A. Green · J. Green · Guettel · Hamlisch · Hammerstein · Harbach · Harburg · Harnick · Hart · Henderson · Herman · Heyman · Jobim · Jones · Kander · Kern · Lane · Legrand · Leigh · Lerner · Levant · C. Lewis · S. Lewis · Jay Livingston · Jerry Livingston · Loesser · Loewe · Mancini · Mandel · Mann · Martin · McHugh · Mercer · Newley · Nilsson · Noble · Parish · Porter · A. Previn · D. Previn · Raksin · Raposo · Razaf · Rodgers · D. Rose · V. Rose · Ross · Schwartz · A. Sherman · R.B. Sherman · R.M. Sherman · Sissle · Sondheim · Stept · Stillman · Strayhorn · Strouse · Styne · Swift · Tiomkin · Troup · Van Heusen · Waller · Warren · Washington · Webb · Webster · Weill · Whiting · Wilder · Williams · Yellen · Youmans · Young








Singers



Alexandria · Allison · K. Allyson · E. Anderson · I. Anderson · Andrews · J. Andrews · Anka · Apaka · Armstrong · Astaire · Austin · Azama · M. Bailey · P. Bailey · Baker · Barber · Bassey · Bennett · Bergen · Berigan · Boone · Boswell · Bowlly · Brewer · Brice · Bublé · Calloway · V. Carr · Carroll · Carter · Cassidy · Channing · Charles · Chevalier · Christy · Cincotti · B. Clark · V. Clark · Cline · Clooney · Cole · Columbo · Como · Connick · Connor · Cook · Cornell · Crosby · Damone · Dandridge · Darin · Davis · Day · Daye · Dearie · DeShannon · Desmond · Dietrich · Downey · Drake · Durante · Eberle · Eberly · Eckstine · Eddy · Edwards · E. Ennis · S. Ennis · Etting · A. Faye · F. Faye · Feinstein · Fisher · Fitzgerald · Flint · Ford · Forrest · Four Freshmen · Franchi · Francis · Gambarini · Garland · Gilberto · Gormé · Goulet · Gray · Greco · Hall · Hanshaw · Hartman · Haymes · Hendricks · Herman · Hibbler · Hildegarde · Hilliard · Hi-Lo's · Ho · Holiday · Holman · Horn · Horne · Howard · Humes · Humperdinck · Hunter · Hyman · Jackie and Roy · James · Jefferson · Jeffries · Jolson · A. Jones · E. Jones · J. Jones · Jordan · Kallen · Keel · Kelly · Kenney · Kent · Kerr · Kiley · King · Kitt · Kral · Krall · C. Laine · F. Laine · Langford · Lanza · C. Lawrence · S. Lawrence · Lee · Lombardo · London · Longet · Lucas · Lund · Lupone · Lutcher · Lynn · Lynne · MacDonald · MacRae · Maggart · D. Martin · M. Martin · T. Martin · Mathis · McCorkle · McDonald · McRae · Mercer · Merman · Merrill · Merry Macs · Midler · Mills · Minnelli · Modernaires · Monheit · Monro · Monroe · Mooney · H. Morgan · J. Morgan · R. Morgan · Morse · Murphy · O'Connell · O'Day · O'Hara · Page · Paris · B. Peters · Peyroux · Piaf · Pied Pipers · Pizzarelli · Pleasure · Prysock · Rainey · Raitt · Raney · Reese · Reeves · Robeson · A. Ross · Rushing · Russell · Scott · Shore · Short · Simone · Simms · Sinatra · Singers Unlimited · Sloane · B. Smith · J. Smith · Kate Smith · Keely Smith · Sommers · Southern · Stafford · Starr · Staton · Stevens · Stewart · Streisand · Sullivan · Sutton · Suzuki · Swingle Singers · Syms · Thornton · Tilton · Todd · Tormé · Tracy · Tucker · Tunnell · Umeki · Vale · Vallée · Vaughan · Veloso · Wain · Ward · Warren · Warwick · Washington · Waters · Wayne · Whiting · Wiley · A. Williams · J. Williams · V. Williams · C. Wilson · N. Wilson · Wright










Persondata


NAME
Fitzgerald, Ella


ALTERNATIVE NAMES
Lady Ella, The First Lady of Song


SHORT DESCRIPTION
American jazz singer


DATE OF BIRTH
April 25, 1917


PLACE OF BIRTH
Newport News, West Virginia


DATE OF DEATH
June 15, 1996


PLACE OF DEATH
Beverly Hills, California






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ella_Fitzgerald"
Categories: Ella Fitzgerald | 1917 births | 1996 deaths | Swing singers | African American singers | African American female singers | American amputees | American female singers | American jazz singers | American singer-songwriters | Bandleaders | Deaths from diabetes | George Peabody Medal winners | Grammy Award winners | Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award winners | Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients | Traditional pop music singers | United States National Medal of Arts recipients | Vaudeville performers | Women in jazz | Kennedy Center honorees | People from Newport News, Virginia | People from Yonkers, New York | Musicians from Virginia | Burials at Inglewood Park Cemetery | Blind people | Verve Records artists | Decca Records artists | Capitol Records artists | Pablo Records artists 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Frysk
Hrvatski
Ido
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Kiswahili
Lietuvių
Limburgs
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Occitan
Polski
Português
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Sicilianu
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 14:09.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
