













Survival kit - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Survival_kit";
		var wgTitle = "Survival kit";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "1941400";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283913879;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Survival kit

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







This article or section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss these issues on the talk page.

It needs additional references or sources for verification. Tagged since September 2008.
It is in a list format that may be better presented using prose. Tagged since December 2007.
It contains instructions, advice, or how-to content. Tagged since September 2008.





A survival kit is a package of basic tools and supplies prepared in advance as an aid to survival in an emergency. Military aircraft, lifeboats, and spacecraft are equipped with survival kits.
Survival kits, in a variety of sizes, contain supplies and tools to provide a person with basic shelter against the elements, help them keep warm, meet their health and first aid needs, provide food and water, signal to rescuers, and assist them in finding their way back to help. Supplies in a survival kit normally contain a knife (often a Swiss army knife or a multi-tool), matches, tinder, first aid kit, bandanna, fish hooks, sewing kit, and an LED flashlight with batteries.
Civilians such as forestry workers, surveyors, or bush pilots, who work in remote locations or in regions with extreme climate conditions may also be equipped with survival kits. Disaster supplies are also kept on hand by those who live in areas prone to earthquakes or other natural disasters. For the average citizen to practice disaster preparedness, some towns will have survival stores to keep survival supplies in stock.




Contents


1 General contents

1.1 Shelter or warmth
1.2 Health and first aid
1.3 Food and water
1.4 Money
1.5 Signaling, navigation and reference
1.6 Multipurpose tools or materials


2 Lifeboat survival kits

2.1 Safety equipment
2.2 Communications and navigation
2.3 Food and water
2.4 Other tools and boating items


3 Military kits
4 Mini survival kits
5 Vehicle kits
6 Natural disasters

6.1 Earthquake
6.2 Hurricane


7 Bug-out bags
8 See also
9 References
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] General contents

[edit] Shelter or warmth

Reflective "aluminized" (Mylar coated) space blanket or survival blanket to retain body heat (and signal)
Lightweight poncho for protection against wind and rain
"Tube tent" or bivvy bag
Tarp with grommets or tie-tapes (best if nylon or polyester)
Large plastic trash bag as poncho or expedient shelter roof
Mosquito net to keep off biting insects
Wide-brimmed hat
Knitted or fleece "watch cap" to insulate area of greatest heat loss
Magnifying glass for fire-starting
Magnesium bar with artificial flint (AKA "Doan Tool") and steel striker for fire-starting
Firesteel (AKA "Metal match," "Hot Spark," "ferrocerium rod") and striker for fire-starting
Waterproof matches
Matches in waterproof container (include striker -- facing away from matches, if not "strike anywhere" matches)or melt candle wax all over your matches before hand.
Butane lighter (won't work under freezing - carry inside clothing)
Hexamine fuel tablets (Esbit) or "heat tablets" for fire-starting
Cotton balls or pads smeared with white petroleum for fire starting (can be carried in 35 mm container or heat-sealed inside large diameter plastic straw)
Dark-colored (black preferred) shoe polish for fire-starting as (It also gives off an odor that can repel animals and insects and can be used for marking and camouflage)


[edit] Health and first aid

First aid kit with bandages, sterile pads and gauze, first aid tape, tweezers, surgical razor, disinfectant pads, oxytetracycline tablets (for diarrhea or infection) and aspirin. Also keep an extra pair of prescription eyeglasses or contacts. Any material in the kit that may be damaged or rendered ineffective by water should be wrapped or sealed in plastic.
Antibiotic cream (also fire-starting)
Insect repellent
Hand sanitizer (also antibiotic and fire-starting)
Salt to maintain ability to perspire
Soap
Toilet paper
Feminine hygiene products (also fire-starting)
Supply of personal prescription medications
Hydrogen peroxide
Epinephrine and antihistamines (example "Benadryl" diphenhydramine) for allergic reactions, primarily to insect stings
Rubbing alcohol
Lip balm
Sun Screen (30 SPF or more is recommended) for when clothing cover is not available
Polarized sunglasses (Protects eyes from glare, especially at sea, in the far north and in the desert


[edit] Food and water

At least three days' worth of water (1 US gallon (3.8 l; 0.83 imp gal) - approximately 8 pounds (3.6 kg)) per person per day: two quarts for drinking, two quarts for food preparation/sanitation). Commercially bottled water is the safest and most reliable emergency supply of water, kept bottled in its original container and unopened.[1] FEMA recommends replacing water at least once each year.[2]
Commercial water filter
Metal container to boil water
Iodine or chlorine tablets for emergency water purification if boiling or filter not available.[3] [4]
Table salt for food and also can be used for brushing teeth.
Collapsible (empty) water bags or containers (Often unlubricated condoms are used in place of commercial water bags)
Canned food, Ready-to-eat meals (MRE), or high-energy foods such as chocolate or emergency food bars. Hiking meals, such as dehydrated food, can also be used, but are not ready to eat - they require rehydration (water), but most are prepared in the bag rather than needing a cooking vessel. Canned foods heated in a closed can may explode.
Fishing line and gear (fish hooks, lures, and split shot leads)
Snare wire
Gill Net (for emergency fishing)
Tea, gum, and hard candy (as a morale booster)
Water Purification Tablets



[edit] Money

A supply of money in small denominations and coins in your kit helps for situations such as telephone calls (if the lines still operate) or vendors selling various goods, both essential and non-essential. If living near national borders various currencies may be beneficial as well.


[edit] Signaling, navigation and reference

Flare
mirror

- Three fires in a triangle is the international distress signal

[edit] Multipurpose tools or materials

Fixed-blade knife - sturdy in safe sheath
Multitool knife such as Swiss Army knife or multitool
Hobo knife (spoon, fork, knife)
Sharpening stone or tool
Folding saw or cable saw
Heavy-duty needle and thread for repairing clothing and equipment
Plastic bag(s) or trash bags
Heavy-duty aluminium foil for frying food and signaling
Brightly-colored bandanna or scarf for filtering water, bandage, sun protection, and signaling
Sturdy cord or "550" parachute cord for setting up a tarpaulin and snaring small animals
Firearms and ammunition for hunting and self-defense
Hatchet with sheath


[edit] Lifeboat survival kits
Lifeboat survival kits are stowed in inflatable or rigid lifeboats or life rafts; the contents of these kits are mandated by coast guard or maritime regulations. These kits provide basic survival tools and supplies to enable passengers to survive until they are rescued. In addition to relying on lifeboat survival kits, many mariners will assemble a "ditch bag" or "abandon ship bag" containing additional survival supplies. Lifeboat survival kit items typically include:

[edit] Safety equipment

Life jackets
Fire extinguisher
First aid kit


[edit] Communications and navigation

Compass
Distress beacons (EPIRBs)
Red flare, rocket parachute flare, and/or smoke signal flare
Radar reflector (to help rescuers locate the raft)
Lantern and fuel and/or searchlight
Radio transceiver if a licensed radio amateur (see Ham Radio) or an AM/FM/Weather/Shortwave radio
GPS


[edit] Food and water

Emergency high-calorie rations and/or hard bread
Fishing kit
Rainwater collection equipment
Seawater desalination kit
Water (typically 3 liters/person)


[edit] Other tools and boating items

Hatchet and knife
Waterproof flashlight
Heaving line
Ladder
Sea anchor (also called a "sea drogue")
Bailer
Bilge pump
Boat hook
Bucket


[edit] Military kits
Survival kits for military aviators are often modified according to the environment of operations:

In desert areas, survival kits may have more water and sunscreen, and have additional items such as shade hats, a compass, a whistle, medical equipment, tinder, matches, and sun glasses.
In tropical areas, a survival kit may have mosquito head netting, additional insect repellent, anti-fungal cream, a machete, water purification tablets, foot powder, matches, a flint strike, a compass, a wire saw, a space blanket, medical equipment (gauze pads, elastic gauze bandage, antiseptic creams, anti-malaria tablets, anti-infection tablets, bandages, etc.), salt tablets, a fishing kit, snare wire, extra socks, a candle, a signal mirror, flares, a sewing kit, safety pins, tinder, tape, a whistle, and rations.
In arctic or alpine areas, survival kits may have additional cold weather clothing (winter hats and gloves), sleeping bags, chemical "hand warmer" packets, sun glasses/snow goggles, snowshoes, a collapsible shovel, a snare wire for small animals, a frying pan, a camp stove, camp stove fuel, a space blanket, matches, a whistle, a compass, tinder, medical equipment, a flint strike, a wire saw, extra socks and a tent designed for arctic use.
For personnel who are flying over large bodies of water, a survival kit may have additional items such as flotation vests, fishing nets, fishing equipment, fluorescent sea marking dye, a flare launching gun and cartridges (and perhaps a revolver and tracer ammunition), a survival radio (e.g., an AN/PRC-90), a distress marker light, seawater desalting kit, a raft repair kit, a paddle, a bailer and sponge, sunscreen, medical equipment, a whistle, a compass, and a sun shade hat.

The US Army uses several basic survival kits, mainly for aviators, which are stored in canvas carrying bags. Aviators in planes with ejection seats have survival kits in the seat pan and the survival vest (SRU-21P) worn by US helicopter crews also contains some basic survival items.

[edit] Mini survival kits
"Mini survival kits" or "Altoids tin" survival kits are small kits that contain a few basic survival tools. These kits often include a small compass, waterproof matches, a fishing hook and fishing line, a large plastic garbage bag, a small vial of bleach, a small candle, a jigsaw blade, an Exacto knife blade, and a safety pin. Pre-packaged survival kits may also include instructions in survival techniques, including fire-starting or first aid methods. In addition, parachute cord can be wrapped around the tin. The parachute cord can be used for setting up an emergency shelter or snaring small animals. They are designed to fit within a container roughly the size of a mint tin.

[edit] Vehicle kits
Another level in some preparedness plans are Vehicle Kits. In some cases, supplies and equipment may be loaded into vehicle such as a van or truck with bicycle racks and an extra “reserve” gas tank. Some survivalists also carry a small (e.g., 250 cc) off-road-capable motorcycle in the van or truck.
Food supplies in the bug-out vehicle include hundreds of pounds of wheat, rice, and beans, and enough honey, powdered milk, canned goods, bottled fruit, vitamins, dehydrated fruits and vegetables, salt, pepper, spices, and oil for several months. In addition, the kits often contain high-calorie energy bars, a cooking kit, utensils, liquid soap, and towels. The water supplies may include bottled water, filtering kit, bottles, collapsible water containers, and chlorine bleach for water purification. Food preparation and washing equipment may include items such as a grain grinder, a bread mixer, a strainer, a manual can opener, a steam canner with canning jars and O-rings, cutlery, knives, an electric 12-volt cooler icebox, kerosene lamps and heaters, kerosene or propane stoves, extra fuel, a clothes wringer, a foot-operated treadle sewing machine, and an electric hot plate.
The medical supplies may include a blood pressure gauge, stethoscope, scissors, tweezers, forceps, disposable scalpels, two thermometers (oral and rectal), inflatable splints, bandages, sutures, adhesive tape, gauze, burn ointment, antibiotic ointment, aspirin, rubbing alcohol, ipecac syrup, sterile water, cotton rags, soap, and cotton swabs. The transportation items may include bicycles with off-road tires, emergency tools and spare auto parts (e.g., fuses, fan belts, light bulbs, head light, tire pump, etc.), and an inflatable raft with paddles.
In addition, the kits may contain typical individual “survival kit” items, such as nylon tarps, extra clothes and coats, blankets, sleeping bags, matches (and/or other fire starting equipment), a compass and maps, rechargeable flashlights, toilet paper, soap, a pocket knife and bowie knife, a fishing kit, a portable camping stove, a power inverter, backpack, paper and pencil, a signaling mirror, flashlight, whistle, cable saw, bleach, insect repellent, magnifying glass, rope and nylon cord, pulleys, and a pistol and ammunition.
The communications equipment may include a multi-band receiver/scanner, a citizens band (CB) radio, portable “walkie-talkies” with rechargeable batteries, and a portable battery-powered television. The power supplies may include a diesel or gasoline generator with a one month fuel supply, an auto battery and charger, extension cord, flashlights, rechargeable batteries (with recharger), an electric multi meter, and a test light. Defense items include a revolver, semi-automatic pistol, rifle, shotgun, ammunition, mace or pepper spray, and a large knife such as a bowie knife.
Tools may include cutting tools such as saws, axes and hatchets; mechanical advantage aids such as a pry bar or wrecking bar, ropes, pulleys, or a 'come-a-long" hand-operated winch; construction tools such as pliers, chisels, a hammer, screwdrivers, a hand-operated twist drill, vise grip pliers, glue, nails, nuts, bolts, and screws; mechanical repair tools such as an arc welder, an oxy-acetylene torch, a propane torch with a spark lighter, a solder iron and flux, wrench set, a nut driver, a tap and die set, a socket set, and a fire extinguisher. As well, some survivalists bring barterable items such as fishing line, liquid soap, insect repellent, light bulbs, can openers, extra fuels, motor oil, and ammunition.

[edit] Natural disasters
The US government's Homeland Security website provides a list of in-home emergency kit items.[5] The list focuses on the basics of survival: fresh water, food, clean air and materials to maintain body warmth. The recommended basic emergency kit items include:

Water, at least one gallon of water per person for each day for drinking & sanitation (should be rotated every 3 months)
Food, non-perishable food for at least three days which is not required to be cooked or refrigerated
Emergency Food Bars, preferably the products with 2,400 or 3,600 calories and contain no coconut or tropical oils to which many people may have an allergic reaction, in addition to non-perishable food which does not require cooking or refrigeration
Battery- and/or hand-powered radio with the Weather band
Flashlight (battery- or hand-powered)
Extra batteries for anything needing them
First aid kit
Copies of any medical prescriptions
Whistle to signal
Dust mask, plastic sheeting and duct tape to shelter-in-place
Moist towelettes, garbage bags and plastic ties for personal sanitation
Wrench or pliers to turn off water valves
Can opener for canned food
Local maps
Spare Keys for Household & Motor Vehicle
Sturdy, comfortable shoes & lightweight raingear, hoods are recommended
Contact & Meeting Place Information for your household


[edit] Earthquake
Below is list of commonly recommended items for an emergency earthquake kit:

Food to last at least three days
Water purification tablets/portable water filter
Heavy-duty gloves
A first aid kit
A minimum of 100$ in cash, at least half of which should be in coins
Family photos and descriptions (to aid emergency personnel in finding missing people)
Copies of personal identification and important papers such as insurance documents, driver's license, etc.
A flashlight and radio (battery-, solar-, and/or hand-powered)
Extra batteries
Goggles and dust mask
A personal commode with sanitary bags


[edit] Hurricane
For hurricanes, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) recommends that the 'disaster bag' include:[6]

a flashlight with spare batteries;
a battery operated portable radio (and spare batteries);
a battery operated NOAA weather radio (and spare batteries);
a "Self Powered Radio" and a "Self Powered Flashlight". One, "Eton" model has the Weather Band and it is "self powered". Some of these will keep your cell phone charged
First aid kit and manual;
prescription medicines (be sure to refill them once they expire);
cash and a credit card;
a cell phone with a fully charged spare battery;
spare keys;
high energy non-perishable food;
one warm blanket or sleeping bag per person;
special items for infant, elderly or disabled family members;
change of clothing.


[edit] Bug-out bags
Main article: Bug-out bag
The term "survival kit" may also refer to the larger, portable survival kits prepared by survivalists, called "bug-out bags" (BOBs), "Personal Emergency Relocation Kits" (PERKs) or "get out of dodge" kits, which are packed into backpacks, or even duffel bags. These kits are designed specifically to be more easily carried by the individual in case alternate forms of transportation are unavailable or impossible to use.
These bags contain supplies such as food, water purification equipment, clothing, medical equipment, communications gear, and tools.
The Bug-out Bag is presented by many to be the first level of preparedness that anyone should put together, simply by virtue of its overall usefulness. As noted elsewhere, the man-portable kit can be used when you don't have to leave. It can be thrown into a vehicle when the situation allows you to drive away from the area. It also provides you with a kit that can be carried out of an affected area if the damage is too great, such as when found after a severe earthquake, to drive a vehicle over rubble or obstacles.

[edit] See also

Bug-out bag
Community Emergency Response Team
Firearm (tool)
Hiking equipment
Survival skills
Survivalism
Store and Ignore Disaster Survival Box


[edit] References


^ Prepare for a Disaster, an article from fema.gov
^ Are you prepared?
^ USEPA recommendations
^ Wilderness Medical Society
^ Ready.gov: Get A Kit
^ Supply Kit



[edit] External links

American Red Cross — Prepare for Disasters Before they Strike: Build A Disaster Supplies Kit - Link to Disaster Supplies Kit page Defunct
FEMA — Assemble a Disaster Supplies Kit
United States Department of Homeland Security — Get A Kit
Off Grid Survival - Items for a Survival Kit - Defunct Link




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Survival_kit"
Categories: Survival skills | Disaster preparednessHidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from September 2008 | Cleanup from December 2007 | Articles containing how-to sections 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Български
Nederlands
Polski









 This page was last modified on 15 April 2009, at 02:07 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
