













Typography - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Typography";
		var wgTitle = "Typography";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "31217";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281057351;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Typography

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (May 2008)






A specimen of roman typefaces by William Caslon


Typography (Etymology: typos—type, graphos—written) is the art and techniques of arranging type, type design, and modifying type glyphs. Type glyphs are created and modified using a variety of illustration techniques. The arrangement of type involves the selection of typefaces, point size, line length, leading (line spacing), adjusting the spaces between groups of letters (tracking) and adjusting the space between pairs of letters (kerning). [1]
Typography is performed by typesetters, compositors, typographers, graphic designers, art directors, comic book artists, and clerical workers. Until the Digital Age, typography was a specialized occupation. Digitization opened up typography to new generations of visual designers and lay users.




Contents


1 History
2 Scope
3 Text typography
4 Readability and legibility
5 Display typography

5.1 Advertising
5.2 Inscriptional and architectural lettering


6 See also

6.1 Supporting organizations


7 Notes
8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History

For the origins and evolution of typography, see the main articles History of western typography, History of typography in East Asia, and Movable type.





Look up typography in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Etymology: Typography (from the Greek words τύπος typos = "to strike" "That by which something is symbolized or figured …" and γραφία graphia = to write).
Typography traces its origins to the first punches and dies used to make seals and currency in ancient times. The first known movable type printing artifact is probably the Phaistos Disc, though its real purpose remains disputed. The item dates between 1850 BC and 1600 BC, back to Minoan age and is now on display at the archaeological museum of Herakleion in Crete, Greece.
Typography with movable type was separately invented in 11th-century China. Modular metal type was first invented in Korea during the Goryeo Dynasty around 1230. It was independently developed in mid-15th century Europe with the development of specialised techniques for casting and combining cheap copies of letterpunches in the vast quantities required to print multiple copies of texts.

[edit] Scope
In contemporary use, the practice and study of typography is very broad, covering all aspects of letter design and application. These include:

typesetting and type design;
handwriting and calligraphy;
graffiti;
inscriptional and architectural lettering;
poster design and other large scale lettering such as signage and billboards;
business communications and promotional collateral;
advertising;
wordmarks and typographic logos (logotypes);
apparel (clothing);
labels on maps;
vehicle instrument panels;
kinetic typography in motion picture films and television;
as a component of industrial design—type on household appliances, pens and wristwatches, for example.
and as a component in modern poetry (see, for example, the poetry of E. E. Cummings)

Since digitization, typography has spread to a wider ranger of applications, appearing on web pages, LCD mobile phone screens, and hand-held video games. The ubiquity of type has led typographers to coin the phrase "Type is everywhere".
Traditional typography follows four principles: repetition, contrast, proximity, and alignment.

[edit] Text typography







Text typeset in Iowan Old Style roman, italics and small caps, optimized at approximately 10 words per line, typeface sized at 14 points on 1.4 x leading, with 0.2  points extra tracking. Extract of an essay by Oscar Wilde The English Renaissance of Art ca. 1882.










Text typeset using LaTeX digital typesetting software





In traditional typography, text is composed to create a readable, coherent, and visually satisfying whole that works invisibly, without the awareness of the reader. Even distribution with a minimum of distractions and anomalies are aimed at producing clarity and transparency.
Choice of font(s) is perhaps the primary aspect of text typography—prose fiction, non-fiction, editorial, educational, religious, scientific, spiritual and commercial writing all have differing characteristics and requirements. For historic material, established text typefaces are frequently chosen according to a scheme of historical genre acquired by a long process of accretion, with considerable overlap between historical periods.
Contemporary books are more likely to be set with state-of-the-art seriffed "text romans" or "book romans" with design values echoing present-day design arts, which are closely based on traditional models such as those of Nicolas Jenson, Francesco Griffo (a punchcutter who created the model for Aldine typefaces), and Claude Garamond. With their more specialized requirements, newspapers and magazines rely on compact, tightly-fitted text romans specially designed for the task, which offer maximum flexibility, readability and efficient use of page space. Sans serif text fonts are often used for introductory paragraphs, incidental text and whole short articles. A current fashion is to pair sans serif type for headings with a high-performance seriffed font of matching style for the text of an article.
The text layout, tone or color of set matter, and the interplay of text with white space of the page and other graphic elements combine to impart a "feel" or "resonance" to the subject matter. With printed media typographers are also concerned with binding margins, paper selection and printing methods.
Typography is modulated by orthography and linguistics, word structures, word frequencies, morphology, phonetic constructs and linguistic syntax. Typography also is subject to specific cultural conventions. For example, in French it is customary to insert a non-breaking space before a colon (:) or semicolon (;) in a sentence, while in English it is not.

[edit] Readability and legibility





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2008)


Readability and legibility are often confused. “Legibility is the quality of the typeface design and readability with the design of the printed page. Designers aim to achieve excellence in both.
"The typeface chosen should be legible, that is, it should be read without effort. Sometimes legibility is simply a matter of type size; more often, however, it is a matter of typeface design. Generally speaking, typefaces that are true to the basic letterforms are more legible than typefaces that have been condensed, expanded, embellished, or abstracted.
"However, even a legible typeface can become unreadable through poor setting and placement, just as a less legible typeface can be made more readable through good design."[2]
Studies of legibility have examined a wide range of factors including type size and type design. For example, comparing serif vs. sans serif type, italic type vs. roman type, line length, line spacing, color contrast, the design of right-hand edge (for example, justification, straight right hand edge) vs. ranged left, and whether text is hyphenated.
Legibility research was published from the late nineteenth century on, but the overall finding has been that the reading process is remarkably robust, and that significant differences are hard to find. So comparative studies of seriffed vs. sans serif type, or justified vs. unjustified type, have failed to settle the argument over which is best.[citation needed]
Legibility is usually measured through speed of reading, with comprehension scores used to check for effectiveness (that is, not a rushed or careless read). For example, Miles Tinker, who published numerous studies from the 1930s to the 1960s, used a speed of reading test that required participants to spot incongruous words as an effectiveness filter.
These days, legibility research tends to be limited to critical issues, or the testing of specific design solutions (for example, when new typefaces are developed). Examples of critical issues include typefaces (also called fonts) for people with visual impairment, and typefaces for highway signs, or for other conditions where legibility may make a key difference.
Much of the legibility research literature is somewhat atheoretical — various factors were tested individually or in combination (inevitably so, as the different factors are interdependent), but many tests were carried out in the absence of a model of reading or visual perception. Some typographers believe that the overall word shape (Bouma) is very important in readability, and that the theory of parallel letterwise recognition is either wrong, less important, or not the entire picture.
Studies distinguishing between Bouma recognition and parallel letterwise recognition with regard to how people actually recognize words when they read, have favored parallel letterwise recognition, which is widely accepted by cognitive psychologists.[citation needed]
Some commonly agreed findings of legibility research include:

Text set in lower case is more legible than text set all in upper case (capitals), presumably because lower case letter structures and word shapes are more distinctive.
Extenders (ascenders, descenders and other projecting parts) increase salience (prominence).
Regular upright type (roman type) is found to be more legible than italics.
Contrast, without dazzling brightness, has also been found to be important, with black on yellow/cream being most effective.
Positive images (e.g. black on white) are easier to read than negative or reversed (e.g. white on black).
The upper portions of letters play a stronger part than the lower portions in the recognition process.

Legibility can also be compromised by letterspacing, word spacing, or leading that is too tight or too loose. It can be improved when generous vertical space separates lines of text, making it easier for the eye to distinguish one line from the next, or previous line. Poorly designed fonts and those that are too tightly or loosely fitted can also result in poor legibility.
Typography is an element of all printed material. Periodical publications, especially newspapers and magazines, use typographical elements to achieve an attractive, distinctive appearance, to aid readers in navigating the publication, and in some cases for dramatic effect. By formulating a style guide, a periodical standardizes on a relatively small collection of typefaces, each used for specific elements within the publication, and makes consistent use of type sizes, italic, boldface, large and small capital letters, colors, and other typographic features. Some publications, such as The Guardian and The Economist, go so far as to commission a type designer to create bespoke (custom tailored) typefaces for their exclusive use.
Different periodical publications design their publications, including their typography, to achieve a particular tone or style. For example, USAToday uses a bold, colorful, and comparatively modern style through their use of a variety of typefaces and colors; type sizes vary widely, and the newspaper's name is placed on a colored background. In contrast, the New York Times use a more traditional approach, with fewer colors, less typeface variation, and more columns.
Especially on the front page of newspapers and on magazine covers, headlines are often set in larger display typefaces to attract attention, and are placed near the masthead.

[edit] Display typography




19th century poster printed with wood and metal types


Display typography is a potent element in graphic design, where there is less concern for readability and more potential for using type in an artistic manner. Type is combined with negative space, graphic elements and pictures, forming relationships and dialog between words and images.
Color and size of type elements are much more prevalent than in text typography. Most display typography exploits type at larger sizes, where the details of letter design are magnified. Color is used for its emotional effect in conveying the tone and nature of subject matter.
Display typography encompasses:

posters; book covers;
typographic logos and wordmarks; billboards;
packaging; on-product typography; calligraphy;
graffiti; inscriptional and architectural lettering;
poster design and other large scale lettering signage;
business communications and promotional collateral; advertising;
wordmarks and typographic logos (logotypes),
and kinetic typography in motion pictures and television; vending machine displays; online and computer screen displays.

The wanted poster for the assassins of Abraham Lincoln was printed with lead and woodcut type, and incorporates photography.

[edit] Advertising




A print advertisement for the Encyclopædia Britannica from a 1913 issue of National Geographic


Typography has long been a vital part of promotional material and advertising. Designers often use typography to set a theme and mood in an advertisement; for example using bold, large text to convey a particular message to the reader. Type is often used to draw attention to a particular advertisement, combined with efficient use of color, shapes and images. Today, typography in advertising often reflects a company's brand. Fonts used in advertisements convey different messages to the reader, classical fonts are for a strong personality, while more modern fonts are for a cleaner, neutral look. Bold fonts are used for making statements and attracting attention.

[edit] Inscriptional and architectural lettering

See also Epigraphy.




Punctuation











apostrophe
( ’ ' )


brackets
(( )), ([ ]), ({ }), (< >)


colon
( : )


comma
( , )


dashes
( ‒, –, —, ― )


ellipses
( …, ... )


exclamation mark/point
( ! )


full stop/period
( . )


guillemets
( « » )


hyphen
( -, ‐ )


question mark
( ? )


quotation marks/inverted commas
( ‘ ’, “ ” )


semicolon
( ; )


slash/stroke
( / )


solidus
( ⁄ )


Word dividers


spaces
( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) (␠) (␢) (␣)


interpunct
( · )


General typography


ampersand
( & )


at sign
( @ )


asterisk
( * )


backslash
( \ )


bullet
( • )


caret
( ^ )


currency
generic:
( ¤ )


specific:
฿, ¢, $, €, ₭, £, ₦, ¥, ₩, ₪


daggers
( †, ‡ )


degree
( ° )


inverted exclamation mark
( ¡ )


inverted question mark
( ¿ )


number sign/pound/hash
( # )


numero sign
( № )


ordinal indicator
(º, ª)


percent (etc.)
( %, ‰, ‱ )


pilcrow
( ¶ )


prime
( ′ )


section sign
( § )


tilde/swung dash
( ~ )


umlaut/diaeresis
( ¨ )


underscore/understrike
( _ )


vertical/pipe/broken bar
( |, ¦ )


Uncommon typography


asterism
( ⁂ )


index/fist
( ☞ )


therefore sign
( ∴ )


because sign
( ∵ )


interrobang
( ‽ )


irony mark
( ⸮ )


lozenge
( ◊ )


reference mark
( ※ )







v • d • e



The history of inscriptional lettering is intimately tied to the history of writing, the evolution of letterforms and the craft of the hand. The widespread use of the computer and various etching and sandblasting techniques today has made the hand carved monument a rarity, and the number of lettercarvers left in the USA continues to dwindle.
For monumental lettering to be effective it must be considered carefully in its context. Proportions of letters need to be altered as their size and distance from the viewer increases. An expert letterer gains understanding of these nuances through much practice and observation of their craft. Letters drawn by hand and for a specific project have the possibility of being richly specific and profoundly beautiful in the hand of a master. Each can also take up to an hour to carve, so it is no wonder that the automated sandblasting process has become the industry standard.
To create a sandblasted letter, a rubber mat is laser cut from a computer file and glued to the stone. The sand then bites a coarse groove or channel into the exposed surface. Unfortunately, many of the computer applications, which create these files and interface with the laser cutter, do not have many typefaces available, and often have inferior versions of typefaces that are available. What can now be done in minutes, however, lacks the striking architecture and geometry of the chisel-cut letter which allows light to play across its distinct interior planes.

[edit] See also

For a comprehensive list of related Wikipedia articles, see Category:Typography.


[edit] Supporting organizations

The Typophiles
International Typographic Association, (Association Typographique Internationale, ATypI)
Society of Typographic Aficionados (SoTA)
Type Directors Club (TDC)
Typophile (Typophile.com)
International Center for the Typographic Arts (ICTA, inactive since 1970s)


[edit] Notes


^ Pipes, Alan. Production For Graphic Designers 2nd Edition, Page 40: Prentice Hall Inc 1997
^ Craig, J. and Scala, IK. Designing with Type, the Essential Guide to Typography. 5th ed. p63. Watson Guptil. 2006.



[edit] References


ASTM D7298 Standard Test Method of Comparative Legibility by Means of Polarizing Filter Instrumentation
Bringhurst, Robert (2002). The Elements of Typographic Style (version 2.5). Vancouver: Hartley & Marks. ISBN 0-88179-133-4. Often referred to simply as "Bringhurst", Elements is widely respected as the current authority on typographic style for Latin typography. (excerpts). Well-paired with Tschichold's The Form of the Book, below, from the same publisher.
Tschichold, Jan (1991). The Form of the Book: Essays on the Morality of Good Design. Vancouver: Hartley & Marks. ISBN 978-0881790344. A comprehensive collection of essays on the typographic art. A more classic companion to Bringhust, above.
Heller, Steven and Meggs, Philip B. Texts on Type: Critical Writings on Typography (c) 2001, Allworth Press, Allworth Communications, New York. ISBN 1-58115-082-2. A compilation of over fifty texts on the history, practice, and aesthetics of type design and typography.
Lexique des règles typographiques en usage à l'Imprimerie nationale, Imprimerie nationale, 2002, ISBN 2-7433-0482-0, for French typography.
Swanson, Gunnar Graphic Design and Reading: explorations of an uneasy relationship (c) 2000, Allworth Press, Allworth Communications, New York. ISBN 1-58115-063-6. The Crystal Goblet, or Printing Should Be Invisible Beatrice Warde; Improving the Tool Hrant H. Papazian.
Alexander Lawson, Anatomy of a Typeface , first published in 1990, devotes entire chapters to the development and uses of individual or small groupings of typefaces. ISBN 978-0879233334
White, Alex W. (1999). Type in Use — Effective typography for electronic publishing (version 2.0). W.W. Norton & Company, Inc. New York. ISBN 0-393-73034-4 (pbk).
Gill, Eric (2000) [1931]. An Essay on Typography. David R Godine. pp. 188. ISBN 0879239506. 



[edit] External links

AIGA typography articles — Articles and interviews relating to typography from AIGA's Voice section.
Decode Unicode Wiki with all 98,884 Unicode characters, including full text search capability.
Luc Devroye's typography pages — Large list of typography and font resources
Type-Culture Academic Resource — Educational resources, including documentary videos about typography.








v • d • e

Typography terminology





Page

Pagination · Recto and verso · Margin · Column · Canons of page construction · Pull quote







Paragraph

Widows and orphans · Leading · River · Alignment · Justification






Character

Ligature · Letter-spacing · Kerning · Majuscule · Minuscule · Small caps · Initial · x-height · Baseline · Median · Cap height · Ascender · Descender · Diacritics · Counter · Text figures · Subscript and superscript · Dingbat






Font

Serif · Sans-serif · Italic · Oblique · Emphasis (bold)






Classifications

Roman type: Old style · Transitional · Modern · Slab serif · Sans-serif · Script
Blackletter type: Textualis · Rotunda · Schwabacher · Fraktur
Gaelic type: Angular · Uncial






Punctuation

Hanging punctuation · Hyphenation · Quotation mark · Prime mark · Dashes






Typesetting

Type design · Type foundry · Movable type · Calligraphy · Phototypesetting · Letterpress · Typeface · Font · Computer font · “ETAOIN SHRDLU” · “Lorem ipsum” · “Hamburgefonts” · Punchcutting · Pangram






Typographic units

Point · Pica · Cicero · Em · En · Agate






Digital typography

Font formats · Typesetting software · Character encoding · Rasterization · Hinting









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Typography"
Categories: Typography | Design | Communication design | Graphic design | Greek loanwordsHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2008 | Articles containing non-English language text | Articles needing additional references from May 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2008 | Articles containing French language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Français
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Latina
Magyar
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Shqip
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
中文









 This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 11:16 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
