













Hamiltonian mechanics - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Hamiltonian_mechanics";
		var wgTitle = "Hamiltonian mechanics";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "198319";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 275951589;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Hamiltonian mechanics

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Classical mechanics




Newton's Second Law



History of ...


Fundamental concepts


Space · Time · Mass · Force
Energy · Momentum




Formulations


Newtonian mechanics
Lagrangian mechanics
Hamiltonian mechanics




Branches


Statics
Dynamics
Kinematics
Applied mechanics
Celestial mechanics
Continuum mechanics
Statistical mechanics




Scientists


Newton · Euler · d'Alembert · Clairaut
Lagrange · Laplace · Hamilton · Poisson






This box: view • talk • edit



Hamiltonian mechanics is a reformulation of classical mechanics that was introduced in 1833 by Irish mathematician William Rowan Hamilton. It arose from Lagrangian mechanics, a previous reformulation of classical mechanics introduced by Joseph Louis Lagrange in 1788, but can be formulated without recourse to Lagrangian mechanics using symplectic spaces (see Mathematical formalism, below). The Hamiltonian method differs from the Lagrangian method in that instead of expressing second-order differential constraints on an n-dimensional coordinate space (where n is the number of degrees of freedom of the system), it expresses first-order constraints on a 2n-dimensional phase space.[1]
As with Lagrangian mechanics, Hamilton's equations provide a new and equivalent way of looking at classical mechanics. Generally, these equations do not provide a more convenient way of solving a particular problem. Rather, they provide deeper insights into both the general structure of classical mechanics and its connection to quantum mechanics as understood through Hamiltonian mechanics, as well as its connection to other areas of science.




Contents


1 Simplified overview of uses

1.1 Basic physical interpretation
1.2 Using Hamilton's equations
1.3 Notes


2 Deriving Hamilton's equations
3 As a reformulation of Lagrangian mechanics
4 Geometry of Hamiltonian systems
5 Generalization to quantum mechanics through Poisson bracket
6 Mathematical formalism
7 Riemannian manifolds
8 Sub-Riemannian manifolds
9 Poisson algebras
10 Charged particle in an electromagnetic field
11 Relativistic charged particle in an electromagnetic field
12 Hamilton's principle applied to deformable bodies
13 References
14 See also





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Simplified overview of uses
For a closed system the sum of the kinetic and potential energy in the system is represented by a set of differential equations known as the Hamilton equations for that system. Hamiltonians can be used to describe such simple systems as a bouncing ball, a pendulum or an oscillating spring in which energy changes from kinetic to potential and back again over time. Hamiltonians can also be employed to model the energy of other more complex dynamic systems such as planetary orbits in celestial mechanics and also in quantum mechanics.[2]
The Hamilton equations are generally written as follows:




In the above equations, the dot denotes the ordinary derivative with respect to time of the functions p = p(t) (called generalized momenta) and q = q(t) (called generalized coordinates), taking values in some vector space, and  =  is the so-called Hamiltonian, or (scalar valued) Hamiltonian function. Thus, a little more explicitly, one can equivalently write




and specify the domain of values in which the parameter t ("time") varies.
For a detailed derivation of these equations from Lagrangian mechanics, see below.

[edit] Basic physical interpretation
The simplest interpretation of the Hamilton Equations is as follows, applying them to a one-dimensional system consisting of one particle of mass m under time independent boundary conditions and exhibiting conservation of energy: The Hamiltonian  represents the energy of the system, which is the sum of kinetic and potential energy, traditionally denoted T & V, respectively. Here q is the x-coordinate and p is the momentum, mv. Then



Note that T is a function of p alone, while V is a function of x (or q) alone.
Now the time-derivative of the momentum p equals the Newtonian force, and so here the first Hamilton Equation means that the force on the particle equals the rate at which it loses potential energy with respect to changes in x, its location. (Force equals the negative gradient of potential energy.)
The time-derivative of q here means the velocity: the second Hamilton Equation here means that the particle’s velocity equals the derivative of its kinetic energy with respect to its momentum. (For the derivative with respect to p of p2/2m equals p/m = mv/m = v.)

[edit] Using Hamilton's equations

First write out the Lagrangian L = T – V. Express T and V as though you were going to use Lagrange's equation.
Calculate the momenta by differentiating the Lagrangian with respect to velocity.
Express the velocities in terms of the momenta by inverting the expressions in step (2).
Calculate the Hamiltonian using the usual definition, . Substitute for the velocities using the results in step (3).
Apply Hamilton's equations.


[edit] Notes
Hamilton's equations are appealing in view of their beautiful simplicity and (slightly broken) symmetry. They have been analyzed under almost every imaginable angle of view, from basic physics up to symplectic geometry. A lot is known about solutions of these equations, yet the exact general case solution of the equations of motion cannot be given explicitly for a system of more than two massive point particles. The finding of conserved quantities plays an important role in the search for solutions or information about their nature. In models with an infinite number of degrees of freedom, this is of course even more complicated. An interesting and promising area of research is the study of integrable systems, where an infinite number of independent conserved quantities can be constructed.

[edit] Deriving Hamilton's equations
We can derive Hamilton's equations by looking at how the Lagrangian changes as you change the time and the positions and velocities of particles



Now the generalized momenta were defined as  and Lagrange's equations tell us that



where Fi is the generalized force. We can rearrange this to get



and substitute the result into the variation of the Lagrangian



We can rewrite this as



and rearrange again to get



The term on the left-hand side is just the Hamiltonian that we have defined before, so we find that



where the second equality holds because of the definition of the partial derivatives. Associating terms from both sides of the equation above yields Hamilton's equations




[edit] As a reformulation of Lagrangian mechanics
Starting with Lagrangian mechanics, the equations of motion are based on generalized coordinates



and matching generalized velocities



We write the Lagrangian as



with the subscripted variables understood to represent all N variables of that type. Hamiltonian mechanics aims to replace the generalized velocity variables with generalized momentum variables, also known as conjugate momenta. By doing so, it is possible to handle certain systems, such as aspects of quantum mechanics, that would otherwise be even more complicated.
For each generalized velocity, there is one corresponding conjugate momentum, defined as:



In Cartesian coordinates, the generalized momenta are precisely the physical linear momenta. In circular polar coordinates, the generalized momentum corresponding to the angular velocity is the physical angular momentum. For an arbitrary choice of generalized coordinates, it may not be possible to obtain an intuitive interpretation of the conjugate momenta.
One thing which is not too obvious in this coordinate dependent formulation is that different generalized coordinates are really nothing more than different coordinatizations of the same symplectic manifold.
The Hamiltonian is the Legendre transform of the Lagrangian:



If the transformation equations defining the generalized coordinates are independent of t, and the Lagrangian is a sum of products of functions (in the generalised coordinates) which are homogeneous of order 0, 1 or 2, then it can be shown that H is equal to the total energy E = T + V.
Each side in the definition of  produces a differential:



Substituting the previous definition of the conjugate momenta into this equation and matching coefficients, we obtain the equations of motion of Hamiltonian mechanics, known as the canonical equations of Hamilton:



Hamilton's equations are first-order differential equations, and thus easier to solve than Lagrange's equations, which are second-order. However, the steps leading to the equations of motion are more onerous than in Lagrangian mechanics - beginning with the generalized coordinates and the Lagrangian, we must calculate the Hamiltonian, express each generalized velocity in terms of the conjugate momenta, and replace the generalized velocities in the Hamiltonian with the conjugate momenta. All in all, there is little labor saved from solving a problem with Hamiltonian mechanics rather than Lagrangian mechanics. Ultimately, it will produce the same solution as Lagrangian mechanics and Newton's laws of motion.
The principal appeal of the Hamiltonian approach is that it provides the groundwork for deeper results in the theory of classical mechanics.

[edit] Geometry of Hamiltonian systems
A Hamiltonian system may be understood as a fiber bundle E over time R, with the fibers Et, t ∈ R being the position space. The Lagrangian is thus a function on the jet bundle J over E; taking the fiberwise Legendre transform of the Lagrangian produces a function on the dual bundle over time whose fiber at t is the cotangent space T*Et, which comes equipped with a natural symplectic form, and this latter function is the Hamiltonian.

[edit] Generalization to quantum mechanics through Poisson bracket
The Hamilton's equations above work well for classical mechanics, but not for quantum mechanics, since the differential equations discussed assume that one can specify the exact position and momentum of the particle simultaneously at any point in time. However, the equations can be further generalized to then be extended to apply to quantum mechanics as well as to classical mechanics, through the deformation of the Poisson algebra over p and q to the algebra of Moyal brackets.
Specifically, the more general form of the Hamilton's equation reads



where f is some function of p and q, and H is the Hamiltonian. To find out the rules for evaluating a Poisson bracket without resorting to differential equations, see Lie algebra; a Poisson bracket is the name for the Lie bracket in a Poisson algebra. These Poisson brackets can then be extended to Moyal brackets comporting to an inequivalent Lie algebra, as proven by H Groenewold, and thereby describe quantum mechanical diffusion in phase space (See the uncertainty principle and Weyl quantization). This more algebraic approach not only permits ultimately extending probability distributions in phase space to Wigner quasi-probability distributions, but, at the mere Poisson bracket classical setting, also provides more power in helping analyze the relevant conserved quantities in a system.

[edit] Mathematical formalism
Any smooth real-valued function H on a symplectic manifold can be used to define a Hamiltonian system. The function H is known as the Hamiltonian or the energy function. The symplectic manifold is then called the phase space. The Hamiltonian induces a special vector field on the symplectic manifold, known as the symplectic vector field.
The symplectic vector field, also called the Hamiltonian vector field, induces a Hamiltonian flow on the manifold. The integral curves of the vector field are a one-parameter family of transformations of the manifold; the parameter of the curves is commonly called the time. The time evolution is given by symplectomorphisms. By Liouville's theorem, each symplectomorphism preserves the volume form on the phase space. The collection of symplectomorphisms induced by the Hamiltonian flow is commonly called the Hamiltonian mechanics of the Hamiltonian system.
The Hamiltonian vector field also induces a special operation, the Poisson bracket. The Poisson bracket acts on functions on the symplectic manifold, thus giving the space of functions on the manifold the structure of a Lie algebra.
In particular, given a function f



If we have a probability distribution, ρ, then (since the phase space velocity () has zero divergence, and probability is conserved) its convective derivative can be shown to be zero and so



This is called Liouville's theorem. Every smooth function G over the symplectic manifold generates a one-parameter family of symplectomorphisms and if { G, H } = 0, then G is conserved and the symplectomorphisms are symmetry transformations.
A Hamiltonian may have multiple conserved quantities Gi. If the symplectic manifold has dimension 2n and there are n functionally independent conserved quantities Gi which are in involution (i.e., { Gi, Gj } = 0), then the Hamiltonian is Liouville integrable. The Liouville–Arnol'd theorem says that locally, any Liouville integrable Hamiltonian can be transformed via a symplectomorphism in a new Hamiltonian with the conserved quantities Gi as coordinates; the new coordinates are called action-angle coordinates. The transformed Hamiltonian depends only on the Gi, and hence the equations of motion have the simple form



for some function F (Arnol'd et al., 1988). There is an entire field focusing on small deviations from integrable systems governed by the KAM theorem.
The integrability of Hamiltonian vector fields is an open question. In general, Hamiltonian systems are chaotic; concepts of measure, completeness, integrability and stability are poorly defined. At this time, the study of dynamical systems is primarily qualitative, and not a quantitative science.

[edit] Riemannian manifolds
An important special case consists of those Hamiltonians that are quadratic forms, that is, Hamiltonians that can be written as



where  is a cometric on the fiber , the cotangent space to the point q in the configuration space. This Hamiltonian consists entirely of the kinetic term.
If one considers a Riemannian manifold or a pseudo-Riemannian manifold, so that one has an invertible, non-degenerate metric, then the cometric is given simply as the inverse of the metric. The solutions to the Hamilton–Jacobi equations for this Hamiltonian are then the same as the geodesics on the manifold. In particular, the Hamiltonian flow in this case is the same thing as the geodesic flow. The existence of such solutions, and the completeness of the set of solutions, are discussed in detail in the article on geodesics. See also Geodesics as Hamiltonian flows.

[edit] Sub-Riemannian manifolds
When the cometric is degenerate, then it is not invertible. In this case, one does not have a Riemannian manifold, as one does not have a metric. However, the Hamiltonian still exists. In the case where the cometric is degenerate at every point q of the configuration space manifold Q, so that the rank of the cometric is less than the dimension of the manifold Q, one has a sub-Riemannian manifold.
The Hamiltonian in this case is known as a sub-Riemannian Hamiltonian. Every such Hamiltonian uniquely determines the cometric, and vice-versa. This implies that every sub-Riemannian manifold is uniquely determined by its sub-Riemannian Hamiltonian, and that the converse is true: every sub-Riemannian manifold has a unique sub-Riemannian Hamiltonian. The existence of sub-Riemannian geodesics is given by the Chow-Rashevskii theorem.
The continuous, real-valued Heisenberg group provides a simple example of a sub-Riemannian manifold. For the Heisenberg group, the Hamiltonian is given by

.

pz is not involved in the Hamiltonian.

[edit] Poisson algebras
Hamiltonian systems can be generalized in various ways. Instead of simply looking at the algebra of smooth functions over a symplectic manifold, Hamiltonian mechanics can be formulated on general commutative unital real Poisson algebras. A state is a continuous linear functional on the Poisson algebra (equipped with some suitable topology) such that for any element A of the algebra, A² maps to a nonnegative real number.
A further generalization is given by Nambu dynamics.

[edit] Charged particle in an electromagnetic field
A good illustration of Hamiltonian mechanics is given by the Hamiltonian of a charged particle in an electromagnetic field. In Cartesian coordinates (i.e. qi = xi), the Lagrangian of a non-relativistic classical particle in an electromagnetic field is (in SI Units):



where e is the electric charge of the particle (not necessarily the electron charge), φ is the electric scalar potential, and the Ai are the components of the magnetic vector potential (these may be modified through a gauge transformation).
The generalized momenta may be derived by:



Rearranging, we may express the velocities in terms of the momenta, as:



If we substitute the definition of the momenta, and the definitions of the velocities in terms of the momenta, into the definition of the Hamiltonian given above, and then simplify and rearrange, we get:



This equation is used frequently in quantum mechanics.

[edit] Relativistic charged particle in an electromagnetic field
The Lagrangian for a relativistic charged particle is given by:



Thus the particle's canonical (total) momentum is



that is, the sum of the kinetic momentum and the potential momentum.
Solving for the velocity, we get



So the Hamiltonian is



From this we get the force equation (equivalent to the Euler–Lagrange equation)



from which one can derive



An equivalent expression for the Hamiltonian as function of the relativistic (kinetic) momentum,  is



This has the advantage that  can be measured experimentally whereas  cannot. Notice that the Hamiltonian (total energy) can be viewed as the sum of the relativistic energy (kinetic+rest) ,  plus the potential energy, 

[edit] Hamilton's principle applied to deformable bodies
Hamilton's principle is an important variational principle in elastodynamics. As opposed to a system composed of rigid bodies, deformable bodies have an infinite number of degrees of freedom and occupy continuous regions of space; consequently, the state of the system is described by using continuous functions of space and time. The extended Hamilton Principle for such bodies is given by



where T is the kinetic energy, U is the elastic energy, We is the work done by external loads on the body, and t1,t2 the initial and final times. If the system is conservative, the work done by external forces may be derived from a scalar potential V. In this case,



This is called Hamilton's Principle and it is invariant under coordinate transformations.

[edit] References


^ LaValle, Steven M. (2006), "§13.4.4 Hamiltonian mechanics", Planning Algorithms, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-86205-9 .
^ The Hamiltonian MIT OpenCourseWare website 18.013A Chapter 16.3 Accessed February 2007



V.I. Arnol'd, Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics, Springer-Verlag (1989), [ISBN 0-387-96890-3]
Ralph Abraham and Jerrold E. Marsden, Foundations of Mechanics, (1978) Benjamin-Cummings, London ISBN 0-8053-0102-X
V.I. Arnol'd, V.V. Kozlov and A.I. Neĩshtadt, "Mathematical aspects of classical and celestial mechanics." In: Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences, Dynamical Systems III (vol. 3), Springer-Verlag, 1988.
A. M. Vinogradov , B. A. Kupershmidt "The structure of Hamiltonian mechanics" (djvu), London Math. Soc. Lect. Notes Ser., 60 (1981), Cambridge Univ. Press, London
Binney, James, "Classical Mechanics" (PostScript) lecture notes (PDF)
Tong, David, Classical Dynamics (Cambridge lecture notes)


[edit] See also

Hamiltonian (quantum mechanics)
Lagrangian mechanics
Canonical transformation
Classical mechanics
Dynamical systems
Quantum mechanics
Maxwell's equations
Field theory
Hamilton–Jacobi equation




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamiltonian_mechanics"
Categories: Fundamental physics concepts | Classical mechanics | Hamiltonian mechanics | Dynamical systems | Symplectic geometry 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Български
Català
Česky
Deutsch
Español
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Português
Русский
Shqip
Suomi
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 9 March 2009, at 02:42.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
