











Knight - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Knight";
		var wgTitle = "Knight";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "16897";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281696334;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["autoconfirmed"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Knight

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 








This article is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add inline citations to guard against copyright violations and factual inaccuracies. (October 2008)


For other uses, see Knight (disambiguation) and Knights (disambiguation).




A knight in gothic plate armour, from a German book illustration published 1483.


Knight (from Old English cniht,[1] cognate of German knecht "servant") is the English term for a "gentleman soldier"[1] or member of the warrior class of the Middle Ages in Europe. In other Indo-European languages, cognates of cavalier or rider are more prevalent (viz French chevalier, Portuguese cavaleiro, Spanish caballero, Italian cavaliere, Polish kawaler for modern knights and rycerz for medieval knights, German Ritter, Scandinavian and Dutch ridder, Czech rytíř and Finnish ritari), suggesting a connection to the knight's legendary mode of transport. In the British Commonwealth, there are technically differing levels of knighthood (see Order of the British Empire), but in practice these are more subtle.[citation needed]
The British legend of King Arthur, popularised throughout Europe in the Middle Ages by Geoffrey of Monmouth in his Historia Regum Britanniae ("History of the Kings of Britain"), written in the 1130s, and Sir Thomas Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur ("The Death of Arthur"), written in 1485, was important in defining the ideal of chivalry which is essential to the European concept of the knight as an elite warrior sworn to uphold the values of faith, loyalty, courage and honour. During the Renaissance, the genre of chivalric romance became popular in literature, growing ever more idealistic and eventually giving rise to a new form of realism in literature popularised by Miguel de Cervantes' Don Quixote. This novel explored the ideals of knighthood and their incongruity with the reality of Cervantes' world.
Some orders of knighthood, such as the Knights Templar have themselves become the stuff of legends, others have disappeared into obscurity. Today, a number of orders of knighthood continue to exist in several countries, such as the Order of the British Empire, the Swedish Royal Order of the Seraphim, the Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav, the Russian Order of St. Andrew, and the Order of Canada. Each of these orders carry their own criteria for eligibility, but knighthood is generally granted by a head of state to a selected person for some merit of achievement.




Contents


1 Etymology
2 Origins of medieval knighthood
3 Chivalric code
4 Knights in literature
5 Regalia
6 Orders of knighthood

6.1 Military-monastic orders
6.2 Chivalric orders
6.3 Hereditary knighthoods in Great Britain and Ireland


7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Etymology
The word knight is also found in German as Knecht. Knighthood, as Old English cnihthād, had the meaning of adolescence, i.e. the period between childhood and manhood. The sense of (adult) lieutenant of a king or other superior was in existence at least as early as 1100, although there are signs of it as early as Alfred's Orosius. The connection of the "knight" and horsemanship is a comparatively early one, with a type of royal servant described in Alfred's time as a rādcniht (meaning "riding-knight"). The rādcniht rendered mounted services to the king: delivering messages, patrolling coastlines, and acting as a royal agent; he was probably also involved in military duties. The term cniht, however, had no particular connection to horsemanship and retained a primary meaning of "servant" or "retainer."
In this respect English differs from most other European languages, where the equivalent word emphasizes the status and prosperity of war horse ownership. Linguistically, the association of horse ownership with social status extends back at least as far as ancient Greece, where many aristocratic names incorporated the Greek word for horse, like Hipparchus and Xanthippe; the character Pheidippides in Aristophanes' Clouds has his grandfather's name with hipp- inserted to sound more aristocratic. Similarly, the Greek ἱππεύς (hippeus) is commonly translated knight; at least in its sense of the highest of the four Athenian social classes, those who could afford to maintain a warhorse in the state service.
An Equestrian (Latin eques, plural equites) was a member of the second highest social class in the Roman Republic and early Roman Empire. This class is often translated as knight; the medieval knight, however, was called miles in Latin, (which in classical Latin meant "soldier", normally infantry). In the later Roman Empire the classical Latin word for horse, equus, was replaced in common parlance by vulgar Latin caballus, derived from Gaulish caballos (Delamare 2003 p.96), thus giving French cheval (keval), Italian cavallo, and (borrowed from French) English cavalry. This formed the basis for the words for knight among the Romance languages: Spanish caballero, French chevalier, Portuguese cavaleiro etc. In German, the etymological meaning of Ritter is rider; and likewise for the Dutch and Danish title Ridder

Origins of medieval knighthood
Since the time of classical antiquity, heavy cavalry known as cataphracts were involved in various wars, with their arms and role in battle similar to those of the Medieval knight. However, off the battlefield a cataphract had no fixed political position or social role beyond military functions.
Knighthood as known in Europe was characterized by the combination of two elements, feudalism and service as a mounted combatant. Both arose under the reign of the Frankish emperor Charlemagne, from which the knighthood of the Middle Ages can be seen to have had its genesis.
Some portions of the armies of Germanic tribes (and super-tribes, such as the Suebi) which occupied Europe from the 3rd century AD had always been mounted, and some armies, such as those of the Ostrogoths, comprised mainly cavalry . However, it was the Franks who came to dominate Western and Central Europe after the fall of Rome in the West, and they generally fielded armies composed of large masses of infantry, with an infantry elite, the comitatus, which often rode to battle on horseback rather than marching on foot. Riding to battle had two key advantages: it prevented fatigue, particularly when the elite soldiers wore armor (as was increasingly the case in the centuries after the fall of Rome in the West); and it gave the soldiers more mobility to react to the raids of the enemy, particularly the invasions of Muslim armies which started in the 7th century. So it was that the armies of the Frankish ruler and warlord Charles Martel, which defeated the Umayyad Arab invasion at the Battle of Tours in 732, were still largely infantry armies, the elites riding to battle but dismounting to fight in order to provide a hard core for the levy of the infantry warbands.
As the 8th century progressed into the Carolingian Age, the Franks were generally on the attack, and larger numbers of warriors took to their horses to ride with the Emperor in his wide-ranging campaigns of conquest. At about this time the Franks increasingly remained on horseback to fight on the battlefield as true cavalry rather than as mounted infantry, and would continue to do for centuries thereafter. Although in some nations the knight returned to foot combat in the 14th century, the association of the knight with mounted combat with a spear, and later a lance, remained a strong one.
These mobile mounted warriors made Charlemagne’s far-flung conquests possible, and to secure their service he rewarded them with grants of land called benefices. These were given to the captains directly by the emperor to reward their efforts in the conquests, and they in turn were to grant benefices to their warrior contingents, who were a mix of free and unfree men. In the century or so following Charlemagne’s death, his newly empowered warrior class grew stronger still, and Charles the Bald declared their fiefs to be hereditary. The period of chaos in the 9th and 10th centuries, between the fall of the Carolingian central authority and the rise of separate Western and Eastern Frankish kingdoms (later to become France and Germany respectively), only entrenched this newly-landed warrior class. This was because governing power, and defense against Viking, Magyar and Saracen attack, became an essentially local affair which revolved around these new hereditary local lords and their demesnes.
The resulting hereditary, landed class of mounted elite warriors, the knights, were increasingly seen as the only true soldiers of Europe, hence the exclusive use of miles for them.

Chivalric code
Main article: Chivalry




Jan van Eyck, "Knights of Christ" (detail of the Ghent Altarpiece).


Knights of the medieval era were asked to "Protect the weak, defenseless, helpless, and fight for the general welfare of all."[2] These few guidelines were the main duties of a medieval knight, but they were very hard to accomplish fully. Rarely could even the best of knights achieve these goals. Knights trained, inter alia, in hunting, fighting, and riding. They were also trained to practise courteous, honorable behaviour, which was extremely important. Chivalry (derived from the French word chevalier implying "skills to handle a horse") was the main principle guiding a knight’s life style.[3] The code of chivalry dealt with three main areas: the military, social life, and religion.[4]
The military side of life was very important to knighthood. Along with the fighting elements of war, there were many customs and rules to be followed as well. A way of demonstrating military chivalry was to own expensive, heavy weaponry. Weapons were not the only crucial instruments for a knight: horses were also extremely important, and each knight often owned several horses for distinct purposes. One of the greatest signs of chivalry was the flying of coloured banners, to display power and to distinguish knights in battle and in tournaments. Warriors were not only required to own all these belongings to prove their allegiance: they were expected to act with military courtesy as well. In combat when nobles and knights were taken prisoner, their lives were spared and were often held for ransom in somewhat comfortable surroundings. This same code of conduct did not apply to non-knights (archers, peasants, foot-soldiers, etc.) who were often slaughtered after capture.
Becoming a knight was not a widely attainable occupation in the medieval era. Only the sons of a knight were eligible for the ranks of knighthood. Those who were destined to become knights were singled out of society. In the years of boyhood, these future warriors were sent off to a castle as pages, later becoming squires. Commonly around the age of 20, knights would be admitted to their rank in a ceremony called "dubbing". Although these strong young men had proved their eligibility, their social status would be permanently controlled. They were expected to obey the code of chivalry at all times, and no failure was accepted.
Chivalry and religion were mutually influenced. The early Crusades helped to clarify the moral code of chivalry as it related to religion. As a result, Christian armies began to devote their efforts to sacred purposes. As time passed, clergy instituted religious vows which required knights to use their weapons chiefly for the protection of the weak and defenseless, especially women and orphans, and of churches.
The Code of Chivlary continued to influence social behaviour long after the actual knighthood ceased to exist, influencing for example the 19th Century Victorian perceptions of how a "gentleman" ought to behave.

Knights in literature
Knights and the ideals of knighthood featured largely in medieval and Renaissance literature, and have secured a permanent place in literary romance. While chivalric romances abound, particularly notable literary portrayals of knighthood include Geoffrey Chaucer's The Knight's Tale, Baldassare Castiglione's The Book of the Courtier, and Miguel de Cervantes' Don Quixote, as well as Sir Thomas Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur and other Arthurian tales (Geoffrey of Monmouth's Historia Regum Britanniae, the Pearl Poet's Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, etc.).

Regalia
Knights are generally armigerous (bearing a coat of arms), and indeed they played an essential role in the development of heraldry. As heavier armour, including enlarged shields and enclosed helmets, developed in the Middle Ages, the need for marks of identification arose, and with coloured shields and surcoats, coat armory was born. Armorial rolls were created to record the knights of various regions or those who participated in various tournaments. Additionally, knights adopted certain forms of regalia which became closely associated with the status of knighthood. At the Battle of Crécy (1346), Edward III of England sent his son, Edward, the Black Prince, to lead the charge into battle and when pressed to send reinforcements, the king replied, "say to them that they suffer him this day to win his spurs."[5] Clearly, by this time, spurs had already become emblematic of knighthood. The livery collar is another part of the knight's regalia specifically associated with knighthood.

Orders of knighthood

Military-monastic orders
For more details on this topic, see Military order.


The Seal of the Knights Templar



Knights Hospitaller, founded during the First Crusade, 1099
Order of Saint Lazarus established about 1100
Knights Templar, founded 1118, disbanded 1307
Teutonic Knights, established about 1190, and ruled the Monastic State of the Teutonic Knights in Prussia until 1525

Other orders were established in the Iberian peninsula, under the influence of the orders in the Holy Land and the Crusader movement of the Reconquista:

the Order of Aviz, established in Avis in 1143
the Order of Alcántara, established in Alcántara in 1156
the Order of Calatrava, established in Calatrava in 1158
the Order of Santiago, established in Santiago in 1164.


Chivalric orders
For more details on this topic, see Chivalric order.
After the Crusades, the military orders became idealized and romanticized, resulting in the late medieval notion of chivalry, as reflected in the Arthurian romances of the time. The creation of chivalric orders was fashionable among the nobility in the 14th and 15th centuries, and this is still reflected in contemporary honours systems, including the term order itself. Examples of notable orders of chivalry are:

the Order of Saint George founded by Charles I of Hungary in 1325/6
the Order of the Garter founded by Edward III of England around 1348 - motto: Honi soit qui mal y pense, "Shame on those who think evil of it"
the Order of the Dragon of St. George founded by Milos Obilic around 1370
the Order of the Dragon founded by king Sigismund of Luxemburg in 1408
the Order of the Golden Fleece founded by Philip III, Duke of Burgundy in 1430
the Order of Saint Michael founded by Louis XI of France in 1469
the Order of the Thistle
the Order of the Elephant
the Order of the Bath - motto: Tria iuncta in uno, "Three things joined in one"

From roughly 1560, purely honorific orders were established, as a way to confer prestige and distinction, unrelated to military service and chivalry in the more narrow sense. Such orders were particularly popular in the 17th and 18th centuries, and knighthood continues to be conferred in various countries:

The United Kingdom (see British honours system) and some Commonwealth of Nations countries;
Some European countries, such as The Netherlands and Russia (see below).
The Holy See — see Papal Orders of Chivalry.

There are other monarchies and also republics that also follow this practice. Modern knighthoods are typically awarded in recognition for services rendered to society: services which are not necessarily martial in nature. The British musician Elton John, for example, is a Knight Bachelor, thus entitled to be called Sir Elton. The female equivalent is a Dame.
In the British honours system the knightly style of Sir is accompanied by the given name, and optionally the surname. So, Elton John may be called Sir Elton or Sir Elton John, but never Sir John. Similarly, actress Judi Dench DBE may be addressed as Dame Judi or Dame Judi Dench, but never Dame Dench.
Wives of knights, however, are entitled to the honorific "Lady" before their husband's surname. Thus Sir Paul McCartney's ex-wife was formally styled Lady McCartney (rather than Lady Paul McCartney or Lady Heather McCartney). The style Dame Heather McCartney could be used for the wife of a knight; however, this style is largely archaic and is only used in the most formal of documents, or where the wife is a Dame in her own right (such as Dame Norma Major, who gained her title six years before her husband Sir John Major was knighted). The husbands of Dames have no honorific, so Dame Norma's husband remained The Rt Hon John Major until he received his own knighthood.
Since the reign of Edward VII a clerk in holy orders in the Church of England or in another Anglican Church has not normally received the accolade on being appointed to a degree of knighthood. He receives the insignia of his honour and may place the appropriate letters after his name or title but he may not be called Sir and consequently his wife may not be called Lady.[6][7] The Rt Revd the Hon Sir Paul Reeves did receive the accolade and is correctly called Sir but it is not clear how this situation arose. Ministers of other Christian Churches are entitled to receive the accolade. For example, His Eminence Sir Norman Cardinal Gilroy did receive the accolade on his appointment as Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire in 1969. A knight who is subsequently ordained does not lose his title. A famous example of this situation was The Revd Sir Derek Pattinson, who was ordained just a year after he was appointed Knight Bachelor, apparently somewhat to the consternation of officials at Buckingham Palace.[8] A woman clerk in holy orders may be appointed a Dame in exactly the same way as any other woman since there are no military connotations attached to the honour. A clerk in holy orders who is a baronet is entitled to use the title Sir.
Outside the British honours system it is usually considered improper to address a knighted person as 'Sir' or 'Dame'. Some countries, however, historically did have equivalent honorifics for knights, such as Cavaliere in Italy (e.g. Cavaliere Benito Mussolini), and Ritter in Germany and the Austro-Hungarian Empire (e.g. Georg Ritter von Trapp).
State Knighthoods in the Netherlands are issued in three orders, the Order of William, the Order of the Netherlands Lion, and the Order of Orange Nassau. Additionally there remain a few hereditary knights in the Netherlands.
In France, among other orders are the Légion d'Honneur, the Ordre National du Mérite, the Ordre des Palmes académiques and the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres. The lowest of the ranks conferred by these orders is Chevalier, meaning Knight.
In the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth the monarchs tried to establish chivalric orders but the hereditary lords who controlled the Union did not agree and managed to ban such assemblies. They feared the King would use Orders to gain support for absolutist goals and to make formal distinctions among the peerage which could lead to its legal breakup into two separate classes, and that the King would later play one against the other and eventually limit the legal privileges of hereditary nobility. But finally in 1705 King August II managed to establish the Order of the White Eagle which remains Poland's most prestigious order of that kind. The head of state (now the President as the acting Grand Master) confers knighthoods of the Order to distinguished citizens, foreign monarchs and other heads of state. The Order has its Chapter. There were no particular honorifics that would accompany a knight's name as historically all (or at least by far most) its members would be royals or hereditary lords anyway. So today, a knight is simply referred to as "Name Surname, knight of the White Eagle (Order)".

Hereditary knighthoods in Great Britain and Ireland
There are traces of the Continental system of hereditary knighthood in British usage, however. There were three hereditary knighthoods in the Kingdom of Ireland:

Knight of Glin or Black Knight (FitzGerald of Limerick) — the current holder is Knight Desmond FitzGerald
Knight of Kerry or Green Knight (FitzGerald of Kerry) — the current holder is Sir Adrian FitzGerald
White Knight Fitzgibbon (see Edmund Fitzgibbon) — now dormant, but there is a claimant

It seems likely that the above "Palatine" hereditary knighthoods, created under the Earl of Desmond, were in some respects modeled on an archaic form of knighthood mentioned in the Chronicles of Jean Froissart (c.1337-c.1405). In Book IV, Ch. 64, we find the tale of four Irish kings being prepared to receive English knighthood. Initially, they seem dismissive of the idea, stating that they were knights already, explaining that "in Ireland, a king makes his son a knight, and should the child have lost his father, then the nearest relation." This was to take place at the age of seven years.
While "warrior orders" or "warrior clans" were described in ancient Ireland in the theoretical service of the High King or Provincial Kings, there is no evidence to support the survival of any such orders into the historical period. However, Gaelic Irish knighthood, in its archaic and hereditary context designating the untitled martial nobility, was clearly practiced well into the 14th century.

See also



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Knights 



Nobility
Knight-errant
Heavy Cavalry
Destrier
Chivalric orders
Papal Orders of Chivalry
Cataphract, an ancient heavy cavalry
Bogatyr, or vityaz, the Kievan Rus' knight-errant
Samurai, a similar class in Japanese history
Yóuxiá, a similar class in Chinese history
Hwarang, a similar class in Korean history
Kshatriya, a similar class in Indian history
Mamluk, a similar class in Middle Eastern history
Zawisza Czarny, also known as "The Black Knight"


Notes


^ a b "Knight". American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, 4th ed. (New York:Houghton Mifflin Company). 2000. 
^ Medieval Knights and Warfare - Britain Express
^ Chivalry - Knights and Armor
^ Chivalry - New Advent
^ Jonathan Blair. "The Battle of Crécy". http://www.myarmoury.com/feature_battle_crecy.html. Retrieved on 2009-04-03. 
^ Crockford's Clerical Directory, accessed 27 October 2007
^ Royal Insight, April 2006, accessed 27 October 2007
^ Michael De-La-Noy, obituary in The Independent



References

Kaveh Farrokh, "Sassanian Elite Cavalry AD 224-642", Osprey Publishing.
David Nicolle, "Arthur and the Anglo-Saxon Wars: Anglo-Celtic Warfare, A.D.410-1066", Osprey Publishing.
Arnold, Benjamin, German Knighthood, 1050-1300 Oxford:Clarendon Press, 1985.
Bloch, Marc: Feudal Society, tr. Manyon London:Rutledge, Keagn Paul (1965)
Bluth, BJ; Marching with Sharpe, UK: HarperCollins, 2001, ISBN 0004145372
Boulton, D'Arcy Jonathan Dacre. The Knights of the Crown: The Monarchical Orders of Knighthood in Later Medieval Europe, 1325-1520. 2d revised ed. Woodbridge, Suffolk: Boydell Press, 2000.
Bull, Stephen; An Historical Guide to Arms and Armour, London: Studio Editions, 1991, ISBN 1851707239
Carey, Brian Todd; Allfree, Joshua B; Cairns, John. Warfare in the Medieval World, UK: Pen & Sword Military, 2006, ISBN 1844153398
Edwards, JC; "What Earthly Reason? The replacement of the longbow by handguns." Medieval History Magazine Is. 7, March 2004
Ellul, Max J. The Green Eight Pointed Cross. Watermelon, 2004.
Embleton, Gerry; Medieval Military Costume, UK: Crowood Press, 2000, ISBN 1861263716
Oakeshott, Ewart; A Knight and his Horse, Rev. 2nd Ed. USA: Dufour Editions, 1998 ISBN 0802312977
Forey, Alan John. The Military Orders: From the Twelfth to the Early Fourteenth Centuries. Basingstoke: Macmillan Education, 1992.
Laing, Lloyd and Jennifer. Medieval Britain: The Age of Chivalry. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1996
Nicolle, David. The Age of Charlemagne. Osprey Publishing, 1984.
Robards, Brooks; The Medieval Knight at War, UK: Tiger Books, 1997, ISBN 1855019191
Shaw, William A. The Knights of England: A Complete Record from the Earliest Time 2v. London: Central Chancery, 1906 (Baltimore: Genealogical Publishing Co., 1970).
Williams, Alan; "The Metallurgy of Medieval Arms and Armour" in Companion to Medieval Arms and Armour, ed by Nicolle, David; UK: Boydell Press, 2002, ISBN 0851158722


External links

"History of Orders of Chivalry". Heraldica. http://www.heraldica.org/topics/orders/ordhist.htm. 
Association of Papal Orders in Great Britain
Modern Honours of the UK
"Papal Orders of Chivalry". http://www.chivalricorders.org/vatican/main2.htm. 


International Commission for Orders of Chivalrywww.rotten.com




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knight"
Categories: Feudalism | Positions of authority | Honorary titles | Knights | Warfare of the Medieval era | Noble titles | EquestrianismHidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism | Wikipedia protected pages without expiry | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2009 | Articles containing non-English language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Беларуская
Bosanski
Български
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Esperanto
Español
فارسی
Français
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latina
Latviešu
Magyar
日本語
Nederlands
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Русский
Simple English
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 13:32.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
