













Great Books of the Western World - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Great_Books_of_the_Western_World";
		var wgTitle = "Great Books of the Western World";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "907822";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282274421;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Great Books of the Western World

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 




The Great Books (second edition)


Great Books of the Western World is a series of books originally published in the United States in 1952 by Encyclopædia Britannica Inc. to present the western canon in a single package of 54 volumes. The series is now in its second edition and contains 60 volumes. The list of Great Books is maintained by the Great Books Foundation, and is part of the Great Books curriculum.




Contents


1 History
2 The works
3 Second edition
4 Criticisms and responses

4.1 Criticisms of the authors selected
4.2 Criticisms of the works selected
4.3 Criticisms of difficulty
4.4 Style over Substance
4.5 Criticism of the ideas


5 References
6 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
The project got its start at the University of Chicago. University president Robert Hutchins collaborated with Mortimer Adler to develop a course, generally aimed at businessmen, for the purpose of filling in gaps in education, to make one more well-rounded and familiar with the "Great Books" and ideas of the past three millennia. Among the original students was William Benton, future US Senator and later CEO of the Encyclopædia Britannica. He proposed selecting the greatest books of the canon, complete and unabridged, having Hutchins and Adler edit them for publishing by Encyclopædia Britannica. Hutchins was wary, fearing that the works would be sold and treated as encyclopedias, thereby cheapening them. Nevertheless, he agreed to the project and paid $60,000 for it.
After debates about what to include and how to present it, with an eventual budget of $2,000,000, the project was ready. It was presented at a gala at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York City on April 15, 1952. In his speech, Hutchins said "This is more than a set of books, and more than a liberal education. Great Books of the Western World is an act of piety. Here are the sources of our being. Here is our heritage. This is the West. This is its meaning for mankind." The first two volumes would be presented to Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom and U.S. President Harry S. Truman.
Sales were initially poor. After 1,863 were sold in 1952, less than one-tenth that number were sold the following year. A financial debacle loomed, until Encyclopædia Britannica altered the marketing strategy and sold the set (as Hutchins had feared) through experienced door-to-door encyclopedia salespeople. Through this method 50,000 sets were sold in 1961. In 1963 the editors published Gateway to the Great Books, a ten-volume set of readings designed as an introduction to the authors and themes in the Great Books series. Each year from 1961 to 1998 the editors published The Great Ideas Today, an annual update on the applicability of the Great Books to current issues.[1][2]

[edit] The works
Originally published in 54 volumes, The Great Books of the Western World covers categories including fiction, history, poetry, natural science, mathematics, philosophy, drama, politics, religion, economics, and ethics. Hutchins wrote the first volume, titled The Great Conversation, as an introduction and discourse on liberal education. Adler sponsored the next two volumes, "The Great Ideas: A Syntopicon", as a way of emphasizing the unity of the set and, by extension, of Western thought in general. A team of indexers spent months compiling references to such topics as "Man's freedom in relation to the will of God" and "The denial of void or vacuum in favor of a plenum". They grouped the topics into 102 chapters, for which Adler wrote 102 introductions. The volumes contained the following works, color-coding the spines to denote the categories::
Volume 1

The Great Conversation

Volume 2

Syntopicon I: Angel, Animal, Aristocracy, Art, Astronomy, Beauty, Being, Cause, Chance, Change, Citizen, Constitution, Courage, Custom and Convention, Definition, Democracy, Desire, Dialectic, Duty, Education, Element, Emotion, Eternity, Evolution, Experience, Family, Fate, Form, God, Good and Evil, Government, Habit, Happiness, History, Honor, Hypothesis, Idea, Immortality, Induction, Infinity, Judgment, Justice, Knowledge, Labor, Language, Law, Liberty, Life and Death, Logic, and Love

Volume 3

Syntopicon II: Man, Mathematics, Matter, Mechanics, Medicine, Memory and Imagination, Metaphysics, Mind, Monarchy, Nature, Necessity and Contingency, Oligarchy, One and Many, Opinion, Opposition, Philosophy, Physics, Pleasure and Pain, Poetry, Principle, Progress, Prophecy, Prudence, Punishment, Quality, Quantity, Reasoning, Relation, Religion, Revolution, Rhetoric, Same and Other, Science, Sense, Sign and Symbol, Sin, Slavery, Soul, Space, State, Temperance, Theology, Time, Truth, Tyranny, Universal and Particular, Virtue and Vice, War and Peace, Wealth, Will, Wisdom, and World

Volume 4

Homer

The Iliad
The Odyssey



Volume 5

Aeschylus

The Suppliant Maidens
The Persians
Seven Against Thebes
Prometheus Bound
The Oresteia

Agamemnon
Choephoroe
The Eumenides




Sophocles

The Oedipus Cycle

Oedipus the King
Oedipus at Colonus
Antigone


Ajax
Electra
The Trachiniae
Philoctetes


Euripides

Rhesus
Medea
Hippolytus
Alcestis
Heracleidae
The Suppliants
Trojan Women
Ion
Helen
Andromache
Electra
Bacchantes
Hecuba
Heracles Mad
Phoenician Women
Orestes
Iphigeneia in Tauris
Iphigeneia at Aulis
Cyclops


Aristophanes

The Acharnians
The Knights
The Clouds
The Wasps
Peace
The Birds
The Frogs
Lysistrata
Thesmophoriazusae
Ecclesiazousae
Plutus



Volume 6

Herodotus

The History


Thucydides

The History of the Peloponnesian War



Volume 7

Plato

Charmides
Lysis
Laches
Protagoras
Euthydemus
Cratylus
Phaedrus
Ion
Symposium
Meno
Euthyphro
Apology
Crito
Phaedo
Gorgias
The Republic
Timaeus
Critias
Parmenides
Theaetetus
Sophist
Statesman
Philebus
Laws
The Seventh Letter



Volume 8

Aristotle

Categories
On Interpretation
Prior Analytics
Posterior Analytics
Topics
On Sophistical Refutations
Physics
On Generation and Corruption
Meteorology
Metaphysics
On the Soul
Minor biological works



Volume 9

Aristotle

History of Animals
On the Parts of Animals
On the Motion of Animals
On the Gait of Animals
On the Generation of Animals
Nicomachean Ethics
Politics
The Athenian Constitution
Rhetoric
Poetics



Volume 10

Hippocrates

Works


Galen

On the Natural Faculties



Volume 11

Euclid

The Thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements


Archimedes

On the Sphere and Cylinder
Measurement of a Circle
On Conoids and Pheroids
On Spirals
On the Equilibrium of Planes
The Sand-Reckoner
The Quadrature of the Parabola
On Floating Bodies
Book of Lemmas
The Method Treating of Mechanical Problems


Apollonius of Perga

On Conic Sections


Nicomachus of Gerasa

Introduction to Arithmetic



Volume 12

Lucretius

On the Nature of Things


Epictetus

The Discourses


Marcus Aurelius

The Meditations



Volume 13

Virgil

The Eclogues
The Georgics
The Aeneid



Volume 14

Plutarch

The Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans



Volume 15

P. Cornelius Tacitus

The Annals
The Histories



Volume 16

Ptolemy

The Almagest


Nicolaus Copernicus

On the Revolutions of Heavenly Spheres


Johannes Kepler

Epitome of Copernican Astronomy (Books IV - V)
The Harmonies of the World (Book V)



Volume 17

Plotinus

The Six Enneads



Volume 18

Augustine of Hippo

The Confessions
The City of God
On Christian Doctrine



Volume 19

Thomas Aquinas

Summa Theologica (First part complete, selections from second part)



Volume 20

Thomas Aquinas

Summa Theologica (Selections from second and third parts and supplement)



Volume 21

Dante Alighieri

The Divine Comedy



Volume 22

Geoffrey Chaucer

Troilus and Criseyde
The Canterbury Tales



Volume 23

Niccolò Machiavelli

The Prince


Thomas Hobbes

Leviathan



Volume 24

François Rabelais

Gargantua and Pantagruel



Volume 25

Michel Eyquem de Montaigne

Essays



Volume 26

William Shakespeare

The First Part of King Henry the Sixth
The Second Part of King Henry the Sixth
The Third Part of King Henry the Sixth
The Tragedy of Richard the Third
The Comedy of Errors
Titus Andronicus
The Taming of the Shrew
The Two Gentlemen of Verona
Love's Labour's Lost
Romeo and Juliet
The Tragedy of King Richard the Second
A Midsummer-Night's Dream
The Life and Death of King John
The Merchant of Venice
The First Part of King Henry the Fourth
The Second Part of King Henry the Fourth
Much Ado About Nothing
The Life of King Henry the Fifth
Julius Caesar
As You Like It



Volume 27

William Shakespeare

Twelfth Night; or, What You Will
The Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark
The Merry Wives of Windsor
Troilus and Cressida
All's Well That Ends Well
Measure For Measure
Othello, the Moor of Venice
King Lear
Macbeth
Antony and Cleopatra
Coriolanus
Timon of Athens
Pericles, Prince of Tyre
Cymbeline
The Winter's Tale
The Tempest
The Famous History of the Life of King Henry the Eighth
Sonnets



Volume 28

William Gilbert

On the Loadstone and Magnetic Bodies


Galileo Galilei

Dialogues Concerning the Two New Sciences


William Harvey

On the Motion of the Heart and Blood in Animals
On the Circulation of Blood
On the Generation of Animals



Volume 29

Miguel de Cervantes

The History of Don Quixote de la Mancha



Volume 30

Sir Francis Bacon

Advancement of Learning
Novum Organum
New Atlantis



Volume 31

René Descartes

Rules for the Direction of the Mind
Discourse on the Method
Meditations on First Philosophy
Objections Against the Meditations and Replies
The Geometry


Benedict de Spinoza

Ethics



Volume 32

John Milton

English Minor Poems
Paradise Lost
Samson Agonistes
Areopagitica



Volume 33

Blaise Pascal

The Provincial Letters
Pensées
Scientific and mathematical essays



Volume 34

Sir Isaac Newton

Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy
Optics


Christian Huygens

Treatise on Light



Volume 35

John Locke

A Letter Concerning Toleration
Concerning Civil Government, Second Essay
An Essay Concerning Human Understanding


George Berkeley

The Principles of Human Knowledge


David Hume

An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding



Volume 36

Jonathan Swift

Gulliver's Travels


Laurence Sterne

The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman



Volume 37

Henry Fielding

The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling



Volume 38

Charles de Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu

The Spirit of the Laws


Jean Jacques Rousseau

A Discourse on the Origin of Inequality
A Discourse on Political Economy
The Social Contract



Volume 39

Adam Smith

An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations



Volume 40

Edward Gibbon

The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (Part 1)



Volume 41

Edward Gibbon

The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (Part 2)



Volume 42

Immanuel Kant

The Critique of Pure Reason
Fundamental Principles of the Metaphysic of Morals
The Critique of Practical Reason
Excerpts from The Metaphysics of Morals

Preface and Introduction to the Metaphysical Elements of Ethics with a note on Conscience
General Introduction to the Metaphysic of Morals
The Science of Right


The Critique of Judgement



Volume 43

American State Papers

Declaration of Independence
Articles of Confederation
The Constitution of the United States of America


Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, John Jay

The Federalist


John Stuart Mill

On Liberty
Considerations on Representative Government
Utilitarianism



Volume 44

James Boswell

The Life of Samuel Johnson, LL.D.



Volume 45

Antoine Laurent Lavoisier

Elements of Chemistry


Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier

Analytical Theory of Heat


Michael Faraday

Experimental Researches in Electricity



Volume 46

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

The Philosophy of Right
The Philosophy of History



Volume 47

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

Faust



Volume 48

Herman Melville

Moby Dick; or, The Whale



Volume 49

Charles Darwin

The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection
The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex



Volume 50

Karl Marx

Capital


Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels

Manifesto of the Communist Party



Volume 51

Count Leo Tolstoy

War and Peace



Volume 52

Fyodor Mikhailovich Dostoevsky

The Brothers Karamazov



Volume 53

William James

The Principles of Psychology



Volume 54

Sigmund Freud

The Origin and Development of Psycho-Analysis
Selected Papers on Hysteria
The Sexual Enlightenment of Children
The Future Prospects of Psycho-Analytic Therapy
Observations on "Wild" Psycho-Analysis
The Interpretation of Dreams
On Narcissism
Instincts and Their Vicissitudes
Repression
The Unconscious
A General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
Beyond the Pleasure Principle
Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego
The Ego and the Id
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
Thoughts for the Times on War and Death
Civilization and Its Discontents
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis




[edit] Second edition
In 1990 a second edition of Great Books of the Western World was published, with updated translations and six more volumes of material covering the 20th century, an era of which the first edition was nearly devoid. A number of pre-20th century books were also added, and four were dropped: Apollonius' On Conic Sections, Laurence Sterne's Tristram Shandy, Henry Fielding's Tom Jones, and Joseph Fourier's Analytical Theory of Heat. Adler later expressed regret about dropping On Conic Sections and Tom Jones. Adler also voiced disagreement with the addition of Voltaire's Candide, and said that the Syntopicon should have included references to the Qur'an. He addressed criticisms that the set was too heavily Western European and did not adequately represent women and minority authors.[3]
The pre-20th century books added (volume numbering is not strictly compatible with the first edition due to rearrangement of some books—see the complete table of contents[4] for the second edition):
Volume 20

John Calvin

Institutes of the Christian Religion (Selections)



Volume 23

Erasmus

The Praise of Folly



Volume 31

Molière

The School for Wives
The Critique of the School for Wives
Tartuffe
Don Juan
The Miser
The Would-Be Gentleman
The Would-Be Invalid


Jean Racine

Bérénice
Phèdre



Volume 34

Voltaire

Candide


Denis Diderot

Rameau's Nephew



Volume 43

Søren Kierkegaard

Fear and Trembling


Friedrich Nietzsche

Beyond Good and Evil



Volume 44

Alexis de Toqueville

Democracy in America



Volume 45

Honoré de Balzac

Cousin Bette



Volume 46

Jane Austen

Emma


George Eliot

Middlemarch



Volume 47

Charles Dickens

Little Dorrit



Volume 48

Mark Twain

Huckleberry Finn



Volume 52

Henrik Ibsen

A Doll's House
The Wild Duck
Hedda Gabler
The Master Builder



The six volumes of 20th century material consisted of the following:
Volume 55

William James

Pragmatism


Henri Bergson

An Introduction to Metaphysics


John Dewey

Experience in Education


Alfred North Whitehead

Science and the Modern World


Bertrand Russell

The Problems of Philosophy


Martin Heidegger

What Is Metaphysics?


Ludwig Wittgenstein

Philosophical Investigations


Karl Barth

The Word of God and the Word of Man



Volume 56

Henri Poincaré

Science and Hypothesis


Max Planck

Scientific Autobiography and Other Papers


Alfred North Whitehead

An Introduction to Mathematics


Albert Einstein

Relativity: The Special and the General Theory


Arthur Eddington

The Expanding Universe


Niels Bohr

Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature (selections)
Discussion with Einstein on Epistemology


G. H. Hardy

A Mathematician's Apology


Werner Heisenberg

Physics and Philosophy


Erwin Schrödinger

What Is Life?


Theodosius Dobzhansky

Genetics and the Origin of Species


C. H. Waddington

The Nature of Life



Volume 57

Thorstein Veblen

The Theory of the Leisure Class


R. H. Tawney

The Acquisitive Society


John Maynard Keynes

The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money



Volume 58

Sir James George Frazer

The Golden Bough (selections)


Max Weber

Essays in Sociology (selections)


Johan Huizinga

The Waning of the Middle Ages


Claude Lévi-Strauss

Structural Anthropology (selections)



Volume 59

Henry James

The Beast in the Jungle


George Bernard Shaw

Saint Joan


Joseph Conrad

Heart of Darkness


Anton Chekhov

Uncle Vanya


Luigi Pirandello

Six Characters in Search of an Author


Marcel Proust

Remembrance of Things Past: "Swann in Love"


Willa Cather

A Lost Lady


Thomas Mann

Death in Venice


James Joyce

A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man



Volume 60

Virginia Woolf

To the Lighthouse


Franz Kafka

The Metamorphosis


D. H. Lawrence

The Prussian Officer


T. S. Eliot

The Waste Land


Eugene O'Neill

Mourning Becomes Electra


F. Scott Fitzgerald

The Great Gatsby


William Faulkner

A Rose for Emily


Bertolt Brecht

Mother Courage and Her Children


Ernest Hemingway

The Short Happy Life of Francis Macomber


George Orwell

Animal Farm


Samuel Beckett

Waiting for Godot




[edit] Criticisms and responses

[edit] Criticisms of the authors selected
Criticism has attended Great Books of the Western World since publication. The stress Hutchins placed on the monumental importance of these works was an easy target for those who dismissed the project as the work of white males celebrating the work of other dead white males, while ignoring contributions of women and non-white authors.[5][6] The criticism swelled in tandem with the feminist and civil rights movements.[7]
In his Europe: A History, Norman Davies criticizes the compilation for overrepresenting selected parts of the western world, especially Britain and the U.S., while ignoring the other, particularly Central and Eastern Europe. According to his calculation, in 151 authors included in both editions, there are 49 English or American authors, 27 Frenchmen, 20 Germans, 15 ancient Greeks, 9 ancient Romans, 6 Russians, 4 Scandinavians, 3 Spaniards, 3 Italians, 3 Irishmen, 3 Scots, and 3 Eastern Europeans. Prejudices and preferences, he concludes, are self-evident.
In response, such criticisms have been derided as ad hominem and biased in themselves. The counter-argument maintains that such criticisms discount the importance of books solely because of generic, imprecise and possibly irrelevant characteristics of the books' authors, rather than because of the content of the books themselves.[3]
Also, writers such as Harold Bloom refer to such arguments as the "school of resentment." Bloom doubts that just because women and minorities "resent" being ignored in the past, that this means we should try to hide or obscure the overwhelming importance of white European males throughout history.

[edit] Criticisms of the works selected
Others thought that while the selected authors were worthy, too much emphasis was placed on the complete works of a single author (even less notable ones) rather than a wider selection of authors and representative works (for instance, all of Shakespeare's plays are included, but no works by Christopher Marlowe or Ben Jonson). Defenders of the set have pointed out that any reasonable number of volumes cannot possibly represent all authors or works that some readers might find desirable, and that any selection of authors and works is bound to be controversial to some extent. The second edition of the set already contained 130 authors and 517 individual works. Indeed, the inclusion of so many writers and so much material has led to complaints of cramped typography. The editors point out that the guides to additional reading for each topic in the Syntopicon refer the interested reader to many more authors (including, incidentally, Marlowe and Jonson).[8]

[edit] Criticisms of difficulty
The scientific and mathematical selections also came under criticism for being incomprehensible to the average reader, especially with the absence of any sort of critical apparatus. The second edition did drop two scientific works, by Apollonius and Fourier, in part because of their perceived difficulty for the average reader. Nevertheless, the editors steadfastly maintain that average readers are capable of understanding far more than the critics deem possible. Robert Hutchins stated this view in the introduction to the first edition:

Because the great bulk of mankind have never had the chance to get a liberal education, it cannot be "proved" that they can get it. Neither can it be "proved" that they cannot. The statement of the ideal, however, is of value in indicating the direction that education should take.[9]


[edit] Style over Substance
Yet another criticism was that the series was in reality more for show than for substance. Many dismissed Adler's Syntopicon as unwieldy and useless. Since the great majority of the works were still in print, some critics noted that the company could have saved 2 million dollars and simply written a list. Encyclopædia Britannica's aggressive promotion produced solid sales, but the fraction that were actually read appeared to be rather small. Some argued that their main use was to create the illusion of culture without any real substance behind it. Furthermore the inexpensive but dated, mostly public domain translations used were generally seen to be poor. Dense formatting also did not help readability.[10]
The second edition selected translations that were generally considered an improvement, though the cramped typography remained. As for the charge that many sets go unread, the same can be said for many of the other books on buyers' bookshelves. Through reading plans and the Syntopicon, the editors have attempted to guide readers through the set.[11]

[edit] Criticism of the ideas
Robert M. Pirsig, in Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, has his main character Phædrus criticize the Great Books project radically for misestimating the value of the books:

"He came to hate them vehemently, and to assail them with every kind of invective he could think of, not because they were irrelevant but for exactly the opposite reason. The more he studied, the more convinced he became that no one had yet told the damage to this world that had resulted from our unconscious acceptance of their thought."

The editors respond that the set contains wide-ranging debates representing many viewpoints on significant issues, not a monolithic school of thought. Mortimer Adler argued in the introduction to the second edition:

Presenting a wide variety and divergence of views or opinions, among which there is likely to be some truth but also much more error, the Syntopicon [and by extension the larger set itself] invites readers to think for themselves and make up their own minds on every topic under consideration.[12]


[edit] References


^ Mialton Meyer (1993). "Robert Maynard Hutchins: A Memoir". University of California Press. http://ark.cdlib.org/ark:/13030/ft4w10061d/. Retrieved on 2007-05-30.  This biography of Robert M. Hutchins contains an extensive and lively discussion of the Great Books project, although the author burdens it with personal opinions.
^ Carrie Golus (2002-07-11). "Special Collections tells the story of a cornerstone of American education". The University of Chicago Chronicle. http://chronicle.uchicago.edu/020711/greatbooks.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-05-30. 
^ a b Mortimer Adler (September 1997). "Selecting works for the 1990 edition of Great Books of the Western World". Great Books Index. http://books.mirror.org/gb.sel1990.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-29.  "We did not base our selections on an author's nationality, religion, politics, or field of study; nor on an author's race or gender. Great books were not chosen to make up quotas of any kind; there was no "affirmative action" in the process." 
^ Robert Teeter (2005-01-04). "Great Books of the Western World (2nd ed., 1990)". http://www.interleaves.org/%7Erteeter/gbww.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-30. 
^ {{cite web|url=http://calbears.findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qn4155/is_20010701/ai_n13916438|author=Sabrina Walters|title=Great Books won Adler fame, scorn|publisher=Chicago Sun-Times|date=2001-07-01|accessdate=2007-07-01}}
^ Peter Temes (2001-07-03). "Death of a Great Reader and Philosopher". Chicago Sun-Times. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qn4155/is_20010703/ai_n13917760. Retrieved on 2007-07-11. 
^ John Berlau (2001-08-27). "What Happened to the Great Ideas? - Mortimer J. Adler's Great Books programs". Insight on the News. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1571/is_32_17/ai_77812349. Retrieved on 2007-05-29.  "Harvard University's Henry Louis Gates blasted the Great Books for showing 'profound disrespect for the intellectual capacities of people of color -- red, brown or yellow.'" 
^ Mortimer J. Adler (1990). "Bibliography of Additional Readings". The Syntopicon: II. Great Books of the Western World, vol. 1-2 (2nd edition ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.. pp. 909–996. ISBN 0-85229-531-6.  The lists of recommended works by Jonson and Marlowe are on p.952 and p.964, respectively.
^ Robert M. Hutchins (1952). "Chapter VI: Education for All". The Great Conversation. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.. p. 44. 
^ Dwight Macdonald (1952-11-29 with later appendix). "The Book-of-the-Millennium Club". The New Yorker. http://www.writing.upenn.edu/~afilreis/50s/macdonald-great-books.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-29.  "I also wonder how many of the over 100,000 customers who have by now caved in under the pressure of Mr. Harden and his banner-bearing colleagues are doing much browsing in these upland pastures?" 
^ Mortimer J. Adler (1990). The Great Conversation (2nd edition ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.. pp. 33–34 for discussion of new translations, pp.74–98 for reading plans and guides. ISBN 0-85229-531-6. 
^ Mortimer J. Adler (1990). "Section 1: The Great Books and the Great Ideas". The Great Conversation (2nd edition ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.. p. 27. ISBN 0-85229-531-6. 



[edit] External links

Official Britannica web page for the Great Books
Center for the Study of the Great Ideas Mortimer Adler web pages with extensive discussion of the Great Books
Shimer College The Great Books College of Chicago
St. John's College in Annapolis, MD and Santa Fe, NM - a "Great Books" college
Thomas Aquinas College in Santa Paula, CA - Roman Catholic Great Books college with an emphasis on Aristotle and Thomas Aquinas
Review of Alex Beam's book "A Great Idea At The Time"




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Books_of_the_Western_World"
Categories: Series of books | Western culture 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


বাংলা
Català
한국어
Italiano
தமிழ்









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 04:47 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
