













Hoover Dam - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Hoover_Dam";
		var wgTitle = "Hoover Dam";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "14308";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281849507;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Hoover Dam

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For the dam near Westerville, Ohio, see Hoover Dam (Ohio).


Hoover Dam



Hoover Dam from the air


Official name
Hoover Dam


Impounds
Colorado River


Creates
Lake Mead


Locale
Nevada-Arizona United States


Maintained by
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation


Length
1244 ft (379 m)


Height
726.4 ft (221 m)


Construction began
1931


Opening date
1936


Geographical Data


Coordinates
36°0′56″N 114°44′16″W﻿ / ﻿36.01556°N 114.73778°W﻿ / 36.01556; -114.73778Coordinates: 36°0′56″N 114°44′16″W﻿ / ﻿36.01556°N 114.73778°W﻿ / 36.01556; -114.73778




Hoover Dam


U.S. National Register of Historic Places


U.S. National Historic Landmark




Hoover Dam by Ansel Adams






Nearest city:
Boulder City, Nevada


Built/Founded:
1933


Architect:
Six Companies,Inc. (structural), Gordon Kaufmann (exteriors)


Architectural style(s):
Art Deco


Governing body:
BUREAU OF RECLAMATION


MPS:
Vehicular Bridges in Arizona MPS (AD)


Added to NRHP:
April 08, 1981[1]


Designated NHL:
August 20, 1985[2]


NRHP Reference#:
81000382


Hoover Dam, originally known as Boulder Dam, is a concrete arch-gravity dam in the Black Canyon of the Colorado River, on the border between the U.S. states of Arizona and Nevada. When completed in 1935, it was both the world's largest electric-power generating station and the world's largest concrete structure. It was surpassed in both these respects by the Grand Coulee Dam in 1945. It is currently the world's 35th-largest hydroelectric generating station.[3]
This dam, located 30 miles (48 km) southeast of Las Vegas, Nevada, is named after Herbert Hoover, who played an instrumental role in its construction, first as the Secretary of Commerce and then later as the President of the United States. Construction began in 1931 and was completed in 1936, more than two years ahead of schedule. The dam and the power plant are operated by the Bureau of Reclamation of the U.S. Department of the Interior. Listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1981, Hoover Dam was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1985.[2][4]
Lake Mead is the reservoir created behind the dam, named after Elwood Mead, who oversaw the construction of the dam.




Contents


1 Planning and agreements
2 Contractors
3 Construction

3.1 Groundworks
3.2 River diversion
3.3 Rock clearance
3.4 Concrete pouring
3.5 Construction deaths


4 Environmental impact
5 Power plant
6 Architectural style
7 Use for road transport
8 Power distribution
9 Statistics
10 Naming controversy
11 Construction Artifacts
12 References
13 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Planning and agreements




A view from the air of the dam from over Lake Mead


A commission was formed in 1922 with a representative from each of the Basin states and one from the Federal Government. The federal representative was Herbert Hoover, then Secretary of Commerce under President Warren Harding. In January 1922, Hoover met with the state governors of Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming to work out an equitable arrangement for apportioning the waters of the Colorado River for their states' use. The resulting Colorado River Compact, signed on November 24, 1922, split the river basin into upper and lower halves with the states within each region deciding how the water would be divided. This agreement, known as the Hoover Compromise, paved the way for the Boulder Dam Project. This huge dam was built to provide irrigation water flow, for flood control, and for hydroelectric-power generation.




Herbert Hoover


The first attempt to gain Congressional approval for construction of Boulder Dam came in 1922 with the introduction of two bills in the House of Representatives and the Senate. The bills were introduced by Congressman Phil D. Swing and Senator Hiram W. Johnson and were known as the Swing-Johnson bills. The bills failed to come up for a vote and were subsequently reintroduced several times. In December 1928, both the House and the Senate finally approved the bill and sent it to the President for approval. On December 21, 1928, President Calvin Coolidge signed the bill approving the Boulder Canyon Project. The initial appropriation for construction was made in July 1930, by which time Herbert Hoover had become President.
Early plans called for the dam to be built in Boulder Canyon, so the project was known as the Boulder Canyon Project. The dam site was eventually moved downstream eight miles (13 km) to Black Canyon, but the project name remained the same.

[edit] Contractors




River view of Boulder (Hoover) dam site, circa 1904






Boulder Dam site (proposed), circa 1921






Sketch of proposed damsite & reservoir, circa 1921


The contract to build the Boulder Dam was awarded to Six Companies, Inc. on March 11, 1931,[5] a joint venture of Morrison-Knudsen Company of Boise, Idaho; Utah Construction Company of Ogden, Utah; Pacific Bridge Company of Portland, Oregon; Henry J. Kaiser & W. A. Bechtel Company of Oakland, California; MacDonald & Kahn Ltd. of Los Angeles; and the J.F. Shea Company of Portland, Oregon. The chief executive of Six Companies, Frank Crowe, had previously invented many of the techniques used to build the dam.
During the concrete-pouring and curing portion of construction, it was necessary to circulate refrigerated water through tubes in the concrete. This was to remove the heat generated by the chemical reactions that solidify the concrete, since the setting and curing of the concrete was calculated to take about 125 years if cooling was not done. Six Companies, Inc., did much of this work, but it discovered that such a large refrigeration project was beyond its expertise. Hence, the Union Carbide Corporation was contracted to assist with the refrigeration needs.
Six Companies, Inc. was contracted to build a new town called Boulder City for workers, but the construction schedule for the dam was accelerated in order to create more jobs in response to the onset of the Great Depression, and the town was not ready when the first dam workers arrived at the site in early 1931. During the first summer of construction, workers and their families were housed in temporary camps like Ragtown while work on the town progressed. Discontent with Ragtown and dangerous working conditions at the dam site led to a strike on August 8, 1931. Six Companies responded by sending in strike-breakers with guns and clubs, and the strike was soon quelled. But the discontent prompted the authorities to speed up the construction of Boulder City, and by the spring of 1932 Ragtown had been deserted.[6] Gambling, drinking alcohol, and prostitution were not permitted in Boulder City during the period of construction. To this day Boulder City is one of only two locations in Nevada not to allow gambling, and the sale of alcohol was illegal until 1969.[7]
While working in the tunnels, many workers suffered from the carbon monoxide generated by the machinery there. The contractors claimed that the sickness was pneumonia and was not their responsibility. Some of the workers sickened and died because of the so-called "pneumonia". Most are uncounted on the official death list. In a court case, one of the claimants (Ed Kraus) said that the poisoning had resulted in his impotence. This was disproved after a prostitute in the pay of the contractors gave evidence. The jury failed to reach a verdict as a result, and the claim was lost.[8]

[edit] Construction

[edit] Groundworks




Hoover Dam Architectural Plans






Overview Of Dam Mechanisms


To protect the construction site from flooding, two cofferdams were constructed. Construction of the upper cofferdam began in September 1932, even though the river had not yet been diverted. A temporary horseshoe-shaped dike protected the cofferdam on the Nevada side of the river. After the Arizona tunnels were completed, and the river diverted, the work was completed much faster. Once the coffer dams were in place and the construction site dewatered, excavation for the dam foundation began. For the dam to rest on solid rock, it was necessary to remove all the riverbed's accumulated erosion soils and other loose materials until sound bedrock was reached. Work on the foundation excavations was completed in June 1933. During excavations for the foundation, approximately 1,500,000 yd³ (1,150,000 m³) of material was removed. Since the dam would be a gravity-arch type, the side-walls of the canyon would also bear the force of the impounded lake. Therefore the side-walls were excavated too, to reach virgin (un-weathered) rock which had not experienced the weathering of centuries of water seepage, wintertime freeze cracking, and the heating/cooling cycles of the Arizona/Nevada desert.

[edit] River diversion
To divert the river's flow around the construction site, four diversion tunnels were driven through the canyon walls, two on the Nevada side and two on the Arizona side. These tunnels were 56 feet (17 m) in diameter. Their combined length was nearly 16,000 feet (4877 meters, more than three miles). Tunneling began at the lower portals of the Nevada tunnels in May 1931. Shortly afterwards, work began on two similar tunnels in the Arizona canyon wall. In March 1932, work began on lining the tunnels with concrete. First the base, or invert, was poured. Gantry cranes, running on rails through the entire length of each tunnel were used to place the concrete. The sidewalls were poured next. Movable sections of steel forms were used for the sidewalls. Finally, using pneumatic guns, the overheads were filled in. The concrete lining is three feet (91.5 centimeters) thick, reducing the finished tunnel diameter to 50 feet (15.25 m).
Following the completion of the dam, the entrances to the two outer diversion tunnels were sealed at the opening and half way through the tunnels with large concrete plugs. The downstream halves of the tunnels following the inner plugs are now the main bodies of the spillway tunnels. The spillways can be seen directly above the outer diversion tunnels. They drop sharply from their entrance point and merge directly into the old diversion tunnels.




Two intake towers on the Arizona side.


The two inner diversion tunnels have two concrete plugs in them. One is roughly half way along their length, and the other is around 75% of the way along their length. The section sandwiched between two concrete plugs is used as part of the tunnel which water travels along, to journey from the outermost intake towers and the generators. The two innermost intake towers have separate tunnels.
The large spillway tunnels have only been used three times in the history of the dam. The first one was during the second half of 1941 for testing. The second one was for about six weeks during the summer of 1983, when record precipitation and snow-melt in the Colorado River basin drained into Lake Mead, and the third one in 1999, again with heavy precipitation that filled Lake Mead.[citation needed][9]

[edit] Rock clearance
The two vertical foundations for each of the arch walls (the Nevada side and Arizona side) had to be founded on sound virgin rock; free of cracks and the weathering that the surface rock of the canyon walls had from thousands of years of weathering and exposure.
The men who removed this rock were called high-scalers. While suspended from the top of the canyon with ropes high-scalers climbed down the canyon walls and removed the loose rock with jackhammers and dynamite.

[edit] Concrete pouring




Hoover Dam - June 2005


The first concrete was placed into the dam on June 6, 1933. Since no structure of the magnitude of the Hoover Dam had been constructed, many of the procedures used in construction of the dam were untried. Since concrete heats up and contracts as it cures, uneven cooling and contraction of the concrete posed a serious problem. The Bureau of Reclamation engineers calculated that if the dam were built in a single continuous pour, the concrete would have taken 125 years to cool to ambient temperature. The resulting stresses would have caused the dam to crack and crumble.[10] To solve this problem the dam was built in a series of interlocking trapezoidal columns. Each pour was no more than six inches (152 mm) deep. Because of this depth it is extremely unlikely that construction workers were accidentally buried alive in the concrete, contrary to popular folklore.[11] To further cool the concrete each form contained cooling coils of 1 inch (25 mm) thin-walled steel pipe. River water was circulated through these pipes to help dissipate the heat from the curing concrete. After this, chilled water from a refrigeration plant on the lower cofferdam was circulated through the coils to further cool the concrete. After each layer had sufficiently cooled the cooling coils were cut off and pressure grouted by pneumatic grout guns. The concrete is still curing and gaining in strength as time goes on.[citation needed]
There is enough concrete in the dam to pave a two-lane highway from San Francisco to New York.[12]

[edit] Construction deaths
There were 112 deaths associated with the construction of the dam.[11][13] There are different accounts as to how many people died while working on the dam and who was the first and last to die. A popular story holds that the first person to die in the construction of Hoover Dam was J. G. Tierney, a surveyor who drowned while looking for an ideal spot for the dam. Coincidentally, his son, Patrick W. Tierney, was the last man to die working on the dam, 13 years to the day later.[11][13] Ninety-six of the deaths occurred during construction at the site. However, another surveyor died prior to construction, while surveying a potential location for the dam, and these statistics do not include other incidental and coincidental (heat stroke, heart failure, etc) deaths during construction.[11]

[edit] Environmental impact
The Hoover Dam and its associated changes in water use had devastating impact on the Colorado River Delta at the mouth of the Colorado River. The construction of the dam has been pointed to as the beginning of an era of decline of this estuarine ecosystem.[14] For six years in the late 1930s, after the construction of the dam and while Lake Mead filled, virtually no flow of water reached the mouth of the river.[15] The Delta's estuary, which once had a freshwater-saltwater mixing zone stretching 65 kilometres (40 mi) south of the river's mouth, was turned into an inverse estuary where the level of salinity was actually higher closer to the river's mouth.[16]
The Colorado River had experienced natural flooding before the construction of the Hoover Dam. The dam eliminated the natural flooding, which imperiled many species adapted to the flooding, including both plants and animals.[17]
The construction of the dam decimated the populations of native fish in the river downstream from the dam.[18] Four species of fish native to the Colorado River, the Bonytail chub, Colorado pikeminnow, Humpback chub, and Razorback sucker, are currently listed as endangered by the U.S. federal government.[19][20]

[edit] Power plant




The hydroelectric generators at Hoover dam


Following an uprating project from 1986 to 1993, the total gross power rating for the plant, including two 2.4 megawatt electric generators that power the plant's operations, is about 2080 megawatts.[21]
Excavation for the powerhouse was carried out simultaneously with the excavation for the dam foundation and abutments. Excavation for the U-shaped structure located at the downstream toe of the dam was completed in late 1933 with the first concrete placed in November 1933.
Generators at the Dam's Hoover Powerplant began transmission of electricity from the Colorado River to Los Angeles, California 266 miles (428 km) away on October 26, 1936. Additional generating units were added through 1961. Original plans called for 16 large generators, 8 on each side of the river (see architectural illustrations) but two smaller generators were installed instead of one of the large ones on the Arizona side, for a total of 17. The smaller generators were used to serve smaller municipalities at a time when the output of each generator was dedicated to a municipality, before the dam's total power output was placed on the grid and made arbitrarily distributable.
Water flowing from Lake Mead through the gradually-narrowing penstocks to the powerhouse reaches a speed of about 85 miles per hour (140 km/h) by the time it reaches the turbines. The entire flow of the Colorado River passes through the turbines (except for seepage around the edges of the dam through the semi-porous volcanic rock it rests against). The spillways are rarely used.
Hydroelectric power plants have the ability to vary the amount of power generated, depending on the demand. Steam turbine power plants are not as easily throttled because of the amount of thermodynamic inertia contained in their systems.
Control of water was the primary concern in the building of the dam. Power generation allowed the dam project to be self sustaining: repaying the 50-year construction loan, and continuing to pay for the multi-million dollar yearly maintenance budget. Power is generated in step with and only with the release of water in response to downstream water demands.

[edit] Architectural style




The dam crosses the border between two time zones, the Pacific Time Zone and the Mountain Time Zone


The initial plans for the finished facade of both the dam and the power plant consisted of a simple, unadorned wall of concrete topped with a Gothic-inspired balustrade and a powerhouse that looked like little more than an industrial warehouse.[citation needed] This initial design was criticized by many as being too plain and unremarkable for a project of such immense scale, so Los Angeles-based architect Gordon B. Kaufmann was brought in to redesign the exteriors.[citation needed] Kaufmann greatly streamlined the buildings, and applied an elegant Art Deco style to the entire project, with sculptured turrets rising seamlessly from the dam face and clock faces on the intake towers set for Nevada and Arizona time, in the Pacific and Mountain time zones respectively (although because Arizona does not observe daylight saving time, the two clocks show the same time during the warmer half of the year).

[edit] Use for road transport




U.S. Highway 93 on Hoover Dam


There are two lanes for automobile traffic across the top of the dam. It serves as the Colorado River crossing for the highway U.S. Route 93. The two-lane section of road approaching the dam is narrow, has several dangerous hairpin turns, and is subject to rock slides.
To provide much more highway capacity, and better safety, the new Hoover Dam Bypass is scheduled to be completed in 2010 and it will divert the U.S. 93 traffic 1,500 feet (460 m) downstream from the dam.[22] The bypass will include a composite steel and concrete arch bridge, tentatively named the Mike O'Callaghan-Pat Tillman Memorial Bridge.
Additionally, in the wake of the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks there are significant security concerns. Because of the attack, the Hoover Dam Bypass project was expedited. Traffic across Hoover Dam is presently restricted. Some types of vehicles are inspected prior to crossing the dam while semi-trailer trucks, buses carrying luggage, and enclosed-box trucks over 40 feet (12 m) long are not allowed on the dam at all.[23] That traffic is diverted south to a Colorado River bridge at Laughlin, Nevada.

[edit] Power distribution




One of two "Winged Figures of the Republic" by Oskar J.W. Hansen, part of the monument of dedication on the Nevada side of the dam.[24]


The Bureau of Reclamation reports that the energy generated is allocated as follows:[25]


Area
Percentage


Metropolitan Water District of Southern California
28.5393%


State of Nevada
23.3706%


State of Arizona
18.9527%


Los Angeles, California
15.4229%


Southern California Edison Company
5.5377%


Boulder City, Nevada
1.7672%


Glendale, California
1.5874%


Pasadena, California
1.3629%


Anaheim, California
1.1487%


Riverside, California
0.8615%


Vernon, California
0.6185%


Burbank, California
0.5876%


Azusa, California
0.1104%


Colton, California
0.0884%


Banning, California
0.0442%



[edit] Statistics




Downstream from Hoover Dam, showing the river, power stations, and power lines.






Aerial shot of Lake Mead and Hoover Dam showing the high-water mark of the 1983 flood season along the shore



Construction period: April 20, 1931 – March 1, 1936
Construction cost: $49 million ($736 million adjusted for inflation from 1936 to 2008[26] )
Deaths attributed to construction: 112; 96 of them at the construction site[11][13][27]
Dam height: 726.4 ft (221.4 m), second highest dam in the United States. (Only the Oroville Dam is taller)
Dam length: 1244 ft (379.2 m)
Dam thickness: 660 ft (200 m) at its base; 45 ft (15 m) thick at its crest.
Concrete: 4.36 million yd³ (3.33 million m³)
Maximum electric power produced by the water turbines: 2.08 gigawatts[28]
Approximate power output: 4 billion KWh per year [29] (i.e. $200 million at $0.05 per kWh)
Traffic across the dam: 13,000 to 16,000 people each day, according to the Federal Highway Administration
Lake Mead (full pool)[30]

area: 157,900 acres (639 km²), backing up 110 miles (177 km) behind the dam.
volume: 28,537,000 acre feet (35.200 km³) at an elevation of 1,221.4 feet (372.3 m) .


With 8 to 10 million visitors each year, including visitors to Hoover Dam but not all traffic across the dam, the Lake Mead National Recreation Area is the fifth busiest National Park Service area.


[edit] Naming controversy
The dam, originally planned for a location in Boulder Canyon, was relocated to Black Canyon for better impoundment, but was still known as the Boulder Dam project. Work on the project started on July 7, 1930. At the official beginning of the project on September 17, 1930, President Hoover's Secretary of the Interior Ray Lyman Wilbur, announced that the new dam on the Colorado River would be named Hoover Dam to honor the then President of the United States. Wilbur followed a standing tradition of naming important dams after the President who was in office when they were constructed, such as the Theodore Roosevelt Dam, the Wilson Dam, and the Coolidge Dam. Furthermore, Hoover was already campaigning for re-election in the face of the Depression and he sought credit for creating jobs. A Congressional Act of February 14, 1931, made the name "Hoover Dam" official.
However, in 1932, Herbert Hoover lost his bid for reelection to Franklin Delano Roosevelt. In his memoirs, Hoover wrote of stopping to inspect progress on the dam, by night, on November 12, 1932, on his way back to Washington from his Palo Alto, California, home after his defeat. He commented, "It does give me extraordinary pleasure to see the great dream I have so long held taking form in actual reality of stone and cement. It is now ten years since I became chairman of the Colorado River Commission.... This dam is the greatest engineering work of its character ever attempted by the hand of man." He went on to list its purposes, concluding, "I hope to be present at its final completion as a bystander. Even so I shall feel a special personal satisfaction." (Hoover adds a footnote to this, see below.) [31]
When Roosevelt took office on March 4, 1933, he brought Harold Ickes with him to replace Ray Lyman Wilbur as Secretary of the Interior. Ickes wasted no time removing Hoover’s name from the Boulder Canyon Project. On May 8, 1933, Ickes issued a memorandum to the Bureau of Reclamation, which was in charge of the dam, stating, "I have your reference to the text for the pamphlet descriptive of the Boulder Canyon Project for use at the Century of Progress Exposition. I would be glad if you will refer to the dam as 'Boulder Dam' in this pamphlet as well as in correspondence and other references to the dam as you may have occasion to make in the future."
This did not happen immediately, but over the following several years all references to Hoover Dam in official sources, as well as tourist and other promotional materials, vanished in favor of Boulder Dam.
Roosevelt died in 1945 and Harold Ickes retired in 1946. On March 4, 1947 California Republican Congressman Jack Anderson submitted House Resolution 140 to restore the name Hoover Dam. Anderson’s resolution passed the House on March 6; a companion resolution passed the Senate on April 23, and on April 30, 1947, President Harry S. Truman signed Public Law 43 which read: "Resolved … that the name of Hoover Dam is hereby restored to the dam on the Colorado River in Black Canyon constructed under the authority of the Boulder Canyon Project Act … . Any law, regulation, document, or record of the United States in which such dam is designated or referred to under the name of Boulder Dam shall be held to refer to such dam under and by the name of Hoover Dam."
Hoover writes this footnote to his comments of November 12, 1932: "Responding to a suggestion from Hiram Johnson, and with his characteristic attitude, Secretary Ickes changed the name of the dam. The hint in the above address that I should like to be present did not secure me an invitation to the dedication ceremonies conducted by President Roosevelt. I have never regarded the name as important. The important thing is a gigantic engineering accomplishment that will bring happiness to millions of people. In 1947, the Congress, by practically unanimous action, restored the name Hoover Dam — to Mr. Ickes' intense indignation."[32]

[edit] Construction Artifacts
A fleet of special dump cars were built by Six Companies for use on the railroad that aided construction. Today, one of these cars survives at the Western Pacific Railroad Museum at Portola, California. The Western Pacific Railroad acquired several of the cars following the end of construction and used them in company service.

[edit] References


^ "National Register Information System". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. 2007-01-23. http://www.nr.nps.gov/. 
^ a b "Hoover Dam". National Historic Landmark summary listing. National Park Service. http://tps.cr.nps.gov/nhl/detail.cfm?ResourceId=1836&ResourceType=Structure. Retrieved on 2007-09-27. 
^ See Grand Coulee Dam and List of the largest hydoelectric power stations.
^ Joan Middleton and Laura Feller (May 31, 1985), National Park Service, National Register of Historic Places Inventory-Nomination: Hoover Dam (aka Boulder Dam until 1947)  (Includes informative drawing of how the dam works) and Accompanying 4 photos, from 1967 and 1997PDF (1.57 MB)
^ Construction of Hoover Dam: a historic account prepared in cooperation with the Department of the Interior. KC Publications. 1976. ISBN 0-916122-51-4.
^ BBC History: The Building of the Hoover Dam, fighting for Progress
^ Las Vegas Invitational at Boulder City
^ BBC TV mini-series Seven Wonders of the Industrial World
^ A source that supports April 1999 spillway use only: Is it Hoover Dam or Boulder Dam
^ Stevens, Joseph E. (September 1990). Hoover Dam: An American Adventure (Paperback). University of Oklahoma Press. pp. 193–194. ISBN 0-8061-2283-8. 
^ a b c d e "Fatalities at Hoover Dam". http://www.usbr.gov/lc/hooverdam/History/essays/fatal.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-27. 
^ Lower Colorado Bureau of Reclamation: Hoover Dam, Facts and Figures. [1]
^ a b c "Fatalities During Construction of Hoover Dam". http://www.usbr.gov/dataweb/dams/hoover_fatalities_table.htm. Retrieved on 2007-06-11. 
^ Edward P. Glenn, Christopher Lee, Richard Felger, Scott Zengel, "Effects of Water Management on the Wetlands of the Colorado River Delta, Mexico", Conservation Biology, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 1175-1186, Aug. 1996.
^ Peter H. Gleick, William C. G. Burns, The World's Water, Island Press, 2002, pp. 139.
^ CA Rodriguez, KW Flessa, DL Dettman, "Macrofaunal and isotopic estimates of the former extent of the Colorado River Estuary, upper Gulf of California, Mexico", Journal of Arid Environments, Vol. 49, pp. 183-193, 2001.
^ John C. Schmidt, Robert H. Webb, Richard A. Valdez, G. Richard Marzolf, Lawrence E. Stevens, "Science and Values in River Restoration in the Grand Canyon", BioScience, Vol. 48, No. 9, "Flooding: Natural and Managed", Sep. 1998, pp. 735-747.
^ Jeffrey P. Cohn, "Resurrecting the Dammed: A Look at Colorado River Restoration", BioScience, Vol. 51, No. 12, pp. 998–1003, Dec. 2001.
^ W. L. Minckley, Paul C. Marsh, James E. Deacon, Thomas E. Dowling, Philip W. Hedrick, William J. Matthews, Gordon Mueller, "A Conservation Plan for Native Fishes of the Lower Colorado River", BioScience, Vol. 53, No. 3, pp. 219-234, 2003.
^ Upper Colorado River Endangered Fish Recovery Program, Retrieved Mar. 21st, 2009.
^ "Frequently Asked Questions". US Department of the Interior. 2006-01-30. http://www.usbr.gov/lc/hooverdam/faqs/powerfaq.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-23. 
^ Hoover Dam Bypass Project, Schedule. Retrieved 1/25/07.
^ Bureau of Reclamation, Crossing Hoover Dam: A Guide for Motorists. Retrieved 1/1/07.
^ Bureau of Reclamation: Lower Colorado Region - Hoover Dam: Artwork
^ "Bureau of Reclamations". Hoover Dam FAQ. Jan 30, 2006. http://www.bbcshop.com/invt/av9050&bklist=%3Cvenda_bklist1%3E. Retrieved on 2006-08-26. 
^ Using Bureau of Labor Statistics calculatorand the interval from 1936 to 2008
^ Sigmund, Pete (2006-11-13). "Hoover Dam: A Symbol of Simple Strength". Construction Equipment Guide. http://www.cegltd.com/story.asp?story=7772&headline=Hoover%20Dam:%20A%20Symbol%20of%20Simple%20Strength. Retrieved on 2007-01-01. 
^ Bureau of Reclamation FAQ "2,080 megawatts"
^ Bureau of Reclamation FAQ "Hoover Dam alone generates more than 4 billion kilowatt-hours a year - enough to serve 1.3 million people"
^ "Bureau of Reclamation". Lake Mead statistics FAQ. U.S. Department of the Interior. http://www.usbr.gov/lc/hooverdam/faqs/lakefaqs.html. Retrieved on 2006-08-27. 
^ Hoover, Herbert (1952). The Memoirs of Herbert Hoover: The Cabinet and the Presidency 1920-1933 (First ed.). New York: Macmillan. p. 229. ISBN (unknown). 
^ Hoover, Herbert (1952). The Memoirs of Herbert Hoover: The Cabinet and the Presidency 1920-1933 (First ed.). New York: Macmillan. p. 228. ISBN (unknown). 



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Hoover Dam 



Hoover Dam's official website
Official State of Nevada Tourism Site
Hoover Dam: Lonely Lands Made Fruitful
Historic Construction Company Project - Hoover Dam
Hoover Dam in the Structurae database
BBC - Hoover Dam, industrial and social history
Hoover Dam page
Dams of the Lower Colorado River - Hoover Dam
Frank Crowe - Builder of Hoover Dam
"Boulder Dam" – Part I and Parts III and IV, documentary films from the Prelinger Archives at the Internet Archive.
Construction of diversion tunnel #4 and spillway tunnel which drops sharply to enter diversion tunnel
Las Vegas and Water in the West The planning and construction of Hoover Dam is the central focus of this digital library. UNLV Special Collections houses the largest collection of primary materials relating to Hoover Dam.
PBS American experience - Hoover Dam








v • d • e

U.S. National Register of Historic Places






Keeper of the Register · History of the National Register of Historic Places · Property types · Historic district · Contributing property








List of entries
National Park Service · National Historic Landmarks · National Battlefields · National Historic Sites · National Historical Parks · National Memorials · National Monuments













v • d • e

Colorado River system





Dams and aqueducts



Shadow Mountain Dam · Granby Dam · Glen Canyon Dam · Flaming Gorge Dam · Hoover Dam · Davis Dam · Parker Dam · Palo Verde Dam · Imperial Dam · Laguna Dam · Morelos Dam · Colorado River Aqueduct · San Diego Aqueduct · Central Arizona Project · All-American Canal · Coachella Canal · Redwall Dam · See also: US Bureau of Reclamation








Canyons



Byers Canyon · Gore Canyon · Red Gorge · Glenwood Canyon · De Beque Canyon · Horsethief Canyon · Ruby Canyon · Westwater Canyon · Cataract Canyon · Narrow Canyon · Glen Canyon · Grand Canyon (Marble Canyon · Granite Gorge · Middle Granite Gorge · Lower Granite Gorge) · Grand Wash Canyon · Iceberg Canyon · Virgin Canyon · Boulder Canyon · Black Canyon · Pyramid Canyon · Mohave Canyon








Natural features



Rocky Mountains · Colorado River Basin · Grand Lake · Sonoran Desert · Mojave Desert · Imperial Valley · Colorado Plateau · New River · Gulf of California/Sea of Cortez · Salton Sea








Tributaries



Blue River · Dirty Devil River · Dolores River · Escalante River · Eagle River · Fraser River · Gila River · Green River · Gunnison River · Kanab Creek · Little Colorado River · Paria River · Roaring Fork River · San Juan River · Virgin River · Williams Fork River








Major reservoirs



Fontenelle Reservoir · Flaming Gorge Reservoir · Taylor Park Reservoir · Navajo Reservoir · Lake Powell · Lake Mead · Lake Mohave · Lake Havasu








Colorado River Compact states



Arizona · California · Colorado · Nevada · New Mexico · Utah · Wyoming








Designated areas



Arches National Park · Canyonlands National Park · Colorado National Monument · Dead Horse Point State Park · Glen Canyon National Recreation Area · Grand Canyon National Park · Lake Mead National Recreation Area · Rocky Mountain National Park















v • d • e

National Register of Historic Places in Clark County, Nevada








Boulder City Historic District - Old Boulder City Hospital - Boulder Dam Hotel - Boulder Dam Park Museum - Brownstone Canyon Archaeological District - Camp Lee Canyon - Clark Avenue Railroad Underpass - Corn Creek Campsite - Desert Valley Museum - Eureka Locomotive - Gold Strike Canyon-Sugarloaf Mountain Traditional Cultural Property - Goodsprings Schoolhouse - Grapevine Canyon Petroglyphs (AZ:F:14:98 ASM) - Green Shack - Hoover Dam - Huntridge Theater - John S. Park Historic Park - Hidden Forest Cabin - Homestake Mine - Jay Dayton Smith House - Kyle Ranch - Las Vegas Grammar School (Fifth Street School) - Las Vegas Grammar School (Westside School) - Las Vegas High School Academic Building and Gymnasium - Las Vegas High School Neighborhood Historic District - Las Vegas Mormon Fort - Las Vegas Mormon Fort (Boundary Increase) - Las Vegas Post Office and Courthouse - Las Vegas Springs - LDS Moapa Stake Office Building - Little Church of the West - Mesquite High School Gymnasium - Morelli House - Mormon Well Spring - Moulin Rouge Hotel - Overton Gymnasium - Parley Hunt House - Potosi - Pueblo Grande de Nevada - Railroad Cottage Historic District - Sandstone Ranch - Sheep Mountain Range Archeological District - Sloan Petroglyph Site - Sloan Petroglyph Site (Boundary Increase) - Mormon Road Historic District - Spirit Mountain - Thomas Leavitt House - Tim Springs Petroglyphs - Tule Springs Archaeological Site - Tule Springs Ranch - St. Thomas Memorial Cemetery - Washington School - Westside School - Walking Box Ranch - Willow Beach Gauging Station - Woodlawn Cemetery








List of Registered Historic Places in Nevada Nevada State Historic Places by county












v • d • e

Electricity generation





Concepts

Availability factor · Baseload · Black start · Capacity factor · Dark spread · Demand management · EROEI · Grid storage · Intermittency · Load following · Peak demand · Spark spread






Sources





Nonrenewable


Coal · Natural gas · Petroleum · Nuclear · Oil shale







Renewable


Biomass · Geothermal · Hydro · Ocean · Solar · Wind









Technology

AC power · Cogeneration · Combined cycle · Cooling tower · Fossil fuel power plant · Induction generator · Micro CHP · Microgeneration · Pumped hydro · Rankine cycle · Virtual power plant






Distribution

Demand response · Distributed generation · Dynamic demand · Electricity distribution · Electrical grid · HVDC · Load control · Negawatts · Pylon · Smart grid · Super grid · TSO






Policies

Carbon offset · Ecotax · Energy subsidies · Feed-in Tariff · Net metering · Pigovian tax · Renewable Energy Certificates · Renewable energy payments · Renewable energy policy






Categories: Electricity distribution · Electricity economics · Power station technology · Portals: Energy · Sustainable development








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hoover_Dam"
Categories: American architecture | Art Deco | Colorado River | Dams in Arizona | Dams in Nevada | Dams on the National Register of Historic Places | Hydroelectric power plants in Arizona | Hydroelectric power plants in Nevada | National Historic Landmarks in Arizona | National Historic Landmarks in Nevada | Arch dams | 1936 architectureHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Български
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Español
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
한국어
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Lietuvių
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Simple English
Suomi
Svenska
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 06:21.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
