













Balkans - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Balkans";
		var wgTitle = "Balkans";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "4829";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281847999;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Balkans

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"Balkan" redirects here. For other uses, see Balkan (disambiguation).
The Balkans (often referred to as the Balkan Peninsula although the two are not coterminous) is a geographic region of southeastern Europe. The region takes its name from the Balkan Mountains, which run through the centre of Bulgaria into eastern Serbia. The region has a combined area of 550,000 km2 (212,000 sq mi) and a population of about 55 million people.
Balkan is an old Turkish word meaning "a chain of wooded mountains".[1] The ancient Greek name for the Balkan Peninsula was the "Peninsula of Haemus” (Χερσόνησος τοῦ Αἵμου, Chersónēsos tou Haímou).




Contents


1 Definitions and boundaries

1.1 The Balkan Peninsula
1.2 The Balkans
1.3 Etymology and evolving meaning
1.4 Southeastern Europe
1.5 Western Balkans


2 Regional organizations
3 Nature and natural resources
4 History and geopolitical significance
5 Population composition by nationality and religion

5.1 Jewish communities of the Balkans


6 See also
7 Notes
8 Sources
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Definitions and boundaries

[edit] The Balkan Peninsula




The Balkan Peninsula, as defined by the Danube-Sava-Kupa line.


The Balkan Peninsula may be defined as an area of southeastern Europe surrounded by water on three sides: the Adriatic Sea to the west, the Mediterranean Sea (including the Ionian and Aegean seas) to the south and the Black Sea to the east. Its northern boundary is often given as the Danube, Sava and Kupa rivers.[2]
Countries which are geographically fully located within the Balkan peninsula:

 Albania
 Bosnia and Herzegovina
 Bulgaria
 Greece
 Kosovo (Disputed status)
 Macedonia
 Montenegro

Countries which are significantly located in the peninsula:  Slovenia (1/2),  Croatia (1/2) and  Serbia (2/3).
Countries which are partially located in the peninsula:  Romania and  Turkey.

[edit] The Balkans




Balkan peninsula with northwest border Soča-Krka-Sava


The term "The Balkans" covers not only those countries which lie within the boundaries of the "Balkan Peninsula", but may also include Croatia, Slovenia, Romania and even Hungary.[2] Slovenia, which was part of Yugoslavia from 1919 to 1991, lies north of the Danube-Sava line and therefore outside the Peninsula, but prior to 1991 the whole of Yugoslavia was considered to be part of the Balkans.[3] The European territories of Turkey, which are located geographically in the Balkan Peninsula, are not generally included in the Balkan region.[3]
In most of the English-speaking, western world, the countries commonly included in the Balkan region are:[4]

 Albania
 Bosnia and Herzegovina
 Bulgaria
 Croatia
 Greece
 Kosovo (Independence from Serbia is disputed)
 Macedonia
 Montenegro
 Serbia

Other countries sometimes included are:

 Moldova
 Romania
 Slovenia


[edit] Etymology and evolving meaning
The region takes its name from the Balkan mountain range in Bulgaria (from the Turkish balkan meaning "a chain of wooded mountains").[5] The name is still preserved in Central Asia where there exist the Balkan Mountains[6] and the Balkan Province of Turkmenistan. On a larger scale, one long continuous chain of mountains crosses the region in the form of a reversed letter S, from the Carpathians south to the Balkan range proper, before it marches away east into Anatolian Turkey. On the west coast, an offshoot of the Dinaric Alps follows the coast south through Dalmatia and Albania, crosses Greece and continues into the sea in the form of various islands. The word was based on Turkish balakan 'stone, cliff', which confirms the pure 'technical' meaning of the term. The mountain range that runs across Bulgaria from west to east (Stara Planina) is still commonly known as the Balkan Mountains.
The first time the name "Balkan" was used in the West for the mountain range in Bulgaria was in a letter by Buonaccorsi Callimarco, an Italian humanist, writer and diplomat in 1490. An English traveler, John Morritt, introduced this term into the English literature at the end of the 18th century, and other authors started applying the name to the wider area between the Adriatic and the Black Sea. The concept of the “Balkan peninsula” was created by the German geographer August Zeune in 1808.[7] As time passed, the term gradually obtained political connotations far from its initial geographic meaning, arising from political changes from the late 1800s to the creation of post-World War I Yugoslavia (initially the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes). Zeune's goal was to have a geographical parallel term to the Italic and Iberian Peninsula, and seemingly nothing more. The gradually acquired political connotations are newer, and, to a large extent, due to oscillating political circumstances. The term Balkans is generally used to describe areas that remained under Turkish rule after 1699, namely: Bulgaria, Serbia (except for Vojvodina), Macedonia, Thrace, Albania, Epirus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro (except for the Boka Bay and Budva), central Greece and the Peloponnese. Vojvodina and Transylvania, it is argued, do not belong to Balkans. After the split of Yugoslavia beginning in June 1991, the term 'Balkans' again received a negative meaning, even in casual usage (see Balkanization). Over the last decade, in the wake of the former Yugoslav split, Slovenes have rejected their former label as 'Balkan nations'. This is in part due to the pejorative connotation of the term 'Balkans' in the 1990s, and continuation of this meaning until now. Today, the term 'Southeast Europe' is preferred or, in the case of Slovenia and Croatia, 'Central Europe'.

[edit] Southeastern Europe
Because of the negative connotations of the term 'Balkan', writers such as Maria Todorova and Vesna Goldsworthy have suggested the use of the term Southeastern Europe instead.[8] The use of this term is slowly growing; a European Union initiative of 1999 is called the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe, and the online newspaper Balkan Times renamed itself Southeast European Times in 2003.
The use of this term to mean the Balkan peninsula (and only that) technically ignores the geographical presence of Romania, Moldova, Ukraine, and Ciscaucasus, which are also located in the southeastern part of the European continent.




The Western Balkan states according to the European Union



[edit] Western Balkans
European Union institutions and member states define the "Western Balkans" as Albania and the constituent republics of the former Yugoslavia, minus Slovenia.[9] The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development uses "Western Balkans" to refer to the above states, minus Croatia.[10]

[edit] Regional organizations







Southeast European Cooperation Process (SEECP) member states








Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe      members     observers      supporting partners










Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA)      members      former members, joined the EU








Central European Initiative (CEI) member states










Southeast European Cooperative Initiative (SECI)      members      observers








Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC)      members      observers





See also the Black Sea Regional organizations

[edit] Nature and natural resources




Southeastern Europe as seen from NASA's Terra Satellite


Most of the area is covered by mountain ranges running from north-west to south-east. The main ranges are the Dinaric Alps in Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia, the Šar massif which spreads from Albania to Republic of Macedonia and the Pindus range, spanning from southern Albania into central Greece. In Bulgaria there are ranges running from east to west: the Balkan mountains and the Rhodope mountains at the border with Greece. The highest mountain of the region is Rila in Bulgaria, with Mussala at 2925 m, with Mount Olympus in Greece, the throne of Zeus, being second at 2919 m and Vihren in Bulgaria being the third at 2914.
On the coasts the climate is Mediterranean, in the inland it is moderate continental. In the northern part of the peninsula and on the mountains, winters are frosty and snowy, while summers are hot and dry. In the southern part winters are milder.
During the centuries many woods have been cut down and replaced with bush and brush. In the southern part and on the coast there is evergreen vegetation. In the inland there are woods typical of Central Europe (oak and beech, and in the mountains, spruce, fir and pine). The tree line in the mountains lies at the height of 1800–2300 m.
The soils are generally poor, except on the plains where areas with natural grass, fertile soils and warm summers provide an opportunity for tillage. Elsewhere, land cultivation is mostly unsuccessful because of the mountains, hot summers and poor soils, although certain cultures such as olives and grapes flourish.
Resources of energy are scarce. There are some deposits of coal, especially in Romania, Bulgaria, Serbia and Bosnia. Lignite deposits are widespread in Greece. Petroleum is most notably present in Romania, although scarce reserves exist in Greece, Serbia, Albania and Croatia. Natural gas deposits are scarce. Hydropower stations are largely used in energetics.
Metal ores are more usual than other raw materials. Iron ore is rare but in some countries there is a considerable amount of copper, zinc, tin, chromite, manganese, magnesite and bauxite. Some metals are exported.

[edit] History and geopolitical significance




Political history of the Balkans






The Balkans at the end of the 19th century


Main article: History of the Balkans
The Balkan region was the first area of Europe to experience the arrival of farming cultures in the Neolithic era. The practices of growing grain and raising livestock arrived in the Balkans from the Fertile Crescent by way of Anatolia, and spread west and north into Pannonia and Central Europe.
The identity of the Balkans is dominated by its geographical position; historically the area was known as a crossroads of various cultures. It has been a juncture between the Latin and Greek bodies of the Roman Empire, the destination of a massive influx of pagan Slavs, an area where Orthodox and Catholic Christianity met, as well as the meeting point between Islam and Christianity.
In pre-classical and classical antiquity, this region was home to Greeks, Illyrians, Paeonians, Thracians, Dacians and other ancient groups. Later the Roman Empire conquered most of the region and spread Roman culture and the Latin language but significant parts still remained under classical Greek influence. During the Middle Ages, the Balkans became the stage for a series of wars between the Byzantine, Bulgarian and Serbian Empires.
Possibly the historical event that left the biggest mark on the collective memories of the peoples of the Balkans was the expansion and later fall of the Ottoman Empire. By the end of the 16th century, it had become the controlling force in the region, although it was centered around Anatolia. Many people in the Balkans and Carpathians place their greatest folk heroes in the era of either the onslaught or the retreat of the Ottoman Empire. As examples, for Croats, Nikola Šubić Zrinski and Petar Kružić; for Serbs, Miloš Obilić and Tzar Lazar; for Albanians, Skanderbeg; for ethnic Macedonians, Nikola Karev; for Bosniaks, Husein Gradaščević; and for Bulgarians, Vasil Levski, Georgi Sava Rakovski and Hristo Botev. In the past 550 years, because of the frequent Ottoman wars in Europe fought in and around the Balkans, and the comparative Ottoman isolation from the mainstream of economic advance (reflecting the shift of Europe's commercial and political centre of gravity towards the Atlantic), the Balkans has been the least developed part of Europe.
The Balkan nations began to regain their independence in the 19th century (Greece, Serbia, Bulgaria, Montenegro), and in 1912–1913 a Balkan League reduced Turkey's territory to its present extent in the Balkan Wars. The First World War was sparked in 1914 by the assassination in Sarajevo (the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina) of the Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria. The Ottoman empire was one of the three most important parties of the Central powers. An important contribution towards the entente victory took place in the region, after Greece joined the war in 1917, which the capitulation of Bulgaria and the Ottoman empire, which led to the swift capitulation of Austria-Hungary.
The Greek success against the Axis forces during World War II, and the subsequent Albanian, Greek and Serb resistance, changed the course of the war and gave the allies a decisive step towards victory[citation needed]. After the Second World War, the Soviet Union and communism played a very important role in the Balkans. During the Cold War, most of the countries in the Balkans were ruled by Soviet-supported communist governments. Greece remained the only non Soviet country, but was also the only country in Europe to which the cold war turned 'hot' due to the Greek Civil War.
However, despite being under communist governments, Yugoslavia (1948) and Albania (1961) fell out with the Soviet Union. Yugoslavia, led by marshal Josip Broz Tito (1892–1980), first propped up then rejected the idea of merging with Bulgaria, and instead sought closer relations with the West, later even joining many third world countries in the Non-Aligned Movement. Albania on the other hand gravitated toward Communist China, later adopting an isolationist position.
The only non-communist countries were Greece and Turkey, which were (and still are) part of NATO.
In the 1990s, the region was gravely affected by armed conflict in the former Yugoslav republics, resulting in intervention by NATO forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, and the Republic of Macedonia. The status of Kosovo and ethnic Albanians in general is still mostly unresolved.
Balkan countries control the direct land routes between Western Europe and South West Asia (Asia Minor and the Middle East). Since 2000, all Balkan countries are friendly towards the EU and the USA.
Greece has been a member of the European Union since 1981; Slovenia and Cyprus since 2004. Bulgaria and Romania became members in 2007. In 2005 the European Union decided to start accession negotiations with candidate countries; Croatia, Turkey, and the Republic of Macedonia were accepted as candidates for European Union membership. As of 2004, Bulgaria, Romania and Slovenia are also members of NATO. Bosnia and Herzegovina and what was then Serbia and Montenegro started negotiations with the EU over the Stabilisation and Accession Agreements, although shortly after they started, negotiations with Serbia and Montenegro were suspended for lack of co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
All other countries have expressed a desire to join the EU but at some date in the future.
The Balkans today is a very diverse ethno-linguistic region, being home to multiple Slavic, Romance, and Turkic languages, as well as Greek, Albanian and others. Through its history many other ethnic groups with their own languages lived in the area, among them Thracians, Illyrians, Romans, Pechenegs, Cumans, Avars, Celts and various Germanic tribes-folk.

[edit] Population composition by nationality and religion





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2008)






Ethnic map of the Balkans prior to the First Balkan War, by Paul Vidal de la Blache.


The region's principal ethnicities include:

Romanians (19.4 million if all of Romania is considered to be included in the Balkans)
Greeks (10.3 million)
Turks (10 million)
Serbs (8.5 million if all of Serbia is considered to be included in the Balkans)
Bulgarians (6.9 million)
Albanians (6.8 million)
Croats (4.7 million if all of Croatia is considered to be included in the Balkans)
Bosniaks (2 million)
Slovenes (2 million if all of Slovenia is considered to be included in the Balkans)
Macedonians (1.4 million)
Montenegrins (350,000)
others (Roma, Jews)

The region's principal religions are Christianity (Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic) and Islam. A variety of different traditions of each faith are practiced, with each of the Eastern Orthodox countries having its own national church.
Eastern Orthodoxy is the principal religion in the following countries:

Bulgaria (Bulgarian Orthodox Church)
Greece (Church of Greece)
Republic of Macedonia (Macedonian Orthodox Church)
Montenegro (Serbian Orthodox Church)
Romania (Romanian Orthodox Church)
Serbia (Serbian Orthodox Church)
Albania (Albanian Orthodox Church)

Roman Catholicism is the principal religion in the following countries:

Croatia (87.83% Catholics (3 897 332); according to 2001 census official data)
Slovenia (57.80% Catholics (1 135 626); according to 2002 census official data)

Albania, Serbia have significant Catholic minorities



Islam is the principal religion in the following countries:

Albania (majority)
Bosnia and Herzegovina (relative/partial majority)
Turkey
Kosovo

Montenegro, Macedonia have a constituent and significant Muslim communities



The following countries have significant minority religious groups of the following denominations:

Albania: Orthodoxy (Eastern Orthodoxy in Albania, as a minority religion is the largest in the Balkans along with Bosnia and Herzegovina), Catholicism.
Bosnia and Herzegovina: Orthodoxy, Catholicism (Eastern Orthodoxy in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a minority religion is the largest in the Balkans along with Albania)
Bulgaria: Islam
Croatia: Orthodoxy
Kosovo: Orthodoxy, Catholicism.
Republic of Macedonia: Islam
Montenegro: Islam
Serbia: Catholicism, Protestantism, Islam
Romania: Catholicism, Protestantism

For more detailed information and a precise ethnic breakdown see articles about particular states:

Demographics of Albania
Demographics of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Demographics of Bulgaria
Demographics of Croatia
Demographics of Greece
Demographics of Kosovo
Demographics of Montenegro
Demographics of the Republic of Macedonia
Demographics of Serbia
Demographics of Slovenia
Demographics of Turkey


[edit] Jewish communities of the Balkans
The Jewish communities of the Balkans were some of the oldest in Europe and date back to ancient times as well as having received a large influx of Sephardic Jews and later Ashkenazi Jews. In Slovenia, there were Jewish immigrants dating back to Roman times pre-dating the 6th Century settlement of the region by the Slavic peoples.[11] In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the tiny Jewish community is 90% Sephardic and Ladino is still spoken among the elderly. The Sephardi Jewish cemetery in Sarajevo has tombstones of a unique shape, inscribed in ancient Ladino.[12] However the Jewish communities in the Balkans suffered immensely during World War II and the vast majority were killed in the Holocaust. Most of the remainder emigrated to Israel and elsewhere.

[edit] See also

History of the Balkans

Historical regions of the Balkan Peninsula
Balkan wars


Balkan languages

Balkan sprachbund


Balkanization
Balkan Insight
Balkan ethnic conflict in the 1940s
Orient Express
Music of Southeastern Europe
The Islamization of Bosnia and Herzegovina


[edit] Notes


^ ""Balkan."". Encarta World English Dictionary. Microsoft Corporation. http://encarta.msn.com/dictionary_/balkan.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-31. 
^ a b Jelavich, Barbara (1983). History of the Balkans: Eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Cambridge University Press. p. 1. ISBN 9780521274586. http://books.google.ie/books?id=qR4EeOrTm-0C&printsec=frontcover. 
^ a b Tintero, Felipa L.; Felicitas R. Manacsa. World Geography Affected by World Upheavals. Goodwill Trading Co., Inc.. p. 51. ISBN 9715740413. http://books.google.ie/books?id=jsnlxH9nnn4C&printsec=frontcover. 
^ britannica.com; encarta.msn.com; The Columbia Encyclopedia.
^ ""Balkan."". Encarta World English Dictionary. Microsoft Corporation. http://encarta.msn.com/dictionary_/balkan.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-31. 
^ ""Balkhan Mountains."". World Land Features Database. Land.WorldCityDB.com. http://land.worldcitydb.com/balkhan_mountains_3522246.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-31. 
^ Pavic, Silvia (2000-11-22). ""Some Thoughts About The Balkans."". About, Inc.. http://geography.about.com/library/misc/ucbalkans.htm. Retrieved on 2008-03-31. 
^ Bideleux, Robert; Ian Jeffries (2007). A history of Eastern Europe. Taylor & Francis. p. 37. ISBN 9780415366274. http://books.google.ie/books?id=PTB0gn_qwTcC&printsec=frontcover. 
^ "Western Balkans: Enhancing the European Perspective". Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council. 2008-03-05. http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/pdf/balkans_communication/western_balkans_communication_050308_en.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-04-08. 
^ Marjola Xhunga (2006-05-21). "Western Balkans Initiative launched". European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. http://www.ebrd.com/new/stories/2006/060521a.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-17. 
^ Jews of Yugoslavia 1941–1945 Victims of Genocide and Freedom Fighters, Jasa Romano
^ European Jewish Congress - Bosnia-Herzegovina [Accessed July 15, 2008].



[edit] Sources

Banac, Ivo (October 1992). "Historiography of the Countries of Eastern Europe: Yugoslavia" (fee required). American Historical Review (University of Chicago Press) 97 (4): 1084–1104. doi:10.2307/2165494. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8762(199210)97%3A4%3C1084%3AY%3E2.0.CO%3B2-O. Retrieved on 2008-06-19. 
Banac, Ivo (1984). The National Question in Yugoslavia: Origins, History, Politics. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0801494932. 
Carter, Francis W., ed. An Historical Geography of the Balkans Academic Press, 1977.
Dvornik, Francis. The Slavs in European History and Civilization Rutgers University Press, 1962.
Fine, John V. A., Jr. The Early Medieval Balkans: A Critical Survey from the Sixth to the Late Twelfth Century [1983]; The Late Medieval Balkans: A Critical Survey from the Late Twelfth Century to the Ottoman Conquest. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, [1987].
John R. Lampe and Marvin R. Jackson; Balkan Economic History, 1550–1950: From Imperial Borderlands to Developing Nations Indiana University Press, 1982
Jelavich, Barbara (1983-07-29). History of the Balkans. Cambridge University Press. 
Jelavich, Charles and Jelavich, Barbara, eds. (1963). The Balkans In Transition: Essays on the Development of Balkan Life and Politics Since the Eighteenth Century. University of California Press. 
Király, Béla K., ed. East Central European Society in the Era of Revolutions, 1775–1856. 1984
Komlos, John (1990-10-15). Economic Development in the Habsburg Monarchy and in the Successor States. East European Monographs #28. East European Monographs. ISBN 978-0880331777. 
Mazower, Mark (2000). The Balkans: A Short History. Modern Library Chronicles. New York: Random House. ISBN 0-679-64087-8. 
Stavrianos, L. S. (2000-05-01) [1958]. The Balkans since 1453. with Traian Stoianovich. New York: NYU Press. ISBN 978-0814797662. 
Stoianovich, Traian (September 1994). Balkan Worlds: The First and Last Europe. Sources and Studies in World History. New York: M.E. Sharpe. ISBN 978-1563240324. 
Kitsikis, Dimitri (2008). La montée du national-bolchevisme dans les Balkans. Le retour à la Serbie de 1830. Paris: Avatar. 


[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Balkans





Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Balkans



South-East Europe Review
Balkan History by Steven W. Sowards
SEEurope.net - news coverage on Southeastern Europe
Southeast European Times
The Centre for South East European Studies
Balkans region: Oil and Gas Fact Sheet - United States Department of Energy Analysis Brief
Balkans urged to curb trafficking - BBC
News from Balkans
Analysis from Balkans








v • d • e

Countries of Europe








Albania · Andorra · Armenia2 · Austria · Azerbaijan1 · Belarus · Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus2 · Czech Republic · Denmark3 · Estonia · Finland · France1 · Georgia1 · Germany · Greece  · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy1 · Kazakhstan1 · Kosovo5 · Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Macedonia4 · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands3 · Norway3 · Poland · Portugal3 · Romania · Russia1 · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia · Slovenia · Spain1 · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey1 · Ukraine · United Kingdom3 · Vatican City
1 Has part of its territory outside Europe.  2 Entirely in West Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe.  3 Has dependencies or similar territories outside Europe. 4 Name disputed by Greece; see Macedonia naming dispute. 5 Declared independence from Serbia on February 17, 2008 and is recognised by 56 United Nations member states.















v • d • e

Regions of the world










Africa
North (Maghreb) · 
Sub-Saharan (Central · Southern · West · East)
 



Americas
North (Northern • Middle • Central • Caribbean) · South (Southern Cone) · Anglo · Latin


Oceania
Australasia · Melanesia · Micronesia · Polynesia



Asia
East (Far East • Asia-Pacific)  · Southeast (Indochina • Malay Archipelago)  · South  · Southwest  · Central · North (Siberia)


Polar
Arctic · Antarctica



Europe
Western · Central · Eastern · Northern · Southern


Oceans
World · Arctic · Atlantic · Indian · Pacific · Southern









See also Continents of the world












v • d • e

Europe





Culture · History · Demographics · Economy · Geography · Politics





Culture

Art (Architecture · Capital of Culture · Classical music · Cinema (Film festivals) · Painting · Sculpture) · Cuisine · Languages (Endangered) · Philosophy · Religion (Christianity · Islam · Judaism) · Sport · Symbols · Universities
(Bologna process · ERASMUS)






History

Prehistory · Classical antiquity · Late Antiquity · Middle Ages · Early modernity · 19th century · 20th century






Demographics

Population · Life expectancy · Ethnic groups (Genetic history · Afro-Europeans) · Immigration






Economy

GDP (nominal) (per capita) · GDP (PPP) (per capita)  · GNI (nominal) per capita  · GNI (PPP) per capita · budget revenues (per capita) · HDI · corruption · minimum wage · FTAs · EFTA · CEFTA · EAEC






Geography

Area and population · Geology · Rivers · Lakes · Mountains · Extreme points






Politics

International organisations · Integration · OSCE (statistics) · CoE · NATO · CSTO · CIS · GUAM · Post-Soviet · Transatlantic · Eurosphere · Press freedom






European Union

Members (future) · Politics · ENP (statistics) · Foreign relations · Third-country relationships (economic) · Economy · € · EEA · EUCU · Schengen · Statistics






Other

Internet users  · Financial and social rankings  · Maps






Portal








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Balkans"
Categories: Balkans | Peninsulas of Europe | Regions of Europe | Words of Turkish originHidden categories: Articles containing Turkish language text | Articles containing non-English language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles needing additional references from April 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Alemannisch
العربية
Arpetan
Asturianu
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gàidhlig
Galego
文言
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ქართული
Kiswahili
Kurdî / كوردی
Ladino
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nederlands
नेपाल भाषा
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Occitan
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Română
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
ไทย
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
Vèneto
中文









 This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 06:06.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
