













Friedrich Hayek - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Friedrich_Hayek";
		var wgTitle = "Friedrich Hayek";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "11646";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281253063;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Friedrich Hayek

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 




Friedrich Hayek

Western Philosophy
20th-century philosophy





Full name
Friedrich August von Hayek


Born
8 May 1899(1899-05-08)
Vienna, Austria-Hungary


Died
23 March 1992 (aged 92)
Freiburg, Germany


School/tradition
Old Whig, Classical liberalism and Austrian School


Main interests
Economics, social philosophy, political philosophy, Hebbian theory, philosophy of mind


Notable ideas
Economic calculation problem, Catallaxy, Extended order, Dispersed knowledge, Spontaneous order, Hebbian theory




Influenced by
Friedrich von Wieser, Carl Menger, Ernst Mach, Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk, Ludwig von Mises, Bernard Mandeville, David Hume, Adam Ferguson, Ludwig Wittgenstein, John Locke, Edmund Burke, Alexis de Tocqueville, Lord Acton, Karl Popper






Influenced
Karl Popper, John Hicks, Robert Nozick, Israel Kirzner, Milton Friedman, Michael Novak, Thomas Sowell, Roy Harrod, Bruno Leoni, Giovanni Sartori, George Stigler, Atilla Yayla, John Gray, Abba Lerner, Konrad Lorenz, John Maynard Keynes, Armen Alchian, Murray Rothbard, Leonid Hurwicz, George Will, Alan Greenspan










Part of the Politics series on


Libertarianism




Origins and history
Austrian School
Chicago School
Classical liberalism
Individualist anarchism
Liberalism






Theory and ideals
Counter-economics
Dispute resolution organization
Economic freedom · Free market
Free market environmentalism
Free society · Free trade
Free will · Freedom of association
Freedom of contract
Homestead principle
Individualism
Individualist feminism
Laissez-faire
Liberty · Limited government
Methodological individualism
Natural rights
Night watchman state
Non-aggression
Non-interventionism
Non-politics · Non-voting
Polycentric law · Property
Private defense agency
Self-governance · Self-ownership
Spontaneous order
Stateless society
Subjective theory of value · Tax resistance
Title-transfer theory of contract
Voluntary association
Voluntary society






Schools
Agorism · Anarcho-capitalism
Autarchism · Christian
Classical liberalism · Consequentalist
Conservative · Constitutionalist
Crypto-anarchism · Deontological
Free market · Geolibertarianism
Green · Individualist anarchism
Left-wing · Minarchist · Mutualist
Paleolibertarianism · Panarchist
Propertarian · Right-wing
Thick and thin · Voluntaryism






Topics
Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism
Controversies · Criticisms
Libertarian movement
Political parties
Theories of law · Views of rights






Related topics
Anti-state · Anti-war
Civil libertarianism
Civil societarianism
Constitutionalism
Constitutional republic
Fusionism
Libertarian Christianity
Libertarian conservatism
Libertarian Democrat
Libertarian Republican
Libertarian socialism
Libertarian transhumanism
Limited government
Market liberalism
Objectivism
Small government
Small-l libertarianism
Ultraliberalism




 


Libertarianism portal
Philosophy portal
Politics portal



v • d • e









Part of the Politics series on


Liberalism




Development
History of liberal thought
Contributions to liberal theory






Ideas
Political liberalism
Political freedom
Individualism · Laissez-faire
Liberal democracy
Liberal neutrality
Negative / positive liberty
Market economy
Mixed economy · Open society
Popular sovereignty
Rights (individual)






Schools
American · Anarchist · Classical
Conservative · Cultural
Economic · Liberal
Libertarianism · Market
National · Neoliberalism
Ordoliberalism · Paleoliberalism
Social · Ultraliberalism






Key figures
John Locke · Adam Smith
Thomas Malthus
Jeremy Bentham
John Stuart Mill
Thomas Hill Green
Alfred Marshall
John Maynard Keynes
Ludwig von Mises
Friedrich von Hayek
Milton Friedman · Robert Nozick
John Rawls
Bertrand Russell






Regional variants
Worldwide
Europe · United States
By country






Organizations
Liberal parties
Liberal International
International Federation of Liberal Youth (IFLRY)
European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party (ELDR)
Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE)
European Liberal Youth (LYMEC)
Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats (CALD)
Africa Liberal Network (ALN)
Liberal Network for Latin America (Relial)





 


Politics portal



v • d • e






Friedrich August von Hayek CH (8 May 1899 – 23 March 1992) was an Austrian (and, after 1938, British) economist, philosopher and intellectual known throughout the world for his defense of classical liberalism and free-market capitalism against socialist and collectivist thought. He is considered to be one of the most important economists and political philosophers of the twentieth century.[1] One of the most influential members of the Austrian School of economics, he also made significant contributions in the fields of jurisprudence and cognitive science.
He shared the 1974 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics with Gunnar Myrdal "for their pioneering work in the theory of money and economic fluctuations and for their penetrating analysis of the interdependence of economic, social and institutional phenomena."[2] He also received the U.S. Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1991.[3]
Hayek lived in Austria, Great Britain, the United States and Germany, and became a British citizen in 1938.




Contents


1 Early life
2 Student and economist
3 Refugee
4 The Road to Serfdom
5 The Constitution of Liberty
6 Work

6.1 The economic calculation problem
6.2 Spontaneous order
6.3 Investment and choice
6.4 The business cycle
6.5 Social and political philosophy


7 Hayek and conservatism
8 Influence and recognition
9 Legacy and honors
10 Selected bibliography
11 Notes
12 Bibliography

12.1 Primary sources


13 See also
14 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Early life
Hayek was born in Vienna, then capital of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the son of a doctor in the municipal health service. Hayek's grandfathers were prominent academics working in the fields of statistics and biology. The paternal line had been raised to the ranks of the Austrian nobility, for its services to the state, a generation before his maternal forebearers, also raised to the lower noble rank. Hayek's father turned his work on regional botany into a highly esteemed botanical treatise, continuing the family's scholarly traditions.
His mother's family belonged to the wealthier bourgeoisie. Also on his mother's side, Hayek was second cousin to the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein. His mother often played with Ludwig's sisters. Inspired by the accident of this family connection, Hayek became one of the first to read Wittgenstein's Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus when the book was published in its original German edition in 1921.
Already as a a teenager, and at his father's suggestion, Hayek read the genetic and evolutionary works of Hugo de Vries and the philosophical works of Ludwig Feuerbach.[4] In school Hayek was much taken by one instructor's lectures on Aristotle's ethics.
In 1917 he joined an artillery regiment in the Austro-Hungarian Army and fought on the Italian front. Much of Hayek's combat experience was spent as a spotter in an aeroplane. He survived the war without serious injury and was decorated for bravery.
Hayek then decided to pursue an academic career, determined to help avoid the mistakes that had led to World War I. Hayek said about his experience: "The decisive influence was really World War I. It's bound to draw your attention to the problems of political organization." He vowed to work for a better world. [5]

[edit] Student and economist
At the University of Vienna, he earned doctorates in law and political science in 1921 and 1923 respectively, and he also studied philosophy, psychology and economics with a keen interest. For a short time, when the University of Vienna closed, Hayek studied in Constantin von Monakow's Institute of Brain Anatomy, where Hayek spent much of his time staining brain cells. Hayek's time in Monakow's lab, and his deep interest in the work of Ernst Mach, inspired Hayek's first intellectual project, eventually published as The Sensory Order (1952). It turned Mach's contribution on its head, locating connective learning at the physical, neurological levels in a direct rejection of the "sense data" associationism of the naive empiricists and logical positivists. Hayek presented his work to the privatseminar Hayek had created with Herbert Furth called the Geistkreis.[6]
Initially sympathetic to socialism, Hayek's economic thinking began to shift after reading Ludwig von Mises' book Socialism. He was a student of Friedrich von Wieser. Hayek worked as a research assistant to Prof. Jeremiah Jenks of New York University from 1923 to 1924. He then aided the Austrian government with the legal and economic details of the Treaty of Versailles at the close of the First World War.[citation needed] It was at this time that Hayek began attending Ludwig Mises' private seminars along with several friends, including Fritz Machlup, who had been participating in Hayek's own more general private seminar.
After his work for the government, Hayek founded and served as director of the Austrian Institute for Business Cycle Research before joining the faculty of the London School of Economics (LSE) in 1931 at the behest of Lionel Robbins. In the 1930s, Hayek enjoyed a considerable reputation as a leading economic theorist, but his models were not received well by the followers of John Maynard Keynes. Debate between the two schools of thought continues to this day. While at LSE in the 1930s, Hayek tutored David Rockefeller.[7][8] Others who studied with Hayek at the LSE include Arthur Lewis, Ronald Coase, John Kenneth Galbraith, Abba Lerner, Nicholas Kaldor, George Shackle, Thomas Balogh, Vera Smith, L. K. Jah, Arthur Seldon, Paul Rosenstein-Rodan, and Oskar Lange. [9][10][11]
In 1950, Hayek left the London School of Economics for the University of Chicago, becoming a professor in the Committee on Social Thought. Hayek's first class at the U. of Chicago was a faculty seminar on the philosophy of science attended by many of the University's most notable scientists of the time, including Enrico Fermi, Seward Wright and Leó Szilárd. During his time at Chicago, Hayek worked on the philosophy of science, economics, political philosophy, and the history of ideas. Most of his economic notes from this period have yet to be published. He did not become part of the Chicago School of Economics.

[edit] Refugee
Unwilling to return to Austria after the Anschluss brought it under the control of Nazi Germany in 1938, Hayek remained in Britain and became a British subject in 1938. He held this status for the remainder of his life, although he did not live in Great Britain after 1950. He lived in the United States from 1950 to 1962 and then mostly in Germany, although briefly in Austria as well.[12]

[edit] The Road to Serfdom
Main article: The Road to Serfdom
It was during this time that The Road to Serfdom was written. Hayek was concerned about the general view in Britain's academia that Fascism was a capitalist reaction against socialism. A chapter in the book is entitled, "The Socialist Roots of Nazism." The book was to be the popular edition of the second volume of a treatise entitled "The Abuse and Decline of Reason".[13] It was written between 1940-1943. The title was inspired by the French classical liberal thinker Alexis de Tocqueville's writings on the "road to servitude".[14] It was first published in Britain by Routledge in March 1944 and was quite popular, leading Hayek to call it "that unobtainable book," also due in part to wartime paper rationing.[15] The book was favourably reviewed by George Orwell among others. When it was published in the United States by the University of Chicago in September of that year, it achieved greater popularity than in Britain. The American magazine Reader's Digest also published an abridged version in April 1945, enabling The Road to Serfdom to reach a far wider audience than academics.
The libertarian economist Walter Block has observed critically that while the The Road to Serfdom makes a strong case against centrally-planned economies, it appears only lukewarm in its support of pure laissez-faire capitalism, with Hayek even going so far as to say that "probably nothing has done so much harm to the liberal cause as the wooden insistence of some liberals on certain rules of thumb, above all of the principle of laissez-faire capitalism" [16]. In the book, Hayek writes that the government has a role to play in the economy through the monetary system, work-hours regulation, and institutions for the flow of proper information.[17]

[edit] The Constitution of Liberty
After editing a book on John Stuart Mill's letters he planned two books on the liberal order. He completed The Constitution of Liberty in May 1959, with publication in February 1960. Hayek was disappointed that the book did not receive the same enthusiastic general reception as The Road to Serfdom had fifteen years before.
From 1962 until his retirement in 1968, he was a professor at the University of Freiburg, where he wrote most of Law, Legislation and Liberty. This was intended for a technical audience, and it was published in three volumes in 1973, 1976 and 1979. He became professor at the University of Salzburg from 1969 to 1977; he then returned to Freiburg, where he spent the rest of his days.
In 1974, he shared the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics, causing a revival of interest in the Austrian school of economics. In 1984, he was appointed as a member of the Order of the Companions of Honour on the advice of British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher for his "services to the study of economics". In 1991 President George H. W. Bush awarded Hayek the Presidential Medal of Freedom, one of the two highest civilian awards in the United States, for a "lifetime of looking beyond the horizon". Hayek died in 1992 in Freiburg, Germany.

[edit] Work





This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2007)



[edit] The economic calculation problem
Hayek was one of the leading academic critics of collectivism in the 20th century. Hayek believed that all forms of collectivism (even those theoretically based on voluntary cooperation) could only be maintained by a central authority of some kind. In his popular book, The Road to Serfdom (1944) and in subsequent works, Hayek claimed that socialism required central economic planning and that such planning in turn had a risk of leading towards totalitarianism, because the central authority would have to be endowed with powers that would have an impact on social life as well, and because the knowledge required for central planning is inherently decentralized.
Building on the earlier work of Mises and others, Hayek also argued that while, in centrally planned economies, an individual or a select group of individuals must determine the distribution of resources, these planners will never have enough information to carry out this allocation reliably. The efficient exchange and use of resources, Hayek claimed, can be maintained only through the price mechanism in free markets (see economic calculation problem). In The Use of Knowledge in Society (1945), Hayek argued that the price mechanism serves to share and synchronize local and personal knowledge, allowing society's members to achieve diverse, complicated ends through a principle of spontaneous self-organization. He used the term catallaxy to describe a "self-organizing system of voluntary co-operation."
In Hayek's view, the central role of the state should be to maintain the rule of law, with as little arbitrary intervention as possible.

[edit] Spontaneous order
Hayek viewed the free price system, not as a conscious invention (that which is intentionally designed by man), but as spontaneous order, or what is referred to as "that which is the result of human action but not of human design". Thus, Hayek put the price mechanism on the same level as, for example, language. Such thinking led him to speculate on how the human brain could accommodate this evolved behavior. In The Sensory Order (1952), he proposed, independently of Donald Hebb, the connectionist hypothesis that forms the basis of the technology of neural networks and of much of modern neurophysiology¹.
Hayek attributed the birth of civilization to private property in his book The Fatal Conceit (1988). He explained that price signals are the only means of enabling each economic decision maker to communicate tacit knowledge or dispersed knowledge to each other, in order to solve the economic calculation problem.

[edit] Investment and choice
Perhaps more fully than any other economist, Hayek investigated the choice theory of investment involving the inter-relations between non-permanent production goods and "latent" or potentially economic permanent resources, building on the choice theoretical insight that, "processes that take more time will evidently not be adopted unless they yield a greater return than those that take less time."[18] Hayek's work on the microeconomics of the choice theoretics of investment, non-permanent goods, potential permanent resources, and economically adapted permanent resources mark a central dividing point between Hayek's work on central planning, trade cycle theory, the division of knowledge, and entrepreneurial adaptation and that of most all other economists, most especially that of the macroeconomic "Marshallian" economists in the tradition of John Maynard Keynes and the microeconomic "Walrasian" economists in the tradition of Abba Lerner.

[edit] The business cycle
Capital, money, and the business cycle are prominent topics in Hayek's early contributions to economics. Mises had earlier explained monetary and banking theory in his Theory of Money and Credit (1912), applying the marginal utility principle to the value of money and then proposing a new theory of industrial fluctuations based on the concepts of the British Currency School and the ideas of the Swedish economist Knut Wicksell. Hayek used this body of work as a starting point for his own interpretation of the business cycle, which defended what later became known as the "Austrian Theory of the Business Cycle". In his Prices and Production (1931) and The Pure Theory of Capital (1941), he explained the origin of the business cycle in terms of central bank credit expansion and its transmission over time in terms of capital misallocation caused by artificially low interest rates. Hayek claimed that: The past instability of the market economy is the consequence of the exclusion of the most important regulator of the market mechanism, money, from itself being regulated by the market process. In accordance with arguments outlined in his essay The Use of Knowledge in Society, he argued that monopolistic governmental agency like central bank can neither possess the relevant information which should govern supply of money, nor have the ability to use it correctly. [19]

[edit] Social and political philosophy
In the latter half of his career Hayek made a number of contributions to social and political philosophy, which he based on his views on the limits of human knowledge[20], and the idea of spontaneous order in social institutions. He argues in favor of a society organized around a market order, in which the apparatus of state is employed almost (though not entirely) exclusively to enforce the legal order (consisting of abstract rules, and not particular commands) necessary for a market of free individuals to function. These ideas were informed by a moral philosophy derived from epistemological concerns regarding the inherent limits of human knowledge.
In his philosophy of science, which has much in common with that of his good friend Karl Popper, Hayek was highly critical of what he termed scientism: a false understanding of the methods of science that has been mistakenly forced upon the social sciences, but that is contrary to the practices of genuine science. Usually scientism involves combining the philosophers' ancient demand for demonstrative justification with the associationists' false view that all scientific explanations are simple two-variable linear relationships. Hayek points out that much of science involves the explanation of complex multi-variable and non-linear phenomena, and that the social science of economics and undesigned order compares favorably with such complex sciences as Darwinian biology. These ideas were developed in The Counter-Revolution of Science: Studies in the Abuse of Reason, 1952 and in some of Hayek's later essays in the philosophy of science such as "Degrees of Explanation" and "The Theory of Complex Phenomena".
In The Sensory Order: An Inquiry into the Foundations of Theoretical Psychology (1952), Hayek independently developed a "Hebbian learning" model of learning and memory – an idea which he first conceived in 1920, prior to his study of economics. Hayek's expansion of the "Hebbian synapse" construction into a global brain theory has received continued attention[citation needed] in neuroscience, cognitive science, computer science, behavioral science, and evolutionary psychology.

[edit] Hayek and conservatism
Hayek attracted new attention in the 1980s and 1990s with the rise of conservative governments in the United States and the United Kingdom. Margaret Thatcher, the Conservative British prime minister from 1979 to 1990, was an outspoken dévotée of Hayek's writings. Shortly after Thatcher became Leader of the party, she “reached into her briefcase and took out a book. It was Friedrich von Hayek's The Constitution of Liberty. Interrupting [the speaker], she held the book up for all of us to see. ‘This’, she said sternly, ‘is what we believe’, and banged Hayek down on the table.”[21] After winning the 1979 election, Thatcher appointed Keith Joseph, the director of the Hayekian Centre for Policy Studies, as her secretary of state for industry in an effort to redirect parliament’s economic strategies. Likewise, David Stockman, Ronald Reagan’s most influential financial official in 1981 was an acknowledged follower of Hayek. [22]
Hayek wrote an essay titled Why I Am Not a Conservative[23] (included as an appendix to The Constitution of Liberty), in which he disparaged conservatism for its inability to adapt to changing human realities or to offer a positive political program. Although he noted that modern day conservatism shares many opinions on economics with classic liberals, particularly a belief in the free market, he believed it's because conservatism wants to "stand still", whereas liberalism embraces the free market because it "wants to go somewhere". Hayek identified himself as a classical liberal, but noted that in the United States it had become almost impossible to use "liberal" in its original definition, and the term "libertarian" has been used instead. However, for his part Hayek found this term "singularly unattractive" and offered the term “Old Whig” (a phrase borrowed from Edmund Burke) instead. In his later life he said: "I am becoming a Burkean Whig". [24]

[edit] Influence and recognition
Hayek's profound influence on the development of economics can be universally acknowledged. Hayek is the second most frequently cited economist (after Kenneth Arrow) in the Nobel lectures of the prize winners in economics. A number of Nobel winners -- such as Vernon Smith and Herbert Simon -- recognize Hayek as the greatest economist of the modern period. Hayek is widely recognized for having introduced the time dimension to the equilibrium construction, and for his key role in helping to having inspired the fields of growth theory, information economics, and the theory of spontaneous order. The "informal" economics presented in Milton Friedman's massively influential popular work "Free to Choose" (1980), is explicitly Hayekian in its account of the price system as a system for transmitting and coordinating knowledge. This is hardly an accident -- Friedman taught Hayek's famous paper "The Use of Knowledge in Society" (1945) in his graduate seminars.
Harvard economist and former Harvard University President Lawrence Summers explains Hayek's place in modern economics this way: "What's the single most important thing to learn from an economics course today? What I tried to leave my students with is the view that the invisible hand is more powerful than the [un]hidden hand. Things will happen in well-organized efforts without direction, controls, plans. That's the consensus among economists. That's the Hayek legacy."[25]
By 1947, Hayek was an organizer of the Mont Pelerin Society, a group of classical liberals who sought to oppose what they saw as socialism in various areas. He was also instrumental in the founding of the Institute of Economic Affairs, the free-market think tank that inspired Thatcherism.
Hayek had a long-standing and close friendship with philosopher of science Karl Popper, also from Vienna. In a letter to Hayek in 1944, Popper stated, "I think I have learnt more from you than from any other living thinker, except perhaps Alfred Tarski." (See Hacohen, 2000). Popper dedicated his Conjectures and Refutations to Hayek. For his part, Hayek dedicated a collection of papers, Studies in Philosophy, Politics, and Economics, to Popper, and in 1982 said, "...ever since his Logik der Forschung first came out in 1934, I have been a complete adherent to his general theory of methodology."[26] Popper also participated in the inaugural meeting of the Mont Pelerin Society. Their friendship and mutual admiration, however, do not change the fact that there are important differences between their ideas.[27]
Hayek heavily influenced Margaret Thatcher's economic approach, and some of Ronald Reagan's economic advisers such as Martin Anderson and his director of Office of Management and Budget (OMB) David Stockman. After the fall of Communism Hayek became one of the most-respected economists in Eastern Europe. It was reported[28] that during one of her first Conservative Party executive meetings as leader, Thatcher said: "When people ask what we stand for ..." then she reached into her briefcase and took out a book. It was Hayek's The Constitution of Liberty. Interrupting the speaker, she held the book up for all of us to see. "This", she said sternly, "is what we believe", and banged Hayek down on the table.[29]
Hayek's greatest intellectual debt was to Carl Menger, who pioneered an approach to social explanation similar to that developed in Britain by Bernard Mandeville and the Scottish moral philosophers (cf. Scottish Enlightenment). He had a wide-reaching influence on contemporary economics, politics, philosophy, sociology, psychology and anthropology. For example, Hayek's discussion in The Road to Serfdom (1944) about truth, falsehood and the use of language influenced some later opponents of postmodernism.[30]

[edit] Legacy and honors
Even after his death, Hayek's intellectual presence was noticeable, especially in the universities where he had taught: the London School of Economics, the University of Chicago, and the University of Freiburg. A number of tributes resulted, many posthumous.

A student-run group at the LSE Hayek Society, was established in his honor.
At Oxford University, the Oxford Libertarian Society was previously known as the Hayek Society.
The Cato Institute named its lower level auditorium after Hayek, who had been a Distinguished Senior Fellow at Cato during his later years.
Also, the auditorium of the school of economics in Universidad Francisco Marroquín in Guatemala is named after him.

Hayek's work on price theory has been central to the thinking of Jimmy Wales about how to manage the Wikipedia project.[31]

[edit] Selected bibliography
See also: List of books by Friedrich Hayek

Monetary Theory and the Trade Cycle, 1929.
Prices and Production, 1931.
Profits, Interest and Investment: And other essays on the theory of industrial fluctuations, 1939.
The Road to Serfdom, 1944.
Individualism and Economic Order, 1948.
The Constitution of Liberty, 1960.
Law, Legislation and Liberty (3 volumes)


1) Rules and Order, 1973
2) The Mirage of Social Justice, 1976
3) The Political Order of a Free People, 1979


The Fatal Conceit: The Errors of Socialism, 1988. (The content of the book was heavily influenced by William Warren Bartley)[32]


[edit] Notes


^ Edward Feser (edt), The Cambridge Companion to Hayek, Cambridge University Press (2007), ISBN 0521849772, p.13
^ Bank of Sweden (1974). "The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 1974". http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economics/laureates/1974/index.html. 
^ George H. W. Bush (1991-11-18). "Remarks on Presenting the Presidential Medal of Freedom Awards". http://bushlibrary.tamu.edu/research/public_papers.php?id=3642&year=&month=. 
^ UCLA Oral History 1978 Interviews with Friedrich Hayek, pp. 32-38
^ http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/commandingheights/shared/minitext/tr_show01.html
^ "The Viennese Connection: Alfred Schutz and the Austrian School" by Peter Kurrild-Klitgaard.
^ Interview with David Rockefeller
^ van der Reijden, Joël (2008-09-17). "The Pilgrims Society - A study of the Anglo-American Establishment". Institute for the Study of Globalization and Covert Politics. http://www.isgp.eu/organisations/Pilgrims_Society02.htm#152. Retrieved on 2009-02-16. 
^ J. K. Galbraith, "Nicholas Kaldor Remembered", in Nicholas Kaldor and Mainstream Economics: Confrontation or Convergence?, New York: St. Martin's Press.
^ Sir Arthur Lewis Autobiography
^ Alan Ebenstein, Friedrich Hayek: A Biography, p. 62, 248, 284.
^ Samuel Brittan, "Hayek, Friedrich August (1899–1992)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, (1984)
^ Alan Ebenstein, Friedrich Hayek. A Biography (New York: Palgrave, 2001), p. 107.
^ Ibid., p. 116.
^ Ibid., p. 128.
^ Hayek, Constitution of Liberty, U. Chicxago Press (1960) pp. 502-3
^ Block W. (1996). "Hayek's Road to Serfdom". Journal of Libertarian Studies.
^ The Pure Theory of Capital, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1941/2007 (Vol. 12 of the Collected Works): p. 90.
^ Hayek, Friedrich (1989). The Collected Works of F.A. Hayek. University of Chicago Press. pp. 202. ISBN 9780226320977. 
^ The Use of Knowledge in Society
^ John Ranelagh, Thatcher's People: An Insider's Account of the Politics, the Power, and the Personalities (1991), p. ix.
^ Kenneth R. Hoover, Economics as Ideology: Keynes, Laski, Hayek, and the Creation of Contemporary Politics (2003) p. 213
^ Why I Am Not a Conservative
^ E. H. H. Green, Ideologies of Conservatism. Conservative Political Ideas in the Twentieth Century (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), p. 259.
^ Lawrence Summers, quoted in The Commanding Heights: The Battle Between Government and the Marketplace that Is Remaking the Modern World, by Daniel Yergin and Joseph Stanislaw. New York: Simon & Schuster. 1998, pp. 150-151.
^ See Weimer and Palermo, 1982
^ See Birner, 2001
^ in the book and documentary series Commanding Heights: The Battle for the World Economy
^ John Ranelagh, Thatcher's People: An Insider's Account of the Politics, the Power, and the Personalities. London: Harper Collins, 1991.
^ e.g., Wolin 2004
^ Katherine Mangu-Ward: [http://www.reason.com/news/show/119689.html Wikipedia and Beyond. Jimmy Wales´ sprawling vision, June 2007
^ Liberty - The Fatal Deceit



[edit] Bibliography

Birner, Jack, 2001, "The mind-body problem and social evolution," CEEL Working Paper 1-02.
Birner, Hack, and Rudy van Zijp, eds., Hayek: Co-ordination and Evolution: His legacy in philosophy, politics, economics and the history of ideas (1994)
Brittan, Samuel "Hayek, Friedrich August (1899–1992)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, (2006) online
Caldwell, Bruce, 2005. Hayek's Challenge: An Intellectual Biography of F.A. Hayek.
Cohen, Avi J. "The Hayek/Knight Capital Controversy: the Irrelevance of Roundaboutness, or Purging Processes in Time?" History of Political Economy 2003 35(3): 469-490. Issn: 0018-2702 Fulltext: online in Project Muse, Swetswise and Ebsco
Doherty, Brian. 2007. Radicals for Capitalism: A Freewheeling History of the Modern American Libertarian Movement
Ebenstein, Alan O., 2001. Friedrich Hayek: A Biography.
Frowen, S. ed., (1997) Hayek: economist and social philosopher
Gamble, Andrew. (1996) The Iron Cage of Liberty, an analysis of Hayek's ideas
Gray, John, 1998. Hayek on Liberty.
Hacohen, Malachi, 2000. Karl Popper: The Formative Years, 1902 – 1945.
Horwitz, Steven. "Friedrich Hayek, Austrian Economist." Journal of the History of Economic Thought 2005 27(1): 71-85. Issn: 1042-7716 Fulltext: in Swetswise, Ingenta and Ebsco
Issing, O. (1999) Hayek, currency competition and European monetary union
Kasper, Sherryl, 2002, The Revival of Laissez-Faire in American Macroeconomic Theory: A Case Study of Its Pioneers. Chpt. 4.
Kley, Roland, 1994. Hayek's Social and Political Thought. Oxford Univ. Press.
Muller, Jerry Z., 2002. The Mind and the Market: Capitalism in Western Thought. Anchor Books.
Pavlík, Ján. 2004 [1]. University of Economics, Prague F. A. von Hayek and The Theory of Spontaneous Order. Professional Publishing 2004, Prague [2].
Rosenof, Theodore, 1974, "Freedom, Planning, and Totalitarianism: The Reception of F. A. Hayek's Road to Serfdom," Canadian Review of American Studies.
Samuelson, Richard A. "Reaction to the Road to Serfdom." Modern Age 1999 41(4): 309-317. Issn: 0026-7457 Fulltext: in Ebsco
Shearmur; Jeremy, 1996. Hayek and after: Hayekian Liberalism as a Research Programme. Routledge.
Touchie, John, 2005. Hayek and Human Rights: Foundations for a Minimalist Approach to Law. Edward Elgar.
Vanberg, V. (2001). "Hayek, Friedrich A von (1899–1992)," International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, pp. 6482–6486. Abstract.
Vernon, Richard. "The 'Great Society' and the 'Open Society': Liberalism in Hayek and Popper." Canadian Journal of Political Science 1976 9(2): 261-276. Issn: 0008-4239 Fulltext: in Jstor
Weimer, W., and Palermo, D., eds., 1982. Cognition and the Symbolic Processes. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Contains Hayek's essay, "The Sensory Order after 25 Years" with "Discussion."
Wolin, R. 2004. The Seduction of Unreason: The Intellectual Romance with Fascism from Nietzsche to Postmodernism. Princeton University Press, Princeton.


[edit] Primary sources

Hayek, Friedrich. Hayek on Hayek: an autobiographical dialogue, ed. S. Kresge and L. Wenar (1994)
Hayek, Friedrich. The collected works of F. A. Hayek, ed. W. W. Bartley and others (1988–)


[edit] See also




Connectionism
Dispersed knowledge
Methodological individualism
Organised order
Rule of Law
Spontaneous order
Austrian School of economics





Eugen von Bohm-Bawerk
Carl Menger
Ludwig von Mises
Israel Kirzner
Murray Rothbard
Roger Garrison
Chicago school of economics





Milton Friedman
George Stigler
Thomas Sowell
Mont Pelerin Society
List of Austrian scientists
List of Austrians
Liberalism in Austria
Thatcherism
Atilla Yayla










[edit] External links



Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Friedrich Hayek



The Hayek Scholar's Page
UCLA Oral History 1978 Interviews with Friedrich Hayek
Bio from the Ludwig von Mises Institute
List of Articles written by Hayek from the Ludwig von Mises Institute
Hayek's influence on Friesian philosophy
Official 1974 Nobel Prize page
Bio and online works on Econlib
The Road to Serfdom in Five Minutes Hayek's book, as illustrated by Look Magazine, condensed into a 5-minute movie
Hayek, F. A Directory of links on Hayek from the Open Source Directory
F A Hayek on the Adam Smith Institute website
Hayek Bio at hayek.de
Reason magazine's article on what Hayek might think of gay marriage (describes the conservatism vs. liberalism dispute)
Information and Economics: A critique of Hayek essay included in the book Towards a New Socialism reviewed by the hayekian Len Brewster
The economics of information, market socialism and Hayek's legacy
Hayek and Socialism by Bruce Caldwell
The Market Dynamics of Speculation: Hayekian Market Signals and the Rise of the Culture Industries
The Connectionist Mind: A Study of Hayekian Psychology by Barry Smith
Hayek Links The most extensive list of links on Hayek
Oxford Hayek Society
"The Road from Serfdom", interview in Reason by Thomas W. Hazlett
Hayek and the Idea of Plan-Coordinationby Israel Kirzner
IDEAS/RePEc







 
Links to related articles














v • d • e

Nobel Laureates in Economics








Ragnar Frisch / Jan Tinbergen (1969) · Paul Samuelson (1970) · Simon Kuznets (1971) · John Hicks / Kenneth Arrow (1972) · Wassily Leontief (1973) · Gunnar Myrdal / Friedrich Hayek (1974) · Leonid Kantorovich / Tjalling Koopmans (1975)










Complete roster · 1969–1975 · 1976–2000 · 2001–present














v • d • e

Austrian School economists








Carl Menger · Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk · Friedrich von Wieser · Frank Fetter · Ludwig von Mises · Joseph Schumpeter · Benjamin Anderson · Henry Hazlitt · Friedrich Hayek · Lionel Robbins · William Harold Hutt · Ludwig Lachmann · Hans Sennholz · Murray Rothbard · Israel Kirzner · George Reisman · Walter Block · Robert Higgs · Gene Callahan · Ralph Raico · Hans-Hermann Hoppe  · Steven Horwitz · Yuri Maltsev · Joseph Salerno · Jeffrey Herbener · Thomas DiLorenzo · Jesús Huerta de Soto · Peter Boettke · Mark Thornton · David Prychitko · Jim Puplava · Jaroslav Romanchuk · Jörg Guido Hülsmann · Peter G. Klein · Peter Schiff · Robert P. Murphy















v • d • e

Schools of economic thought





Pre-modern

Ancient schools · Medieval Islamic · Scholasticism






Early modern

Mercantilism · Physiocrats






Modern

Classical · French liberal · German historical · English historical · French historical · Utopian · Marxian · State socialism · Ricardian socialism · Christian socialism · Distributism  · Anarchist · Institutional · Neoclassical · Lausanne






20th century

Stockholm · Keynesian · Austrian · Chicago  · Neo-Ricardian  · New institutional · Post-Keynesian  · Islamic · New classical






Related

Economics · History of economic thought















Persondata


NAME
Hayek, Friedrich August von


ALTERNATIVE NAMES



SHORT DESCRIPTION
Austrian (later British) economist and political philosopher; Nobel Memorial Prize winner; professor; Austrian school member; supported free markets and liberal democracy; anti-Marxist


DATE OF BIRTH
May 8, 1899(1899-05-08)


PLACE OF BIRTH



DATE OF DEATH
March 23, 1992


PLACE OF DEATH






Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Friedrich_Hayek"
Categories: 20th-century philosophers | Academics of the London School of Economics | Austrian economists | Austrian philosophers | Austrian nobility | Austrian School economists | Austrian libertarians | Austrian agnostics | Austrian anti-communists | Austro-Hungarian military personnel of World War I | British economists | British libertarians | Classical liberals | Minarchists | Libertarian historians | Libertarian economists | Heterodox economists | Historians of economic thought | Philosophers of law | Members of the Order of the Companions of Honour | Mont Pelerin Society members | Nobel laureates in Economics | People from Vienna | Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients | Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class) | University of Chicago faculty | University of Vienna alumni | 1899 births | 1992 deathsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2008 | Articles needing additional references from May 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
বাংলা
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Gàidhlig
한국어
Ido
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
ქართული
Latina
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Монгол
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Occitan
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
Türkçe
Українська
Tiếng Việt
中文









 This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 08:15.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
