













National Football League - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "National_Football_League";
		var wgTitle = "National Football League";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "21211";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282137243;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); National Football League

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"NFL" redirects here.  For other leagues using the name "National Football League", see National Football League (disambiguation). For other uses of "NFL", see NFL (disambiguation).


National Football League


Current season or competition:
2009 NFL Draft





Sport
American Football


Founded
September 17, 1920


Commissioner
Roger Goodell


Inaugural season
1920


No. of teams
32


Country(ies)
 United States


Most recent
champion(s)
Pittsburgh Steelers


Most championships
Green Bay Packers (12)


TV partner(s)
CBS, FOX, NBC, ESPN, NFL Network


Official website
http://www.nfl.com


The National Football League (NFL) is the largest Professional Football league in the United States. It is an unincorporated 501(c)(6) association controlled by its members.[1] It was formed by eleven teams in 1920 as the American Professional Football Association (the league changed the name to American Professional Football League in 1921 and then settled on its current name in 1922). The league currently consists of thirty-two teams from the United States. The league is divided evenly into two conferences — the American Football Conference (AFC) and National Football Conference (NFC), and each conference has four divisions that have 4 teams each.
The regular season is a seventeen-week schedule during which each team has one bye week and plays sixteen games. This schedule includes six games against a team's divisional rivals, as well as several inter-division and inter-conference games. The season currently starts on the Thursday night in the first full week of September (the Thursday after Labor Day) and runs weekly to late December or early January.
At the end of each regular season, six teams from each conference play in the NFL playoffs, a twelve-team single-elimination tournament that culminates with the championship game, known as the Super Bowl. This game is held at a pre-selected site which is usually a city that hosts an NFL team. Selected all-star players from both the AFC and NFC meet in the Pro Bowl, held in Honolulu, Hawaii; up to and including 2009, this game took place the weekend after the Super Bowl. In 2010, it will take place the week prior to the Super Bowl, in Miami, Florida.




Contents


1 History

1.1 Beginnings
1.2 A new league is born
1.3 Minority Players
1.4 The Merger
1.5 Modern era
1.6 Franchise relocations and mergers
1.7 Popularity


2 Season structure

2.1 Exhibition season
2.2 Regular Season
2.3 Playoffs


3 Teams

3.1 Current NFL teams
3.2 Former NFL teams


4 Calendar
5 Media

5.1 Television
5.2 Radio
5.3 Internet/New Media


6 Player contracts and compensation

6.1 Salaries
6.2 Salary cap


7 NFL Draft
8 Free agency

8.1 General
8.2 Restricted free agent
8.3 Unrestricted free agent
8.4 Free Agency Changes in 2010
8.5 Franchise tag


9 Banned substances policy
10 Video games
11 Commissioners and presidents
12 Main league offices
13 Franchise owners
14 Uniform numbers
15 Awards

15.1 Discontinued awards


16 See also

16.1 Regular seasons

16.1.1 Special regular season games


16.2 Cheerleading
16.3 Postseasons
16.4 Records
16.5 Related football leagues


17 Notes
18 References
19 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History

[edit] Beginnings

Total NFL Titles*[2]

Team
Titles


Green Bay Packers
12


Chicago Bears
9


New York Giants
7


Pittsburgh Steelers
6


Dallas Cowboys
5


San Francisco 49ers


Washington Redskins


Indianapolis Colts


Cleveland Browns
4


Detroit Lions


Oakland Raiders


New England Patriots
3


Philadelphia Eagles


St. Louis Rams


Kansas City Chiefs


Arizona Cardinals
2


Denver Broncos


Miami Dolphins


Tennessee Titans


Buffalo Bills


San Diego Chargers
1


Baltimore Ravens


New York Jets


Minnesota Vikings


Tampa Bay Buccaneers


Further information: History of American football
The National Football League was the brainchild of Jim Thorpe, player-coach of the Canton Bulldogs, and Leo Lyons, owner of the Rochester Jeffersons, a sandlot football team. After Lyons's Jeffersons played, and lost badly to, Thorpe's Bulldogs in a 1917 match, Lyons (wanting to build a sport that rivaled Major League Baseball in popularity) suggested to Thorpe that a league be formed.[3] Plans could not be initiated immediately in 1918, due to the Spanish flu quarantines and the loss of players to the Great War, which led to the Bulldogs suspending operations and most other teams either suspending operations or reducing their schedules to local teams.
The next year, however, Lyons started in his home state of New York, challenging a cluster of professional teams in Buffalo to a championship in 1919; the Buffalo Prospects took the challenge and won. Canton was already a part of the unofficial Ohio League, which included teams such as the Bulldogs, the Massillon Tigers, the Shelby Blues and the Ironton Tanks; Thorpe convinced Bulldogs manager Ralph Hay and other Ohio teams to play under a league-style format for 1919. Other independent clusters of teams were playing at about the same time across Illinois, Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota and Indiana; Pennsylvania and New York City also had teams but did not contribute any to the NFL at the time of its founding (especially notable since Pennsylvania is often considered to be the birthplace of professional football).

[edit] A new league is born
It was not until August 1920, at a Hupmobile dealership in Canton, Ohio, that the league was formalized, originally as the American Professional Football league, initially consisting only of the Ohio League teams (though some of the teams declined participation). One month later, the league was renamed the American Professional Football Association, adding Buffalo and Rochester from the New York league and five other teams from nearby circuits. The eleven founding teams initially struck an agreement over player poaching and the declaration of an end-of-season champion. Thorpe, while still playing for the Bulldogs, was elected president. Only four of the founding teams finished the 1920 schedule and the undefeated Akron Pros claimed the first championship. Membership of the league increased to 22 teams (including more of the New York teams) in 1921, but throughout the 1920s the membership was unstable and the league was not a major national sport. On June 24, 1922, the organization changed its title a final time to the National Football League. [4]
Two charter members, the Chicago Cardinals (now the Arizona Cardinals) and the Decatur Staleys (now the Chicago Bears), are still in existence. The Green Bay Packers franchise (founded in 1919) is the oldest team not to change locations, but did not begin league play until 1921. The Indianapolis Colts franchise traces its history through several predecessors,is one of the including ones of the league's founding teams (the Dayton Triangles), but is considered a separate franchise from those teams and was founded as the Baltimore Colts in 1953. Though the original NFL teams representing Buffalo, Cleveland, Chicago and Detroit no longer exist, replacement franchises have since been established for those cities.
Early championships were awarded to the team with the best won-lost record, initially rather haphazardly, as some teams played more or fewer games than others, or scheduled games against non-league, amateur or collegiate teams; this led to the title being decided on a tiebreaker in 1921, a disputed title in 1925, and the scheduling of an impromptu indoor playoff game in 1932. It was not until 1933 that an annual championship game was instituted. By 1934, all of the small-town teams, with the exception of the Green Bay Packers, had moved to or been replaced by teams in big cities, and even Green Bay established a relationship with much larger Milwaukee for support. An annual draft of college players was first held in 1936. It was during this era, however, that the NFL became segregated: there were no Black players in Professional Football in the United States between 1933 and 1945, mainly due to the influence of self-admitted bigot George Preston Marshall, who entered the league in 1932 as the owner of the Boston Braves. Other NFL owners emulated Marshall's tactics to mollify southern fans, and even after the NFL's color barrier had been broken in the 1950s, Marshall's Washington Redskins remained all-white until forced to integrate by the Kennedy administration in 1962.[5] Despite his anti-social tendencies, Marshall was selected as a charter member of the NFL-inspired Pro Football Hall of Fame.
College football was the bigger attraction, but by the end of World War II, pro football began to rival the college game for fans' attention. Rule changes and innovations such as the T formation led to a faster-paced, higher-scoring game. The league also expanded out of its eastern and midwestern cradle; in 1945, the Cleveland Rams moved to Los Angeles, becoming the first big-league sports franchise on the West Coast (not counting the various teams in ice hockey's PCHA, which was a rival to the NHL in the 1910s and 1920s). In 1950, the NFL accepted three teams from the defunct All-America Football Conference, expanding to thirteen clubs. In the 1950s, with the league broadcast on national television, pro football finally earned its place as a major sport.

[edit] Minority Players
Main article: Black players in American professional football
At its inception in 1920, the NFL's precursor, the American Professional Football Association, had several African-American players (a total of thirteen between 1920 and 1933). However, by 1932 the National Football League had only two black players, and by 1934 there were none, effectively coinciding with the entry of one of the leading owners of the league, George Preston Marshall, who openly refused to have black athletes on his Boston Braves/Washington Redskins team, and reportedly pressured the rest of the league to follow suit until after World War II.
NFL 'integration' occurred only when the Cleveland Rams wanted to move to Los Angeles, and the venue, the Los Angeles Coliseum, required them to integrate their team. They then signed two black players. Other NFL teams eventually followed suit, but Marshall refused to integrate the Redskins until forced to by the Kennedy admnistration as a pre-condition for using RFK Stadium. In spite of this open bias, Marshall was elected to the NFL's Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1963. In 1946, the Cleveland Browns of a rival Professional Football league, the All-America Football Conference, signed two black players. By 1960, the NFL's new competitor, the American Football League, actively recruited players from small predominantly black colleges that had been largely ignored by the NFL, giving those schools' black players the opportunity to play Professional Football. Early AFL teams averaged more blacks than NFL teams did.[6]
However, despite the NFL's previous segregationist policies, the clear competitive advantage of AFL teams with liberal signing policies affected the NFL's drafts. By 1969, a comparison of the two league's championship team photos showed the AFL's Chiefs with 23 black players out of 51 players pictured, while the NFL Vikings had 11 blacks, of 42 players in the photo. Chiefs players have been quoted as saying that one motivating factor in their defeat of the Vikings was their pride in their diverse squad. Recent surveys have shown that the current, post-merger NFL is approximately 57–61% non-white (this includes African Americans, Polynesians, non-white Hispanics, Asians, and people that are mixed race.)

[edit] The Merger
Main article: AFL-NFL merger
By the middle of the 1960s, competition for players, including separate college drafts, was driving up player salaries. In 1965, in the most high profile such contest and a major boost to the AFL, University of Alabama quarterback Joe Namath signed with the New York Jets in preference to the NFL's St. Louis Cardinals for a then-record $427,000. In 1966, the AFL Commissioner Al Davis embarked on a campaign to sign players away from the NFL, especially quarterbacks, but behind the scenes a number of team owners began action to end the detrimental rivalry.
In an agreement brokered by AFL founder Lamar Hunt and Dallas Cowboys General Manager Tex Schramm, the two leagues announced their merger deal on June 8, 1966. The leagues would henceforth hold a Common Draft and an end-of-season World Championship Game between the two league champions (later known as the Super Bowl and reverting to simply an NFL championship game). Still another city received an NFL franchise thanks to the AFL, as New Orleans was awarded an NFL team after Louisiana's federal Congressmen pushed for the passage of Public Law 89-800, which permitted the merger and exempted the action from Anti-Trust restrictions. The monopoly that would be created needed to be legitimized by an act of Congress. In 1970, the leagues fully merged under the name National Football League and divided into two conferences of an equal number of teams. There was also a financial settlement, with the AFL teams paying a combined $18 million over 20 years. There was also strident objection by many American Football League fans over their league's loss of its separate identity, name, and distinctive logo.
Although the AFL's identity was subsumed by the NFL, the American Football League's innovations: the on-field game clock; names on player jerseys; recruiting at small and predominantly black colleges; gate and television revenue-sharing; establishment of southern franchises; and more wide-open offensive rules, all eventually adopted by the ultra-conservative NFL, permanently changed the face of Professional Football in America.

[edit] Modern era




The second NFL logo, officially used between 1970 and April 2008.


In the 1970s and 1980s, the NFL solidified its dominance as America's top spectator sport and its important role in American culture. The Super Bowl became an unofficial national holiday and the top-rated TV program most years. Monday Night Football, which first aired in 1970, brought in high ratings by mixing sports and entertainment. Rule changes in the late 1970s ensured a fast-paced game with lots of passing to attract the casual fan.
The World Football League was the first post-merger challenge to the NFL's dominance, and in 1974, successfully lured some top NFL talent to its league and prompted a few rules changes in the NFL. However, financial problems led the league to fold halfway through its 1975 season. Two teams, the Birmingham Vulcans and Memphis Southmen, made unsuccessful efforts to move from the WFL to the NFL.
The founding of the United States Football League in the early 1980s was the biggest challenge to the NFL in the post-merger era. The USFL was a well-financed competitor with big-name players and a national television contract. However, the USFL failed to make money and folded after three years. The USFL filed a successful anti-trust lawsuit against the NFL, but the remedies were minimal, and mismanagement (most notably, a planned move of its niche spring football season to a head-to-head competition in the fall) led to the league's collapse. However, like the AFL before it, the success of the USFL led directly to new NFL teams in Baltimore, Carolina (though the USFL never had a franchise there) and Jacksonville, as well as the relocation of the St. Louis Cardinals to Arizona and the return of the Los Angeles Raiders to their original home city of Oakland. In addition, the USFL also used the two-point conversion, which was first introduced to American Professional Football by the American Football League in 1960, and later adopted by the NFL in 1994 (the two point-conversion had previously been used in American college football since 1958).
2001 saw the establishment of the XFL, an attempt by Vince McMahon and NBC, which had lost the NFL broadcast rights for that year, to compete with the league; the XFL folded after just one season. Unlike the WFL and USFL, the XFL had no impact on the NFL's rules or franchise locations (its attempts at innovations were often ridiculed), but a few NFL players used the XFL to relaunch their careers. Three other leagues plan on launching in 2009 and 2010; the one most directly challenging the NFL is the United Football League, which is playing a fall schedule, placing teams in New York City (the Jets and Giants play in New Jersey), Los Angeles, Las Vegas and other high profile cities without NFL teams, and is willing to lure NFL-caliber talent with comparable salaries. (The two other leagues, the All American Football League and New USFL, are spring leagues that are not aiming to directly compete with the NFL.)
In recent years, the NFL has expanded into new markets and ventures. In 1986, the league began holding a series of pre-season exhibition games, called American Bowls, held at international sites outside the United States; these games continued until 2005. Then in 1991, the league formed the World League of American Football, later known as NFL Europe and still later as NFL Europa, a developmental league that had teams in the United Kingdom, Germany, Catalonia, and in The Netherlands. The NFL shut down the program in June 2007. In 2003, the NFL launched its own cable-television channel, NFL Network.
The league played a regular-season NFL game in Mexico City in 2005. On October 28, 2007, a regular season game between the Miami Dolphins and the New York Giants was held outside of North America for the first time in Wembley Stadium, a 90,000-seat stadium in London. It was a financial success with nearly 40,000 tickets sold within 90 minutes of the start of sales,[7] and a game-day attendance of over 80,000. In 2008, the New Orleans Saints and San Diego Chargers played at Wembley[8], and in October 2009, the New England Patriots and Tampa Bay Buccaneers will meet.[9] Starting from the 2008-09 season, the Buffalo Bills play an annual home game in Toronto's Rogers Centre[10].
On August 31, 2007, a story in USA Today unveiled the first changes to the league's shield logo since 1970, which took effect with the 2008 season.[11] The redesign reduced the number of stars in the logo from 25[11] (which were found not to have a meaning beyond being decorative) to eight (for each of the league's divisions), repositioned the football in the manner of the Vince Lombardi Trophy, and changed the NFL letters to a straight, serifed font. The redesign was created with television and digital media, along with clothing, in mind. The shield logo itself dates back to the 1940s.

[edit] Franchise relocations and mergers
Further information: National Football League franchise moves and mergers
In the early years, the league was not stable and teams moved frequently. Franchise mergers were popular during World War II in response to the scarcity of players. An example of this was the Steagles, temporarily formed as a merger between the Pittsburgh Steelers and Philadelphia Eagles.
Franchise moves became far more controversial in the late 20th century when a vastly more popular NFL was free from financial instability and allowed many franchises to abandon long-held strongholds for perceived financially greener pastures. This was done in spite of the promises to Congress by Pete Rozelle in 1966 that if the AFL-NFL merger were allowed, no city would lose its franchise. Those promises were made to ensure passage of PL 89-800, which granted Anti-trust immunity to the merged Professional Football leagues. While owners invariably cited financial difficulties as the primary factor in such moves, many fans bitterly disputed these contentions, especially in Cleveland (the Rams and the Browns), Baltimore (the Colts), Houston (the Oilers), and St. Louis (the Cardinals), each of which eventually received teams some years after their original franchises left (the Browns, another Browns, Ravens, Texans, and Rams, respectively). However, Los Angeles, the second-largest media market in the United States, has not had an NFL team since 1994 after both the Raiders and the Rams relocated elsewhere.
Additionally, with the increasing suburbanization of the U.S., the building of new stadiums and other team facilities in the suburbs instead of the central city became popular from the 1970s on; however, at the turn of the millennium, a reverse shift back to the central city became somewhat evident, as with the move by the Detroit Lions from the Silverdome in Pontiac, Michigan to Ford Field in downtown Detroit and, similarly, the Chicago Bears decision to remain in a rebuilt Soldier Field located in downtown Chicago.

[edit] Popularity
While baseball is known as "America's national pastime", football is the most popular sport in the United States. According to the Harris Poll, Professional Football moved ahead of baseball as the fans' favorite in 1965, during the emergence of the NFL's challenger, the American Football League, as a major Professional Football league. Football has remained America's favorite sport ever since. In a Harris Poll conducted in 2008, the NFL was the favorite sport of as many people (30%) as the combined total of the next three professional sports--baseball (15%), auto racing (10%), and hockey (5%).[12] Additionally, football's American TV viewership ratings now surpass those of other sports, although football season comprises far fewer games than the seasons of other sports.[13] Furthermore, college football is actually the third-most popular sport in the US, with 12% of survey respondents listing it as their favorite. Therefore, fully 42% of Americans consider some level of football their favorite sport.
However, the Harris Polls only allow one unaided selection of a "favorite sport." Other studies and polls such as the ESPN Sports Poll and the studies released by the Associated Press and conducted by Sports Marketing Group from 1988 to 2004, show higher levels of popularity for NFL Football since they list from thirty to over 100 sports that each respondent must rate. According to the Associated Press, the Sports Marketing Group polls from 1988 to 2004 show NFL Football to be the most popular spectator sport in America. The AP stated that "In the most detailed survey ever of America's sports tastes" researching "114 spectator sports they might attend, follow on television or radio or read about in newspapers or magazines, the NFL topped all sports with 39 percent of Americans saying they loved it or considered it one of their favorites."[14] The total percentage of Americans who liked or loved NFL Football exceeds 60% of the American Public.
The NFL has the highest per-game attendance of any domestic professional sports league in the world, drawing over 67,000 spectators per game for each of its two most recently completed seasons, 2006[15] and 2007.[16] However, the NFL's overall attendance is only approximately 20% of Major League Baseball, due to the latter's longer schedule (162-game scheduled regular season).

[edit] Season structure
Since 2002, The NFL season features the following schedule:

a 4-game exhibition season (or preseason) running from early August to early September;
a 16-game, 17-week regular season running from September to December or early January; and
a 12-team playoff tournament beginning in January, culminating in the Super Bowl in early February.

Traditionally, American High school football games are played on Friday, American College football games are played on Saturday, and most NFL games are played on Sunday. Because the NFL season is longer than the college football season, the NFL schedules Saturday games and Saturday playoff games outside the college football season. The ABC Television network added Monday Night Football in 1970, and Thursday night NFL games were added in the 1980s.

[edit] Exhibition season
Main article: National Football League exhibition season
Following mini-camps in the spring and officially recognized Training Camp in July-August, NFL teams typically play four exhibition games from early August through early September. Each team hosts two games of the four. The Pro Football Hall of Fame Game and American Bowl are held at neutral sites, so the four teams in those games play five exhibition games each.
The games are useful for new players who are not used to playing in front of very large crowds. Management often uses the games to evaluate newly-signed players. Veteran starters will generally play only for about a quarter of each game to minimize the risk of injury.

[edit] Regular Season




A sample scheduling grid, with a single team's (the Browns) schedule highlighted. Under this hypothetical schedule, the Browns would play the teams in blue twice and the teams in yellow once, for a total of 16 games.


Main article: Regular season (NFL)
Following the preseason, each of the 32 teams embark on a 17 week, 16 game schedule, with the extra week consisting of a bye to allow teams a rest sometime in the middle of the season (and also to increase television coverage). The regular season currently begins the Thursday evening after Labor Day with a primetime "Kickoff Game" (NBC currently holds broadcast rights for that game). According to the current scheduling structure, the earliest the season could begin is September 4 (as it was in the 2008 season), while the latest would be September 10 (as it will be in the 2009 season, due to September 1 falling on a Tuesday). Each of the 32 teams' schedules are organized in the following way:

Each team plays the other three teams in its division twice: once at home, and once on the road (six games).
Each team plays the four teams from another division within its own conference once on a rotating three-year cycle: two at home, and two on the road (four games).
Each team plays the four teams from a division in the other conference once on a rotating four-year cycle: two at home, and two on the road (four games).
Each team plays once against the other teams in its conference that finished in the same place in their own divisions as themselves the previous season, not counting the division they were already scheduled to play: one at home, one on the road (two games).


[edit] Playoffs




The NFL Playoffs. Each of the 4 division winners is seeded 1–4 based on their W-L-T records. The two Wild Card teams (labeled Wild Card 1 and 2) are seeded 5th and 6th (with the better of the two having seed 5) regardless of their records compared to the 4 division winners.


Main article: NFL playoffs
The season concludes with a 12-team tournament used to determine the teams to play in the Super Bowl. The tournament brackets are made up of six teams from each of the league's two conferences, the American Football Conference (AFC) and the National Football Conference (NFC), following the end of the 16-game regular season:

The four division champions from each conference (the team in each division with the best regular season won-lost-tied record), which are seeded 1 through 4 based on their regular season won-lost-tied record (tie-breaker rules may apply).
Two wild card qualifiers from each conference (those non-division champions with the conference's best record, i.e. the best won-lost-tied percentages, with a series of tie-breaking rules in place in the event that there are teams with the same number of wins and losses[17]), which are seeded 5 and 6.

In each conference, the #3 and #6 seeded teams, and the #4 and #5 seeds, face each other during the first round of the playoffs, dubbed the Wild Card Playoffs (the league in recent years has also used the term Wild Card Weekend). The #1 and #2 seeds from each conference receive a bye in the first round, which entitles these teams to automatically advance to the second round, the Divisional Playoff games, to face the winning teams from the first round. In round two, the highest surviving seed (#1) always plays the lowest surviving seed in their conference. And in any given playoff game, whoever has the higher seed gets the home field advantage (i.e. the game is held at the higher seed's home field).
The two surviving teams from the Divisional Playoff games meet in Conference Championship games, with the winners of those contests going on to face one another in the Super Bowl in a game located at a neutral venue that is either indoors or in a warm-weather locale. The designated "home team" alternates year to year between the conferences. In Super Bowl XLII the AFC team (New England Patriots) were "home". In Super Bowl XLIII the NFC team, the Arizona Cardinals, were the home team.

[edit] Teams

[edit] Current NFL teams




Bills


Dolphins


Patriots


Jets


Ravens


Bengals


Browns


Steelers


Texans


Colts


Titans


Broncos


Chiefs


Raiders


Chargers


Cowboys


Giants


Eagles


Redskins


Bears


Lions


Packers


Vikings


Falcons


Panthers


Saints


Buccaneers


Jaguars


Cardinals


Rams


49ers


Seahawks




The NFL consists of 32 clubs. Each club is allowed a maximum of 53 players on their roster, but they may only dress 45 to play each week during the regular season. Unlike Major League Baseball, the National Basketball Association and the National Hockey League, the league has no full-time teams in Canada largely because of the historical existence of the Canadian Football League, although the Buffalo Bills play one game per year (outside of the CFL season) in Toronto, Ontario. Most teams are in the Eastern United States; 16 teams are in the Eastern Time Zone and 10 others in the Central Time Zone. The six teams in the Mountain and Pacific time zones pose special scheduling challenges and cannot play at home prior to noon local time (meaning they usually play as the second half of a doubleheader), giving them an advantage in national exposure.
Most major metropolitan areas in the United States have an NFL franchise. Los Angeles, the second-largest metropolitan area in the country, has not hosted an NFL team since 1994.
Further information: list of TV markets and major sports teams
The Rams and the Raiders called Los Angeles home from 1946-1994 and 1982-1994 respectively. In 2005, some Saints games were played in San Antonio because of Hurricane Katrina. Also, there is talk of possibly bringing the NFL to Toronto, the largest city of Canada. The most frequently mentioned team for such a move is the aforementioned Buffalo Bills, who play 80 miles (130 km) south in Buffalo and do play some of their games in Toronto's Rogers Centre.[18]
The Dallas Cowboys are the highest valued American football franchise in the world, valued at approximately $1.6 billion[19] and one of the most valuable franchises in all of professional sports, currently second only to English soccer club Manchester United,[19] which has an approximate value of US$1.8 billion at current exchange rates.[20]
Since the 2002 season, the teams have been aligned as follows:


Division
Team
City/Area
Stadium
Founded
Joined
Head Coach


American Football Conference


East
Buffalo Bills
Orchard Park, NY
Ralph Wilson Stadium[4]
1959
1970
Dick Jauron


Miami Dolphins
Miami Gardens, FL
Dolphin Stadium
1966
1970
Tony Sparano


New England Patriots
Foxborough, MA
Gillette Stadium
1959
1970
Bill Belichick


New York Jets
East Rutherford, NJ
Giants Stadium[5]
1960
1970
Rex Ryan


North
Baltimore Ravens
Baltimore, MD
M&T Bank Stadium
1996[6]
John Harbaugh


Cincinnati Bengals
Cincinnati, OH
Paul Brown Stadium
1968
1970
Marvin Lewis


Cleveland Browns
Cleveland, OH
Cleveland Browns Stadium
1946
1950[7]
Eric Mangini


Pittsburgh Steelers
Pittsburgh, PA
Heinz Field
1933
Mike Tomlin


South
Houston Texans
Houston, TX
Reliant Stadium
2002
Gary Kubiak


Indianapolis Colts*
Indianapolis, IN
Lucas Oil Stadium
1953
Jim Caldwell


Jacksonville Jaguars
Jacksonville, FL
Jacksonville Municipal Stadium
1995
Jack Del Rio


Tennessee Titans*
Nashville, TN
LP Field
1960
1970
Jeff Fisher


West
Denver Broncos
Denver, CO
Invesco Field at Mile High
1960
1970
Josh McDaniels


Kansas City Chiefs*
Kansas City, MO
Arrowhead Stadium[8]
1960
1970
Todd Haley


Oakland Raiders*
Oakland, CA
Oakland-Alameda County Coliseum
1960
1970
Tom Cable


San Diego Chargers*
San Diego, CA
Qualcomm Stadium
1960
1970
Norv Turner


National Football Conference


East
Dallas Cowboys
Arlington, TX
Dallas Cowboys New Stadium
1960
Wade Phillips


New York Giants
East Rutherford, NJ
Giants Stadium[9]
1925
Tom Coughlin


Philadelphia Eagles
Philadelphia, PA
Lincoln Financial Field
1933
Andy Reid


Washington Redskins*
Landover, MD
FedExField
1932
Jim Zorn


North
Chicago Bears*
Chicago, IL
Soldier Field
1919
1920
Lovie Smith


Detroit Lions*
Detroit, MI
Ford Field
1929
1930
Jim Schwartz


Green Bay Packers
Green Bay, WI
Lambeau Field
1919
1921
Mike McCarthy


Minnesota Vikings
Minneapolis, MN
Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome[10]
1961
Brad Childress


South
Atlanta Falcons
Atlanta, GA
Georgia Dome
1966
Mike Smith


Carolina Panthers
Charlotte, NC
Bank of America Stadium
1995
John Fox


New Orleans Saints
New Orleans, LA
Louisiana Superdome
1967
Sean Payton


Tampa Bay Buccaneers
Tampa, FL
Raymond James Stadium
1976
Raheem Morris


West
Arizona Cardinals*
Glendale, AZ
University of Phoenix Stadium
1898
1920
Ken Whisenhunt


St. Louis Rams*
St. Louis, MO
Edward Jones Dome
1936
1937
Steve Spagnuolo


San Francisco 49ers
San Francisco, CA
Candlestick Park
1946
1950
Mike Singletary


Seattle Seahawks
Seattle, WA
Qwest Field
1976
Jim L. Mora



Notes



An asterisk (*) denotes a franchise move. See the respective team articles for more information.


^  The Buffalo Bills play one regular game each year and one preseason game every two years at the Rogers Centre in Toronto.
^  The Jets and Giants will move into the Meadowlands Stadium in East Rutherford by 2010.
^  As the result of a relocation controversy in 1996, the league officially suspended operations of the Cleveland Browns while its players and personnel moved to Baltimore to become a new franchise called the Baltimore Ravens. As per an agreement with the two cities, the Ravens are officially regarded as a new 1996 team while the league's official history and records views the Browns as one continuous franchise that began in 1946, suspended operations from 1996–1998, and resumed play in 1999 with new players.
^  The Kansas City Chiefs will renovate and expand Arrowhead Stadium by 2010.
^  The State of Minnesota is currently reviewing plans for the construction of Vikings Stadium, a retractable roof venue to replace the Metrodome in Minneapolis.



[edit] Former NFL teams
Further information: Defunct National Football League franchises
In its earliest years, the NFL was a very unstable and somewhat informal organization. Many teams entered and left the league annually. However, since the acquisition of the All-America Football Conference in 1950, the NFL has shown remarkable stability. The last NFL team to fold was the Dallas Texans in 1952; its remnants were salvaged to form what is now the Indianapolis Colts. The Colts franchise is officially a separate franchise that began in 1953, but it has a turbulent history tracing through several teams: the Dayton Triangles (1913-1929), Brooklyn Dodgers (1930-1944), Brooklyn Tigers (1945), AAFC New York Yankees (1946-1949), Boston Yanks (1944-1948), New York Bulldogs (1949), New York Yanks (1950-51), AAFC Baltimore Colts (1947-1950), and the Texans (1952).
The last team with no connections to the current Indianapolis Colts franchise to fold was the Cincinnati Reds in 1934; they folded midseason and were replaced by the independent St. Louis Gunners for the rest of the season.

[edit] Calendar
A typical calendar of league events is as follows, with the dates listed being those for the 2009 NFL season:

Feb. 3 -- Pro Football Hall of Fame Game opponents announced.
Feb. 18-24 -- NFL Scouting Combine: Lucas Oil Stadium, Indianapolis, Ind.
Feb. 19 -- Deadline for Clubs to designate Franchise and Transition players.
Feb. 27 -- Veteran Free Agency signing period begins. Trading period begins.
March 22-25 -- NFL Annual Meeting: Dana Point, Calif. Usually accompanied by announcement of scheduling and opponents for first game and opening-weekend night games.
Early to mid-April: Rest of schedule announced.
April 25-26 -- NFL Draft: New York City.
May 18-20 -- NFL Spring Meeting: Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
June 28-July 1 -- NFL Rookie Symposium, Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
Mid-July -- Training camps open.
Aug. 8 -- Pro Football Hall of Fame Induction Ceremony, Canton, Ohio, including Hall of Fame Game.
Aug. 13-17 -- First full Preseason weekend.
Sept. 1 -- Roster cutdown from 80 to maximum of 75 players.
Sept. 5 -- Roster cutdown from 75 to maximum of 53 players.
Sept. 10-14 -- Kickoff 2009 Weekend (Week 1 of regular season)
Oct. 25 -- International Series game.
November -- Pro Bowl balloting and flexible scheduling for Sunday Night Football begin.
Nov. 26 -- Thanksgiving games, and start of the NFL Network's night game package (tentative).
Jan. 3, 2010 -- End of regular season.
Jan. 9, 2010 -- Playoffs begin.
Jan. 24 -- AFC Championship Game and NFC Championship Game.
Jan. 31 -- Pro Bowl.
Feb. 7 -- Super Bowl.


[edit] Media

[edit] Television
For more details on this topic, see NFL on television.
The television rights to the NFL are the most lucrative and expensive rights not only of any American sport, but of any American entertainment property. With the fragmentation of audiences due to the increased specialization of broadcast and cable TV networks, sports remain one of the few entertainment properties that not only can guarantee a large and diversified audience, but an audience that will watch in real time.
Annually, the Super Bowl often ranks among the most watched shows of the year. Four of Nielsen Media Research's top ten programs are Super Bowls.[21] Networks have purchased a share of the broadcasting rights to the NFL as a means of raising the entire network's profile.[22]
Under the current television contracts, which began during the 2006 season, regular season games are broadcast on five networks: CBS, FOX, NBC, ESPN, and the NFL Network. Regionally shown games are broadcast on Sundays on CBS and FOX, carrying the AFC and NFC teams respectively (the traveling team deciding the broadcast station in the event of inter-Conference games, presumably so that each network can show games from all the stadiums). These games generally air at 1:00 p.m. ET and 4:00 p.m. or 4:15 p.m. ET. Nationally televised games include Sunday night games (shown on NBC), Monday night games (shown on ESPN), the Thursday night NFL Kickoff Game (shown on NBC), the annual Dallas Cowboys and Detroit Lions Thanksgiving Day games (CBS and Fox), and beginning in 2006, select Thursday and Saturday games on the NFL Network, a wholly owned subsidiary of the National Football League.[23][24]
Additionally, satellite broadcast company DirecTV offers NFL Sunday Ticket, a subscription based package, that allows most Sunday daytime regional games to be watched.[25][26] This package is exclusive to DirecTV in the USA. In Canada, NFL Sunday Ticket is available on a per-provider distribution deal on both cable and satellite.

[edit] Radio
Each NFL team has its own radio network and employs its announcers. Nationally, the NFL is heard on the Westwood One Radio Network, Sports USA Radio Network and in Spanish on Univision Radio and the United Stations Radio Networks. Westwood One carries Sunday and Monday Night Football, all Thursday games, two Sunday afternoon contests each week, the Pro Football Hall of Fame Game, and all post-season games, including the Pro Bowl. Sports USA Radio broadcasts two Sunday afternoon games every Sunday during the regular season.[23]
The NFL also has a contract with Sirius Satellite Radio, which provides news, analysis, commentary and game coverage for all games, as well as comprehensive coverage of the draft and off-season on its own channel, Sirius NFL Radio.[27]
Internet radio broadcasts of all NFL games are managed through FieldPass, a subscription service. Radio stations are, by rule, prohibited from streaming the games for free from their Web sites; however, there are numerous stations that break this rule. The NFL on Westwood One and the NFL on Sports USA Radio are not available on FieldPass.

[edit] Internet/New Media
In October 2006 the NFL announced the league would fully operate NFL.com, including the development of the technology, infrastructure and editorial content. Launching its first major redesign since 1999 in August 2007, the site had been previously produced and hosted since 2001 by CBS SportsLine. It is estimated that the contract cost CBS $120 million over a five year period. Prior to CBS, ESPN.com produced and hosted the NFL site.[28]
Brian Rolapp, senior vice president of NFL digital media and media strategy: “In a rapidly changing digital landscape, bringing NFL.com in-house provides us greater control of our valuable content and enables us to strategically build the site as a media asset. Fans can look forward to an even more entertaining, interactive and informative site built upon the expertise of the NFL and its other in-house media outlets such as NFL Network and NFL Films.”
Univision Online, Inc., the interactive subsidiary of Univision Communications Inc., and the NFL announced in January 2008 that they will jointly manage and operate NFLatino.com powered by Univision.com, the official U.S. Spanish-language website of the NFL. NFLatino.com is the only Spanish-language website in the United States to feature NFL video game highlights. In addition, the website includes live radio broadcasts, up-to-date stats, Hispanic player diaries, Fantasy Football and an insider’s view of all 32 teams.[29]
Announced in March 2009, NFL.com received its first-ever Sports Emmy nominations, which earned recognition for its NFL.com LIVE coverage of NFL Network’s Thursday and Saturday Night Football (Outstanding new approaches, coverage) and its Anatomy of a Play, a short-form 360-degree analysis of key plays of the week (Outstanding new approaches, general interest).[30]
Beginning September 2008, the NFL announced that it would simulcast all NBC Sunday Night Football games on NFL.com, located at nfl.com/snf. In 2007, they had provided an Emmy-nominated "complementary live broadcast" which included a partial simulcast of the NFL Network's Run to the Playoffs eight game package along with expanded NFL Network analysis.
As of December 2008, the NFL offers NFL Game Rewind, a pay service allows fans to watch all 2008-09 NFL regular season, playoff, and Super Bowl games online. The service is updated Monday, Wednesday, and Friday and offers full DVR functionality with the ability to watch up to four games at once.
As of September 2008, the NFL offers NFL Game Gamepass, a pay service for NFL fans out side United States to watch live all regular season games and the playoffs game live. Only game not available live is the Super Bowl.

[edit] Player contracts and compensation
NFL players are all members of a union called the National Football League Players Association (NFLPA). The NFLPA negotiates the general minimum contract for all players in the league. This contract is called the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA), and it is the central document that governs the negotiation of individual player contracts for all of the league's players. The current CBA has been in place since 1993, and was amended in 1998 and again in 2006. The NFL has not had any labor-related work stoppages since the 1987 season, which is much longer than Major League Baseball, the NBA or the NHL. The current CBA was originally scheduled to expire at the end of the 2012 season, but in 2008 the owners exercised their right to opt out of the agreement two years early.[31][32]
Players are tiered into three different levels with regards to their rights to negotiate for contracts:

Players who have been drafted (see below), and have not yet played in their first year, may only negotiate with the team that drafted them.[31] If terms cannot be agreed upon, the players' only recourse is to refuse to play ("hold out") until terms can be reached. Players often use the threat of holding out as a means to force the hands of the teams that drafted them. For example, John Elway was drafted by the Baltimore Colts in 1983 but refused to play for them. He had a fallback option of baseball, as he had played in the New York Yankees organization for two summers while at Stanford. The Colts traded his rights to the Denver Broncos and Elway agreed to play.[33] Bo Jackson sat out an entire year in 1986, choosing to play baseball in the Kansas City Royals organization (and ultimately for the Royals themselves) rather than play for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, the team that had drafted him. He reentered the draft the following year, and was drafted and subsequently signed with the Los Angeles Raiders.[34]
Players that have played 3 full seasons in the league, and whose contract has expired are considered "Restricted Free Agents" (see below). They have limited rights to negotiate with any club.[31]
Players that have played 4 or more full seasons in the league, and whose contract has expired, are considered "Unrestricted Free Agents"(see below) and have unlimited rights to negotiate with any club. Teams may name a single player in any given year as a "Franchise Player"(see below), which eliminates much of that player's negotiation rights. This is a limited right of the team, however, and affects only a small handful of players each year.[31]

In 2010, unless the CBA is extended, the rules will change so that players don't become "Unrestricted Free Agents" until they have played at least 6 full seasons in the league. They will be "Restricted Free Agents" if they have 3-5 full seasons in the league.
Among the items covered in the CBA are:

The league minimum salary
The salary cap
The annual collegiate draft
Rules regarding "free agency"
Waiver rules


[edit] Salaries


Years Experience
Minimum Salary[35]


0
$260,000


1
$460,000


2
$535,000


3
$610,000


4–6
$795,000


7–9
$920,000


10+
$1.1 mil


A player's salary, as defined by the CBA, includes any "compensation in money, property, investments, loans or anything else of value to which an NFL player may be awarded" excluding such benefits as insurance and pension. A salary can include an annual pay and a one-time "signing bonus" which is paid in full when the player signs his contract. For the purposes of the salary cap (see below), the signing bonus is prorated over the life of the contract rather than to the year in which the signing bonus is paid.[36]
Player contracts are not guaranteed; teams are only required to pay on the contract as long as the player remains a member of the team. If the player is cut, or quits, for any reason, the balance of the contract is voided and the player receives no further compensation.[35]
Among other things, the CBA establishes a minimum salary for its players,[35] which is stepped-up as a player's years of experience increase. Players and their agents may negotiate with clubs for higher salaries, and frequently do. As of the 2008 NFL season, the highest paid player was Pittsburgh Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger, whose compensation was $27,701,920.[37]

[edit] Salary cap
The salary cap is defined as the maximum amount that a team may spend on player compensation (see above) in a given season, for all of its players combined. Unlike other leagues, for example the NBA (which permits certain exemptions) or Major League Baseball (which has a "soft cap" enforced by "luxury taxes"), the NFL has a "hard cap": an amount no team under any circumstances may exceed.
The NFL salary cap is calculated by the current CBA to be 59.5% of the total projected league revenue for the upcoming year. This number, divided by the number of teams, determines an individual team's maximum salary cap. For 2008, this was approximately $116 million per team[38]. For 2009, it increased to $127 million[39]. As a result of the NFL owners opting out of the CBA two years early, in the absence of a new CBA 2010 will have no salary cap[32].
Teams and players often find creative ways to fit salaries under the salary cap. Early in the salary cap era, "signing bonuses" were used to give players a large chunk of money up front, and thus not count in the salary for the bulk of the contract. This led to a rule whereby all signing bonus are pro-rated equally for each year of the contract. Thus if a player receives a $10 million signing bonus for a 5 year contract, $2 million per year would count against the salary cap for the life of the contract, even though the full $10 million was paid up front during the first year of the contract.[35]
Player contracts tend to be "back-loaded". This means that the contract is not divided equally among the time period it covers. Instead, the player earns progressively more and more each year. For instance, a player signing a 4-year deal worth $10 million may get paid $1 million the first year, $2 million the second year, $3 million the third year, and $4 million the fourth year. If a team cuts this player after the first year, the final three years do not count against the cap. Any signing bonus, however, ceases to be pro-rated, and the entire balance of the bonus counts against the cap in the upcoming season.[35]

[edit] NFL Draft
For more details on this topic, see NFL Draft.
Each April, each NFL franchise seeks to add new players to its roster through a collegiate draft known as "the NFL Annual Player Selection Meeting", which is more commonly known as the NFL Draft.
Teams are ranked in inverse order based on the previous season's record, with the team having the worst record picking first, and the second-worst picking second, and so on. Regardless of regular season records, the last two picks of each round go to the two teams in the Super Bowl immediately preceding the draft, with the Super Bowl champion picking last.
The draft proceeds for seven rounds. Rounds 1–2 are run on Saturday of draft weekend, rounds 3–7 are run on Sunday. Teams are given a limited amount of time to make their picks.[40] If the pick is not made in the allotted time, subsequent teams in the draft may draft before them. This happened in 2003 to the Minnesota Vikings.[41]
Teams have the option of trading away their picks to other teams for different picks, players, cash, or a combination thereof. While player-for-player trades are rare during the rest of the year (especially in comparison to the other major league sports), trades are far more common on draft day. In 1989, the Dallas Cowboys traded running back Herschel Walker to the Minnesota Vikings for five veteran players and six draft picks over 3 years. The Cowboys would use these picks to leverage trades for additional draft picks and veteran players. As a direct result of this trade, they would draft many of the stars who would help them win three Super Bowls in the 1990s, including Emmitt Smith, Russell Maryland and Darren Woodson.[42]
The first pick in the draft is often taken to be the best overall player in the rookie class. This may or may not be true, since teams often select players based more on the teams' needs than on the players' overall skills. Plus, comparing players at different positions is difficult to do. Still, it is considered a great honor to be a first-round pick, and a greater honor to be the first overall pick. The last pick in the draft is known as Mr. Irrelevant, and is the subject of a dinner in his (dubious) honor in Newport Beach, California.
Drafted players may only negotiate with the team that drafted them (or to another team if their rights were traded away). The drafting team has one year to sign the player. If they do not do so, the player may reenter the draft and can be drafted by another team. Bo Jackson famously sat out a season in this way.[34]
Further information: List of NFL first overall draft choices

[edit] Free agency
For more details on this topic, see Free Agent#NFL usage.

[edit] General
As defined by the Collective Barganing Agreement (CBA), a free agent is any player who is not under contract to any team and thus has fully free rights to negotiate with any other team for new contract terms.[31][43] Free agents are classified into two categories: restricted and unrestricted. Furthermore, a team may "tag" a player as a franchise or transition, which places additional restrictions on that player's ability to negotiate. However, the ability to "tag" is quite limited, and only affects a handful of players each year.
Free agency in the NFL began with a limited free agency system known as "Plan B Free Agency", which was in effect between the 1989 and 1992 seasons. Beginning with the 1993 season, "Plan A Free Agency" went into effect, which is the system which remains in the NFL today.[citation needed]

[edit] Restricted free agent
For more details on this topic, see Restricted free agent.
A player who has 3 years of experience is eligible for restricted free agency, whereby his current team has the chance to retain rights to this player by matching the highest offer any other NFL franchise might make to that player. The club can either block a signing or, in essence, force a trade by offering a salary over a certain threshold. In 2006, these thresholds were as follows:

If a club tenders an offer of $685,000 per year for a three year veteran, and $725,000 for a four year veteran, the player's current team has "right of first refusal" over the contract at those terms, and may sign the player at those terms.
If a club tenders an offer of $712,000 or 110% (whichever is greater) of the previous year's salary, then the current club has both "right of first refusal" and rights to a draft pick from the same round (or better) from the signing club. Essentially, this means that the new club must forfeit the draft pick to the old club if they wish to sign the player under these terms.
If a club tenders an offer of $1.552 million or 110% (whichever is greater) of the previous year's salary, then the current club has both "right of first refusal"; and rights to the first round draft pick from the signing club.[43]


[edit] Unrestricted free agent
A player who has 4 or more years of experience is eligible for unrestricted free agency, whereby his current team has no guaranteed right to match outside offers to that player. This means that players in this category have unlimited rights to negotiate any terms with any team.[43]

[edit] Free Agency Changes in 2010
In 2010, unless the CBA is extended, the rules will change so that players don't become "Unrestricted Free Agents" until they have at least 6 years of experience. They will be "Restricted Free Agents" if they have 3-5 years of experience. There will also be limitations imposed on which clubs are allowed to sign free agents. This is part of a set of rule changes written into the CBA designed to encourage the owners and the NFLPA to negotiate a new CBA: the players lose some free agency rights, and the owners lose the salary cap.[31]

[edit] Franchise tag
For more details on this topic, see Franchise tag.
The franchise tag is a designation given to a player by a franchise that guarantees that player a contract the average of the five highest-paid players of that same position in the entire league, or 120% of the player's previous year's salary (whichever is greater) in return for retaining rights to that player for one year. An NFL franchise may only designate one player a year as having the franchise tag, and may designate the same player for consecutive years. This has caused some tension between some NFL franchise designees and their respective teams due to the fact that a player designated as a franchise player precludes that player from pursuing large signing bonuses that are common in unrestricted free agency, and also prevents a player from leaving the team, especially when the reasons for leaving are not necessarily financial. A team may, at their discretion, allow the franchise player to negotiate with other clubs, but if he signs with another club, the first club is entitled to two first round draft picks in compensation.[43]

[edit] Banned substances policy
The NFL banned substances policy has been acclaimed by some[44] and criticized by others[45], but the policy is the longest running in American professional sports, beginning in 1987.[44] The current policy of the NFL suspends players without pay who test positive for banned substances as it has since 1989: four games for the first offense (a quarter of the regular season), eight games for a second offense (half of the regular season), and 12 months for a third offense.[46] The suspended games may be either regular season games or playoff games.[46]
In comparison to the policies of Major League Baseball and the National Hockey League, the NFL has long been the most strict. While recently MLB and the NHL decided to permanently ban athletes for a third offense, they have long been resistant to such measures, and random testing is in its infancy.[47][48]
Since the NFL started random, year-round tests and suspending players for banned substances, many more players have been found to be in violation of the policy. By April 2005, 111 NFL players had tested positive for banned substances, and of those 111, the NFL suspended 54.[45]
A new rule is in the works due to Shawne Merriman. Starting the 2007–2008 season, the new rule would prohibit any player testing positive for banned substances from being able to play in the Pro Bowl that year.[49]

[edit] Video games
There have been several football video games based on NFL teams created for various consoles over the years, from 10-Yard Fight and the Tecmo Bowl series for the NES to the more well known Madden series that have been released annually since 1988. The latter series is named after former coach and current football commentator John Madden, who commentates the game along with Al Michaels (Pat Summerall prior to 2003). Prior to the 2005–2006 football season, other NFL games were produced by competing video game publishers, such as 2K Games and Midway Games. However, in December 2004, Electronic Arts signed a five-year exclusive agreement with the NFL, meaning only Electronic Arts will be permitted to publish games featuring NFL team and player names. This prompted video game developer Midway Games to release a game in 2005 called Blitz: The League, with fictitious teams such as the "Washington Redhawks", and make references to NFL players such as the Washington Redhawks left-handed QB "Ron Mexico", alluding to Michael Vick of the Atlanta Falcons, who allegedly used the alias at a walk-in clinic. In February 2008, EA Sports renewed their exclusivity agreement with the league through Super Bowl XLVII in 2013.[50]

[edit] Commissioners and presidents

President Jim Thorpe (1920–1921)[51]
President Joseph Carr (1921–1939)
President Carl Storck (1939–1941)
Commissioner Elmer Layden (1941–1946)
Commissioner Bert Bell (1946–1959)
Interim President Austin Gunsel (1959–1960, following death of Bell)
Commissioner Alvin "Pete" Rozelle (1960–1989)
Commissioner Paul Tagliabue (1989–2006)
Commissioner Roger Goodell (2006–present)


[edit] Main league offices

Canton (1920–1921)
Columbus (1921–1941)
Chicago (1941–1946)
Philadelphia (1946–1960)
New York City (AFL, 1960-1969)
New York City (1960–present)


[edit] Franchise owners
Main article: List of NFL franchise owners
Unlike many professional leagues, the NFL forbids corporate owners. Ownership groups must contain 24 or fewer individuals, and at least one partner must hold a 30 percent or greater share of the team. The exceptions to this policy were the Green Bay Packers, who have been owned by a non-profit corporation for more than eighty years, and the Pittsburgh Steelers, whose ownership was split up evenly among five brothers. The Packers' situation was grandfathered into the current policy and remains today;[52] the Steelers only moved into compliance with the rules in 2008.

[edit] Uniform numbers
Main article: Uniform number (American football)
In the NFL, players wear uniform numbers based on the position they play. The current system was instituted into the league on April 5, 1973,[53] as a means for fans and officials (referees, linesmen) to more easily identify players on the field by their position. Players who were already in the league at that date were grandfathered and did not have to change their uniform numbers if they did not conform. Since that date, players are invariably assigned numbers within the following ranges, based on their primary position:

Quarterbacks, placekickers and punters: 1–19
Wide Receivers: 10–19 and 80–89
Running backs and defensive backs: 20–49
Offensive linemen: 50–79
Linebackers: 50–59 and 90–99, or 40–49 if all are taken
Defensive linemen: 60–79 and 90–99
Tight ends: 80–89, or 40–49 if all are taken

Prior to 2004, wide receivers were allowed to only wear numbers 80–89.[54] The NFL changed the rule that year to allow wide receivers to wear numbers 10–19 to allow for the increased number of players at wide receiver and tight end coming into the league. Linebackers are allowed to wear numbers between 40–49 when all of 50–59 and 90–99 numbers are taken. Prior to that, players were only allowed to wear non-standard numbers if their team had run out of numbers within the prescribed number range. Keyshawn Johnson began wearing number 19 in 1996 because the New York Jets had run out of numbers in the 80s. Oakland Raider offensive center Jim Otto wore a 00 jersey during most of his career with the AFL team and kept the number after the leagues merged. Devin Hester is a wide receiver/return specalist for the Chicago Bears but wears number 23 because he was drafted as a cornerback but transferred to wide receiver after his rookie year.
Occasionally, players will petition the NFL to allow them to wear a number that is not in line with the numbering system. Brad Van Pelt, a linebacker who entered the NFL in 1973 with the New York Giants, wore number 10 during his 11 seasons with the club, despite not being covered by the grandfather clause. In 2006, New Orleans Saints running back Reggie Bush petitioned the NFL to let him keep the number 5 which he used at USC. His request was later denied.[55] Former Seattle Seahawks standout Brian Bosworth attempted such a petition in 1987 (to wear his collegiate number of 44 at the linebacker position which he used at the University of Oklahoma), also without success. The Seahawks attempted to get around the rule by listing Bosworth as a safety, but after he wore number 44 for a game against the Kansas City Chiefs, the NFL ruled Bosworth would have to switch back to his original number, 55.
It should be noted that this NFL numbering system is based on a player's primary position. Any player wearing any number may play at any position on the field at any time (though offensive and defensive players wearing numbers 50–79/90-99 and wishing to play at end or back must let the referee know that they are playing out of position by reporting in as an "eligible receiver"). Normally, only players on offense with eligible numbers are permitted to touch the ball by taking a snap from center, receiving a hand-off or catching a pass. It is not uncommon for running backs to line up at wide receiver on certain plays, or to even have a large offensive or defensive lineman play at fullback or tight end in short yardage situations. Also, in preseason games, when teams have expanded rosters, players may wear numbers that are outside of the above rules. When the final 53-player roster is established, they are reissued numbers within the above guidelines.

[edit] Awards

Vince Lombardi Trophy
Lamar Hunt Trophy
George S. Halas Trophy
Most Valuable Player
Coach of the Year
Offensive Player of the Year
Defensive Player of the Year
NFL Offensive Rookie of the Year Award
NFL Defensive Rookie of the Year Award
Super Bowl MVP Pete Rozelle Trophy
NFL Comeback Player of the Year
Walter Payton Man of the Year Award
Pro Bowl MVP


[edit] Discontinued awards

AFL All-Star Game MVP
UPI NFL MVP
UPI NFC Player of the Year
UPI AFL-AFC Player of the Year


[edit] See also

Association of Professional Football Leagues
Coaching tree
Current NFL coaches
Defunct NFL teams
Glossary of American football
Comparison of Canadian and American football
Index of Professional Sports teams in the United States and Canada
Instant replay in American football
National Football League depth charts
National Football League stadiums
List of American football players
List of current NFL announcers
List of famous American sports figures who became politicians
List of Professional Football Drafts
List of sports attendance figures — the NFL's attendance in a worldwide context
List of TV markets and major sports teams
Madden NFL series
NFL 75th Anniversary All-Time Team
NFL All-Decade Teams
NFL Blitz
NFL Charities
NFL Cheerleading
NFL Films
NFL franchise moves and mergers
NFL Network
NFL nicknames
NFL Lore
NFL Street series
Personal Seat License
Pro Football Hall of Fame
USA Football
Canadian Football League
Football Canada


[edit] Regular seasons

List of NFL seasons
List of NFL tied games (since 1974)
National Football League: Last to First
Significant rivalries in the NFL
Sunday Night Football
Monday Night Football
Thursday and Saturday Night Football


[edit] Special regular season games

Kickoff game, first game of the season
International Series, last weekend of October
Thanksgiving Classic
Christmas games


[edit] Cheerleading
Each football team is supported by a professional cheerleading squad, who attend games and promote the team. To see more on NFL Cheerleading, see National Football League Cheerleading.

[edit] Postseasons

One Game Playoff
NFL playoffs
AFC Championship Game
NFC Championship Game
Super Bowl
Pro Bowl
History of NFL Championships
List of Super Bowl champions
List of NFL champions
Professional Football Championship Games
List of Current NFL franchise post-season droughts
Active NFL playoff appearance streaks


[edit] Records

NFL Standings since 1920
NFL Standings since AFL-NFL merger
NFL opening day standings
NFL Individual Records
NFL Team-Oriented Records
Super Bowl records


[edit] Related football leagues

American Football League
All American Football League
All-America Football Conference
NFL Europa
American Youth Football
List of leagues of American and Canadian football


[edit] Notes


^ For example, "The Oakland Raiders is a Professional Football team owned by Al Davis, with a membership in the National Football League (NFL), which is an unincorporated association governed by its own constitution and bylaws." Oakland Raiders v. National Football League, 41 Cal.4th 624, 629 (2007).
^ Tallies only the amount of titles collected in the National Football League (1920-1969) and Super Bowl era (1970-present) of current NFL teams, AFL titles are included.
^ Carroll, Bob. THE CITY THAT HATED PRO FOOTBALL. Professional Football Researchers Association Coffin Corner. 1981.
^ National Football League [1] "NFL History by Decade". 2009.
^ Charles K. Ross (1999). Outside the Lines: African Americans and the Integration of the National Football League. New York University Press. ISBN 0-8147-7495-4. 
^ Charles K. Ross (1999). Outside the Lines: African Americans and the Integration of the National Football League. New York University Press. ISBN 0-8147-7495-4. 
^ "NFL sells 40,000 tickets in 90 minutes". http://www.nfllondon2007.com/news.aspx?id=36. 
^ Chargers, Saints to play in London in 2008
^ http://www.patriots.com/search/index.cfm?ac=searchdetail&pid=35465&pcid=43
^ Commissioner announces Toronto plan for Bills
^ a b "NFL to revamp shield with redesigned logo". http://www.usatoday.com/sports/football/nfl/2007-08-30-shield-change_N.htm. 
^ http://www.harrisinteractive.com/harris_poll/index.asp?PID=866
^ National Football League, "NFL:America's Choice," January 2007, http://www.coldhardfootballfacts.com/Documents/NFL_all_about_SB_1-07.pdf
^ http://community.seattletimes.nwsource.com/archive/?date=19910221&slug=1267313
^ NFL News (2007-01-04). "NFL sets paid attendance record". http://www.nfl.com/news/story/9908132. Retrieved on 2007-04-13. 
^ NFL News (2008-01-03). "NFL sets regular-season paid attendance record". http://www.nfl.com/news/story;jsessionid=AF4D3B22C7A59A3DF3D2ACA800E9C944?id=09000d5d805b5d53&template=without-video&confirm=true. Retrieved on 2008-01-04. 
^ NFL Tie-Breaking Procedures
^ Wawrow, John. Buffalo Bills May Play Game in Toronto. Associated Press. 18 October 2007.
^ a b Van Riper, Tom (2009). "The world’s most valuable pro sports teams". Forbes.com. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/28801975/. Retrieved on 2009-01-24. 
^ Gage, Jack; P. Maidment (2008-04-30). "The Most Valuable Soccer Teams". Forbes. http://www.forbes.com/2008/04/30/valuable-soccer-teams-biz-soccer08-cx_jg_pm_0430soccer_land.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-28. 
^ "Nielson's Top 10 Ratings: Top 10 Network Telecasts of All Time". http://www.nielsenmedia.com/ratings/topnetworktelecasts.htm. Retrieved on 2007-01-21. 
^ "McKenna, Barrie "NBC hoping NFL, Internet will lead comeback", globeandmail.com, retrieved on October 30, 2006". http://www.theglobeandmail.com/servlet/story/RTGAM.20060906.gtnbc06/BNStory/Technology/home. Retrieved on 2007-01-21. 
^ a b "NFL TV and Radio Broadcast Partner Schedule, NFL.com". http://www.nfl.com/tvradio. Retrieved on 2007-01-21. 
^ ""Bryant Gumbel, Cris Collinsworth to announce NFL Network games", NFL News, NFL.com, April 26, 2006". http://www.nfl.com/nflnetwork/story/9398370. Retrieved on 2007-01-21. 
^ "NFL Sunday Ticket". http://www.directv.com/DTVAPP/global/contentPage.jsp?assetId=900046. Retrieved on 2007-01-21. 
^ "NFL Sunday Ticket". http://www.nfl.com/ticket. Retrieved on 2007-01-21. 
^ "NFL TV and Radio Broadcast Partner Schedule, NFL.com". http://www.nfl.com/tvradio. 
^ "NFL Ends Deal With CBS; Opts For DIY Model, PaidContent.org". http://www.paidcontent.org/entry/nfl-ends-deals-deal-with-cbs-opts-for-diy-model/. Retrieved on 2006-10-24. 
^ "Univision.Com and National Football League Launch the Ultimate NFL Experience for Online Hispanics, Univision.com". http://corporate.univision.com/corp/en/pr/New_York_31012008-2.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-31. 
^ "NFL Network, NFL Films and NFL.com garner Emmy nominations, NFL.com". http://www.nfl.com/nflnetwork/story?id=09000d5d80732b5f&template=without-video&confirm=true. Retrieved on 2008-03-13. 
^ a b c d e f "COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE NFL MANAGEMENT COUNCIL AND THE NFL PLAYERS ASSOCIATION, nflpa.org, As amended March 8, 2006". http://www.nflpa.org/CBA/CBA_Complete.aspx. Retrieved on 2007-04-20. 
^ a b "NFL owners opt out of CBA". 2008-05-20. http://www.nfl.com/news/story?id=09000d5d80868b78&template=without-video&confirm=true. 
^ "The Life and Football Career of John Elway, johnelway.com". http://www.johnelway.com/bio.aspx. Retrieved on 2007-01-21. 
^ a b "Flatter, Ron "Bo knows stardom and disappointment", ESPN.com CLASSIC/BIO, March 6, 2006". http://sports.espn.go.com/espn/classic/bio/news/story?page=Jackson_Bo. Retrieved on 2007-01-21. 
^ a b c d e "Salary Cap FAQ, askthecommish.com, retrieved October 30, 2006". http://askthecommish.com/salarycap/faq.asp. Retrieved on 2007-01-21. 
^ "CBA". http://www.nflpa.org/CBA/CBA_Complete.aspx. Retrieved on 2007-01-22. 
^ "USATODAY Player Salaries Database—Top 25 players". http://content.usatoday.com/sports/football/nfl/salaries/top25.aspx?year=2008. Retrieved on 2009-03-31. 
^ [2]
^ [3]
^ ""NFL Draft Basics:Time Limits by Round football.about.com, retrieved November 2, 2006". http://football.about.com/library/weekly/bl_drafttimelimits.htm. Retrieved on 2007-01-21. 
^ "Black, James C. " Off-season Overview: Minnesota Vikings" May 29, 2003, ESPN.com, retrieved November 2, 2006". http://static.espn.go.com/nfl/overview/vikings2003.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-21. 
^ ""The Herschel Walker Trade", Scout.com, Retrieved November 2, 2006". http://vikings.scout.com/2/11653.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-21. 
^ a b c d "Free Agency 101, askthecommish.com, retrieved November 6, 2006". http://www.askthecommish.com/freeagency/. Retrieved on 2007-01-21. 
^ a b NFL's Steroid Policy Gets Kudos on Capitol Hill (washingtonpost.com)
^ a b NFL Steroid Policy 'Not Perfect', House Committee Praises Tougher Testing Policy, But Still May Act - CBS News
^ a b http://www.nflpa.org/pdfs/RulesAndRegs/BannedSubstances.pdf
^ USATODAY.com - MLB, players agree to update drug policy
^ CTV.ca | NHL unveils new drug testing policy
^ TV Station 7/39 KNSD (NBC in San Diego, CA) Broadcast 5:00 AM News on February 8th, 2007. (Retrieved from the Global Broadcast Database on 9/17/2008)
^ EA Sports extends NFL deal through 2012 season - Xbox 360 News at GameSpot
^ "1921 Once more, with feeling". Professional Football Researchers Association. http://www.footballresearch.com/articles/frpage.cfm?topic=1921b. Retrieved on 2006-10-18. 
^ NFL may drop ownership rules, The (Oklahoma City) Journal Record, 1 September 1998
^ "NFL uniform numbering system". http://football.about.com/cs/football101/a/bl_numbersystem.htm. Retrieved on 2007-01-21. 
^ "2004 NFL Rules changes". http://football.about.com/od/nationalfootballleague/a/04rulechanges.htm. Retrieved on 2007-01-21. 
^ "Clayton, John "NFL will not change numbering system for Bush", ESPN.com, May 23, 2006". http://sports.espn.go.com/nfl/news/story?id=2455586. Retrieved on 2007-01-21. 



[edit] References

2006 NFL Record and Fact Book. Time Inc. Home Entertainment. ISBN 1-933405-32-5. 
Total Football II: The Official Encyclopedia of the National Football League. Harper Collins. ISBN 1-933405-32-5. 


[edit] External links




American football portal




Official NFL website
Official NFL players website
Official Super Bowl website
NFL History - Champion and Award Lists
NFL Digest of Rules
ESPN.com's NFL Section
NFL Video at ESPN's Video Archive
Pro Football Reference - Historical stats of every team, player and coach in the NFL
NFL's Economic Model Shows Signs of Strain
Process of game-time decisions will eliminate TV duds, create chaos by Michael Hiestand, USA Today, April 5, 2006 (Last accessed April 5, 2006)
Five NFL teams worth over $1 billion




v • d • e
National Football League (2009)


AFC
East
North
South
West


Buffalo Bills
Baltimore Ravens
Houston Texans
Denver Broncos


Miami Dolphins
Cincinnati Bengals
Indianapolis Colts
Kansas City Chiefs


New England Patriots
Cleveland Browns
Jacksonville Jaguars
Oakland Raiders


New York Jets
Pittsburgh Steelers
Tennessee Titans
San Diego Chargers


NFC
East
North
South
West


Dallas Cowboys
Chicago Bears
Atlanta Falcons
Arizona Cardinals


New York Giants
Detroit Lions
Carolina Panthers
St. Louis Rams


Philadelphia Eagles
Green Bay Packers
New Orleans Saints
San Francisco 49ers


Washington Redskins
Minnesota Vikings
Tampa Bay Buccaneers
Seattle Seahawks


Seasons (by team) · Playoffs · AFC Championship · NFC Championship · Super Bowl (Champions) · All-Pro · Pro Bowl
League Championship History: AFL Championship (1960–1969) · NFL Championship (1920–1969) · One-Game Playoff · Playoff Bowl


Defunct Franchises · Owners · Officials · Stadiums (chronology) · Records (individual, team, Super Bowl) · Hall of Fame · Lore · AFL · Merger · NFL in L.A., Toronto · International Series · Europa (World Bowl) · TV · Radio · Management Council · NFLPA · Player Conduct · Draft · Training Camp · Preseason (Hall of Fame Game, American Bowl) · Kickoff · Monday Night Football · Thanksgiving Classic · Christmas Games









v • d • e

National Football League awards and trophies





Team

Vince Lombardi Trophy · Lamar Hunt Trophy · George S. Halas Trophy






Individual

Most Valuable Player · Coach of the Year · Offensive Player of the Year · Defensive Player of the Year · Offensive Rookie of the Year · Defensive Rookie of the Year · Super Bowl Most Valuable Player · Comeback Player of the Year · Walter Payton Man of the Year · Pro Bowl MVP






Defunct

AFL All-Star Game Most Valuable Player · UPI NFC Player of the Year  · UPI AFL-AFC Player of the Year













v • d • e

National Football League seasons





Early Era
(1920-1969)


1920 • 1921 • 1922 • 1923 • 1924 • 1925 • 1926 • 1927 • 1928 • 1929
1930 • 1931 • 1932 • 1933 • 1934 • 1935 • 1936 • 1937 • 1938 • 1939
1940 • 1941 • 1942 • 1943 • 1944 • 1945 • 1946 • 1947 • 1948 • 1949
1950 • 1951 • 1952 • 1953 • 1954 • 1955 • 1956 • 1957 • 1958 • 1959
1960 • 1961 • 1962 • 1963 • 1964 • 1965 • 1966 • 1967 • 1968 • 1969







Modern Era
(1970-present)


1970 • 1971 • 1972 • 1973 • 1974 • 1975 • 1976 • 1977 • 1978 • 1979
1980 • 1981 • 1982 • 1983 • 1984 • 1985 • 1986 • 1987 • 1988 • 1989
1990 • 1991 • 1992 • 1993 • 1994 • 1995 • 1996 • 1997 • 1998 • 1999
2000 • 2001 • 2002 • 2003 • 2004 • 2005 • 2006 • 2007 • 2008 • 2009














v • d • e

Professional gridiron football leagues in North America





American football

Major: National Football League
Semi-pro: Central Football League  · Colonial Football Alliance  · Empire Football League  · Federacion Mexicana de Futbol Americano  · Mid Continental Football League  · Mid Ohio Football League  · Minor League Football Alliance  · Minor League Football Association  · New England Football League  · North American Football League  · Northeastern Football Alliance  · Southern States Football League  · Texas/Louisiana Southern Football Association  · United States Football Alliance
Women's: Women's Professional Football League  · National Women's Football Association  · Independent Women's Football League  · Lingerie Football League  · Women's Football League  · Women's Football Alliance
Defunct major: All-America Football Conference  · American Football League (1926)  · American Football League (1936-1937)  · American Football League (1940-1941)  · American Football League (1960-1969)  · National Football League (1902)  · New York Pro Football League  · Ohio League  · United States Football League  · World Football League  · XFL
Defunct minor/semi-pro: American Association (1936-1941)/American Football League (1946-1950)  · American Football League (1934)  · American Football League (1938-1939)  · American Football League (1944)  · Anthracite League  · Atlantic Coast Football League  · Continental Football League  · Dixie League  · Eastern League of Professional Football  · Midwest Football League  · Pacific Coast Professional Football League  · Hawaii Football League  · NFL Europa  · Regional Football League  · Spring Football League  · United Football League (1961)  · Virginia-Carolina Football League
Folded or merged before any games were played: Asia Pacific Football League  · Professional Spring Football League
Future/planned: United National Gridiron League (Spring 2009)  · United Football League (Fall 2009)  · United States Football League (Winter 2010)  · All American Football League (Spring 2010)






Canadian football

Major: Canadian Football League
Canadian Rugby Football Union reorganized as part of the Canadian Rugby Union.
Evolved from amateur to professional leagues: Interprovincial Rugby Football Union  · Western Interprovincial Football Union
Also refer to Amateur gridiron football leagues in Canada.






Arena/indoor football

Major: Arena Football League (operations suspended)
Minor: af2  · American Indoor Football Association  · American Professional Football League  · Continental Indoor Football League  · Indoor Football League  · Southern Indoor Football League
Semi-pro: Independent Indoor Football Alliance
Defunct: Eastern Indoor Football League  · Indoor Football League (1999-2000)  · Indoor Professional Football League  · Intense Football League  · National Indoor Football League  · Professional Indoor Football League  · United Indoor Football  · World Indoor Football League
Folded or merged before any games were played: North American Indoor Football League (2005)  · North American Indoor Football League (2007)  · World Indoor Football League  · Xtreme Football League









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Football_League"
Categories: National Football League | 1920 establishments | American cooperatives | American football | American football leagues | Professional sports leagues | Supraorganizations | Sports rules and regulationsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Bosanski
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Gaeilge
한국어
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
ไทย
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 16:31.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
