













South Korea - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "South_Korea";
		var wgTitle = "South Korea";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "27019";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282820920;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); South Korea

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


Republic of Korea
대한민국
Daehan-minguk










Flag
Coat of arms





Motto: 널리 인간을 이롭게 하라 (홍익인간)
"Benefit all Mankind"


Anthem: Aegukga (애국가)
The Patriotic Song










Capital
(and largest city)
Seoul
37°35′N 127°0′E﻿ / ﻿37.583°N 127°E﻿ / 37.583; 127


Official languages
Korean


Demonym
South Korean, Korean


Government
Semi-presidential republic


 - 
President
Lee Myung-bak


 - 
Prime Minister
Han Seung-soo


Legislature
National Assembly


Establishment


 - 
Independence declared
March 1, 1919 


 - 
Provisional Government
April 13, 1919 


 - 
Liberation
August 15, 1945 


 - 
Constitution
July 17, 1948 


 - 
Government Proclaimed
August 15, 1948 


Area


 - 
Total
100,032 km2 (108th)
38,622 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
0.3


Population


 - 
 estimate
49,540,367 (24th)


 - 
Density
493/km2 (12th)
1,274/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$1,201.9 billion[1] (13th)


 - 
Per capita
$24,803[1] (33rd)


GDP (nominal)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$969.871 billion[1] (13th)


 - 
Per capita
$20,015[1] (34th)


Gini (2007)
31.3 (low)[2] 


HDI (2008)
▲ 0.928 (high) (25th)


Currency
South Korean won (₩) (KRW)


Time zone
Korea Standard Time (UTC+9)


 - 
Summer (DST)
not observed (UTC+9)


Date formats
yyyy년 mm월 dd일
yyyy/mm/dd (CE)


Drives on the
right


Internet TLD
.kr


Calling code
82


1
Mobile phone system CDMA, WCDMA, HSDPA and WiBro


2
Domestic power supply 220V/60 Hz, CEE 7/7 sockets


South Korea, officially the Republic of Korea (ROK) (Hangul: 대한민국, Hanja: 大韓民國, IPA: [tɛː.han.min.ɡuk̚]),  listen (help·info)), often referred to as Korea and the "Land of the Morning Calm," is a semi-presidential republic in East Asia, located in the southern half of the Korean Peninsula. It borders North Korea to the north and closely neighbors China to the west and Japan to the east. Its capital is Seoul.
Korea is one of the oldest civilizations in the world,[3] first inhabited as early as the Lower Paleolithic. After the Gojoseon period, Three Korean Kingdoms period ran from 57 BC until Silla's triumph over Goguryeo in 668, which marked the beginning of the North and South States period of Unified Silla in the South and Balhae in the North. Following the unification of North and South States period under Goryeo 936 AD. Korea went through the Goryeo and Joseon Dynasty as one nation until the end of the Korean Empire in 1910. After liberation and division, South Korea was established in 1948 and has since become one of the two full democracies in Asia. Following the Korean War, the South Korean economy grew significantly, transforming the country into a major global economy.[4] South Korea's economic growth is known as the Miracle on the Han River, and South Korea today is considered one of the Four Asian Tigers. South Korea has an international outlook with memberships in the United Nations, WTO, OECD and G-20 major economies. It is also a founding member of APEC and the East Asia Summit, being a major non-NATO ally of the United States.
South Korea is a developed country. It has the fourth-largest economy in Asia and a High-income OECD member, classified as an Advanced economy by CIA and IMF. Today, it is among the world's fastest growing advanced economies[5] and is leading the Next Eleven nations; its economic success serves as a role model for many developing countries.[6][7][8] South Korea has a high-tech and futuristic infrastructure,[9] and is a world leader in technologically advanced goods such as electronics, automobiles, ships, machinery, petrochemicals and robotics, headed by Samsung, POSCO, and Hyundai Heavy Industries. Since the 21st century, South Korea's modern culture has become popular in Asia and beyond in a phenomenon known as the Korean wave.




Contents


1 Government
2 History

2.1 Before division
2.2 After division


3 Foreign relations

3.1 United States
3.2 China
3.3 Japan
3.4 North Korea


4 Armed forces
5 Administrative divisions
6 Geography and climate

6.1 Climate
6.2 Environment


7 Economy

7.1 High-tech industries
7.2 Transportation and energy


8 Science and technology

8.1 Aerospace research
8.2 Robotics
8.3 Communication technology
8.4 Biotechnology


9 Education
10 Demographics

10.1 Religion
10.2 Largest cities


11 Culture

11.1 Entertainment
11.2 Cuisine
11.3 Technology culture


12 Sports
13 Notes
14 References
15 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Government
Main article: Government of South Korea




The National Assembly of South Korea


The government of South Korea is divided into three branches: executive, judicial, and legislative. The executive and legislative branches operate primarily at the national level, although various ministries in the executive branch also carry out local functions. Local governments are semi-autonomous, and contain executive and legislative bodies of their own. The judicial branch operates at both the national and local levels. South Korea is a constitutional democracy.
The South Korean government's structure is determined by the Constitution of the Republic of Korea. This document has been revised several times since its first promulgation in 1948 (see History of South Korea). However, it has retained many broad characteristics; with the exception of the short-lived Second Republic of South Korea, the country has always had a presidential system with an independent chief executive.[10] South Korea has developed a successful liberal democracy since the 1960s and the first direct election was held in 1987. The CIA World Factbook describes South Korea's democracy as a "fully functioning modern democracy".[11]

[edit] History

[edit] Before division
Main article: History of Korea
Korea began with the founding of Joseon (The name Gojoseon is almost always used to prevent confusion with another Joseon dynasty founded in 14th century; the prefix Go- means 'old' or 'earlier') in 2333 BCE by Dangun.[12] Gojoseon expanded until it controlled much of the northern Korean peninsula and parts of Manchuria. After numerous wars with the Chinese Han Dynasty, Gojoseon disintegrated, leading to the Proto-Three Kingdoms of Korea period.
In the early centuries of the Common Era, Buyeo, Okjeo, Dongye, and the Samhan confederacy occupied the peninsula and southern Manchuria. Of the various small states, Goguryeo, Baekje, and Silla grew to control the peninsula as the Three Kingdoms. The unification of the Three Kingdoms by Silla in 676 led to the North-South States period, in which much of the Korean peninsula was controlled by Unified Silla, while Balhae succeeded the northern parts of Goguryeo. In Unified Silla, poetry and art was encouraged, and Buddhist culture flourished. Relationships between Korea and China remained relatively peaceful during this time. However, Unified Silla weakened under internal strife, and surrendered to Goryeo in 935. Balhae, Silla's neighbor to the north, was formed as a successor state to Goguryeo. During its height, Balhae controlled most of Manchuria and parts of Russia. It fell to the Khitan in 926.
After the North-South Period, successor states fought for control during the Later Three Kingdoms period. The peninsula was soon united by Emperor Taejo of Goryeo. Like Silla, Goryeo was a highly cultural state and created the Jikji in 1377, using the world's oldest movable metal printing press.[13]




Gyeongbok Palace is the largest of the Five Grand Palaces built during the Joseon Dynasty.


The Mongol invasions in the 13th century greatly weakened Goryeo. However, Goryeo continued to rule Korea as a tributary ally to the Mongols. After the fall of the Mongolian Empire, Goryeo continued its rule. After severe political strife and continued invasions, Goryeo was replaced by the Joseon Dynasty in 1388 following a rebellion by General Yi Seong-gye. General Yi declared the new name of Korea as Joseon in reference to Gojoseon, and moved the capital to Seoul. The first 200 years of the Joseon Dynasty was marked by relative peace and saw the creation of hangul by Sejong the Great in the 14th century and the rise and influence of Confucianism.
In the latter of the 16th century, Joseon was invaded by a newly unified Japan. During the Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598), centuries of peace had left the dynasty unprepared, and the lack of technology and poor leadership from the Joseon government and generals led to the destruction of much of the Korean peninsula. In the first Japanese invasion (1592–1593), the army sent from China to assist Korea had a prescribed strength of 100,000, including 42,000 from five northern military districts and a contingent of 3,000 soldiers proficient in the use of firearms from South China. In the second Japanese invasion (1597–1598), Chinese army and navy involved were around 75,000 at the climax of the second campaign. In comparison, Japan's invasion army was depleted from 167,700 in the first invasion to 122,100 in the second invasion. Though outnumbered by the Japanese invasion force, however, continued Korean dominance at sea led by Admiral Yi, the rise of local militias, and the intervention of Ming China put Japan under great pressure to retreat in 1598.
Today, Admiral Yi is celebrated as one of Korea's foremost heroes and his turtle ships, used with great success against the Japanese, are considered the world's first ironclad warships, although lack of hard evidence of iron plating sparks much debate.
During the last years of the Joseon Dynasty, Korea's isolationist policy earned it the name the "Hermit Kingdom", primarily for protection against Western imperialism before it was forced to open trade beginning an era leading into Japanese colonial rule.

[edit] After division
Main article: History of South Korea




A sculpture at the Incheon Landing Operation Memorial Hall


In the aftermath of World War II, Soviet Union and United States troops controlled the northern and southern halves of the country respectively. The two Cold War rivals established governments sympathetic to their own ideologies, leading to Korea's division into two political entities: North Korea and South Korea.




View of Seoul's Gangnam-gu district in the present day


Despite the initial plan of a unified Korea in the 1943 Cairo Declaration, escalating Cold War antagonism eventually led to the establishment of two separate governments: the communist North and the capitalist South. In the North, a former anti-Japanese guerrilla and communist activist, Kim Il-sung[14] and in the South, an exiled Korean political leader, Syngman Rhee, were installed as presidents.[15]
On June 25, 1950, North Korea invaded the South leading to the Korean War. The Soviet boycott of the United Nations at the time, and therefore, no veto, allowed the UN to intervene when it became apparent that the superior communist forces would easily take over the entire country. The Soviet Union and China backed North Korea, with the later participation of millions of Chinese troops. After huge advances on both sides, the war eventually reached a stalemate. The 1953 armistice, never signed by South Korea, split the peninsula along the demilitarized zone near the original demarcation line. No peace treaty was ever signed, and the two countries are still technically at war.[16]
In 1960, a student uprising led to the resignation of the autocratic President Syngman Rhee. A period of political instability followed, broken by General Park Chung-hee's military coup (the "5.16 coup d'état") against the weak and ineffectual government the next year. Park took over as president until his assassination in 1979, overseeing rapid export-led economic growth as well as severe political repression. Park is heavily criticised as a ruthless military dictator, although the Korean economy developed significantly during his tenure.
The years after Park's assassination were marked by, again, considerable political turmoil as the previously repressed opposition leaders all campaigned to run for president in the sudden political void. In 1980, there was a coup d'état, by General Chun Doo-hwan against the transitional government of Choi Gyu Ha, the interim president and a former prime minister under Park. Chun assumed the presidency. His seizure of power triggered nationwide protest demanding democracy, in particular the city of Gwangju, in Jeollanam-do where Chun sent in special forces to violently suppress the city, in what is now known as the Gwangju Massacre.




Since 1991, the Korean Unification Flag has been used to represent all of Korea when North and South Korea participate together in sporting events.






View of the Seoul World Cup Stadium used during the 2002 FIFA World Cup co-hosted by South Korea and Japan


Until 1987, Chun and his government held Korea under despotic rule when Park Jong Chul — a student attending Seoul National University — was tortured to death.[17] The Catholic Priests' Association for Justice revealed that Park was tortured, igniting huge demonstrations around the country. The demonstrations snowballed when another student from Yonsei University, Lee Han Yeol, was killed by a police-fired tear gas bomb while he was demonstrating against the military government. The period of resistance is called the Resistance of June when all joined the national movement. Eventually, Chun's party, the Democratic Justice Party, and its leader, Roh Tae-woo announced the June 29th Declaration, which included the direct election of the president.[18]
In 1988, Seoul hosted the 1988 Summer Olympics, a cause of both national and international celebration in contrast to great turmoil of the past. In 1996, South Korea became a member of the OECD, a testament to further economic growth. As with many of its Asian neighbors, South Korea suffered the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis, but the country was able to re-emerge and continue its growth towards a major economic power after a swift recovery.[19]
In June 2000, as part of South Korean president Kim Dae-jung's Sunshine Policy of engagement, a North-South summit took place in Pyongyang, the capital city of North Korea. That year, Former President Kim received the Nobel Peace Prize "for his work for democracy and human rights in South Korea and in East Asia in general, and for peace and reconciliation with North Korea in particular."[20]
In 2002, South Korea and Japan jointly co-hosted the 2002 FIFA World Cup. The event marked South Korea's emergence in the world stage and provided stronger economic growth and a cultural union between South Koreans.[citation needed]

[edit] Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of South Korea
South Korea maintains diplomatic relations with approximately 170 countries. The country has also been a member of the United Nations since 1991, when it became a member state at the same time as North Korea. On January 1, 2007, South Korean Foreign Minister Ban Ki-moon assumed the post of UN Secretary-General. It has also developed links with Association of Southeast Asian Nations as both a member of ASEAN Plus three, a body of observers, and the East Asia Summit (EAS).
Beginning in May 2007, South Korea and the European Union are negotiating a Free Trade Agreement to reduce trade barriers.[21] South Korea is also negotiating a Free Trade Agreement with Canada, [22] and another with New Zealand. [23]

[edit] United States




Secretary-General of the United Nations Ban Ki-moon, with former U.S. President George W. Bush


The United States engaged in the decolonization of Korea (mainly South, Soviet Union engaged North Korea) from Japan after World War II. After 3 years of military administration by the United States, the South Korean government was established. Upon the onset of the Korean War, the United States Military was sent to South Korea to defend against the invasion of North Korea and later China. Since then, the two nations have had strong economic, diplomatic and military ties, although they have at times disagreed with regards to policies towards North Korea. Currently, the U.S. Eighth Army, Seventh Air Force and U.S. Naval Forces Korea are stationed in South Korea.

[edit] China
Historically, Korea has had relatively close relations with the Republic of China. Before the formation of South Korea, Korean independence fighters worked with Chinese soldiers during the Japanese occupation. However, after World War II, the People's Republic of China embraced Maoism while South Korea fell under the influence of the United States. The PRC assisted North Korea with manpower and supplies during the Korean War, and in its aftermath the diplomatic relationship between South Korea and the PRC almost completely ceased. Relations thawed gradually and South Korea and the PRC re-established formal diplomatic relations on August 24, 1992. The two countries sought to improve bilateral relations and lifted the forty-year old trade embargo, and[24] South Korean-Chinese relations have improved steadily since 1992.[24] Korea broke off official relations with the Republic of China upon gaining official relations with the People's Republic.

[edit] Japan
Although there were no formal diplomatic ties between South Korea and Japan after the Korean War, South Korea and Japan signed the Treaty on Basic Relations between Japan and the Republic of Korea in 1965 to establish diplomatic ties. There is heavy anti-Japanese sentiment in South Korea due to a number of unsettled Japanese-Korean disputes, many of which stem from the period of Japanese occupation. During World War II, more than 100,000 Koreans were forced to serve in the Imperial Japanese Army.[25][26]Longstanding issues such as Japanese war crimes against Korean civilians, the visits by Japanese politicians to the Yasukuni Shrine honoring Japanese soldiers killed at war, including class A war criminals like Hideki Tojo, the re-writing of Japanese textbooks to overlook Japanese aggression during World War II, and the territorial disputes over Liancourt Rocks continue to trouble Korean-Japanese relations. In response to then-Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi's repeated visits to the Yasukuni Shrine, former President Roh Moo-hyun suspended all summit talks between South Korea and Japan.[27]

[edit] North Korea
Both North and South Korea continue to officially claim sovereignty over the entire peninsula and any outlying islands. With longstanding animosity following the Korean War from 1950 to 1953, North Korea and South Korea signed an agreement to pursue peace.[28] On October 4, 2007, Roh Moo-Hyun and North Korean leader Kim Jong-il signed an eight-point agreement on issues of permanent peace, high-level talks, economic cooperation, renewal of train services, highway and air travel, and a joint Olympic cheering squad.[28]
Despite the Sunshine Policy and efforts at reconciliation, the progress was complicated by North Korean missile tests in 1993, 1998, and again in 2006. Recently, North Korea agreed to temporarily suspend its pursuit of a nuclear weapons program for economic and diplomatic support, although some Korean and American officials criticised the North for not being fully cooperative in its temporary suspension of a nuclear weapons program.[29]
As of early 2009[update], relationships between North and South Korea are tense; North Korea has been reported to have deployed missiles,[30] ended its former agreements with South Korea,[31] and threatened South Korea and the United States not to interfere with a satellite launch it is planning.[32] As of 2009, North and South Korea are still technically at war (having never signed an armistice after the Korean war) and share the world’s most heavily-fortified border. [33]

[edit] Armed forces







This section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss these issues on the talk page.

It is missing citations or footnotes. Please help improve it by adding inline citations. Tagged since February 2009.
Its quality may be compromised by peacock terms. Tagged since February 2009.
Its neutrality is disputed. Tagged since February 2009.





Main article: Military of South Korea




South Korea's T-50 Golden Eagle, a supersonic trainer aircraft


South Korea has the world's sixth largest number of active troops,[34] the world's second largest number of reserve troops[34] and the twelfth largest defence budget. The South Korean army has 2,300 tanks in operation,[35] consisting of technologically advanced models such as the K1A1 and the new K2 Black Panther. The South Korean navy has the world's sixth largest fleet of destroyers and is one of the five navies in the world to operate an Aegis guided missile enabled destroyer, the King Sejong the Great class destroyer.[36] It has also the world's largest fleet of frigates, the sixth largest of corvettes and the fourth largest of submarines in operation. The South Korean airforce operates the ninth largest airforce in the world,[37] composed of advanced American fighters such as the F-15K, KF-16 and advanced indigenous models such as the T-50 Golden Eagle.[38]
The South Korean military consists of the Army (ROKA), the Navy (ROKN), the Air Force (ROKAF), and the Marine Corps (ROKMC), together with reserve forces.[39] Many of these forces are concentrated near the Korean Demilitarized Zone. All South Korean males are constitutionally required to serve in the military, typically for a period of two years. However, there have been debates about shortening the length of the military services, and even dismissing the mandatory service itself. The government recently allowed some male students who were in the process of earning a university bachelor's degree and master's degree to dismiss the military requirements to allow them to further study and research their fields.




A South Korean midshipman aboard ROKN Daecheong


From time to time, South Korea has sent its troops overseas to assist American forces. It has participated in most major conflicts that the United States has been involved in the past 50 years. South Korea dispatched 320,000 troops to fight alongside American, Australian, Filipino, New Zealand and South Vietnamese soldiers in the Vietnam War, with a peak strength of 50,000. Most recently, South Korea sent 3,300 troops of the Zaytun Division to help re-building in northern Iraq, and was the 3rd largest contributor in the coalition forces after only the US and Britain.[40]
The United States has stationed a substantial contingent of troops in South Korea since the Korean War to defend South Korea in case of a North Korean attack. There are also approximately 29,000 U.S. Military personnel stationed in Korea,[41] most of them serving one year of unaccompanied tours. The American Troops, which primarily are assigned to the Eighth United States Army are stationed in installations at Osan, Yongsan, Dongducheon, Sungbuk, and Daegu, of which are considered camps not for their lack of buildings or support structure, but to make a political and military statement representing a lack of permanence. A still functioning UN Command is technically the top of the chain of command of all forces in South Korea, including the US forces and the entire South Korean military.

[edit] Administrative divisions
Main article: Administrative divisions of South Korea

See also Special cities of Korea and Provinces of Korea





The Sungnyemun in Seoul, before being razed in the 2008 Namdaemun fire






Principal divisions of South Korea






The Han River flowing through Seoul






General map of South Korea






The Cheonjiyeon Waterfall in Jeju island





Namea
hangul
hanja


Special cities (Teukbyeolsi)a


1
Seoul (National Capital)
서울특별시
서울特別市


Metropolitan cities (Gwangyeoksi)a


2
Busan
부산광역시
釜山廣域市


3
Daegu
대구광역시
大邱廣域市


4
Incheon
인천광역시
仁川廣域市


5
Gwangju
광주광역시
光州廣域市


6
Daejeon
대전광역시
大田廣域市


7
Ulsan
울산광역시
蔚山廣域市


Provinces


8
Gyeonggi-do
경기도
京畿道


9
Gangwon-do
강원도
江原道


10
Chungcheongbuk-do (Northern Chungcheong)
충청북도
忠淸北道


11
Chungcheongnam-do (Southern Chungcheong)
충청남도
忠淸南道


12
Jeollabuk-do (Northern Jeolla)
전라북도
全羅北道


13
Jeollanam-do (Southern Jeolla)
전라남도
全羅南道


14
Gyeongsangbuk-do (Northern Gyeongsang)
경상북도
慶尙北道


15
Gyeongsangnam-do (Southern Gyeongsang)
경상남도
慶尙南道


Special self-governing province (Teukbyeoljachi-do)a


16
Jeju-teukbyeoljachido
제주특별자치도
濟州特別自治道


a Revised Romanisation.

[edit] Geography and climate
Main article: Geography of South Korea




Topography of South Korea






View of the Seoul Grand Park


South Korea occupies the southern portion of the Korean Peninsula, which extends some 680 miles (1,100 km) from the Asian mainland. This mountainous peninsula is flanked by the Yellow Sea to the west, and the Sea of Japan (East Sea) to the east. Its southern tip lies on the Korea Strait and the East China Sea.
The country's total area is 38,622.57 square miles (100,032.00 km2).[42]
South Korea can be divided into four general regions: an eastern region of high mountain ranges and narrow coastal plains; a western region of broad coastal plains, river basins, and rolling hills; a southwestern region of mountains and valleys; and a southeastern region dominated by the broad basin of the Nakdong River.
South Korea's terrain is mostly mountainous, most of which is not arable. Lowlands, located primarily in the west and southeast, constitute only 30% of the total land area.
About three thousand islands, mostly small and uninhabited, lie off the western and southern coasts of South Korea. Jeju-do is located about 100 kilometers (about 60 mi) off the southern coast of South Korea. It is the country's largest island, with an area of 1,845 square kilometres (712 sq mi). Jeju is also the site of South Korea's highest point: Hallasan, an extinct volcano, reaches 1,950 meters (6,398 ft) above sea level. The most eastern islands of South Korea include Ulleungdo and Liancourt Rocks (Dokdo in Korean), while Marado and Socotra Rock are the southernmost islands of South Korea.

[edit] Climate


Climate chart for Seoul


J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D




 
 
23
 
1
-7




 
 
25
 
3
-5




 
 
47
 
10
0




 
 
94
 
17
7




 
 
92
 
23
13




 
 
134
 
26
17




 
 
369
 
29
22




 
 
294
 
30
22




 
 
169
 
26
17




 
 
50
 
20
10




 
 
53
 
11
3




 
 
21
 
4
-4




average temperatures in °C
precipitation totals in mm
source: climate-charts.com




Imperial conversion



J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D




 
 
0.9
 
33
19




 
 
1
 
37
23




 
 
1.9
 
50
32




 
 
3.7
 
63
45




 
 
3.6
 
73
55




 
 
5.3
 
79
63




 
 
15
 
84
72




 
 
12
 
86
72




 
 
6.7
 
79
63




 
 
2
 
68
50




 
 
2.1
 
52
37




 
 
0.8
 
39
25




average temperatures in °F
precipitation totals in inches







South Korea has humid continental climate and humid subtropical climate, and is affected by the East Asian monsoon, with precipitation heavier in summer during a short rainy season called jangma (장마), which begins end of June through the end of July. Winters can be bitterly cold, in Seoul, the average January temperature range is -7 °C to 1 °C (19 °F to 33 °F), and the average August temperature range is 22 °C to 30 °C (71 °F to 86 °F). Winter temperatures are higher along the southern coast and considerably lower in the mountainous interior. Rainfall is concentrated in the summer months of June through September. The southern coast is subject to late summer typhoons that bring strong winds and heavy rains. The average annual precipitation varies from 1,370 millimeters (54 inches) in Seoul to 1,470 millimeters (58 inches) in Busan. There are occasional typhoons that bring high winds and floods. The government is concerned of the impact of global warming on the natural disasters.

[edit] Environment
Main article: Environment of South Korea
Following the rapid industrialization, air pollution and water pollution, in particular in urban areas, rose rapidly. Government actions taken since the 1990s to improve the environment led to a rapid decrease of sulfur emissions[43], though the continuing growth of traffic has led to increase of other pollutants. Despite its small size, South Korea is the ninth largest consumer of ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbons. There are major issues with air and water pollution due to South Korea's high population density.[citation needed] Recently, though, there has been several initiatives (such as the restoration of Cheonggyecheon in central Seoul.[44]) to improve the environment in Korea.[citation needed] In mid-2008, the Ministry of Knowledge Economy said the country intends to spend 194.4 billion won ($193 million) on technologies and projects, including solar, wind and biofuels, in 2008.[45]
South Korea is a member of numerous international environmental organisations and treaties, including Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity Treaty, Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, and Whaling.[46]

[edit] Economy
Main article: Economy of South Korea







This section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss these issues on the talk page.

Its quality may be compromised by peacock terms. Tagged since February 2009.
Its neutrality is disputed. Tagged since February 2009.
It may contain inappropriate or misinterpreted citations which do not verify the text.Tagged since February 2009.









World Trade Center Seoul






South Korea's nominal GDP growth from 1960 to 2007, in billions of US dollars. South Korea's recent growth is often called the Miracle on the Han River.


South Korea has been the world's second fastest growing economy for over four decades.[47] For example, in 1957 South Korea's annual per capita GDP was comparable to that of Ghana,[48] and by 2008 it was 17 times as high as Ghana's.[49] Its remarkable transformation to a wealthy developed country in less than half a century is often called the Miracle on the Han River and earned the distinctive reputation of "Asian Tiger" in the international community. South Korea's economic success is now a role model for many developing countries.[50][51][52][53]
Today, South Korea has a highly developed[54] trillion dollar[55] economy and is a member of the OECD,[56] classified as a High-income economy by the World Bank and an Advanced economy by the IMF and CIA[57][58] in 2007, 2008. Its capital, Seoul, is consistently placed among the world's top ten financial and commercial cities.[59][60]
South Korea is regarded as one of the strongest economies in the world,[61] despite lacking natural resources and having the smallest territory among the G-20 major economies. The South Korean economy is the fourth largest in Asia and 13th largest in the world.[62] Like West Germany and Japan, rapid industrialization since the 1960s has made South Korea one of the world's top ten exporters. It is the seventh largest trading partner of the United States.[63] South Korea has the second highest savings rate in the developed world[64] and has the world's sixth biggest foreign exchange reserves.[65]
An extremely competitive education environment[66] and motivated workforce[67] are two key factors driving this knowledge economy. the country files the largest number of patents per GDP and R&D expenditure in the world.[68]
Many globally well-known South Korean conglomerates such as Samsung, Hyundai-Kia, Hyundai Heavy Industries, LG, SK, and POSCO have rapidly grown to become world leaders in their respective industries. Samsung Group is the world's largest conglomerate[69] and a leading consumer electronics brand. [70] In 2006, Samsung Group alone would have been the world's 34th largest economy if ranked.[71] The Hyundai Kia Automotive Group is the second largest car company in Asia and one of the top five automakers in the world.[72] Hyundai Heavy Industries is the world's largest shipbuilder[73][74] and POSCO is the world's second largest steel maker.[75] South Korea is the world's largest shipbuilder,[76]and one of the world's top five automobile manufacturing nations,[77] and the sixth largest steel producer in the world.[78]




Korean Air cargo airline, shipping nearly 10 billion tons of goods worldwide in 2007.[79]


The new Lee Myung-bak administration is devoted to make South Korea's economic power and wealth to fully match the G7, concentrating all of the nation's resources to recreate the Miracle on the Han River under the ambitious 747 Project, which is targeting an annual GDP growth of 7%, a GDP per capita of $40,000 and making South Korea the world's seventh largest economy by 2013.[80] President Lee describes himself as the CEO of "Korea Inc." and his macroeconomic policies are often called Mbnomics.[81] His most notable projects include the building of the Grand Korean Waterway and completing Free Trade Agreements with the US (also known as KORUS FTA) and EU.[82]
Despite having achieved developed status, South Korea continues to be one of the world's fastest growing economies, recording one of the highest GDP, export and industrial production growth rates in the developed world. In October 2008, the IMF forecasted that the South Korean economy will overtake Canada in 2009 and Spain in 2011[83] and that its GDP per capita will surpass New Zealand in 2009, Italy in 2012, and Spain in 2013.[84] In 2007, Goldman Sachs predicted that by 2050, South Korea's GDP will quadruple to over $4 trillion and have a GDP per capita in excess of $90,000, becoming the second richest major economy in the world.[85] It is the only developed country to be listed among the Next Eleven economies.

[edit] High-tech industries




Cell phones such as the transparent LG GD900 is a major industry in South Korea.[86]






Samsung Group, the world's largest conglomerate[87] and a leading global consumer electronics brand[88]






South Korea supplies 45% of the world's memory chips.[89]


Frequently described as a technology superpower,[90] South Korea has a high-tech infrastructure,[91] and is a world leader in technology goods such as electronics, automobiles, ships,[92] machinery, petrochemicals and robotics. It boasts the world's highest broadband internet access per capita[93] and is the most wired country in the world.[94] In 2007, the Economist Intelligence Unit ranked South Korea's IT Industry Competitiveness among the top three in the world.[95] South Korea's e-readiness and e-Government readiness is also ranked above Japan and many European countries.[96][97]
South Korean electronics conglomerates currently dominate the world technology industry. South Korea is the world's largest OLED and Plasma display maker.[98] Samsung and LG are the world's first and second largest LCD makers, together controlling nearly 50% of the global market.[99] Samsung and LG are the world's second and third largest mobile phone makers.[100][101] Samsung is the leading mobile phone vendor in the United States[102] and Canada.[103] South Korea is the world's leading memory chip producer and Samsung and Hynix are the world's second and sixth largest semiconductor companies in the world.[104] For over a decade, Samsung has been the world's leading DRAM and SRAM manufacturer.[105] Samsung is the world's largest laser printer maker[106] and Samsung Techwin is the world's third largest digital camera maker.[107]
Today, there are many strong South Korean industries. South Korea's largest automaker, Hyundai Motor Company and its subsidiary Kia Motors are the fifth largest car groups in the world.[108] The South Korean shipbuilding industry is one of the most highly developed in the world, headed by chaebols such as the Hyundai Heavy Industries, Samsung Heavy Industry and Daewoo Shipbuilding & Marine Engineering. South Korea is the world's largest shipbuilding nation, producing over half of the world's ships in 2008.[109] South Korea also exports radioactive isotope production equipment for medical and industrial use to countries such as Russia, Japan, Turkey and others.[110]
Nationwide 100 Mbit/s High-Speed Internet Access, Interactive Full High-Definition TV Broadcasting, DMB, WiBro and 4G technology rolled out since 2000, which are a few of the nation's plans to set benchmarks in the global information technology industry. In addition to its highly advanced IT infrastructure, the government is now beginning to invest in the robotics industry. With the aim of becoming the "World's Number 1 Robotics Nation" by 2025, there are plans to put one robot in every household by 2020.[111][112] There are other plans to expand or create other sectors of the economy, including the financial, biotechnology, aerospace and entertainment industries.

[edit] Transportation and energy
Main articles: Transportation in South Korea and Nuclear power in South Korea




Incheon International Airport, rated best airport worldwide in 2005 by Airports Council International[113]






A KTX bullet train


South Korea has a technologically advanced transportation network consisting of high-speed railways, highways, bus routes, ferry services, and air routes that criss-cross the country. Korea Expressway Corporation operates the toll highways and service amenities en route. South Korea has currently the world's fifth largest rapid transit system.[114]
Korail provides frequent train service to all major South Korean cities. Two rail lines, Gyeongui and Donghae Bukbu Line, to North Korea are now being reconnected. The Korean high-speed rail system, KTX, provides high-speed service along Gyeongbu and Honam Line. Major cities have subway systems, including the popular Seoul Subway, Busan, Incheon, Daegu, Daejeon and Gwangju. Metropolitan Cities have express bus terminals.
South Korea's largest international airport is the Incheon International Airport, which has been named as the best airport in the world by the ACI for 3 consecutive years. It serves as the main hub for the country's largest air carriers, Korean Air and Asiana Airlines, and more recently, the Korean subsidiary of Tiger Airways. South Korea has eight international airports and seven domestic airports in total, with about 71 international passenger and cargo airlines operating frequent flight services between South Korea and all over the world. The largest ports are in Busan and Incheon. South Korea has currently more heliports than any other country in the world.[115]
South Korea is the world's sixth largest nuclear power producer and the second largest in Asia.[116] Nuclear power in South Korea supplies 45% of electricity production and research is very active with investigation into a variety of advanced reactors, including a small modular reactor, a liquid-metal fast/transmutation reactor and a high-temperature hydrogen generation design. Fuel production and waste handling technologies have also been developed locally. It is also a member of the ITER project.


[edit] Science and technology
Main article: Ministry of Science and Technology (South Korea)
See also: Science and technology in Korea







This section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss these issues on the talk page.

Its quality may be compromised by peacock terms. Tagged since February 2009.
Its neutrality is disputed. Tagged since February 2009.
It may contain inappropriate or misinterpreted citations which do not verify the text.Tagged since February 2009.






[edit] Aerospace research
Main article: Korea Aerospace Research Institute




Yi So-yeon, South Korea's first astronaut in space


South Korea has a space partnership with Russia[117] and has launched the Arirang-1 and Arirang-2 which both have surveillance cameras equipped. Naro Space Center, the first spaceport of South Korea, was completed in 2008 at Goheung, Jeollanam-do. Korea Space Center is expected to send a Korea Space Launch Vehicle into space in the summer of 2009.[118] The spaceport will be controlled by the state-run Korea Aerospace Research Institute and will contain features necessary for spaceflight operation having a launch tower, a control tower, rocket assembly, test facilities and space simulators.[119] The South Korean government has named Yi So-yeon as its first person to go to space after replacing its initial choice Ko San, at the request of the Russian Federal Space Agency, on March 10, 2008.[120] On 8 April 2008, Yi So-yeon became the first South Korean in space, aboard Soyuz TMA-12.

[edit] Robotics




Albert HUBO, a humanoid robot






EveR-3, an android capable of expressing some human emotions


South Korea is a world leader in the development and adoption of advanced robotics technology and has an ambitious plan to put a robot in every household by 2020.[111][112] Several robot cities are about to be constructed in the country, with the first city being built in 2009 at a cost of 500 billion won, of which 50 billion is direct government investment.[121] The new robot city will feature research and development centers for manufacturers and part suppliers, as well as exhibition halls and a stadium for robot competitions. The government is also investing another $1.3 billion to build two new robot theme parks in Incheon and Masan by 2013, which will be developed as centres for the country's robot industry, featuring a number of attractions that allow visitors to interact with robots and test new products.[122] The country's new Robotics Ethics Charter will establish ground rules and laws for human interaction with robots in the future, setting standards for robotics users and manufacturers, as well as guidelines on ethical standards to be programmed into robots to prevent human abuse of robots and vice versa.[123]
Faced with a critically low birth rate and an aging population, the country is quickly turning to robots to replace disappearing workers and loss of military manpower. Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology developed the world's second walking humanoid robot, HUBO. In 2005, KAIST announced they had created the world's smartest robot, able to think and learn like a human.[124] It is the first network based humanoid in the world taking advantage of South Korea's advanced communication network. In 2006, South Korean scientists from the Korea University of Science and Technology unveiled the world's second female android, Ever-1, capable of expressing human emotions. Its successors are expected to walk, sing and dance, to be used in department stores and museums, as well as reading stories to children. Engineers from Samsung Techwin revealed in 2006 the Intelligent Surveillance and Guard Robot, a machine-gunned sentry robot able to detect and repel intruders along the heavily armed border with North Korea.[125]

[edit] Communication technology




A DMB device


South Korea is the world's most connected "information society" leading or tied for top rankings in each of internet use, internet penetration, broadband penetration, mobile phone ownership, 3G mobile telecoms, WiFi hotspots and WiBro (Mobile WiMax) coverage. The ensuing ecosystem for online always-on services is a unique testbed for concepts for the future, including such areas as intelligent bridges with self-diagnostics, the automated parking place finder, the intelligent floors for hospitals, etc. The South Korean government has pushed very hard for eGovernment initiatives to provide most government services online. The economy from TV to advertising to banking to the automobile sector has embraced wireless broadband connectivity offering everything from digital broadcast TV to handhelds and cars, to over half of South Koreans using payment systems on their mobile phones. The first book to discuss the telecoms and digital convergence innovations of South Korea is Digital Korea by Ahonen and O'Reilly in 2007.

[edit] Biotechnology




Snuppy, the world's first cloned dog


The South Korean biotechnology industry transformed from a fast-follower to an innovator with extensive R&D networks based on cooperation between industry, college, and research institute. Scientific quality of Korean biotechnology is confirmed from outstanding infrastructures through increasing innovative researchers, paper publications and patents registration. In addition, the incidence of aging and adult disease brings about increase of healthcare expenditures. Recently in Korea the number of clinical trials for the new drug development is growing with the best medical doctors/hospitals and advanced IT infrastructure. Korean government is focusing on the innovation of national biotechnology promotion policy and accelerating globalisation of bioindustry.
Among others, Snuppy, the world's first cloned dog, demonstrated South Korea's leadership in the cloning and genetics field. It was the most advanced and complex animal cloned to-date and two females of an endangered species of wolf was cloned by the Seoul National University in 2007.[126] South Korea has now commercialised dog cloning technology and is receiving orders from countries worldwide for the cloning of the owners' pet dogs. In February 2008, a US woman paid $150,000 to RNL Bio, South Korea's first dog cloning business, so that her dead pet pit-bull terrier could be cloned from tissue samples that she sent.[127]

[edit] Education
Main article: Education in South Korea




A pavilion in Korea University, one of the oldest universities in South Korea






Facilities in Sungkyunkwan University


Education in South Korea is regarded as being crucial to one's success and competition is consequently very heated and fierce. In the most recent OECD Programme for International Student Assessment, South Korea came first in problem solving, first in reading, third in mathematics and eleventh in science.[128]
A centralised administration in South Korea oversees the process for the education of children from kindergarten to the third and final year of high school. South Korea has adopted a new educational program to increase the number of their foreign students through the year 2010. According to Ministry of Education, Science and Technology estimate, by that time, the number of scholarships for foreign students in South Korea will be doubled, and the number of foreign students will reach 100,000.[129] Mathematics, science, Korean, social studies, and English are generally considered[who?] to be the most important subjects and are considered compulsory. South Korea was the first country in the world to provide high-speed internet access to every primary, junior, and high school.[citation needed] The school year is divided into two semesters, the first of which begins in the beginning of March and ends in mid-July, the second of which begins in late August and ends in mid-February.The schedules are not uniformly standardized and vary from school to school.

[edit] Demographics
Main articles: Demographics of South Korea and Koreans
Most South Koreans live in urban areas, due to rapid migration from the countryside during the country's quick economic expansion in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s.[130] The capital city of Seoul is also the country's largest city and chief industrial center. It had 10.3 million inhabitants in 2006, making Seoul one of the most populated single cities in the world.[131] Other major cities include Busan (3.65 million), Incheon (2.63 million), Daegu (2.53 million), Daejeon (1.46 million), Gwangju (1.41 million) and Ulsan (1.10 million).[132][dead link]
The population has also been shaped by international migration. Following the division of the Korean peninsula after World War II, about four million people from North Korea crossed the border to South Korea. This trend of net entry reversed over the next forty years due to emigration, especially to the United States and Canada. However, South Korea's burgeoning economy and democracy in the early and mid-1990s slowed the high emigration rates typical of the previous decades. The South Korea’s total population in 1960 was 25 million.[133] The current population of South Korea is roughly 49,540,000.[134]
South Korea is a homogeneous society with absolute majority of the population of Korean ethnicity.[135] Although small, the percentage of non-Koreans has been increasing. Officially, as of the summer of 2007, there are just over 1 million foreigners living in Korea. That number includes foreign residents, students, tourists and illegal immigrants. Among them, 104,749 people were married to Koreans, 404,051 were working in Korea and 225,273 were illegal immigrants.[136]
South Korea's birthrate has fallen well below the level needed to replace the existing population, and there are currently between 9 and 10 births per 1000 people each year. [137] This is the second-lowest birthrate in the world, and South Korea's population is expected to shrink from 2019.
Korean farmers have a hard time finding wives, as few women want to live in the countryside. Farmers are forced to look abroad to find wives, mostly from Southeast Asia. For the year 2006, 41% of the marriages amongst the farmers were to foreign nationals.[138]
There are 31,000 US military personnel.[139]

[edit] Religion
Main article: Religion in South Korea
See also: Korean Shamanism, Korean Confucianism, Buddhism in Korea, and Christianity in Korea


Religion in South Korea









Christianity

  

29.3%


Buddhism

  

22.8%


Won Buddhism

  

0.3%


Confucianism

  

0.2%


Cheondoism

  

0.1%


No religion

  

46.5%









The Seokguram Grotto in Bulguksa temple, UNESCO World Heritage Site.






Jangseungs






A traditional Korean Ancestor worship altar






The Yoido Full Gospel Church


As of 2005, approximately 46.5% of the South Korean population express no religious preference.[140] Of the rest, most are Christian or Buddhist; according to the 2005 census, 29.2% of the population at that time was Christian (18.3% professed to being Protestants and 10.9% Catholics), and 22.8% were Buddhist.[141][142] Approximately half of Koreans (49.3% in 1995[143]) are unaffiliated with any religion, and the remaining portion (1.3% in 1995[143]) affiliated with other religions, including Islam and various new religious movements such as Jeungism, Daesunism, Cheondoism and Wonbuddhism.
Throughout history, numerous religions—including Mahayana Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism and Korean Shamanism—have existed in Korea, and South Korea remains religiously diverse[144][145][146]. The relationship between numerous religions in Korea today has been described as one of "peaceful coexistence"[147], and government guarantees freedom of religion[148].
Korean shamanism is the original religion in South Korea. It is however interesting to note that religion in South Korea and in particular, the dominant religious faiths of Buddhism and Christianity have imbibed much from Confucianism as practiced in South Korea. Korean Confucianism had been the state religion of the Joseon Dynasty which ruled for 500 long years. More than being a religion in South Korea, Confucianism and its inherent values have actually become a way of life for the South Korean people.[149]
There are approximately 13.7 million Christians[148] (8.6 million Protestants and 5.1 million Catholics[141]) in the country today. The largest Christian church in South Korea, Yoido Full Gospel Church, is located in Seoul and has approximately 780,000 members (2003 estimate). Including Yoido Full Gospel, 11 of the world's 12 largest churches are located in Seoul.[citation needed] Roman Catholicism has been the fastest growing religion in South Korea since the late 1980s.[150] South Korea is also the second largest missionary-sending nation on earth, after the US.[151]
Buddhism was introduced to Korea from China in the year 372[152]. According to the national census as of 2005, South Korea has over 10.7 million Buddhists.[148][153][154] Today, about 90% of Korean Buddhists belong to Jogye Order. Most of the National Treasures of South Korea are Buddhist artifacts. Along with Neo-Confucianism, Buddhism was also a state religion during the periods from Three Kingdoms of Korea to Goryeo before suppression under the Joseon Dynasty.[155]
There are an estimated 45,000 Muslim Koreans, in addition to some 100,000 foreign workers from Muslim countries,[156] particularly Bangladesh and Pakistan.[157]
A growing number of South Koreans adhere to new religious movements. Among these are Cheondoism (0.1%), Jeungism (0.07%) and Daesunjinrihoe.[140] These religions have developed as a reaction to the influence of Christianity and Western culture in Korean society. The exact figures of the amount of followers of these new religions remain controversial.

[edit] Largest cities
Main article: Cities of South Korea
The figures below are the 2007 estimates for the ten largest cities populations within administrative city limits; the figures below only include long-term residents.


Leading Urban Centers of the South Korea




Seoul

Busan

Daejeon

Rank
Core City
Division
Pop.

view • talk • edit

Incheon

Gwangju

Suwon



1
Seoul
Seoul Special City
11,153,200


2
Busan
Busan Metropolitan City
4,085,300


3
Incheon
Incheon Metropolitan City
3,053,800


4
Daegu
Daegu Metropolitan City
2,743,800


5
Daejeon
Daejeon Metropolitan City
1,442,856


6
Gwangju
Gwangju Metropolitan City
1,682,953


7
Seongnam
Gyeonggi Province
1,675,953


8
Ulsan
Ulsan Metropoltan City
1,156,900


9
Bucheon
Gyeonggi Province
1,136,904


10
Suwon
Gyeonggi Province
1,086,904


2007 Census



[edit] Culture
Main articles: Culture of Korea and South Korean culture







This section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss these issues on the talk page.

It needs additional references or sources for verification. Tagged since February 2009.
Its quality may be compromised by peacock terms. Tagged since February 2009.
Its neutrality is disputed. Tagged since February 2009.
It may contain inappropriate or misinterpreted citations which do not verify the text.Tagged since February 2009.





South Korea shares its traditional culture with North Korea, but the two Koreas have developed distinct contemporary forms of culture since the peninsula was divided in 1945. The South Korean Ministry of Culture and Tourism actively encourages the traditional arts, as well as modern forms, through funding and education programs.[158] The industrialization and urbanization of South Korea have brought many changes to the way Korean people live. Changing economics and lifestyles have led to a concentration of population in major cities, especially the capital Seoul, with multi-generational households separating into nuclear family living arrangements.

[edit] Entertainment
South Korean mainstream culture is highly popular throughout the Asian continent, and increasingly in South America and Eastern Europe in a phenomenon called the Korean wave (Hallyu). Many South Korean pop stars and groups are well known in East Asia and Southeast Asia. K-pop often emulates American popular music, and usually features young performers. The emergence of the group Seo Taiji and Boys in 1992 marked a turning point for Korean popular music, as the group incorporated elements of American popular musical genres of rap, rock, and techno into its music. Dance-oriented acts were dominant in the Korean popular music scene of the 1990s.
Since the success of the Korean film Shiri in 1999, Korean film has become more popular, both in South Korea and abroad. Today South Korea is one of the few countries where Hollywood productions do not enjoy a dominant share of the domestic market. This fact, however, is partly due to the existence of screen quotas requiring cinemas to show Korean films at least 73 days a year.
Korean television and especially the short form dramatic mini-series colloquially called "dramas" by Koreans have become extremely popular outside of Korea. Dramas were foremost among cultural exports driving the Korean Wave trend in Asia. The trend has driven Korean stars to fame and has done much to boost the image and prestige of Korean popular culture. Korean dramas are popular in China, Taiwan, Japan, South East Asian countries, Australia and even America (especially Asian-American communities). Dramas showcase a wide range of stories, but the most prominent among the export dramas have been romance ("Autumn Fairy Tale", "Winter Sonata", "All About Eve"), and historical/fantasy dramas ("Dae Jang Geum", "The Legend (TV series)" and "Goong").

[edit] Cuisine
Main article: Korean cuisine




Bibimbap






Bulgogi, marinated grilled beef


Korean cuisine (hanguk yori, 한국요리, 韓國料理 or hanshik, 한식, 韓食) as a national cuisine known today has evolved through centuries of social and political change. Its roots can be traced back to myths and legends of antiquity.
Ingredients and dishes vary by province. There are many significant regional dishes that have become both national and regional. Many dishes that were once regional, however, have proliferated in different variations across the country in the present day. The Korean royal court cuisine once brought all of the unique regional specialties together for the royal family. Meals consumed both by the royal family and ordinary Korean citizens have been regulated by a culture of etiquette that is unique to Korea.
Korean cuisine is largely based on rice, noodles, tofu, vegetables, and meats. Traditional Korean meals are noted for the number of side dishes (banchan) that accompany steam-cooked short-grain rice. Every meal is accompanied by numerous banchan.[159] Kimchi, a fermented, spicy vegetable dish is usually served at every meal and is one of the best known Korean dishes. Korean cuisine usually involves heavy seasoning with sesame oil, doenjang (fermented soybean paste), soy sauce, salt, garlic, ginger, and gochujang (red chili paste).
Soups are a common part of any Korean meal. Unlike other cultures, in Korean culture, soup is served as part of the main course rather than at the beginning or the end of the meal. Soups known as guk (국) are often made with meats, shellfish and vegetables, formal soups known as tang are prepared with meats offered at ancestral rites, and jjigae are a thicker, simple soup or stew.[160]

[edit] Technology culture
In recent years online games have become a significant part of Korean culture. Starcraft, the PC real-time strategy game is by far the most popular televised game in Korea. Game tournaments, recorded in places like the COEX Mall are often broadcast live on TV stations such as MBCGame and Ongamenet. Professional Starcraft players, such as Lim Yo-Hwan, can command considerable salaries in Korea. PC games are usually played in PC bangs which are basically internet cafes, dedicated to LAN games of popular titles like Kart Rider, Maple Story, World of Warcraft, Mabinogi and Lineage.
South Korean corporations Samsung and LG are the second and third largest cell phone companies in the world, and South Korean consumers change their phones on average every 11 months. An estimated 90% of South Koreans own mobile phones and use them not only for calling and messaging but also for watching Digital Multimedia Broadcasting (DMB) or viewing websites. Over one million DMB phones have been sold and providers like KTF and SK Telecom provide coverage throughout many parts of major cities.

[edit] Sports
Main article: Sport in South Korea




A Taekwondo practitioner demonstrating dollyo chagui technique






Kim Yu-Na is a world leading figure skater and one of the most recognized athletes in South Korea.






Korean baseball player Hyun Soo Kim in the outfield during the 2009 World Baseball Classic.


The martial art Taekwondo originated in Korea. In the 1950s and 60's, modern rules were standardised, and Taekwondo became an official Olympic sport in 2000.[161] Taekwondo in the military is an integral part in the Korean land forces. Other Korean martial arts include taekkyeon, hapkido, tangsoodo, kuksoolwon, Kumdo and subak.
The South Korean national football team is widely regarded as the most successful football team in Asia. It currently holds the best FIFA World Cup record among Asian teams[162] and in the 2002 FIFA World Cup, jointly hosted by South Korea and Japan, South Korea became the first and only Asian team to reach the semi-finals, beating Spain, Italy and Portugal in the knock-out stages.[163] The football team, also known as the "Taeguk Warriors", played in the 2006 FIFA World Cup in Germany for their sixth consecutive World Cup.
In 1988, South Korea hosted the Summer Olympics in Seoul, coming fourth in the world with 12 gold medals, 10 silver medals and 11 bronze medals.[164] South Korea regularly comes in the top ten countries in the Olympic Games, performing particularly strongly in archery, shooting, table tennis, badminton, short track speed skating, handball, hockey, freestyle wrestling,baseball, judo, taekwondo, and weightlifting. South Korea also hosted the Asian Games in 1986 and 2002 and will host again in 2014[165] and hosted the Winter Asian Games in 1999,[166] the Summer Universiade in 2003[167] and the Winter Universiade in 1997.[168][dead link]
Baseball was first introduced to Korea in 1905 and has since become the most popular spectator sport in South Korea.[169] The first South Korean professional sports league was the Korea Baseball Organization, established in 1982. During the 2006 World Baseball Classic, South Korea finished third. In the 2008 Olympics held in Beijing, South Korea won the gold medal, beating Cuba 3-2 in the finals on a home run by Lee Seung Yub.[170]
In 2007, South Korea hosted a cycling competition called Tour de Korea.[171] It was the first international cycling competition in South Korea in 10 years. In 2010 South Korea will host their first Formula One race to be staged at Korean International Circuit in Yeongam about 240 miles (390 km) south of Seoul.[171]

[edit] Notes


^ a b c d "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects: South Korea". International Monetary Fund. 2007. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?pr.x=44&pr.y=3&sy=2004&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=542&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&grp=0&a=. Retrieved on 2008-10-09. 
^ https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ks.html
^ "News Releases: Gallery of Korea". Royal Ontario Museum. 12 December 2005. http://www.rom.on.ca/news/releases/public.php?mediakey=sg1yebpnv8. Retrieved on 2009-02-16. 
^ "South Korea: Economic and social developments". Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Encyclopædia Britannica. 2009. http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/322280/South-Korea/34997/Economic-and-social-developments. Retrieved on 2009-02-16. 
^ Rank Order - GDP - real growth rate
^ "Can Africa really learn from Korea?". afrol News. 24 November 2008. http://www.afrol.com/articles/22953. Retrieved on 2009-02-16. 
^ "Korea role model for Latin America: envoy". Korean Culture and Information Service. 1 March 2008. http://www.korea.net/news/news/newsView.asp?serial_no=20080301004∂=103. Retrieved on 2009-02-16. 
^ Leea, Jinyong; LaPlacab, Peter; Rassekh, Farhad (2 September 2008). "Korean economic growth and marketing practice progress: A role model for economic growth of developing countries". Industrial Marketing Management (Elsevier B.V. (subscription required)). http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6V69-4TR37CX-3&_user=10&_rdoc=1&_fmt=&_orig=search&_sort=d&view=c&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=5614827be8562007c3b0d6865ef92d15. Retrieved on 2009-02-16. 
^ "KOREA: Future is now for Korean info-tech". AsiaMedia (Regents of the University of California). 14 June 2005. http://www.asiamedia.ucla.edu/article.asp?parentid=25697. Retrieved on 2009-02-24. 
^ "South Korea - Constitution". International Constitutional Law. http://www.servat.unibe.ch/icl/ks00000_.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-16. 
^ "Korea, South". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 10 February 2009. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ks.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-16. 
^ "Korea's History". AsianInfo. http://www.asianinfo.org/asianinfo/korea/history.htm. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ Digital Jikji
^ "Kim Il Sung". The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. Columbia University Press. http://www.bartleby.com/65/ki/KimIlSun.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ "The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition". Columbia University Press. http://www.bartleby.com/65/rh/Rhee-Syn.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ "South Korea". US Department of State. http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/2800.htm. Retrieved on 2006-09-16. 
^ http://www.yolsa.org/sub_plus_1.html Yolsa.org Information on Anti-Yushin protests
^ http://www.encyber.com/search_w/ctdetail.php?gs=ws&gd=&cd=&q=&p=&masterno=211762&contentno=211762 Encyber Encyclopedia article on June 29th Declaration
^ "'1997-98 financial crisis' recovery efforts galvanized Korea". Korean Culture and Information Service. 21 November 2007. http://www.korea.net/news/news/newsView.asp?serial_no=20071108002∂=104&SearchDay=&page=1. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ "The Nobel Peace Prize 2000". The Nobel Foundation. 2000. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/peace/laureates/2000/index.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ "External Trade - Trade Issues - South Korea". European Commission. December 2008. http://ec.europa.eu/trade/issues/bilateral/countries/korea/index_en.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-05. 
^ "Canada-Korea - Free Trade Agreement Negotiations". Foreign Affairs and International Trade Canada. 5 January 2009. http://www.international.gc.ca/trade-agreements-accords-commerciaux/agr-acc/korea-coree/index.aspx?lang=en. Retrieved on 2009-03-05. 
^ http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2009-03/03/content_10933684.htm
^ a b Asia Times - News and analysis from Korea; North and South
^ A Brief History of the US-Korea Relations Prior to 1945. "While less than 100 Koreans in America enlisted in the US military during World War II, more than 100,000 Koreans served in the Japanese army as officers and soldiers. There were two Korean Lt. Generals in the Japanese Army: a Chosun prince, whose rank was honorary and who commanded no troops; and Lt. Gen. Hong Sa-Ik, who was a professional military man from the old Chosun army."
^ "Truth Commission on Forced Mobilization under the japanese Imperialism Republic of Korea.". http://www.gangje.go.kr/admin_view0305.asp?idx=711&page=1. Retrieved on 18/03/9. 
^ "President Roh Moo-hyun will not hold a summit with Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi until Koizumi stops visits to Japan's Yasukuni shrine". Voice of America. 17 March 2006. http://www.voanews.com/Korean/archive/2006-03/2006-03-17-voa12.cfm. Retrieved on 2009-02-15. 
^ a b "FACTBOX - North, South Korea pledge peace, prosperity". Reuters. Thomson Reuters. 4 October 2007. http://uk.reuters.com/article/worldNews/idUKSEO16392220071004. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ "North Korea Agrees to End Nuke Program". FOX News Network. 13 February 2007. http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,251618,00.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ "N Korea 'deploying more missiles'". BBC News. 23 February 2009. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/7905361.stm. 
^ "North Korea tears up agreements". BBC News. 30 January 2009. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/7859671.stm. Retrieved on 2009-03-08. 
^ . BBC News. 3 March 2009. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/7931670.stm. Retrieved on 2009-03-08. 
^ http://edition.cnn.com/2004/WORLD/asiapcf/06/03/koreas.agree/index.html
^ a b "South Korea's Armed Forces, CSIS (Page 24)". 2006-07-25. http://www.csis.org/media/csis/pubs/060626_asia_balance_powers.pdf. 
^ Cordesman, Anthony H.; Kleiber, Martin (26 June 2006) (PDF). The Asian Conventional Military Balance in 2006: Overview of major Asian Powers. Center for Strategic and International Studies. http://www.csis.org/media/csis/pubs/060626_asia_balance_powers.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-02-14. 
^ "South Korea launches first Aegis-equipped destroyer". 24 May 2007. http://www.iht.com/articles/ap/2007/05/25/asia/AS-GEN-SKorea-Aegis-Destroyer.php. Retrieved on 2009-02-15. 
^ ROK Air Force Equipment
^ Jung, Sung-ki (10 November 2008). "US Pilots Test Fly T-50 Trainer". The Korea Times. http://www.koreatimes.co.kr/www/news/nation/2009/01/205_34171.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-15. 
^ GlobalSecurity on Military of Republic of Korea http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/rok/index.html
^ "Zaytun Division official website". http://www.army.mil.kr:7081/zaytun2/english/index.jsp. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. [dead link]
^ "America's Unsinkable Fleet". Newsweek. 26 Feb 2007. http://www.newsweek.com/id/68465. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ The estimated area rises steadily from year to year, possibly due to land reclamation. "행정구역(구시군)별 국토적". Korea Statistical Information Service. http://kosis.nso.go.kr/cgi-bin/sws_999.cgi?ID=DT_1A1&IDTYPE=3&A_LANG=1&FPUB=3&SELITEM=. Retrieved on 2006-03-27. 
^ "Korean Air Pollution Problems"
^ Seoul Metropolitan Government - "A Clean, Attractive & Global City, Seoul!"
^ http://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/south-korea-to-boost-renewable-energy-investments-by-60-1191.html
^  This article contains material from the CIA World Factbook which, as a U.S. government publication, is in the public domain.
^ Pecotich, Anthony; Shultz, Clifford J.. Handbook of Markets and Economies. M.E. Sharpe. ISBN 978-0-7656-0972-4. http://books.google.com/books?id=zdqAakpAeloC&pg=PA328&lpg=PA328&dq=south+korea+fastest+growing+economy+20th+century&source=web&ots=UUvZrK4buo&sig=cvQaMFViBSklOtjirClbbGjgPKY&hl=en&sa=X&oi=book_result&resnum=10&ct=result. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. [page needed]
^ Ghana and South Korea: Lessons from world bank case studies. Herbert Werlin. University of Maryland.
^ Data refer to the year 2008. $26,341 GDP for Korea, $1513 for Ghana. World Economic Outlook Database-October 2008, International Monetary Fund. Accessed on February 14, 2009.
^ "South Korea Role Model for Kazakhstan". The Seoul Times. The Seoul Times Company. 27 March 2007. http://theseoultimes.com/ST/?url=/ST/db/read.php?idx=5047&PHPSESSID=984f157329630313846de3099546ebfc. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ "Can Africa really learn from Korea?". afrol News. 24 November 2008. http://www.afrol.com/articles/22953. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ "Korea role model for Latin America: envoy". Korean Culture and Information Service. 1 Mar 2008. http://www.korea.net/news/news/newsView.asp?serial_no=20080301004∂=103. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ Leea, Jinyong; LaPlacab, Peter; Rassekh, Farhad (2 September 2008). "Korean economic growth and marketing practice progress: A role model for economic growth of developing countries". Industrial Marketing Management (Elsevier B.V. (subscription required)). http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6V69-4TR37CX-3&_user=10&_rdoc=1&_fmt=&_orig=search&_sort=d&view=c&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=5614827be8562007c3b0d6865ef92d15. 
^ "Korea, Republic of". United States Department of State. 2 January 2009. http://travel.state.gov/travel/cis_pa_tw/cis/cis_1018.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ Korea-Gross domestic product based on purchasing-power-parity (PPP) valuation of country GDP
^ OECD's country websites
^ IMF Advanced Economies List. World Economic Outlook, Database—WEO Groups and Aggregates Information, October 2008.
^ CIA (2008). "Appendix B. International Organizations and Groups. World Factbook.". https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/appendix/appendix-b.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-10. 
^ "London remains number one but the future belongs to Asia". City Mayors. 10 June 2008. http://www.citymayors.com/economics/financial-cities.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-16. 
^ "OECD Regional Accounts". Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2006. http://webnet.oecd.org/wbos/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=REG_ACC_TL2. Retrieved on 2009-02-16. 
^ Cromwell, Thomas (17 October 2008). "Korea Lacks in Strong Identity in Brand Positioning". The Korea Times. http://www.koreatimes.co.kr/www/news/special/2008/10/260_32859.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ "Gross domestic product 2007, PPP". World Development Indicators database, World Bank. 17 October 2008. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DATASTATISTICS/Resources/GDP_PPP.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ "Top Trading Partners - Total Trade, Exports, Imports". United States Census Bureau. 14 February 2008. http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/statistics/highlights/top/top0712.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ "Economy Statistics: Adjusted net savings, excluding particulate emission damage: % of GNI (most recent) by country". NationMaster. http://www.nationmaster.com/graph/eco_adj_net_sav_exc_par_emi_dam_of_gni-excluding-particulate-emission-damage-gni. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ See List of countries by foreign exchange reserves
^ "Web-based tutorials take off in South Korea". Cable News Network. 2007. http://edition.cnn.com/2007/BUSINESS/05/14/ft.korea.megastudy/index.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ Cho, Dong-Sung (11 May 1999). "Korean Economic Crisis: Causes and Cures". Seoul National University. http://www.cic.sfu.ca/forum/DongSungChoOct211999.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-21.  "Until 1980 the highly educated and motivated workforce was the main driving force behind Korea's economic growth. However, growth-oriented policies encouraged a very rapid growth in real wages in excess of the productivity growth rate." 
^ "WIPO Patent Report: Statistics on Worldwide Patent Activities". World Intellectual Property Organization. 2007. http://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/freepublications/en/patents/931/wipo_pub_931.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ See List of companies by revenue.
^ http://images.businessweek.com/ss/06/07/top_brands/source/20.htm
^ [초 국가기업 <上> 삼성 매출>싱가포르 GDP… 국가를 가르친다 - 조선닷컴]
^ See Automotive industry.
^ "Bloomberg.com". http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=aau_Zeq74Z9k. Retrieved on 19/1/09. 
^ "HHI Constructs World’s Best Ship for 26 Years Straight". http://news.mk.co.kr/outside/view.php?year=2008&no=703877. Retrieved on 18/11/08. 
^ "Bloomberg.com". http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=ae5qz21hHvhM. Retrieved on 15/1/09. 
^ "South Korea dominates shipbuilding industry". StraightStocks. 9 September 2008. http://www.straightstocks.com/investing-in-asia-stocks/south-korea-dominates-shipbuilding-industry/. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ See List of countries by automobile production
^ See Steel production by country
^ http://www.iata.org/ps/publications/wats-freight-km.htm
^ Robert Koehler (Mar. 2008). Korea's CEO President Lee Myung-bak, Seoul Selection.[1]
^ "Biography: Yoon Jeung-Hyun". Ministry of Strategy and Finance. 2007. http://english.mosf.go.kr/about/dpm/dpm2.php. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ Kim, Se-jeong (7 June 2008). "S. Korea, EU Seek to Conclude FTA This Year". The Korea Times. http://www.koreatimes.co.kr/www/news/special/2008/11/176_27098.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ See List of countries by future GDP (PPP) estimates.
^ See List of countries by future GDP (PPP) per capita estimates.
^ The N-11: More Than an Acronym. Goldman Sachs Economic Research Group. 28 March 2007. http://www.chicagogsb.edu/alumni/clubs/pakistan/docs/next11dream-march%20%2707-goldmansachs.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ "(paid subscription only)". http://www.digitimes.com/news/a20090120PD205.html. 
^ See List of companies by revenue
^ "The 100 Top Brands: Samsung". BusinessWeek. McGraw-Hill Companies. http://images.businessweek.com/ss/08/09/0918_best_brands/22.htm. 
^ "Memory chip output value to hit $6.96 billion". Global Sources. 31 July 2007. http://www.globalsources.com/gsol/I/Memory-chip/a/9000000089299.htm. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ "Science and Technology: Innovative Solutions". International Student Conferences. 12 August 2008. http://iscdc.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=67&Itemid=88. Retrieved on 2009-02-21.  "“The most wired nation in the world,” “The world leader in cloning research,” “A pioneer in semiconducting technology”—all these monikers are very familiar to Koreans. In recent years however, all of these national titles have been challenged: Korea is no longer #1 in broadband saturation, cloning scandals have stalled biotechnology research, and Hynix Semiconductor has suspended all operations at its U.S. plant. What can be done to rejuvenate Korea’s technology industry? (And how important is this industry?) How can the technology superpowers of the U.S. and Korea collaborate and coordinate their own research and development? This roundtable will consider these controversies and other emerging issues in the field, seeking to apply participants’ pooled knowledge to generate real policy recommendations for Korea and for Korea-U.S. cooperation." 
^ "KOREA: Future is now for Korean info-tech". Regents of the University of California. 14 June 2005. http://www.asiamedia.ucla.edu/article.asp?parentid=25697. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ "South Korea dominates shipbuilding industry". StraightStocks. 9 September 2008. http://www.straightstocks.com/investing-in-asia-stocks/south-korea-dominates-shipbuilding-industry/. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ "Internet Statistics: Broadband access (per capita) (most recent) by country". NationMaster. (undated). http://www.nationmaster.com/graph/int_bro_acc_percap-internet-broadband-access-per-capita. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ Fackler, Martin (18 November 2007). "In Korea, a Boot Camp Cure for Web Obsession". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/11/18/technology/18rehab.html?_r=3&ref=business. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ "Chart: World's most competitive IT industries". CBS Interactive. 12 July 2007. http://news.cnet.com/2300-1022_3-6196218-1.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ See E-readiness
^ "United Nations e-Government Survey 2008" (PDF). United Nations. 2008. http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/UN/UNPAN028607.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-02-21.  "The designations of country groups in the text and the tables are intended solely for statistical or analytical convenience and do not necessarily express a judgement about the stage reached by a particular country or area in the development process." 
^ "한국 또 '세계 디스플레이 4관왕'". 8 February 2009. http://news.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/02/08/2009020800069.html?Dep0=chosunmain&Dep1=news&Dep2=headline7&Dep3=h3_07. Retrieved on 08-02-09. 
^ Kim, Yoo-chul (21 July 2008). "Outlook Dims for LCD Manufacturers". The Korea Times. http://www.koreatimes.co.kr/www/news/tech/2008/11/133_27908.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ Gardner, W. David (7 November 2008). "Samsung Overtakes U.S. Market Share Lead From Motorola". United Business Media. http://www.informationweek.com/news/mobility/business/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=212001304. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ Morrison, Dianne See (21 July 2008). "Earnings: Premium Handsets Boost LG Electronics Profits". ContentNext Media. http://www.moconews.net/entry/419-earnings-mobile-phone-sales-boost-lg-electronics-profits/. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ Ziegler, Chris (7 November 2008). "Samsung No. 1 in US Cell Phone Market, Dethrones Motorola". Weblogs. http://www.switched.com/2008/11/07/samsung-no-1-in-us-cell-phone-market-dethrones-motorola/. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ Reyes, Allan David (3 December 2008). "Samsung no. 1 in Canada for Q3 2008". WCS Cellphones. http://www.cellphones.ca/news/post004644/. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ See Semiconductor sales leaders by year.
^ "Samsung Semiconductor performance". Samsung. 2007. http://www.samsung.com/global/business/semiconductor/aboutus/AboutUs_Performance.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ http://www.samsung.com/hk_en/news/newsRead.do?news_seq=10721
^ "Unleash Your Creativity with Three New Samsung Digital Cameras". Samsung. 17 November 2006. http://www.samsung.com/he/presscenter/pressrelease/pressrelease_20061117_0000301398.asp. Retrieved on 2009-02-21.  "Samsung increased market share to top 3 with new digital camera series. “According to GFK August reports about digital camera market in HK, Samsung has been enlisted in top 5 providers in Hong Kong’s digital camera market in August, as the company’s market share has been doubled because of the release of the NV series. Samsung has sold more than 100,000 digital cameras from January 2006 to November 2006." 
^ "Hyundai-Kia Pass Nissan to Become Worlds Sixth Largest Automaker". Auto News. (undated). http://car-reviews.automobile.com/news/hyundai-kia-pass-nissan-to-become-worlds-sixth-largest-automaker/1916/. 
^ http://www.straightstocks.com/investing-in-asia-stocks/south-korea-dominates-shipbuilding-industry/
^ "Korea to export isotope production equipment to Russia, Turkey, Algeria". Korean Culture and Information Service. 5 June 2007. http://korea.net/news/news/newsView.asp?serial_no=20070605015∂=107&SearchDay=&page=5. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ a b "In a Wired South Korea, Robots Will Feel Right at Home". The New York Times. 2006-04-02. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/04/02/world/asia/02robot.html?ex=1301634000&en=7d5fcaf014309078&ei=5088&partner=rssnyt&emc=rss. Retrieved on 2007-06-24. 
^ a b "A Robot in Every Home by 2020, South Korea Says". National Geographic News. 6 September 2006. http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2006/09/060906-robots.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-24. 
^ "Airport Service Excellence Awards for 2005". ACI website. 2006-03-07. Archived from the original on 13 March 2006. http://web.archive.org/web/20060313234011/http://www.airports.org/cda/aci/display/main/aci_content.jsp?zn=aci&cp=1-7-46^6702_9_2__. Retrieved on 2006-08-25. 
^ See Total rapid transit systems statistics by country
^ "Transportation Statistics > Heliports (most recent) by country". NationMaster. 2008. http://www.nationmaster.com/graph/tra_hel-transportation-heliports. Retrieved on 2009-02-21. 
^ See Nuclear power by country
^ "Korea, Russia enter full-fledged space partnership". Korean Culture and Information Service. 3 July 2007. http://korea.net/news/news/newsView.asp?serial_no=20070703031∂=107. Retrieved on 2009-03-01. 
^ Atkins, William (5 September 2007). "First South Korean astronaut selected". ITWire. http://www.itwire.com/content/view/14338/1066/. Retrieved on 2009-03-01. 
^ "South Korea Begins Construction Of New Space Center". Korean Information Service. SpaceDaily. 12 August 2003. http://www.spacedaily.com/news/korea-03b.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-01. 
^ S. Korea names woman as first astronaut – Korean CNN, March 10, 2008[dead link]
^ South Korea set to build "Robot Land" - Engadget
^ Robot love: South Korea to build robot theme parks NetworkWorld.com Community
^ Robot Code of Ethics to Prevent Android Abuse, Protect Humans
^ South Korea claims world's smartest robot
^ http://abcnews.go.com/Technology/story?id=2504508
^ Discovery Channel :: News - Animals :: Endangered Wolf Cloned in South Korea
^ Dog Cloning Becomes Business
^ http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PISA
^ South Korea Now Open For Foreign Students
^ "South Korea". CIA Country Studies. http://countrystudies.us/south-korea/33.htm. Retrieved on 2006-04-22. 
^ "World City Populations". http://worldatlas.com/citypops.htm. Retrieved on 2006-04-04. 
^ Populations for all cities as of 2005, "By city and province". NSO Database. http://kosis.nso.go.kr/cgi-bin/sws_888.cgi?ID=DT_1B040A2&IDTYPE=3&A_LANG=2&FPUB=4&SELITEM=0. Retrieved on 2006-04-22. 
^ World Population Prospects: The 2006 Revision. Source: Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat.
^ "2008년 12월 31일 기준 주민등록인구 및 세대". Korea National Statistical Office. http://ups.kosis.kr/upload/Magazine/NEW/AC/AC10_2008.xls. Retrieved on 2009-04-08. 
^ South Korea. CIA - The World Factbook.
^ INSIDE JoongAng Daily
^ http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_birth_rate
^ INSIDE JoongAng Daily
^ US military figures as of 2005, from [2] (Excel file) Tim Kane Global US Troop Deployment, 1950-2003
^ a b According to figures compiled by the South Korean National Statistical Office. "인구,가구/시도별 종교인구/시도별 종교인구 (2005년 인구총조사)". NSO online KOSIS database. http://kosis.nso.go.kr:7001/ups/chapterRetrieve.jsp?pubcode=MA&seq=292&pub=3. Retrieved on 2006-08-23.  This should not be confused with other figures which report only the percentage of the religious population that are Buddhist, Christian, Cheondoist, etc...
^ a b "Korea.net: The official website of the Republic of Korea - Religion". http://www.korea.net/korea/kor_loca.asp?code=U05. 
^ "International Religious Freedom Report 2008 - Korea, Republic of". Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor. 22 January 2009. http://2001-2009.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2008/108411.htm. Retrieved on 31 January 2009. 
^ a b "Korea, South". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 22 January 2009. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ks.html#People. Retrieved on 2009-01-31. 
^ "Korea.net: The official website of the Republic of Korea - Religion". http://www.korea.net/korea/kor_loca.asp?code=U05. 
^ Every Culture - South Koreans
^ Every Culture - Culture of SOUTH KOREA
^ Staff. "Religion Continues to Haunt the Lee Administration". The Chosun Ilbo. http://english.chosun.com/w21data/html/news/200808/200808110023.html. Retrieved on 31 January 2009. 
^ a b c Agence France-Presse (31 January 2009). "S. Korea president faces protests from Buddhists". The Straits Times. http://www.straitstimes.com/Breaking%2BNews/World/Story/STIStory_267202.html. Retrieved on 31 January 2009. 
^ Religion In South Korea
^ Kim, Andrew Eungi (2000). "Christianity, Shamanism, and Modernization in South Korea". CBS Interactive. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m2096/is_2000_Spring-Summer/ai_63300897. Retrieved on 2009-02-13. 
^ Moll, Rob (1 March 2006). "Missions Incredible". Christianity Today. Christianity Today International. http://www.christianitytoday.com/ct/2006/003/16.28.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ "Buddhism in Korea". Korean Buddhism Magazine, Seoul. 1997. http://www.buddhismtoday.com/english/world/country/027-korea.htm. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ "Korea.net: The official website of the Republic of Korea - Religion". http://www.korea.net/korea/kor_loca.asp?code=U05. 
^ "International Religious Freedom Report 2008 - Korea, Republic of". United States Department of State. 19 September 2008. http://2001-2009.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2008/108411.htm. Retrieved on 2009-02-17. 
^ BBC - Korean Zen Buddhism
^ Islam takes root and blooms
^ "Korea’s Muslims Mark Ramadan". The Chosun Ilbo. September 11, 2008. http://english.chosun.com/w21data/html/news/200809/200809110016.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-09. 
^ "Associated Organisations". MCT Website. http://www.mct.go.kr/english/section/bureau/cultural_1.jsp. Retrieved on 2006-04-11.  See also "Mission and Goal". Korea Cultural Administration website. http://www.kcaf.or.kr/ehome3/mission.htm. Retrieved on 2006-04-11. 
^ Fritscher, Lisa "Korean Food Basics".
^ Pettid, 56.
^ INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC COMMITTEE - SPORTS
^ "Korean derby takes centre stage". Fifa.com. 2008-01-20. http://www.fifa.com/worldcup/preliminaries/asia/standings/group=250439/analysis.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-07. 
^ see 2002 FIFA World Cup
^ see 1988 Summer Olympics medal table
^ "The Games". Olympic Council of Asia. http://www.ocasia.org/games.asp. Retrieved on 2009-03-03. 
^ "Fourth Asian Winter Games". Olympic Council of Asia. 2001. http://www.ocasia.org/4WAG.asp. Retrieved on 2009-03-03. 
^ "Summer Universiade Daegu 2003". http://www.universiadedaegu.org/. Retrieved on 2009-03-03. 
^ 1997 Winter Universiade Mascot
^ KOIS (2003), p.632.
^ "South Korea beats Cuba, finishes Olympic tourney unbeaten". ESPN. 23 August 2008. http://sports.espn.go.com/oly/summer08/baseball/recap?gameId=836. Retrieved on 2009-03-03. 
^ a b www.cyclingnews.com - the world centre of cycling



[edit] References


Cumings, Bruce (1997). Korea's place in the sun. New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 0-393-31681-5. 
KOIS (Korea Overseas Information Service) (2003). Handbook of Korea, 11th ed.. Seoul: Hollym. ISBN 1-56591-212-8. 
Nahm, Andrew C. (1996). Korea: A history of the Korean people (2nd ed.). Seoul: Hollym. ISBN 1-56591-070-2. 
Yang, Sung Chul (1999). The North and South Korean political systems: A comparative analysis (rev. ed.). Seoul: Hollym. ISBN 1-56591-105-9. 
Yonhap News Agency (2004). Korea Annual 2004. Seoul: Author. ISBN 89-7433-070-9. 
Dennis Hart (2003). From Tradition to Consumption: Constructing a Capitalist Culture in South Korea. Seoul: Author. ISBN 89-88095-44-8. 
Michael Breen (2004). The Koreans: Who They Are, What They Want, Where Their Future Lies. St. Martin's Griffin. ISBN 0312326092. 



[edit] External links




Korea portal






Wikimedia Commons has media related to: South Korea



Find more about South Korea on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

VISITKOREA - The Official Korea Tourism Guide Site
Korea.net: Gateway to Korea
Korea National Statistical Office
South Korea in Encyclopædia Britannica
South Korea entry at The World Factbook
A Country Study: South Korea in the Library of Congress
South Korea at the Open Directory Project
South Korea at the Yahoo! Directory
Main cities of South Korea, satellite views and geographical coordinates








v • d • e

Korea topics





 North Korea ·  South Korea










 
History






Timeline · List of monarchs · Military history · Gojoseon · Jin · Proto-Three Kingdoms (Buyeo · Okjeo · Dongye · Samhan) · Gaya · Three Kingdoms (Goguryeo · Baekje · Silla) · Unified Silla · Balhae · Later Three Kingdoms · Goryeo (Mongol invasion) · Joseon (Seven Year War) · Korean Empire · Japanese rule (Independence movements · March 1st Movement · Provisional Government) · Division of Korea (USAMGIK) · Korean War · North Korea · South Korea














 
Politics










North Korea


Government (President · Chairman · Premier · Supreme People's Assembly · Presidium) · Elections · Political parties (Workers' Party of Korea) · Human rights · Nuclear program · Military · Foreign relations · "Juche"







South Korea


Government (Constitution · President · Prime Minister · Assembly) · Elections · Political parties · Human rights · Military · Foreign relations (Sunshine policy)

















 
Economy










North Korea


List of companies · Currency · Communications · Transportation · Famine







South Korea


List of companies · Chaebol (Samsung · Hyundai · LG · SK) · "Miracle on the Han River" · Currency · 1997 financial crisis · Communications · Transportation · Real estate · Financial services

















 
Geography










General


Korean Peninsula · Regions · Provinces (historical) · Special cities · Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) · Mountains (Baekdudaegan · Baekdusan · Kumgangsan · Seoraksan · Jirisan · Hallasan) · Islands (Jeju-do) · Rivers (Tumen · Yalu · Han · Nakdong) · Lakes







North Korea


Administrative divisions · Cities (Pyongyang)







South Korea


Administrative divisions · Cities (Seoul · Busan) · Environment

















 
Demographics






Koreans (list) · Koreatown · Language (Hangul · Hanja) · Names · North Korea · South Korea (Adoptees)














 
Culture










General


Religion (Buddhism · Shamanism · Christianity) · Philosophy · Confucianism · Mythology · Cinema · Drama · Martial arts (Taekwondo · Hapkido) · Ssireum · Swords · Cuisine (Kimchi · Galbi · Bulgogi) · Tea ceremony







Arts


Pottery · Painting · Calligraphy · Architecture · Music (Pansori · Arirang) · Literature (Poetry · Sijo · Gasa) · Cinema (Animation · List of films)







North Korea


"Juche" · Arirang Festival · Sports · Education · Religion · Tourism







South Korea


Korean wave · K-pop · Sports · Education · Religion · Tourism · Marriage


















 
Geography and administration














v • d • e

Regions and administrative divisions of South Korea





Regions

Capital area · Gwandong (Yeongdong · Yeongseo) · Hoseo · Honam (Jeju) · Yeongnam






Provinces

Chungbuk · Chungnam · Gangwon · Gyeonggi · Gyeongbuk · Gyeongnam · Jeonbuk · Jeonnam






Autonomous province

Jeju






Special city

Seoul






Metropolitan cities

Busan · Daegu · Daejeon · Gwangju · Incheon · Ulsan













v • d • e

Countries and territories of East Asia






People's Republic of China (S.A.R: Hong Kong · Macau) · Republic of China1 · South Korea · Japan · Mongolia · North Korea
Sometimes included:  Singapore · Vietnam · Russian Far East
1 Commonly known as "Taiwan"; see Political status of Taiwan.














v • d • e

Countries of Asia








Afghanistan · Armenia · Azerbaijan1 · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Bhutan · Brunei · Burma · Cambodia · People's Republic of China · Republic of China (Taiwan)2 · Cyprus · Egypt3 · Georgia1 · India · Indonesia4 · Iran · Iraq · Israel · Japan · Jordan · Kazakhstan1 · North Korea · South Korea · Kuwait · Kyrgyzstan · Laos · Lebanon · Malaysia · Maldives · Mongolia · Nepal · Oman · Pakistan · Philippines · Qatar · Russia1 · Saudi Arabia · Singapore · Sri Lanka · Syria · Tajikistan · Thailand · East Timor (Timor-Leste)4 · Turkey1 · Turkmenistan · United Arab Emirates · Uzbekistan · Vietnam · Yemen3

For dependent and other territories, see Dependent territory.

1 Partly or significantly in Europe.  2 The Republic of China (Taiwan) is not officially recognized by the United Nations; see Political status of Taiwan.
3 Partly or significantly in Africa.  4 Partly or wholly reckoned in Oceania.





















 
International membership














v • d • e

Major non-NATO allies of the United States






 Argentina ·  Australia ·  Bahrain ·  Egypt ·  Japan ·  Jordan ·  Kuwait ·  Morocco ·  New Zealand ·  Philippines ·  South Korea ·  Thailand






Map showing the Major non-NATO allies















v • d • e

Member states of the East Asia Summit (EAS)









   


 Australia
 Brunei
 Burma (Myanmar)
 Cambodia




 India
 Indonesia
 Japan
 Laos




 Malaysia
 New Zealand
 People's Republic of China
 Philippines




 Singapore
 South Korea
 Thailand
 Vietnam











Potential future members       Timor-Leste    Russia












v • d • e

States belonging to the Community of Democracies at the United Nations





Members

 Cape Verde ·  Chile ·  Czech Republic ·  El Salvador ·  India ·  Italy ·  Korea, South ·  Lithuania ·  Mali
 Mexico ·  Mongolia ·  Morocco ·  Philippines ·  Poland ·  Portugal ·  South Africa ·  United States













v • d • e

Member states of the Four Asian Tigers






 Hong Kong  ·    South Korea  ·    Singapore  ·    Republic of China













 [[nap:Corea do Sud]]



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/South_Korea"
Categories: South Korea | Divided regions | Republics | Liberal democracies | States and territories established in 1948Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead external links since February 2009 | Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the World Factbook | Wikipedia articles needing page number citations | Articles with dead external links since March 2009 | Articles containing non-English language text | Articles containing Korean language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2009 | Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2009 | All articles containing potentially dated statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 | Articles with peacock terms | NPOV disputes from February 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | All articles lacking sources | Articles lacking sources from February 2009 | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since April 2009 | Articles with dead external links since March 2008 | Articles lacking reliable references from February 2009 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
العربية
Aragonés
Arpetan
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Boarisch
བོད་ཡིག
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Dolnoserbski
ཇོང་ཁ
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Fiji Hindi
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
贛語
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ಕನ್ನಡ
Kapampangan
ქართული
कश्मीरी - (كشميري)
Kaszëbsczi
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Коми
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
Malagasy
മലയാളം
Malti
मराठी
مصرى
Bahasa Melayu
Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄
Монгол
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
नेपाली
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
O'zbek
پښتو
Piemontèis
Tok Pisin
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
Gagana Samoa
संस्कृत
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
Tetun
ไทย
ᏣᎳᎩ
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Удмурт
Українська
اردو
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
Volapük
文言
Winaray
Wolof
吴语
ייִדיש
粵語
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 18:50 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
