













Cuisine of Hong Kong - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Cuisine_of_Hong_Kong";
		var wgTitle = "Cuisine of Hong Kong";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "1701360";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283203805;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Cuisine of Hong Kong

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







Demographics and Culture
of Hong Kong



    Census




    Demographics
      Healthcare
      Hong Kong people
      Hong Kong Identity Card
      Languages
      Religion
      Right of abode




    Culture
      Cinema      Cuisine       Holidays
      Shopping   Manhua      Music
      Opera         Sport




Other Hong Kong topics




Economy - Education
Geography - History - Politics
Hong Kong Portal



The cuisine of Hong Kong can best be described as a type of eclectic cuisine with extensive influences from Cantonese cuisine and parts of non-Cantonese-speaking China (especially Chaozhou, Dongjiang, Fujian and the Yangtze River Delta), Western world, Japan, and Southeast Asia. Due to Hong Kong's past as a British colony and long history of being an international city of commerce. From the roadside stalls to the most upscale restaurants, Hong Kong provides an unlimited variety of food in every class. Complex combinations and international gourmet expertise have given Hong Kong the reputable labels of "Gourmet Paradise" and "World's Fair of Food"[1].




Contents


1 Background
2 History

2.1 19th century: Colonial origins
2.2 1920s: Canton's influence
2.3 1949: Shanghainese and Western influences
2.4 1960s-80s: prosperity
2.5 1980-90s: links with mainland China and Taiwan
2.6 Post-1997: decline


3 Eating habits
4 Eating Etiquette
5 Ingredients
6 Styles

6.1 Chinese and Other Asian
6.2 Western
6.3 Non-service-based


7 Chinese and Other Asian Styles

7.1 Hawker
7.2 Dai Pai Dong
7.3 Specialty Shops
7.4 Hong Kong-Style Fast Food
7.5 Chinese Pastry
7.6 Cuisine: Cantonese
7.7 Cuisine: Buddhist
7.8 Cuisine: Hakka
7.9 Cuisine: Beijing
7.10 Cuisine: Japanese
7.11 Cuisine: Indian
7.12 Hot Pot
7.13 Hong Kong-Style Drinks
7.14 Chinese Tea


8 Western Styles

8.1 Hong Kong-Style Western Cuisine
8.2 Western Fast Food
8.3 Western Pastry
8.4 Cuisine: American
8.5 Cuisine: Italian
8.6 Cuisine: French
8.7 Western Drinks
8.8 Western Coffee


9 Locales
10 Famous chefs
11 Culture

11.1 Truffle madness


12 See also
13 References
14 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Background




Tsim Sha Tsui, a major food district in Hong Kong


Modern Hong Kong has a predominantly service-based economy[2], and restaurant businesses serve as a main economic contributor. With the 3rd highest density population per square meters in the world and serving a population of 7 million[3], Hong Kong is host to a restaurant industry in which competition is cutthroat. Due to its small geographical size, Hong Kong contains a high number of restaurants per unit area.
With Chinese ethnicity making up 98% of the resident population[4], Chinese cuisine is naturally served at home. A majority of Chinese in Hong Kong are Cantonese in addition to sizeable numbers of Hakka, Teochew and Shanghainese people, and home dishes are Cantonese with occasional mixes of the other three types of cuisines. Rice is predominantly the main staple for home meals. Home ingredients are picked up from local grocery stores and independent produce shops, although supermarkets have become progressively more popular.
Traditional Chinese preference of food freshness means grocery shopping happens much more frequently, and in small quantities, for Hong Kong's population than the Western world. Take-out and dining out is also very common, since people are often too busy to cook with an average 47-hour work week[5].

[edit] History

[edit] 19th century: Colonial origins
The cuisine of Hong Kong traces its origins to its founding as a British colonial outpost in 1841. Soon after the colony was founded, many British and other Western merchants along with Chinese from nearby Guangzhou flocked there to conduct business. Initially, much of Hong Kong society was segregated into expatriate Westerners, a majority of working class Chinese coolies, Chinese farmers and fishermen, and Chinese merchants. The simple peasant cuisine was rudimentary compared to the cuisine of 19th century Canton (now commonly known as Guangzhou)[6].
As the colony developed there arose a need for meals to entertain businessmen. Some Chinese restaurants were founded in the late 19th century and early 20th century as branches of renowned restaurants in Canton and offered elaborate meals consisting of traditional Chinese "eight main courses and eight entrees" (八大八小) types of banquets for 2 taels of silver, at the time equal to a clerk's monthly wage[7]. Before 1935 when prostitution was still legal in Hong Kong, female escorts often accompanied diners to restaurant meals, especially those of a business entertainment nature. Opium was also offered which lasted until World War II. For the majority of Chinese who were not part of the merchant class, dining out in restaurants was non-existent and consisted of simple Cantonese country fares. Meat only appeared in festive occasions and celebrations such as birthdays were often done by catering services who prepared the meals at the celebrant's home. The restaurant scene for Europeans in Hong Kong was segregated from Chinese dining. Elaborate colonial dining existed at the likes of Hongkong Hotel and subsequently Gloucester Hotel.

[edit] 1920s: Canton's influence
Hong Kong's dining lagged behind the then-leader of Chinese cuisine, Canton, for a long time and many Hong Kong chefs spent their formative years in Canton. Canton was renowned for its food, and there was a traditional saying of "Eat in Canton" (食在廣州).[8] Cantonese cuisine in Canton reached its peak during the 1920s and was renowned in the care in preparation even for peasant fares such as char siu or boat congee. Dai San Yuan was renowned for its braised shark fin dish that charged 60 silver yuan, equivalent to 6 months' wage for a working class family[9]. The Guandong cooking style eventually trickled down to the culinary scene in Hong Kong [10].

[edit] 1949: Shanghainese and Western influences
The victory of Chinese Communists in the Chinese Civil War in 1949 created a wave of refugees into Hong Kong. A sizable number of refugees were from non-Cantonese speaking parts of China, including the Yangtze River Delta, and introduced Shanghai cuisine to Hong Kong. On the other hand, most renowned chefs of Canton, now known as Guangzhou in pinyin romanization, settled in Hong Kong to escape from Communist rule in mainland China [11].
Prostitution and opium had by then long faded from the restaurant scene, and in order to survive, many restaurants started to tap into winning businesses from families by offering yum cha and wedding banquets, while on the other hand, the end of strict colonial segregation by the British colonial government and expatriate Westerners after the Second World War opened up Western fare to the Chinese.
Egg tarts and Hong Kong-style milk tea soon became part of Hong Kong's food culture. It could be argued that the seeds of Hong Kong society as understood today were not sown until 1949, and the cuisine of Hong Kong has its direct roots in this period.

[edit] 1960s-80s: prosperity
By the 1960s Hong Kong was past the worst of the economic depression, and there was a long and continuous period of relative calm and openness compared to the Communist misrule in Mao Zedong-era China and martial law isolation in Taiwan. The Cantonese cuisine in Hong Kong had by then surpassed that of Guangzhou, which had witnessed a long period of decline after the Communists came to power. The rising prosperity from the mid 1960s had given birth to increasing demand for quality dining. Many of the chefs, who spent their formative years in pre-Communist Guangzhou and Shanghai, started to bring out the best of fine dining specialties from pre-1949 Guangzhou and Shanghai. Families had largely abandoned catering services and resorted to restaurants for celebratory meals[12]. Seafood started to become specialised delicacies in the 1960s, followed by games in the 1970s.
This wave of prosperity also propelled Hong Kong Chinese's awareness of foreign food trends, and many are willing to try foreign ingredients such as asparagus and crayfish from Australia. Foreign food styles such as Japanese and Southeast Asian cuisine started to influence local food, and the pace of change accelerated during the late 1970s and early 1980s. This gave birth to nouvelle Cantonese cuisine (traditional Chinese: 新派粵菜) that incorporated foreign dishes such as sashimi into Cantonese banquets[13]. For the first time, many Hong Kong Chinese started to have the economic means to visit many Western restaurants of the domain of mainly wealthy expatriate Westerners such as Gaddi's of the Peninsula Hotel. During these years, there was great wealth growth from stock market investments, and one visible manifestation of the resultant nouveau riche mentality in 1970s Hong Kong were sayings such as "mixing shark's fin soup with rice" (Chinese:魚翅撈飯).

[edit] 1980-90s: links with mainland China and Taiwan
China initiated economic reforms when Deng Xiaoping came to power after Mao Zedong died. The opening up of the country gave chefs from Hong Kong chances to reestablish links with chefs from mainland China severed in 1949 and opportunities to gain awareness of various regional Chinese cuisines. Many of these cuisines also contributed to nouvelle Cantonese cuisines in Hong Kong[14]. The lift of martial law in Taiwan in 1987 jump-started Taiwanese links with mainland China and has caused a proliferation of eateries specializing in Taiwanese cuisine in Hong Kong as Taiwanese tourists and businessmen used Hong Kong as a mid-point for visits to mainland China. From 1978 until 1997 there was no dispute Hong Kong was the epicenter of Chinese, not merely Cantonese, cuisine worldwide, with Chinese restaurants in mainland China and Taiwan, and among overseas Chinese communities, racing to employ chefs trained or worked in Hong Kong and emulating dishes improvised or invented in Hong Kong. Hong Kong-style Cantonese cuisine (traditional Chinese: 港式粵菜) became a coinword for innovative Chinese cuisine during this period[15]. It was even unofficially rumored the Chinese government had secretly consulted the head chef for the Peking Garden Restaurant of Hong Kong, part of the Maxim's restaurant and catering conglomerate, to teach chefs back at the renowned Quanjude restaurant in Beijing how to make good Peking Duck, Quanjude's signature dish, in the early 1980s as the skills to produce the dish were largely lost during the Cultural Revolution.

[edit] Post-1997: decline
After Hong Kong was returned to China in 1997, the Asian financial crisis and SARS epidemic led to a decade-long depression. The boom in Hong Kong culinary scene came to a halt and many restaurants, including a number of renowned eateries like Sun Tung Lok, closed down. It is argued that the catch up in prosperity among populations from coastal regions of China, particularly the nouveau riche (derogatory Chinese: da kuan 大款) and corrupted officials (derogatory Chinese: da ye 大爺), has driven up the demand of many delicacies such as abalone and grouper, and many celebratory dishes have become outrageously expensive that they are beyond the reach of even many upper-middle class Hong Kong families. At the same time, Hong Kong people's tastes have become cosmopolitan when compared with one generation ago. Many are now able to appreciate specific European cuisines rather than one generic "Western cuisine", and appreciation of other Asian cuisines, especially Japanese cuisine and Thai cuisine has been ever increasing. These has produced a proliferation of many specialist ethnic cuisine restaurants geared towards young middle class couples on one hand, and a consolidation of fine-dining Cantonese restaurants on the other.[citation needed]
As of the early 21st century Hong Kong, notwithstanding the partial recovery of Hong Kong's economy from the slump in 2003 due to the SARS epidemic, many pundits argue that contemporary Hong Kong's economy is heavily skewed towards real estate development and financial services. This provides prosperity to only a select few minority and an uncertain long-term economic fortune vis-a-vis more diversified mega-rich cities in China such as Shanghai and Guangzhou, and the territory therefore no longer possesses the economic base to support mass-level super fine-dining that is required to sustain an active dining culture. A common perception of Hong Kong's current culinary culture is one being in decline and resting on past laurels. For example, culinary magazines such as Eat and Travel Weekly report fewer fundamentally new dishes being invented in Hong Kong post-2000 than the 1980s heyday, and many restaurants tend to resort to popularise haute dishes invented in the 1980s. Modern Hong Kong's labor market has also disrupted the traditional ways of grooming Chinese chefs, which henceforth been trained in a very long and drawn one-to-one practical apprenticeships. Very few chefs are willing to sacrifice their time and effort to produce traditional cooking that discourages cutting corners, and emphasises techniques over ingredients' net economic worth[16]. On the other hand, a minority of optimistic pundits argue Hong Kong may well develop a foodie culture similar to other developed economies and preserve the best of traditional cooking.
Historically Hong Kong's food source came from a combination of mini stores instead of supermarkets. Some of the stores included: rice dealers (Chinese: 米舖), serving as mini rice storage warehouses; wine shops (辦館), which offered beverages; see-dor (士多, Cantonese rendering of "store"), which were single convenient stores, most notable for serving fresh baked bread. The main component was wet markets (街市) - one of the first market gatherings in Hong Kong was Central Market that began in the 1840s.
The idea of a single facility or supermarket that provided all food ingredients did not take place until the early 1970s when Wellcome , a local grocery chain, changed its format into a supermarket. Air-conditioned supermarkets did not become standardised until the 1980s. The early 21st century Western environmentalism- or sustainability-inspired food fashions, such as natural food, organic food, GE free food, local food, and farmer's markets, have been ignored by a majority of Hong Kong's populations. It must be noted though, that the Western farmer's markets share some similarities with the traditional Chinese wet markets, however support of wet markets is largely based on traditional Chinese cultural preference rather than sustainability, and wet markets contain many features that are condemned by modern Western environmentalists on the grounds of "animal cruelty" (live animals sold for food) and "high food miles" (fruits and seafood from another continent).

[edit] Eating habits




People enjoying a meal


Most restaurant serving sizes are considerably small by international standards, especially in comparison to most Western nations like the United States or Canada. The main course is usually accompanied by a generous portion of carbohydrates such as rice or mein(noodles). People generally eat 5 times a day[1]. Dinner is often accompanied with dessert. Snack time also fits anywhere in between meals.
As Hong Kong is Cantonese in origin and most Hong Kong Chinese are immigrants or descendants of immigrants from Cantonese-speaking parts of China, the food is a variant of Cantonese cuisine - almost all homecooking and much of the dine-out fares, from restaurant to bakery, are Cantonese or heavily Cantonese-influenced. Most of the celebrated food in Hong Kong such as the wife cake, roast duck, dim sum, herbal tea, shark's fin and abalone cooking, poached chicken, and the mooncake, and others, originated in Guangzhou, and dai pai dong was an institution adopted from the southern Chinese city. As in the parent cuisine, the Hong Kong Cantonese cuisine accepts a wide variety of ingredients, a lighted seasoned taste. Unlike Guangzhou, the uninterrupted contacts Hong Kong has with the West has made it more susceptible to Western influences, and has produced favorites such as egg tarts, Hong Kong-style milk tea.
In addition, other foreign styles of cuisines are also popular in the territory, although almost all offer one of generic Western (authentic, international, or Hong Kong-style), Italian, French, Japanese, Korean, Thai, Vietnamese, Indian, Malaysian and Singaporean cuisines. Unlike London, New York, Paris and Singapore, Hong Kong does not offer as much breadth in variety of cuisines available as its relatively homogeneous population renders exotic styles of cuisines without sufficient numbers of ethnic clientèles difficult to survive.[citation needed]


Time of Day
Meal


morning
Breakfast


noon (12PM)
Lunch


3 PM
Afternoon Tea


evening
Dinner


10PM or later
Siu yeh



[edit] Eating Etiquette



This article is part of the series:
Chinese cuisine





History


History of Chinese cuisine






Eight Great Traditions


Anhui (Hui 徽)
Cantonese (Yue 粵)
Fujian (Min 闽)
Hunan (Xiang 湘)
Jiangsu (Su 苏 or Yang 揚)
Shandong (Lu 魯)
Szechuan (Chuan 川)
Zhejiang (Zhe 浙)






Others


Beijing

Imperial
Aristocrat
Liao (Liaoning)
Jin (Tianjin)


Chinese Buddhist
Chaozhou
Guangxi
E (Hubei)
Gan (Jiangxi)
Hainan
Hakka
Jin (Shanxi)
Hong Kong
Huaiyang
Chinese Islamic
Northeast
Qian (Guizhou)
Qin (Shaanxi)
Shanghai
Xinjiang
Macanese
Yu (Henan)
Yunnan






Taiwanese


Taiwanese






Overseas Chinese


American Chinese
Australian Chinese
British Chinese
Burmese Chinese
Canadian Chinese
Caribbean Chinese
Chifa (Perú)
Filipino Chinese
French Chinese
German Chinese
Indian Chinese
Indonesian Chinese
Japanese Chinese
Korean Chinese
Malaysian Chinese
Peranakan
Singaporean Chinese
Thai Chinese
Viet Chinese




[edit]


Most East Asian cuisines, with the exception of fusion and Thai, are consumed exclusively with chopsticks. The more Western style cuisines favor cutlery. Some meals are more suited for the use of hands. One notable trend in restaurants is the limited number of napkins provided during a meal. Most mid to low-tier restaurants operate under the assumption that customers bring their own napkins or tissue packs when dining. Standard Western dining etiquettes are rarely observed even in upscale restaurants in Hong Kong.

[edit] Ingredients
Similar to Cantonese cuisine elsewhere, Hong Kong's cooking uses a wide variety of ingredients and the common ones include:






Century egg
Salted duck egg
Chinese cabbage
Shiitake








Kai-lan
Red Bean
Hoisin Sauce
Chinese Sausage








Dried Shrimp
Dried Scallop
Jujube
Lotus seed







[edit] Styles

[edit] Chinese and Other Asian


Chinese and Other Asian Cuisines
Style Name
Most Popular
Examples


Small Shops
Hawker
Snack
Fish balls on a stick, Stinky tofu



Dai Pai Dong
Snack
Wonton noodle



Specialty
Snack
Tofu pudding, beef jerky, Haw flakes


Informal
HK-Style Fast Food
Anytime
Cutlet Porkchop, Vegetable with Oyster sauce


Bakery
Chinese Pastry
Snack
Wife Cake, Egg tart



Cantonese
Lunch, Dinner
Dim sum, Shark's fin, Char siu



Buddhist
Lunch, Dinner
Buddha's delight, Mantou



Hakka
Lunch, Dinner
Poon Choi



Beijing
Lunch, Dinner
Peking Duck



Japanese
Lunch, Dinner
Sushi, Sashimi



Indian
Lunch, Dinner
Curry Chicken



Hot Pot
Dinner
Scallop, Shrimp


Drinks
HK-Style Drinks
Anytime
milk tea, Yuanyang



Chinese Tea
Anytime
Chrysanthemum tea



[edit] Western


Western Category
Style Name
Most Popular
Examples


Small Shops
HK-style western
Brunch
French Toast, Instant noodles


Informal
Western Fast Food
Anytime
Big Mac, Hotdog


Bakery
Western Bakery
Snack
Maxim cakes, Tiramisu


Cuisine
American
Lunch, Dinner
Sirloin steak, Buffalo wings



Italian
Lunch, Dinner
Spaghetti with Vienna Sausage, Beef Brisket, Pizza



French
Lunch, Dinner
Quiche, Lamb Mignon


Drinks
Western Drinks
Anytime
Horlicks, Cola



Western Coffee
Anytime
Espresso, Iced coffee



[edit] Non-service-based
Non-service-based items are food that do not require cooking or any chef services. They are usually imported, cultivated or produced. It is identical if served outside of Hong Kong.


Category
Style Name
Most Popular
Examples


Alcoholic
Beer
Lunch, Dinner
Tsingtao, Carlsberg, Heineken



Wine
Lunch, Dinner
XO cognac


Fruits
Pacific Fruits
Anytime
Ya Pear, Durian, Lychee



[edit] Chinese and Other Asian Styles




Hawker



[edit] Hawker
These are basically streetside food stalls, operated by usually 1 or 2 people pushing a cart. The carts are usually very mobile, allowing the business freedom to sell snacks in which ever area is most populated at a particular point in time. While they have been popular in the 70s and 80s, tight health regulations and other forms of lease versus licensed hawker restrictions have put a burden on this mobile food culture[17]. The term Jau Gwei became associated with the hawkers trying to avoid restrictions.

Includes:

Fishball
Butzaigo
Roasted chestnuts







Dai Pai Dong



[edit] Dai Pai Dong
Main article: dai pai dong
These are small Chinese style casual outdoor dining restaurants, serving mostly Cantonese and Teochew peasant fares. The business is catered toward the locals with many menus exclusively in Chinese.

Includes:

Congee and Youtiao
Sweetened Condensed milk Toast
Wonton noodle







Specialty Shops



[edit] Specialty Shops
Specialty stores usually dedicate to selling a certain type of snack or dried goods. If the focus is on beef jerky for example, the store will offer 10 to 20 different types of the highest grade and quality. During holiday times, specialty stores are sometimes the premiere place for purchasing food gift items. Sun-dried goods and Chinese candy are also common merchandise found.

Includes:

Beef Jerky
Almond Biscuit
Dried Shredded Squid







Hong Kong-Style Fast Food



[edit] Hong Kong-Style Fast Food
Hong Kong-style fast food is either served in fast-casual restaurants such as Café de Coral, Maxim's and Fairwood or in food courts typically attached to malls or supermarkets such as CitySuper. The food offered is a mix of Canto-Western cuisine (see Hong Kong-Style Western Cuisine below), Cantonese fares, and increasingly Asian food from outside China.

Includes:

Pork Cutlet - Japanese inspired
Chinese Broccoli with Oyster sauce - Cantonese
baked pork chop rice - Western (specifically British) inspired







Chinese Bakery



[edit] Chinese Pastry
Main article: Chinese bakery
Hong Kong-style Chinese pastry offers a plethora of choices for the discerning taster. Depending on location, some shops may carry a wider selection than others, and some may bake goods on the premise while others have it delivered from an off-site bakery. Most bakeries carry standard fare such as Pineapple Buns and Egg Tarts. During the Mid-Autumn Festival, moon cake is one of the hottest sellers. Pastries are baked fresh daily (and sometimes throughout the day), and it's said that Hong Kong people have taste buds so sophisticated that they can tell the difference between something baked 1 hour versus 5 hours ago.

Includes:

Wife Cake
Jin deui
Cream Bun







Dim Sum



[edit] Cuisine: Cantonese
Main articles: Cantonese cuisine and Dim Sum
As the most predominant cultural group in Hong Kong, Cantonese food forms the backbone of homecooking and dine-out scenes. Many early celebrated Cantonese restaurants, including Tai San Yuan, Luk Yu Tea House, were originally Hong Kong branches of the famed Guangzhou-based restaurants, and most chefs in Hong Kong until the 1970s had spent their formative years working in the restaurant industry in Gaungzhou[18]. Most of the celebrated dishes in Hong Kong were introduced into the territory through Guangzhou, often refined with awareness of international tastes. Cantonese food prices perhaps cover the widest range, from the small businesses lou mei to the most expensive abalone delicacies, which involves abalone.
One well developed dish in Cantonese cuisine is dim sum. Waiters cart around stacks of steamer baskets or small plates of food for customers to choose. Dim Sum includes dishes based on meat, seafood, vegetables, as well as desserts and fruit. The term Yum cha (literally "drink tea") is synonymous with eating Dim Sum. It is customary for families to eat Dim Sum on weekends.

Includes:

Cart noodle
Siu mei
Cha siu baau
Shaomai
Har gau
Crispy fried chicken
Seafood birdsnest







Buddhist



[edit] Cuisine: Buddhist
Main article: Buddhist cuisine
This cuisine is essentially vegetarian specialties using tofu, wheat gluten, mushroom and other non-animal sourced ingredients. Despite the name, the cuisine are enjoyed by many non-Buddhists. Hong Kong's vegetarian dishes, as part of the Cantonese branch of Chinese vegetarian cuisine, puts emphasis on meat analogues substitutes to the point where it can taste and look identical to real meat, often by using deep-fried gluten and tofu to recreate meat-like textures, and heavy-flavored sauces are prepared for the dishes. Even committed meat-eaters enjoy the cuisine regularly[19]. Unlike western countries, vegetarian diet in Hong Kong is not considered a commitment. This cuisine is also served in some temples and monasteries like the Po Lin Monastery. The vegetarian cuisine served in some Taoist temples or monasteries, such as the Yuen Yuen Institute, can also be classified under this category.

Includes:

Mantou
Buddha's delight



Non-Cantonese Chinese vegetarian cuisine is extremely rare in Hong Kong, although there are some isolated temples and restaurants offering Shanghaiese-style vegetarian cuisine. Compared with Cantonese-style vegetarian cuisine, dishes are less oily and some food items favored by non-Cantonese Chinese, such as bamboo shoot, picked vegetables, are often used. Meat analogues are prominently featured, albeit expressed in differently manners from Cantonese vegetarian cuisine.




Salt baked chicke in Hakka cuisine



[edit] Cuisine: Hakka
Main article: Hakka cuisine
This form of cooking style from the Hakka people originally came from Guangdong and Fujian in southeastern China. The style uses dried and preserved ingredients. Pork is by far the most common meat in the style.

Includes:

Poon Choi
Salt baked chicken




[edit] Cuisine: Beijing
Main article: Beijing cuisine




Peking duck


This cuisine have one of the longest history in terms of style development. The variety and complexity provide a glimpse of what imperial Chinese Emperors might have eaten at one time. Exotic dishes in this category often require a considerable wait time before it is served.

Includes:

Peking Duck
Hot and Sour Soup







Japanese



[edit] Cuisine: Japanese
Main articles: Sushi and Sashimi
Sushi is the most common association made to Japanese cuisine in Hong Kong. From small cafe shops to conveyor belt sushi restaurants to restaurants specializing in Teppanyaki, Japanese-style cooking is fairly popular. Depending on the locale, many sushi-centric restaurants are designed to mirror close to those in Japan.

Includes:

Sushi with Wasabi
Okinawa soba







Hong Kong-style Curry



[edit] Cuisine: Indian
Main article: Indian Cuisine
Unlike in India which may separate into regional variants such as Punjabi, the Chinese population in Hong Kong overwhelming identify Indian cuisine with curry spices. Because meat is always expected, it can also be said that HK Indian cuisine leans toward Northern Indian Cuisine.

Includes:

Curry Chicken with Biryani
Curry Beef with Naan







Hot Pot



[edit] Hot Pot
Main article: Hot pot
This hot pot cuisine, known as daa bin lou (打邊爐) in Cantonese, is unique in the sense that everyone is a chef. A boiling pot of water (soup-based, and customers can choose their preferred soup taste), is placed in the center of the table, and essentially everyone boils their own ingredients in that pot. This is highly popular and is usually accompanied with a bottle of cold beer or soda. This style is common during frigid winter times, since people are essentially cuddled around a fire. This format is also considered entertaining.

Includes:

Beef, Pork, Chicken
Crab, Prawns, and clams
Chinese cabbage, carrots and lettuce
Fish balls and beef balls
Tofu







Hong Kong-Style Drinks



[edit] Hong Kong-Style Drinks
Non-alcoholic beverages are served at restaurants of all classes, but most notably at Cha chaan teng, a unique kind of restaurants in Hong Kong. Since drink recipes are not franchise based, most drinks can vary depending on the restaurant. Rock sugar and syrup are commonly used to add sweetness.
Some beverages that was originated in the tea culture of Taiwan, such as bubble tea and honey green tea, had been brought to Hong Kong and become part of Hong Kong's beverage culture.

Includes:

Hong Kong-style milk tea
Red Bean Ice
Soy milk
Sugar Cane Juice







Chinese Tea



[edit] Chinese Tea
Main article: Hong Kong tea culture
A large wide variety of tea leaves and combinations are used for Chinese tea. In the 50s and 60s, citizens would go to tea houses accompanied by their pet birds locked in a bird cage. Noon tea was an essential break in the middle of the day. Though tea nowadays go along with any meal.

Includes:

Chrysanthemum tea
Bolay
24 flavors




[edit] Western Styles




Hong Kong-Style Western Cuisine



[edit] Hong Kong-Style Western Cuisine
Dishes derived from cuisines of the Western world, but not classified into a particular country, belong in this category. Outside Hong Kong it is termed Hong Kong-style Western cuisine or Canto-Western cuisine. Small restaurants that offer Sai Chaan are usually Cha chaan teng at the popular end or "Sai Chaan Restaurants" at the more upscale range. Restaurants that have come to expect tourists will likely offer both east and west menus. Most dishes are localized with Chinese tastes[20] and contain Chinese and specifically Cantonese influences, such as steak marinated in soy sauce, served in a soy sauce dominated gravy, and with fried rice as on the side, or wok-fried spaghetti with meat sauce [21]. The cuisine's detractors term the cuisine soy sauce Western cuisine (Chinese:豉油西餐) since the use of soy sauce was unheard of as an ingredient in Western culinary art before international cuisine took off in the late 1980s.
As Hong Kong became economically more prosperous which drive more commercial contacts with the West and fuel foreign travels, people's tastes have become more broadened and Sai Chaan Restaurants have become a rarity due to proliferation of more authentic Western restaurants focusing on local Hong Kong Chinese clientele. Those that remain, such as Goldfinch or Tai Ping Koon, have become quaint relics drawing customers with their 1960s and 1970s nostalgia. Cha chaan teng has tended to incorporate more Chinese food and remain popular as ever in the Hong Kong dining scene.

Includes:

Macaroni in broth with Fried egg and Sausages
Fried chicken wings
Swiss sauce chicken wings
Instant noodle with Sausages
French Toast, called "Western Toast" (西多士) in Chinese







Western Fast Food



[edit] Western Fast Food
Western style fast food are essentially replicas of US or European franchised fast food restaurant models. McDonald's is likely the most common. Others include Hardee's (formerly), Pizza Hut and many more.

Includes:

Big Mac
Hot dog
Pizza







Western Pastry



[edit] Western Pastry
The general association made is that western pastry are much sweeter and potent in taste than typical Chinese pastry. Pastry of this category are reciped by western countries. Some western style pastry lean very close to their western counterpart, while others are modified with a reduction in cheese, whip cream and other western ingredients. Chinese Bakery shops often sell both east and west goods. Maxim's is one of the most popular franchise found in nearly every MTR subway stations. Délifrance is another place that offers western sandwiches.

Includes:

Donut
Fruit Tart
Croissant







American



[edit] Cuisine: American
These are standard meals taken from the U.S., except with a significant reduction in usage of butter. For example, an order of mashed potato in Hong Kong will seem relatively plain and light compared to its U.S. counterpart. Popcorn in Hong Kong is sweetened. If served in the U.S., Americans would classify it as Cracker Jack instead. Steak can be classified as Sai Chaan or American food.

Includes:

Sirloin steak
Buffalo wings
Clam Chowder







Italian



[edit] Cuisine: Italian
This cuisine is usually considered up-scale, following a 3 course antipasto, primo and secondo format. Italian food in Hong Kong are generally considered more Modern Italian, instead of being authentic Traditional Italian. Though if one was to explicitly look for Venetian style, it can be done. Drinks and desserts are often mixed with Chinese options. The main course itself will lean closer to American-Italian. "Fat Angelos" is an example of an HK Italian restaurant.

Includes:

Pasta with Beef Brisket, Veal
Saltimbocca alla Romana
Risotto







French



[edit] Cuisine: French
Common French dishes can be found in Hong Kong along with delicacies. Many of the French desserts like Crème brûlée have been modified into some form of pudding (Chinese: 布甸) to be served with Chinese dishes. So aside from being a standalone style, influence of French cuisine in Asian dishes are apparent.

Includes:

Lamb Fillet
Pan Fried Duck Breast







Western Drinks



[edit] Western Drinks
Beverage from the west have been deeply integrated into the food culture. The line between east and west drinks are blurred to the point where many westernised drinks can be found in Chinese style restaurants. Especially in Cha chaan teng, they have essentially become just another item on the menu. British malt drinks have become closely associated with breakfast in Hong Kong.



Ovaltine
Horlicks
Cola
Milkshake







Western Coffee



[edit] Western Coffee
Coffee from the west has become heavily franchised in recent years. The arrival of Pacific Coffee and Starbucks changed the landscape of western style coffee in Hong Kong. While independent coffee shops do exist, franchise stores are often situated in favorable locations that cater to foreign workers.



Espresso
Iced Coffee
Frappuccino




[edit] Locales
Major food districts are Causeway Bay, Kowloon City, Lan Kwai Fong, Tsim Sha Tsui and Soho. Stanley, with its expatriate population, has many seaside pubs and European restaurants. Sai Kung, Lamma Island, Lau Fau Shan and Lei Yue Mun serve seafood. Old fishing towns such as Cheung Chau and Tai O also have many original restaurants.
Most pubs and bars are at Lan Kwai Fong, Lockhart Road and Jaffe Road of Wan Chai; Canton Road, Tsim Sha Tsui East; and around Prince Edward MTR station in Mong Kok. Since 1991, Oktoberfest has been held annually on Canton Road.

[edit] Famous chefs
Hong Kong diners are willing to pay top dollar for the best food and service, this helps to attract many celebrity and star chefs to open restaurants in Hong Kong, including:



Spoon by Alain Ducasse (InterContinental Hotel) - Alain Ducasse
Pierre (Mandarin Oriental Hotel) - Pierre Gagnaire
Amber (The Landmark Mandarin Oriental Hotel) - Richard Ekkebus
L'Atelier de Joël Robuchon (The Landmark) - Joël Robuchon
Nobu Matsuhisa opened Nobu Hong Kong at the InterContinental Hotel in late 2006.
Aspasia by former Michelin three star restaurant chef Roland Schuller.
Pearl on the Peak, operated by Australian chef Geoff Lindsay, operator of Pearl Restaurant in Australia.
Four Seasons Hotel brought in many staff from its Michelin three star restaurant Le Cinq in Paris and opened Caprice in Hong Kong in 2006.
Uwe Opocensky, who trained at El Bulli, voted by Restaurant Magazine as the world's number 1 restaurant, has been appointed executive chef at The Krug Room in the Mandarin Oriental Hotel.




[edit] Culture

[edit] Truffle madness
Truffle madness began to take off in Hong Kong 2005 when a group of citizens paid what was then a world record HK$863,000 for a 1.2 kg White Alba truffle. It was prepared by chef Umberto Bombana of Toscana restaurant at the Ritz-Carlton hotel.[22]
A 1.51 kilogram rare White Alba truffle, was sold for 125,000 Euros/HK$1,250,000/US$160,000 on November 13, 2006 to Hong Kong property tycoon Sir Gordon Wu. This price beat the previous world record of 95,000 Euros for a 1.21 kg White Alba truffle in 2005. Both the 2005 and 2006 truffles were sold in Hong Kong.
The record price paid for a single white truffle was set again in December 2007, when Macau casino owner Stanley Ho paid US$330,000 (£165,000) for a specimen weighing 1.5 kg (3.3lb). One of the largest truffles found in decades. It was unearthed near Pisa and sold at an auction held simultaneously in Macau, London and Florence.[23]

[edit] See also



Cantonese cuisine
Culture of Hong Kong
Private kitchen




[edit] References


^ a b Sterling, Richard. Chong, Elizabeth. Qin, Lushan Charles. [2001] (2001) World Food Hong Kong. Hong Kong: Lonely Planet Publishing. ISBN 1864502886
^ Hong Kong census. "Census labour data pdf." Labour. Retrieved on 2007-03-14.
^ HK Census. "HK Census." Statistical Table of population. Retrieved on 2007-03-16.
^ HK Census. "HK Census." Statistical Table. Retrieved on 2007-03-08.
^ Steers, Richard. [1999] (1999). Made in Korea: Chung Ju Yung and the Rise of Hyundai. United Kingdom: Routledge. ISBN 0415920507
^ Steers, Richard. [1999] (1999). Made in Korea: Chung Ju Yung and the Rise of Hyundai. United Kingdom: Routledge. ISBN 0415920507
^ pg 11-12, Famous Cuisine in Hong Kong (香港名菜精選), Wan Li Publishings, Hong Kong, October 1988
^ buddhistdoor.com Chinese lifestyle quote
^ pg 39-41, Special Test Editor (Chan Mun-yan) (特級校對（陳夢因）), History of Cantonese Dishes (粵菜溯源錄), Food and Drink World Publishing Limited, Hong Kong, May 1988
^ pg 31, Special Test Editor (Chan Mun-yan), Ibid
^ pg 40-41, Special Test Editor (Chan Mun-yan), Ibid
^ pg 13-14, Famous Cuisine in Hong Kong (香港名菜精選)
^ pg 11-13, New-Style Chinese Cooking From Hong Kong (香港新派中菜精華), Wan Li Publishings, Hong Kong, October 1987
^ pg 10-11, New-Style Chinese Cooking From Hong Kong (香港新派中菜精華)
^ pg14, Famous Cuisine in Hong Kong (香港名菜精選)
^ pg15, Famous Cuisine in Hong Kong (香港名菜精選)
^ Mau, Stephen D. [2006] (2006). Hong Kong Legal Principles: Important Topics for Students and Professionals. Hong Kong University Press. ISBN 9622097782
^ Cheuk Choi (蔡焯), pg 4, Preface to Famous Cuisine in Hong Kong (香港名菜精選)
^ Brown, Jules. Gardner, Dinah. The Rough Guide to Hong Kong and Macau. ISBN 185828872X
^ pg 149, World Food Hong Kong, Richard Sterling and Elizabeth Chong, Lonely Planet, Melbourne, 2002
^ AP, Explore the world of Canto-Western cuisine, Jan 8 2007 http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/16440507/
^ Hong Kong tycoon revealed as buyer of prized truffle
^ "Giant truffle sets record price". BBC News. 2007-12-02. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/7123414.stm. Retrieved on 2007-12-02. 



[edit] External links



Top Ten Weird Hong Kong Foods
Eat Drink Hong Kong - Restaurant directory and reviews
Hong Kong Restaurant Reviews
Gourmet Paradise - Hong Kong Tourism Board
OpenRice - Hong Kong Restaurant Reviews (Traditional Chinese)
FoodPara - Hong Kong Restaurant and Food Index and Search Engine (Traditional Chinese)
DiningCity Hong Kong - Restaurant directory including photos and reviews
Harmful Soup










v • d • e

Asian cuisine





Sovereign
states



Afghanistan · Armenia1 · Azerbaijan1 · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Bhutan · Brunei · Burma2 · Cambodia · People's Republic of China · Cyprus1 · East Timor3 · Egypt4 · Georgia4 · India · Indonesia · Iran · Iraq · Israel · Japan · Jordan · Kazakhstan4 · North Korea · South Korea · Kuwait · Kyrgyzstan · Laos · Lebanon · Malaysia · Maldives · Mongolia · Nepal · Oman · Pakistan · Philippines · Qatar · Russia4 · Saudi Arabia · Singapore · Sri Lanka · Syria · Tajikistan · Republic of China5 · Thailand · Turkey4 · Turkmenistan · United Arab Emirates · Uzbekistan · Vietnam · Yemen








Dependencies,
autonomies,
other territories



Aceh · Adjara1 · Abkhazia1 · Akrotiri and Dhekelia · Altai · British Indian Ocean Territory · Buryatia · Christmas Island · Cocos (Keeling) Islands · Guangxi · Hong Kong · Inner Mongolia · Iraqi Kurdistan · Jakarta · Khakassia · Macau · Nagorno-Karabakh · Nakhchivan · Ningxia · Northern Cyprus · Palestine (Gaza Strip · West Bank) · Papua · Sakha · South Ossetia1 · Tibet · Tuva · West Papua · Xinjiang · Yogyakarta








Italics indicates an unrecognised or partially recognised country.  1 Sometimes included in Europe, depending on the border definitions.  2 Officially known as Myanmar.  3 Sometimes included in Oceania, and also known as Timor-Leste.  4 Transcontinental country.  5 Commonly known as Taiwan. 








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cuisine_of_Hong_Kong"
Categories: Hong Kong cuisine | Cantonese cuisine | Chinese cuisineHidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 | Articles containing Chinese language text | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2008 | Region topic template using suffix 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


한국어
粵語
中文









 This page was last modified on 11 April 2009, at 17:01 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
