













Peer-to-peer - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Peer-to-peer";
		var wgTitle = "Peer-to-peer";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "24107";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280422890;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Peer-to-peer

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 

For other uses of the term see Peer-to-peer (disambiguation)
For peer-to-peer networks used for file sharing see File sharing





A peer-to-peer based network.






A server based network (i.e: not peer-to-peer).


A peer-to-peer (or P2P) computer network uses diverse connectivity between participants in a network and the cumulative bandwidth of network participants rather than conventional centralized resources where a relatively low number of servers provide the core value to a service or application. P2P networks are typically used for connecting nodes via largely ad hoc connections. Such networks are useful for many purposes. Sharing content files (see file sharing) containing audio, video, data or anything in digital format is very common, and real time data, such as telephony traffic, is also passed using P2P technology.
A pure P2P network does not have the notion of clients or servers but only equal peer nodes that simultaneously function as both "clients" and "servers" to the other nodes on the network. This model of network arrangement differs from the client-server model where communication is usually to and from a central server. A typical example of a file transfer that is not P2P is an FTP server where the client and server programs are quite distinct: the clients initiate the download/uploads, and the servers react to and satisfy these requests.
In contrast to the above discussed pure P2P network, an example of a distributed discussion system that also adopts a client-server model is the Usenet news server system, in which news servers communicate with one another to propagate Usenet news articles over the entire Usenet network. Particularly in the earlier days of Usenet, UUCP was used to extend even beyond the Internet. However, the news server system acted in a client-server form when individual users accessed a local news server to read and post articles. The same consideration applies to SMTP email in the sense that the core email relaying network of Mail transfer agents follows a P2P model while the periphery of e-mail clients and their direct connections is client-server. Tim Berners-Lee's vision for the World Wide Web, as evidenced by his WorldWideWeb editor/browser, was close to a P2P network in that it assumed each user of the web would be an active editor and contributor creating and linking content to form an interlinked "web" of links. This contrasts to the more broadcasting-like structure of the web as it has developed over the years.
Some networks and channels such as Napster, OpenNAP and IRC serving channels use a client-server structure for some tasks (e.g. searching) and a P2P structure for others. Networks such as Gnutella or Freenet use a P2P structure for all purposes, and are sometimes referred to as true P2P networks, although Gnutella is greatly facilitated by directory servers that inform peers of the network addresses of other peers.
P2P architecture embodies one of the key technical concepts of the Internet, described in the first Internet Request for Comments, RFC 1, "Host Software" dated April 7, 1969. More recently, the concept has achieved recognition in the general public in the context of the absence of central indexing servers in architectures used for exchanging multimedia files.
The concept of P2P is increasingly evolving to an expanded usage as the relational dynamic active in distributed networks, i.e. not just computer to computer, but human to human. Yochai Benkler has coined the term commons-based peer production to denote collaborative projects such as free software. Associated with peer production are the concept of peer governance (referring to the manner in which peer production projects are managed) and peer property (referring to the new type of licenses which recognize individual authorship but not exclusive property rights, such as the GNU General Public License and the Creative Commons licenses).




Contents


1 Classifications of P2P networks
2 Advantages of P2P networks
3 Unstructured and structured P2P networks
4 The Chord protocol
5 US legal controversy
6 Computer science perspective
7 Application of P2P network besides file sharing
8 Security

8.1 Anonymity
8.2 Encryption


9 Networks, protocols and applications

9.1 Other types of peer-to-peer applications
9.2 Networks and protocols
9.3 Multi-network applications


10 Social and economic issues
11 History
12 See also
13 References
14 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Classifications of P2P networks
P2P networks can be classified by what they can be used for:

file sharing
telephony
media streaming (audio, video)
discussion forums


Other classification of P2P networks is according to their degree of centralization.
In 'pure' P2P networks:

Peers act as equals, merging the roles of clients and server
There is no central server managing the network
There is no central router

some examples of pure P2P application layer networks designed for file sharing are Gnutella and Freenet.
There also exist countless hybrid P2P systems:

Has a central server that keeps information on peers and responds to requests for that information.
Peers are responsible for hosting available resources (as the central server does not have them), for letting the central server know what resources they want to share, and for making its shareable resources available to peers that request it.
Route terminals are used as addresses, which are referenced by a set of indices to obtain an absolute address.

e.g.

Centralized P2P network such as Napster
Decentralized P2P network such as KaZaA
Structured P2P network such as CAN
Unstructured P2P network such as Gnutella
Hybrid P2P network (Centralized and Decentralized) such as JXTA (an open source P2P protocol specification)


[edit] Advantages of P2P networks
An important goal in P2P networks is that all clients provide resources, including bandwidth, storage space, and computing power. Thus, as nodes arrive and demand on the system increases, the total capacity of the system also increases. This is not true of a client-server architecture with a fixed set of servers, in which adding more clients could mean slower data transfer for all users.
The distributed nature of P2P networks also increases robustness in case of failures by replicating data over multiple peers, and -- in pure P2P systems -- by enabling peers to find the data without relying on a centralized index server. In the latter case, there is no single point of failure in the system.[1]

[edit] Unstructured and structured P2P networks
The P2P overlay network consists of all the participating peers as network nodes. There are links between any two nodes that know each other: i.e. if a participating peer knows the location of another peer in the P2P network, then there is a directed edge from the former node to the latter in the overlay network. Based on how the nodes in the overlay network are linked to each other, we can classify the P2P networks as unstructured or structured.
An unstructured P2P network is formed when the overlay links are established arbitrarily. Such networks can be easily constructed as a new peer that wants to join the network can copy existing links of another node and then form its own links over time. In an unstructured P2P network, if a peer wants to find a desired piece of data in the network, the query has to be flooded through the network to find as many peers as possible that share the data. The main disadvantage with such networks is that the queries may not always be resolved. Popular content is likely to be available at several peers and any peer searching for it is likely to find the same thing. But if a peer is looking for rare data shared by only a few other peers, then it is highly unlikely that search will be successful. Since there is no correlation between a peer and the content managed by it, there is no guarantee that flooding will find a peer that has the desired data. Flooding also causes a high amount of signaling traffic in the network and hence such networks typically have very poor search efficiency. Most of the popular P2P networks are unstructured.
Structured P2P network employ a globally consistent protocol to ensure that any node can efficiently route a search to some peer that has the desired file, even if the file is extremely rare. Such a guarantee necessitates a more structured pattern of overlay links. By far the most common type of structured P2P network is the distributed hash table (DHT), in which a variant of consistent hashing is used to assign ownership of each file to a particular peer, in a way analogous to a traditional hash table's assignment of each key to a particular array slot.

[edit] The Chord protocol
The Chord protocol is one solution for connecting the peers of a P2P network together. Chord consistently maps a key onto a node. Both keys and nodes are assigned an m-bit identifier. This identifier is a hash of the node's IP address. A key's identifier is a hash of the key. There are many other algorithms in use by P2P, but this is a simple and common approach.
A logical ring with positions numbered 0 to 2^(m-1) is formed among nodes. Key k is assigned to node successor(k), which is the node whose identifier is equal to or follows the identifier of k. If there are N nodes and K keys, then each node is responsible for roughly K / N keys.
When the (N+1)th node joins or leaves the network, responsibility for O(K/N) keys changes hands. Each node knows the IP address of its successor. If each node knows the location of its successor, you can perform linear search over the network for a particular key. This is a naive method for searching the network.
A faster search will require each node to keep a "finger table" containing up to m entries. The i(th) entry of node n will contain the address of successor(n + 2i).
The number of node that must be contacted to find a successor in an N-node network is O(log n). Proof: 	Assume node n wants to resolve a query for key k. 	Let p be the node that contains k. 	We will analyze the number of steps to reach p. 	Let i be such that p is in n + 2i − 1, n + 2i. 	Node n will contact the smallest node in this interval; call this node f. 	Fact: f is closer to p than to n. Therefore, in one step, the distance to p decreases by at least half.

[edit] US legal controversy
See also: File sharing and the law
In Sony Corp. v. Universal Studios, 464 U.S. 417 (1984), the Supreme Court found that Sony's new product, the Betamax, did not subject Sony to secondary copyright liability because it was capable of substantial non-infringing uses. Decades later, this case became the jumping-off point for all peer-to-peer copyright infringement litigation.
The first peer-to-peer case was A&M Records v. Napster, 239 F.3d 1004 (9th Cir. 2001). In the Napster case, the 9th Circuit considered whether Napster was liable as a secondary infringer. First, the court considered whether Napster was contributorily liable for copyright infringement. To be found contributorily liable, Napster must have engaged in "personal conduct that encourages or assists the infringement."[2] The court found that Napster was contributorily liable for the copyright infringement of its end-users because it "knowingly encourages and assists the infringement of plaintiffs' copyrights."[3] The court goes on to analyze whether Napster was vicariously liable for copyright infringement. The standard applied by the court is whether Napster "has the right and ability to supervise the infringing activity and also has a direct financial interest in such activities."[4] The court found that Napster did receive a financial benefit, and had the right and ability to supervise the activity, meaning that the plaintiffs demonstrated a likelihood of success on the merits of their claim of vicarious infringement.[5] The court denied all of Napster's defenses, including its claim of fair use.
The next major peer-to-peer case was MGM v. Grokster, 545 U.S. 913 (2005). In this case, the Supreme Court found that even if Grokster was capable of substantial non-infringing uses, which the Sony Court found was enough to relieve one of secondary copyright liability, Grokster was still secondarily liable because it induced its users to infringe.[6]
It is important to note the concept of blame in cases such as these. In a pure P2P network there is no host, but in practice most P2P networks are a hybrid (see "Computer science perspective" below). This has led groups such as the RIAA to file suit against individual users, rather than against companies. The reason that Napster was subject to violation of the law and ultimately lost in court is because Napster was not a pure P2P network but instead maintained central server. This server maintained an index of the files currently available on the network.
Around the world in 2006, an estimated five billion songs, equating to 38,000 years in music were swapped on peer-to-peer websites, while 509 million were purchased online [7].

[edit] Computer science perspective
Technically, a completely pure P2P application must implement only peering protocols that do not recognize the concepts of "server" and "client". Such pure peer applications and networks are rare. Most networks and applications described as P2P actually contain or rely on some non-peer elements, such as DNS. Also, real world applications often use multiple protocols and act as client, server, and peer simultaneously, or over time. Completely decentralized networks of peers have been in use for many years: two examples are Usenet (1979) and WWIVnet (1987).
Many P2P systems use stronger peers (super-peers, super-nodes) as servers and client-peers are connected in a star-like fashion to a single super-peer.
Sun added classes to the Java technology to speed the development of P2P applications quickly in the late 1990s so that developers could build decentralized real time chat applets and applications before Instant Messaging networks were popular. This effort is now being continued with the JXTA project.
P2P systems and applications have attracted a great deal of attention from computer science research; some prominent research projects include the Chord project, the PAST storage utility, the P-Grid, a self-organized and emerging overlay network and the CoopNet content distribution system (see below for external links related to these projects).
Distributed Hash Table (DHT) networks have been widely utilized for accomplishing efficient resource discovery [8] [9] for Grid computing systems, as it aids in resource management and scheduling of applications. Resource discovery activity involve searching for the appropriate resource types that match the user’s application requirements. Recent advances in the domain of decentralized resource discovery have been based on extending the existing DHTs with the capability of multi-dimensional data organization and query routing. Majority of the efforts have looked at embedding spatial database indices such as the Space Filling Curves (SFCs) including the Hilbert curves, Z-curves, k-d tree, MX-CIF Quad tree and R*-tree for managing, routing, and indexing of complex Grid resource query objects over DHT networks. Spatial indices are well suited for handling the complexity of Grid resource queries. Although some spatial indices can have issues as regards to routing load-balance in case of a skewed data set, all the spatial indices are more scalable in terms of the number of hops traversed and messages generated while searching and routing Grid resource queries.

[edit] Application of P2P network besides file sharing

Bioinformatics: P2P networks have also begun to attract attention from scientists in other disciplines, especially those that deal with large datasets such as bioinformatics. P2P networks can be used to run large programs designed to carry out tests to identify drug candidates. The first such program was begun in 2001 the Centre for Computational Drug Discovery at Oxford University in cooperation with the National Foundation for Cancer Research. There are now several similar programs running under the auspices of the United Devices Cancer Research Project.


Academic Search engine: The sciencenet P2P search engine provides a free and open search engine for scientific knowledge. sciencenet is based on yacy technology. Universities / research institutes can download the free java software and contribute with their own peer(s) to the global network. Liebel-Lab @ Karlsruhe institute of technology KIT.


Education and Academia: Due to the fast distribution and large storage space features, many organizations are trying to apply P2P networks for educational and academic purposes. For instance, Pennsylvania State University, MIT and Simon Fraser University are carrying on a project called LionShare designed for facilitating file sharing among educational institutions globally.


Military: The U.S. Department of Defense has already started research on P2P networks as part of its modern network warfare strategy. In November, 2001, Colonel Robert Wardell from the Pentagon told a group of P2P software engineers at a tech conference in Washington, DC: "You have to empower the fringes if you are going to... be able to make decisions faster than the bad guy".[10] Wardell indicated he was looking for P2P experts to join his engineering effort. In May, 2003 Dr. Tether. Director of Defense Advanced Research Project Agency testified that U.S. Military is using P2P networks. Due to security reasons, details are kept classified.


Business: P2P networks have already been used in business areas, but it is still in the beginning stages. Currently, Kato et al’s studies indicate over 200 companies with approximately $400 million USD are investing in P2P network. Besides File Sharing, companies are also interested in Distributing Computing, Content Distribution, e-marketplace, Distributed Search engines, Groupware and Office Automation via P2P networks. There are several reasons why companies prefer P2P sometimes, such as: Server space and bandwidth saving; Real-time collaboration--a server cannot scale well with increasing volume of content; a process which requires strong computing power; a process which needs high-speed communications, etc. At the same time, P2P is not fully used as it still faces a lot of security issues. Several non-profit projects, like many Linux distributions, use P2P to save humongous amounts of bandwidth on downloads as heavy as CDs and DVDs.


TV: Quite a few applications available to delivery TV content over a P2P network (P2PTV)


Telecommunication: Nowadays, people are not just satisfied with “can hear a person from another side of the earth”, instead, the demands of clearer voice in real-time are increasing globally. Just like the TV network, there are already cables in place, and it's not very likely for companies to change all the cables. Many of them turn to use the internet, more specifically P2P networks. For instance, Skype, one of the most widely used internet phone applications is using P2P technology. Furthermore, many research organizations are trying to apply P2P networks to cellular networks.


[edit] Security

[edit] Anonymity
Main article: Anonymous P2P
Some P2P protocols (such as Freenet) attempt to hide the identity of network users by passing all traffic through intermediate nodes.

[edit] Encryption
Some P2P networks encrypt the traffic flows between peers.
This may help to:

make it harder for an ISP to detect that peer-to-peer technology is being used (as some artificially limit bandwidth)
hide the contents of the file from eavesdroppers
impede efforts towards law enforcement or censorship of certain kinds of material
authenticate users and prevent 'man in the middle' attacks on protocols
aid in maintaining anonymity


[edit] Networks, protocols and applications



This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards.



[edit] Other types of peer-to-peer applications

File sharing (using application layer protocols such as BitTorrent)
VoIP (using application layer protocols such as SIP)
Streaming media
Instant messaging and online chat
Software publication and distribution
Media publication and distribution (radio, video)


[edit] Networks and protocols


Network or Protocol
Use
Applications


ANts P2P
File sharing/Software distribution/Media distribution
ANts P2P


Ares
File sharing
Ares Galaxy, Warez P2P, KCeasy


BitTorrent
File sharing/Software distribution/Media distribution
ABC, AllPeers, Vuze (formerly Azureus), BitComet, BitLord, BitTornado, BitTorrent, Burst!, Deluge, FlashGet, G3 Torrent, Halite, KTorrent, LimeWire, MLDonkey, Opera, QTorrent, rTorrent, Shareaza, TorrentFlux, Transmission, Tribler, µTorrent, Xunlei


Direct Connect
File sharing, chat
DC++, NeoModus Direct Connect, SababaDC, BCDC++, RevConnect, fulDC, LDC++, CzDC, McDC++, DCDM++, DDC++, iDC++, IceDC++, Zion++, R2++, rmDC++, LinuxDC++, LanDC++, ApexDC++, StrongDC++


Domain Name System
Internet information retrieval
See Comparison of DNS server software


eDonkey
File sharing
aMule, eDonkey2000 (discontinued), eMule, eMule Plus, FlashGet, iMesh, Jubster, lMule, MLDonkey, Morpheus, Pruna, Shareaza, xMule


FastTrack
File sharing
giFT, Grokster, iMesh (and its variants stripped of adware including iMesh Light), Kazaa (and its variants stripped of adware such as Kazaa Lite), KCeasy, Mammoth, MLDonkey, Poisoned


Freenet
Distributed data store
Entropy (on its own network), Freenet


GNUnet
File sharing, chat
GNUnet, (GNUnet-gtk)


Gnutella
File sharing
Acquisition, BearShare, Cabos, FilesWire, FrostWire, Gnucleus, Grokster, gtk-gnutella, iMesh, Kiwi Alpha, LimeWire, MLDonkey, Morpheus, MP3 Rocket, Poisoned, Shareaza, Swapper, XoloX


Gnutella2
File sharing
Adagio, Gnucleus, Kiwi Alpha, MLDonkey, Morpheus, Shareaza, TrustyFiles


JXTA
Peer applications
Collanos Workplace (Teamwork software), Sixearch


Kad Network
File sharing
aMule, eMule, MLDonkey


Napster
File sharing
Napigator, Napster


OpenNap
File sharing
WinMX, Utatane, XNap, Napster


P2PTV
Video stream or file sharing
TVUPlayer, Joost, CoolStreaming, Cybersky-TV, TVants, PPLive, LiveStation


PDTP
Streaming media or file sharing
PDTP


Peercasting
Multicasting streams
PeerCast, IceShare, FreeCast, Rawflow


Usenet
Distributed discussion
See list of news clients


WWIVnet
Distributed network
See WWIV


WPNP
File sharing
WinMX


Windows Peer-to-Peer
Distributed peer application development, collaboration [11]
Shipped with Advanced Networking Pack for Windows XP [12], Windows XP SP2, Windows Vista. This is a Windows component that runs only over IPv6 and provides a 'meta' peer-to-peer network that applications can utilize. It does not have file sharing support but third-parties can develop one. [11] It also includes the Peer Name Resolution Protocol that allows dynamic domain name publication and resolution of names to endpoints. Windows Meeting Space and the People Near Me feature of Windows Vista use this protocol. It can be used to setup a Windows Internet Computer Name (WICN) using netsh p2p. [13] Remote Assistance and HomeGroup features of Windows 7 also use it. [14]



Other networks: Applejuice, Audiogalaxy, Avalanche, CAKE, Chord, The Circle, Coral, Dijjer, FileTopia, Groove, Hamachi, iFolder, konspire2b, Madster/Aimster, MUTE, NeoRouter, OpenFT, P-Grid, IRC, MojoNation, Mnet, Octoshape, Omemo, Overnet, Peersites, Perfect Dark, Scour, SharingZone, Skype, Solipsis, soribada, Soulseek, SPIN, Swarmcast, WASTE, Winny, Wippien

An earlier generation of peer-to-peer systems were called "metacomputing" or were classed as "middleware". These include: Legion, Globus

[edit] Multi-network applications
Main article: Comparison of file sharing applications


Applications
Network or Protocol
Operating systems
License


aMule
eDonkey network, Kad network
Cross-platform
GPL


DC++
BCDC++
Windows
GPL


eMule
eDonkey network, Kad network
Windows
GPL


FilesWire
Gnutella, G3
Cross Platform
Proprietary


giFT
eDonkey network, FastTrack, Gnutella
Cross-platform
GPL


Gnucleus
Gnutella, Gnutella2
Windows
GPL


gtk-gnutella
Gnutella
Linux
GPL


iMesh
FastTrack, eDonkey network, Gnutella, Gnutella2 (All Prior to Version 6.0 Only)
Windows
Proprietary


KCeasy
Ares, FastTrack, Gnutella, OpenFT
Windows
GPL


Kiwi Alpha
Gnutella, Gnutella2
Windows
Proprietary


MLDonkey
BitTorrent, Direct Connect, eDonkey network, FastTrack, Kad Network, OpenNap, SoulSeek, HTTP/FTP
Cross-platform
GPL


Morpheus
Gnutella, Gnutella2, BitTorrent
Windows
Proprietary


Shareaza
Gnutella, Gnutella2, eDonkey, BitTorrent, HTTP/FTP
Windows
GPL


Vagaa
BitTorrent, eDonkey, Kad
Windows
Proprietary


WinMX
WPNP, OpenNap
Windows
Proprietary


Zultrax
Gnutella, ZEPP
Windows
Proprietary


JMule
eDonkey network
Cross-platform
GPL



[edit] Social and economic issues
Some researchers have explored the benefits of enabling virtual communities to self-organize and introduce incentives as a resource sharing and cooperation, arguing that what is missing from today's peer-to-peer systems, should be seen both as a goal and a means for self-organized virtual communities to be built and fostered[15]. Ongoing research efforts for designing effective incentive mechanisms in P2P systems, based on principles from game theory are beginning to take on a more psychological and information processing direction.

[edit] History

Dec, 1987: creation of WWIVnet
July, 1999: publication of Freenet protocol
September, 1999: creation of Napster
November, 1999: first release of Direct Connect client
March 14, 2000: first release of Gnutella
September 6, 2000: first release of eDonkey2000
November, 2000: Kontiki founded, design of the Kontiki protocol
March, 2001: introduction of the FastTrack protocol
April, 2001: design of the BitTorrent protocol
May, 2001: first release of WinMX Peer Network Protocol
July, 2001: shutdown of Napster
November 6, 2001: first release of GNUnet
March, 2002: publication of the Kademlia DHT
November, 2002: start of the Gnutella2 project
August, 2007: the P4P working group is formed


[edit] See also


Ad-hoc network Nono es tonto
Ambient network
Anonymous P2P
Byzantine Fault Tolerance
Client-server
Comparison of P2P applications
Compulsory license
Computer cluster
Decentralized computing
Distributed hash table
File sharing
Friend-to-friend (or F2F)
Friend-to-friend with third party storage
Grid computing
Mobile VoIP
MP3 Rocket
Overlay network
Phynd
Private P2P
Servent
Swarm intelligence
P2P-Next
Peer-to-peer renting
DUNDi
Mesh networking



[edit] References


^ Advantages of peer-to-peer networks
^ A&M Records v. Napster, Inc., 239 F.3d 1004, 1019 (9th Cir. 2001) citing Matthew Bender & Co. v. West Publ'g Co., 158 F.3d 693, 706 (2d Cir. 1998)
^ Napster, at 1020.
^ Napster, at 1022, citing Gershwin Publ'g Corp. v. Columbia Artists Mgmt., Inc, 443 F.2d 1159, 1162 (2d Cir. 1971.
^ Napster, at 1024.
^ MGM v. Grokster, 514 U.S. 913, 940 (2005).
^ June 2008, The Tables Have Turned: Rock Stars – Not Record Labels – Cashing In On Digital Revolution, IBISWorld
^ Rajiv Ranjan, Aaron Harwood, and Rajkumar Buyya, [http://www.cs.mu.oz.au/%7Erranjan/pgrid.pdf Peer-to-Peer Based Discovery of Grid Resource
^ Rajiv Ranjan, Lipo Chan, Aaron Harwood, Shanika Karunasekera, Rajkumar Buyya Decentralised Resource Discovery Service for Large Scale Federated Grids
^ Walker, Leslie. Uncle Sam Wants Napster! The Washington Post, November 8, 2001
^ a b Windows Peer-to-peer SDK FAQ
^ Overview of the Advanced Networking Pack for Windows XP
^ Windows Peer-to-Peer Networking
^ Peer-To-Peer based Features in Win 7
^ Antoniadis, P. & Le Grand, B. (2007). Incentives for resource sharing in self-organized communities: From economics to social psychology. Digital Information Management, 2007. ICDIM '07



[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: P2P 



Glossary of P2P terminology
Foundation of Peer-to-Peer Computing, Special Issue, Elsevier Journal of Computer Communication, (Ed) Javed I. Khan and Adam Wierzbicki, Volume 31, Issue 2, February 2008
Ross J. Anderson. The eternity service. In Pragocrypt 1996, 1996.


Marling Engle & J. I. Khan. Vulnerabilities of P2P systems and a critical look at their solutions, May 2006


Stephanos Androutsellis-Theotokis and Diomidis Spinellis. A survey of peer-to-peer content distribution technologies. ACM Computing Surveys, 36(4):335–371, December 2004.


Biddle, Peter, Paul England, Marcus Peinado, and Bryan Willman, The Darknet and the Future of Content Distribution. In 2002 ACM Workshop on Digital Rights Management, November 2002.


John F. Buford, Heather Yu, Eng Keong Lua P2P Networking and Applications. ISBN 30-12374-214-5, Morgan Kaufmann, December 2008


Detlef Schoder and Kai Fischbach, Core Concepts in Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Networking. In: Subramanian, R.; Goodman, B. (eds.): P2P Computing: The Evolution of a Disruptive Technology, Idea Group Inc, Hershey. 2005


Ralf Steinmetz, Klaus Wehrle (Eds). Peer-to-Peer Systems and Applications. ISBN 3-540-29192-X, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Volume 3485, September 2005.


Ramesh Subramanian and Brian Goodman (eds), Peer-to-Peer Computing: Evolution of a Disruptive Technology, ISBN 1-59140-429-0, Idea Group Inc., Hershey, PA, USA, 2005.


Shuman Ghosemajumder. Advanced Peer-Based Technology Business Models. MIT Sloan School of Management, 2002.


Silverthorne, Sean. Music Downloads: Pirates- or Customers?. Harvard Business School Working Knowledge, 2004.




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peer-to-peer"
Categories: Business law | File sharing networks | Distributed data sharing | Electronic commerceHidden categories: Cleanup from October 2007 | All pages needing cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Български
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Galego
한국어
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Magyar
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Shqip
Slovenčina
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Українська
ייִדיש
中文
हिन्दी









 This page was last modified on 29 March 2009, at 14:35 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
