













Nation of Islam - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Nation_of_Islam";
		var wgTitle = "Nation of Islam";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "21709";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 283073321;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Nation of Islam

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article contains too many quotations for an encyclopedic entry. Please help improve the article by removing excessive quotations or transferring them to Wikiquote. Help is available. (June 2008)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2007)




Part of a series on
Nation of Islam






Famous leaders
Wallace Fard Muhammad · Elijah Muhammad · Malcolm X · Warith Deen Mohammed · Louis Farrakhan

History and beliefs
Saviours' Day · Nation of Islam and antisemitism · Tribe of Shabazz · Yakub · Million Man March

Publications
The Final Call · How to Eat to Live · Message to the Blackman in America · Muhammad Speaks

Subsidiaries and offshoots
American Society of Muslims · Fruit of Islam · The Nation of Gods and Earths · New Black Panther Party · United Nation of Islam · Your Black Muslim Bakery




This box: view • talk • edit



The Nation of Islam (NOI) (Arabic: أمة الإسلام‎, Ummat al-Islāmu) is a religious group founded in Detroit, Michigan, United States by Master Wallace D. Fard Muhammad in July 1930 with the self-proclaimed goal of resurrecting the spiritual, mental, social, and economic condition of the black men and women of America. NOI also promotes the belief that God will bring about a universal government of peace.[1]
From 1978 to the present, Louis Farrakhan has been the leader of a reconstituted Nation of Islam, the original organization having been renamed and dissolved by Warith Deen Muhammad. The Nation of Islam's National Center and headquarters is located in Chicago, Illinois, and is also home to its flagship Mosque No. 2, Mosque Maryam.
As of 2005, the Nation of Islam was included in the Southern Poverty Law Center's list of active hate groups in the United States.[2]




Contents


1 History
2 Beliefs and theology

2.1 Official Platform
2.2 Cosmology
2.3 Black experience of slavery was Bible prophecy
2.4 Separatism
2.5 Teachings on race
2.6 The Mother Plane and Ezekiel's Wheel
2.7 Criticisms
2.8 Legend of the 1975 death of Elijah Muhammad


3 Antisemitism
4 Comparison with traditional Islam
5 Actions and programs
6 Noted current and former members and associates of Nation of Islam
7 In Popular Culture
8 See also
9 Audio/video webcasts
10 References
11 External links

11.1 Nation of Islam Links
11.2 Non-NOI Muslims







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History




Elijah Muhammad standing behind microphones at podium






Current Nation of Islam leader Louis Farrakhan


Main article: History of the Nation of Islam
The original Nation of Islam was founded in Detroit, Michigan in 1930 by Wallace Fard Muhammad also known as Master W. D. Fard Muhammad (1877-1934 or later). The Nation of Islam teaches that W. Fard Muhammad is both the "Messiah" of Christianity and the Mahdi of Islam. One of Fard's first disciples was Elijah Muhammad (1897-1975), who led the organization from 1935 through 1975. [1]
By the time Elijah Muhammad died in 1975, there were 75 centers across America. [3] In 1975, Warith Deen Mohammed or W.D. (Wallace) Muhammad was installed as Supreme Minister of the Nation of Islam. Thereupon he renamed the organization "The World Community of Al-Islam in the West" which later became the American Society of Muslims and shunned his father's theology and black separatist views, and accepted whites as fellow worshipers and forged closer ties with mainstream Muslim communities in an attempt to bring the Nation of Islam closer into Sunni Islam.

[edit] Beliefs and theology









African American topics


 


African American history


Atlantic slave trade · Maafa
Slavery in the United States
African American military history
Jim Crow laws · Redlining
Civil Rights Movements 1896–1954 and
1955–1968
Afrocentrism · Reparations


African American culture


African American studies
Neighborhoods · Juneteenth
Kwanzaa · Art · Museums
Dance · Literature · Music


Religion


Black church · Black theology
Black liberation theology
Doctrine of Father Divine
Black Hebrew Israelites
Nation of Islam · Rastafari


Political movements


Pan-Africanism · Black Power
Nationalism · Capitalism
Conservatism · Populism
Leftism · Black Panther Party
Garveyism


Civic and economic groups


NAACP · SCLC · CORE · SNCC · NUL
Rights groups · ASALH · UNCF
NBCC · NPHC · The Links · NCNW


Sports


Negro league baseball
CIAA · SIAC · MEAC · SWAC


Ethnic sub-divisions


Black Indians · Gullah


Languages


English · Gullah · Creole
African American Vernacular


Diaspora


Liberia · Nova Scotia · France
Sierra Leone · United Kingdom


Lists


African Americans
African-American firsts
First mayors · US state firsts
Landmark legislation
Related topics
Black and African people


Category · Portal



This box: view • talk • edit



Main article: Beliefs and theology of the Nation of Islam
The main belief of The Nation of Islam and its followers is that there is no other God but Allah. However, they redefine "Allah" by saying "who came in the person of W. D. Fard." Fard founded the Nation of Islam and subsequently installed Elijah Muhammad as the organization's leader. Their teachings are heretical by traditional Islamic standards which abhor the deification of any person, or the anthropomorphization of God.
The official beliefs of the Nation of Islam have been outlined in books, documents, and articles published by the organization as well as speeches by Elijah Muhammad, Malcolm X, Louis Farrakhan, and other ministers. Many of Elijah Muhammad's teachings may be found in Message to the Blackman in America and The True History of Jesus as Taught by the Honorable Elijah Muhammad [4]. Many of Malcolm X's teachings of NOI theology are in his The End of White World Supremacy, while a later more critical discussion of those beliefs can be found in The Autobiography of Malcolm X, co-written with Alex Haley.
Passed down via written lessons from 1930-1934 from W. Fard Muhammad to his student, Elijah Muhammad, referred to and titled, The Supreme Wisdom the Nation of Islam continues to teach its followers that the present world society is segmented into three distinct categories. They teach that from a general perspective, 85% of the world's people of all races and faiths are the deaf, dumb and blind masses of the people who are easily led in the wrong direction and hard to lead in the right direction. These 85% of the masses are said to be manipulated by 10% of the people who are referred to as the rich slave-makers of the masses of the people. Those 10% rich slave-makers are said to manipulate the 85% masses of the people through ignorance, the skillful use of religious doctrine and the mass media.
The third group referred to as the 5% poor righteous teachers of the people of the world who know the truth of the manipulation of the 85% masses of the people by the 10% and that 5% righteous teachers are at constant struggle and war with 10% to reach and free the minds of the masses of the people. [5]

[edit] Official Platform
An official Nation of Islam platform referred to as "The Muslim Program" was written by Elijah Muhammad in his book Message to the Blackman in America, published in 1965. The itemized platform contains two sections; What The Muslims Want consisting of 10 points and What The Muslims Believe consisting of 12 points. [6]

[edit] Cosmology
The NOI teaches that the Earth and Moon were once the same, and that the Earth is over 76 trillion years old.[7] The entire land mass on the Earth was called "Asia". This was, Elijah Muhammad claims, long before Adam.[8]

[edit] Black experience of slavery was Bible prophecy






Part of a series on 
Islam



Beliefs



Allah · Oneness of God
Muhammad · Other prophets



Practices



Profession of faith · Prayer
Fasting · Charity · Pilgrimage




Texts and laws




Qur'an · Sunnah · Hadith
Fiqh · Sharia · Kalam · Sufism




History and leadership




Timeline of Muslim history
Ahl al-Bayt · Sahaba
Sunni · Shi'a
Rashidun · Shi'a imams




Culture and society




Academics · Animals · Art
Calendar · Children
Demographics · Festivals
Mosques · Philosophy
Science · Women
Politics · Dawah




Islam and other religions




Christianity · Judaism
Hinduism · Sikhism · Jainism




See also




Criticism · Islamophobia
Glossary of Islamic terms




Islam portal
 v • d • e 






The NOI teaches that black people constitute a nation and that through the institution of the Atlantic slave trade they were systematically denied knowledge of their past history, language, culture, and religion and, in effect, lost control of their lives. Central to this doctrine, NOI theology asserts that black people’s experience of slavery was the fulfillment of Bible prophecy and therefore, black people are the seed of Abraham referred to in the Bible, in Genesis 15:13–14:


And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years; And also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they come out with great substance.

—King James Version


[edit] Separatism
In an April 13, 1997 interview on NBC's Meet the Press, Louis Farrakhan was asked by Tim Russert to explain the Nation of Islam's view on separation:


"Tim Russert: Once a week, on the back page [of your newspaper] is The Muslim Program, "What the Muslims Want," [written in 1965]. The first is in terms of territory, "Since we cannot get along with them in peace and equality, we believe our contributions to this land and the suffering forced upon us by white America justifies our demand for complete separation in a state or territory of our own." Is that your view in 1997, a separate state for Black Americans?"
"Minister Louis Farrakhan: First, the program starts with number one. That is number four. The first part of that program is that we want freedom, a full and complete freedom. The second is, we want justice. We want equal justice under the law, and we want justice applied equally to all, regardless of race or class or color. And the third is that we want equality. We want equal membership in society with the best in civilized society. If we can get that within the political, economic, social system of America, there's no need for point number four. But if we cannot get along in peace after giving America 400 years of our service and sweat and labor, then, of course, separation would be the solution to our race problem." [9]



[edit] Teachings on race
The Nation of Islam teaches that Black people were the original humans. Louis Farrakhan has stated that "White people are potential humans…they haven’t evolved yet." [10] However, Farrakhan further expounded by saying, "If you look at the human family — now, I'm talking about black, brown, red, yellow and white — we all seem to be frozen on a subhuman level of existence. In Islam and, I believe, in Christian theology and Jewish theology as well, there are three stages of human development. The first stage is called the animalistic stage of development. But when we submit to animal passions, then we can do evil things to one another in that animalistic stage of development. But when moral consciousness comes and we have a self-accusing spirit, it is then that we become human beings. Right now, we have the potential for humanity, but we have not reached that potential, because we are functioning on the animalistic plane of existence." [11]


"The Blackman is the original man. From him came all brown, yellow, red, and white people. By using a special method of birth control law, the Blackman was able to produce the white race. This method of birth control was developed by a Black scientist known as Yakub, who envisioned making and teaching a nation of people who would be diametrically opposed to the Original People. A Race of people who would one day rule the original people and the earth for a period of 6,000 years. Yakub promised his followers that he would graft a nation from his own people, and he would teach them how to rule his people, through a system of tricks and lies whereby they use deceit to divide and conquer, and break the unity of the darker people, put one brother against another, and then act as mediators and rule both sides." [12]


In an interview on NBC's Meet the Press, Louis Farrakhan said the following in response to host Tim Russert's question on the Nation of Islam's teachings on race:


"You know, it’s not unreal to believe that white people — who genetically cannot produce yellow, brown or black — had a Black origin. The scholars and scientists of this world agree that the origin of man and humankind started in Africa and that the first parent of the world was black. The Qur'an says that God created Adam out of black mud and fashioned him into shape. So if white people came from the original people, the Black people, what is the process by which you came to life? That is not a silly question. That is a scientific question with a scientific answer. It doesn't suggest that we are superior or that you are inferior. It suggests, however, that your birth or your origin is from the black people of this earth: superiority and inferiority is determined by our righteousness and not by our color."[9]






Meeting where Elijah Muhammad addresses followers


Pressed by Russert on whether he agreed with Elijah Muhammad's preaching that whites are blue-eyed devils, Farrakhan responded:


"Well, you have not been saints in the way you have acted toward the darker peoples of the world and toward even your own people. But, in truth, Mr. Russert, any human being who gives themself over to the doing of evil could be considered a devil. In the Bible, in the Book of Revelation, it talks about the fall of Babylon. It says Babylon is fallen because she has become the habitation of devils. We believe that that ancient Babylon is a symbol of a modern Babylon, which is America."


While Malcolm X was a member of the Nation of Islam, he preached that black people were genetically superior to white people but were dominated by a system of white supremacy.


Thoughtful white people know they are inferior to Black people. Even [Senator James] Eastland knows it. Anyone who has studied the genetic phase of biology knows that white is considered recessive and black is considered dominant. ..The entire American economy is based on white supremacy. Even the religious philosophies, in essence, white supremacy. A white Jesus. A white Virgin. White angels. White everything. But a black Devil, of course. The "Uncle Sam" political foundation is based on white supremacy, relegating nonwhites to second−class citizenship. It goes without saying that the social philosophy is strictly white supremacist. And the educational system perpetuates white supremacy.[13]


The Nation of Islam teaches that intermarriage or race mixing should be prohibited. This is point 10 of the official platform, "What the Muslims Want" published 1965.

[edit] The Mother Plane and Ezekiel's Wheel
Elijah Muhammad taught his followers about a Mother Plane or Wheel, a UFO that was seen and described in the visions of the prophet Ezekiel in the Book of Ezekiel, in the Hebrew Bible.


Now as I looked at the living creatures, I saw a wheel on the earth beside the living creatures, one for each of the four of them. As for the appearance of the wheels and their construction: their appearance was like the gleaming of beryl. And the four had the same likeness, their appearance and construction being as it were a wheel within a wheel. When they went, they went in any of their four directions without turning as they went. And their rims were tall and awesome, and the rims of all four were full of eyes all around.

—Book of Ezekiel Chapter 1:15-18, Bible, English Standard Version

Louis Farrakhan, commenting on his teacher's description said the following:


The Honorable Elijah Muhammad told us of a giant Mother Plane that is made like the universe, spheres within spheres. White people call them unidentified flying objects (UFOs). Ezekiel, in the Old Testament, saw a wheel that looked like a cloud by day but a pillar of fire by night. The Honorable Elijah Muhammad said that that wheel was built on the island of Nippon, which is now called Japan, by some of the Original scientists. It took $15 billion in gold at that time to build it. It is made of the toughest steel. America does not yet know the composition of the steel used to make an instrument like it. It is a circular plane, and the Bible says that it never makes turns. Because of its circular nature it can stop and travel in all directions at speeds of thousands of miles per hour. He said there are 1,500 small wheels in this Mother Wheel, which is a half mile by a half mile (800 m by 800 m). This Mother Wheel is like a small human-built planet. Each one of these small planes carry three bombs.
The Honorable Elijah Muhammad said these planes were used to set up mountains on the earth. The Qur'an says it like this: We have raised mountains on the earth lest it convulse with you. How do you raise a mountain, and what is the purpose of a mountain? Have you ever tried to balance a tire? You use weights to keep the tire balanced. That's how the earth is balanced, with mountain ranges. The Honorable Elijah Muhammad said that we have a type of bomb that, when it strikes the earth a drill on it is timed to go into the earth and explode at the height that you wish the mountain to be. If you wish to take the mountain up a mile (1.6 km), you time the drill to go a mile (1.6 km) in and then explode. The bombs these planes have are timed to go one mile (1.6 km) down and bring up a mountain one mile (1.6 km) high, but it will destroy everything within a 50-square-mile (130 km²) radius. The white man writes in his above top secret memos of the UFOs. He sees them around his military installations like they are spying.
That Mother Wheel is a dreadful-looking thing. White folks are making movies now to make these planes look like fiction, but it is based on something real. The Honorable Elijah Muhammad said that Mother Plane is so powerful that with sound reverberating in the atmosphere, just with a sound, she can crumble buildings.

—Minister Louis Farrakhan, The Divine Destruction of America: Can She Avert It?[14]


[edit] Criticisms
The first book analyzing the Nation of Islam was The Black Muslims in America (1961) by C. Eric Lincoln. Lincoln describes the use of doctrines during religious services.


Often the minister reads passages from well-known historical, sociological, or anthropological works, and finds in them inconspicuous references to the Blackman’s true history in the world.... Occasionally the minister chides the audience for its skepticism: “I know you don't believe me because I happen to be a Black man. Well, you can look it up in a book I’m going to tell you about that was written by a white man.” He then reads off references that his hearers are challenged to check.



[edit] Legend of the 1975 death of Elijah Muhammad
Members of The Nation of Islam have long held that Elijah Muhammad did not die, but instead escaped a death plot, was restored to health, and is aboard “that huge wheel-like plane that is even now flying over our heads.” Among Muhammad's passengers on the Mother Wheel is the mysterious figure named W.D. Fard.[15]

[edit] Antisemitism
Main article: Nation of Islam and antisemitism
A number of Jewish organizations, Christian organizations, and academics consider the Nation of Islam to be antisemitic. Professor David W. Leinweber, Ph.D. of Emory University asserts that the Nation Of Islam has engaged in revisionist and antisemitic interpretations of the Holocaust and that they exaggerate the role of Jews in the trans-Atlantic slave trade.[16]
The Anti-Defamation League (ADL) alleges that NOI Health Minister, Abdul Alim Muhammad, has accused Jewish doctors of injecting Blacks with the AIDS virus,[17] an allegation that Dr. Abdul Alim Muhammad has denied.
The Nation of Islam has repeatedly denied charges of anti-Semitism,[18] and NOI leader Minister Louis Farrakhan has stated, "The ADL .. uses the term 'anti-Semitism' to stifle all criticism of Zionism and the Zionist policies of the State of Israel and also to stifle all legitimate criticism of the errant behavior of some Jewish people toward the non-Jewish population of the earth."[19]
Responding to the widely reported assertion that he referred to Judaism as a dirty and "gutter religion", Farrakhan wrote a June 18 1997 letter to a former Wall Street Journal associate editor, Jude Wanniski, stating in part:

Countless times over the years I have explained that I never referred to Judaism as a dirty religion, but, clearly referred to the machinations of those who hide behind the shield of Judaism while using unjust political means to achieve their objectives. This was distilled in the New York tabloids and other media saying, "Farrakhan calls Judaism a gutter religion." As a Muslim, I revere Abraham, Moses, and all the Prophets who Allah (God) sent to the children of Israel. I believe in the scriptures brought by these Prophets and the Laws of Allah (God) as expressed in the Torah. I would never refer to the Revealed Word of Allah (God) -- the basis of Jewish Faith -- as "dirty" or "gutter." You know, Jude, as well as I, that the Revealed Word of Allah (God) comes as a Message from Allah (God) to purify us from our evil that has divided us and caused us to fall into the gutter. Over the centuries, the evils of Christians, Jews and Muslims have dirtied their respective religions. True Faith in the laws and Teaching of Abraham, Jesus and Muhammad is not dirty, but, practices in the name of these religions can be unclean and can cause people to look upon the misrepresented religion as being unclean.[20]

Jude Wanniski also defended the Nation of Islam against charges of racism and anti-Semitism, writing, "I've met dozens of men and women who belong to the Nation of Islam, attended many of their conferences, and prayed with them in their Chicago mosque to the God of Abraham, Moses, Jesus and Mohammed. I've concluded beyond any reasonable doubt that there is not an ounce of anti-Semitism or bigotry in Farrakhan."[21]
The Nation of Islam has had friendly relations with the Neturei Karta, a small, controversial Jewish group that is well-known for its association with and support for anti-Zionists. Neturei Karta stressed that NOI leader, "Minister Louis Farrakhan is an extraordinary force for good in the Black community. His followers are responsible, industrious, modest and moral. And for this he and they have our respect."[22]
In a letter responding to ADL Director Abraham Foxman's insistence that black leaders distance themselves from the Nation of Islam, hip hop mogul Russell Simmons wrote, "Simply put, you are misguided, arrogant, and very disrespectful of African Americans and most importantly your statements will unintentionally or intentionally lead to a negative impression of Jews in the minds of millions of African Americans", he continued, "For over 50 years, Minister Farrakhan has labored to resurrect the downtrodden masses of African Americans up out of poverty and self-destruction" and indicated that he had personally witnessed Farrakhan affirm, 'A Muslim can not hate a Jew. We are all members of the family of Abraham and all of us should maintain dialogue and mutual respect.'" [23]

[edit] Comparison with traditional Islam
The Nation of Islam preaches adherence to the Five Pillars of the Islamic Faith: shahadah, or profession of faith; salat, or prayer, five times daily facing toward Mecca; zakat, charity to the poor; sawm, fasting during the holy month of Ramadan; and hajj, a pilgrimage to Mecca required of every Muslim financially and physically able to go, at least once in his or her lifetime. The NOI also teaches morality and personal decorum, emphasizing modesty, mutual respect, and discipline in dress and comportment. NOI adherents do not consume pork, frown upon the consumption of alcohol, drugs, and tobacco, and stress a healthy diet and physical fitness. However, the Nation of Islam argues that because of the unique experience of the oppression and degradation of slavery, Elijah Muhammad used unique methods for introducing Islam to his people. Traditional Islamic beliefs however, stand in stark opposition to the entire theological and creedal foundation of the Nation of Islam.[24]




A little mosque of Nation of Islam in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, United States, 2005.


Other doctrines of the Nation of Islam are disputed, specifically:

God's incarnation

NOI teaches that "Allah (God) appeared in the Person of Master W. Fard Muhammad, July 1930; the long-awaited Messiah of the Christians and the Mahdi of the Muslims.
Traditional Sunni and Shi'a Muslim doctrine is that it is heretical and blasphemous to believe that God would manifest Himself in human form (or any material form). Likening any individual(s) to God is a form of shirk—a major sin in Islam.[25]




Relations with whites

NOI teaches that the Black man is the original man, and from him came all brown, yellow, and white people. By using a special method of birth control law, the Blackman was able to produce the white race.[12]
Traditional Islam teaches that all races are equal. One of the influences in Malcolm X's decision to leave NOI and join traditional Islam was witnessing this equality of races during the Hajj (pilgrimage in Makkah). Islam recognizes the Biblical and Qur’anic figure, the patriarch Jacob, but this Jacob is viewed by Muslims as a prophet, and is not connected to the Yakub of the NOI. Traditional Islam does not teach of the Yakub featured in Nation of Islam theology.




Perspectives on the Quran.

The vast majority of Muslims, worldwide, believe that it was Allah's final revelation to mankind and that it was given to the Islamic prophet Muhammad between the years of 610 and 632. The NOI states that they believe in the Qur'an and the writings of all the prophets of God.[26]




Status of the Islamic prophet Muhammad vs. other prophets.

Mainstream Islam teaches that Muhammad was the last of the messengers that Allah has sent to mankind--there would be no more, and the one for all to follow. The Nation of Islam believes that Elijah Muhammad was also a messenger and was taught by God Himself (W. D. Fard).[27]




Practice of Friday prayers:

For decades the Nation of Islam ignored the Jumuah, a pillar of practice for Muslims. This was changed in 2002, when W. Deen Mohammed, an orthodox Muslim opposed to black separatism, delivered the Friday sermon at the Los Angeles Convention Center.[28]




[edit] Actions and programs




NOI preacher in 1999, in England.






A Nation of Islam member sells copies of the Final Call newspaper and what looks to be assorted oils and perfumes.


The NOI has a do-for-self philosophy that resulted in the NOI owning and operating hundreds of businesses nationwide, employing thousands of people. The NOI has purchased and now operates food-industry services, bakeries, and restaurants. It owns a large amount of farmland in Georgia. It owns and operates hair-care shops. Some of these business ventures have been success stories. Others have been criticized as Amway-style marketing schemes that have not benefited most of their employees.
The NOI has worked to clean up drug addicts, reform prostitutes, and keep black youth out of gangs. It has helped some newly released ex-convicts make a new start and stay out of jail.
In The Fire Next Time, James Baldwin wrote:


“
Elijah Muhammad has been able to do what generations of welfare workers and committees and resolutions and reports and housing projects and playgrounds have failed to do: to heal and redeem drunkards and junkies, to convert people who have come out of prison and to keep them out, to make men chaste and women virtuous, and to invest both the male and the female with pride and a serenity that hang about them like an unfailing light. He has done all these things, which our Christian church has spectacularly failed to do. (James Baldwin, The Fire Next Time, New York: Vintage International/Random House, 1963)
”


During the 1980s when crack cocaine became very common, the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development employed several private firms run by members of the Nation of Islam to provide security in housing projects in black neighborhoods. The Anti-Defamation League was successful in its controversial lobbying of Congress to sever the HUD contracts [29].

[edit] Noted current and former members and associates of Nation of Islam

Elijah Muhammad
Louis Farrakhan
Malcolm X - Later converted to mainstream Islam
Muhammad Ali - Later converted to mainstream Sunni Islam
Benjamin Chavis Muhammad
Betty Shabazz - Later converted to mainstream Islam
Khadijah Farrakhan
Ice Cube - Was associated with the Nation of Islam, but never a regular member.[30]
MC Ren - Later converted to mainstream Islam
Busta Rhymes
Kam (rapper)
John Allen Muhammad - The Beltway Sniper, Gulf war veteran, former NOI member [31]
Mohamed-rashid Abdulle - Spokesperson of the Nation of Islam until 1993
Warith Deen Mohammed
Snoop Dogg[32]


[edit] In Popular Culture

In Showtime's Weeds, Heylia falls for Nation of Islam member Joseph. She later uses the religion as a cover for her drug trafficking when she is tipped off about a DEA drug raid in her home.
In HBO's The Wire, contract killer Brother Mouzone is a devout member of the Nation of Islam, expresses black nationalist sentiments, and dresses in a style very similar to dress of common NOI men.
In Jeffrey Eugenides novel Middlesex, the character Desdemona is employed as a silk maker at NOI's Mosque Number 1 in Detroit.


[edit] See also

Black separatism
Black supremacy
The Final Call
Fruit of Islam (FOI)
History of the Nation of Islam
Islam in the African diaspora
List of topics related to Black and African people
Moorish Science Temple of America
Muslim Girls Training (MGT)
The Nation of Gods and Earths
Nation of Islam and antisemitism
Zebra Murders


[edit] Audio/video webcasts

Saviours' Day 2007 Webcast: 'One Nation Under God' by Minister Louis Farrakhan, Feb. 25, 2007
Messenger Elijah Muhammad's Theology of Time Lecture Series
Messenger Elijah Muhammad's Classic Lectures
Mr. Muhammad Speaks Radio Broadcasts
Messenger Muhammad's Saviour's Day and other Historic Videos
March, 2006 Havana, Cuba Press Conference
Let us make man
BBC Video
May, 2004 National Press Club Press Conference (Nation of Islam's Position on Iraq and the "War on Terror")
Millions More Movement (FOX News Interview)
Nation of Islam's Position On the Murder of Malcolm X
Malcolm X Reloaded: Who Really Assassinated Malcolm X


[edit] References


^ The Emergence of Islam in the African-American Community, http://www.islamfortoday.com/africanamerican02.htm
^ "Active U.S. Hate Groups in 2006". Southern Poverty Law Center. http://www.splcenter.org/intel/map/hate.jsp?T=32&m=5. Retrieved on 2007-09-15. 
^ Muhammad's Temple of Islam, Information taken from the October 4, 1974 edition of Muhammad Speaks Newspaper
^ Chicago: Coalition for the Remembrance of Elijah Muhammad, 1992
^ Assignment of Mr. Elijah Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom, February 20, 1934; Power at Last Forever, Minister Louis Farrakhan, Madison Square Garden, New York, October, 1985
^ "The Muslim Program". The Nation of Islam. http://www.noi.org/muslim_program.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-22. 
^ Elijah Muhammad's 1961 "Atlanta Speech", quoted in Louis E. Lomax's When The Word Is Given...
^ Message to the Blackman, Elijah Muhammad, 1965]
^ a b http://www.finalcall.com/national/mlf-mtp5-13-97.html FCN/NBC, 1997
^ Philadelphia Inquirer, 3/18/00
^ Million Family March Transcript, 10/16/00
^ a b Elijah Muhammad|Message to the Blackman in America, Muhammad's Temple No. 2, 1965 & Dorothy Blake Fardan, Yakub and the Origins of White Supremacy, Lushena Books, 2001
^ Malcolm X The Playboy Interview: Malcolm X, interviewed by Alex Haley, Playboy Magazine, May 1963
^ FCN, 1996
^ Mattias Gardell. 1996. In the Name of Elijah Muhammad: Louis Farrakhan and The Nation of Islam. Duke University Press.
^ H-ANTISEMITISM OCCASIONAL PAPERS, NO. 1M
^ Nation of Islam
^ Farrakhan and the Jewish Rift; A Historic Reference
^ The Final Call, February 16, 1994
^ "Judaism a Gutter Religion" - Farrakhan rebuts canard
^ Memo, 10-28-98, Fire Abe Foxman!
^ Letter to Journal News 12/31/99
^ Hip Hop Summit Action Network Press Release, May 9, 2005http://www.millionsmoremovement.com/news/russell-simmons05-09-2005.htm
^ The Religion of Islam and the Nation of Islam: What is the Difference?, Mustafa El-Amin, El-Amin Productions, Newark, N.J., 1991
^ Philips, Abu Ameenah Bilal. The Fundamentals of Tawheed (Islamic Monotheism). Al-Hidaayah. ISBN 1898649405. 
^ NOI.org: The Official Website for The Nation of Islam
^ http://www.religiousmovements.lib.virginia.edu/nrms/Nofislam.html.com
^ Daniel Wood. "America's black Muslims close a rift". CSMonitor. http://www.csmonitor.com/2002/0214/p03s01-ussc.html. 
^ Memo, 3-3-98; And Then There Were None
^ Chillin' with Cube | Film | The Guardian
^ Minister Louis Farrakhan addresses sniper arrest
^ "Snoop Dogg appears at Nation of Islam convention." PeoplePC News. Accessed on March 1, 2009.


30. ^http://www.ccky.org/PDF%20Files/prison/Nation%20of%20Islam.pdf

[edit] External links





This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links.



[edit] Nation of Islam Links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Nation of Islam



Official Website The Nation of Islam (N.O.I.)
Official Website The Nation of Islam of Canada (N.O.I.C.)
Nation of Islam affiliated Final Call Newspaper website
The New Nation of Islam Website, not affiliated with the 'Nation of Islam' under Louis Farrakhan
Nation de Islam, Paris, France (Français)
Seventhfam-- Elijah Muhammad's Teachings Online
Millions More Movement
Nation of Islam's "Muhammad Farms" Project
Malcolm X Reloaded Podcast
The Immortal Birth Book, The Nation of Gods and Earths (Advertisement)
A personal account of the Nation of Islam and its teachings
Walker, Dennis Searching for African American Nationhood: Looking Into the Nation of Islam (Interview)
What is Orthodox Islam? Asked by a follower of The Hon. Elijah Muhammad


[edit] Non-NOI Muslims

Tawhid and Shirk: A Clear Guide to Islam
The Nation of Islam Exposed
The Nation of Islam is not Islam
Learn about true Islam







 
Links to related articles














v • d • e

Black supremacist organizations





United States

Nation of Yahweh · Nuwaubianism · New Black Panther Party · The Nation of Gods and Earths · Nation of Islam






France

Génération Kémi Séba













v • d • e

Racism





History of racism

Apartheid · The Holocaust · Racism in the United States · Anti-racism · Civil rights movement







Racist ideologies

White supremacy · Black supremacy · Social Darwinism · Nazism · Aryanism · Ketuanan Melayu






Acts of racism

Institutional racism · State racism · Racial profiling · Racism by country · Hate speech · Racial segregation · Stereotype · Scientific racism · Slavery · Crime of apartheid






Racial violence

Ethnic cleansing · Hate crime · Race war · Genocide · Lynching






Racism against groups

Native Americans · Arabs · Armenians · Blacks · Chinese · Hispanics · Irish · Italians · Japanese · Jews · Mexicans · Poles · Roma people · Russians · South Asians · East Asians · Whites






Racist groups

Ku Klux Klan · Neo-Nazis · Grey Wolves · South African National Party · Nation of Islam · New Black Panthers ·






Anti-racist groups
and movements

NAACP · Anti-Defamation League · Anti-Fascist Action · Civil Rights Movement · Fighting Discrimination (Human Rights First) · Southern Poverty Law Center · Searchlight













v • d • e

African American topics





African American
history

Atlantic slave trade · Maafa · Slavery in the United States · Military history of African Americans · Jim Crow laws · Redlining · Civil Rights Movements 1896–1954 and · 1955–1968 · Afrocentrism · Reparations for slavery







African American
culture

African American studies · Neighborhoods · Juneteenth · Black Colleges and Universities · Kwanzaa · Art · Museums · Dance · Literature · Music






Religion

Black church · Black liberation theology · Black theology · Doctrine of Father Divine · Nation of Islam · Black Hebrew Israelites






Political
movements

Pan-Africanism · Nationalism · Black Power · Capitalism · Conservatism · Populism · Leftism · Black Panther Party · Garveyism






Civic and economic
groups

National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) · Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) · Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) · Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) · National Urban League (NUL) · Rights organizations · Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH) · United Negro College Fund (UNCF) · National Black Chamber of Commerce (NBCC) · National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC) · The Links · National Council of Negro Women (NCNW) · Ebony Experiment






Sports

Negro league baseball · Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association (CIAA) · Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (SIAC) · Mid-Eastern Athletic Conference (MEAC) · Southwestern Athletic Conference (SWAC)






Ethnic sub-divisions

Black Indians · Gullah






Languages

English · Gullah · Louisiana Creole French · African American Vernacular English






Diaspora

Americo-Liberian · Nova Scotia · Sierra Leone · United Kingdom · France






Lists

African Americans · African-American firsts · First mayors · US state firsts · Landmark African-American legislation · African-American-related topics · Topics related to Black and African people






Category · Portal












v • d • e

Islam topics





Beliefs

God in Islam · Tawhid · Muhammad · Prophets of Islam






Five Pillars

Shahadah · Salah · Sawm · Zakat · Hajj






History & leaders

Timeline of Muslim history · Ahl al-Bayt · Sahaba · Shi'a Imams · Caliphs: Rashidun Caliphs, Umayyad, Abbasid, Fatimid, Ottomans · Caliphates: Rashidun Caliphate, Umayyad, Abbasid, Caliphate of Cordoba, Fatimid, Ottoman Empire · Conquests · Golden Age · Agricultural Revolution






Religious texts

Qur'an · Sunnah · Hadith






Denominations

Sunni · Shia · Sufism · Ibadi






Life and Culture

Animals · Art · Calendar · Children · Holidays · Mosques · Philosophy · Political aspects · Science · Women · Islamic studies · Islam by country






Law &
Jurisprudence

Baligh · Cleanliness · Criminal · Dhabiĥa · Dhimmi · Divorce · Diet · Economics: Banking, Economic history, Murabaha, Riba · Ethics · Etiquette · Gambling · Gender segregation · Ghusl · Honorifics · Hudud · Hygiene: Miswak, Toilet, Wudu, Najis · Inheritance · Jizya · Leadership · Marital: Marriage contract, Nikah, Nikah Mut‘ah · Mahr · Mahram · Ma malakat aymanukum · Military: Prisoners of war · Slavery · Political · Sexuality: Masturbation, Sexual techniques · Sukuk · Takaful · Tayammum · Theological: Kalam · Zina · Sources






Islamic studies

Agriculture · Arts: Arabesque, Architecture, Calligraphy, Music, Pottery · Creationism · Feminism · Golden Age · Literature: Poetry · Philosophy: Early philosophy, Modern philosophy, Eschatology, Ethics, Theology · Sciences: Alchemy & Chemistry, Astrology, Astronomy, Economics, Islam and science, Mathematics, Medicine, Physics, Psychology · Sociology: Early sociology · Shu'ubiyya · Sports · Conversion of mosques · Historiography · Inventions






Other religions

Christianity · Hinduism · Jainism · Judaism · Sikhism






Related topics

Apostasy · Controversies · Criticism of Islam · Criticism of Muhammad · Criticism of the Qur'an · Islamism · Islamophobia · Islamic terrorism · Islamic view of miracles · Islam and antisemitism · Domestic violence · Persecution of Muslims · Qur'an and miracles · Qutbism

















Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nation_of_Islam"
Categories: African American culture | Antisemitism | Religious antisemitism | Black supremacy | Islamic sects | Nation of Islam | Organizations based in Chicago, Illinois | Religious organizations established in 1930 | RacismHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing style editing from June 2008 | All articles needing style editing | Articles needing additional references from August 2007 | Articles containing Arabic language text | Wikipedia external links cleanup 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
العربية
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Français
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
اردو









 This page was last modified on 10 April 2009, at 23:16 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
