













Unmanned aerial vehicle - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Unmanned_aerial_vehicle";
		var wgTitle = "Unmanned aerial vehicle";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "58900";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282122614;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Unmanned aerial vehicle

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





This article may require copy-editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone or spelling. You can assist by editing it now. A how-to guide is available. (August 2008)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2008)






A RQ-2 Pioneer, a reconnaissance UAV of the Romanian Air Force during the Gulf and Iraq Wars.






Although most UAVs are fixed-wing aircraft, rotorcraft designs such as this MQ-8B Fire Scout also exist.






A MQ-9 Reaper, a hunter-killer surveillance UAV used by the United States Armed Forces and British Armed Forces, especially in Iraq and Afghanistan.


An unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) is an unpiloted aircraft. UAVs come in two varieties: some are controlled from a remote location, and others fly autonomously based on pre-programmed flight plans using more complex dynamic automation systems. Currently, UAVs perform reconnaissance as well as attack missions. They are also used in a small but growing number of civil applications, such as firefighting. UAVs are often preferred for missions that are too "dull, dirty, or dangerous" for manned aircraft.
There is a wide variety of UAV shapes, sizes, configurations, and characteristics. For the purposes of this article and to distinguish UAVs from missiles, a UAV is defined as capable of controlled, sustained, level flight and powered by a jet or reciprocating engine. Cruise missiles are not classed as UAVs, because, like many other guided missiles, the vehicle itself is a weapon that is not reused, even though it is also unmanned and in some cases remotely guided.
The abbreviation UAV has been expanded in some cases to UAVS (unmanned-aircraft vehicle system). The Federal Aviation Administration has adopted the generic class unmanned aircraft system (UAS) originally introduced by the U.S. Navy to reflect the fact that these are not just aircraft, but systems, including ground stations and other elements.




Contents


1 History
2 UAV classification

2.1 U.S. military UAV classifications

2.1.1 US Air Force tiers
2.1.2 US Marine Corps tiers
2.1.3 U.S. Army tiers
2.1.4 Future Combat Systems (FCS) (U.S. Army) classes
2.1.5 Unmanned Aircraft System




3 UAV functions

3.1 Remote sensing
3.2 Transport
3.3 Scientific research
3.4 Precision strikes
3.5 Search and Rescue


4 Design and development considerations

4.1 Degree of autonomy
4.2 Endurance


5 Existing UAV systems
6 Other information
7 See also
8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Main article: History of unmanned aerial vehicles
The earliest UAV was A. M. Low's "Aerial Target" of 1916.[1] A number of remote-controlled airplane advances followed, including the Hewitt-Sperry Automatic Airplane, during and after World War I, including the first scale RPV (Remote Piloted Vehicle), developed by the film star and model airplane enthusiast Reginald Denny in 1935.[1] More were made in the technology rush during the Second World War; these were used both to train antiaircraft gunners and to fly attack missions. Jet engines were applied after WW2, in such types as the Teledyne Ryan Firebee I of 1951, while companies like Beechcraft also got in the game with their Model 1001 for the United States Navy in 1955.[1] Nevertheless, they were little more than remote-controlled airplanes until the Vietnam Era.




Front view of a MQ-1 Predator (Reno Air Show)


With the maturing and miniaturization of applicable technologies as seen in the 1980s and 1990s, interest in UAVs grew within the higher echelons of the US military. UAVs were seen to offer the possibility of cheaper, more capable fighting machines that can be used without risk to aircrews. Initial generations were primarily surveillance aircraft, but some were fitted with weaponry (such as the MQ-1 Predator, which utilized AGM-114 Hellfire air-to-ground missiles). An armed UAV is known as an unmanned combat air vehicle (UCAV).
The near future will likely see unmanned aircraft employed, offensively, for bombing and ground attack. As a tool for search and rescue, UAVs can help find humans lost in the wilderness, trapped in collapsed buildings, or adrift at sea. While air-to-air combat will likely remain the last domain of the human pilot, when unmanned fighter jets do come about, they will enjoy the advantage of almost unlimited immunity to G-force effects.
In the future, UAVs will be able to take full advantage of scramjet technology. Today's scramjets, while unmanned, see use only for testing purposes (e.g., NASA X-43A, NASA's Hyper-X scramjet program), but have the potential when developed for combat to out-maneuver even the most experienced pilots.

[edit] UAV classification




Luna X 2000 UAV of the German Army






The Mexican UAV S4 Ehécatl in take-off mode


UAVs typically fall into one of six functional categories (although multi-role airframe platforms are becoming more prevalent):

Target and decoy - providing ground and aerial gunnery a target that simulates an enemy aircraft or missile
Reconnaissance - providing battlefield intelligence
Combat - providing attack capability for high-risk missions (see Unmanned combat air vehicle)
Logistics - UAVs specifically designed for cargo and logistics operation
Research and development - used to further develop UAV technologies to be integrated into field deployed UAV aircraft
Civil and Commercial UAVs - UAVs specifically designed for civil and commercial applications

They can also be categorised in terms of range/altitude and the following has been advanced as relevant at such industry events as ParcAberporth Unmanned Systems forum:

Handheld 2,000 ft (600 m) altitude, about 2 km range
Close 5,000 ft (1,500 m) altitude, up to 10 km range
NATO type 10,000 ft (3,000 m) altitude, up to 50 km range
Tactical 18,000 ft (5,500 m) altitude, about 160 km range
MALE (medium altitude, long endurance) up to 30,000 ft (9,000 m) and range over 200 km
HALE (high altitude, long endurance) over 30,000 ft and indefinite range
HYPERSONIC high-speed, supersonic (Mach 1-5) or hypersonic (Mach 5+) 50,000 ft (15,200 m) or suborbital altitude, range over 200km
ORBITAL low earth orbit (Mach 25+)
CIS Lunar Earth-Moon transfer





A Train Cable UAV (TCUAV)


Additional category can be applied in pattern of function: fixed routes vs. dynamically variable routes:

A Train Cable UAV (TCUAV) is a combination of three concepts: unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs), and trains.

The U.S. military employs a tier system for categorizing its UAVs.

[edit] U.S. military UAV classifications
The modern concept of U.S. military UAVs is to have the various aircraft systems work together in support of personnel on the ground. The integration scheme is described in terms of a "Tier" system, and is used by military planners to designate the various individual aircraft elements in an overall usage plan for integrated operations. The Tiers do not refer to specific models of aircraft, but rather roles for which various models and their manufacturers competed. The U.S. Air Force and the U.S. Marine Corps each has its own tier system, and the two systems are themselves not integrated.

[edit] US Air Force tiers

Tier N/A: Small/Micro UAV. Role filled by BATMAV (Wasp Block III). [1]
Tier I: Low altitude, long endurance. Role filled by the Gnat 750.[2]
Tier II: Medium altitude, long endurance (MALE). Role currently filled by the MQ-1 Predator and MQ-9 Reaper.
Tier II+: High altitude, long endurance conventional UAV (or HALE UAV). Altitude: 60,000 to 65,000 feet (19,800 m), less than 300 knots (560 km/h) airspeed, 3,000-nautical-mile (6,000 km) radius, 24 hour time-on-station capability. Complementary to the Tier III- aircraft. Role currently filled by the RQ-4 Global Hawk.
Tier III-: High altitude, long endurance low-observable UAV. Same parameters as, and complementary to, the Tier II+ aircraft. The RQ-3 DarkStar was originally intended to fulfill this role before it was "terminated."[3][4]


[edit] US Marine Corps tiers

Tier N/A: Micro UAV. Wasp III fills this role, driven largely by the desire for commonality with the USAF BATMAV. [2]
Tier I: Role currently filled by the Dragon Eye but all ongoing and future procurement for the Dragon Eye program is going now to the RQ-11B Raven B.
Tier II: Role currently filled by the ScanEagle and, to some extent, the RQ-2 Pioneer.
Tier III: For two decades, the role of medium range tactical UAV was filled by the Pioneer UAV. In July 2007, the Marine Corps announced its intention to retire the aging Pioneer fleet and transition to the Shadow Tactical Unmanned Aircraft System by AAI Corporation. The first Marine Shadow systems have already been delivered, and training for their respective Marine Corps units is underway.[5][6]


[edit] U.S. Army tiers

Tier I: Small UAV. Role filled by the RQ-11A/B Raven.
Tier II: Short Range Tactical UAV. Role filled by the RQ-7A/B Shadow 200.
Tier III: Medium Range Tactical UAV. Role currently filled by the RQ-5A / MQ-5A/B Hunter and IGNAT/IGNAT-ER, but transitioning to the Extended Range Multi-Purpose (ERMP) MQ-1C Warrior.


[edit] Future Combat Systems (FCS) (U.S. Army) classes

Class I: For small units. Role to be filled by all new UAV with some similarity to Micro Air Vehicle.
Class II: For companies. (cancelled.) [3]
Class III: For battalions. (cancelled.) [4]
Class IV: For brigades. Role to be filled by the RQ-8A/B / MQ-8B Fire Scout.


[edit] Unmanned Aircraft System
UAS, or unmanned aircraft system, is the official U.S. Department of Defense term for an unmanned aerial vehicle. Initially coined by the Navy to reflect the fact that these complex systems include ground stations and other elements besides the actual aircraft, the term was first officially used in the DoD 2005 Unmanned Aircraft System Roadmap 2005–2030.[7] Many people have mistakenly used the term Unmanned Aerial System, or Unmanned Air Vehicle System, as these designations were in provisional use at one time or another. The official acronym 'UAS' is not widely used outside military circles, however, as the term UAV has become part of the modern lexicon.
The military role of unmanned aircraft systems is growing at unprecedented rates. In 2005, tactical- and theater-level unmanned aircraft alone had flown over 100,000 flight hours in support of Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom. Rapid advances in technology are enabling more and more capability to be placed on smaller airframes which is spurring a large increase in the number of Small Unmanned Aircraft Systems (SUAS) being deployed on the battlefield. The use of SUAS in combat is so new that no formal DoD wide reporting procedures have been established to track SUAS flight hours. As the capabilities grow for all types of UAS, nations continue to subsidize their research and development leading to further advances enabling them to perform a multitude of missions. UAS no longer only perform intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance missions, although this still remains their predominant type. Their roles have expanded to areas including electronic attack, strike missions, suppression and/or destruction of enemy air defense, network node or communications relay, combat search and rescue, and derivations of these themes. These UAS range in cost from a few thousand dollars to tens of millions of dollars, with aircraft ranging from less than one pound to over 40,000 pounds.

[edit] UAV functions
UAVs perform a wide variety of functions. The majority of these functions are some form of remote sensing; this is central to the reconnaissance role most UAVs fulfill. Less common UAV functions include interaction and transport.

[edit] Remote sensing




A Bell Eagle Eye, used by the US Coast Guard






The RQ-7 Shadow is capable of delivering a 20-lb. "Quick-MEDS" canister to front-line troops.






Malazgirt VTOL Mini Unmanned System operated by Turkish Armed Forces


UAV remote sensing functions include electromagnetic spectrum sensors, biological sensors, and chemical sensors. A UAV's electromagnetic sensors typically include visual spectrum, infrared, or near infrared cameras as well as radar systems. Other electromagnetic wave detectors such as microwave and ultraviolet spectrum sensors may also be used, but are uncommon. Biological sensors are sensors capable of detecting the airborne presence of various microorganisms and other biological factors. Chemical sensors use laser spectroscopy to analyze the concentrations of each element in the air.

[edit] Transport
UAVs can transport goods using various means based on the configuration of the UAV itself. Most payloads are stored in an internal payload bay somewhere in the airframe. For many helicopter configurations, external payloads can be tethered to the bottom of the airframe. With fixed wing UAVs, payloads can also be attached to the airframe, but aerodynamics of the aircraft with the payload must be assessed. For such situations, payloads are often enclosed in aerodynamic pods for transport.

[edit] Scientific research
Unmanned aircraft are uniquely capable of penetrating areas which may be too dangerous for piloted craft. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) began utilizing the Aerosonde unmanned aircraft system in 2006 as a hurricane hunter. AAI Corporation subsidiary Aerosonde Pty Ltd. of Victoria (Australia), designs and manufactures the 35-pound system, which can fly into a hurricane and communicate near-real-time data directly to the National Hurricane Center in Florida. Beyond the standard barometric pressure and temperature data typically culled from manned hurricane hunters, the Aerosonde system provides measurements far closer to the water’s surface than previously captured. Further applications for unmanned aircraft can be explored once solutions have been developed for their accommodation within national airspace, an issue currently under discussion by the Federal Aviation Administration.

[edit] Precision strikes
See also: Unmanned Combat Aerial Vehicle




Rear view of a MQ-1 Predator (Reno Air Show)


MQ-1 Predator UAVs armed with Hellfire missiles are now used as platforms for hitting ground targets in sensitive areas. Armed Predators were first used in late 2001 from bases in Pakistan and Uzbekistan, mostly for targeted assassinations inside Afghanistan. Since then, there were several reported cases of such assassinations taking place in Pakistan, this time from Afghan-based Predators. The advantage of using an unmanned vehicle, rather than a manned aircraft in such cases, is to avoid a diplomatic embarrassment should the aircraft be shot down and the pilots captured, since the bombings took place in countries deemed friendly and without the official permission of those countries.[8][9][10][11]
A Predator, based in a neighboring Arab country, was used to kill suspected al-Qa'ida terrorists in Yemen on November 3, 2002. This marked the first use of an armed Predator as an attack aircraft outside of a theater of war such as Afghanistan.[12]

[edit] Search and Rescue
UAVs will likely play an increased role in search and rescue in the United States. This was demonstrated by the successful use of UAVs during the 2008 hurricanes that struck Louisiana and Texas.
For example, Predators, operating between 18,000-29,000 feet above sea level, performed search and rescue and damage assessment. Payloads carried were an optical sensor, (which is a daytime and infra red camera), and a synthetic aperture radar. The Predator's SAR is a sophisticated all-weather sensor capable of providing photographic-like images through clouds, rain or fog, and in daytime or nighttime conditions; all in real-time. A concept of coherent change detection in SAR images allows for exceptional search and rescue ability: photos taken before and after the storm hits are compared and a computer highlights areas of damage. [13] [14]

[edit] Design and development considerations
UAV design and production is a global activity, with manufacturers all across the world. The United States and Israel were initial pioneers in this technology, and U.S. manufacturers have a market share of over 60% in 2006, with U.S. market share due to increase by 5-10% through 2016.[15] Northrop Grumman and General Atomics are the dominant manufacturers in this industry, on the strength of the Global Hawk and Predator/Mariner systems.[15] Israeli and European manufacturers form a second tier due to lower indigenous investments, and the governments of those nations have initiatives to acquire U.S. systems due to higher levels of capability.[15] European market share represented just 4% of global revenue in 2006.[15]

[edit] Degree of autonomy




UAV monitoring and control at CBP






HiMAT Remote Cockpit Synthetic Vision Display (Photo: NASA 1984)


Early UAVs used during the Vietnam War after launch captured video that was recorded to film or tape on the aircraft. These aircraft often were launched and flew either in a straight line or in preset circles collecting video until they ran out of fuel and landed. After landing, the film was recovered for analysis. Because of the simple nature of these aircraft, they were often called drones. As new radio frequencies gained more available, UAVs were often remote controlled and the term "remotely piloted vehicle" came into vogue. Today's UAVs often combine remote control and computerized automation. More sophisticated versions may have built-in control and/or guidance systems to perform low-level human pilot duties such as speed and flight-path stabilization, and simple prescripted navigation functions such as waypoint following. In news and other discussions, often the term "drone" is still mistakenly used to refer to these more sophisticated aircraft.
From this perspective, most early UAVs are not autonomous at all. In fact, the field of air-vehicle autonomy is a recently emerging field, whose economics is largely driven by the military to develop battle-ready technology. Compared to the manufacturing of UAV flight hardware, the market for autonomy technology is fairly immature and undeveloped. Because of this, autonomy has been and may continue to be the bottleneck for future UAV developments, and the overall value and rate of expansion of the future UAV market could be largely driven by advances to be made in the field of autonomy.
Autonomy technology that is important to UAV development falls under the following categories:

Sensor fusion: Combining information from different sensors for use on board the vehicle
Communications: Handling communication and coordination between multiple agents in the presence of incomplete and imperfect information
Path planning: Determining an optimal path for vehicle to go while meeting certain objectives and mission constraints, such as obstacles or fuel requirements
Trajectory Generation (sometimes called Motion planning): Determining an optimal control maneuver to take to follow a given path or to go from one location to another
Trajectory Regulation: The specific control strategies required to constrain a vehicle within some tolerance to a trajectory
Task Allocation and Scheduling: Determining the optimal distribution of tasks amongst a group of agents, with time and equipment constraints
Cooperative Tactics: Formulating an optimal sequence and spatial distribution of activities between agents in order to maximize chance of success in any given mission scenario

Autonomy is commonly defined as the ability to make decisions without human intervention. To that end, the goal of autonomy is to teach machines to be "smart" and act more like humans. The keen observer may associate this with the development in the field of artificial intelligence made popular in the 1980s and 1990s such as expert systems, neural networks, machine learning, natural language processing, and vision. However, the mode of technological development in the field of autonomy has mostly followed a bottom-up approach, such as hierarchical control systems[16], and recent advances have been largely driven by the practitioners in the field of control science, not computer science. Similarly, autonomy has been and probably will continue to be considered an extension of the controls field.
To some extent, the ultimate goal in the development of autonomy technology is to replace the human pilot. It remains to be seen whether future developments of autonomy technology, the perception of the technology, and most importantly, the political climate surrounding the use of such technology, will limit the development and utility of autonomy for UAV applications. Also as a result of this, synthetic vision for piloting has not caught on in the UAV arena as it did with manned aircraft. NASA utilized synthetic vision for test pilots on the HiMAT program in the early 1980s (see photo), but the advent of more autonomous UAV autopilots, greatly reduced the need for this technology.
Interoperable UAV technologies became essential as systems proved their mettle in military operations, taking on tasks too challenging or dangerous for warfighters. NATO addressed the need for commonality through STANAG (Standardization Agreement) 4586. According to a NATO press release, the agreement began the ratification process in 1992. Its goal was to allow allied nations to easily share information obtained from unmanned aircraft through common ground control station technology. STANAG 4586 - aircraft that adhere to this protocol are equipped to translate information into standardized message formats; likewise, information received from other compliant aircraft can be transferred into vehicle-specific messaging formats for seamless interoperability. Amendments have since been made to the original agreement, based on expert feedback from the field and an industry panel known as the Custodian Support Team. Edition Two of STANAG 4586 is currently under review. There are many systems available today that are developed in accordance with STANAG 4586, including products by industry leaders such as AAI Corporation, CDL Systems, and Raytheon, all three of which are members of the Custodian Support Team for this protocol.

[edit] Endurance




RQ-4 Global Hawk, a high-altitude reconnaissance UAV capable of 36 hours continuous flight time


Because UAVs are not burdened with the physiological limitations of human pilots, they can be designed for maximized on-station times. The maximum flight duration of unmanned, aerial vehicles varies widely. Internal-combustion-engine aircraft endurance depends strongly on the percentage of fuel burned as a fraction of total weight (the Breguet endurance equation), and so is largely independent of aircraft size. Solar-electric UAVs hold potential for unlimited flight, a concept originally championed by the Aerovironment Helios Prototype, which was destroyed in a 2003 crash. One of the major problems with UAVs is no capability for inflight refuelling. Currently the US Air Force is promoting research that should end in an inflight UAV refueling capability, which should be available by 2010.
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) is to sign a contract on building an UAV which should have an enormous endurance capability of about 5 years. The project is entitled "Vulture". The developers are certain neither on the design of the UAV nor on what fuel it should run to be able to stay in air without any maintenance for such a long period of time.[17]

Notable high endurance flights

UAV
Flight time
Date
Notes


QinetiQ Zephyr Solar Electric
82 hours 37 minutes
28-31 July 2008
QinetiQ press release


Boeing Condor
58 hours, 11 minutes
 ?
The aircraft is currently in the Hiller Aviation Museum, CA.
Hiller Aviation Museum reference to the flight



QinetiQ Zephyr Solar Electric
54 hours
September 2007
QinetiQ press release
New Scientist article



IAI Heron
52 hours
 ?
NOVA PBS TV program reference
IAI reference



AC Propulsion Solar Electric
48 hours, 11 minutes
June 3, 2005
AC Propulsion release describing the flight


MQ-1 Predator
40 hours, 5 minutes
 ?
UAV Forum reference
Federation of American Scientists reference



GNAT-750
40 hours
1992
Directory of US Military Rockets and Missiles reference to the flight
UAV Endurance Prehistory reference



TAM-5
38 hours, 52 minutes
August 11, 2003
Smallest UAV to cross the Atlantic
TAM Homepage
TAM-5 FAQ page



Aerosonde
38 hours, 48 minutes
May 3, 2006

Aerosonde release on the flight



I-GNAT
38 hours, landed with 10-hour reserve
 ?
General Atomics reference to the flight


RQ-4 Global Hawk
36 hours
 ?
Space Daily story on the flight
RAND Corporation report



Aerosonde "Laima"
26 hours, 45 minutes
August 21, 1998
First UAV to cross the Atlantic
Aerosonde Laima page
Seattle Museum of Flight



TIHA (Turkish MALE Unmanned Aerial Vehicle)
24 hours
Prototypes: 24 December 2004 Serial Production: To be complete by 2010
TIHA Program
Turkish Aerospace Industries UAV Products



Vulture(UAV)
Has not flown. Potential endurance 5 years
 ?
A DARPA project - Vulture - The Unmanned Aircraft Able to Stay in the Air for 5 Years



[edit] Existing UAV systems
UAVs have been developed and deployed by many countries around the world. For a list of models by country, see: List of unmanned aerial vehicles

[edit] Other information





Lists of miscellaneous information should be avoided. Please relocate any relevant information into appropriate sections or articles. (September 2007)



UAVs have been used in many episodes of the science-fiction television series Stargate SG-1, and a sentient unmanned, combat aerial vehicle (UCAV) was a central figure in the action film Stealth.
During the Gulf War, Iraqi Army forces surrendered to the UAVs of the USS Wisconsin.
In October, 2002, a few days before the U.S. Senate vote on the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution, about 75 senators were told in closed session that Saddam Hussein had the means of delivering biological and chemical weapons of mass destruction by UAV drones that could be launched from ships off the Atlantic coast to attack U.S. eastern seaboard cities. Colin Powell suggested in his presentation to the United Nations that they had been transported out of Iraq and could be launched against the U.S.[18] It was later revealed that Iraq's UAV fleet consisted of only a few outdated Czech training drones.[19] At the time, there was a vigorous dispute within the intelligence community as to whether CIA's conclusions about Iraqi UAVs were accurate. The U.S. Air Force agency most familiar with UAVs denied outright that Iraq possessed any offensive UAV capability.[20]
In December 2002, the first ever dogfight involving a UAV occurred when an Iraqi MiG-25 and a U.S. RQ-1 Predator fired missiles at each other. The MiG's missile destroyed the Predator. [21]


[edit] See also



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Unmanned aerial vehicles 



82d Aerial Targets Squadron
Aerobot
Autonomous Underwater Vehicle
Intelligence collection management
International Aerial Robotics Competition
List of unmanned aerial vehicles
Miniature UAVs
Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance
Kettering Bug
MASINT
Micro air vehicle
ParcAberporth
Radio-controlled aircraft
Remotely Operated Vehicle
TIHA
Train Cable UAV (TCUAV)
UAV Battlelab
Unmanned Aircraft System
Unmanned Combat Air Vehicle
Unmanned Ground Vehicle
Unmanned space vehicle


[edit] References


^ a b c Taylor, A. J. P. Jane's Book of Remotely Piloted Vehicles.
^ History of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
^ Comparison of USAF Tier II, II+ and III- systems
^ http://www.edwards.af.mil/articles98/docs_html/splash/may98/cover/Tier.htm USAF Tier system
^ USMC powerpoint presentation of tier system
^ Detailed description of USMC tier system
^ http://www.acq.osd.mil/usd/Roadmap%20Final2.pdf#search=%22Dod%20UAS%20Roadmap%202005%22
^ Fox News
^ Defense Industry Daily
^ MSNBC
^ Globe and Mail
^ Federation of American Scientists
^ AP Texas News
^ 2008 Search and Rescue Missions
^ a b c d "UAVs on the Rise." Dickerson, L. Aviation Week & Space Technology. January 15, 2007.
^ Shim, D. H, Kim, H. J., Sastry, S., Hierarchical Control System Synthesis for Rotorcraft-based Unmanned Aerial Vehicles.
^ Vulture - The Unmanned Aircraft Able to Stay in the Air for 5 Years
^ Senator Bill Nelson (January 28, 2004) "New Information on Iraq's Possession of Weapons of Mass Destruction", Congressional Record
^ Lowe, C. (December 16, 2003) "Senator: White House Warned of UAV Attack," Defense Tech
^ Hammond, J. (November 14, 2005) "The U.S. 'intelligence failure' and Iraq's UAVs" The Yirmeyahu Review
^ Pilotless Warriors Soar To Success, www.cbsnews.com, 25 April 2004. Accessed 21 April 2007.



[edit] External links

History & Articles


VTOL UAVs
History of WWI-era UAVs - Remote Piloted Aerial Vehicles : The 'Aerial Target' and 'Aerial Torpedo' in the USA
"Human Pilots: Who Needs 'Em?" — Wired News, 23 November 2003
"Drone aircraft may prowl U.S. skies"- c|net News, 29 Mar 2006
Inside the Rise of the Warbots - Interview with Brookings Institution senior fellow Peter W. Singer about his book Wired for War


Organizations and current news


Defense Update reports about UAV employment in Persistent Surveillance
UAV Mission Management Research
Attopilot User Group








v • d • e

Lists relating to aviation





General

Timeline of aviation · Aircraft (manufacturers) · Aircraft engines (manufacturers) · Airports · Airlines · Civil authorities · Museums






Military

Air forces · Aircraft weapons · Missiles · Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) · Experimental aircraft






Accidents/incidents

General · Military · Commercial (airliners) · Deaths






Records

Airspeed · Distance · Altitude · Endurance · Most-produced aircraft













v • d • e

Intelligence cycle management





Intelligence
collection
management




HUMINT/
Human Intelligence

Clandestine HUMINT (recruiting · operational techniques · Covert action · Direct action · Clandestine cell system)
Special reconnaissance (organizations)
Espionage (Agent handling · Black bag operation · Concealment device · Cryptography · Cut-out · Dead drop · Eavesdropping · False flag operations · Honeypot · Non-official cover · Interrogation · Numbers messaging · One-way voice link · Steganography · Surveillance)






SIGINT/
Signals Intelligence

SIGINT by Alliances, Nations and Industries · SIGINT Operational Platforms by Nation · SIGINT in Modern History · TEMPEST · Direction finding · Traffic analysis






MASINT/
Measurement and
Signature Intelligence

Electro-optical · Nuclear · Geophysical · Radar · Radiofrequency · Materials · Casualty estimation






Others

OSINT/Open Source Intelligence · IMINT/Imagery Intelligence · FININT/Financial Intelligence · TECHINT/Technical intelligence









Intelligence
analysis
management

Intelligence analysis · Cognitive traps for intelligence analysis · Words of Estimative Probability · Analysis of Competing Hypotheses · Intelligence cycle (target-centric approach)






Intelligence
dissemination
management

Intelligence cycle security · Counter-intelligence · Counter-intelligence and counter-terrorism organizations · List of counterintelligence organizations · Counterintelligence failures









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unmanned_aerial_vehicle"
Categories: Military terminology | Signals intelligence | UAVs and drones | Unmanned vehiclesHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from August 2008 | All articles needing copy edit | Articles needing additional references from August 2008 | Articles with trivia sections from September 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Español
فارسی
Français
한국어
Italiano
עברית
ಕನ್ನಡ
Limburgs
Magyar
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
سنڌي
Slovenščina
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 15:09 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
