













Walt Disney Imagineering - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Walt_Disney_Imagineering";
		var wgTitle = "Walt Disney Imagineering";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "1201805";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 286214187;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Walt Disney Imagineering

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 

Walt Disney Imagineering was formed by entertainment mogul Walt Disney on December 16, 1952 as WED Enterprises (WED: Walter Elias Disney) to develop plans for a theme park and to manage Disney's personal assets. It was an independent, private company, owned by Walt Disney himself, but on February 3, 1965, was merged into Walt Disney Productions. It is known as Walt Disney Imagineering (WDI), Disney Imagineering, or simply Imagineering and occasionally does business as Theme Park Productions, Inc[1].




Contents


1 History
2 Employees
3 Theme park projects

3.1 Current imagineering projects
3.2 Completed projects


4 Non-theme park projects
5 Corporate

5.1 Corporate locations
5.2 Walt Disney Imagineering Management


6 Books
7 Notes
8 Related pages
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] History
Ever since the founding of WED Enterprises, when Walt Disney's favorites at the Walt Disney Studios were handpicked to design an immersive themed experience now known as Disneyland, the company has been shrouded in mystery and its secrets are proudly guarded by Disney executives as senior as former CEO Michael Eisner, who had regular meetings with the Imagineers up until a few years before his departure.
Today, the theme parks have a new attraction either being developed or having just opened at each of the eleven parks around the world.
In April 2006, John Lasseter, the new Principal Creative Adviser, a position created through the acquisition of Pixar by Disney, has made his feelings known about getting back to basics with Imagineering, such as focusing on the story-telling and not the technology so much. In a move which surprised many, he even made it known he would like Walt Disney Imagineering to return to the WED Enterprises name, partly in homage to Walt Disney and partly to regain the spirit that many feel left Walt Disney Imagineering in the late 1990s. He also said at the Walt Disney Company shareholders meeting in March that he felt that developing attractions based on movies to open in time with the movie's opening was a crucial step in moving Imagineering forward.
WED Enterprises applied for a trademark for the term in 1967, claiming first use in 1962.
The company was formed separately from Walt Disney Productions to keep the affairs separate. Although, when WED was required to design and build sets for Walt Disney's live-action television shows, WED and the Walt Disney Studios got closer together. In 1952 when WED were asked to design and build Disneyland, Walt and his brother Roy O. Disney formed Disneyland, Inc. to build, design, and manage Disneyland and produce the Disneyland television show. Disneyland, Inc was absorbed into WED Enterprises and WED Enterprises became a division of Walt Disney Studios - itself a division of Walt Disney Productions, now named The Walt Disney Company.
Walt Disney Imagineering is now the research and development arm of Walt Disney Parks and Resorts, no longer a division of Walt Disney Productions. Imagineering also includes Walt Disney Creative Entertainment, the company which utilizes Imagineering techniques among others to create shows, fireworks displays and parades at the Disney theme parks which are significant enough not to be developed by the entertainment studios at that theme park.
The company has a listing in the OUI Vendor List for MAC Addresses as 00-E0-7E. [1]

[edit] Employees
An Imagineer (officially known as a Walt Disney Imagineer), is an employee of Walt Disney Imagineering, or any other employee of The Walt Disney Company given that title. Nearly all Imagineers work at the headquarters in Glendale, California, developing ideas and attractions for Disney parks. During the construction of a major project, Imagineers sometimes are deployed to work on-site for six months to a year.
Imagineers may include artists, writers, architects, landscape architects, engineers, model builders, construction managers, technicians and designers. Past Imagineers include Alan Kay, Bran Ferren, Robert Swirsky, J. Robert Sewell, Lee Adams and Danny Hillis.

[edit] Theme park projects

[edit] Current imagineering projects


Project
Park\Resort
Opening Date


Playhouse Disney Live on Stage
Disney's Hollywood Studios
March 2009


New Central Plaza Stage
Disneyland Paris
March 2009


Stitch's Supersonic Celebration
Magic Kingdom (Florida)
April 2009


Monsters, Inc.: Ride n' Go Seek!
Tokyo Disneyland
April 2009


Hall of Presidents Refurbishment
Magic Kingdom (Florida)
July 2009


Mickey's Fun Wheel
Disney's California Adventure
May 8, 2009


Silly Symphony Swings
Disney's California Adventure
2009


Turtle Talk with Crush
Tokyo DisneySea
2009


Space Mountain Refurbishment
Magic Kingdom (Florida)
2010


Mickey's PhilharMagic
Tokyo Disneyland
2011


The Little Mermaid: Ariel's Adventure
Disney's California Adventure
2011


Walt Disney's Wonderful World of Color
Disney's California Adventure
2010


Buena Vista Street
Disney's California Adventure
2012


Disney Dream
Disney Cruise Line
2011


Disney Fantasy
Disney Cruise Line
2012


Cars Land
Disney's California Adventure
2012



[edit] Completed projects
Walt Disney Imagineering is particularly known for designing and building the world-famous Walt Disney Parks and Resorts:

Disneyland Resort in Anaheim, California, USA
Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando, Florida, USA
Tokyo Disney Resort in Urayasu, Chiba, Japan
Disneyland Resort Paris in Marne-la-Vallée, France
Hong Kong Disneyland Resort in Lantau Island, Hong Kong, China

These include:


Project
Park\Resort
Opening Date


Mark VII Monorail
Disneyland (California)
April 2008


Games of the Boardwalk
Disney's California Adventure
April 11,2009


The American Idol Experience
Disney's Hollywood Studios
February 14, 2009


It's a Small World Refurbishment
Disneyland (California)
February 2009


Sleeping Beauty Castle Walkthrough
Disneyland (California)
November 27, 2008


The Art of Animation
Hong Kong Disneyland
August 16, 2008


The Enchanted Tiki Room: Stitch Presents Aloha e Komo Mai!
Tokyo Disneyland
July 25, 2008


Toy Story Midway Mania!
Disney's California Adventure
June 17, 2008


Toy Story Midway Mania!
Disney's Hollywood Studios
May 31, 2008


Turtle Talk with Crush
Hong Kong Disneyland
May 31, 2008


"it's a small world"
Hong Kong Disneyland
April 28, 2008


Stitch Live!
Disney's Hollywood Studios
March 2008


Spaceship Earth Refurbishment
Epcot Center
February 15, 2008


Hollywood Boulevard
Disney's Hollywood Studios
January 2008


The Twilight Zone Tower of Terror
Disney's Hollywood Studios
December 22, 2007


Haunted Mansion Refurbishment
Magic Kingdom (Florida)
September 13, 2007


Mickey's WaterWorks
Hong Kong Disneyland
July 14, 2007


Finding Nemo Submarine Voyage
Disneyland (California)
June 11, 2007


Toon Studio
Disney's Hollywood Studios
June 09, 2007


Crush's Coaster
Disney's Hollywood Studios
June 09, 2007


Cars Quatre Roues Rallye (Cars Race Rally)
Disney's Hollywood Studios
June 09, 2007


Pirate's Lair
Disneyland (California)
May 25, 2007


Monsters, Inc. Laugh Floor
Magic Kingdom (Florida)
April 02, 2007


Animation Academy
Hong Kong Disneyland
July 2007


The Seas with Nemo and Friends
Epcot Center
2006


Tower of Terror
Tokyo DisneySea
September 2006


Pirates of the Caribbean renovation
Disneyland (California)
July 2006


Autopia
Hong Kong Disneyland
July 2006


Stitch Encounter
Hong Kong Disneyland
July 2006


Buzz Lightyear Laser Blast
Disneyland Park (Paris)
April 08, 2006


Expedition Everest
Disney's Animal Kingdom
April 07, 2006


Monsters, Inc.: Mike and Sully to the Rescue
Disney's California Adventure
January 23, 2006


Happiest Homecoming on Earth
Walt Disney Parks and Resorts
May 05, 2005



[edit] Non-theme park projects
The Imagineers have been called on by many other divisions of the Walt Disney Company as well as being contracted by outside firms to design and build structures outside of the theme parks.

The very first Disney Store opened in Glendale, California, near Imagineering headquarters, and was designed and constructed by a group of architectural Imagineers.
Environmental and graphic design for The Disney Cruise Line and DCL's Castaway Cay
Imagineering have co-operated with Walt Disney Consumer Products on four more occasions for Disney Stores. Firstly, WDI developed the Walt Disney Gallery at the Main Place Mall in Santa Ana, California (open for a short time in the 1990s, next to the still-operating Disney Store), and then a Roman themed Disney Store at The Forum Shops at Caesars in Las Vegas, Nevada. Two more themed Disney stores were opened in San Francisco, California, and New York City, New York - the latter having been developed into a World of Disney.
After the purchase of the Disney Stores by The Children's Place in 2004, Disney developed a more exclusive chain of flagship Disney stores, called World of Disney (see above). Located in Lake Buena Vista, Florida (at the Walt Disney World Resort), Anaheim, California (at the Disneyland Resort) and New York City. Each have been designed by Walt Disney Imagineering. A fourth incarnation of the "World of Disney" brand is due to arrive in Disney Village at Disneyland Resort Paris in 2008/2009.
Former Senior Vice President of Imagineering John Hench designed the "Tower of Nations" for the opening and closing ceremony of the 1960 Winter Olympics, where Walt Disney was Pageantry Committee Chairman.
Imagineering designed galleries and exhibitions for the Autry Museum of Western Heritage in Los Angeles, California.
Imagineering developed the Encounter Restaurant, a science fiction themed redesign of the restaurant suspended at the top of the 135-foot parabolic arches of the Theme Building at the Los Angeles International Airport.
Imagineering manufactured flight attendant uniforms for Northwest Airlines from Claude Montana designs in 1989 due in part to the fact that Northwest's then-CEO Al Checchi was also a member of The Walt Disney Company's board. The WDI-made uniforms only lasted until 1992.
When Disney purchased ABC, the Imagineers remodeled the ABC Times Square Studios in New York City.
Imagineering designed exhibits for the Port Discovery children's museum at the Inner Harbor in Baltimore, Maryland.
When Disney purchased the California Angels, they renamed the team to Anaheim Angels, and Walt Disney Imagineering and HOK Sport renovated the then-30-year-old Anaheim-owned Anaheim Stadium, adding modern amenities.


[edit] Corporate

[edit] Corporate locations
Since the 1960s, Imagineering's headquarters have been in Glendale, California, a short distance from Disney's corporate headquarters in Burbank.
There are two field offices at the Walt Disney World Resort, required for the sheer size of the resort. There are field offices located at;

Epcot and Disney's Hollywood Studios, Walt Disney World Resort
Tokyo Disney Resort Administration Building, Tokyo Disney Resort
The former WDFA field office, Disneyland Resort Paris
Walt Disney Imagineering Hong Kong Site Office, Hong Kong Disneyland Resort


[edit] Walt Disney Imagineering Management
Walt Disney Imagineering

Chief Creative Executive - Bruce Vaughn
Chief Development and Delivery Executive - Craig Russell
Principal Creative Adviser - John Lasseter
Senior Vice President, Executive Designer - Joe Rohde
Senior Vice President, Creative Development - Tony Baxter
Senior Vice President, Creative Development - Eric Jacobson
Executive Vice President, Imagineering Ambassador - Marty Sklar
Executive Vice President, Senior Creative Executive - Tom Fitzgerald
Executive Vice President, Master Planning and Development - Wing Chao
Executive Vice President, Resort Development - Don Goodman
Executive Vice President, New Ship Development - Frank de Heer
Executive Vice President, Creative Reasurch and Development - Scott Trowbridge
Executive Vice President, Producer - Kathy Mangum
Executive Vice President, - Bob Weiss
Creative Vice President for Tokyo Disney Resort - Joe Lanzisero
Senior Concept Writer - Kevin P. Rafferty
Senior Show Producer/Director - Kathy Rogers
Senior Concept Designer - John Gritz
Senior Concept Writer, Creative Development - Michael Sprout
Senior Fabrication Designer - James George "Jim" Armagost
Director and Chief, Sculpture - Valerie Edwards
Director, Art - Kim Irvine
Principal Plastics Technician - Michael Traxler
Principal Concept Designer - Scot Drake
Principal Show Artist - Heather Greene
Principal Show Artist - Tod Mathias
Show Writer, Creative Development - David Fisher
Associate Graphic Designer - Caroline May
Mechanical Lead - Rick Taylor
Sculpturer - Scott Goodard

Prior to 2007, Walt Disney Imagineering was headed by a President. After a corparate shake up, It was decided that the President role would be dropped. Bruce Vaughn and Craig Russell now both head the division. All creative executives now directly report to Vaughn and Russell.
Walt Disney Creative Entertainment

Executive Vice President, Walt Disney Creative Entertainment - Kevin Eld
Creative Director and Vice President, Parades and Spectaculars - Steve Davison

Walt Disney Imagineering Legends

Ken Anderson - Worked on most of the original Disneyland Fantasyland attractions
Xavier Atencio - Works include Pirates of the Caribbean and the Haunted Mansion
Mary Blair - Designed the overall style and sets for It's A Small World
Roger E. Broggie - Oversaw development of the Santa Fe & Disneyland Railroad, the Disneyland Monorail, and the Matterhorn Bobsleds
Harriet Burns - WDI's first female Imagineer; helped design Audio-Animatronics attractions like The Enchanted Tiki Room and designed The Plaza Inn
Rolly Crump - Re-design of the Adventureland Bazzar, Tower of the Four Winds and Epcot
Claude Coats - Designed the sets for Pirates of the Caribbean, The Haunted Mansion,Adventure Through Inner Space, If You Had Wings, and many other classic attractions
Bill Cottrell - Known as 'Uncle Bill'. He was the First President of WDI and later became President of Retlaw
Marc Davis - Designed most of the characters in The Jungle Cruise, The Enchanted Tiki Room, Pirates of the Caribbean, Haunted Mansion, Carousel of Progress, Country Bear Jamboree, America Sings and many other classic attractions.
Alice Estes Davis - Designed Costumes for Audio-Animatronics in many rides including It's A Small World and Flight to the Moon
Bill Evans - WDI'S Chief of Landscape
Joe Fowler - Helped build both Disneyland and Walt Disney World
Blaine Gibson - Chief sculptor who created many Audio-Animatronics figures, including most in the Hall of Presidents
Harper Goff - In charge for the Jungle Cruise. Help design the look of Disney's early live action flims.
Yale Gracey - Best known for the Haunted Mansion and inventing new attraction technologies.
Bob Gurr - Responsible for designing ride vehicles.
John Hench - Most famous work is Space Mountain's exterior look. Worked on Pirates of the Caribbean, Haunted Mansion, and Spaceship Earth and EPCOT Center in addition to multiple other projects.
Richard Irvine - Master of Planning and designing attractions.
Bill Martin - Helped Design the Monorail, Fantasyland attractions, Pirates of the Caribbean and Walt Disney World.
Sam McKim - Responsible for creating sketches of the early Disneyland attractions including Main Street, U.S.A.
Wathel Rogers - Known for programming and designing Audio-Animatronics
Herb Ryman - Most famous for his bird's-eye drawing of Disneyland. Did many conceptual drawings for WDI and contributed to numerous projects.
Richard and Robert Sherman - Created musical scores such as There's a Great Big Beautiful Tomorrow from the Carousel of Progress, It's A Small World after all and In the Tiki Tiki Tiki Room from Walt Disney's Enchanted Tiki Room.

Former Walt Disney Imagineering Management

Vice Chairman, Walt Disney Imagineering 2005-2007 - Marty Sklar


President, Walt Disney Imagineering 2005-2007 - Don Goodman
President, Walt Disney Imagineering 1987-1996 - Marty Sklar
President, Walt Disney Imagineering 1979-1989 - Carl Bongirno
President, Walt Disney Imagineering 1952-1964 - Bill Cotrell


[edit] Books

Hench, John, with Peggy Van Pelt. Designing Disney: Imagineering and the Art of the Show. Disney Editions, 2003, ISBN 0-7868-5406-5.
Imagineers, The. Walt Disney Imagineering: A Behind the Dreams Look At Making the Magic Real. Disney Editions, 1996, ISBN 0-7868-6246-7 (hardcover); 1998, ISBN 0-7868-8372-3 (paperback).
Imagineers, The. The Imagineering Way: Ideas to Ignite Your Creativity. Disney Editions, 2003, ISBN 0-7868-5401-4.
Imagineers, The (as "The Disney Imagineers"). The Imagineering Workout: Exercises to Shape Your Creative Muscles. Disney Editions, 2005, ISBN 0-7868-5554-1.
Imagineers, The. The Imagineering Field Guide to Disneyland. Disney Editions, 2008, ISBN-10: 1423109759, ISBN-13: 978-1423109754.
Imagineers, The. The Imagineering Field Guide to Animal Kingdom at Walt Disney World. Disney Editions, 2007, ISBN-10: 1423103203, ISBN-13: 978-1423103202.
Imagineers, The. The Imagineering Field Guide to Epcot at Walt Disney World. Disney Editions, 2006, ISBN 0-7868-4886-3.
Imagineers, The. The Imagineering Field Guide to Magic Kingdom at Walt Disney World. Disney Editions, 2005, ISBN 0-7868-5553-3.
Kurtti, Jeff. Walt Disney's Legends of Imagineering and the Genesis of the Disney Theme Park. Disney Editions, 2006, ISBN 0-7868-5559-2.
Alcorn, Steve and David Green. Building a Better Mouse: The Story of the Electronic Imagineers Who Designed Epcot. Themeperks Press, 2007, ISBN 0-9729777-3-2.
Surrell, Jason. The Disney Mountains: Imagineering at Its Peak. Disney Editions, 2007, ISBN 1-4231-0155-3
Ghez, Didier; Littaye, Alain; Translated into English by Cohn, Danielle. Disneyland Paris From Sketch To Reality. Nouveau Millénaire Editions, 2002, ISBN 2-9517883-1-2
Surrell, Jason. Pirates of the Caribbean: From The Magic Kingdom To The Movies. Disney Editions, 2007, ISBN-10: 141769274X, ISBN-13: 978-1417692743.


[edit] Notes

^ http://www.macraesbluebook.com/search/company.cfm?company=656032


[edit] Related pages

Disney research


[edit] External links

Walt Disney Imagineering careers page on disney.com
Walt Disney Imagineering internship opportunities
Rebuilding Tomorrowland, Scott Kirsner, Wired Magazine vol 10.12, September 2002.
Harriet Burns, who help create Disney rides, dies, Associated Press, Sfgate (San Francisco Chronicle), 29 July 2008. Burns was the first female Imagineer.

Coordinates: 34°09′42″N 118°17′21″W﻿ / ﻿34.161674°N 118.289065°W﻿ / 34.161674; -118.289065







v • d • e

Walt Disney Parks and Resorts





Disneyland Resort

Disneyland · Disney's California Adventure · Downtown Disney (California)






Walt Disney World Resort

Magic Kingdom · Epcot · Disney's Hollywood Studios · Disney's Animal Kingdom · Disney's Typhoon Lagoon · Disney's Blizzard Beach · Disney's Wide World of Sports Complex · Downtown Disney (Florida)






Tokyo Disney Resort

Tokyo Disneyland · Tokyo DisneySea · Ikspiari






Disneyland Resort Paris

Disneyland Park · Walt Disney Studios Park · Disney Village






Hong Kong Disneyland Resort

Hong Kong Disneyland · Inspiration Lake Recreation Centre






Shanghai Disneyland Resort

Shanghai Disneyland Park






Disney Cruise Line

Disney Magic · Disney Wonder · Disney Dream · Disney Fantasy · Castaway Cay






Other

Disney Regional Entertainment (ESPN Zone) · Disney Vacation Club · Adventures by Disney · World of Disney






The Walt Disney Company · Walt Disney Imagineering · Walt Disney Creative Entertainment












v • d • e

The Walt Disney Company





Board of directors

Susan Arnold · John Bryson · John S. Chen · Judith Estrin · Robert Iger (President, CEO) · Steve Jobs · Fred Langhammer · Aylwin Lewis · Robert Matschullat · John E. Pepper, Jr. (Chairman) · Orin C. Smith






Walt Disney
Studio Entertainment





Walt Disney
Motion Pictures Group


Disneynature · Hollywood Pictures · Miramax Films · Pixar Animation Studios · Touchstone Pictures · Walt Disney Animation Studios · Walt Disney Pictures







Disney Music Group


Hollywood Records · Lyric Street Records · Mammoth Records ·  · Walt Disney Music Company Walt Disney Records · Wonderland Music Company







Other studio holdings


Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment · Walt Disney Studios (Burbank) · Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures · Walt Disney Theatrical Productions









Disney-ABC
Television Group





ABC Network


ABC · ABC News · ABC News Now · Live Well HD Network







ABC-owned TV stations


KABC-TV · KFSN-TV · KGO-TV · KTRK-TV · WABC-TV · WJRT-TV · WLS-TV · WPVI-TV · WTVD · WTVG







Cable TV Channels


ABC Family · A&E Television Networks (37.5%) · Disney Channel · Disney Family Movies · Disney Cinemagic · Disney XD · ESPN (80%) (see navpage) · GMTV  (25%)  · Jetix · Jetix Play · Lifetime Entertainment Services (50%) · Playhouse Disney · SOAPnet







Radio & TV Distribution


ABC News Radio · Disney-ABC Domestic Television · Disney-ABC International TV · Radio Disney · Radio Disney Latin America







TV Production


ABC Studios · Greengrass Productions · Walt Disney Television Animation









Walt Disney
Parks and Resorts

Adventures by Disney · Disney Cruise Line · Disneyland Resort · Disneyland Resort Paris · Disney Regional Entertainment · Disney Vacation Club · Hong Kong Disneyland Resort · Tokyo Disney Resort · Walt Disney Creative Entertainment · Walt Disney Imagineering · Walt Disney World Resort






Disney Interactive
Media Group





Walt Disney Internet Group


ABC.com · ABCNews.com · Disney.com · ESPN.com · Go.com







Disney Interactive Studios


Avalanche Software · Black Rock Studio · Disney Interactive Studios · Fall Line Studios · Junction Point Studios · Propaganda Games ·









Radio Stations





Radio Disney


KALY-AM · KDDZ-AM · KDIS-AM · KDIS-FM · KDZR-AM · KDIZ-AM · KIID-AM · KKDZ-AM · KMIC-AM · KMIK-AM · KMKI-AM · KMKY-AM · KMUS-AM · KPHN-AM · KRDY-AM · KWDZ-AM · WBWL-AM · WBYU-AM · WCOG-AM · WDDY-AM · WDRD-AM · WDWD-AM · WDZY-AM · WFDF-AM · WGFY-AM · WHKT-AM · WKSH-AM · WMKI-AM · WMYM-AM · WQEW-AM · WRDZ-AM · WRDZ-FM · WSDZ-AM · WWCS-AM[1] · WWMI-AM · WWMK-AM







ESPN Radio/Deportes


KESN-FM · KNIT-AM[2] · KSPN-AM · WEAE-AM · WEPN-AM · WMVP-AM







Other Station(s)


WRJR-AM









Miscellaneous
Assets

Buena Vista · Golden Oak Ranch · Hyperion Books · Muppets Holding Company · The Prospect Studios · Reedy Creek Energy · Times Square Studios · Walt Disney Consumer Products (see navpage)






Notes: 1. Operated by Birach Broadcasting, controlled by Disney under an LMA.  2. Disney manages and operates this station owned by James Crystal Radio under an LMA.

Annual Revenue: ▲ $35.5 billion USD (2007) · Employees: 137,000 (Mar 2008) · Stock Symbol: NYSE: DIS · Website: corporate.disney.go.com












v • d • e

Disneyland Resort





Theme parks

Disneyland (current attractions · past attractions) · Disney's California Adventure (current attractions · past attractions)






Hotels

Disneyland Hotel · Paradise Pier Hotel · Grand Californian Hotel






Resort area

Downtown Disney · World of Disney · Disneyland Monorail System






People

Walt Disney · Ed Grier · Greg Emmer · Matt Ouimet · Cynthia Harriss · Paul Pressler · Jack Lindquist · Ron Dominguez






Events

Happiest Homecoming on Earth · Grad Nites · Magic Music Days · Weddings






Other

Incidents · E ticket · Fastpass (attractions) · PhotoPass · Disneyland, Inc. · Team Disney Anaheim · Partners Federal Credit Union · VoluntEARS






Related articles

Walt Disney Parks and Resorts · Walt Disney Imagineering · Anaheim, California









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walt_Disney_Imagineering"
Categories: 1952 establishments | Amusement ride makers | Disney jargon | Disney technology | Walt Disney Company subsidiaries 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
Français
ไทย









 This page was last modified on 26 April 2009, at 11:45 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
