











Paris - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Paris";
		var wgTitle = "Paris";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "22989";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282097361;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Paris

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the capital of France.  For other uses, see Paris (disambiguation).



Coordinates: 48°52′0″N 2°19′59″E﻿ / ﻿48.86667°N 2.33306°E﻿ / 48.86667; 2.33306





Paris












City flag
City coat of arms



Motto: Fluctuat nec mergitur






The Eiffel Tower (foreground) and the skyscrapers of Paris's suburban La Défense business district (background).


Location













Time Zone
CET (UTC +1)


Coordinates
48°52′0″N 2°19′59″E﻿ / ﻿48.86667°N 2.33306°E﻿ / 48.86667; 2.33306


Administration


Country
France


Region
Île-de-France


Department
Paris (75)


Subdivisions
20 arrondissements


Mayor
Bertrand Delanoë (PS)
(2008-2014)


Statistics


Land area1 [1]
86.9 km2 (33.6 sq mi)


Population2
(January 2006 estimate)
2,167,994


 - Ranking
1st in France


 - Density
24,948 /km² (64,620 /sq mi)


Urban Spread


Urban Area
2,723 km2 (1,051 sq mi) (1999)


 - Population
10,142,977 (2006)


Metro Area
14,518.3 km2 (5,605.5 sq mi) (1999)


 - Population
12,067,000 (2007)


1 French Land Register data, which excludes lakes, ponds, glaciers > 1 km² (0.386 sq mi or 247 acres) and river estuaries.


2 Population sans doubles comptes: residents of multiple communes (e.g., students and military personnel) only counted once.


Paris (pronounced /ˈpærɪs/ in English;  [paʁi] (help·info) in French) is the capital of France and the country's largest city. It is situated on the river Seine, in northern France, at the heart of the Île-de-France region (also known as the "Paris Region"; French: Région parisienne). The city of Paris, within its limits largely unchanged since 1860, has an estimated population of 2,167,994 (January 2006),[2] but the Paris aire urbaine (or metropolitan area) has a population of nearly 12 million,[3] and is one of the most populated metropolitan areas in Europe.[4]
An important settlement for more than two millennia, Paris is today one of the world's leading business and cultural centres, and its influence in politics, education, entertainment, media, fashion, science and the arts all contribute to its status as one of the world's major global cities.[5] According to 2005 estimates, the Paris urban area is Europe's biggest city economy,[6] and is fifth in the world's list of cities by GDP.[7]
Paris and the Paris Region, with €533.6 billion (US$731.3 billion) in 2007, produces more than a quarter of the gross domestic product (GDP) of France.[8] The Paris Region hosts 37 of the Fortune Global 500 companies[9] in several business districts, notably La Défense, the largest purpose-built business district in Europe.[10] Paris also hosts many international organizations such as UNESCO, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) and the informal Paris Club.
Paris is one of the most popular tourist destinations in the world, with 45 million tourists every year in the Paris Region, 60% of whom are foreign visitors.[11] There are numerous iconic landmarks among its many attractions, along with world-famous institutions and popular parks.





Contents


1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Beginnings
2.2 Middle ages to 19th century
2.3 Nineteenth century
2.4 Twentieth century
2.5 Twenty-first century


3 Geography

3.1 Climate


4 Cityscape

4.1 Architecture
4.2 Districts and historical centres

4.2.1 City of Paris
4.2.2 In the Paris area


4.3 Monuments and landmarks
4.4 Parks and gardens
4.5 Cemeteries


5 Culture

5.1 Music
5.2 Opera & theatre
5.3 Cuisine
5.4 Movies
5.5 Tourism
5.6 Sports


6 Economy
7 Demographics

7.1 Density
7.2 Paris agglomeration
7.3 Immigration


8 Administration

8.1 Capital of France
8.2 City government
8.3 Municipal offices
8.4 Capital of the Île-de-France région
8.5 Intercommunality


9 Education

9.1 Primary and secondary education
9.2 Higher-education
9.3 Universities
9.4 Grandes écoles
9.5 Libraries


10 Transportation
11 Water and sanitation
12 International relations

12.1 Sister city
12.2 Partner cities


13 See also
14 References
15 Further reading
16 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Etymology
The name Paris derives from that of its inhabitants, the Gaulish tribe known as the Parisii. The city was called Lutetia (/lutetja/) (more fully, Lutetia Parisiorum, "Lutetia of the Parisii"), during the first- to sixth-century Roman occupation, but during the reign of Julian the Apostate (360–363) the city was renamed Paris.[12]
Others consider that the name of the Parisii tribe comes from the Celtic Gallic word parisio meaning "the working people" or "the craftsmen."[13] Since the early 20th century, Paris has been known as Paname ([panam]) in French slang (Moi j'suis d'Paname, i.e. "I'm from Paname"), a slang name that has been regaining favor with young people in recent years.
Paris has many nicknames, but its most famous is "La Ville-Lumière" (literally, "The Light City"; although most often translated as "The City of Lights" or as "The City of Light"),[14] a name it owes both to its fame as a centre of education and ideas and its early adoption of street lighting.
Paris' inhabitants are known in English as "Parisians" (/pəˈrɪzɪənz/ or /pəˈriːʒənz/) and in French as Parisiens ( [paʁizjɛ̃] (help·info)). Parisians are often pejoratively called Parigots ( [paʁigo] (help·info)) by those living outside the Paris region, but the term may be considered endearing by Parisians themselves.

See Wiktionary for the name of Paris in various languages other than English and French.


History
Main article: History of Paris

Beginnings




Roman bath beneath the Latin Quarter


The earliest archaeological signs of permanent habitation in the Paris area date from around 4200 BC.[15] The Parisii, a sub-tribe of the Celtic Senones, known as boatsmen and traders[citation needed], inhabited the area near the river Seine from around 250 BC[citation needed]. The Romans conquered the Paris basin in 52 BC,[15] with a permanent settlement by the end of the same century on the Left Bank Sainte Geneviève Hill and the Île de la Cité. The Gallo-Roman town was originally called Lutetia, but later Gallicised to Lutèce. It expanded greatly over the following centuries, becoming a prosperous city with a forum, palaces, baths, temples, theatres, and an amphitheatre.[16] The collapse of the Roman empire and the fifth-century Germanic invasions sent the city into a period of decline. By 400 AD, Lutèce, by then largely abandoned by its inhabitants, was little more than a garrison town entrenched into the hastily fortified central island.[15] The city reclaimed its original appellation of "Paris" towards the end of the Roman occupation. The Frankish king Clovis I established Paris as his capital in 508.

Middle ages to 19th century




The Louvre fortress from the early 15th century illuminated manuscript Book of Hours, Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry, month of October.


Paris lost its position as seat of the French realm during occupation of the English-allied Burgundians during the Hundred Years' War, but regained its title when Charles VII of France reclaimed the city in 1437. Although Paris was capital once again, the Crown preferred to remain in the Loire Valley.[17] In 1528, King Francois I shifted the center of power in France from the Loire back to the capital of Paris. During the French Wars of Religion, Paris was a stronghold of the Catholic party. In August 1572, under the reign of Charles IX, while many noble Protestants were in Paris on the occasion of the marriage of Henry of Navarre, the future Henry IV, to Marguerite de Valois, sister of Charles IX, the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre occurred; begun on 24 August, it lasted several days and spread throughout the country.[18][19] During the Fronde, Parisians rose in rebellion and the royal family fled the city (1648). King Louis XIV then moved the royal court permanently to Versailles in 1682. A century later, Paris was the centre stage for the French Revolution, with the Storming of the Bastille in 1789 and the overthrow of the monarchy in 1792.[20] On 31 March 1814, Paris fell to the Russians—the first time in 400 years that the city had been conquered by a foreign power.[21] The Cossack and Kalmyk cavalry units in Russian service entered city.

Nineteenth century
Parisians revolted against the monarchy during the July Revolution of 1830. King Charles X was forced to abdicate the throne. The "February Revolution" of 1848 ended the constitutional monarchy of Louis-Philippe, and led to the creation of the Second Republic.
The Industrial Revolution, the French Second Empire, and the Belle Époque brought Paris the greatest development in its history. From the 1840s, rail transport allowed an unprecedented flow of migrants into Paris attracted by employment in the new industries in the suburbs. The city underwent a massive renovation under Napoleon III and his préfet Haussmann, who levelled entire districts of narrow, winding medieval streets to create the network of wide avenues and neo-classical façades of modern Paris. This programme of "Haussmannization" was designed to make the city both more beautiful and more sanitary for its inhabitants, although it did have the added benefit that, in case of future revolts or revolutions, cavalry charges and rifle fire could be used to deal with the insurrection, while the rebel tactic of barricading so often used during the Revolution would become obsolete.[22]




1889 Universal Exposition.


Cholera epidemics in 1832 and 1849 affected the population of Paris; the 1832 epidemic alone claimed 20,000 of the then-population of 650,000.[23] Paris also suffered greatly from the siege, which ended the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871): in the chaos caused by the fall of Napoleon III's government, the newly-established Commune of Paris sent many of Paris' administrative centres (and city archives) up in flames while 20,000 Parisians were killed by fighting between Commune and government forces in what became known as the semaine sanglante (Bloody Week).[24]
Paris recovered rapidly from these events to host the famous Universal Expositions of the late nineteenth century.[25] The Eiffel Tower was built for the French Revolution centennial 1889 Universal Exposition, as a "temporary" display of architectural engineering prowess but remained the world's tallest building until 1930, and is the city's best-known landmark, while the 1900 Universal Exposition saw the opening of the first Paris Métro line. Paris' World's Fairs also consolidated its position in the tourist industry and as an attractive setting for international technology and trade shows.[25]

Twentieth century
During World War I, Paris was at the forefront of the war effort, having been spared a German invasion by the French and British victory at the First Battle of the Marne in 1914. In 1918-1919, it was the scene of Allied victory parades and peace negotiations. In the inter-war period Paris was famed for its cultural and artistic communities and its nightlife. The city became a gathering place of artists from around the world, from exiled Russian composer Stravinsky and Spanish painters Picasso and Dalí to American writer Hemingway.[26]
On 14 June 1940, five weeks after the start of the Battle of France, Paris fell to German occupation forces, who remained there until the city was liberated in August 1944, two months after the Normandy invasion.[27] Central Paris endured World War II practically unscathed, as there were no strategic targets for Allied bombers (train stations in central Paris are terminal stations; major factories were located in the suburbs). Also, German General von Choltitz did not destroy all Parisian monuments before any German retreat, as ordered by Adolf Hitler, who had visited the city in 1940.[28]




Liberation of Paris in August 1944.


In the post-war era, Paris experienced its largest development since the end of the Belle Époque in 1914. The suburbs began to expand considerably, with the construction of large social estates known as cités and the beginning of the business district La Défense. A comprehensive express subway network, the RER, was built to complement the Métro and serve the distant suburbs, while a network of freeways was developed in the suburbs, centred on the Périphérique expressway circling around the city.[29][30][31]
Since the 1970s, many inner suburbs of Paris (especially the north and eastern ones) have experienced deindustrialization, and the once-thriving cités have gradually become ghettos for immigrants and oases of unemployment.[32][33] At the same time, the city of Paris (within its Périphérique ring) and the western and southern suburbs have successfully shifted their economic base from traditional manufacturing to high-value-added services and high-tech manufacturing, generating great wealth for their residents whose per capita income is among the highest in Europe.[34][35][36] The resulting widening social gap between these two areas has led to periodic unrest since the mid-1980s, such as the 2005 riots which largely concentrated in the northeastern suburbs.[37]

Twenty-first century
In order to alleviate social tensions in the inner suburbs and revitalise the metropolitan economy of Paris, several plans are currently underway. The office of Secretary of State for the Development of the Capital Region was created in March 2008 within the French government. Its office holder, Christian Blanc, is in charge of overseeing President Nicolas Sarkozy's plans for the creation of an integrated Grand Paris ("Greater Paris") metropolitan authority (see Administration section below), as well as the extension of the subway network to cope with the renewed growth of population in Paris and its suburbs, and various economic development projects to boost the metropolitan economy such as the creation of a world-class technology and scientific cluster and university campus on the Saclay plateau in the southern suburbs.




La Défense


In parallel, President Sarkozy also launched in 2008 an international urban and architectural competition for the future development of metropolitan Paris. Ten teams gathering architects, urban planners, geographers, landscape architects will offer their vision for building a Paris metropolis of the 21st century in the post-Kyoto era and make a prospective diagnosis for Paris and its suburbs that will define future developments in Greater Paris for the next 40 years. The goal is not only to build an environmentally sustainable metropolis but also to integrate the inner suburbs with the central City of Paris through large-scale urban planning operations and iconic architectural projects.
Meanwhile, in an effort to boost the global economic image of metropolitan Paris, several skyscrapers (300 m (984 ft) and higher) have been approved since 2006 in the business district of La Défense, to the west of the city proper, and are scheduled to be completed by the early 2010s. Paris authorities also made public they are planning to authorise the construction of skyscrapers within the city proper by relaxing the cap on building height for the first time since the construction of the Tour Montparnasse in the early 1970s.

Geography




Paris seen from Spot Satellite


Main article: Topography of Paris
Paris is located in the north-bending arc of the river Seine and includes two islands, the Île Saint-Louis and the larger Île de la Cité, which form the oldest part of the city. Overall, the city is relatively flat, and the lowest elevation is 35 m (115 ft) above sea level. Paris has several prominent hills, of which the highest is Montmartre at 130 m (427 ft).[38]
Paris, excluding the outlying parks of Bois de Boulogne and Bois de Vincennes, covers an oval measuring 86.928 km2 (34 sq mi) in area.[citation needed] The city's last major annexation of outlying territories in 1860 not only gave it its modern form but created the twenty clockwise-spiralling arrondissements (municipal boroughs). From the 1860 area of 78 km2 (30 sq mi), the city limits were expanded marginally to 86.9 km2 (34 sq mi) in the 1920s. In 1929, the Bois de Boulogne and Bois de Vincennes forest parks were officially annexed to the city, bringing its area to the present 105.39 km2 (41 sq mi)[39].

Climate
Paris has an oceanic climate and is affected by the North Atlantic Current, so the city rarely sees extremely high or low temperatures (such as the heat wave of 2003 and the cold wave of 2006).
Paris has warm summers with average high temperatures of 25 °C (77 °F) and lows of 15 °C (59 °F). Winters are chilly, but rarely below freezing point, with temperatures around 3 °C (37 °F) - 8 °C (46 °F). Spring and Autumn have mild days and cool evenings. Rainfall could occur at any time of the year, and, although not a very rainy city, Paris is known for its sudden showers. The yearly annual precipitation is 642 mm (25 in) with light rainfall fairly distributed throughout the year. Snowfall is a rare occurrence, but the city could see light snow or flurries without accumulation in some winters. The highest temperature ever in Paris was 40.4 °C (105 °F) on 28 July 1948, and the lowest was a −23.9 °C (−11 °F) on 10 December 1879.[40]


 Weather averages for Paris, France 


Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year


Average high °C (°F)
7
(45)
8
(47)
13
(55)
16
(60)
20
(68)
23
(74)
24
(76)
25
(77)
22
(71)
16
(61)
11
(51)
8
(46)
16
(61)


Average low °C (°F)
3
(38)
4
(40)
6
(43)
8
(46)
12
(53)
14
(58)
16
(61)
17
(62)
14
(57)
11
(51)
6
(43)
4
(40)
9
(49)


Precipitation mm (inches)
55
(2.17)
45
(1.77)
52
(2.05)
50
(1.97)
62
(2.44)
53
(2.09)
58
(2.28)
46
(1.81)
53
(2.09)
55
(2.17)
57
(2.24)
55
(2.17)
642
(25.28)


Sunshine hours
59
89
134
176
203
221
240
228
183
133
79
53
1,798


Source: MSN Weather[41] 2009-01-06



Cityscape





Panoramic view over the western side of Paris, at dusk, from the top of the Tour Montparnasse.





Architecture
Much of contemporary Paris is the result of a vast mid-19th century urban remodelling.




Typical Haussmannian building


For centuries, the city had been a labyrinth of narrow streets and half-timber houses, but, beginning in 1852, the Baron Haussmann's vast urbanisation program leveled entire quarters to make way for wide avenues lined with neo-classical stone buildings of bourgeoise standing; most of this 'new' Paris is the Paris we see today. These Second Empire plans are in many cases still applied today, as the city of Paris is still imposing the then-defined "alignement" law (building facades placed according to a pre-defined street width) on many new constructions. A building's height was also defined according to the width of the street it lines, and Paris' building code has seen few changes since the mid-19th century to allow for higher constructions.
Many of Paris's important institutions are located outside the city limits. The financial (La Défense) business district, the main food wholesale market (Rungis), major renowned schools (École Polytechnique, HEC, ESSEC, INSEAD, etc.), world-famous research laboratories (in Saclay or Évry), the largest sport stadium (the Stade de France), and some ministries (notably the Ministry of Transportation) are located in the city's suburbs.

Districts and historical centres
Main article: Paris districts

City of Paris




Place de la Concorde.



Place de la Bastille (4th, 11th and 12th arrondissements, right bank) a district of great historical significance, not only for Paris but for the whole of France. Because of its historical value, the square is often used for political demonstrations, including the massive anti-CPE demonstration of March 2006.
Champs-Élysées (8th arrondissement, right bank) is a seventeenth century garden-promenade-turned-avenue connecting the Concorde and Arc de Triomphe. It is one of the many tourist attractions and a major shopping street of Paris.
Place de la Concorde (8th arrondissement, right bank) is at the foot of the Champs-Élysées, built as the "Place Louis XV", site of the infamous guillotine. The Egyptian obelisk is Paris' "oldest monument". On this place, on either side of the Rue Royale, there are two identical stone buildings: The eastern one houses the French Naval Ministry, the western the luxurious Hôtel de Crillon. Nearby Place Vendôme is famous for its fashionable and deluxe hotels (Hotel Ritz and Hôtel de Vendôme) and its jewellers. Many famous fashion designers have had their salons in the square.
Les Halles (1st arrondissement, right bank) was formerly Paris' central meat and produce market, and, since the late 1970s, a major shopping centre around an important metro connection station (Châtelet-Les Halles, the biggest in Europe). The past Les Halles was destroyed in 1971 and replaced by the Forum des Halles. The central market of Paris, the biggest wholesale food market in the world, was transferred to Rungis, in the southern suburbs.





The Sacré-Cœur Basilica.



Le Marais (3rd and 4th arrondissements) is a trendy Right Bank district. It is a very culturally open place.
Avenue Montaigne (8th arrondissement), next to the Champs-Élysées, is home to luxury brand labels such as Chanel, Louis Vuitton (LVMH), Dior and Givenchy.
Montmartre (18th arrondissement, right bank) is a historic area on the Butte, home to the Basilique du Sacré-Cœur. Montmartre has always had a history with artists and has many studios and cafés of many great artists in that area.
Montparnasse (14th arrondissement) is a historic Left Bank area famous for artists' studios, music halls, and café life. The large Montparnasse - Bienvenüe métro station and the lone Tour Montparnasse skyscraper are located there.
L'Opéra (9th arrondissement, right bank) is the area around the Opéra Garnier is a home to the capital's densest concentration of both department stores and offices. A few examples are the Printemps and Galeries Lafayette grands magasins (department stores), and the Paris headquarters of financial giants such as Crédit Lyonnais and American Express.
Quartier Latin (5th and 6th arrondissements, left bank) is a twelfth-century scholastic centre formerly stretching between the Left Bank's Place Maubert and the Sorbonne campus. It is known for its lively atmosphere and many bistros. Various higher-education establishments, such as the École Normale Supérieure, ParisTech, and the Jussieu university campus, make it a major educational centre in Paris.
Faubourg Saint-Honoré (8th arrondissement, right bank) is one of Paris' high-fashion districts, home to labels such as Hermès and Christian Lacroix.






Avenue des Champs-Élysées at Christmas.




In the Paris area

La Défense (straddling the communes of Courbevoie, Puteaux, and Nanterre, 2.5 km (2 mi) west of the city proper) is a key suburb of Paris and is one of the largest business centres in the world. Built at the western end of a westward extension of Paris' historical axis from the Champs-Élysées, La Défense consists mainly of business high-rises. Initiated by the French government in 1958, the district hosts 3,500,000 m2 (37,673,686 sq ft) of offices, making it the largest district in Europe specifically developed for business. The Grande Arche (Great Arch) of la Défense, which houses a part of the French Transports Minister's headquarters, ends the central Esplanade, around which the district is organised.




Val de Seine



Plaine Saint-Denis (straddling the communes of Saint-Denis, Aubervilliers, and Saint-Ouen, immediately north of the 18th arrondissement, across the Périphérique ring road) is a former derelict manufacturing area that has undergone large-scale urban renewal in the last 10 years. It now hosts the Stade de France, around which is being built the new business district of LandyFrance, with two RER stations (on RER line B and D) and possibly some skyscrapers. In the Plaine Saint-Denis are also located most of France's television studios as well as some major movie studios.
Val de Seine (straddling the 15th arrondissement and the communes of Issy-les-Moulineaux and Boulogne-Billancourt to the south-west of central Paris) is the new media hub of Paris and France, hosting the headquarters of most of France's TV networks (TF1 in Boulogne-Billancourt, France 2 in the 15th arrondissement, Canal+ and the international channels France 24 and Eurosport in Issy-les-Moulineaux), as well as several telecommunication and IT companies such as Neuf Cegetel in Boulogne-Billancourt or Microsoft's Europe, Africa & Middle East regional headquarters in Issy-les-Moulineaux.


Monuments and landmarks
Main article: List of visitor attractions in Paris
Three of the most famous Parisian landmarks are the twelfth-century cathedral Notre Dame de Paris on the Île de la Cité, the nineteenth-century Eiffel Tower, and the Napoleonic Arc de Triomphe.




Église de la Madeleine.


The Eiffel Tower was a "temporary" construction by Gustave Eiffel for the 1889 Universal Exposition, but the tower was never dismantled and is now an enduring symbol of Paris. The Historical axis is a line of monuments, buildings, and thoroughfares that run in a roughly straight line from the city-centre westwards: The line of monuments begins with the Louvre and continues through the Tuileries Gardens, the Champs-Élysées, and the Arc de Triomphe, centred in the Place de l'Étoile circus. From the 1960s, the line was prolonged even further west to the La Défense business district dominated by square-shaped triumphal Grande Arche of its own; this district hosts most of the tallest skyscrapers in the Paris urban area. The Invalides museum is the burial place for many great French soldiers, including Napoleon, and the Panthéon church is where many of France's illustrious men and women are buried. The former Conciergerie prison held some prominent Ancien Régime members before their deaths during the French Revolution. Another symbol of the Revolution are the two Statues of Liberty located on the Île des Cygnes on the Seine and in the Luxembourg Garden. A larger version of the statues was sent as a gift from France to America in 1886 and now stands in New York City's harbour.The Palais Garnier built in the later Second Empire period, houses the Paris Opera and the Paris Opera Ballet, while the former palace of the Louvre now houses one of the most famous museums in the world. The Sorbonne is the most famous part of the University of Paris and is based in the centre of the Latin Quarter. Apart from Notre Dame de Paris, there are several other ecclesiastical masterpieces including the Gothic thirteenth-century Sainte-Chapelle palace chapel and the Église de la Madeleine. 
Parks and gardens
Main article: List of parks and gardens in Paris




Jardin du Luxembourg.


Two of Paris' oldest and famous gardens are the Tuileries Garden, created from the 16th century for a palace on the banks of the Seine near the Louvre, and the Left bank Luxembourg Garden, another former private garden belonging to a château built for the Marie de' Medici in 1612. The Jardin des Plantes, created by Louis XIII's doctor Guy de La Brosse for the cultivation of medicinal plants, was Paris' first public garden.
A few of Paris' other large gardens are Second Empire creations: The former suburban parks of Montsouris, Parc des Buttes Chaumont, and Parc Monceau (formerly known as the "folie de Chartres") are creations of Napoleon III's engineer Jean-Charles Alphand. Another project executed under the orders of Baron Haussmann was the re-sculpting of Paris' western Bois de Boulogne forest-parklands; the Bois de Vincennes, on the city's opposite eastern end, received a similar treatment in years following.
Newer additions to Paris' park landscape are the Parc de la Villette, built by the architect Bernard Tschumi on the location of Paris' former slaughterhouses, the Parc André Citroën, and gardens being laid to the periphery along the traces of its former circular "Petite Ceinture" railway line: Promenade Plantée.

Cemeteries




The Catacombs


Paris' main cemetery was located to its outskirts on its Left Bank from the beginning of its history[citation needed], but this changed with the rise of Catholicism and the construction of churches towards the city-centre, many of them having adjoining burial grounds for use by their parishes. Generations of a growing city population soon filled these cemeteries to overflowing, creating sometimes very unsanitary conditions: Condemned from 1786, the contents of all Paris' parish cemeteries were transferred to a renovated section of Paris' then suburban stone mines outside the Left Bank "Porte d'Enfer" city gate (today 14th arrondissement's place Denfert-Rochereau). After a tentative creation of several smaller suburban cemeteries, Napoleon Bonaparte provided a more definitive solution in the creation of three massive Parisian cemeteries to the outside of the Fermiers-Généraux city tax walls; Open from 1804, these were the cemeteries of Père Lachaise, Montmartre, Montparnasse, and later Passy.
When Paris annexed all communes to the inside of its much larger ring of suburban fortifications in 1860, its cemeteries were once again within its city walls. New suburban cemeteries were created in the early 20th century: The largest of these are the Cimetière Parisien de Saint-Ouen, the Cimetière Parisien de Bobigny-Pantin, the Cimetière Parisien d'Ivry, and the Cimetière Parisien de Bagneux.

Culture

Music
Several yearly festivals take place in Paris, such as Rock en Seine. A famous composer who lives in Paris is Rhys Chatham. Pop music artists: Soko.

Opera & theatre




The Opéra Garnier.


Paris' largest opera houses are the 19th-century Opéra Garnier (historical Paris Opéra) and modern Opéra Bastille; the former tends towards the more classic ballets and operas, and the latter provides a mixed repertoire of classic and modern. In middle of 19th century, there were active two other competing opera houses: Opéra-Comique (which still exists to this day) and Théâtre Lyrique (which in modern times changed its profile and name to Théâtre de la Ville).
Theatre traditionally has occupied a large place in Parisian culture. This still holds true today; and many of its most popular actors today are also stars of French television. Some of Paris' major theatres include Bobino, Théâtre Mogador, and the Théâtre de la Gaîté-Montparnasse. Some Parisian theatres have also doubled as concert halls. Many of France's greatest musical legends, such as Édith Piaf, Maurice Chevalier, Georges Brassens, and Charles Aznavour, found their fame in Parisian concert halls: Legendary yet still-showing examples of these are Le Lido, Bobino, l'Olympia, la Cigale, and le Splendid.
The Élysées-Montmartre, much reduced from its original size, is a concert hall today. The New Morning is one of few Parisian clubs still holding jazz concerts, but the same also specialises in 'indie' music. In more recent times, the Le Zénith hall in Paris' La Villette quarter and a "parc-omnisports" stadium in Bercy serve as large-scale rock concert halls.

Cuisine




The Les Deux Magots cafe.


Paris' culinary reputation has its base in the diverse origins of its inhabitants. In its beginnings, it owed much to the 19th-century organisation of a railway system that had Paris as a centre, making the Capital a focal point for immigration from France's many different regions and gastronomical cultures. This reputation continues through today in a cultural diversity that has since spread to an worldwide level thanks to Paris' continued reputation for culinary finesse and further immigration from increasingly distant climes.
Hotels were another result of widespread travel and tourism, especially Paris' late-19th-century Expositions Universelles (World's Fairs). Of the most luxurious of these, the Hôtel Ritz, appeared in the Place Vendôme from 1898, and the Hôtel de Crillon opened its doors on the north side of the place de la Concorde from 1909.

Movies
See also: List of films set in Paris
Parisians tend to share the same movie-going trends as many of the world's global cities, that is to say with a dominance of Hollywood-generated film entertainment. French cinema comes a close second, with major directors (réalisateurs) such as Claude Lelouch, François Truffaut, Jean-Luc Godard, Claude Chabrol, and Luc Besson, and the more slapstick/popular genre with director Claude Zidi as an example. European and Asian films are also widely shown and appreciated. A specialty of Paris is its very large network of small movie theatres: On a given week, the movie fan has the choice between around 300 old or new movies from all over the world.
Many of Paris' concert/dance halls were transformed into movie theatres when the media became popular from the 1930s. Later, most of the largest cinemas were divided into multiple, smaller rooms: Paris' largest cinema today is by far le Grand Rex theatre with 2,800 seats, whereas other cinemas all have fewer than 1,000 seats. There is now a trend toward modern multiplexes that contain more than 10 or 20 screens.

Tourism


Paris, Banks of the Seine*


UNESCO World Heritage Site







Notre Dame de Paris on the Île de la Cité, on the River Seine.



Type
Cultural


Criteria
i, ii, iv


Reference
600


Region**
Europe and North America


Inscription history


Inscription
1991  (15th Session)


* Name as inscribed on World Heritage List.
** Region as classified by UNESCO.


Main article: List of museums in Paris
Paris from the 11th century was a popular destination for traders, students and religious pilgrimages, but its 'tourist industry' began on a large scale only with the 19th-century appearance of rail travel, namely from the state's re-organisation of France's rail network, with Paris at its centre, from 1848. Among Paris' first mass attractions drawing international interest were the above-mentioned Expositions Universelles that were the origin of Paris' many monuments, namely the Eiffel Tower from 1889. These, in addition to the capital's Second Empire embellishments, did much to make the city itself the attraction it is today.
Paris' museums and monuments are among its highest-esteemed attractions; tourism has motivated both the city and national governments to create new ones. The city's most prized museum, the Louvre, welcomes over 8 million visitors a year, being by far the world's most-visited art museum. The city's cathedrals are another main attraction: Its Notre Dame de Paris and the Basilique du Sacré-Coeur receive 12 million and eight million visitors, respectively. The Eiffel Tower, by far Paris' most famous monument, averages over six million visitors per year and more than 200 million since its construction. Disneyland Resort Paris is a major tourist attraction not only for visitors to Paris but for visitors to the rest of Europe as well, with 14.5 million visitors in 2007.
The Louvre is one of the largest and most famous museums, housing many works of art, including the Mona Lisa (La Joconde) and the Venus de Milo statue. Works by Pablo Picasso and Auguste Rodin are found in Musée Picasso and Musée Rodin, respectively, while the artistic community of Montparnasse is chronicled at the Musée du Montparnasse. Starkly apparent with its service-pipe exterior, the Centre Georges Pompidou, also known as Beaubourg, houses the Musée National d'Art Moderne. Art and artifacts from the Middle Ages and Impressionist eras are kept in Musée Cluny and Musée d'Orsay, respectively, the former with the prized tapestry cycle The Lady and the Unicorn. Paris' newest (and third-largest) museum, the Musée du quai Branly, opened its doors in June 2006 and houses art from Africa, Asia, Oceania, and the Americas.
Many of Paris' once-popular local establishments have come to cater to the tastes and expectations of tourists, rather than local patrons. Le Lido, The Moulin Rouge cabaret-dancehall, for example, are a staged dinner theatre spectacle, a dance display that was once but one aspect of the cabaret's former atmosphere. All of the establishment's former social or cultural elements, such as its ballrooms and gardens, are gone today. Much of Paris' hotel, restaurant and night entertainment trades have become heavily dependent on tourism.

Sports




Stade de France.


Paris' most popular sport clubs are the football club Paris Saint-Germain FC, the basketball team Paris Basket Racing, and the rugby union club Stade Français. The 80,000-seat Stade de France, built for the 1998 FIFA World Cup, is located in Saint-Denis. It is used for football, rugby union and track and field athletics. It hosts annually French national rugby team's home matches of the Six Nations Championship, French national football team for friendlies and major tournaments qualifiers, and several important matches of the Stade Français rugby team.
In addition to Paris Saint-Germain FC, the city has a number of other amateur football clubs: Paris FC, Red Star, RCF Paris and Stade Français Paris. The last is the football section of the omnisport club of the same name, most notable for its rugby team.
The city's major rugby side is Stade Français. Racing Métro 92 Paris (who now play in Rugby Pro D2) is another rugby team, which actually contested the first ever final against Stade Français in 1892. Paris also hosted the 1900 and 1924 Olympic Games and was venue for the 1938 and 1998 FIFA World Cups.
Although the starting point and the route of the famous Tour de France varies each year, the final stage always finishes in Paris, and, since 1975, the race has finished on the Champs-Elysées. Tennis is another popular sport in Paris and throughout France. The French Open, held every year on the red clay of the Roland Garros National Tennis Centre near the Bois de Boulogne, is one of the four Grand Slam events of the world professional tennis tour. The 2006 UEFA Champions League Final between Arsenal and FC Barcelona was played in the Stade de France. Paris hosted the 2007 Rugby World Cup final at Stade de France on 20 October 2007.

Economy
Main article: Economy of Paris




Grande Arche.


With a 2007 GDP of €533.6 billion[8] (US$731.3 billion), the Paris region has one of the highest GDPs in Europe, making it an engine of the global economy: Were it a country, it would rank as the seventeenth-largest economy in the world, almost as large as the Dutch economy.[42] The Paris Region is France's premier centre of economic activity: While its population accounted for 18.8% of the total population of metropolitan France in 2007,[43] its GDP accounted for 28.7% of metropolitan France's GDP.[8] Activity in the Paris urban area, though diverse, does not have a leading specialised industry (such as Los Angeles with entertainment industries or London and New York with financial industries in addition to their other activities). Recently, the Paris economy has been shifting towards high-value-added service industries (finance, IT services, etc.) and high-tech manufacturing (electronics, optics, aerospace, etc).
The Paris region's most intense economic activity through the central Hauts-de-Seine département and suburban La Défense business district places Paris' economic centre to the west of the city, in a triangle between the Opéra Garnier, La Défense, and the Val de Seine. Paris' administrative borders have little consequences on the limits of its economic activity: Although most workers commute from the suburbs to work in the city, many commute from the city to work in the suburbs. Although the Paris economy is largely dominated by services, it remains an important manufacturing powerhouse of Europe, especially in industrial sectors such as automobiles, aeronautics, and electronics. Over recent decades, the local economy has moved towards high-value-added activities, in particular business services.
The 1999 census indicated that, of the 5,089,170 persons employed in the Paris urban area, 16.5% worked in business services, 13.0% in commerce (retail and wholesale trade), 12.3% in manufacturing, 10.0% in public administrations and defence, 8.7% in health services, 8.2% in transportation and communications, 6.6% in education, and the remaining 24.7% in many other economic sectors. In the manufacturing sector, the largest employers were the electronic and electrical industry (17.9% of the total manufacturing workforce in 1999) and the publishing and printing industry (14.0% of the total manufacturing workforce), with the remaining 68.1% of the manufacturing workforce distributed among many other industries. Tourism and tourist related services employ 6.2% of Paris' workforce, and 3.6% of all workers within the Paris Region.[44]

Demographics

Demographics within the Paris Region
(according to the INSEE 2005 estimates)




Ile-de-France départements


Areas
Population
2006 est.
Area
Density
1999-2005
pop. growth


City of Paris
(département 75)
2,168,000
105 km2 (41 sq mi)
20,648/km² (53,478/sq mi)
+1.33%


Inner ring
(Petite Couronne)
(Depts. 92, 93, 94)
4,310,000
657 km2 (254 sq mi)
6,560/km² (16,990/sq mi)
+5.34%


Outer ring
(Grande Couronne)
(Depts. 77, 78, 91, 95)
5,013,000
11,249 km2 (4,343 sq mi)
446/km² (1,155/sq mi)
+4.25%


Ile-de-France
(entire région)
11,491,000
12,011 km2 (4,637 sq mi)
957/km² (2,479/sq mi)
+4.08%


Statistical Growth (INSEE 1999 census)


Areas
Population
1999 census
Area
Density
1990-1999
pop. growth


Urban area
(Paris agglomeration)
9,644,507
2,723 km2 (1,051 sq mi)
3,542/km² (9,174/sq mi)
+1.85%


Metro area
(Paris aire urbaine)
11,174,743
14,518 km2 (5,605 sq mi)
770/km² (1,994/sq mi)
+2.90%


Main article: Demographics of Paris
The population of the city of Paris was 2,125,246 at the 1999 census, lower than its historical peak of 2.9 million in 1921. The city's population loss mirrors the experience of most other core cities in the developed world that have not expanded their boundaries. The principal factors in the process are a significant decline in household size, and a dramatic migration of residents to the suburbs between 1962 and 1975. Factors in the migration include de-industrialisation, high rent, the gentrification of many inner quarters, the transformation of living space into offices, and improved affluence among working families. The city's population loss was one of the most severe among international municipalities and the largest for any that had achieved more than 2,000,000 residents. These losses are generally seen as negative for the city; the city administration is trying to reverse them with some success, as the population estimate of July 2004 showed a population increase for the first time since 1954, reaching a total of 2,144,700 inhabitants.

Density
Paris is one of the most densely populated cities in the world. Its density, excluding the outlying woodland parks of Boulogne and Vincennes, was 24,448 inhabitants per square kilometre (63,320/sq mi) in the 1999 official census, which could be compared only with some Asian megapolis. Even including the two woodland areas its population density was 20,164 inhabitants per square kilometre (52,224.5/sq mi), the fifth-most-densely populated commune in France following Le Pré-Saint-Gervais, Vincennes, Levallois-Perret, and Saint-Mandé, all of which border the city proper. The most sparsely populated quarters are the western and central office and administration-focussed arrondissements. The city's population is densest in the northern and eastern arrondissements; the 11th arrondissement had a density of 40,672 inhabitants per square kilometre (105,340/sq mi) in 1999, and some of the same arrondissement's eastern quarters had densities close to 100,000/km² (260,000/sq mi) in the same year.

Paris agglomeration
The City of Paris covers an area much smaller than the urban area of which it is the core. At present, Paris' real urbanisation, defined by the pôle urbain (urban area) statistical area, covers 2,723 km2 (1,051 sq mi),[45] or an area about 26 times larger than the city itself. The administration of Paris' urban growth is divided between itself and its surrounding départements: Paris' closest ring of three adjoining departments, or petite couronne ("small ring") are fully saturated with urban growth, and the ring of four departments outside of these, the grande couronne départements, are only covered in their inner regions by Paris' urbanisation. These eight départements form the larger administrative Île-de-France région; most of this region is filled, and overextended in places, by the Paris aire urbaine.
The Paris agglomeration has shown a steady rate of growth since the end of the late 16th century French Wars of Religion, save brief setbacks during the French Revolution and World War II[citation needed]. Suburban development has accelerated in recent years: With an estimated total of 11.4 million inhabitants for 2005, the Île-de-France région shows a rate of growth double that of the 1990s.[46][47]

Immigration
By law, French censuses do not ask questions regarding ethnicity or religion, but do gather information concerning one's country of birth. From this it is still possible to determine that the Paris and its aire urbaine (metropolitan area) is one of the most multi-cultural in Europe: At the 1999 census, 19.4% of its total population was born outside of metropolitan France.[48] At the same census, 4.2% of the Paris aire urbaine's population were recent immigrants (people who had immigrated to France between 1990 and 1999),[49] in their majority from mainland China and Africa.[50]
The first wave of international migration to Paris started as early as in 1820 with the arrivals of German peasants fleeing an agricultural crisis in their homeland. Several waves of immigration followed continuously until today: Italians and central European Jews during the 19th century; Russians after the revolution of 1917 and Armenians fleeing genocide in the Ottoman Empire; colonial citizens during World War I and later; Poles between the two world wars; Spaniards, Italians, Portuguese, and North Africans from the 1950s to the 1970s; North African Jews after the independence of those countries; Africans and Asians since then.[51]

Administration
Paris, its administrative limits unchanged since 1860, is one of few cities that have not evolved politically with its real demographic growth; this issue is at present being discussed in plans for a "Grand Paris" (Greater Paris) that will extend Paris' administrative limits to embrace much more of its urban tissue.[52]

Capital of France
As the capital, Paris is the seat of France's national government. For the executive, the two chief officers each have their own official residences, which also serve as their offices. The President of France resides at the Élysée Palace in the 8th arrondissement, while the Prime Minister's seat is at the Hôtel Matignon in the 7th arrondissement. Government ministries are located in various parts of the city; many are located in the 7th arrondissement, near the Matignon.




The Élysée Palace.


The two houses of the French Parliament are also located on the Left Bank. The upper house, the Senate, meets in the Palais du Luxembourg in the 6th arrondissement, while the more important lower house, the Assemblée Nationale, meets in the Palais Bourbon in the 7th. The President of the Senate, the second-highest public official in France after the President of the Republic, resides in the "Petit Luxembourg", a smaller palace annex to the Palais du Luxembourg.
France's highest courts are located in Paris. The Court of Cassation, the highest court in the judicial order, which reviews criminal and civil cases, is located in the Palais de Justice on the Île de la Cité, while the Conseil d'État, which provides legal advice to the executive and acts as the highest court in the administrative order, judging litigation against public bodies, is located in the Palais Royal in the 1st arrondissement.
The Constitutional Council, an advisory body with ultimate authority on the constitutionality of laws and government decrees, also meets in the Palais Royal.

City government
Main articles: Paris mayors and Arrondissements of Paris




Arrondissements of Paris.


Paris has been a commune (municipality) since 1834 (and also briefly between 1790 and 1795). At the 1790 division (during the French Revolution) of France into communes, and again in 1834, Paris was a city only half its modern size, but, in 1860, it annexed bordering communes, some entirely, to create the new administrative map of twenty municipal arrondissements the city still has today. These municipal subdivisions describe a clockwise spiral outward from its most central, the 1st arrondissement.
In 1790, Paris became the préfecture (seat) of the Seine département, which covered much of the Paris region. In 1968, it was split into four smaller ones: The city of Paris became a distinct département of its own, retaining the Seine's departmental number of 75 (originating from the Seine département's position in France's alphabetical list), while three new départements of Hauts-de-Seine, Seine-Saint-Denis and Val-de-Marne were created and given the numbers 92, 93, and 94, respectively. The result of this division is that today Paris' limits as a département are exactly those of its limits as a commune, a situation unique in France.

Municipal offices




Paris City Hall.


Each of Paris' 20 arrondissements has a directly elected council (conseil d'arrondissement), which, in turn, elects an arrondissement mayor. A selection of members from each arrondissement council form the Council of Paris (conseil de Paris), which, in turn, elects the mayor of Paris.
In medieval times, Paris was governed by a merchant-elected municipality whose head was the provost of the merchants: In addition to regulating city commerce, the provost of the merchants was responsible for some civic duties such as the guarding of city walls and the cleaning of city streets. The creation of the provost of Paris from the 13th century diminished the merchant Provost's responsibilities and powers considerably: A direct representative of the king, in a role resembling somewhat the préfet of later years, the Provost of Paris oversaw the application and execution of law and order in the city and its surrounding prévôté (county). Many functions from both provost offices were transferred to the office of the crown-appointed lieutenant general of police upon its creation in 1667.

Composition of the Council of Paris

Party
Seats


•
Socialist Party
72



Union for a Popular Movement
55


•
The Greens
9


•
French Communist Party
8



New Centre
8


•
Citizen and Republican Movement
5


•
Miscellaneous Left
2


•
Left Party
2



MoDem
1


Paris' last Prévôt des marchands was assassinated the afternoon of the 14th of July 1789 uprising that was the French Revolution Storming of the Bastille. Paris became an official "commune" from the creation of the administrative division on 14 December the same year, and its provisional "Paris commune" revolutionary municipality was replaced with the city's first municipal constitution and government from 9 October 1790.[53] Through the turmoil of the 1794 Thermidorian Reaction, it became apparent that revolutionary Paris' political independence was a threat to any governing power: The office of mayor was abolished the same year, and its municipal council one year later.
Although the municipal council was recreated in 1834, for most of the 19th and 20th centuries Paris, along with the larger Seine département of which it was a centre, was under the direct control of the state-appointed préfet of the Seine, in charge of general affairs there; the state-appointed Prefect of Police was in charge of police in the same jurisdiction. Save for a few brief occasions, the city did not have a mayor until 1977, and the Paris Prefecture of Police is still under state control today.
Despite its dual existence as commune and département, Paris has a single council to govern both; the Council of Paris, presided by the mayor of Paris, meets either as a municipal council (conseil municipal) or as a departmental council (conseil général) depending on the issue to be debated.
Paris' modern administrative organisation still retains some traces of the former Seine département jurisdiction. The Prefecture of Police (also directing Paris' fire brigades), for example, has still a jurisdiction extending to Paris' petite couronne of bordering three départements for some operations such as fire protection or rescue operations, and is still directed by France's national government. Paris has no municipal police force, although it does have its own brigade of traffic wardens.

Capital of the Île-de-France région




Departments of Île-de-France


As part of a 1961 nation-wide administrative effort to consolidate regional economies, Paris as a département became the capital of the new région of the District of Paris, renamed the Île-de-France région in 1976. It encompasses the Paris département and its seven closest départements. Its regional council members, since 1986, have been chosen by direct elections. The prefect of the Paris département (who served as the prefect of the Seine département before 1968) is also prefect of the Île-de-France région, although the office lost much of its power following the creation of the office of mayor of Paris in 1977.

Intercommunality
Few of the above changes have taken into account Paris' existence as an agglomeration. Unlike in most of France's major urban areas such as Lille and Lyon, there is no intercommunal entity in the Paris urban area, no intercommunal council treating the problems of the region's dense urban core as a whole; Paris' alienation of its suburbs is indeed a problem today, and considered by many to be the main causes of civil unrest such as the suburban riots in 2005. A direct result of these unfortunate events is propositions for a more efficient metropolitan structure to cover the city of Paris and some of the suburbs, ranging from a socialist idea of a loose "metropolitan conference" (conférence métropolitaine) to the right-wing idea of a more integrated Grand Paris ("Greater Paris").

Education
In the early ninth century, the emperor Charlemagne mandated all churches to give lessons in reading, writing and basic arithmetic to their parishes, and cathedrals to give a higher-education in the finer arts of language, physics, music, and theology; at that time, Paris was already one of France's major cathedral towns and beginning its rise to fame as a scholastic centre. By the early 13th century, the Île de la Cité Notre-Dame cathedral school had many famous teachers, and the controversial teachings of some of these led to the creation of a separate Left-Bank Sainte-Genevieve University that would become the centre of Paris' scholastic Latin Quarter best represented by the Sorbonne university.
Twelve centuries later, education in Paris and the Paris region (Île-de-France région) employs approximately 330,000 persons, 170,000 of whom are teachers and professors teaching approximately 2.9 million children and students in around 9,000 primary, secondary, and higher education schools and institutions.[54]




Lycée Louis-le-Grand



Primary and secondary education
Paris is home to several of France's most prestigious high-schools such as Lycée Louis-le-Grand, and Lycée Henri-IV. Other high-schools of international renown in the Paris area include the Lycée International de Saint Germain-en-Laye and the École Active Bilingue Jeannine Manuel.

Higher-education
As of the academic year 2004-2005, the Paris Region's 17 public universities, with its 359,749 registered students,[55] is the largest concentration of university students in Europe.[56] The Paris Region's prestigious grandes écoles and scores of university-independent private and public schools have an additional 240,778 registered students, that, together with the university population, creates a grand total of 600,527 students in higher education that year.[55]

Universities
The cathedral of Notre-Dame was the first centre of higher-education before the creation of the University of Paris. The universitas was chartered by King Philip Augustus in 1200, as a corporation granting teachers (and their students) the right to rule themselves independently from crown law and taxes. At the time, many classes were held in open air. Non-Parisian students and teachers would stay in hostels, or "colleges", created for the boursiers coming from afar. Already famous by the 13th century, the University of Paris had students from all of Europe. Paris' Rive Gauche scholastic centre, dubbed "Latin Quarter" as classes were taught in Latin then, would eventually regroup around the college created by Robert de Sorbon from 1257, the Collège de Sorbonne. The University of Paris in the 19th century had six faculties: law, science, medicine, pharmaceutical studies, literature, and theology.




The University of Paris.


Following the 1968 student riots, there was an extensive reform of the University of Paris, in an effort to disperse the centralised student body. The following year, the former unique University of Paris was split between thirteen autonomous universities ("Paris I" to "Paris XIII") located throughout the City of Paris and its suburbs. Each of these universities inherited only some of the departments of the old University of Paris, and are not generalist universities. Paris I, II, V, and X, inherited the Law School; Paris V inherited the School of Medicine as well; Paris VI and VII inherited the scientific departments; etc.
In 1991, four more universities were created in the suburbs of Paris, reaching a total of seventeen public universities for the Paris (Île-de-France) région. These new universities were given names (based on the name of the suburb in which they are located) and not numbers like the previous thirteen: University of Cergy-Pontoise, University of Évry Val d'Essonne, University of Marne-la-Vallée, and University of Versailles Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines. Other institutions include the University of Westminster's Centre for International Studies, the American University of Paris, and the American Business School of Paris.
There is also a University of London Institute in Paris(ULIP) which offers undergraduate and postgraduate degrees in French Studies ratified by the University of London.

Grandes écoles
The Paris region hosts France's highest concentration of the prestigious grandes écoles, which are specialised centres of higher-education outside the public university structure. The prestigious public universities are usually considered grands établissements. Most of the grandes écoles were relocated to the suburbs of Paris in the 1960s and 1970s, in new campuses much larger than the old campuses within the crowded city of Paris, though the École Normale Supérieure has remained on rue d'Ulm in the 5th arrondissement. The Paris area has a high number of engineering schools, led by the prestigious Paris Institute of Technology (ParisTech), which comprises several colleges such as École Polytechnique, École des Mines, École Centrale Paris, Supélec, Arts et Métiers, Télécom Paris, and École des Ponts et Chaussées. There are also many business schools, including , HEC, ESSEC, INSEAD, and ESCP-EAP European School of Management. Although the elite administrative school ENA has been relocated to Strasbourg, the political science school Sciences-Po is still located in Paris' Left bank 7th arrondissement.
The grandes écoles system is supported by a number of preparatory schools that offer courses of two to three years' duration called Classes Préparatoires, also known as classes prépas or simply prépas. These courses provide entry to the grandes écoles. Many of the best prépas are located in Paris, including Lycée Louis-le-Grand, Lycée Henri-IV, Lycée Saint-Louis, Lycée Janson de Sailly, and Lycée Carnot. Two other top-ranking prépas (Lycée Hoche and Lycée Privé Sainte-Geneviève) are located in Versailles, near Paris. Student selection is based on school grades and teacher remarks. Prépas attract most of the best students in France and are known to be very demanding in terms of work load and psychological stress.





The four buildings of the Bibliothèque nationale de France.




Libraries
The Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF) operates libraries in Paris. Its Paris libraries include François-Mitterrand Library, Richelieu Library, Louvois, Opéra Library, and Arsenal Library.[57]
The American Library in Paris opened in 1920. It is a part of a private, non-profit organization.[58] The modern library originated from cases of books sent by the American Library Association to U.S. soldiers in France.[59] A incarnation existed in the 1850s.[60]

Transportation
Main article: Transport in Paris
See also: List of railway stations in Paris
The role of Paris as an international trade centre has caused its transportation system to develop considerably throughout history, and it continues its growth at a fast pace today. The public transit networks of the Paris region are coordinated by the Syndicat des transports d'Île-de-France[61] (STIF), formerly Syndicat des transports parisiens (STP).




Paris Metro.


The members of this syndicate are the Ile-de-France region and the eight departments of this region. The syndicate coordinates public transport and contracts it out to the RATP (operating 654 bus lines, the Métro, three tramway lines, and sections of the RER), the SNCF (operating suburban rails, a tramway line and the other sections of the RER) and the Optile consortium of private operators managing 1,070 minor bus lines.
The Métro is Paris' most important transportation system. The system, with 300 stations (384 stops) connected by 214 km (133.0 mi) of rails, comprises 16 lines, identified by numbers from 1 to 14, with two minor lines, 3bis and 7bis, so numbered because they used to be branches of their respective original lines, and only later became independent. In October 1998, the new line 14 was inaugurated after a 70-year hiatus in inaugurating fully new métro lines. Because of the short distance between stations on the Métro network, lines were too slow to be extended further into the suburbs, as is the case in most other cities. As such, an additional express network, the RER, has been created since the 1960s to connect more-distant parts of the urban area. The RER consists in the integration of modern city-centre subway and pre-existing suburban rail. Nowadays, the RER network comprises 5 lines, 257 stops and 587 km (365 mi) of rails.
In addition, Paris is served by a light-rail network of 4 lines, the tramway: Line T1 runs from Saint-Denis to Noisy-le-Sec, line T2 runs from La Défense to Issy, line T3 runs from Pont de Garigliano to Porte d'Ivry, line T4 runs from Bondy to Aulnay-sous-Bois. Paris also offers a bike sharing system called Vélib' with more than 20,000 public bicycles distributed at 1,450 parking stations, which can be rented for short and medium distances including one way trips. The new ferry service Voguéo has been inaugurated in June 2008, on the rivers Seine and Marne.




Vélib'.


Paris is a central hub of the national rail network. The six major railway stations, Gare du Nord, Gare Montparnasse, Gare de l'Est, Gare de Lyon, Gare d'Austerlitz, and Gare Saint-Lazare, are connected to three networks: The TGV serving 4 High-speed rail lines, the normal speed Corail trains, and the suburban rails (Transilien).
Paris is served by two major airports: Orly Airport, which is south of Paris, and the Charles de Gaulle International Airport, nearby Roissy-en-France, which is one of the busiest in the world. A third and much smaller airport, Beauvais Tillé Airport, located in the town of Beauvais, 70 km (43 mi) to the north of the city, is used by charter and low-cost airlines. The fourth airport, Le Bourget nowadays only hosts business jets, air trade shows and the aerospace museum.
The city is also the most important hub of France's motorway network, and is surrounded by three orbital freeways: the Périphérique, which follows the approximate path of 19th-century fortifications around Paris, the A86 motorway in the inner suburbs, and finally the Francilienne motorway in the outer suburbs. Paris has an extensive road network with over 2,000 km (1,243 mi) of highways and motorways. By road, Brussels can be reached in three hours, Frankfurt in 6 hours and Barcelona in 12 hours. By train, London is now just 2 h 15 min away, Brussels can be reached in more or less 1h30min, and the south of France with cities like Marseille or Bordeaux in 3 hours.

Water and sanitation




Canal Saint-Martin.


Paris in its early history had only the Seine and Bièvre rivers for water. Later forms of irrigation were a first-century Roman aqueduct from southerly Wissous (later left to ruin); sources from the Right bank hills from the late 11th century; from the 15th century, an aqueduct built roughly along the path of the abandoned Wissous aqueduct; and, from 1809, the canal de l'Ourcq, providing Paris with water from less-polluted rivers to the northeast of the capital. Paris would have its first constant and plentiful source of drinkable water only from the late 19th century: From 1857, the civil engineer Eugène Belgrand, under Napoleon III's Préfet Haussmann, oversaw the construction of a series of new aqueducts that brought sources from locations all around the city to several reservoirs built atop the Capital's highest points of elevation. From then on, the new reservoir system became Paris' principal source of drinking water, and the remains of the old system, pumped into lower levels of the same reservoirs, were from then used for the cleaning of Paris' streets. This system is still a major part of Paris' modern water supply network.
Paris has over 2,400 km of underground passageways[62] dedicated to the evacuation of Paris' liquid wastes. Most of these date from the late 19th century, a result of the combined plans of the Préfet Baron Haussmann and the civil engineer Eugène Belgrand to improve the then-very unsanitary conditions in the Capital. Maintained by a round-the-clock service since their construction, only a small percentage of Paris' sewer réseau has needed complete renovation. The entire Paris network of sewers and collectors has been managed since the late 20th century by a computerised network system, known under the acronym "G.A.AS.PAR", that controls all of Paris' water distribution, even the flow of the river Seine through the capital.

International relations
Paris has one sister city and numerous partner cities.[63][64]

Sister city

 Rome, Italy, since 1956 (Seule Paris est digne de Rome; seule Rome est digne de Paris / Solo Parigi è degna di Roma; Solo Roma è degna di Parigi / "Only Paris is worthy of Rome; Only Rome is worthy of Paris").[64]


Partner cities






 Algiers, Algeria, since 2003.[64]
 Amman, Jordan, since 1987.[64]
 Athens, Greece, since 2000.[64]
 Beijing, China, since 1997.[64]
 Beirut, Lebanon, since 1992.[64]
 Berlin, Germany, since 1987.[64]
 Buenos Aires, Argentina, since 1999.[63]
 Cairo, Egypt, since 1985.[64]
 Casablanca, Morocco, since 2004.[63]
 Chicago, United States, since 1996.[64]
 Copenhagen, Denmark, since 2005.[63]
 Geneva, Switzerland, since 2002.[64]
 Jakarta, Indonesia, since 1995.[64]
 Kyoto, Japan, since 1958.[64]
 Lisbon, Portugal, since 1998.[64]
 London, United Kingdom, since 2001.[64]
 Madrid, Spain, since 2000.[64]
 Mexico City, Mexico, since 1999.[64]
 Montreal, Canada, since 2006.[63]
 Moscow, Russia, since 1992.[64]






 Porto Alegre, Brazil, since 2001.[63]
 Prague, Czech Republic, since 1997.[64]
 Quebec City, Canada, since 2003.[64]
 Rabat, Morocco, since 2004.[63]
 Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, since 1997.[64]
 Saint Petersburg, Russia, since 1997.[64]
 San‘a’, Yemen, since 1987.[64]
 San Francisco, United States, since 1996.[64]
 Santiago, Chile, since 1997.[64]
 São Paulo, Brazil, since 2004.[64]
 Seoul, South Korea, since 1991.[64]
 Sofia, Bulgaria, since 1998.[64]
 Sydney, Australia, since 1998.[64]
 Tbilisi, Georgia, since 1997.[64]
 Tokyo, Japan, since 1982.[64]
 Tunis, Tunisia, since 2004.[63]
 Warsaw, Poland, since 1999.[64]
 Washington, D.C., United States, since 2000.[64]
 Yerevan, Armenia, since 1998.[64]







See also




Paris portal




Paris Exposition
Large Cities Climate Leadership Group
Megacity
Paris chronology
University of London Institute in Paris


References


^ Excluding Bois de Boulogne and Bois de Vincennes
^ (French) Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Économiques. "" Estimation de population par département, sexe et grande classe d’âge – Années 1990 à 2006"". http://www.insee.fr/fr/ffc/docs_ffc/ElpDep_5trages90-06.xls. Retrieved on 2008-02-16. 
^ (French) Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Économiques. ""Aire Urbaine '99 – pop totale par sexe et âge"". http://www.recensement.insee.fr/RP99/rp99/wr_page.affiche?p_id_nivgeo=M&p_id_loca=001&p_id_princ=POP1&p_theme=ALL&p_typeprod=ALL&p_langue=FR. Retrieved on 2006-04-10. 
^ Stefan Helders, World Gazetteer. ""World Metropolitan Areas"". http://www.world-gazetteer.com/wg.php?x=&men=gcis&lng=en&dat=32&srt=pnan&col=aohdq&va=&pt=a. Retrieved on 2007-01-18. 
^ Globalization and World Cities (GaWC) Study Group and Network, Loughborough University. ""Inventory of World Cities"". http://www.lboro.ac.uk/gawc/citylist.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-04. 
^ "London ranked as world's six largest economy". ITWeek. http://www.itweek.co.uk/accountancyage/news/2184877/london-ranked-world-six-largest=. Retrieved on 2008-08-04. 
^ PriceWaterhouseCoopers, "UK Economic Outlook, March 2007", page 5. ""Table 1.2 – Top 30 urban agglomeration GDP rankings in 2005 and illustrative projections to 2020 (using UN definitions and population estimates)"" (PDF). http://www.ukmediacentre.pwc.com/imagelibrary/downloadMedia.asp?MediaDetailsID=863. Retrieved on 2007-03-09. 
^ a b c (French) Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Économiques. "Produits Intérieurs Bruts Régionaux (PIBR) en valeur en millions d'euros" (XLS). http://www.insee.fr/fr/ppp/bases-de-donnees/donnees-detaillees/cnat-region/pib_reg.xls. Retrieved on 2008-10-22. 
^ Fortune. "Global Fortune 500 by countries: France". http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/global500/2008/countries/France.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-28. 
^ Logistics-in-Europe.com, Vertical Mail. ""Paris Ile-de-France, a head start in Europe"". http://www.logistics-in-europe.com/pidf-gb/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-04. 
^ Île-de-France Regional Council. "Tourism". http://www.iledefrance.fr/english/sports-loisirs-tourisme/tourism/tourism/. Retrieved on 2009-01-19. 
^ The City of Antiquity, official history of Paris by The Paris Convention and Visitors Bureau
^ (French) Georges Dottin (1920). La Langue Gauloise : Grammaire, Textes et Glossaire. Paris: C. Klincksieck. isbn = 2051002088. 
^ [1], English Version of "Presentation of the City"
^ a b c Mairie de Paris. "Paris, Roman City - Chronology". http://www.paris.culture.fr/en/ow_chrono.htm. Retrieved on 2006-07-16. 
^ Mairie de Paris. "Paris, Roman City - The City". http://www.paris.culture.fr/en/. Retrieved on 2006-07-16. 
^ Loire Valley: Land of a thousand chateaux, CNN.com
^ Massacre of Saint Bartholomew's Day, Britannica Online Encyclopedia
^ Bayrou, François, Henri IV, le roi libre, Flammarion, Paris, 1994, pp. 121-130, (French).
^ consulted 29 November 2008.
^ Battle of Paris 1814
^ Jones, Colin (2005) Paris: The Biography of a City (New York, NY: Penguin Viking), pp. 318–319.
^ Amicale Genealogie, La Petite Gazette Généalogique. ""Le Cholera"" (in French). http://www.amicale-genealogie.org/Histoires_temps-passe/Epidemies/chol01.htm. Retrieved on 2006-04-10. 
^ Jones, Colin (2005) Paris: The Biography of a City (New York, NY: Penguin Viking), pp. 324–325.
^ a b Jones, Colin (2005) Paris: The Biography of a City (New York, NY: Penguin Viking), p. 334.
^ Jones, Colin (2005) Paris: The Biography of a City (New York, NY: Penguin Viking), pp. 388–391
^ Overy, Richard (2006). Why the Allies Won. Pimlico. pp. 215–216. ISBN 1845950658. 
^ Bell, Kelly. "Dietrich von Choltitz: Saved of Paris From Destruction During World War II". www.TheHistoryNet.com. http://www.historynet.com/magazines/world_war_2/3031316.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-17. 
^ (French) Émilie Willaert, professor of History and Geography. "La région parisienne en chantier". http://www.cndp.fr/revueTDC/913-81441.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-03. 
^ (French) Jérome Toulza, Université de Marne-la-Vallée. "La conception du RER" (PDF). http://www.univ-mlv.fr/mastergu/Docs_IMO/Memimo_0304/Toulza.PDF. Retrieved on 2008-08-03. 
^ Mathieu Flonneau. "City infrastructures and city dwellers: Accommodating the automobile in twentieth-century Paris". The Journal of Transport History. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qa3884/is_200603/ai_n17181949/pg_1?tag=artBody;col1. Retrieved on 2008-08-03. 
^ (French) Thomas Sauvadet. "Les jeunes de la cité - Processus de ghettoïsation et mode de socialisation" (PDF). Université Paris 8. http://www.univ-paris8.fr/sociologie/fichiers/sauvadet-journalparis8.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-08-03. 
^ (French) Hervé Vieillard-Baron, professor at the Université Paris 8. "Les quartiers sensibles, entre disqualification visible et réseaux invisibles". http://fig-st-die.education.fr/actes/actes_2005/viellard-baron/article.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-03. 
^ (French) "Roland de Laage (Devoteam) : "L'Ouest parisien, ce sont des départements technologiques à haute valeur ajoutée"". Journal du net. 16 January 2006. http://www.journaldunet.com/solutions/0601/060116_prestas-hauts-de-seine-delaage.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-08-03. 
^ (French) Pierre Beckouche. "Une région parisienne à deux vitesses - L'accroissement des disparités spatiales dans l'Ile-de-France des années 1980". Strates - Matériaux pour la recherche en sciences sociales. http://strates.revues.org/document1155.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-03. 
^ "Disposable income per NUTS level 2 regions in Europe". Eurostat. http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page?_pageid=1996,39140985&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL&screen=detailref&language=en&product=REF_TB_regional&root=REF_TB_regional/t_reg/t_reg_eco/tgs00026. Retrieved on 2008-08-03. 
^ "Special Report: Riots in France". BBC News. 2005-11-09. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/in_depth/4417096.stm. Retrieved on 2007-11-17. 
^ "Montmartre". Paris-walking-tours.com. http://www.paris-walking-tours.com/montmartre.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-06. 
^ Note: 100 ha.=1 km2.
^ (French) Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Économiques. ""Géographie de la capitale - Le climat"". http://www.paris.fr/portail/accueil/Portal.lut?page_id=4946&document_type_id=5&document_id=3076&portlet_id=10579. Retrieved on 2006-05-24. 
^ "Weather Information for Paris". MSN Weather. http://weather.msn.com/local.aspx?&wealocations=wc%3aFRXX0076&q=Paris%2c+FRA&setunit=C. Retrieved on 2009-01-06. 
^ World Bank. "Total GDP 2007" (PDF). http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DATASTATISTICS/Resources/GDP.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-10-22. 
^ "Population des régions aux derniers recensements" (in French). Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Économiques. http://www.insee.fr/fr/themes/tableau.asp?reg_id=99&ref_id=CMRSOS02137. Retrieved on 2008-10-22. 
^ ""Les emplois dans les activités liées au tourisme: un sur quatre en Ile-de-France"" (in French) (PDF). Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Économiques. http://www.insee.fr/fr/insee_regions/idf/rfc/docs/alapage234.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-04-10. 
^ ""Chiffres-Clefs – Unité Urbaine – Paris"" (in French). Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Économiques. http://www.insee.fr/fr/insee_regions/idf/zoom/chif_cles/uu99/fuu9900851.htm. Retrieved on 2006-05-28. 
^ Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Économiques. ""Enquêtes annuelles de recensement 2004 et 2005"" (PDF). http://www.insee.fr/fr/ffc/docs_ffc/IP061058.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-04-10. 
^ ""Enquêtes annuelles de recensement: premiers résultats de la collecte 2004"" (in French) (PDF). Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Économiques. http://www.insee.fr/fr/ffc/docs_ffc/IP1000.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-04-10. 
^ Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Économiques. ""Aire urbaine 99 : Paris - Migrations (caractère socio-économique selon le lieu de naissance)"" (in French). http://www.recensement.insee.fr/RP99/rp99/wr_page.affiche?p_id_nivgeo=M&p_id_loca=001&p_id_princ=MIG3&p_theme=ALL&p_typeprod=ALL&p_langue=FR. Retrieved on 2006-07-06. 
^ Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Économiques. ""Aire urbaine 99 : Paris - Migrations (caractère démographique selon le lieu de résidence au 01/01/90)"" (in French). http://www.recensement.insee.fr/RP99/rp99/wr_page.affiche?p_id_nivgeo=M&p_id_loca=001&p_id_princ=MIG2&p_theme=ALL&p_typeprod=ALL&p_langue=FR. Retrieved on 2006-07-06. 
^ Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Économiques. ""Flux d'immigration permanente par motif en 2003"" (in French). http://www.insee.fr/fr/ffc/chifcle_fiche.asp?tab_id=498. Retrieved on 2006-06-25. 
^ Cité Nationale de l'Histoire de l'Immigration. ""Histoire de l'immigration en France"" (in French). http://www.histoire-immigration.fr/index.php?lg=fr&nav=14&flash=0. Retrieved on 2006-06-25. 
^ (French) 20mins.fr. ""Sarkozy relance le projet d'un Grand Paris"". http://www.20minutes.fr/article/169001/Paris-Sarkozy-relance-le-projet-d-un-Grand-Paris.php. Retrieved on 2008-04-13. 
^ Henry E. Bourne. "Improvising a Government in Paris in July 1789". The American Historical Review. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8762%28190501%2910%3A2%3C280%3AIAGIPI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-V&size=LARGE. Retrieved on 2006-09-14. 
^ (French) La Préfecture de la Région d'Ile-de-France. "L'enseignement". http://www.idf.pref.gouv.fr/donnees/enseignement.htm. Retrieved on 2007-10-09. 
^ a b Regional Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Paris – Île-de-France (2006). "Paris Region : key figures 2006" (PDF). http://www.paris-iledefrance.cci.fr/pdf/eco_regionale/chiffres_cles/2006/anglais/cc_2006_en_15-21.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-07-04. 
^ (French) Céline Rozenblat, Patricia Cicille, Delegation for Spatial Planning and Regional Action (Datar) (2006). "Les villes européennes – Analyse comparative (page 42)" (PDF). http://www.diact.gouv.fr/Datar_Site/DATAR_Metropoles.nsf/76f84e7666af90b6c125655a0046b83c/30207c6b28edd873c1256e59003d0619/$FILE/Villes%20europ%C3%A9ennes.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-07-04. 
^ "How to find us." Bibliothèque nationale de France. Retrieved on 21 January 2009.
^ "History of the Library." American Library in Paris. Retrieved on 21 January 2009.
^ "The American Library in Paris." The New York Times. 29 June 1930. Retrieved on 21 January 2009.
^ "American Library in Paris." The New York Times. 23 March 1855. Retrieved on 21 January 2009.
^ Syndicat des Transports d'Ile-de-France (STIF). ""Le web des voyageurs franciliens"" (in French). http://www.stif-idf.fr. Retrieved on 2006-04-10. 
^ Mairie de Paris. ""Les égouts parisiens"" (in French). http://www.paris.fr/portail/Environnement/Portal.lut?page_id=1313&document_type_id=5&document_id=2158&portlet_id=3139. Retrieved on 2006-05-15. 
^ a b c d e f g h "Les pactes d'amitié et de coopération". Mairie de Paris. http://www.paris.fr/portail/accueil/Portal.lut?page_id=6587&document_type_id=5&document_id=16468&portlet_id=14974. Retrieved on 2007-10-14. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah "International relations : special partners". Mairie de Paris. http://www.paris.fr/en/city_government/international/special_partners.asp. Retrieved on 2007-10-14. 



Further reading

Vincent Cronin (1989). Paris on the Eve, 1900-1914. New York: Harper Collins. ISBN 0-312-04876-9. 
Vincent Cronin (1994). Paris:City of Light, 1919-1939. New York: Harper Collins. ISBN 0-00-215191-X. 
Jean Favier (1997-04-23) (in French). Paris. Fayard. ISBN 2-213-59874-6. 
Jacques Hillairet (2005-04-22) (in French). Connaissance du Vieux Paris. Rivages. ISBN 2-86930-648-2. 
Colin Jones (2004). Paris: The Biography of a City. New York: Penguin Viking. ISBN 0670033936. 


External links

Find more about Paris on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Official Paris website
Paris tourism website
Ile-de-France tourism website
Paris at the Open Directory Project
Paris travel guide from Wikitravel
Paris,  an external wiki
 "Paris". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911. 







 
Administrative structures














v • d • e

Communes in the metropolitan area of Paris





Population over 2 million

Paris






Population over 75,000

Argenteuil · Asnières-sur-Seine · Aulnay-sous-Bois · Boulogne-Billancourt · Champigny-sur-Marne · Colombes · Courbevoie · Créteil · Montreuil · Nanterre · Rueil-Malmaison · Saint-Denis · Saint-Maur-des-Fossés · Versailles · Vitry-sur-Seine






Population over 50,000

Antony · Aubervilliers · Le Blanc-Mesnil · Bondy · Cergy · Clichy · Drancy · Évry · Fontenay-sous-Bois · Issy-les-Moulineaux · Ivry-sur-Seine · Levallois-Perret · Maisons-Alfort · Neuilly-sur-Seine · Noisy-le-Grand · Pantin · Sarcelles · Sartrouville · Sevran · Villejuif






Population over 25,000

Alfortville · Athis-Mons · Bagneux · Bagnolet · Bezons · Bobigny · Bois-Colombes · Brunoy · Cachan · Champs-sur-Marne · Charenton-le-Pont · Châtenay-Malabry · Châtillon · Chatou · Chelles · Le Chesnay · Choisy-le-Roi · Clamart · Clichy-sous-Bois · Conflans-Sainte-Honorine · Corbeil-Essonnes · La Courneuve · Draveil · Élancourt · Épinay-sur-Seine · Ermont · Franconville · Fresnes · Gagny · La Garenne-Colombes  · Garges-lès-Gonesse · Gennevilliers · Gonesse · Goussainville · Grigny · Guyancourt · L'Haÿ-les-Roses · Herblay · Houilles · Le Kremlin-Bicêtre · Livry-Gargan · Malakoff · Mantes-la-Jolie · Massy · Meaux · Melun · Meudon · Montfermeil · Montigny-le-Bretonneux · Montrouge · Les Mureaux · Neuilly-sur-Marne · Nogent-sur-Marne · Noisy-le-Sec · Palaiseau · Le Perreux-sur-Marne · Pierrefitte-sur-Seine · Plaisir · Poissy · Pontault-Combault · Pontoise · Puteaux · Ris-Orangis · Rosny-sous-Bois · Saint-Cloud · Saint-Germain-en-Laye · Saint-Ouen · Sainte-Geneviève-des-Bois · Sannois · Savigny-sur-Orge · Savigny-le-Temple · Stains · Sucy-en-Brie · Suresnes · Taverny · Thiais · Trappes · Tremblay-en-France · Vanves · Vigneux-sur-Seine · Villemomble · Villeneuve-Saint-Georges · Villepinte · Villiers-le-Bel · Villiers-sur-Marne · Vincennes · Viry-Châtillon · Yerres






Population under 25,000

1,460 other communes













v • d • e

Préfectures of départements of France








Bourg-en-Bresse (Ain) · Laon (Aisne) · Moulins (Allier) · Digne-les-Bains (Alpes-de-Haute-Provence) · Gap (Hautes-Alpes) · Nice (Alpes-Maritimes) · Privas (Ardèche) · Charleville-Mézières (Ardennes) · Foix (Ariège) · Troyes (Aube) · Carcassonne (Aude) · Rodez (Aveyron) · Marseille (Bouches-du-Rhône) · Caen (Calvados) · Aurillac (Cantal) · Angoulême (Charente) · La Rochelle (Charente-Maritime) · Bourges (Cher) · Tulle (Corrèze) · Ajaccio (Corse-du-Sud) · Bastia (Haute-Corse) · Dijon (Côte-d'Or) · Saint-Brieuc (Côtes-d'Armor) · Guéret (Creuse) · Périgueux (Dordogne) · Besançon (Doubs) · Valence (Drôme) · Évreux (Eure) · Chartres (Eure-et-Loir) · Quimper (Finistère) · Nîmes (Gard) · Toulouse (Haute-Garonne) · Auch (Gers) · Bordeaux (Gironde) · Montpellier (Hérault) · Rennes (Ille-et-Vilaine) · Châteauroux (Indre) · Tours (Indre-et-Loire) · Grenoble (Isère) · Lons-le-Saunier (Jura) · Mont-de-Marsan (Landes) · Blois (Loir-et-Cher) · Saint-Étienne (Loire) · Le Puy-en-Velay (Haute-Loire) · Nantes (Loire-Atlantique) · Orléans (Loiret) · Cahors (Lot) · Agen (Lot-et-Garonne) · Mende (Lozère) · Angers (Maine-et-Loire) · Saint-Lô (Manche) · Châlons-en-Champagne (Marne) · Chaumont (Haute-Marne) · Laval (Mayenne) · Nancy (Meurthe-et-Moselle) · Bar-le-Duc (Meuse) · Vannes (Morbihan) · Metz (Moselle) · Nevers (Nièvre) · Lille (Nord) · Beauvais (Oise) · Alençon (Orne) · Arras (Pas-de-Calais) · Clermont-Ferrand (Puy-de-Dôme) · Pau (Pyrénées-Atlantiques) · Tarbes (Hautes-Pyrénées) · Perpignan (Pyrénées-Orientales) · Strasbourg (Bas-Rhin) · Colmar (Haut-Rhin) · Lyon (Rhône) · Vesoul (Haute-Saône) · Mâcon (Saône-et-Loire) · Le Mans (Sarthe) · Chambéry (Savoie) · Annecy (Haute-Savoie) · Paris (Paris) · Rouen (Seine-Maritime) · Melun (Seine-et-Marne) · Versailles (Yvelines) · Niort (Deux-Sèvres) · Amiens (Somme) · Albi (Tarn) · Montauban (Tarn-et-Garonne) · Toulon (Var) · Avignon (Vaucluse) · La Roche-sur-Yon (Vendée) · Poitiers (Vienne) · Limoges (Haute-Vienne) · Épinal (Vosges) · Auxerre (Yonne) · Belfort (Territoire de Belfort) · Évry (Essonne) · Nanterre (Hauts-de-Seine) · Bobigny (Seine-Saint-Denis) · Créteil (Val-de-Marne) · Cergy (Val-d'Oise)









Overseas departments









Cayenne (French Guiana) · Basse-Terre (Guadeloupe) · Fort-de-France (Martinique) · Saint-Denis (Réunion)















v • d • e

Préfectures of régions of France





Metropolitan France



Strasbourg (Alsace) · Bordeaux (Aquitaine) · Clermont-Ferrand (Auvergne) · Dijon (Bourgogne) · Rennes (Bretagne) · Orléans (Centre) · Châlons-en-Champagne (Champagne-Ardenne) · Ajaccio (Corsica) · Besançon (Franche-Comté) · Paris (Île-de-France) · Montpellier (Languedoc-Roussillon) · Limoges (Limousin) · Metz (Lorraine) · Toulouse (Midi-Pyrénées) · Lille (Nord-Pas de Calais) · Caen (Basse-Normandie) · Rouen (Haute-Normandie) · Nantes (Pays de la Loire) · Amiens (Picardie) · Poitiers (Poitou-Charentes) · Marseille (Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur) · Lyon (Rhône-Alpes)








Overseas regions



Cayenne (French Guiana) · Basse-Terre (Guadeloupe) · Fort-de-France (Martinique) · Saint-Denis (Réunion)















v • d • e

Departments of France








Ain · Aisne · Allier · Alpes-de-Haute-Provence · Hautes-Alpes · Alpes-Maritimes · Ardèche · Ardennes · Ariège · Aube · Aude · Aveyron · Bouches-du-Rhône · Calvados · Cantal · Charente · Charente-Maritime · Cher · Corrèze · Corse-du-Sud · Haute-Corse · Côte-d'Or · Côtes-d'Armor · Creuse · Dordogne · Doubs · Drôme · Eure · Eure-et-Loir · Finistère · Gard · Haute-Garonne · Gers · Gironde · Hérault · Ille-et-Vilaine · Indre · Indre-et-Loire · Isère · Jura · Landes · Loir-et-Cher · Loire · Haute-Loire · Loire-Atlantique · Loiret · Lot · Lot-et-Garonne · Lozère · Maine-et-Loire · Manche · Marne · Haute-Marne · Mayenne · Meurthe-et-Moselle · Meuse · Morbihan · Moselle · Nièvre · Nord · Oise · Orne · Pas-de-Calais · Puy-de-Dôme · Pyrénées-Atlantiques · Hautes-Pyrénées · Pyrénées-Orientales · Bas-Rhin · Haut-Rhin · Rhône · Haute-Saône · Saône-et-Loire · Sarthe · Savoie · Haute-Savoie · Paris · Seine-Maritime · Seine-et-Marne · Yvelines · Deux-Sèvres · Somme · Tarn · Tarn-et-Garonne · Var · Vaucluse · Vendée · Vienne · Haute-Vienne · Vosges · Yonne · Territoire de Belfort · Essonne · Hauts-de-Seine · Seine-Saint-Denis · Val-de-Marne · Val-d'Oise
Overseas departments: French Guiana · Guadeloupe · Martinique · Réunion





















 
Paris in the European Union














v • d • e

Capitals of European states and territories





Capitals of non-sovereign territories or constituent nations shown in bold italics









Central
Southern
Western
Northern








Berlin, Germany
Bratislava, Slovakia
Budapest, Hungary
Ljubljana, Slovenia
Prague, Czech Republic
Vienna, Austria
Warsaw, Poland
Vaduz, Liechtenstein
Eastern
Astana, Kazakhstan 1
Baku, Azerbaijan 1
Bucharest, Romania
Chişinău, Moldova
Kiev, Ukraine
Minsk, Belarus
Moscow, Russia 1
Sukhumi, Abkhazia 3
Tbilisi, Georgia 1
Tskhinvali, South Ossetia 3
Yerevan, Armenia 2





Ankara, Turkey 1
Athens, Greece
Belgrade, Serbia
Gibraltar, Gibraltar4
Nicosia, Cyprus 2
Nicosia, Northern Cyprus 2, 3
Podgorica, Montenegro
Pristina, Kosovo 3
Rome, Italy
San Marino, San Marino
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
Skopje, Republic of Macedonia
Sofia, Bulgaria
Tirana, Albania
Valletta, Malta
Vatican City, Vatican City
Zagreb, Croatia




Amsterdam, Netherlands
Andorra la Vella, Andorra
Berne, Switzerland
Brussels, Belgium 6
Douglas, Isle of Man4
Dublin, Ireland
Lisbon, Portugal
London, United Kingdom
Luxembourg, Luxembourg
Madrid, Spain
Monaco, Monaco
Paris, France
St. Helier, Jersey4
St. Peter Port, Guernsey4




Copenhagen, Denmark
Helsinki, Finland
Longyearbyen, Svalbard
Mariehamn, Åland Islands
Oslo, Norway
Reykjavík, Iceland
Riga, Latvia
Stockholm, Sweden
Tallinn, Estonia
Tórshavn, Faroe Islands
Vilnius, Lithuania











1 Transcontinental country.  2 Entirely in Southwest Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe.  3 Partially recognised country.  4 Crown Dependency or Overseas Territory of the United Kingdom.  5 Part of Spain.  6 Also the seat of the European Union, see Location of European Union institutions and Brussels and the European Union.












v • d • e

 Capital cities of the Member States of the European Union






Amsterdam · Athens · Berlin · Bratislava · Brussels · Bucharest · Budapest · Copenhagen · Dublin · Helsinki · Lisbon · Ljubljana · London · Luxembourg City · Madrid · Nicosia · Paris · Prague · Riga · Rome · Sofia · Stockholm · Tallinn · Valletta · Vienna · Vilnius · Warsaw













v • d • e

European Capitals of Culture








1985 Athens · 1986 Florence · 1987 Amsterdam · 1988 West Berlin · 1989 Paris · 1990 Glasgow · 1991 Dublin · 1992 Madrid · 1993 Antwerp · 1994 Lisbon · 1995 Luxembourg City · 1996 Copenhagen · 1997 Thessaloniki · 1998 Stockholm · 1999 Weimar · 2000 Reykjavík · Bergen · Helsinki · Brussels · Prague · Kraków · Santiago de Compostela · Avignon · Bologna · 2001 Rotterdam · Porto · 2002 Bruges · Salamanca · 2003 Graz · 2004 Genoa · Lille · 2005 Cork · 2006 Patras · 2007 Luxembourg City and Greater Region · Sibiu · 2008 Liverpool · Stavanger · 2009 Linz · Vilnius · 2010 Essen · Pécs · Istanbul · 2011 Turku · Tallinn · 2012 Maribor · Guimarães





















 
International events














v • d • e

Summer Olympic Games host cities








1896: Athens • 1900: Paris • 1904: St. Louis • 1908: London • 1912: Stockholm • 1920: Antwerp • 1924: Paris • 1928: Amsterdam • 1932: Los Angeles • 1936: Berlin • 1948: London • 1952: Helsinki • 1956: Melbourne • 1960: Rome • 1964: Tokyo • 1968: Mexico City • 1972: Munich • 1976: Montreal • 1980: Moscow • 1984: Los Angeles • 1988: Seoul • 1992: Barcelona • 1996: Atlanta • 2000: Sydney • 2004: Athens • 2008: Beijing • 2012: London 2016: TBA 2020: TBA















v • d • e

World's fifty most-populous urban areas












Tokyo – Yokohama
New York
Seoul – Incheon
Mumbai
Jakarta
Delhi
Mexico City
São Paulo
Manila
Osaka – Kobe – Kyoto






Cairo
Los Angeles
Kolkata
Shanghai
Moscow
Buenos Aires
Beijing
Shenzhen
Rio de Janeiro
Istanbul






Paris
Lagos
Karachi
Nagoya
Chicago
London
Bangkok
Ho Chi Minh City
Kinshasa
Lima






Tehran
Dhaka
Bogotá
Ruhr Area 
(Essen–Düsseldorf)
Chennai
Guangzhou
Hong Kong
Lahore
Bangalore
Taipei






Johannesburg – East Rand
Hyderabad
Dongguan
Baghdad
Toronto – Hamilton
Santiago
Miami
San Francisco – San Jose
Philadelphia
St. Petersburg



















     



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paris"
Categories: Departments of France | Host cities of the Summer Olympic Games | 3rd-century BC establishments | Capitals in Europe | Orthodox Jewish communities | Paris | World Heritage Sites in FranceHidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | Articles including recorded pronunciations | Articles containing French language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
Armãneashce
Arpetan
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Башҡорт
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bikol Central
Bislama
Boarisch
བོད་ཡིག
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deitsch
Deutsch
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Эрзянь
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Fiji Hindi
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
贛語
한국어
Hawai`i
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ಕನ್ನಡ
Kapampangan
ქართული
Қазақша
Kernewek
Кыргызча
Kiswahili
Коми
Kurdî / كوردی
Ladino
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lingála
Lojban
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
Malagasy
മലയാളം
मराठी
مصرى
مَزِروني
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Myanmasa
Nāhuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
नेपाली
日本語
Nnapulitano
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Occitan
O'zbek
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
پښتو
Piemontèis
Tok Pisin
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Reo Mā`ohi
Ripoarisch
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Словѣ́ньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Soomaaliga
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Taqbaylit
Tarandíne
Tetun
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Удмурт
Українська
اردو
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
Volapük
Võro
Walon
文言
West-Vlams
Winaray
Wolof
ייִדיש
粵語
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 12:28.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
