











List of sex positions - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "List_of_sex_positions";
		var wgTitle = "List of sex positions";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "167748";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281377855;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); List of sex positions

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







The missionary position depicted by Édouard-Henri Avril






In the spoons position both partners face the same direction and are on their side


This list of sex positions describes the sex positions which people may adopt for the purpose of sexual intercourse and other sexual acts. Sexual acts are generally described by the positions the participants take in order to perform those acts. Alfred Kinsey used six primary positions as categories.[1] Since the number of positions that can be used for sex is essentially limitless,[2] this list is not exhaustive.




Contents


1 Penetrative positions

1.1 Penetrating partner on top with front entry
1.2 Penetrating from behind
1.3 Receiving partner on top
1.4 Sitting and kneeling
1.5 Standing
1.6 Anal sex positions
1.7 Less common positions
1.8 Using furniture or special apparatus
1.9 Positions to promote or prevent conception
1.10 Positions during pregnancy


2 Non-penetrative positions

2.1 Genital-genital sex


3 Oral sex positions

3.1 Fellatio
3.2 Cunnilingus
3.3 Sixty-nine
3.4 Anilingus


4 Other positions
5 Group sex

5.1 With three participants

5.1.1 Multiple penetration


5.2 With many participants


6 See also
7 Further reading

7.1 Historical
7.2 Modern


8 References
9 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Penetrative positions
These positions involve the insertion of a penis or other phallus (such as a strap-on dildo) into a vagina or anus.

Penetrating partner on top with front entry




The missionary position


The basic sex position is generally called the missionary position. In this position, the participants face each other. The receiving partner lies on their back with legs apart, while the penetrating partner lies on top. This position and the following variations are primarily used for vaginal intercourse, although some can also be used for anal sex.

The penetrating partner stands in front of the receiving partner, whose legs dangle over the edge of a bed or some other platform like a table.[3] With the receiving partner's legs lifted towards the ceiling and resting against the penetrating partner, this is sometimes called the butterfly position. This can also be done as a kneeling position.
The receiving partner lies on his or her back. The penetrating partner stands and lifts the receiving partner's pelvis for penetration. A variant is for the receiving partner to rest his or her legs on the penetrating partner's shoulders.
The receiving partner lies on his or her back, legs pulled up straight and knees near to the head. The penetrating partner holds the receiving partner's legs and penetrates from above.
Similarly to the previous position, but the receiving partner's legs need not be straight and the penetrating partner wraps his or her arms around the receiving partner to push the legs as close as possible to the chest. Called the stopperage in Burton's translation of The Perfumed Garden.[4]
The coital alignment technique, a position where a woman is penetrated vaginally: the penetrating partner enters vaginally in the missionary position and moves slightly forward so that the base of the phallus rubs the clitoris.
The receiving partner crosses their feet behind their head (or at least puts their feet next to their ears), while lying on their back. The penetrating partner then holds the receiving partner tightly around each instep or ankle and lies on the receiving partner full-length. A variation is to have the receiving partner cross their ankles on their stomach, knees to shoulders, and then have the penetrating partner lie on the receiving partner's crossed ankles with their full weight. Called the Viennese oyster by The Joy of Sex.[5]


Penetrating from behind




A variant of the "doggy style" position


Most of these positions can be used for either vaginal or anal penetration.

Variants of the doggy style or doggy position include:




The receiving partner is on all fours with their torso horizontal. The penetrating partner inserts from behind. The penetrating partner may also grab the receiving partner's hair for added leverage, and increased control.
In a variant on the doggy position, the receiving partner's torso is angled downwards. The penetrating partner can raise their own hips above those of the receiving partner for maximum penetration.
In another variant of the doggy position, the penetrating partner places their feet on each side of the receiving partner while keeping their knees bent and effectively raising up as high as possible while maintaining penetration. The penetrating partner's hands usually have to be placed on the receiving partner's back to keep from falling forward.[citation needed]
In a variant on the doggy position, the receiving partner kneels upright. The penetrating partner may gently pull the receiving partner's arms backwards at the wrists towards them.




In the spoons position both partners lie on their same side facing in the same direction.[6]
The receiving partner lies on their side. The penetrating partner kneels and penetrates from behind. Alternatively, the penetrating partner can stand if the receiving partner is on a raised surface.
The receiving partner lies facing down, possibly with their legs spread. The penetrating partner lies on top of them.[2] The placement of a pillow beneath the receiving partner's hips can help increase stimulation in this position.
The receiving partner lies face down, knees together. The penetrating partner lies on top with spread legs.
The receiving partner lies on their side with their uppermost leg forward. The penetrating partner kneels astride the receiver's lowermost leg.


Receiving partner on top




The cowgirl position


See also: Woman on top (sex position)
These positions are sometimes called the woman on top, cowboy or cowgirl positions. Most of these positions can be used for either vaginal or anal penetration.
A feature of these positions is that the penetrating partner lies on his or her back with the receiving partner on top:

the receiving partner can kneel while straddling the penetrating partner, with the participants facing each other.
alternatively, the receiving partner can face away from the penetrating partner. This position is sometimes called the reverse cowboy or reverse cowgirl position.
the receiving partner can arch back with hands on the ground.
the receiving partner can squat (instead of kneel) facing the penetrating partner.
the receiving partner can bring forward their knees against the ground.
the penetrating partner lies with their upper back on a low table, couch, chair or edge of bed, keeping their feet flat on the floor and back parallel to floor. The receiving partner straddles them, also keeping their feet on the floor. Receiving partner can assume any of various positions.
the lateral coital position was recommended by Masters and Johnson, and was preferred by three quarters of their heterosexual study participants after having tried it. The position involves the man on his back, with the woman rolled slightly to the side so that her pelvis is atop his, but her weight is beside his.


Sitting and kneeling




Kneeling variant of the lotus position.


Most of these positions can be used for either vaginal or anal penetration.

The penetrating partner sits on an area surface, legs outstretched. The receiving partner sits on top and wraps their legs around the penetrating partner. Called pounding on the spot in the Burton translation of The Perfumed Garden.[4] If the penetrator crosses their legs instead, it is called the lotus position.[7] This position can be combined with fondling of both the breasts and buttocks of the receiving partner and the buttocks of the penetrating partner, increasing the chances of both pleasure and orgasm in both partners.
The penetrating partner sits in a chair. The receiving partner straddles penetrating partner and sits, facing the penetrating partner, feet on floor. This is sometimes known as the lap dance. Other receiver-on-top variants can be adapted in this way as well.
The penetrating partner sits on a couch or in a chair that has armrests. The receiving partner sits in the penetrating partner's lap, perpendicular to penetrating partner, with his or her back against the armrest.
The penetrating partner kneels while the receiving partner lies on his or her back, ankles on each side of penetrating partner's shoulders.[4]


Standing




One partner stands while holding up the other without a support.


Most of these positions can be used for either vaginal or anal penetration. In the basic standing position, both partners stand facing each other. The following variations are possible:

In the basic standing position, both partners stand facing each other and engage in vaginal sex. In order to match heights, the shorter partner can, for instance, stand on a stair or wear high heels. It may be easier to maintain solid thrusts if the woman has her back to a wall. With such a support, the Kama Sutra calls this position the suspended congress.[8] This position is most often used in upright places, such as a wall in a bedroom or a shower.

The penetrating partner stands, and the receiving partner wraps their arms around his neck, and their legs around his waist, thereby exposing either the vagina or anus to the man's penis. This position is made easier with the use of a solid object behind the receiver, as above.


Alternatively, the receiving partner can face away from the penetrating partner which allows for anal sex. This position is varied by having the receiving partner assume different semi-standing positions. For instance, they may bend at the waist, resting their hands or elbows on a table.


Anal sex positions
Anal sex positions involve anal penetration. Most anal sex positions are adaptations of vaginal penetrative positions:

Doggy style penetration maximizes the depth of penetration, but can pose the risk of pushing against the sigmoid colon. If the receiving partner is male, this increases the chances of stimulating the prostate. The penetrating partner controls the thrusting rhythm. A variation is the leapfrog position, in which the receiving partner angles their torso downward. The receiving partner may also lie flat and face down, with the penetrating partner straddling their thighs.
In the missionary positions, to achieve optimal alignment, the receiving partner's legs should be in the air with the knees drawn towards their chest. Some sort of support (such as a pillow) under the receiving partner's hips can also be useful. The penetrating partner positions themselves between the receiving partner's legs. The penetrating partner controls the thrusting rhythm. This position is often cited as good for beginners, because it allows them to relax more fully than is usual in the doggy style position.
The spoons position allows the receiving partner to control initial penetration and the depth, speed and force of subsequent thrusting.
The receiving partner on top positions allow the receiving partner more control over the depth, rhythm and speed of penetration. More specifically, the receiving partner can slowly push their anus down on the penetrating partner, allowing time for their muscles to relax.


Less common positions




The T-square position


These positions are more innovative, and perhaps not as widely known or practiced as the ones listed above.

The receiving partner is on the bottom. The penetrating partner lies on top perpendicularly to them.
The penetrating partner lies on their back, legs spread. The receiving partner is on their back on top of the penetrator, legs spread, facing the opposite direction.
The penetrator and the receiver lie on their backs, heads pointed away from one another. Each places one leg on the other's shoulder (as a brace) and the other leg out somewhat to the side.
The receiving partner lies on their back with knees up and legs apart. The penetrating partner lies on their side perpendicular to the receiver, with the penetrating partner's hips under the arch formed by receiver's legs. Sometimes called the T-square.[citation needed]
The receiving partner's legs are together turning to one side while looking up towards the penetrator, who has spread legs and is kneeing straight behind the other's hips. The penetrator's hands are on the other's hips. This position can be called the Modified T-square.[9]
The receiving partner lies on their back with the penetrating partner lying perpendicular. The receiving partner bends the knee closest to the penetrating partner's head enough so that there is room for the penetrating partner's waist to fit beneath it, while the penetrating partner's legs straddle the receiving partner's other leg. The in-and-out thrusting action will move more along a side-to-side rather than top-to-bottom axis. This position allows for breast stimulation during sex, for partners to maintain eye contact if they wish, and for a good view of both partners as they reach orgasm.
The penetrating partner sits on edge of a bed or chair with feet spread wide on floor. The receiving partner lays on their back on the floor and drapes their legs and thighs over the legs of the penetrating partner. The penetrating partner holds the knees of the receiving partner and controls thrusts.
The Seventh Posture of Burton's translation of The Perfumed Garden is an unusual position not described in other classical sex manuals.[4] The receiving partner lies on their side. The penetrating partner faces the receiver, straddling the receiver's lower leg, and lifts the receiver's upper leg on either side of the body onto the crook of penetrating partner's elbow or onto the shoulder. While some references describe this position as being "for acrobats and not to be taken seriously,"[10] others have found it very comfortable, especially during pregnancy.
The penetrator straddles one of the legs of the receiver, who is lying on their side.
The piledriver is a difficult position sometimes seen in porn videos. It is described in many ways by different sources. In a heterosexual context, the woman lies on her back, then raises her hips as high as possible, so that her partner, standing, can enter her vaginally or anally. The position places considerable strain on the woman's neck, so firm cushions should be used to support her.
The receiver lies face down legs spread on the edge of the bed and parallel to the floor, while the penetrator stands behind, holding both legs.
"The Rusty Bike Pump" is similar to a piledriver where penetration is achieved from above at a downward angle with the receiving partner bottom side up.


Using furniture or special apparatus




Using a table to allow a variant of the missionary position


Most sex acts are typically performed on a bed or other simple platform. As the range of supports available increases, so does the range of positions that are possible. Ordinary furniture can be used for this purpose. Also, various forms of erotic furniture and other apparatus such as fisting slings and trapezes have been used to facilitate even more exotic sexual positions.

Positions to promote or prevent conception
Pregnancy is a potential result of any form of sex where sperm comes in contact with the vaginal area (typically vaginal sex, but pregnancy can result from anal sex, digital sex with sperm fluids on the fingers, or even sperm that is on the body and is transferred to the vaginal area) between a fertile female and a fertile male. (Men and women are typically fertile by the time they reach puberty.) Oral sex itself can never result in pregnancy. However, if not careful, it can result in pregnancy if sperm on the hands or body comes in contact with the vaginal area. Though certain sexual positions are believed by some to produce more favorable results than others, none of these are effective means of contraception. See Birth control: Misconceptions.

Positions during pregnancy
The goal is to prevent excessive pressure on the belly and to restrict penetration as required by the particular partners. Some of the positions below are popular positions for sex during pregnancy.

Missionary with caution
Spoons
Doggy style
Woman on top
Intercrural sex


Non-penetrative positions
Main article: Non-penetrative sex
Non-penetrative sex or frottage – the general term for rubbing one's genitals on one's partner. This may include the partner's genitals or buttocks.
Other forms of frottage – as part of foreplay or to avoid penetrative sex, people engage in a variety of other non-penetrative sexual behaviour, which may or may not lead to orgasm.

Dry humping – frottage while clothed. This act is common, although not essential, in the dance style known as "grinding".
Handjob – Manual stimulation of a partner's penis.
Footjob – using the feet to stimulate the penis.
Mammary intercourse – using the breasts together to stimulate the penis through the cleavage. (Should not be confused with a "boob job" meaning to have augmentive surgery done on the breasts.) Also called a titjob, titty-fucking, a tit-wank, or a muscle fuck. Several other slang terms exist.
Intercrural intercourse or interfemoral sex – with the penis between the partner's thighs, perhaps rubbing the vulva, scrotum or perineum.
Axillary intercourse – with the penis in the armpit.

The slang term humping may refer to masturbation – thrusting one's genitals against the surface of non-sexual objects, clothed or unclothed; or it may refer to penetrative sex.

Genital-genital sex




Frot


Main articles: Frot and Tribadism
Genital-genital sex, sometimes referred to as GG rubbing, is generally understood as sexual intercourse in a narrower sense, and among samesex partners vanilla sex. Sex by mutual genital rubbing is sometimes grouped with 'frottage'. However, other terms like 'non-penetrative' or 'outercourse' are heterosexist in reference and misleadingly assume a penile-vaginal context.

Frot or frottage – two males mutually rubbing penises together.
Tribadism or tribbing – two females mutually rubbing vulvae together.
Docking - mutual masturbation by inserting the head of the penis into the foreskin of another male's uncircumcised penis.[11][12] Circumcised men can also use a sex toy called a "docking sleeve", a tube-shaped device made of silicone, rubber or Cyberskin which takes the place of the foreskin.


Oral sex positions
Oral sex is the term given to genital stimulation by the mouth. People may engage in oral sex as part of foreplay before intercourse, or during or following intercourse. It may also be performed for its own sake.
It can be performed simultaneously (e.g. one partner performs cunnilingus, while the other partner performs fellatio), or only one partner may perform upon the other; this creates a multitude of variations[13]

Fellatio




Fellatio


Fellatio is oral sex involving a man's genitals. Possible positions include:

The man lies on his back while his partner kneels between his legs.
The man lies on his back while his partner lies off to the side of his legs.
The man sits in a chair and partner kneels in front of him between his legs.
The man stands while his partner either kneels in front of him or sits (in a chair or on the edge of a bed, etc.) and bends forward.
The man stands while his partner, also standing, bends forward at the waist.
While the active partner lies on their back, the man assumes the missionary position but adjusted forward so as to insert his penis in his partner's mouth.
The man stands or crouches at the edge of the bed, facing the bed. The active partner lies on the bed with their head hanging over the edge of the bed backward. The man inserts his penis into his partner's mouth, usually to achieve deep throat penetration, whereby the entire penis penetrates the mouth opening.
The man fellates his own penis; see autofellatio
The active partner (being female) lies on her back, and the man inserts his penis between her cleavage, and into her mouth.


Cunnilingus




Cunnilingus


Cunnilingus is oral sex involving a woman's genitals. Possible positions include:

The woman lies on her back as in the missionary position. The active partner lies on their front between her legs.
The active partner sits. The woman stands facing away and bends at the hips.
The active partner sits. The woman stands or squats facing towards partner and may arch her back, to create further stimulation.
The active partner lies on their back while the woman kneels with her legs at their sides and her genitals on their mouth. Humorously popularised in the Monty Python song "Sit On My Face" (1980).
The woman services her own genitals. Although rarer, some women still find this possible; see autofellatio
The woman stands, possibly bracing herself against a wall. The active partner kneels in front of her.
The woman sits on the bed with her legs open, the active partner kneels in front of her.
The woman is upside-down (standing on hands, held by partner, or using support, such as bondage or furniture), with the active partner standing or kneeling (depending on elevation) in front or behind. Such a position may be difficult to achieve, or maintain for extended time periods, but the rush of blood to the brain can alter stimulation's effect.
The woman stands on hands, resting each leg on either side of the active partner's head, with the active partner standing or kneeling facing them. Depending on which way up the woman is facing, different stimulation and levels of comfort may be available.


Sixty-nine




Women in the 69 position


Simultaneous oral sex between two people is called 69. It is called the congress of the crow in the Kama Sutra. Each partner may be male or female. They can be lying side-by-side, lying one on top of the other, or standing with one partner holding the other upside down.

Anilingus
Positions for anilingus, also known as butt licking, rimming, anal-oral sex, rimjob, or tossing the salad are often variants on those for genital-oral sex. Rimming-specific positions include:

The passive partner is on all fours. The active partner is behind them.
The passive partner is on their back with their legs up.
The Rusty trombone, in which a male is standing while the active partner is both performing anilingus from behind, generally from a kneeling position, while also masturbating the standing partner, thus somewhat resembling someone playing the trombone.


Other positions

Fingering of the vagina or anus.
Shocker – simultaneous fingering of the vagina and anus using one hand. The index and middle finger are inserted in the vagina, and the pinky in the anus. A number of variations are possible by using different combinations of fingers in each orifice. This act figures prominently in the Story of O: shortly after O's arrival at the Chateau, a man grabs her in this way. O is shocked, but she learns to accept this and ruder intrusions. Sometimes referred to as "Two in the pink, one in the stink."
Female shocker – simultaneously fingering a man's anus with one's thumb while stimulating his scrotum with the other fingers. This is done by making a shape with the hands as though one were holding the bowl of a wine glass.
Fisting – inserting the entire hand into the vagina or anus. This usually requires large amounts of lubricant and relaxation. The hand is usually not actually made into a fist, but instead the thumb is placed between the middle and ring fingers. Anal fisting can be extremely dangerous and even fatal if the hand tears the lining of the intestine.[citation needed]


Group sex




Oral threesome with one male and two females






Threesome with three females






Édouard-Henri Avril's depiction of a "sandwich"






Double penetration.


Various assemblages of people may participate in group sex. While group sex does not imply that all participants must be in sexual contact with all others simultaneously, some positions are only possible with three or more people.
As with the positions listed above, more group sex positions become practical if erotic furniture is used.

With three participants
When three people have sex with each other, it is called a threesome. Possible ways of having all partners in sexual contact with each other include:

One person performs oral sex on either of the other two partners while they engage in anal or vaginal intercourse.
A man has vaginal or anal sex with one partner, while himself being anally penetrated by another (possibly with a strap-on dildo).
Three partners lie or stand in parallel, with one between the other two. Sometimes called a sandwich. This term may specifically refer to the double penetration of a woman, with one penis in her anus, and the other in her vagina.
A participant has vaginal or anal sex with one partner, and both give oral sex to a third.
Three people perform oral sex in a triangular configuration, commonly called a "daisy chain".


Multiple penetration
Multiple penetration refers to one person being sexually penetrated several times simultaneously. It generally involves between three and five participants. Penetration may be accomplished by fingers, toes, sex toys, or penises. These positions are popular in pornography, but it is difficult to say whether they enjoy any significant popularity outside of it.
If one person is penetrated by two objects, it is generically called double penetration (sometimes abbreviated dp). Given the vagina, anus and mouth, there are several ways in which this can be done. These include:

Simultaneous penetration of the anus by two penises or other objects. This is commonly called double anal or double stuffing.
Simultaneous penetration of the vagina by two penises or other objects. This is commonly called double vaginal or double stuffing.
Simultaneous penetration of the vagina and anus. If this is done using penises and/or strap-on dildos, this is sometimes called the sandwich or BigMac. The shocker (see above) accomplishes this using several fingers of one hand.



Simultaneous penetration of the mouth and either the vagina or anus. If the penetrating objects are penises, this is sometimes called the spit roast.

If one person is penetrated by three objects, it is generically called triple penetration. Possibilities include:

Two penises penetrating the vagina and one in the anus or vice versa. While possible, this position is very difficult.
One penis in the anus, one in the vagina, and one in the mouth simultaneously, sometimes called making her airtight or an airtight seal.

These variations of multiple penetration are commonly seen in pornography aimed at straight men. Some of these positions put two men in intimate contact with each other, either directly or indirectly.
Penetration by larger numbers of objects is rarer and generally not named, with two exceptions, which are likely physically impossible:

Double vaginal, double anal penetration (DVDA): simultaneous penetration of the vagina and anus of a single woman by two penises each. The term gained popularity after its inclusion in the movie Orgazmo by South Park co-creator Trey Parker, and is also the name of Parker's and Matt Stone's band.
Triple-Double: Multiple penetration of a single woman by six penises. Two penises in the mouth, vagina, and anus simultaneously.


With many participants
These positions can be expanded to accommodate any number of participants:

A group of males masturbating is called a circle jerk.
A group of males masturbating and ejaculating on one person's face, is known as bukkake.
A group of men, women, or both, each performing oral sex on the next, is called a daisy chain.
When one woman or man is given the serial or parallel attention of many, often involving a queue, it is often termed a gangbang (originally exclusively a rape term, but now used to include consensual group sex).


See also




Sexuality portal






Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Sex 





Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Sex positions 



Cybersex
Kama Sutra
Kamashastra
List of sexology topics
Mutual masturbation
Phone sex
Sex
Sexual norm
Sexual slang


Further reading

Historical
In the Indian Kama Sutra, the act and manner of sex was an art-form. In the Khajuraho statues, it has ethical meaning. In the Kama Sutra, eighty-four sex positions are explained as arts. These may be considered yoga positions for a couple. Tantric yoga, as applied to couples, is sometimes called the yoga of union and is the supposed ethical context for these positions.
The Arabic Perfumed Garden is another ancient text which describes sex positions. However, the most commonly known English version, translated from French by Sir Richard Francis Burton,[4] has mangled the original almost beyond recognition. A modern translation by Jim Coville claiming to be faithful to the original describes only 11 unnamed sex positions,[3] whereas Burton's translation lists some 39, each either with a name or number.

Modern
Alex Comfort's The Joy of Sex was one of the first widely accepted modern sex manuals to describe sexual positions. See also:

Gillian, Max, "The Illustrated Guide to Extended Massive Orgasm". Hunter House. 1st ed., 2002. ISBN 0-89793-362-1, 235 pages.
Hooper, Anne J., "Sexopedia". DK Publishing. 1st American ed., 2002. ISBN 0-7894-8958-9, 272 pages.
Kemper, Alfred M., "Love Couches Design Criteria". Los Angeles 1972. Library of Congress #75-36170, 101 pages — design criteria for assistive furniture, with sections on accommodation of disabled persons.
McMeel, Andrews and Lisa Sussman, "Sex Positions". Carlton Publishing Group. 2002. ISBN 1-84222-266-X, 96 pages.
Nerve.com, "Position of the Day Playbook, Sex Every Day in Every Way". Chronicle Books. 2005. ISBN 0-8118-4701-2, 376 pages.


References


^ 6 Positions For Sexual Intercourse - In Order Of Popularity (Waybacked)
^ a b Rogiere, Jean, "The Little Book of Sex". Ulysses Press. 2001. ISBN 1-56975-305-9, 96 pages.
^ a b The Perfumed Garden of Sensual Delight, Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Nafzawi, translated by Jim Coville, 1999, Kegan Paul International, ISBN 0-7103-0644-X, 82 pages.
^ a b c d e The Perfumed Garden, Shaykh Nefwazi [sic], translated by Sir Richard Francis Burton, 1886. full text available at Internet Sacred Text Archive
^ Comfort, Alex, "The Joy of Sex: Fully Revised & Completely Updated for the 21st Century". Crown. Fully rev. ed., 2002. ISBN 1-4000-4614-9, 256 pages.
^ Westheimer, Ruth K., "Sex for Dummies". For Dummies. 2nd ed., 2000. ISBN 0-7645-5302-X, 432 pages.
^ So Feminine, Love Machine, accessed 24 September 2006
^ The Kama Sutra, as given at Kamasutra-sex.org
^ The Modified T-square is Position 17 at Sensual Interactive
^ Hooper, Anne J., "Anne Hooper's Kama Sutra". DK Publishing. 1st ed., 1998. ISBN 1-56458-649-9, 160 pages.
^ CockDockers.org: A brief explanation for beginners Not suitable for work or around children
^ Graphic image of docking Not suitable for work or around children
^ on each basic position.



External links

The-Clitoris.com - Positions for Intercourse
Sensualinteractive.com presents - A list of sexual positions
menshealth.com









v • d • e

Sex





History

History of erotic depictions · Sexual revolution






Sexual acts

Sexual intercourse (foreplay · positions) · Oral sex · Anal sex · Anal–oral sex · Group sex · Sexual sublimation · Barebacking · Dirty talk · Facial · Fisting · Masturbation · Non-penetrative sex (Fingering/Handjob · Sumata) · Quickie






Physiological events

Sexual arousal · Erection · Orgasm · Ejaculation · Insemination · Pregnancy






Health and education

Birth control · Condom · Reproductive medicine (Andrology · Gynaecology · Urology) · Safe sex · Sexual dysfunction (Erectile dysfunction · Hypersexuality) · Sex education · Sex therapy · Sexually transmitted disease · Sex surrogate






Identity

Sexual identity · Sexual orientation






Law

Age of consent · Obscenity · Incest · Public indecency · Sexual abuse (Sexual harassment · Rape · Sexual assault · Sexual violence)






Relationships
and society

BDSM · Family planning · Marriage · Paraphilia · Religion and sexuality · Romance · Sexual abstinence · Sexual attraction · Sexual ethics · Sexual objectification






Sex industry

Adult video game · Erotica · Lubricant · Paddle · Pornography · Prostitution · Sex toys (Artificial vagina · Dildo · Sex doll · Vibrator) · Sex shop · Sex tourism






Human sexual behavior · Human sexuality · Sexology · Sexual slang · Animal sexual behavior












v • d • e

Sex positions





Genital/anal





Penetrating partner on top with front entry


Missionary · Coital alignment technique







With rear entry


Doggy style · Spoons







Receptive partner on top


Woman on top (cowgirl/cowboy) · Lateral coital position









Other sex acts

69 · Anal sex · Anal–oral sex (rimming) · Axillary intercourse · Fingering · Fisting · Frot · Frottage · Handjob · Intercrural sex · Mammary intercourse · Oral sex · Tribadism






Sex manuals

Kama Sutra · The Perfumed Garden · The Joy of Sex













v • d • e

Sexual urban legends








Donkey punch · Gel bracelet · Penis captivus · Progesterex · Rainbow party · Sex party · Soggy biscuit · Toothing · Vagina dentata








Sexuality portal









Human sexual behavior · Human sexuality · List of sex positions · Sexual slang








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_sex_positions"
Categories: Sex positions | Sexual acts | Sexuality-related listsHidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2007 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Català
Česky
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
한국어
हिन्दी
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
Lietuvių
Magyar
日本語
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Polski
Português
Русский
Simple English
Suomi
Svenska
Tiếng Việt
ייִדיש
中文









 This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 22:00.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
