













Human skeleton - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Human_skeleton";
		var wgTitle = "Human skeleton";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "168848";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 281736235;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Human skeleton

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 





It has been suggested that the section The Human skull from the article Skeleton be merged into this article or section. (Discuss)






Front view of a skeleton of an adult human






Back view of a skeleton of an adult human


The human skeleton consists of both fused and individual bones supported and supplemented by ligaments, tendons, muscles and cartilage. It serves as a scaffold which supports organs, anchors muscles, and protects organs such as the brain, lungs and heart. The biggest bone in the body is the femur and the smallest is the stapes bone in the middle ear. In an adult, the skeleton comprises around 13% of the total body weight [1], and half of this weight is water.
Fused bones include those of the pelvis and the cranium. Not all bones are interconnected directly: There are three bones in each middle ear called the ossicles that articulate only with each other. The hyoid bone, which is located in the neck and serves as the point of attachment for the tongue, does not articulate with any other bones in the body, being supported by muscles and ligaments.




Contents


1 Development
2 Organization

2.1 Axial skeleton
2.2 Appendicular skeleton


3 Function

3.1 Support
3.2 Movement
3.3 Protection
3.4 Blood cell production
3.5 Storage
3.6 Endocrine regulation


4 Gender-based differences
5 Disorders

5.1 Osteoporosis


6 Gallery
7 References
8 See also





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Development
Early in gestation, a fetus has a cartilaginous skeleton from which the long bones and most other bones gradually form throughout the remaining gestation period and for years after birth in a process called endochondral ossification. The flat bones of the skull and the clavicles are formed from connective tissue in a process known as intramembranous ossification, and ossification of the mandible occurs in the fibrous membrane covering the outer surfaces of Meckel's cartilages. At birth a newborn baby has approximately 270 bones , whereas on average an adult human has 206 bones (these numbers can vary slightly from individual to individual). The difference comes from a number of small bones that fuse together during growth, such as the sacrum and coccyx of the vertebral column. The sacrum (the bone at the base of the spine) consists of five bones which are separate at birth but fuse together into a solid structure in later years. An infant is born with zones of cartilage, called epiphyseal plates, between segments of bone to allow further growth. Longitudinal bone growth ends when the bone of the epiphysis and diaphysis fuses. This process, called epiphyseal plate closure, happens at about 18 years of age in females and 21 years of age in males. [2]

[edit] Organization
See also: List of bones of the human skeleton
Much of the human skeleton maintains the ancient segmental pattern present in all vertebrates (mammals, birds, fish, reptiles and amphibians) with basic units being repeated. This segmental pattern is particularly evident in the vertebral column and in the ribcage.[citation needed]
There are 206 bones in the adult human skeleton, a number which varies between individuals and with age - newborn babies have 270 bones[3] some of which fuse together. These bones are organized into a longitudinal axis, the axial skeleton, to which the appendicular skeleton is attached.[4]

[edit] Axial skeleton
The axial skeleton (80 bones) is formed by the vertebral column (26), the thoracic cage (12 pairs of ribs and the sternum), and the skull (22 bones and 7 associated bones). The axial skeleton transmits the weight from the head, the trunk, and the upper extremities down to the lower extremities at the hip joints, and is therefore responsible for the upright position of the human body. Most of the body weight is located in front of the spinal column which therefore have the erector spinae muscles and a large amount of ligaments attached to it resulting in the curved shape of the spine. The 240 skeletal muscles acting on the axial skeleton position the spine, allowing for small movements in the thoracic cage for breathing, and the head, where they control the minute and complex facial movements.[4]

[edit] Appendicular skeleton
Main article: Appendicular skeleton
The appendicular skeleton (126 bones) is formed by the pectoral girdles (4), the upper limbs (60), the pelvic girdle (2), and the lower limbs (60). Their functions are to make locomotion possible and to protect the major organs of locomotion, digestion, excretion, and reproduction. [4]

[edit] Function
The skeleton has six main functions:

[edit] Support
The skeleton provides the framework which supports the body and maintains its shape. The pelvis and associated ligaments and muscles provide a floor for the pelvic structures. Without the ribs, costal cartilages, and the intercostal muscles the lungs would collapse.

[edit] Movement
The joints between bones permit movement, some allowing a wider range of movement than others, e.g. the ball and socket joint allows a greater range of movement than the pivot joint at the neck. Movement is powered by skeletal muscles, which are attached to the skeleton at various sites on bones. Muscles, bones, and joints provide the principal mechanics for movement, all coordinated by the nervous system.

[edit] Protection
The skeleton protects many vital organs:

The skull protects the brain, the eyes, and the middle and inner ears.
The spine protects the spinal cord.
The rib cage, spine, and sternum protect the lungs, heart and major blood vessels.
The clavicle and scapula protect the shoulder.
The ilium and spine protect the digestive and urogenital systems and the hip.
The patella and the ulna protect the knee and the elbow respectively.
The carpals and tarsals protect the wrist and ankle respectively.


[edit] Blood cell production
The skeleton is the site of haematopoiesis, which takes place in red bone marrow. Marrow is found in the center of long bones.

[edit] Storage
Bone matrix can store calcium and is involved in calcium metabolism, and bone marrow can store iron in ferritin and is involved in iron metabolism. However, bones are not entirely made of calcium, but a mixture of chondroitin sulfate and hydroxyapatite, the latter making up 70% of a bone.

[edit] Endocrine regulation
Bone cells release a hormone called osteocalcin, which contributes to the regulation of blood sugar (glucose) and fat deposition. Osteocalcin increases both the insulin secretion and sensitivity, in addition to boosting the number of insulin-producing cells and reducing stores of fat.[5]

[edit] Gender-based differences




An articulated human skeleton, as used in biology education


There are many differences between the male and female human skeletons. Most prominent is the difference in the pelvis, owing to characteristics required for the processes of childbirth. The shape of a female pelvis is flatter, more rounded and proportionally larger to allow the head of a fetus to pass. Men tend to have slightly thicker and longer limbs and digit bones (phalanges), while women tend to have narrower rib cages, smaller teeth, less angular mandibles, less pronounced cranial features such as the brow ridges and external occipital protuberance (the small bump at the back of the skull), and the carrying angle of the forearm is more pronounced in females. Females also tend to have more rounded shoulder blades.

[edit] Disorders
See also: List of skeletal disorders
There are many disorders of the skeleton. One of the most common is osteoporosis.

[edit] Osteoporosis
Main article: Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis is a disease of bone, which leads to an increased risk of fracture. In osteoporosis, the bone mineral density (BMD) is reduced, bone microarchitecture is disrupted, and the amount and variety of non-collagenous proteins in bone is altered. Osteoporosis is defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) in women as a bone mineral density 2.5 standard deviations below peak bone mass (20-year-old sex-matched healthy person average) as measured by DXA; the term "established osteoporosis" includes the presence of a fragility fracture.[6] Osteoporosis is most common in women after the menopause, when it is called postmenopausal osteoporosis, but may develop in men and premenopausal women in the presence of particular hormonal disorders and other chronic diseases or as a result of smoking and medications, specifically glucocorticoids, when the disease is craned steroid- or glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis (SIOP or GIOP).
Osteoporosis can be prevented with lifestyle advice and medication, and preventing falls in people with known or suspected osteoporosis is an established way to prevent fractures. Osteoporosis can also be prevented with having a good source of calcium and vitamin D. Osteoporosis can be treated with bisphosphonates and various other medical treatments.

[edit] Gallery








Drawing the reverse of a female skeleton giving an impression of the location relative to surface markings









Annotated skeleton






[edit] References


^ William W. Reynolds and William J. Karlotski (1977). "The Allometric Relationship of Skeleton Weight to Body Weight in Teleost Fishes: A Preliminary Comparison with Birds and Mammals". Copeia: 160–163. 
^ Marieb, Elaine N. and Katja Hoehn. Anatomy and Physiology. Cummings Benjamin, 14 Jan 2006.
^ Miller, Larry (2007-12-09). "We’re Born With 270 Bones. As Adults We Have 206". Ground Report. http://www.groundreport.com/Health_and_Science/We-re-Born-With-270-Bones-As-Adults-We-Have-206. 
^ a b c Tözeren, Aydın (2000). Human Body Dynamics: Classical Mechanics and Human Movement. Springer. pp. 6–10. ISBN 0-387-98801-7. 
^ Lee, Na Kyung; et al. (10 August 2007). "Endocrine Regulation of Energy Metabolism by the Skeleton". Cell 130: 456–469. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2007.05.047. http://download.cell.com/pdfs/0092-8674/PIIS0092867407007015.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-15. 
^ WHO (1994). "Assessment of fracture risk and its application to screening for postmenopausal osteoporosis. Report of a WHO Study Group". World Health Organization technical report series 843: 1–129. PMID 7941614. 



[edit] See also







v • d • e

Bones (Axial skeleton, Appendicular skeleton)





VERTEBRAL COLUMN

vertebrae (cervical, thoracic, lumbar) · sacrum · coccyx






THORAX

sternum · rib






cranial bones of SKULL

occipital · parietal · frontal · temporal  · sphenoid · ethmoid






facial bones of SKULL

nasal · maxilla · lacrimal · zygomatic · palatine · inferior nasal conchae · vomer · mandible · THROAT: hyoid (greater cornu, lesser cornu, body)






UPPER EXTREMITY

SHOULDER GIRDLE:clavicle · scapula · ARM: humerus · ulna · radius- HAND:carpals (scaphoid · lunate bone · triquetral · pisiform · trapezium · trapezoid · capitate · hamate) · metacarpals · phalanges (prox, int, dist)






LOWER EXTREMITY

PELVIS:pelvis (ilium, ischium, pubis) · LEG: femur · patella · fibula · tibia · FOOT: tarsals (calcaneus, talus, navicular, cuneiform, cuboid ) · metatarsals · phalanges (prox, int, dist)






MIDDLE EAR OSSICLES

malleus · incus · stapes













v • d • e

Bones of head and neck: the facial bones of the skull





Maxilla





Surfaces


Anterior: fossae (Incisive fossa, Canine fossa) · Infraorbital foramen · Anterior nasal spine
Infratemporal: Alveolar canals · Maxillary tuberosity
Orbital: Infraorbital groove · Infraorbital canal
Nasal: Pterygopalatine canal







Processes


Zygomatic process
Frontal process (Agger nasi, Anterior lacrimal crest)
Alveolar process
Palatine process (Incisive foramen, Incisive canals, Foramina of Scarpa, Incisive bone, Anterior nasal spine)







Other


Body of maxilla · Maxillary sinus









Zygomatic

Orbital process (Zygomatico-orbital) · Temporal process (Zygomaticotemporal) · Lateral process (Zygomaticofacial)






Palatine





Fossae


Pterygopalatine fossa · Pterygoid fossa







Plates


Horizontal plate (Posterior nasal spine) · Perpendicular plate (Pterygopalatine canal, Sphenopalatine foramen, Pyramidal process)







Processes


Orbital · Sphenoidal









Mandible





Body


external surface (Symphysis menti, Mental protuberance, Mental foramen) · internal surface (Mental spine, Mylohyoid line, Sublingual fovea, Submandibular fovea) · Alveolar part of mandible







Ramus


Mylohyoid groove (Mandibular canal, Lingula) · Mandibular foramen · Angle
Coronoid process · Mandibular notch · Condyloid process · Pterygoid fovea









Minor/
nose

Nasal bone: Internasal suture · Nasal foramina
Inferior nasal concha: Ethmoidal process · Maxillary process
Vomer: Wing
Lacrimal: Posterior lacrimal crest · Lacrimal groove · Lacrimal hamulus













v • d • e

Bones of head and neck: the cranium of the skull





Occipital





Squama


external (Inion/External occipital protuberance, Nuchal lines) · planes (Occipital, Nuchal) · internal (Cruciform eminence, Internal occipital protuberance, Sagittal sulcus, Internal occipital crest)







Lateral parts


Condyle (Condyloid fossa, Condylar canal) · Hypoglossal canal · jugular (Jugular process, Jugular tubercle)







Basilar part


Pharyngeal tubercle







Other


Foramen magnum









Parietal

Parietal eminence · Temporal line · Parietal foramen






Frontal





Squama


Frontal suture · Frontal eminence · external (Superciliary arches, Glabella) · foramina (Supraorbital, Cecum) · Zygomatic process · internal (Sagittal sulcus, Frontal crest)







Orbital part


Ethmoidal notch · Lacrimal fossa · Trochlear fovea · Frontal sinus · Frontonasal duct









Temporal





Squama


Articular tubercle · Suprameatal triangle · Mandibular fossa · Petrotympanic fissure · Zygomatic process







Mastoid part


Mastoid foramen · Mastoid process (Mastoid cells) · Mastoid notch · Occipital groove · Sigmoid sulcus · Mastoid antrum (Entrance)







Petrous part


Carotid canal · Facial canal (Hiatus) · Internal auditory meatus · Aqueduct of cochlea · Stylomastoid foramen
fossae (Subarcuate fossa, Jugular fossa) · canaliculi (Inferior tympanic, Mastoid) · Styloid process · Petrosquamous suture
(note: ossicles in petrous part, but not part of temporal bone)







Tympanic part


Suprameatal spine









Sphenoid





Surfaces


Superior surface: Sella turcica (Dorsum sellae, Tuberculum sellae, Hypophysial fossa, Posterior clinoid processes) · Ethmoidal spine · Chiasmatic groove · Middle clinoid process · Petrosal process · Clivus
Lateral surface: Carotid groove · Sphenoidal lingula
Anterior surface: Sphenoidal sinuses







Great wings


foramina (Rotundum, Ovale, Vesalii, Spinosum) · Spine · Infratemporal crest · Sulcus for auditory tube







Small wings


Superior orbital fissure · Anterior clinoid process · Optic canal







Pterygoid
processes


fossae (Pterygoid, Scaphoid) · pterygoid plates (Lateral, Medial) · Pterygoid canal · Hamulus







Other


Body · Sphenoidal conchae









Ethmoid





Plates


Cribriform plate (Crista galli, Olfactory foramina) · Perpendicular plate







Surfaces


Lateral surface Orbital lamina · Uncinate process
Medial surface Superior nasal concha · Superior meatus · Middle nasal concha · Middle meatus







Labyrinth


Ethmoid sinus · ethmoidal foramina (Posterior, Anterior)
















v • d • e

Bones of head and neck: cranial sutures, fontanelles, and related regions





Cranial sutures

Cranial: frontoethmoidal – frontal or metopic (frontal/frontal) – coronal (frontal/parietal) – occipitomastoid (occipital/temporal) – lambdoid (parietal/temporal) – sagittal (parietal/parietal) – sphenoethmoidal – sphenofrontal – sphenoparietal – sphenosquamosal (sphenoid/temporal) – sphenopetrosal (sphenoid/temporal) – squamosal (temporal/parietal) – petrosquamous (temporal/temporal)
Facial: palatomaxillary suture
Cranial–facial: sphenozygomatic – zygomaticotemporal – zygomaticofrontal






Fontanelles

anterior – posterior – sphenoidal – mastoid






Foramina of multiple bones

inferior orbital fissure – foramen lacerum – jugular foramen – nasolacrimal canal






Fossae

anterior cranial fossa – middle cranial fossa – posterior cranial fossa – cranial cavity






Other compound structures

Cranial: asterion – pterion – calvaria – stephanion – bregma – lambda
Facial: nasion
Cranial–facial: dacryon – zygomatic arch – temporal fossa – infratemporal fossa – pterygomaxillary fissure – pterygopalatine fossa













v • d • e

Bones of upper limbs





Pectoral girdle,
clavicle

conoid tubercle – trapezoid line – costal tuberosity – subclavian groove






Scapula

fossae (subscapular, supraspinatous, infraspinatous) – suprascapular notch – glenoid cavity
tubercles (infraglenoid, supraglenoid) – spine of scapula – acromion – coracoid process
borders (superior, lateral/axillary, medial/vertebral) – angles (superior, inferior, lateral)






Humerus

upper extremity: necks (anatomical, surgical) – tubercles (greater, lesser) – intertubercular sulcus
body: radial sulcus – deltoid tuberosity
lower extremity: capitulum – trochlea – epicondyles (lateral, medial) – supracondylar ridges (lateral, medial) – fossae (radial, coronoid, olecranon)






Forearm

radius: upper extremity (head, tuberosity) – body – lower extremity (ulnar notch, styloid process)
ulna: upper extremity (tuberosity, olecranon, coronoid process, radial notch, trochlear notch) – body – lower extremity (head, styloid process)






Hand

carpus: scaphoid – lunate – triquetral – pisiform – trapezium – trapezoid – capitate – hamate (hamulus)
metacarpus: 1st metacarpal – 2nd – 3rd – 4th – 5th
phalanges of the hand: proximal – intermediate – distal













v • d • e

Bones of torso





Sternum

Suprasternal notch, Manubrium, Sternal angle, Body of sternum, Xiphisternal joint, Xiphoid process






Rib

specific ribs (1, 2, 9, 10, 11, 12, false – 8–12, floating – 11–12) – parts (Angle, Tubercle, Costal groove, Neck, Head)






Vertebra





General structures


body of vertebra, vertebral arch (pedicle, lamina, vertebral notch), foramina (vertebral, intervertebral), processes (transverse, articular/zygapophysis, spinous), spinal canal







Cervical vertebrae


C1 (anterior arch, posterior arch, lateral mass), C2 (dens), C3, C4, C5, C6, C7
anterior tubercle, posterior tubercle, foramen transversarium







Thoracic vertebrae


T1, T2, T3, T4, T5, T6, T7, T8, T9, T10, T11, T12
costal facets (superior, inferior, transverse)







Lumbar vertebrae


accessory process, mammillary process, L5







Sacrum


pelvic surface (anterior sacral foramina), dorsal surface (posterior sacral foramina, median sacral crest, medial sacral crest, lateral sacral crest), lateral surface (sacral tuberosity), base, sacral hiatus – presacral space – sacral promontory – sacral canal  – ala of sacrum – sacrovertebral angle







Coccyx


 
















v • d • e

Bones of lower limbs





Femur





upper extremity


head (fovea) · neck · greater trochanter (trochanteric fossa) · lesser trochanter · intertrochanteric line · intertrochanteric crest







body


linea aspera · gluteal tuberosity / third trochanter · pectineal line







lower extremity


adductor tubercle · patellar surface · epicondyles (lateral, medial) · condyles (lateral, medial) · intercondylar fossa









Crus





Tibia






upper extremity


condyles (lateral, medial) · intercondylar eminence (lateral/medial intercondylar tubercle) · posterior/anterior intercondylar area







body


tuberosity · soleal line







lower extremity


medial malleolus · fibular notch










Fibula


head · body · lateral malleolus







Other


patella









Foot





Tarsus


calcaneus (sustentaculum tali, trochlear process) · talus (body, neck, head) · navicular · cuboid · cuneiform (medial, intermediate, lateral)







Metatarsus


1st metatarsal · 2nd · 3rd · 4th · 5th







Other


phalanges of the foot
















v • d • e

Bones of pelvis / pelvic cavity





General

sacrum · coccyx · hip bone






Ilium





body


arcuate line







wing


gluteal lines (posterior, anterior, inferior)
iliac spines (anterior superior, anterior inferior, posterior superior, posterior inferior)
other: crest · tuberosity · fossa









Ischium





body


ischial spine · lesser sciatic notch







superior ramus


tuberosity of the ischium







inferior ramus


no substructures









Pubis





body


pubic crest







superior ramus


pubic tubercle · obturator crest







inferior ramus


pectineal line









Compound

acetabulum (acetabular notch) · iliopubic eminence / iliopectineal line · linea terminalis · ischiopubic ramus / pubic arch
obturator foramen · greater sciatic foramen / greater sciatic notch · lesser sciatic foramen
lesser pelvis (pelvic inlet, pelvic brim, pelvic outlet) · greater pelvis









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_skeleton"
Categories: Skull | Bones of the upper limb | Pelvis | Endocrine system | Human anatomy | Osteology | Skeletal systemHidden categories: Articles to be merged since March 2009 | All articles to be merged | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Bosanski
Česky
Ελληνικά
Español
فارسی
Français
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
ភាសាខ្មែរ
한국어
Latviešu
Bahasa Melayu
Polski
Português
Русский
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Shqip
Suomi
Tagalog
ไทย
اردو
中文









 This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 17:52.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
