













Monaco - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Monaco";
		var wgTitle = "Monaco";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "19261";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282012259;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Monaco

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses see Monaco (disambiguation)


Principality of Monaco
Principauté de Monaco










Flag
Coat of arms





Motto: "Deo Juvante"  (Latin)
"With God's Help"


Anthem: Hymne Monégasque







Location of  Monaco  (circled in inset)
on the European continent  (white)





Capital
Monaco[1]


Largest Most populated quartier

Monte Carlo


Official languages
French[2] is the only official language. Monegasque, Italian and English are widely understood.


Demonym
Monégasque or Monagasque


Government
Constitutional monarchy and Principality


 - 
Prince
Albert II


 - 
Minister of State
Jean-Paul Proust


 - 
President of the National Council
Stéphane Valeri (UPM)


Independence


 - 
House of Grimaldi
1297 


Area


 - 
Total
1.95 km2 (230th)
.76 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
0.0


Population


 - 
2009 estimate
32,965[3] (205th)


 - 
2000 census
32,020 


 - 
Density
16,818/km2 (1st)
43,560/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$976 million (179th)


 - 
Per capita
$70,670 (€50,000) (Mid Sept. 07 est.) (2/3)


HDI (2003)
▬ 0.946 (high) (16th as of 2005)


Currency
Euro (EUR)


Time zone
CET (UTC+1)


 - 
Summer (DST)
CEST (UTC+2)


Internet TLD
.mc


Calling code
377


Monaco  /ˈmɒnəkoʊ/ (help·info), officially the Principality of Monaco (French: Principauté de Monaco; Monégasque: Principatu de Múnegu; Italian: Principato di Monaco; Occitan: Principat de Mónegue), is a small sovereign city-state located in South Western Europe (Monaco is the name of the country as well as the name of its only city). The territory lies on the northern coast of the Mediterranean Sea has land borders only with France and is close to Italy. Monaco is often regarded as a tax haven, and many of its inhabitants are wealthy and from foreign countries making up a majority of the population, at around 84%.[4]
Monaco is a constitutional monarchy and principality, with Prince Albert II as head of state. The Grimaldi family has ruled Monaco since 1297, and the state's sovereignty was officially recognized by the Franco-Monegasque Treaty of 1861. Despite being independent, Monaco's defence is the responsibility of France.
Monaco is the world's most densely populated sovereign country, and the world's smallest French-speaking country. An average person takes only 56 minutes to walk across the width of the country.




Contents


1 Administrative division
2 History
3 Law and government
4 Economy

4.1 Tax haven


5 Numismatics
6 Geography of Monaco
7 Sport and entertainment

7.1 Formula One
7.2 Monte Carlo Rally
7.3 Football
7.4 Rugby
7.5 Other sports


8 Education

8.1 Primary and secondary schools
8.2 Colleges and universities


9 Demographics
10 Religion

10.1 Christian

10.1.1 Roman Catholic
10.1.2 Anglican


10.2 Jewish


11 Security
12 Flag
13 Transport
14 See also
15 References
16 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Administrative division




Wards of Monaco


Monaco is the second smallest principality in Europe, as well as the second smallest country in the world. The state consists of only one municipality (commune). There is no geographical distinction between the State and City of Monaco, although responsibilities of the government (State-level) and of the municipality (city-level) are different. According to the constitution of 1911, the principality was subdivided into three municipalities:

Monaco (Monaco-Ville), the old city on a rocky promontory extending into the Mediterranean, known as the Rock of Monaco, or simply Le Rocher (the Rock), where the palace is located
Monte Carlo, the principal residential and resort area with the Monte Carlo Casino in the east and northeast
La Condamine, the northwest section including the port area





Directly ahead is La Condamine, to the right with the smaller harbor is Fontvieille and to the left with the high-rise buildings is Monte Carlo.


The three municipalities were merged into one in 1954 (after accusations that the government was acting according to the motto "divide and conquer"), and they had the status of wards (quartiers) thereafter.

Fontvieille was added as fourth ward, a newly constructed area reclaimed from the sea (in the 1970s)
Moneghetti became the fifth ward, created from a part of La Condamine
Larvotto became the sixth ward, created from a part of Monte Carlo
La Rousse/Saint Roman (including Le Ténao) became the seventh ward, also created from a part of Monte Carlo

Subsequently, three additional wards were created:

Saint Michel, from a part of Monte Carlo
La Colle, from a part of La Condamine
Les Révoires, from a part of La Condamine

An additional ward was planned by new land reclamation, to be settled from 2014. Prince Albert II announced in his New Year Speech 2009 that such plans had been put on hold due to the current economic climate.
Currently the principality is subdivided into 10 wards (with their official numbers; Le Portier, the proposed ward, was anticipated as number 11):


Nr
Ward
Area
(m²)
Population
(Census
of 2000)
Density
km2
City
Blocks
(îlots)
Remarks


Former municipality of Monaco


05
Monaco-Ville
184,750
1,034
5597
19
Old City with palace


Former municipality of Monte Carlo


01
Monte Carlo/Spélugues (Bd. Des Moulins-Av. de la Madone)
281,461
3,034
10779
20
the casino and resort area


02
La Rousse/Saint Roman (Annonciade-Château Périgord)
105,215
3,223
30633
15
in the northeast, incl. Le Ténao


03
Larvotto/Bas Moulins (Larvotto-Bd Psse Grace)
328,479
5,443
16570
15
eastern beach area


10
Saint Michel (Psse Charlotte-Park Palace)
142,223
3,807
26768
24
central residential area


Former municipality of La Condamine


04
La Condamine
237,283
3,847
16213
27
port area in the northwest


07
La Colle (Plati-Pasteur-Bd Charles III)
188,073
2,822
15005
15
on the western border with Cap d'Ail


08
Les Révoires (Hector Otto-Honoré Labande)
75,747
2,515
33203
11
containing the Jardin Exotique


09
Moneghetti/ Bd de Belgique (Bd Rainier III-Bd de Belgique
107,056
3,003
28051
18
 


new land reclaimed from the sea


06
Fontvieille
324,157
3,292
10156
9
started 1971


11
Le Portier
275,0001)
-
-
-
plans put on hold by Prince Albert II in 2009


 
Monaco
1,974,444
32,020
16217
173
 


1) Area not included in total, as it is only proposed


For statistical purposes, the wards of Monaco are further subdivided into 173 city blocks (îlots), which are comparable to the census blocks in the United States.

[edit] History
Main article: History of Monaco




View of Monte Carlo






The territory of the Principality of Monaco


Monaco's name comes from the nearby Phocaean Greek colony, in the 6th century, which referred to the Ligurians as Monoikos, from the Greek μόνοικος "single house", from μόνος "alone, single" + οίκος "house", which bears the sense of a people either settled in a "single habitation" or of "living apart" from others. According to an ancient myth, Hercules passed through the Monaco area and turned away the previous gods. As a result, a temple was constructed there, the temple of Hercules Monoikos. Because the only temple of this area was the "House" of Hercules, the city was called Monoikos.[5]
Following a land grant from Emperor Henry VI in 1191, Monaco was re-founded in 1228 as a colony of Genoa. Monaco has been ruled by the House of Grimaldi since 1297, when Francesco Grimaldi ("Il Malizia", translated from Italian either as "The Malicious One" or "The Cunning One") and his men captured the fortress protecting the Rock of Monaco while he was dressed as a Franciscan monk - a Monaco in Italian, although this is a coincidence as the area was already known by this name.




A statue of François Grimaldi says "il Malizia" (the Shrewd) guised as a monk with a sword under his frock before the Prince's Palace of Monaco.


In 1793, French Revolutionary forces captured Monaco, and it remained under French control until 1814. The principality was re-established that year, only to be designated a protectorate of the Kingdom of Sardinia by the Congress of Vienna in 1815. Monaco remained in this position until 1860, when by the Treaty of Turin, Sardinia ceded to France the surrounding county of Nice (as well as Savoy). During this time there was unrest in the towns of Menton and Roquebrune, which declared independence, hoping for annexation by Sardinia. The unrest continued until the ruling prince gave up his claim to the two towns (some 95% of the country), and they were ceded to France in return for four million francs. This transfer and Monaco's sovereignty was recognised by the Franco-Monegasque Treaty of 1861.
Until the adoption of the 1911 constitution, the princes of Monaco were absolute rulers. In July 1918, a treaty was signed providing for limited French protection over Monaco. The treaty, part of the Treaty of Versailles, established that Monegasque international policy would be aligned with French political, military, and economic interests.
In 1943, the Italian army invaded and occupied Monaco, setting up a Fascist administration. Shortly thereafter, following Mussolini's collapse in Italy, the Nazi German Wehrmacht occupied Monaco and began the deportation of the Jewish population. The prominent French Jew René Blum (Paris, 13 March 1878 - Auschwitz, 30 April 1943), who founded the Ballet de l'Opera in Monte Carlo, was arrested in his Paris home and held in the Drancy deportation camp outside Paris, France from whence he was then shipped to the Auschwitz concentration camp where he was killed.




Rainier III, Prince of Monaco, 1949 to 2005


Rainier III who ruled until 2005 acceded to the throne following the death of his grandfather, Prince Louis II, in 1949. On April 19, 1956, Prince Rainier married the American actress Grace Kelly; the event was widely televised and covered in the popular press, focusing the world's attention onto the tiny Principality.
A new constitution, proclaimed in 1962, abolished capital punishment, provided for women's suffrage, and established a Supreme Court of Monaco to guarantee fundamental liberties. In 1993, the Principality of Monaco became a member of the United Nations, with full voting rights.
In 2002, a new treaty between France and Monaco specified that, should there be no heirs to carry on the Grimaldi dynasty, the principality would still remain an independent nation rather than revert to France. Monaco's military defence, however, is still the responsibility of France.
On 31 March 2005, Prince Rainier III, too ill to exercise his duties, relinquished them to his only son and heir, Prince Albert Alexandre Louis. Prince Rainier died on 6 April 2005, after a reign of 56 years, and his son succeeded him as Albert II, Sovereign Prince of Monaco.
Following a period of official mourning, Prince Albert II formally assumed the princely crown on 12 July 2005, in a celebration that began with a solemn Mass at Monaco cathedral, where his father had been buried three months earlier. His accession to the Monegasque throne was a two-step event, with a further ceremony, drawing heads of state for an elaborate levée, held on 19 November 2005 at the historic palace in Monaco-Ville. Albert II is the son of the late Princess Grace, known prior to her marriage to Prince Rainer III in 1956 as Grace Kelly.

[edit] Law and government




View of the Port of Hercules, La Condamine, Monaco


Monaco has been governed as a constitutional monarchy since 1911, with the Sovereign Prince of Monaco as head of state. The executive branch consists of a Minister of State (the head of government), who presides over a four-member Council of Government (the Cabinet). Until 2002, the Minister of State was a French citizen appointed by the prince from among candidates proposed by the French government; since the constitution amendment in 2002, the Minister of State can be French or Monegasque. Under the 1962 constitution, the prince shares his power with the unicameral National Council (parliament). The twenty-four members of this legislative body are elected from lists by universal suffrage for five-year terms. The principality's local affairs are directed by the Communal Council, which consists of fifteen elected members and is presided over by the mayor.

[edit] Economy




Fontvieille and its new harbour


One of Monaco's main sources of income is tourism; each year many are attracted to its casino and pleasant climate. (Monaco's own citizens are not allowed to gamble in the casino.) In 2001, a major new construction project extended the pier used by cruise ships in the main harbour. The principality has successfully sought to diversify into services and small, high-value-added, non-polluting industries such as cosmetics and biothermics.
The state retains monopolies in numerous sectors, including tobacco and the postal service. The telephone network (Monaco Telecom) used to be owned by the state; it now owns 45%, while the remaining 55% is owned by Cable and Wireless (49%) and Compagnie Monégasque de Banque (6%). It is still, however, a monopoly. Living standards are high, roughly comparable to those in prosperous French metropolitan areas.
Monaco is not a member of the European Union but is very closely linked to it via a customs union with France, and as such its currency is the same as that of France: the euro. Before 2002, Monaco minted its own franc coins, the Monegasque franc. Monaco has acquired the right to mint euro coins with Monegasque designs on their national side.

[edit] Tax haven
Monaco levies no income tax on individuals. The absence of a personal income tax in the principality has attracted to it a considerable number of wealthy "tax refugee" residents from European countries who derive the majority of their income from activity outside Monaco; celebrities such as Formula One drivers attract most of the attention, but the vast majority of them are less well-known business people.




Monte Carlo Casino


In 2000, a report by French parliamentarians Arnaud Montebourg and Vincent Peillon alleged that Monaco has lax policies with respect to money laundering, including within its famed casino, and that the government of Monaco puts political pressure on the judiciary so that alleged crimes are not properly investigated.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) issued in 1998 a first report on the consequences of the tax havens financial systems. Monaco did not appear in the list of these territories until 2004, when OECD became indignant regarding the Monegasque situation[6] and denounced it in its last report[7] (as well as Andorra, the Principality of Liechtenstein, Liberia and the Republic of the Marshall Islands) underlining its lack of co-operation as regards financial information disclosure and availability.
In 2000, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) underlined that Monaco suffers a great lack of adequate resources.[8] The Principality is no longer blamed in the FATF 2005 report,[9] as well as all other territories in 2006.[10]
Since 2003, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has identified Monaco, along with 36 other territories, as a tax haven.[11]
The Council of Europe also decided to issue reports naming tax havens. Twenty-two territories, Monaco included, were thus evaluated between 1998 and 2000 on a first round. Monaco is the only territory that refuses to perform the second round, initially forecast between 2001 and 2003, whereas the 21 other territories are implementing the third and last round, planned between 2005 and 2007.[12]

[edit] Numismatics




First Monegasque euro commemorative coin minted in 2002, face value of €20


Main articles: Monegasque euro coins and Euro gold and silver commemorative coins (Monaco)
In Monaco, the euro was introduced in 2002. As a preparation for this date, the minting of the new euro coins started as early as 2001. This is why the first euro coins from Monaco has the year 2001 on it, instead of 2002 like other countries of the Eurozone. Three different designs were selected for the Monegasque coins. In 2006, the design was changed after the death of ruling Prince Rainier to have the effigy of Prince Albert.
Monaco also has a rich and valuable collection of collectors' coins, with face value ranging from 5 to 100 euro. These coins are a legacy of an old national practice of minting silver and gold commemorative coins. Unlike normal issues, these coins are not legal tender in all the Eurozone. For instance, a €5 Monegasque commemorative coin cannot be used in any other country. The same practice concerning commemorative coins is exercised with all eurozone countries. Commemorative coins are legal tender only in their country of issue, unlike normal circulation coins, which are accepted in all euro-zone countries.

[edit] Geography of Monaco
Main article: Geography of Monaco
Monaco is completely bordered by France to the north, west, and south; to the east it is bordered by the Mediterranean Sea.


 Weather averages for Monaco 


Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year


Average high °F (°C)
55
(13)
55
(13)
58
(14)
61
(16)
67
(19)
74
(23)
79
(26)
80
(27)
75
(24)
68
(20)
61
(16)
56
(13)
67
(19)


Average low °F (°C)
42
(6)
43
(6)
46
(8)
49
(9)
56
(13)
62
(17)
67
(19)
68
(20)
63
(17)
56
(13)
48
(9)
43
(6)
55
(13)


Precipitation inches (mm)
3.5
(88.9)
3
(76.2)
2.9
(73.7)
2.9
(73.7)
2.5
(63.5)
1.9
(48.3)
1.5
(38.1)
0.7
(17.8)
1.2
(30.5)
2.6
(66)
4.4
(111.8)
4.6
(116.8)
31.7
(805.2)


Source: {{{source}}} {{{accessdate}}}


[citation needed] 
[edit] Sport and entertainment

[edit] Formula One




Formation lap for the 1996 Monaco Grand Prix.


Since 1929, the Monaco Grand Prix has been held annually in the streets of Monaco. It is widely considered to be one of the most prestigious automobile races in the world. The erecting of the circuit takes six weeks to complete, and the removal after the race another three weeks. The circuit has many elevation changes and tight corners, along with a tunnel. This together with being incredibly narrow make it perhaps the most demanding Formula One track. Only two drivers have ever crashed into the harbour, the most famous being Alberto Ascari in the 1955 Grand Prix (Ascari lost his life four days later at Monza). The other was Paul Hawkins during the 1965 Grand Prix.

[edit] Monte Carlo Rally
The Monte Carlo Rally has been held since 1911, having originally been held at the behest of Albert I, Prince of Monaco, and is, like the principality's Grand Prix, organised by the Automobile Club de Monaco. It has long been considered to be one of the toughest and most prestigious events in rallying and from 1973 to 2008 was the opening round of the World Rally Championship.

[edit] Football
AS Monaco play at Stade Louis II and have been one of the more successful French sides of recent times and because of the popular appeal of living in Monaco and the lack of income tax, many international stars have played for the club such as Jurgen Klinsmann, Oliver Bierhoff, George Weah, John Collins , Akis Zikos , Rafael Márquez and Emmanuel Adebayor. The club reached the UEFA Champions League Final in 2004 led by Fernando Morientes, Akis Zikos , Jerome Rothen and Ludovic Giuly, losing 3-0 to Portuguese team FC Porto. The Stade Louis II also plays host to the annual UEFA Super Cup, which is played between the winners of the UEFA Champions League and the UEFA Cup, which is now called the UEFA Europa League. Technically speaking, one of the goals in the Stade Louis II sits in the territory of Monaco, and the other in France.

[edit] Rugby
Monaco national rugby team, as of January 2009, is 87th in International Rugby Board ranking.

[edit] Other sports
The Monte Carlo Masters is currently held annually in neighbouring Roquebrune-Cap-Martin, France, as a professional tournament for men as part of tennis' ATP Masters Series. The tournament has been held since 1897. Golf's Monte Carlo Open was also held at the Monte Carlo Golf Club at Mont Agel in France between 1984 and 1992. Monaco has also competed in the Olympics, although, as of 2008, no athlete from Monaco has ever won an Olympic medal.
In 2009, the Tour de France, the world's premier bicycle race, starts from Monaco with a 15 km closed-circuit individual time trial starting and finishing there on the first day (4 July) and the 182 km second leg starting there on the following day and ending in Brignoles, France.

[edit] Education

[edit] Primary and secondary schools
Monaco has ten state-operated schools, including seven nursery and primary schools, one secondary school (Collège Charles III), one lycée that provides general and technological training (Lycée Albert 1er), and one lycée that provides vocational and hotel training.[13] There are also two grant-aided denominational private schools (including Institution François d'Assise Nicolas Barré and Ecole des Sœurs Dominicaines) and one international school (International School of Monaco).

[edit] Colleges and universities

International University of Monaco


[edit] Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Monaco
Monaco's population is unusual in that the native Monegasques are a minority in their own country. The largest proportion of residents are French nationals (47%), followed by Monegasque (16%), and Italians (16%). The remaining 21% belong to one of the other 125 nationalities that make up Monaco's international population.

[edit] Religion




Cathedral of Monaco



[edit] Christian

[edit] Roman Catholic
The official religion is Roman Catholicism, with freedom of other religions guaranteed by the constitution. There are five Roman Catholic parish churches in Monaco and one cathedral, which is the seat of the archbishop of Monaco. The diocese, which has existed since the mid-nineteenth century, was raised to an archbishopric in 1981 as the Archdiocese of Monaco.

[edit] Anglican
There is one Anglican church (St. Paul's Church), located in the Avenue de Grande Bretagne in Monte Carlo. In 2007 this had a formal membership of 135 Anglicans resident in the principality, but was also serving a considerably larger number of Anglicans temporarily in the country, mostly as tourists. The church site also accommodates an English-language library of over 3,000 books.[14] The church is part of the Anglican Diocese of Gibraltar in Europe.

[edit] Jewish
The Association Culturelle Israelite de Monaco (founded 1948) is a converted house containing a synagogue, a community Hebrew school, and a kosher food shop, located in Monte Carlo. The community (approximately 1,500 strong) mainly consists of retired Jews from Britain (40%) and North Africa. Half the population is Ashkenazi, while the other half are Sephardic.[15]

[edit] Security
See also: Law enforcement in Monaco
See also: Military of Monaco
The wider defense of the nation is provided by France.
Monaco has no navy or air force, but on both a per-capita and per-area basis, Monaco has the largest police force (515 police officers for 32,000 people) and police presence in the world. Its police includes a specialist unit which operates patrol and surveillance boats. There is also a small military consisting of a (mainly ceremonial) bodyguard unit for the Prince and his palace called the Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince which numbers 112 officers and men and is equipped with modern weapons such as M-16 rifles and 9 mm pistols, and a militarized (and armed) fire and civil defence Corps.
The Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince (Prince's Company of Carabiniers) is the main ceremonial unit of the military force of Monaco. It was created by Prince Honoré IV in 1817 for the protection of the Principality and the Princely family. The company numbers exactly 112 officers and men; while the NCOs and soldiers are local, the officers have generally served in the French Army. Together with the local fire service, the Carabiniers form Monaco's total public forces. In addition to their guard duties, the company patrols the Principality's beaches and coastal waters, as well as duties around the Palace in Monaco-Ville.

[edit] Flag
It is one of the world's oldest national flag designs. The flag of Monaco is identical to that of Indonesia (except for the ratio of height to width).[16]

[edit] Transport
Main article: Transport in Monaco
Several train systems serve Monaco.
Monaco is served by Monaco - Fontvieille Heliport. The closest airport is Cote d'Azur Airport in Nice, France. Some airlines marketed Monaco via Nice Airport.[17]





A wide view of La Condamine, Monaco



[edit] See also




AS Monaco FC, local football team.

Stade Louis II, the team's home stadium.


Association des Guides et Scouts de Monaco
Communications in Monaco
Foreign relations of Monaco
International University of Monaco
List of radio stations in Monaco
List of rulers of Monaco





Military of Monaco
Monaco Grand Prix
Monte-Carlo Philharmonic Orchestra
Music of Monaco
Oceanographic Museum
Postage stamps and postal history of Monaco
Prince's Palace of Monaco
Railway line and station
Rallye Automobile Monte Carlo











[edit] References


^ "History & Heritage". Council of Government. http://www.gouv.mc/devwww/wwwnew.nsf/1909!/x2Gb?OpenDocument&2Gb. Retrieved on 2008-05-22. 
^ "Constitution de la Principauté". Council of Government. http://www.gouv.mc/devwww/wwwnew.nsf/1909$/036c62fe5f92f2efc1256f5b0054fa42gb?OpenDocument&3Gb. Retrieved on 2008-05-22. 
^ Monaco at the CIA World Factbook
^ [1] Per capita purchasing power parity GDP (US dept. of State 2006 est.): $30,000
^ Strabo, Geography, Gaul, 4.6.3 at LacusCurtious
^ Declaration of April 18th, 2004, by the representative of the OECD Centre for Tax Policy and Administration Gabriel Makhlouf regarding the list of alleged tax havens non-cooperatives countries comparable
^ Stage Report 2004: Project of OECD on the detrimental tax practices, OECD, Paris, 2004
^ Review to Identify Non-Cooperative Countries or Territories: Increasing the Worldwide Effectiveness of Anti-Money Laundering Measures, FATF, Paris, 2000
^ Review to Identify Non-Cooperative Countries or Territories: Increasing the Worldwide Effectiveness of Anti-Money Laundering Measures, FATF, Paris, 2005
^ Review to Identify Non-Cooperative Countries or Territories: Increasing the Worldwide Effectiveness of Anti-Money Laundering Measures, FATF, Paris, 2006
^ « Financial Centres with Significant Offshore Activities » in Offshore Financial Centres. The Assessment Program. A Progress Report Supplementary Information, IMF, Washington, 2005
^ First Mutual Evaluation Report on the Principality of Monaco, Moneyval, Strasbourg, 2003
^ [2][dead link]
^ See the website of St Paul's Church, Monaco.
^ Details at Jewish Virtual Library
^ Monaco Flag - World Flags 101 - Monacan Flags
^ "Route Map" in 1993, Trans World Airlines



[edit] External links

Find more about Monaco on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Government


Official Government Portal
Official website of the Prince's Palace of Monaco
Chief of State and Cabinet Members


General information


Monaco entry at The World Factbook
Monaco from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Monaco at the Open Directory Project
History of Monaco: Primary documents
Wikimedia Atlas of Monaco


Travel


Official website for Tourism
Monaco travel guide from Wikitravel
Visitors Guide from Exec Digital


Other


(French) Order of the doctors of Monaco
(French) French Monaco Web portail
(French) Official Statistical Report 2006 (with detailed information about the 10 wards)PDF (1.24 MiB)
Monaco Photos







 
Geographic locale














v • d • e

Countries of Europe








Albania · Andorra · Armenia2 · Austria · Azerbaijan1 · Belarus · Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus2 · Czech Republic · Denmark3 · Estonia · Finland · France1 · Georgia1 · Germany · Greece  · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy1 · Kazakhstan1 · Kosovo5 · Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Macedonia4 · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands3 · Norway3 · Poland · Portugal3 · Romania · Russia1 · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia · Slovenia · Spain1 · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey1 · Ukraine · United Kingdom3 · Vatican City
1 Has part of its territory outside Europe.  2 Entirely in West Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe.  3 Has dependencies or similar territories outside Europe. 4 Name disputed by Greece; see Macedonia naming dispute. 5 Declared independence from Serbia on February 17, 2008 and is recognised by 56 United Nations member states.















v • d • e

Capitals of European states and territories





Capitals of non-sovereign territories or constituent nations shown in bold italics









Central
Southern
Western
Northern








Berlin, Germany
Bratislava, Slovakia
Budapest, Hungary
Ljubljana, Slovenia
Prague, Czech Republic
Vienna, Austria
Warsaw, Poland
Vaduz, Liechtenstein
Eastern
Astana, Kazakhstan 1
Baku, Azerbaijan 1
Bucharest, Romania
Chişinău, Moldova
Kiev, Ukraine
Minsk, Belarus
Moscow, Russia 1
Sukhumi, Abkhazia 3
Tbilisi, Georgia 1
Tskhinvali, South Ossetia 3
Yerevan, Armenia 2





Ankara, Turkey 1
Athens, Greece
Belgrade, Serbia
Gibraltar, Gibraltar4
Nicosia, Cyprus 2
Nicosia, Northern Cyprus 2, 3
Podgorica, Montenegro
Pristina, Kosovo 3
Rome, Italy
San Marino, San Marino
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
Skopje, Republic of Macedonia
Sofia, Bulgaria
Tirana, Albania
Valletta, Malta
Vatican City, Vatican City
Zagreb, Croatia




Amsterdam, Netherlands
Andorra la Vella, Andorra
Berne, Switzerland
Brussels, Belgium 6
Douglas, Isle of Man4
Dublin, Ireland
Lisbon, Portugal
London, United Kingdom
Luxembourg, Luxembourg
Madrid, Spain
Monaco, Monaco
Paris, France
St. Helier, Jersey4
St. Peter Port, Guernsey4




Copenhagen, Denmark
Helsinki, Finland
Longyearbyen, Svalbard
Mariehamn, Åland Islands
Oslo, Norway
Reykjavík, Iceland
Riga, Latvia
Stockholm, Sweden
Tallinn, Estonia
Tórshavn, Faroe Islands
Vilnius, Lithuania











1 Transcontinental country.  2 Entirely in Southwest Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe.  3 Partially recognised country.  4 Crown Dependency or Overseas Territory of the United Kingdom.  5 Part of Spain.  6 Also the seat of the European Union, see Location of European Union institutions and Brussels and the European Union.












v • d • e

 Administrative divisions of Monaco 





Traditional Quartiers
(by age of foundation)

Monaco-Ville · La Condamine · Monte Carlo · Fontvieille







Current Wards
(by official Ward number)

01 Monte Carlo · 02 Saint Roman · 03 Larvotto · 04 La Condamine · 05 Monaco-Ville · 06 Fontvieille · 07 La Colle · 08 Les Révoires · 09 Moneghetti · 10 Saint Michel






Modern Geographic 'Areas'
(defined by Monaco Dept of Tourism)

Monaco-Ville · La Condamine · Monte Carlo · Fontvieille · Moneghetti













v • d • e

Countries and territories bordering the Mediterranean Sea






Albania • Algeria • Bosnia-Herzegovina • Croatia • Cyprus • Egypt • France • Gibraltar • Greece • Israel • Italy • Lebanon • Libya • Malta • Monaco • Montenegro • Morocco • Palestinian Authority • Slovenia • Spain • Syria • Tunisia • Turkey • Akrotiri / Dhekelia



















 
International organizations














v • d • e

Member states of the Council of Europe






Albania · Andorra · Armenia · Austria · Azerbaijan · Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus · Czech Republic · Denmark · Estonia · Finland · France · Georgia · Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Macedonia1 · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands · Norway · Poland · Portugal · Romania · Russia · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia · Slovenia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey · Ukraine · United Kingdom







Observer member status: Argentina · Canada · Chile · Israel · Japan · Mexico · Morocco · United States of America · Vatican City
1 Provisionally referred to by the Council of Europe as the "former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia"; see Macedonia naming dispute.














v • d • e

Latin Union





Member Nations

Andorra · Angola · Bolivia · Brazil · Cape Verde · Chile · Colombia · Costa Rica · Côte d'Ivoire · Cuba · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · El Salvador · France · Guatemala · Guinea-Bissau · Haiti · Honduras · Italy · Mexico · Moldova · Monaco · Mozambique · Nicaragua · Panama · Paraguay · Peru · Philippines · Portugal · Romania · San Marino · São Tomé and Príncipe · Senegal · Spain · East Timor · Uruguay · Venezuela






Permanent Observers

Argentina · Holy See · Sovereign Military Order of Malta






Official languages

Catalan · French · Italian · Portuguese · Romanian · Spanish



















 
Other information














v • d • e

Monarchies





Geography

Africa · Americas · Europe · Oceania









Absolute

Brunei · Saudi Arabia · Swaziland · Vatican City






Constitutional

Antigua and Barbuda · Australia · Andorra · Bahamas · Bahrain · Barbados · Belize · Belgium · Bhutan · Cambodia · Canada · Denmark · Grenada · Jamaica · Japan1 · Jordan · Kuwait · Liechtenstein · Lesotho · Luxembourg · Malaysia · Monaco · Morocco · Netherlands · New Zealand · Norway · Oman2 · Papua New Guinea · Qatar2 · Spain · Saint Kitts and Nevis · Saint Lucia · Saint Vincent and the Grenadines · Solomon Islands · Sweden · Thailand · Tonga · Tuvalu · United Arab Emirates3 · United Kingdom






Elective

Andorra · Cambodia · Kuwait · Malaysia · Swaziland · United Arab Emirates3 · Vatican City






Subnational





Ghana


Ashanti · Dagbon







Malaysia


Johor · Kedah · Kelantan · Negeri Sembilan · Pahang · Perak · Perlis · Selangor · Terengganu







Nigeria


Ibadan · Nri · Kano · Sokoto Caliphate · Lagos







Uganda


Ankole · Buganda · Bunyoro · Busoga · Toro







United Arab Emirates


Abu Dhabi · Ajman · Dubai · Fujairah · Ras al-Khaimah · Sharjah · Umm al-Qaiwain







Wallis and Futuna


Alo · Sigave · Uvea







Others


Māori (New Zealand) · Yogyakarta (Indonesia) · Zululand (South Africa) · Barotseland (Zambia)









Italics indicate Commonwealth realms, which each share the same monarch as head of state.
1 Monarch debatable as Head of State.   2 Technically constitutional, but effectively absolute.   3 Uses the title President.












Coordinates: 43°43′58″N 7°25′11″E﻿ / ﻿43.73278°N 7.41972°E﻿ / 43.73278; 7.41972




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monaco"
Categories: Monaco | 1297 establishments | French-speaking countries | Italian-speaking countries | Member states of La Francophonie | Constitutional monarchies | Port cities of the Mediterranean SeaHidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead external links since March 2009 | Articles including recorded pronunciations | Articles containing French language text | Articles containing non-English language text | Articles containing Occitan language text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
Arpetan
Asturianu
Azərbaycan
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Hawai`i
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ಕನ್ನಡ
Kapampangan
ქართული
कश्मीरी - (كشميري)
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Коми
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Ladino
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lingála
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
مصرى
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
नेपाली
日本語
Нохчийн
Norfuk / Pitkern
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Novial
Occitan
O'zbek
پښتو
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Ripoarisch
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
संस्कृत
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Удмурт
Українська
اردو
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
Volapük
Võro
Winaray
Wolof
粵語
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 01:55.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
