













Autonomism - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Autonomism";
		var wgTitle = "Autonomism";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "4685264";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280609298;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Autonomism

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
For other uses, see Autonomism (disambiguation).




Raised fist, stenciled protest symbol of Autonome at the Ernst-Kirchweger-Haus in Vienna, Austria


Autonomism refers to a set of left-wing political and social movements and theories close to the socialist movement. Autonomism (autonomia), as an identifiable theoretical system, first emerged in Italy in the 1960s from workerist (operaismo) communism. Later, post-Marxist and anarchist tendencies became significant after influence from the Situationists, the failure of the Italian far-left movements in the 1970s and the emergence of a number of important theorists including Antonio Negri, who had contributed to the 1969 founding of Potere Operaio Marxist group, Mario Tronti, Paolo Virno, etc. It influenced the German and Dutch Autonomen, the worldwide Social Centre movement, and today is influential in Italy, France, and to a significantly lesser extent the English-speaking countries. Those who describe themselves as autonomists now vary from Marxists to post-structuralists and anarchists.




Contents


1 Etymology
2 The Marxist Autonomist theory
3 Italian autonomism

3.1 Influences
3.2 Direct action
3.3 The Piazza Fontana bombing and its legacy
3.4 The killing of Aldo Moro and the prosecution of the autonomists


4 The French autonome movement
5 The German Autonome movement in the 1970-80s
6 The Greek "Άναρχο-αυτόνομοι", "Anarcho-autonomoi"
7 Influence
8 References
9 Bibliography
10 See also

10.1 Autonomist thinkers
10.2 Autonomist Marxism thinkers
10.3 Other movements or organizations
10.4 Italian 1960-80 context
10.5 Others


11 External links

11.1 Archives
11.2 Others







//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Etymology
The term autonomia/Autonome is derived from the Greek "auto'-nomo*s" referring to someone or something which lives by his/her own rule. Autonomy, in this sense, is not independence. While independence refers to an autarcic kind of life, separated from the community, autonomy refers to life in society but by one's own rule. Aristotle thus considered that only beasts or gods could be independent and live apart from the polis ("community"), while Kant defined the Enlightenment by autonomy of thought and the famous "Sapere aude" ("dare to know").

[edit] The Marxist Autonomist theory
Unlike other forms of Marxism, autonomist Marxism emphasises the ability of the working class to force changes to the organisation of the capitalist system independent of the state, trade unions or political parties. Autonomists are less concerned with party political organisation than other Marxists, focusing instead on self-organised action outside of traditional organisational structures. Autonomist Marxism is thus a "bottom up" theory: it draws attention to activities that autonomists see as everyday working class resistance to capitalism, for example absenteeism, slow working, and socialisation in the workplace.
Like other Marxists, autonomists see class struggle as being of central importance. However, autonomists have a broader definition of the working class than other Marxists: as well as wage-earning workers (both white collar and blue collar), autonomists also include the unwaged (students, the unemployed, homemakers etc), who are traditionally deprived of any form of union representation.
Early theorists (such as Mario Tronti, Antonio Negri, Sergio Bologna and Paolo Virno) developed notions of "immaterial" and "social labour" that extended the Marxist concept of labour to all society. They suggested that modern society's wealth was produced by unaccountable collective work, and that only a little of this was redistributed to the workers in the form of wages. They emphasised the importance of feminism and the value of unpaid female labour to capitalist society.

[edit] Italian autonomism
Further information: History of the Italian Republic
Autonomist Marxism - referred to in Italy as operaismo, which translates literally as "workerism" - first appeared in Italy in the early 1960s. Arguably, the emergence of early autonomism can be traced to the dissatisfaction of automotive workers in Turin with their union, which reached an agreement with FIAT. The disillusionment of these workers with their organised representation, along with the resultant riots (in particular the 1962 riots by FIAT workers in Turin - "fatti di Piazza Statuto") were critical factors in the development of a theory of self-organised labour representation outside the scope of traditional representatives such as trade unions.
In 1969, the operaismo approach was active mainly in two different groups: Lotta Continua, led by Adriano Sofri (which had a very significant Roman Catholic cultural matrix) and Potere Operaio, led by Antonio Negri, Franco Piperno, Oreste Scalzone, and Valerio Morucci. Mario Capanna was the charismatic leader of the Milan student movement, which had a more classical Marxist-Leninist approach.

[edit] Influences
Through translations made available by Danilo Montaldi and others, the Italian autonomists drew upon previous activist research in the United States by the Johnson-Forest Tendency and in France by the group Socialisme ou Barbarie (see below). The Johnson-Forest Tendency had studied working class life and struggles within the US auto industry, publishing pamphlets such as "The American Worker" (1947), "Punching Out" (1952) and "Union Committeemen and Wildcat Strikes" (1955). That work was translated into French by Socialisme ou Barbarie and published, serially, in their journal. They too began investigating and writing about what was going on inside workplaces, in their case inside both auto factories and insurance offices.
The journal Quaderni Rossi ("Red Notebooks"), along with its successor Classe Operaia ("Working Class"), were also influential in the development of early autonomism. Both of these were founded by Antonio Negri and Mario Tronti - Quaderni Rossi was produced between 1961 and 1965, and Classe Operaia between 1963 and 1966.
Pirate radio stations also were a factor in spreading autonomist ideas and theory. Bologna's Radio Alice was an example of such a station.

[edit] Direct action
The Italian student movement, starting from 1966 (murder by neo-fascists of student Paolo Rossi in Rome University) engaged in various direct action operations, including riots and University occupations, along with more peaceful activities such as self reduction, in which individuals refused to pay for such services and goods as public transport, electricity, gas, rent, and food. Several clashes occurred between the students ("Movimento studentesco") and the police, during the occupations of Universities in the winter 1967-1968, during the Fiat occupations, in March 1968 in Rome during the "Battle of Valle Giulia".

[edit] The Piazza Fontana bombing and its legacy
Main article: Piazza Fontana bombing
In December 1969, four bombings struck in Rome the Monument of Vittorio Emanuele II (Altare della Patria), the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, and in Milan the Banca Commerciale and the Banca Nazionale dell'Agricoltura. The latter bombing, known as the Piazza Fontana bombing of 12 December 1969, killed 16 and injured 90, conventionally marking the beginning of the "strategia della tensione" (strategy of tension) in Italy. After the bombing, numerous members of left-wing groups - including anarchists - were detained by the police. Giuseppe Pinelli, an anarchist, was at the time treated as a suspected culprit for the bombing [1].
Giuseppe Pinelli was held and interrogated for three days, longer than Italian law specified that people could be held without seeing a judge. On December 15, he died after falling out of a window. Luigi Calabresi, the police officer who had directed his interrogation, as well as other officers were accused of pushing him out of the window, and put under investigation in 1971 for murder, but charges were dropped. Next year Calabresi was murdered by two shots from a revolver outside his home[2] (and was posthumously awarded the Italian Republic's Gold Medal for Civil Merit).
Another anarchist, Pietro Valpreda, was arrested, sentenced for the crime, before being released and eventually cleared sixteen years later. In the 1980s, the neo-fascist terrorist Vincenzo Vinciguerra confessed to magistrate Felice Casson that the bombing had in fact been carried out by the far-right organisation Ordine Nuovo, supported by Gladio, NATO's stay-behind anti-Communist network, in an attempt to push the state into declaring a state of emergency. All defendants were acquitted by the Court of Cassation on May 3, 2005, during the seventh trial for the Piazza Fontana bombing.[citation needed]
This attack has been widely considered part of the strategy of tension (strategia della tensione), which allegedly aimed at destabilizing the country through a campaign of "false flags" terrorist attacks - attacks blamed on left-wing groups. The strategy aimed to promote an authoritatian government and (in later years) to sabotage the possibilities for a historic compromise (compromesso storico) between the Christian Democracy (DC) and the Communist Party (PCI).[citation needed]
In 1988, former Lotta continua member Adriano Sofri was arrested, along with Ovidio Bompressi and Giorgio Pietrostefani, for the murder of Luigi Calabresi, the police officer who was suspected by Lotta Continua of having killed Giuseppe Pinelli. The charges against them were based on the violent press campaign conducted by Lotta Continua against Calabresi, on testimony provided, sixteen years after the facts, by a "collaboratore di giustizia"- an ex-militant who contacted police authorities and accused himself of having carried out the murder of Calabresi (under order from Sofri) and collaborated with the magistrates. Sofri claimed his innocence, but was sentenced after a long series of trials, in 2000. Historian Carlo Ginzburg wrote, on this case, a book in support of Sofri's innocence, entitled The Judge and the Historian: Marginal Notes on a Late Twentieth-Century Miscarriage of Justice[2].

[edit] The killing of Aldo Moro and the prosecution of the autonomists
On March 11, 1977, riots took place in Bologna following the killing of a young man by the police.
Starting from 1979, the state effectively prosecuted the autonomist movement, claiming it protected the Red Brigades, which had kidnapped and assassinated Aldo Moro. 12,000 far-left activists were detained; 600 fled the country, including 300 to France and 200 others to South America.[3].

[edit] The French autonome movement
In France, the marxist group Socialisme ou Barbarie, led by philosopher Cornelius Castoriadis, could be said to be one of the first autonomist groups, as well as having importance in the council communist tradition. As mentioned above, Socialisme ou Barbarie drew upon the American Johnson-Forest Tendency's activist research inside US auto plants and carried out their own investigations into rank and file workers struggles - struggles autonomous of union or party leadership.
Also parallel to the work of the Johnson-Forest Tendency, Socialisme ou Barbarie harshly criticised the Stalinist regime in the USSR, which it considered a form of 'bureaucratic capitalism' and not at all the state socialism it pretended to be. Philosopher Jean-François Lyotard, famous for his work on post-modernism, was also part of this movement.
However, the Italian influence of the operaismo movement was more directly felt in the creation of the review Matériaux pour l'intervention (1972-1973) by Yann Moulier-Boutang, a French economist close to Toni Negri. This led in turn to the creation of the Camarades group (1974-78) by Moulier-Boutang. Along with others, Moulier-Boutang joined the Centre International pour des Nouveaux Espaces de Liberté (CINEL), founded three years before by Félix Guattari, and assisted Italian activists accused of terrorism, of whom at least 300 fled to France.
The French autonome mouvement organised itself in the AGPA (Assemblée Parisienne des Groupes Autonomes, "Parisian Assembly of Autonome Groups"; 1977-78). Many tendencies were present in it, including the Camarades group led by Moulier-Boutang, members of the Organisation communiste libertaire (OCL - an autonomist group), some people referring themselves to the "Desiring Autonomy" of Bob Nadoulek, but also squatters and street-wise people (including the groupe Marge). French autonomes supported captured Rote Armee Fraktion ("Red Army Faction" - RAF) terrorists. Jean-Paul Sartre also intervened on the conditions for the detention of RAF detainees.
The militant group Action Directe appeared in 1979 and carried out several violent direct actions. Action Directe claimed responsibility for the murders of Renault's CEO Georges Besse and General Audran. George Besse had been CEO of nuclear company Eurodif. Action Directe was dissolved in 1987.
In the 1980s, the autonomist movement underwent a deep crisis in Italy because of effective prosecution by the State, and was stronger in Germany than in France. It remained present in Parisian squats and in some riots (for example in 1980 near the Jussieu campus in Paris, or in 1982 in the Ardennes department during anti-nuclear demonstrations). In the 1980s, the French autonomists published the periodicals CAT Pages (1981-1982), Rebelles (1981-1993), Tout ! (1982-1985), Molotov et Confetti (1984), Les Fossoyeurs du Vieux Monde, La Chôme (1984-1985) and Contre (1987-1989).
In the 1990s, the French autonomist movement was present in struggles led by unemployed people, with Travailleurs, Chômeurs, et Précaires en colère (TCP, "Angry Workers, Unemployed, and Precarious people") and l'Assemblée générale des chômeurs de Jussieu ("General Assembly of Jussieu's unemployed people"). It was also involved in the alter-globalisation movement and above all in the solidarity with illegal foreigners (Collective Des Papiers pour tous ("Permits for all", 1996) and Collectif Anti-Expulsion (1998-2005)). Several autonomist journals date from this time: Quilombo (1988-1993), Apache (1990-1998), Tic-Tac (1995-1997), Karoshi (1998-1999), and Tiqqun (1999-2001).
From July 19 to July 28, 2002, a No Borders camp was made in Strasbourg to protest against anti-immigration policies, in particular inside the Schengen European space.
In 2003, autonomists came into conflict with the French Socialist Party (PS) during a demonstration that took place in the frame of the European Social Forum in Saint-Denis (Paris). At the end of December, hundreds of unemployed people helped themselves in the Bon Marché supermarket to be able to celebrate Christmas (an action called "autoréduction" (of prices) in French). French riot police (CRS) physically opposed the unemployed people inside the shop. Autonomes rioted during the spring 2006 protests against the CPE, and again after the 2007 presidential election when Nicolas Sarkozy was elected. In 2008, on the 11th of november, the french police arrested ten people, including five living in a farmhouse on a hill overlooking Tarnac, and accused them of associating with "a terrorist enterprise." by sabotaging TGV's overhead lines. Nine out of ten were let go and only Julien Coupat the alleged leader remain in custody, charged with "directing a terrorist group" by the Paris Prosecutor's office.

[edit] The German Autonome movement in the 1970-80s
In Germany, Autonome was used during the late 1970s to depict the most radical part of the political left. These individuals participated in practically all actions of the social movements at the time, especially in demonstrations against nuclear energy plants (Brokdorf 1981, Wackersdorf 1986) and in actions against the construction of airport runways (Frankfurt 1976-1986). The defense of squats against the police such as in Hamburg's Hafenstraße was also a major "task" for the "autonome" movement. The Dutch anarchist Autonomen movement from the 1960s also concentrated on squatting.
Tactics of the "Autonome" were usually militant, including the construction of barricades or throwing stones or molotov cocktails at the police. During their most powerful times in the early 1980s, on at least one occasion the police had to take flight.
Because of their outfit (heavy black clothing, ski masks, helmets), the "Autonome" were dubbed der schwarze Block by the German media, and in these tactics were similar to modern black blocs. In 1989, laws regarding demonstrations in Germany were changed, prohibiting the use of so-called "passive weaponry" such as helmets or padding and covering your face.
Today, the "autonome" scene in Germany is greatly reduced and concentrates mainly on anti-fascist actions, ecology, solidarity with refugees, and feminism. There are larger and more militant groups still in operation, such as in Switzerland or Italy.

[edit] The Greek "Άναρχο-αυτόνομοι", "Anarcho-autonomoi"
In Greece, the "anarcho-autonomoi" ("anarchist-autonomists") emerged as an important trend in the youth and student's movement, first during the 1973 Athens Polytechnic uprising against the military dictatorship which at that time ruled the country. After the collapse of the dictatorship in 1974, the "anarcho-autonomoi" became considerably influential, firstly as a social trend within the youth and then as a (very loose and diverse) political trend. The definition "anarcho-autonomoi", itself, is much debated. One reason for this is that it was originally coined by opponents. However, it was also quite quickly adopted by many adherents, used as a generic term. - Before 1973, in Greece, there was very little tradition in Anarchism or Libertarian Socialism in general. An exception to this was Agis Stinas, an early comrade of Cornelius Castoriadis. Castoriadis belonged to Stinas's small Council Communist group (before he emigrated to France) and was influenced by it (later these roles were turned around). Such small groups which existed, were almost (physically) eliminated by the Nazis, the local establishment and the stalinist communist party during the Nazi occupation and the Greek Civil War that followed, with Castoriadis and Stinas, themselves, being two of the few survivors. Thus, the radical Greek youth in the 70s, having very little relative background to refer to, resided to an extensive "syncretism" of multiple trends originating in the respective movements in other European countries. Anarchist and anarcho-syndicalist trends did converge with situationist, workerist or other autonomist trends and even with radical (non-autonomist) marxist trends. - The "anarcho-autonomoi" made a very strong stand during the 1978-80 student movement, coming also into violent confrontation with the police and the (also, of considerable influence) stalinist communist youth (K.N.E). Such stands were repeated again and again whenever the student's, the worker's and the youth movement were at a rise (in 1987, in 1990-91, in 1998-99, in 2006-07). However, their intensity has been falling since after 1990-91. - Parallel to such participation in social movements a large number of social-centers (many of them squatted) exist, to the day, around Greece and many of them participate in social struggles on a more local level. These social centers, whether they identify, now, as "Autonomist" or not (most use more generic terms as "anti-authoritarian", some identify as "anarchist" ), function in the ways that historically emerged through "Autonomia". - There is also a multitude of small political groups which identify as "Autonomist" (ranging from workerist to post-modernist). Most of them are still connected to the respective groups that identify as "Anarchist".

[edit] Influence
The Autonomist Marxist and Autonomen movements provided inspiration to some on the revolutionary left in English speaking countries, particularly among anarchists, many of whom have have adopted autonomist tactics. Some English-speaking anarchists even describe themselves as Autonomists. The Italian operaismo movement also influenced Marxist academics such as Harry Cleaver, John Holloway, Steve Wright, and Nick Dyer-Witheford. In Denmark, the word is used as a catch-all phrase for anarchists and the extraparliamentary extreme left in general, as was seen in the media coverage of the eviction of the Ungdomshuset squat in Copenhagen in March 2007.

[edit] References


^ "On This Day: 12 December". BBC. http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/december/12/newsid_3953000/3953999.stm. Retrieved on 2 January 2009. 
^ a b Groner, Jonathan. "The Judge and the Historian". Salon.com. http://www.salon.com/books/review/1999/08/13/ginzburg/. Retrieved on 2 January 2009. 
^ (French) On the Autonomist movement



[edit] Bibliography

(French) L’Autonomie. Le mouvement autonome en France et en Italie, éditions Spartacus 1978
(French) Autonomes, Jan Bucquoy and Jacques Santi, ANSALDI 1985
(French) Action Directe. Du terrorisme français à l’euroterrorisme, Alain Hamon and Jean-Charles Marchand, SEUIL 1986
(French) Paroles Directes. Légitimité, révolte et révolution : autour d’Action Directe, Loïc Debray, Jean-Pierre Duteuil, Philippe Godard, Henri Lefebvre, Catherine Régulier, Anne Sveva, Jacques Wajnsztejn, ACRATIE 1990
(French) Un Traître chez les totos, Guy Dardel, ACTES SUD 1999 (novel)
(French) Bac + 2 + crime : l’affaire Florence Rey, Frédéric Couderc, CASTELLS 1998
(French) Italie 77. Le « Mouvement », les intellectuels, Fabrizio Calvi, SEUIL 1977
(Italian) Una sparatoria tranquilla. Per una storia orale del '77, ODRADEK 1997
(German) Die Autonomen, Thomas Schultze et Almut Gross, KONKRET LITERATUR 1997
(German) Autonome in Bewegung, AG Grauwacke aus den ersten 23 Jahren, ASSOCIATION A 2003
(English) The Subversion of Politics: European Autonomous Social Movements and the Decolonization of Everyday Life Georgy Katsiaficas, AK Press 2006
(English) Negativity and Revolution: Adorno and Political Activism London: Pluto Press, 2008 John Holloway ed. with Fernando Matamoros & Sergio Tischler ISBN 978-07453-2836-2
(English) Autonomia: Post-Political Politics, ed. Sylvere Lotringer & Christian Marazzi. New York: Semiotext(e), 1980, 2007. ISBN-10: 1-58435-053-9, ISBN-13: 978-1-58435-053-8. Available online at Semiotext(e)
(English) Storming Heaven: Class composition and struggle in Italian Autonomist Marxism, Steve Wright, University of Michigan Press ISBN 0-7453-1607-9
(Greek) Νοέμβρης 73. Αυτοί οι αγώνες συνεχίζονται, δεν εξαγοράζονται, δεν δικαιώθηκαν, ed. Αυτόνομη Πρωτοβουλία Πολιτών. Athens 1983.
(Greek), Αναμνήσεις, Άγης Στίνας, υψιλον, Αθήνα 1985
(Greek), Το επαναστατικό πρόβλημα σήμερα, Κορνήλιος Καστοριάδης, υψιλον, Αθήνα 2000


[edit] See also

[edit] Autonomist thinkers

Cornelius Castoriadis


[edit] Autonomist Marxism thinkers

Antonio Negri
Sergio Bologna
Mario Tronti
Paolo Virno
Silvia Federici
Multitudes magazine
Daniel Guerin
Harry Cleaver
Peter Linebaugh


[edit] Other movements or organizations

Autonomedia (US radical media collective)
Black blocs (alter-globalization groups)
Os Cangaceiros (a french group)
Red & Anarchist Action Network
Council Communist
Disobbedienti (ex Tute Bianche)
Industrial Workers of the World (IWW)
Libertarian Marxism
London Autonomists
Luxembourgism
Socialisme ou Barbarie, a French group led by philosopher Cornelius Castoriadis
The Blitz (movement) (Norway)
Ungdomshuset (Danish autonomist squatt, evicted in March 2007)
Zapatista Army of National Liberation, Mexican indigenous people's movement
Landless Workers' Movement, Brazilian landless people's movement
Abahlali baseMjondolo, African shack dwellers' movement
Kämpa tillsammans!, Swedish theory group
Homeless Workers' Movement MTST
Western Cape Anti-Eviction Campaign
Autonomous Anticapitalist Commandos, Basque armed group


[edit] Italian 1960-80 context

History of Italy as a Republic
strategy of tension
Operation Gladio
Autonomia Operaia
Indiani Metropolitani
Cesare Battisti, former terrorist and member of the PAC


[edit] Others

autonomation
direct action
precarity
propaganda of the deed
spontaneism
horizontalidad
Kommune 1


[edit] External links

[edit] Archives

Libertarian Communist Library Mario Tronti Archive
Libertarian Communist Library Sergio Bolognia Archive
Libertairn Communist Library Mariarosa Dalla Costa Archive
Libertarian Communist Library Nick Dyer-Witheford Archive
Libertarian Communist Library Antonio Negri Archive
Libertarian Communist Library Raniero Panzieri Archive
Libertarian Communist Library Harry Cleaver Archive


[edit] Others

Articles by members of the operaismo movement
Aut-op-sy - Autonomist forum and texts
Rekombinant - Autonomist forum and mailing list
Texas Archives of Autonomist Marxism
Affinty Project directory and chronology of Autonomous Marxism
Libertarian Communist Library, texts on autonomism
Wildcat
A critique of autonomism, published by a Trotskyist group
TIQQUN “Introduction to Civil War [fragments"]








v • d • e

Anarchism





Schools of
thought

Agorist · Buddhist · Capitalist · Christian · Collectivist · Communist · Crypto · Feminist · Free market · Green · Immediatist · Individualist · Info · Insurrectionary · Leftist · Lifestylist · Mutualist · Pacifist · Pan · Philosophical · Platformist · Post-anarchism · Post-colonial · Post-left · Primitivist · Social · Syndicalist · Zenarchy · Anarchism without adjectives







Theory and
practice

Anarchy · Black bloc · Class struggle  · Communes · Co-operatives · Counter-economics · Direct action · Direct democracy · Economics · Especifismo · Private defense agency · Self-ownership · Social ecology · Spontaneous order · Squatting · Workers' self-management






Issues

Anarcho-capitalism · Animal rights · Capitalism · Criticisms · Islam · Marxism · Nationalism · Orthodox Judaism · Religion · Violence






History

Amakasu Incident · Anarchist Catalonia · Anarchist Exclusion Act · Anarchy in Somalia · Australian Anarchist Centenary Celebrations · Barcelona May Days · Escuela Moderna · Hague Congress · Haymarket affair · High Treason Incident · Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine · International Anarchist Congress of Amsterdam · Kate Sharpley Library · Kronstadt rebellion · Labadie Collection · LIP · Manifesto of the Sixteen · May 1968 in France · May Day · Paris Commune · Spanish Revolution · Tragic Week






Culture

Anarcho-punk · Arts · Black anarchism · Culture jamming · DIY culture · Freeganism · Free school · Free store · Independent Media Center · Infoshop · Jewish anarchism · Popular education · Really Really Free Market · Symbolism · Terminology · A las barricadas






Economics

Agorism · Capitalism · Collectivism · Communism · Co-operatives · Counter-economics · Free market · Free school · Free store · Geolibertarianism · Gift economy · Market abolitionism · Mutual aid · Mutualism · Participatory economics · Really Really Free Market · Self-ownership · Syndicalism · Wage slavery · Workers' self-management






By region

Africa · Austria · Brazil · Canada · China · Cuba · England · France · Greece · India · Ireland · Israel · Italy · Japan · Korea · Mexico · Poland · Russia · Spain · Sweden · Turkey · Ukraine · United States · Vietnam






Lists

Books · Communities · Fictional characters · Jewish anarchists · Musicians · Movements by region · Organizations · Periodicals · Poets · Anarcho-punk bands · Russian anarchists






Related topics

Anti-capitalism · Anti-communism · Anti-consumerism · Anti-corporatism · Anti-globalization · Antimilitarism · Anti-statism · Anti-war · Autarchism · Autonomism · Labour movement · Libertarianism · Libertarian socialism · Situationist International






 Anarchism portal · Philosophy portal · Politics portal








Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autonomism"
Categories: Far-left politics | Anarchism by form | Anarchist movements | Labor | Marxism | Marxist theory | History of anarchism | History of ideas | History of socialism | History of social movements | Contemporary Italian history | Contemporary French history | Contemporary German history | 1960s | 1970s | 1980s | 1990s | 2000sHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2008 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Dansk
Deutsch
Español
Français
Magyar
Nederlands
Српски / Srpski
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe









 This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 09:02.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
