













List of Linux distributions - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "List_of_Linux_distributions";
		var wgTitle = "List of Linux distributions";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "620709";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282306754;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); List of Linux distributions

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This page provides general information about notable Linux distributions in the form of a categorized list. Distributions are organized into sections by the major distribution they are based on, or the package management system they are based around.




Contents


1 Debian-based

1.1 Knoppix-based
1.2 Ubuntu-based

1.2.1 Official distributions
1.2.2 Contributed distributions
1.2.3 Unofficial distributions




2 Gentoo-based
3 RPM-based

3.1 Fedora-based
3.2 Red Hat Enterprise Linux-based
3.3 Others (RPM-based)


4 Slackware-based

4.1 SLAX-based


5 Others
6 See also
7 References
8 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Debian-based
Debian is a distribution that emphasizes free software. It is supported on many hardware platforms. Debian and distributions based on it use the .deb package format and the dpkg package manager.

General Purpose Debian distributions

Distribution
Description


AbulÉdu
French. Designed for data processing in educational establishments.


AGNULA
Former DeMuDi for multimedia production


Baltix
For Lithuanian and Latvian languages


BeatrIX
A compact distribution from the Czech Republic that focuses on providing a user-friendly desktop environment.


Corel Linux
Commercial. Short-lived desktop distribution, bought by Xandros Linux


Dreamlinux
A Brazilian Linux distribution.


Elive
A Live CD and Distribution featuring Enlightenment as the only window manager. Aims to be intuitive and easy to use.


gNewSense
A distribution of GNU/Linux focused on guaranteeing 100% Free Software


gnuLinEx
A distribution promoted by the government of Extremadura, Spain.


grml
Live CD for system recovery


Kanotix
An installable live CD for desktop usage using KDE, focusing on convenient scripts and GUI for ease of use.


Knoppix
The first Live CD (later DVD) version of Debian GNU/Linux.


Kurumin
Earlier, it was a version of the Knoppix distribution, modified with Debian and designed for Brazilian users.


LiMux
An ISO 9241 industry workplace certified Linux distribution, deployed at the City of Munich, Germany.


Linspire
Commercial. Desktop-oriented distribution, previously called Lindows. Focuses on a proprietary software application manager obtained via a paid (CNR) subscription. Bought by Xandros Linux.


MEPIS
Focuses on ease of use.


NepaLinux
A Debian and Morphix based distribution focused for desktop usage in Nepali language computing.


PingOO
French distribution aimed at local communities, public organizations, schools, etc. It comes in three editions: PingOO Communication Server, PingOO Secure Server and PingOO File Server.


Progeny Componentized Linux
Distribution from Progeny Linux Systems which was also founded by Debian founder Ian Murdock.


Rxart
Desktop-oriented distribution. Focused on providing proprietary software.


sidux
Multilingual desktop-oriented Live CD based on Debian unstable.


Skolelinux
A distribution from Norway. It is provided as a thin client distribution for schools.


Symphony OS
Includes the Mezzo desktop environment. Previous versions were based on Knoppix.


Trisquel
Created in Galicia (Spain). It has support for old PCs, includes a 3D desktop with Compiz.


Tuquito
Created in Argentina.


Ubuntu
A distribution sponsored by Canonical Ltd as well as receiving major funding from South African Mark Shuttleworth. Aims to offer a complete and polished desktop on a single CD.


UserLinux
Commercial distribution that would have included GNOME. Short-lived.


Xandros Open Circulation Edition
Based on Xandros 3.0 Standard Edition. DVD burning is disabled and CD burning is restricted to a maximum speed of 4X.



Specialized Debian distributions

Distribution
Description


64 Studio
Attempts to specialize in audio and video production on AMD64 workstations.


eBox
Router/Firewall and NAS/PDC


Finnix
A small system administration Live CD that is available for multiple architectures.


Gibraltar
Commercial. Router/firewall distribution.


LEAF Project
The Linux Embedded Appliance Firewall. A tiny primarily floppy-based distribution for routers, firewalls and other appliances.


The Linux Router Project
A defunct floppy-based distribution for routers and firewalls. Supplanted by LEAF Project.


Maemo
A development platform for hand held devices such as the Nokia N800 and N810 Internet Tablets and other Linux-based devices.


OpenZaurus
Debian packages and ROM image for the Sharp Zaurus PDA. Replaced by Ångström distribution.


Outernet Server
A modified version of Debian that installs preconfigured and is specifically meant for a High speed multimedia Networks.


Pure:dyne
pure:dyne is an Debian based operating system developed to provide media artists with a complete set of tools for realtime audio and video processing.


Salgix
Distribution developed and maintained by GMSI (Gemini Microsystems International) for its line of Visual Computing workstations.


Voyage Linux
Oriented for embedded routers on multiple platforms


Xebian
For the Xbox home gaming console.



[edit] Knoppix-based
Knoppix, itself, is based on Debian.


Distribution
Description


Buildix
For agile developers.


Damn Small Linux
Generally considered as the starter of mini distributions. A live CD designed for MiniCD with a hard drive install option.


Feather Linux
Fits in under 128 MB. It boots from either a CD or a USB flash drive. Uses Knoppix-based hardware detection and the Fluxbox window manager.


Kaella
The French translation of Knoppix.


Knoppel
Localised & customised Greek Knoppix distribution.[citation needed]


KnoppMyth
Specialized Knoppix distribution for easy setup of the MythTV PVR software.


Morphix
A Live CD distribution with different flavours, including GNOME. Used as a base for many other custom live distribution such as Clusterix, PHlAK or Gnix.


Musix
A Knoppix/Debian based distribution, intended for music production, graphic design, audio, video editing, and other tasks. It is built with only free software.



[edit] Ubuntu-based
Ubuntu is a distribution based on Debian. Each has a different release schedule; Debian's release cycle is about 1.5 years and Ubuntu's is 6 months. Ubuntu's packages are downloaded from Debian, re-packaged with Ubuntu version numbers and integrated to the system with Ubuntu-specific patches as needed. Ubuntu officially only supports 2 computer architectures, Debian about 10. Ubuntu has two maintenance lines (stable, in development), Debian has several suites (stable, testing, unstable, experimental).


[edit] Official distributions
These Ubuntu variants simply install a set of packages different from the original Ubuntu, but since they draw additional packages and updates from the same repositories as Ubuntu, all of the same software is available for each of them.


Distribution
Description


Ubuntu Server Edition
An official derivative made for use in servers. Ubuntu Server handles mails, printers, fileserver, LAMP and more.


Kubuntu
An official derivative of the Ubuntu Linux distribution using the KDE environment instead of the default GNOME environment used by default in Ubuntu. It has a predictable 6 month release cycle and is part of the Ubuntu project.


Xubuntu
An official derivative of the Ubuntu open source operating system, using the Xfce desktop environment. Xubuntu is intended for use on less-powerful computers or those who seek a highly efficient desktop environment on faster systems[1], and uses mostly GTK+ applications.


Edubuntu
A complete Linux-based operating system targeted for primary and secondary education. It is freely available with community based support. The Edubuntu community is built on the ideas enshrined in the Edubuntu Manifesto: that software, especially for education, should be available free of charge and that software tools should be usable by people in their local language and despite any disabilities. Since version 8.04, Edubuntu has now been named Ubuntu Education Edition and has been made as an add-on for the Ubuntu operating system.[2]


Ubuntu JeOS (pronounced as "juice")
Described as "an efficient variant [...] configured specifically for virtual appliances".[3]


Ubuntu Mobile
An embedded operating system designed for use on mobile devices. The operating system will use Hildon from maemo as its graphical frontend.


Ubuntu Netbook Remix,[4]
Released in 2008,[5] Netbook Remix is an official derivative of Ubuntu designed for netbooks using the Intel Atom processor.



[edit] Contributed distributions


Distribution
Description


Gobuntu
Was an official derivative of the Ubuntu operating system, aiming to provide a distribution consisting entirely of free software, it was officially announced by Mark Shuttleworth on July 10, 2007, and daily builds of Gobuntu 7.10 began to be publicly released. The project ended around the release of 8.04 and has since merged into Ubuntu as a 'free software' option (Discontinued).


Ubuntu Studio
A multimedia creation flavor of Ubuntu. Ubuntu Studio is aimed at the audio, video and graphic enthusiast as well as professional. The project aims to provide a suite of the best open-source applications available for multimedia creation.


Mythbuntu
provides an Ubuntu based and MythTV based distribution that is easy to configure, maintain, and use.



[edit] Unofficial distributions
Unofficial variants and derivatives are not controlled or guided by Canonical and are generally forks with different goals in mind:


Distribution
Description


Alinex
Portuguese Linux distribution, from Évora university, used as OEM from some Portuguese computer manufacturers.


andLinux
Linux distribution running on Microsoft Windows natively


Baltix
Ubuntu based distribution for Lithuanian and Latvian people. Supported languages are Lithuanian, Latvian, Estonian, Russian, English, Norwegian and other around Baltic region. Main language is Lithuanian.


Buddhabuntu
Ubuntu based distribution for Buddhists to compliment Ubuntu Christian Edition and Muslim Editions


CrunchBang Linux
An Ubuntu based distribution featuring the lightweight Openbox window manager and GTK+ applications developed from a minimal Ubuntu install and has been designed to offer a good balance of speed and functionality.


Easy Peasy (formerly Ubuntu eee)
Ubuntu based distribution customized for the ASUS Eee PC series [6].


Elementary OS
Ubuntu distro that gets rid of the bottom panel and adds docks[citation needed]


eeebuntu
Ubuntu based distribution specially designed to work on the Asus eeepc netbook series[citation needed]


Estobuntu
Remastered Kubuntu Live CD that uses Estonian by default where ever possible, includes media codecs, Java, Firefox plugins and modifications for the Estonian ID-card to work out of the box with the most common Smart card readers in Estonia.[citation needed]


Fluxbuntu
Light-weight and featuring the Fluxbox window manager. The project’s primary goal is to develop an operating system that would run on a wide range of mobile devices and computers, both low-end and high-end (Discontinued).


gNewSense
Designed for users who wish to use only free software. It is officially sponsored and recommended by the Free Software Foundation. The project has also produced a set of scripts that allow anyone to create a free distribution.


Gnoppix
Intended to offer the GNOME desktop environment on a Live CD. Discontinued.


gOS
Uses the GNOME desktop environment with user interface enhancements to make it work more like Mac OS X, it also features Google Apps, Picasa, Google Gadgets and other web-based applications, and comes with Wine 1.0 pre-installed


Guadalinex
Ubuntu-based distribution promoted by the local government of Andalucia, Spain, for home users and schools (cf. EduLinux, Skolelinux).


Hiweed
Chinese Linux distribution, based on Ubuntu. Its features include preconfigured Chinese applications, such as Chinese (simplified) input method, Chinese-English and English-Chinese dictionaries, and Chinese (simplified) true-type fonts.


Impi Linux
South African and focuses on the enterprise and government sector.


Kanotix
Distribution based on current Debian "stable" aka "Etch", but uses the current "ubuntu" kernel with some patches.[7]. As a result of the cooperation between ubuntu Developers and Kanotix Developer Jörg Schirottke aka "Kano" most of the new patches are implemented in Hardy Heron's kernel, too.


KiwiLinux
IA-32 distribution aimed for Romanian users. It supports localization for Romanian, Hungarian and German, and offers some extra tools that can be used to configure DSL modems for the main Romanian ISPs. Flash and Java are installed out of the box.


Linux4One
Ubuntu based distribution specially designed to work on the Acer Aspire One series


Linux Mint
Intended to produce an elegant, up to date and comfortable Linux desktop based on Ubuntu, with some added features.


LinuxICE
Designed for implementation in transport applications for IVI (In Vehicle Infotainment) Supported by a number of proprietary hardware manufacturers.[citation needed]


LinuxMCE (Linux Media Center Edition)
Kubuntu based distribution that provides in depth HTPC functionality as well as home automation.


LOUD (LCSEE Optimized Ubuntu Distribution)
An Ubuntu distribution used at West Virginia University. It contains several specialized educational packages as well as its own themes and login manager.


Maryan Linux
Uses the Enlightenment 17 window manager as default window manager, also has Fluxbox and Pekwm ready to use. It is aimed at users migrating from Microsoft Windows.


Molinux
Ubuntu based initiative to introduce the Castile-La Mancha community in Spain to the information society.


nUbuntu or Network Ubuntu
A project to take the existing Ubuntu distribution and remaster it as a Live CD and Full Install with tools needed for penetration-testing servers and networks. The main idea is to keep Ubuntu’s ease of use and mix it with popular penetration testing tools. Besides usage for network and server testing, nUbuntu will be made to be a desktop distribution for advanced Linux users.


OpenGEU
Ubuntu based distribution with Enlightenment window manager, previously known as Geubuntu.


OzOS
Is built on Xubuntu and utilizes the Enlightenment 17 Desktop.


Portable Ubuntu for Windows
Uses Colinux to run Ubuntu "on top" of Windows


Poseidon Linux
Distribution designed for academic and scientific use. Although based on Ubuntu, it enhances its parent by adding a large number of applications for GIS/maps, numerical modelling, 2D/3D/4D visualization, statistics, tools for creating simple and complex graphics, programming languages and more. The usual software for daily use, such as office suite, Internet browser, instant messaging and chat clients are also included.


PSUbuntu
Ubuntu distribution intended for the PlayStation 3.


SUTLinux Desktop
Server and in RAM distribution from Thailand. Optimize for easy install and quick ready to use.


Super Ubuntu
Aiming to provide an ‘Out of the Box’ experience, containing various enhancements over Ubuntu.


TOSS
Its a distribution derived from ubuntu which targets all engineering students. TOSS has a variety of engineering applications required by the engineers of all branches. TOSS has a completely different look and feel. It can also be used by other common people. Its released by Thiagarajar College of Engineering,Madurai,India.


Ultimate Edition
An Ubuntu based distribution that is loaded with lots of software to make it an easier "out of the box" experience. It was previously called Ubuntu Ultimate Edition.


Ubuntu extras remix
A simple remix of Ubuntu, only with updates, ubuntu-restricted-extras, and libdvdcss


Ubuntu Mini Remix
A fully working Ubuntu livecd containing only the minimal set of software to make the system work.


TurnKey Linux
Open source project developing a family of free, Ubuntu-based appliances optimized for ease of use in server-type usage scenarios.


U-lite
Has the main goal to be very light consuming hardware resources. The last version uses the LXDE desktop environment. It was previously called Ubuntulite.


Vinux (formerly Vibuntu)
Aimed for the use of the people with visual impairments. It is designed to log a user in automatically with start-up of Orca screenreader.


ZevenOS
With a focus on a fast and easy to use system with a focus on a BeOS "feel".



[edit] Gentoo-based
Gentoo is a distribution designed to have highly optimized and frequently updated software. Distributions based on Gentoo use the Portage package management system with emerge.


Distribution
Description


Gentoox
An adaptation of Gentoo for the Xbox.


Knopperdisk
A new distribution aimed at USB sticks.


Kororaa
Aimed at easy installation of a Gentoo system by using install scripts instead of manual configuration.


Pentoo
Penetration-testing Live CD


Sabayon Linux
Live DVD which includes a wide range of desktop environments and open-source software applications. Like Knoppix, Sabayon Linux can be installed on the hard drive.


SystemRescueCD
System rescue Live CD version of Gentoo.


Tin Hat Linux
Based on hardened Gentoo


Ututo
Made in Argentina


VidaLinux
Uses Anaconda as its installer.



[edit] RPM-based
Red Hat Linux and SUSE Linux were the original major distributions that used the RPM file format, which is today used in several package management systems. Both of these later divided into commercial and community-supported distributions. Red Hat Linux divided into a community-supported distribution sponsored by Red Hat called Fedora, and a commercially supported distribution called Red Hat Enterprise Linux.

[edit] Fedora-based


Distribution
Description


Aurora SPARC Linux
For Sun's SPARC architecture


K12LTSP
A distribution for educational purpose. Comes with LTSP support.


Linux XP
Focuses on ease of installation and use. It uses a Windows like interface.


Linpus Linux
Focused on the Chinese market, along with Linpus Lite focused on the netbook market.


Ojuba Linux
Focused on providing the best Arabic support, as well as some Islamic tools such as Hijra (Hijri calendar) and Minbar (prayer time indicator).


Yellow Dog Linux
For the PowerPC platform.



[edit] Red Hat Enterprise Linux-based


Distribution
Description


Asianux
A distribution co-developed between Red Flag Software Co., Ltd., Miracle Linux Corp. and Haansoft, INC., focused on Chinese, Japanese and Korean supports.


CentOS
Community-supported distribution that aims to be compatible with Red Hat Enterprise Linux without the inclusion of proprietary software.


ClarkConnect
Small Business Server. File, Print, Messaging, UTM, VPN.


Scientific Linux
A distribution co-developed by Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory and the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), which aims to be compatible with and based on Red Hat Enterprise Linux.


SME Server
Based on CentOS and targeting Small and Medium Enterprises.


White Box Enterprise Linux
A distribution designed to be compatible with Red Hat Enterprise Linux.


See Red Hat Enterprise Linux derivatives for a more complete list, as well as Commercial products based on Red Hat Enterprise Linux.

[edit] Others (RPM-based)


Distribution
Description


TinyMe
A lightweight distribution based on PCLinuxOS


aLinux
A distribution for home use designed to be equivalent to Windows XP Home (formerly known as Peanut Linux).


ALT Linux
Several distributions including Master, Compact, and Junior. Provides support for Cyrillic languages. [8]


Annvix
A security-focused server distribution. Originally based on Mandrake 9.2 but has diverged a lot.


Ark Linux
A distribution focused on ease of use and ease of learning.


Berry Linux
A medium-sized Fedora-based distribution that provides support in Japanese and English.


Caixa Mágica
A Portuguese distribution.


Caldera Linux
Caldera bought SCO then took the SCO name and no longer produces a Linux distribution. Last release: 3.1.1 - Jan. 30, 2002


cAos Linux
A general purpose distribution. Designed to have low overhead, run on older hardware, and be easily customizable


EduLinux
A distribution for educational purposes (cf. Guadalinex, Skolelinux).


EnGarde Secure Linux
Server-only distribution designed to be secure.


Granular Linux
Based on PCLinuxOS and features two desktop environments - KDE & Enlightenment


Linkat
A distribution promoted by the government of Catalonia, Spain.


Mandriva Linux
Easy to use system through its unique Control Center.


MCNLive
A Mandriva-based distribution designed to run from CD or USB Flash Drive, focused on multimedia, internet, graphics.


PCLinuxOS
A Live CD distribution. Originally based on Mandrake 9.2. Later rebased on Mandriva 2007.


Red Flag Linux
A distribution developed in China and optimized for the Chinese market.


Red Hat Linux
Split into Fedora Core and Red Hat Enterprise Linux. The last official release was Red Hat Linux 9 in March 2003.


SUSE Linux
A desktop-oriented Linux distribution supplied by Novell, Inc.. SUSE is one of the most popular distributions in Europe. Like Red Hat Linux, it is a large distribution on several CDs/DVDs. Free Eval versions are available for the SUSE Linux Enterprise versions.





openSUSE - A branch developed by the community and sponsored by Novell. openSUSE maintains a strict policy of ensuring all code in the standard installs will be from Free/Libre/Open-Source Software solutions, including Linux kernel Modules. Novell's enterprise Linux products are all based on the codebase that comes out of the openSUSE project.
SUSE Linux Enterprise Server - A server-oriented Linux distribution supplied by Novell, Inc. and targeted at the business market.
SUSE Linux Enterprise Desktop (previously branded Novell Linux Desktop) - A desktop-oriented Linux distribution supplied by Novell, Inc. and targeted at the enterprise market.
SUSE Linux Enterprise Real Time - A specialized version of the SUSE distribution from Novell designed to support low latency for time critical operations.








Trustix
A distribution focused on security.


Turbolinux
Based on Red Hat Linux.


Vine Linux
A Japanese distribution based on Red Hat Linux.


YOPER
A desktop distribution from New Zealand that focuses on optimizing system performance for workstation use.



[edit] Slackware-based
Slackware is known as a highly customizable distribution that stresses ease of maintenance and reliability over cutting-edge software and automated tools. Generally considered a distribution for advanced users, it is often suggested to those who want to learn the inner workings of a Linux operating system.


Distribution
Description


Austrumi
An 86 MB bootable live CD


BasicLinux
A mini linux designed to run in old PCs (386). Has a certain degree of compatibility with Slackware packages.


Frugalware
A general purpose Linux distribution designed for intermediate users.


GoblinX
A live CD that features multiple customizable desktop environments.


HostGIS
HostGIS Linux is a Slackware based distribution specifically made for handling GIS information.


MuLinux
Floppy based distribution with replaceable modules.


NimbleX
Completely customizable through the Nimblex website.


Slackintosh
An unofficial port of Slackware to the PowerPC architecture.


SMS - Slack Mini Server
A full feature server distribution (inc. dovecot, postfix, mailscanner, clamav, spamassassin, openldap), manageable through webmin interface or kde environment. Also features TorrentFlux (a php bittorrent client). [9]


Slamd64
An unofficial port of Slackware to the x86-64 architecture.


SLAX
A very popular live CD which aims to provide a complete desktop for general use. Permanent installation of SLAX is not recommended or supported; it is designed for "live" use only.


Topologilinux
Designed to run from within Microsoft Windows, Topologilinux can be installed without any changes to the user's hard disk.


Vector Linux
A lightweight distribution designed to be easy to use even for new users. Generally considered well suited for older hardware.


Wolvix Linux
A Slackware derivative featuring the Xfce desktop environment..


Zenwalk Linux
Originally a minimal version of Slackware, Zenwalk has evolved into a very different operating system; however, compatibility with Slackware is still maintained.



[edit] SLAX-based
SLAX's modularity and reputation of quality have made it a popular base for other live CD projects.


Distribution
Description


AliXe Linux
A french-(English) live CD distribution, designed by Silvie Alisou from Canada. It is general-purpose- and, to a certain extent, lightweight-oriented. The recent release (from Jan 11, 2007) was equipped with a harddisk installer with no back-confirmation of entries, launching a LILO bootloader. Once an option-induced choice is entered in the harddisk install, it's a "decided matter".[citation needed]


BackTrack
A network security suite developed by RemoteExploit.org. It includes many penetration testing utilities and development tools. While BackTrack is principally used as a live CD, it can also be installed permanently.


DAVIX
A live CD for data analysis and visualization.


DNALinux
A small distribution designed for running bioinformatics software, including BLAST and EMBOSS.


SLAMPP
Designed to be used on a home server.



[edit] Others
The following distributions either use another packaging system, do not use any, or are simply not categorized.


Distribution
Description


Arch Linux
An i686- and x86-64-optimized distribution targeted at experienced users. Arch runs on a rolling release system and uses the pacman utility for package management.


Billix
A live CD or live USB system administration toolkit and multiboot distribution with the ability to install any of the included distributions.


Coyote Linux
Router/firewall distribution.


CRUX
CRUX is a lightweight, i686-optimized Linux distribution targeted at experienced Linux users. The primary focus of this distribution is "keep it simple", which is reflected in a simple tar.gz-based package system, BSD-style initscripts, and a relatively small collection of trimmed packages


DD-WRT
Embedded firewall distribution.


DeLi Linux
A desktop based mini distribution with office suite, web browser and other graphical programs to run on a 486. Built from scratch with some influences from Slackware and CRUX.


Devil-Linux
firewall/router/server distribution running from CD or USB. Configuration held on USB or floppy disk.


DSLinux
Version of Linux designed for the Nintendo DS.


dyne:bolic
Live CD geared toward multimedia (audio and video) production, but comes with other non-media specific application (eg: word processor, desktop publisher). It is completely free software as defined by the Free Software Foundation.


Familiar Linux
Distribution for iPAQ handhelds.


Fli4l
a single floppy ISDN, DSL and Ethernet-Router.


Foresight Linux
A distribution built around the Conary package manager.


FREESCO
A free replacement for proprietary routers supporting up to 10 network cards and up to 10 modems.


GeeXboX
Live CD media center distribution, mainly to play special-encoded video files (eg: .ogg, XVID) on home theater.


GoboLinux
An alternative Linux distribution which redefines the entire file system hierarchy by installing everything belonging to one application in one folder under /Programs, and using symlinks from /System and its subfolders to point to the proper files.


Hikarunix
A distro solely for studying and playing the game of Go.


IPCop
Router/firewall distribution.


iPodLinux
Embedded Linux firmware for the Apple iPod based on the µCLinux kernel.


Jlime
Distribution for the HP Jornada 6xx and 7xx and NEC MobilePro 900(c) handhelds.


Lunar Linux
A source code-based distribution descended from Sorcerer GNU/Linux.


Lycoris
Desktop/LX: Fell down to one employee and then acquired by Mandriva.


MCC Interim Linux
MCC Interim Linux, possibly the first Linux distribution. Created by the Manchester Computing Centre in February 1992.


MkLinux
A distribution for PowerPC systems that runs the Linux kernel as a server on top of the Mach microkernel.


Mobilinux
By Montavista for smartphones.


MontaVista Linux
Embedded systems distro by MontaVista Software.


NASLite
a floppy-based Linux designed to turn an old computer into a simple Network Attached Storage device.


Nitix
Developed by Net Integration Technologies Inc., Nitix claims to be the first autonomic Linux-based server operating system.


OpenWrt
Embedded firewall distribution.


Pardus
Developed by Turkish National Research Institute of Electronics and Cryptology. It uses PISI as package manager, COMAR as configuration framework.


PS2 Linux
Sony Computer Entertainment distribution released officially for the PlayStation 2 video game console.


Puppy Linux
A mini distribution which runs well under low-end PCs - even under 32 MB RAM. Includes Slackware 12 support (since version 3).


Rocks Cluster Distribution
A distribution for building a High-performance computing computer cluster.


rPath
A distribution built around the Conary package manager.


Sentry Firewall
A firewall, server or intrusion detection system distribution.


SliTaz GNU/Linux
A small desktop distro. The ISO is 25 MB; runs entirely in RAM.


Smallfoot
Developed by the Santa Cruz Operation ( SCO UNIX / SCO Group ), formerly Caldera.


SmoothWall
Router/firewall distribution.


Softlanding Linux System
One of the earliest distributions, developed from 1992-1994; Slackware was originally based on it.


Sorcerer
A source code-based distribution.


Source Mage GNU/Linux
A source code-based distribution, descended from Sorcerer.


Tinfoil Hat Linux
Bootable floppy distribution focusing on extreme security


Thinstation
Thin client distribution supporting all major connectivity protocols.


tomsrtbt
Root boot disk.


Yggdrasil Linux/GNU/X
One of the oldest Linux distributions, not updated since 1995.



[edit] See also




Free software portal




Comparison of Linux distributions
List of Linux router or firewall distributions
List of live CDs


[edit] References


^ Xubuntu home page
^ Ubuntu Education Edition 8.04 Released | edubuntu
^ "Ubuntu JeOS 7.10 released". https://lists.ubuntu.com/archives/ubuntu-announce/2007-November/000106.html. 
^ "Ubuntu to announce its mobile Linux in June". http://news.cnet.com/8301-13580_3-9950552-39.html. 
^ "Ubuntu Netbook Remix". http://www.canonical.com/projects/ubuntu/nbr. 
^ Easy Peasy Linux released for netbooks
^ Kanotix News
^ http://distrowatch.com/altlinux
^ DistroWatch Weekly, Issue 215, 13 August 2007



[edit] External links

DistroWatch.com - Compares all significant Linux distributions in detail.








v • d • e

The Linux operating system





General

Adoption · Comparison of Windows and Linux · Criticism · GNU Project · History · Free Software Foundation · Linux Foundation · Kernel (portability) · Linus's Law · GNU/Linux naming controversy · Tux · GNU General Public License · GNU packages






Linux
portal









Distribution

Distribution (comparison) · Live CD · Live USB · Mini Linux · Package formats






Applications

Desktop · Devices · Embedded · Gaming · LAMP · Thin client






People

Jono Bacon · Alan Cox · Jon 'Mad Dog' Hall · Benjamin Mako Hill · Ari Lemmke · Andrew Morton · Ian Murdock · Hans Reiser · Scott James Remnant · Daniel Robbins · Mark Shuttleworth · Richard Stallman · Linus Torvalds · Theodore Ts'o · Patrick Volkerding · Matt Zimmerman






Media

Free Software Magazine · Linux.com · Linux Format · Linux Gazette · Linux Journal · Linux-Magazin · Linux Magazine · LWN.net · O3 Magazine · Phoronix · LugRadio · Linux Outlaws






Lists

Devices · Distributions · Live CDs






Mobile

Access Linux Platform · Android · LiMo Foundation · LiMo Platform · Linux Phone Standards Forum · Mobilinux · Moblin project · Open Handset Alliance · Openmoko · palm webOS · Ubuntu Mobile






Other topics

Linux malware · Linux User Group (LUG) · Linux Standard Base · Revolution OS · SCO and Linux · Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Linux_distributions"
Categories: Lists of software | Linux distributionsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Česky
Deutsch
Español
Français
Magyar
മലയാളം
Bahasa Melayu
Nederlands
Português
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Suomi
Tiếng Việt
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 09:41.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
