











Spain - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Spain";
		var wgTitle = "Spain";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "26667";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282060005;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = ["autoconfirmed"];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Spain

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
This article is about the country.  For other uses, see Spain (disambiguation).





Kingdom of Spain
Reino de España










Flag
Coat of arms





Motto: "Plus Ultra"  (Latin)
"Further Beyond"


Anthem: "Marcha Real"  (Spanish)[note 1]
"Royal March"







Location of  Spain  (dark green)
– on the European continent  (light green & dark grey)
– in the European Union  (light green)  —  [Legend]





Capital
(and largest city)
Madrid
40°26′N 3°42′W﻿ / ﻿40.433°N 3.7°W﻿ / 40.433; -3.7


Official languages
Spanish[note 2]


Recognised regional languages
Aranese, Basque, Catalan/Valencian and Galician


Ethnic groups 
88.7% Spanish, 11.3% Other (Romanian, Moroccan, Ecuadorian, Colombian, British)[1][2]


Demonym
Spanish, Spaniard


Government
Parliamentary democracy and Constitutional monarchy


 - 
King
Juan Carlos I


 - 
Prime Minister
José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero (PSOE)


Formation
15th century 


 - 
  Dynastic
1479 


 - 
  de facto
1516 


 - 
  de jure
1716 


 - 
  Constitutional democracy
1978 


EU accession
1 January 1986


Area


 - 
Total
504,030 km2 (51st)
195,364 sq mi 


 - 
Water (%)
1.04


Population


 - 
2008 estimate
46,157,822[3] (28th)


 - 
Density
90 people/km2 (106th)
231/sq mi


GDP (PPP)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$1,351 trillion[4] (12th)


 - 
Per capita
$30,118[4] (IMF) (26th)


GDP (nominal)
2007 estimate


 - 
Total
$1,439 trillion[4] (8th)


 - 
Per capita
$32,089[4] (IMF) (25th)


Gini (2005)
32[5] 


HDI (2005)
0.949 (high) (16th)


Currency
Euro (€)[note 3] (EUR)


Time zone
CET[note 4] (UTC+1)


 - 
Summer (DST)
CEST (UTC+2)


Date formats
dd.mm.yyyy (Spanish; CE)


Drives on the
right


Internet TLD
.es[note 5]


Calling code
34


Spain  /ˈspeɪn/ (help·info) (Spanish: España?·i, Spanish pronunciation: [esˈpaɲa]) or the Kingdom of Spain (Spanish: Reino de España), is a country located in southwestern Europe on the Iberian Peninsula.[note 6] Its mainland is bordered to the south and east by the Mediterranean Sea except for a small land boundary with Gibraltar; to the north by France, Andorra, and the Bay of Biscay; and to the west by the Atlantic Ocean and Portugal. Spanish territory also includes the Balearic Islands in the Mediterranean, the Canary Islands in the Atlantic Ocean off the African coast, and two autonomous cities in North Africa, Ceuta and Melilla, that border Morocco. With an area of 504,030 km², Spain is the second largest country in Western Europe after France.
Because of its location, the territory of Spain was subject to many external influences, often simultaneously, since prehistoric times and through the dawn of Spain as a country. On the other side, the country itself has been an important source of influence to other regions, chiefly during the Modern Era, when it became a global empire that has left a legacy of over 400 million Spanish speakers today.
Spain is a democracy organised in the form of a parliamentary government under a constitutional monarchy. It is a developed country with the eighth largest economy by nominal GDP. It is a member of the European Union and NATO.
The name Spain was derived from the ancient Roman name for Iberia, Hispania.





Contents


1 Geography

1.1 Climate


2 History

2.1 Prehistory and pre-Roman peoples
2.2 Roman Empire and the Germanic Kingdoms
2.3 Muslim Iberia
2.4 Fall of Muslim rule and unification
2.5 Imperial Spain
2.6 Napoleonic rule and its consequences
2.7 Spanish-American War
2.8 20th century
2.9 21st century


3 Politics

3.1 Constitution
3.2 Government
3.3 Administrative divisions
3.4 Foreign relations

3.4.1 Territorial disputes

3.4.1.1 Territory claimed by Spain
3.4.1.2 Spanish territories claimed by other countries






4 Military
5 Economy

5.1 Transportation


6 Demographics

6.1 Metropolitan areas
6.2 Immigration
6.3 Minority groups
6.4 Peoples
6.5 Languages


7 Religion
8 Culture

8.1 Schools
8.2 Literature
8.3 Real Academia Española
8.4 Art
8.5 Cinema
8.6 Architecture
8.7 Music
8.8 Cuisine
8.9 Sport
8.10 Public holidays


9 See also
10 Notes
11 References
12 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


Geography
Main article: Geography of Spain




Spanish countryside in Huesca, Aragon in northeastern Spain.


At 195,884 mi² (504,782 km²), Spain is the world's 51st-largest country. It is some 47,000 km² smaller than France and 81,000 km² larger than the U.S. state of California.
On the west, Spain borders Portugal, on the south, it borders Gibraltar (a British overseas territory) and Morocco, through its cities in North Africa (Ceuta and Melilla). On the northeast, along the Pyrenees mountain range, it borders France and the tiny principality of Andorra. Spain also includes the Balearic Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, the Canary Islands in the Atlantic Ocean and a number of uninhabited islands on the Mediterranean side of the strait of Gibraltar, known as Plazas de soberanía, such as the Chafarine islands, the isle of Alborán, the "rocks" (peñones) of Vélez and Alhucemas, and the tiny Isla Perejil. Along the Pyrenees in Catalonia, a small exclave town called Llívia is surrounded by France. The little Pheasant Island in the River Bidasoa is a Spanish-French condominium.
Mainland Spain is dominated by high plateaus and mountain ranges, such as the Sierra Nevada. Running from these heights are several major rivers such as the Tagus, the Ebro, the Duero, the Guadiana and the Guadalquivir. Alluvial plains are found along the coast, the largest of which is that of the Guadalquivir in Andalusia.

Climate
Due to Spain's geographical situation and orographic conditions, the climate is extremely diverse; it can be roughly divided into four areas:

A Continental Mediterranean climate in the inland areas of the Peninsula (largest city, Madrid).
A Mediterranean climate region extends from the Andalusian plain along the southern and eastern coasts up to the Pyrenees, on the seaward side of the mountain ranges that run near the coast (largest city, Barcelona). They get warm winds from the Saharas called Leveche, also known as Sirocco.
An Oceanic climate in Galicia and the coastal strip near the Bay of Biscay or (largest city,) Bilbao. This area is often called Green Spain.
A Subtropical climate in Canary Islands is a very humid place and the islands have palm trees and beaches.


History
Main article: History of Spain
After a long and hard conquest, the Iberian Peninsula became a region of the Roman Empire known as Hispania. During the early Middle Ages it came under Germanic rule. Later it was conquered by Muslim invaders. Through a very long and fitful process, the Christian kingdoms in the north gradually rolled back Muslim rule, finally extinguishing its last remnant in Granada in 1492, the same year Columbus reached the Americas. A global empire began. Spain became the strongest kingdom in Europe and the leading world power during the 16th century and first half of the 17th century; but continued wars and other problems eventually led to a diminished status. The French invasion of Spain in the early 19th century led to chaos; triggering independence movements that tore apart most of the empire and left the country politically unstable. In the 20th century it suffered a devastating civil war and came under the rule of an authoritarian government, leading to years of stagnation, but finishing in an impressive economic surge. Democracy was restored in 1978 in the form of a parliamentary constitutional monarchy. In 1986, Spain joined the European Union; experiencing a cultural renaissance and steady economic growth.

Prehistory and pre-Roman peoples
Main article: Prehistoric Iberia




Replica of the Altamira Cave paintings


Archaeological research at Atapuerca indicates the Iberian Peninsula was peopled 1.2 million years ago.[6] Modern humans in the form of Cro-Magnons began arriving in the Iberian Peninsula through the Pyrenees some 35,000 years ago. The best known artifacts of these prehistoric human settlements are the famous paintings in the Altamira cave of Cantabria in northern Spain, which were created about 15,000 BCE.
Archaeological and genetic evidence strongly suggests that the Iberian Peninsula acted as one of three major refugia from which northern Europe was repopulated following the end of the last ice age.
The two main historical peoples of the peninsula were the Iberians and the Celts, the former inhabiting the Mediterranean side from the northeast to the southwest, the latter inhabiting the Atlantic side, in the north and northwest part of the peninsula. In the inner part of the peninsula, where both groups were in contact, a mixed, distinctive culture—known as Celtiberian—was present. In addition, Basques occupied the western area of the Pyrenees mountains. Other ethnic groups existed along the southern coastal areas of present day Andalusia. Among these southern groups there grew the earliest urban culture in the Iberian Peninsula, that of the semi-mythical southern city of Tartessos (perhaps pre-1100 BC) near the location of present-day Cádiz. The flourishing trade in gold and silver between the people of Tartessos and Phoenicians and Greeks is documented in the history of Strabo and in the biblical book of king Solomon. Between about 500 BC and 300 BC, the seafaring Phoenicians and Greeks founded trading colonies all along the Spanish Mediterranean coast. Carthaginians briefly took control of much of the Mediterranean coast in the course of the Punic Wars, until they were eventually defeated and replaced by the Romans.[7]

Roman Empire and the Germanic Kingdoms
Main article: Hispania




Roman Theatre of Mérida


During the Second Punic War, an expanding Roman Empire captured Carthaginian trading colonies along the Mediterranean coast from roughly 210 BC to 205 BC, leading to eventual Roman control of nearly the entire Iberian Peninsula; this lasted over 500 years, bound together by law, language, and the Roman road.[8]
The base Celt and Iberian population remained in various stages of Romanisation, and local leaders were admitted into the Roman aristocratic class.[note 7][7] Hispania served as a granary for the Roman market, and its harbors exported gold, wool, olive oil, and wine. Agricultural production increased with the introduction of irrigation projects, some of which remain in use. Emperors Trajan, Theodosius I, and the philosopher Seneca were born in Hispania.[note 8] Christianity was introduced into Hispania in the 1st century CE and it became popular in the cities in the 2nd century CE.[7] Most of Spain's present languages and religion, and the basis of its laws, originate from this period.[8] Rome's loss of jurisdiction in Hispania began in 409, when the Germanic Suevi and Vandals, together with the Sarmatian Alans crossed the Rhine and ravaged Gaul until the Visigoths drove them into Iberia that same year. The Suevi established a kingdom in what is today modern Galicia and northern Portugal. The Alans' allies, the Hasdingi Vandals, established a kingdom in Gallaecia, too, occupying largely the same region but extending further south to the Duero river. The Silingi Vandals occupied the region that still bears a form of their name - Vandalusia, modern Andalusia, in Spain. The Byzantines established an enclave, Spania, in the south, with the intention of reviving the Roman empire throughout Iberia. Eventually, however, Hispania was reunited under Visigothic rule.

Muslim Iberia
Main article: Al-Andalus




View from a room inside the Alhambra palace complex in Granada


In the 8th century, nearly all of the Iberian Peninsula was conquered (711-718) by Muslim armies (see Moors) from North Africa. These conquests were part of the expansion of the Umayyad Islamic Empire.[note 9] Only a number of areas in the north of the Iberian Peninsula managed to resist the initial invasion and they were the starters of the Reconquista. These areas roughly corresponding to modern Asturias, Cantabria, Navarre and northern Aragon.
Under Islam, Christians and Jews were recognised as "peoples of the book", and were free to practice their religion, but faced a number of mandatory discriminations and penalties as dhimmis.[9] Conversion to Islam proceeded at a steadily increasing pace. Following the mass conversions in the 10th and 11th centuries it is believed that Muslims came to outnumber Christians in the remaining Muslim controlled areas.[10] The muladies (Muslims of ethnic Iberian origin) comprised the majority of the population of Al-Andalus by the end of the 10th century.[11]
The Muslim community in the Iberian peninsula was itself diverse and beset by social tensions. The Berber people of North Africa, who had provided the bulk of the invading armies, clashed with the Arab leadership from the Middle East.[note 10] Over time, large Moorish populations became established, especially in the Guadalquivir River valley, the coastal plain of Valencia, and (towards the end of this period) in the mountainous region of Granada.[10]
Córdoba, the capital of the caliphate, was the largest, richest and most sophisticated city of medieval western Europe.[note 11] Mediterranean trade and cultural exchange flourished. Muslims imported a rich intellectual tradition from the Middle East and North Africa. Muslim and Jewish scholars played an important part in reviving and expanding classical Greek learning in Western Europe. The Romanized cultures of the Iberian peninsula interacted with Muslim and Jewish cultures in complex ways, thus giving the region a distinctive culture.[10] Outside the cities, where the vast majority lived, the land ownership system from Roman times remained largely intact as Muslim leaders rarely dispossessed landowners, and the introduction of new crops and techniques led to a remarkable expansion of agriculture.
However, by the 11th century, Muslim holdings had fractured into rival Taifa kingdoms, allowing the small Christian states the opportunity to greatly enlarge their territories and consolidate their positions.[10] The arrival of the North African Muslim ruling sects of the Almoravids and the Almohads restored unity upon Muslim holdings, with a stricter, less tolerant application of Islam, but ultimately, after some successes in invading the north, proved unable to resist the increasing military strength of the Christian states.[7]

Fall of Muslim rule and unification
Main article: Reconquista
The Reconquista ("Reconquest") is the centuries-long period of expansion of Spain's Christian kingdoms; Reconquista is viewed as beginning with the battle of Covadonga in 722 and being concurrent with the period of Muslim rule on the Iberian peninsula. The Christian army's victory over the Muslim forces led to the creation of the Christian Kingdom of Asturias along the northern coastal mountains. Muslim armies had also moved north of the Pyrenees, but they were defeated at the Battle of Poitiers in France. Subsequently, they retreated to more secure positions south of the Pyrenees with a frontier marked by the Ebro and Duero rivers in Spain. As early as 739 Muslim forces were driven from Galicia, which was to host one of medieval Europe's holiest sites, Santiago de Compostela. A little later Frankish forces established Christian counties south of the Pyrenees; these areas were to grow into kingdoms, in the north-east and the western part of the Pyrenees. These territories included Navarre, Aragon and Catalonia.[12]




Catholic Monarchs, Ferdinand II and Isabella I


The breakup of Al-Andalus into the competing Taifa kingdoms helped the expanding Christian kingdoms. The capture of Toledo in 1085 was soon followed by the completion of the Christian powers reconquest of Spain's northern half.[note 12] After a Muslim resurgence in the 12th century, the great Moorish strongholds in the south fell to Christian Spain in the 13th century—Córdoba in 1236 and Seville in 1248—leaving only the Muslim enclave of Granada as a tributary state in the south.[13] Marinid invasions from north Africa in the 13th and 14th centuries failed to re-establish Muslim rule. Also in the 13th century, the kingdom of Aragon, formed by Aragon, Catalonia and Valencia expanded its reach across the Mediterranean to Sicily.[14] Around this time the universities of Palencia (1212/1263) and Salamanca (1218/1254) were established; among the earliest in Europe. The Black Death of 1348 and 1349 devastated Spain.[15]
In 1469, the crowns of the Christian kingdoms of Castile and Aragon were united by the marriage of Isabella and Ferdinand. In 1478 began the final stage of the conquest of Canary Islands and in 1492, these united kingdoms captured Granada, ending the last remnant of a 781-year presence of Islamic rule in Iberia. The Treaty of Granada guaranteed religious tolerance toward Muslims.[16] The year 1492 also marked the arrival in the New World of Christopher Columbus, during a voyage funded by Isabella. That same year, Spain's Jews were ordered to convert to Catholicism or face expulsion from Spanish territories during the Spanish Inquisition. Not long after, Muslims were also expelled under the same conditions.[note 13][17]
As Renaissance New Monarchs, Isabella and Ferdinand centralized royal power at the expense of local nobility, and the word España - whose root is the ancient name Hispania - began to be commonly used to designate the whole of the two kingdoms.[17] With their wide-ranging political, legal, religious and military reforms, Spain emerged as the first world power.




Map of the Spanish-Portuguese Empire in the period of the Iberian Union (1580–1640). Red - Spanish Empire. Blue - Portuguese Empire.



Imperial Spain
Main article: Spanish Empire
The unification of the kingdoms of Aragon and Castile laid the basis for modern Spain and the Spanish Empire.[18] Spain was Europe's leading power throughout the 16th century and most of the 17th century, a position reinforced by trade and wealth from colonial possessions. Spain reached its apogee during the reigns of the first two Spanish Habsburgs - Charles I (1516–1556) and Philip II (1556–1598). This period also saw the Italian Wars, the revolt of the comuneros, the Dutch revolt, the Morisco revolt, clashes with the Ottomans, the Anglo-Spanish war and wars with France.[19]
The Spanish Empire expanded to include most parts of South and Central America, Mexico, southern and western portions of today's United States, the Philippines, Guam and the Mariana Islands in Eastern Asia, parts of northern Italy, southern Italy, Sicily, cities in Northern Africa, as well as parts of France, modern Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands.




Philip II of Spain


It was the first empire about which it was said that the sun never set. This was an age of discovery, with daring explorations by sea and by land, the opening-up of new trade routes across oceans, conquests and the beginnings of European colonialism. Along with the arrival of precious metals,[note 14] spices, luxuries, and new agricultural plants, Spanish and other explorers brought back knowledge from the New World, playing a leading part in transforming Europeans understanding of the globe.[20] The cultural efflorescence witnessed is now referred to as the Spanish Golden Age. The rise of humanism, the Protestant Reformation and new geographical discoveries raised issues addressed by the influential intellectual movement now known as the School of Salamanca.
In the late 16th century and first half of the 17th century, Spain was confronted by unrelenting challenges from all sides. Barbary pirates under the aegis of the rapidly growing Ottoman empire, disrupted life in many coastal areas through their slave raids and renewed the threat of an Islamic invasion.[note 15] This at a time when Spain was often at war with France in Italy and elsewhere. Later the Protestant Reformation schism from the Catholic Church dragged the kingdom ever more deeply into the mire of religiously charged wars. The result was a country forced into ever expanding military efforts across Europe and in the Mediterranean.[21]




The galleon became synonymous with the riches of the Spanish Empire.


By the middle decades of a war and plague ridden 17th century Europe (see Great Plague of Seville),[22] the effects of the strain began to show. The Spanish Habsburgs had enmeshed the country in the continent wide religious-political conflicts. These conflicts drained it of resources and undermined the European economy generally. Spain managed to hold on to most of the scattered Habsburg empire, and help the imperial forces of the Holy Roman Empire reverse a large part of the advances made by Protestant forces, but it was finally forced to recognise the separation of Portugal (with whom it had been united in a personal union of the crowns from 1580 to 1640) and the Netherlands, and eventually suffered some serious military reverses to France in the latter stages of the immensely destructive, Europe-wide Thirty Years War.[23]
In the latter half of the 17th century, Spain went into a gradual relative decline, during which it surrendered a number of small territories to France. However Spain maintained and enlarged its vast overseas empire, which remained intact until the beginning of the 19th century.
The decline culminated in a controversy over succession to the throne which consumed the first years of the 18th century. The War of Spanish Succession, a wide ranging international conflict combined with a civil war, cost Spain its European possessions and its position as one of the leading powers on the Continent.[24]
During this war, a new dynasty—the French Bourbons—was installed. Long united only by the Crown, a true Spanish state was established when the first Bourbon king Philip V of Spain united Castile and Aragon into a single state, abolishing many of the regional privileges (fueros).[25]
The 18th century saw a gradual recovery and an increase in prosperity through much of the empire. The new Bourbon monarchy drew on the French system of modernising the administration and the economy. Enlightenment ideas began to gain ground among some of the kingdom's elite and monarchy. Towards the end of the century trade finally began growing strongly. Military assistance for the rebellious British colonies in the American War of Independence improved Spain's international standing.[26]

Napoleonic rule and its consequences
Main article: Mid-nineteenth century Spain




The Second of May 1808 by Francisco Goya


In 1793, Spain went to war against the new French Republic, which had overthrown and executed its Bourbon king, Louis XVI. The war polarised the country in an apparent reaction against the gallicised elites. Defeated in the field, Spain made peace with France in 1795 and effectively became a client state of that country; the following year, it declared war against Britain and Portugal. A disastrous economic situation, along with other factors, led to the abdication of the Spanish king in favour of Napoleon's brother, Joseph Bonaparte.
This foreign puppet monarch was widely regarded with scorn. On 2 May 1808, the people of Madrid began a nationalist uprising against the French army, one of many across the country, marking the beginning of what is known to the Spanish as the War of Independence, and to the English as the Peninsular War.[27] Napoleon was forced to intervene personally, defeating several badly coordinated Spanish armies and forcing a British Army to retreat to Corunna. However, further military action by Spanish guerrillas and Wellington's Anglo-Portuguese army, combined with Napoleon's disastrous invasion of Russia, led to the ousting of the French from Spain in 1814, and the return of King Ferdinand VII.[28]
The French invasion proved disastrous for Spain's economy, and left a deeply divided country that was prone to political instability for more than a century. The power struggles of the early 19th century led to the loss of all of Spain's colonies in Latin America, with the exception of Cuba and Puerto Rico.

Spanish-American War
Main article: Spanish–American War
Amid the instability and economic crisis that afflicted Spain in the 19th century there arose nationalist movements in the Philippines and Cuba. Wars of independence ensued in those colonies and eventually the United States became involved. Despite the commitment and ability shown by some military units, they were so mismanaged by the highest levels of command that the Spanish–American War, fought in the Spring of 1898, did not last long. "El Desastre" (The Disaster), as the war became known in Spain, helped give impetus to the Generation of 98 who were already conducting much critical analysis concerning the country. It also weakened the stability that had been established during Alfonso XII's reign.

20th century
The 20th century brought little peace; Spain played a minor part in the scramble for Africa, with the colonisation of Western Sahara, Spanish Morocco and Equatorial Guinea. The heavy losses suffered during the Rif war in Morocco helped to undermine the monarchy. A period of authoritarian rule under General Miguel Primo de Rivera (1923-1931) ended with the establishment of the Second Spanish Republic. The Republic offered political autonomy to the Basque Country, Catalonia and Galicia and gave voting rights to women.




Guernica by Picasso, 1937.






Polish volunteers of the International Brigades.


The bitterly fought Spanish Civil War (1936-39) ensued. Three years later the Nationalist forces, led by General Francisco Franco, emerged victorious with the support of Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy. The Republican side was supported by the Soviet Union and Mexico and International Brigades, including the American Abraham Lincoln Brigade, but it was not supported officially by the Western powers due to the British-led policy of Non-Intervention. The Spanish Civil War has been called the first battle of the Second World War; under Franco, Spain was neutral in the Second World War though sympathetic to the Axis.[note 16] The conflict had claimed the lives of over 500,000 people[29] and had caused the flight of up to one half-million more citizens.[30]
The only legal party under Franco's regime was the Falange española tradicionalista y de las JONS, formed in 1937; the party emphasised anti-Communism, Catholicism and nationalism. Nonetheless, since Franco's anti-democratic ideology was opposed to the idea of political parties, the new party was renamed officially a National Movement (Movimiento Nacional) in 1949.




Francisco Franco


After World War II, Spain was politically and economically isolated, and was kept out of the United Nations until 1955, when due to the Cold War it became strategically important for the U.S. to create a military presence on the Iberian peninsula, next to the Mediterranean Sea and the Strait of Gibraltar, in order to protect southern Europe. In the 1960s, Spain registered an unprecedented economic growth in what was called the Spanish miracle, which rapidly resumed the long interrupted transition towards a modern industrial economy with a thriving tourism sector and a high degree of human development.
Upon the death of General Franco in November 1975, Prince Juan Carlos assumed the position of king and head of state. With the approval of the new Spanish Constitution of 1978 and the arrival of democracy, the State devolved autonomy to the regions and created an internal organization based on autonomous communities. In the Basque Country, moderate Basque nationalism coexisted with a radical nationalism supportive of the separatist group ETA.
On 23 February 1981, rebel elements among the security forces seized the Cortes and tried to impose a military-backed government. However, the great majority of the military forces remained loyal to King Juan Carlos, who used his personal authority and addressed the usurpers via national TV as commander in chief to put down the bloodless coup attempt.
On 30 May 1982, NATO gained a new member when, following a referendum, the newly democratic Spain joined the alliance. Also in 1982, the Spanish Socialist Workers Party (PSOE) came to power, representing the return of a left-wing government after 43 years. In 1986, Spain joined the European Community - what has now become the European Union. The PSOE was replaced in government by the Partido Popular (PP) after the latter won the 1996 General Elections; at that point the PSOE had served almost 14 consecutive years in office.
The Government of Spain has been involved in a long-running campaign against the separatist and terrorist organization ETA ("Basque Homeland and Freedom"), founded in 1959 in opposition to Franco and dedicated to promoting Basque independence through violent means. They consider themselves a guerrilla organization while they are listed as a terrorist organization by both the European Union and the United States on their respective watchlists. The current nationalist-led Basque Autonomous government does not endorse ETA's nationalist violence, which has caused over 800 deaths in the past 40 years.

21st century
Further information: Spanish society after the democratic transition




Spain issued the single European currency, the euro, in 2002, together with 15 other EU member states it forms the Eurozone.


On 1 January 2002, Spain terminated its peseta currency and replaced it with the euro, which it shares with 15 other countries in the Eurozone. Spain has also seen strong economic growth, well above the EU average, but concerns are growing that the extraordinary property boom and high foreign trade deficits of recent years may bring this to an end.[31]
A series of bombs exploded in commuter trains in Madrid, Spain on 11 March 2004. After a five month trial in 2007 it was concluded the bombings were perpetrated by a local Islamist militant group inspired by al-Qaeda.[32] The bombings killed 191 people and wounded more than 1800, and the intention of the perpetrators may have been to influence the outcome of the Spanish general election, held three days later.[33] Though initial suspicions focused on the Basque group ETA, evidence soon emerged indicating possible Islamist involvement. Because of the proximity of the election, the issue of responsibility quickly became a political controversy, with the main competing parties PP and PSOE exchanging accusations over the handling of the aftermath.[34] At the 14 March elections, PSOE, led by José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, obtained a large plurality, enough to form a new cabinet with Rodríguez Zapatero as the new Presidente del Gobierno or prime minister of Spain, thus succeeding the former PP administration.[35]

Politics
Main article: Politics of Spain

Constitution
Main article: Spanish Constitution of 1978




King Juan Carlos I






José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, President of the Government.


The Spanish Constitution of 1978 is the culmination of the Spanish transition to democracy. The constitutional history of Spain dates back to the constitution of 1812. After the death of Francisco Franco in 1975, a general election in 1977 convened the Constituent Cortes (the Spanish Parliament, in its capacity as a constitutional assembly) for the purpose of drafting and approving the constitution of 1978.
As a result, Spain is now composed of 17 autonomous communities and two autonomous cities with varying degrees of autonomy thanks to its Constitution, which nevertheless explicitly states the indivisible unity of the Spanish nation as well as that Spain has today no official religion but all are free to practice and believe as they wish.

Government
Spain is a constitutional monarchy, with a hereditary monarch and a bicameral parliament, the Cortes Generales. The executive branch consists of a Council of Ministers presided over by the President of Government (comparable to a prime minister), proposed by the monarch and elected by the National Assembly following legislative elections.
The legislative branch is made up of the Congress of Deputies (Congreso de los Diputados) with 350 members, elected by popular vote on block lists by proportional representation to serve four-year terms, and a Senate (Senado) with 259 seats of which 208 are directly elected by popular vote and the other 51 appointed by the regional legislatures to also serve four-year terms.

Head of State

King Juan Carlos I, since 22 November 1975


Head of Government

President of the Government: José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, elected 14 March 2004.

First Vice President and Minister of Presidency: María Teresa Fernández de la Vega.
Second Vice President and Minister of Economy and Finance: Pedro Solbes.




Cabinet

Council of Ministers (Spanish Consejo de Ministros) designated by the president.



The Spanish nation is organizationally composed in the form of called Estado de las Autonomías ("State of Autonomies"); it is one of the most decentralized countries in Europe, along with Switzerland, Germany and Belgium;[36] for example, all Autonomous Communities have their own elected parliaments, governments, public administrations, budgets, and resources; therefore, health and education systems among others are managed regionally, besides, the Basque Country and Navarre also manage their own public finances based on foral provisions. In Catalonia and the Basque Country, a full fledged autonomous police corps replaces some of the State police functions (see Mossos d'Esquadra and Ertzaintza).
See also: List of Spanish monarchs and Monarchs of Spain family tree

Administrative divisions




Galicia


Navarre


Madrid


La Rioja


Aragon


Catalonia


Valencia


Castilla
La Mancha


Extremadura


Portugal


Castilla
y León


Asturias


Cantabria


Basque Country


Murcia


Andalusia


Ceuta


Melilla


France


Balearic
Islands


Canary
Islands


Mediterranean Sea


Bay of Biscay


Atlantic
Ocean


Andorra


Atlantic
Ocean
































































Main articles: Autonomous communities of Spain and Provinces of Spain
Spain is politically organized into 17 autonomous communities (comunidades autónomas) and 2 autonomous cities (ciudades autónomas) - Ceuta and Melilla.
Administratively Spain also comprises fifty provinces. Seven autonomous communities are composed of only one province: Asturias, Balearic Islands, Cantabria, La Rioja, Madrid, Murcia, and Navarre.
Historically, some provinces are also divided into comarcas (roughly equivalent to a US "county" or an English district). The lowest administrative division of Spain is the municipality (municipio).

Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of Spain




Spain is a founding member of the European Union in 1993 and signed the Maastricht Treaty.


After the return of democracy following the death of Franco in 1975, Spain's foreign policy priorities were to break out of the diplomatic isolation of the Franco years and expand diplomatic relations, enter the European Community, and define security relations with the West.
As a member of NATO since 1982, Spain has established itself as a major participant in multilateral international security activities. Spain's EU membership represents an important part of its foreign policy. Even on many international issues beyond western Europe, Spain prefers to coordinate its efforts with its EU partners through the European political cooperation mechanisms.
With the normalization of diplomatic relations with North Korea in 2001, Spain completed the process of universalizing its diplomatic relations.
Spain has maintained its special identification with Latin America. Its policy emphasizes the concept of an Iberoamerican community, essentially the renewal of the historically liberal concept of hispanoamericanismo, or hispanism as it is often referred to in English, which has sought to link the Iberian peninsula with Latin America through language, commerce, history and culture. Spain has been an effective example of transition from dictatorship to democracy for formerly non-democratic South American states, as shown in the many trips that Spain's King and Prime Ministers have made to the region.

Territorial disputes

Territory claimed by Spain
Spain claims Gibraltar, a 6 square km Overseas Territory of the United Kingdom in the southernmost part of the Iberian Peninsula which was conquered by Britain from Spain in 1704 during the War of the Spanish Succession, along with the Spanish island of Minorca (which had also been invaded but was reconquered in 1782 and finally ceded back to Spain in 1802 by the Treaty of Amiens).
The legal situation concerning Gibraltar was settled in 1713 by the Treaty of Utrecht, in which Spain ceded the territory in perpetuity to the British Crown[37] stating that, should the British abandon this post, it would return to Spanish sovereignty. Ever since the 1940s Spain has called for the return of Gibraltar. The overwhelming majority of Gibraltarians strongly oppose this, along with any proposal of shared sovereignty.[38] UN resolutions call on the United Kingdom and Spain, both EU members, to reach an agreement over the status of Gibraltar.[39]

Spanish territories claimed by other countries
Morocco claims the Spanish cities of Ceuta and Melilla and the plazas de soberanía islets off the northern coast of Africa. Portugal does not recognise Spain's sovereignty over the territory of Olivenza.




Emblem of Spanish Armed Forces



Military
Main article: Spanish Armed Forces
The armed forces of Spain are known as the Spanish Armed Forces (Spanish: Fuerzas Armadas Españolas). Their Commander-in-chief is the King of Spain, Juan Carlos I.[40]
The Spanish Armed Forces are divided into three branches:[41]

Army (Ejército de Tierra)
Navy (Armada)
Air Force (Ejército del Aire)


Economy
Main articles: Economy of Spain and Renewable energy in Spain




View of Madrid, from Edificio Carrión (a downtown building) to the north. At the left, Cuatro Torres Business Area buildings. At the right, AZCA business park, and in it, Torre Picasso (white skyscraper).


According to the World Bank, Spain's economy is the eighth largest worldwide and the fifth largest in Europe. As of 2007, absolute GDP was valued at $1,439,000 trillion according to the CIA Factbook, (see List of countries by GDP (nominal)). The per capita PPP is estimated at $33,600 (2007), ahead of G7 countries like Italy at $30,900 (2007), France at $32,600 (2007), or Japan at $33,500 (2007). The Spanish economy grew 3.8% in 2007 outpacing all G7 members and all the big EU economies for the 3rd consecutive year. Spain is also the 3rd largest world investor.[42]
The centre-right government of former prime minister José María Aznar worked successfully to gain admission to the group of countries launching the euro in 1999. Unemployment stood at 7.6% in October 2006, a rate that compares favorably to many other European countries, and which is a marked improvement over rates that exceeded 20% in the early 1990s. Perennial weak points of Spain's economy include high inflation,[43] a large underground economy,[44] and an education system which OECD reports place among the poorest for developed countries, together with the United States and UK.[45] Nevertheless, it is expected that the Spanish economy will continue growing above the EU average based on the strengthening of industry, the growth of the global economy and increasing trade with Latin America and Asia.
The Spanish economy is credited for having avoided the virtual zero growth rate of some of its largest partners in the EU.[46] In fact, the country's economy has created more than half of all the new jobs in the European Union over the five years ending 2005.[47] The Spanish economy has thus been regarded lately as one of the most dynamic within the EU, attracting significant amounts of foreign investment.[48] During the last four decades the Spanish tourism industry has grown to become the second biggest in the world, worth approximately 40 billion Euros, about 5% of GDP, in 2006.[49][50] More recently, the Spanish economy has benefited greatly from the global real estate boom, with construction representing 16% of GDP and 12% of employment.[49] According to calculations by the German newspaper Die Welt, Spain is on course to overtake countries like Germany in per capita income by 2011.[51] However, the downside of the real estate boom has been a corresponding rise in the levels of personal debt; as prospective homeowners struggle to meet asking prices, the average level of household debt has tripled in less than a decade. Among lower income groups, the median ratio of indebtedness to income was 125% in 2005.[52] In 2008/ 2009 the credit crunch and world recession manifested itself in Spain through a massive downturn in the property sector. However, Spain's banks and financial services largely avoided the huge problems of their counterparts in the Anglo-Saxon economies, largely due to the more vigilant regulatory regime in Spain. In fact Banco Santander actually came to the assistance of the UK government's bale-out of part of the UK banking sector. [53]
A European Commission forecast predicted Spain would enter a recession by the end of 2008.[54] According to Spain’s Finance Minister, the “Spain faces its deepest recession in half a century”.[55] Spain's government forecast the unemployment rate would rise to 16% in 2009. The ESADE business school predicts 20%.[56]

Transportation
Main article: Transport in Spain




Night view of Gran Vía (a downtown avenue) in Madrid from Edificio Carrión.





This section requires expansion.


Spain aims to put 1 million electric cars on the road by 2014 as part of the government’s plan to save energy and boost energy efficiency.[57] The Minister of Industry Miguel Sebastian said that "the electric vehicle is the future and the engine of an industrial revolution." [58]

Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Spain




Geographical distribution of the Spanish population in 2007


In 2008 Spain officially reached 46 million people registered at the Padrón municipal, an official record analogous to the British Register office.[59] Spain's population density, at 91/km² (235/sq mi), is lower than that of most Western European countries and its distribution along the country is very unequal. With the exception of the region surrounding the capital, Madrid, the most populated areas lie around the coast.
The population of Spain doubled during the 20th century, due to the spectacular demographic boom in the 1960s and early 1970s. The pattern of growth was extremely uneven due to large-scale internal migration from the rural interior to the industrial cities during this period. No fewer than eleven of Spain's fifty provinces saw an absolute decline in population over the century. Then, after the birth rate plunged in the 80s and Spain's population growth rate dropped, a new population increase started based initially on the return of many Spaniards who had emigrated to other European countries during the 70s. More recently, it has been boosted by a large numbers of immigrants, mostly from Latin America (39%), Eastern Europe (15%), North Africa (16%) and Sub-Saharan Africa (4%).[60] In 2005, Spain instituted a 3-month amnesty program through which certain hitherto undocumented aliens were granted legal residency. Also there are some significant pockets of population that have come from other EU countries - 21% of foreign residents - especially on the Mediterranean costas and Balearic islands, where many Europeans choose to live their retirement or telework. These are mostly English, French, German, and Dutch and, from outside the EU, Norwegian.




Gran Vía, one of the main streets in Madrid, the largest city and capital of Spain




Pos.
City
Region
Prov.
population


1
Madrid
Madrid
Madrid
3,232,463


2
Barcelona
Catalonia
Barcelona
1,595,110


3
Valencia
Valencian Community
Valencia
797,654


4
Seville
Andalusia
Seville
699,145


5
Zaragoza
Aragon
Zaragoza
654,390


6
Málaga
Andalusia
Málaga
561,250


7
Murcia
Murcia
Murcia
422,861


8
Palma de Mallorca
Balearic Islands
Palma de Mallorca
413,781


9
Las Palmas de Gran Canaria
Canary Islands
Las Palmas
377,203


10
Bilbao
Basque Country
Bilbao
353,168



Metropolitan areas


Pos.
City(ies)
Region
Prov.
population


1
Madrid
Madrid
Madrid
5,883,521


2
Barcelona
Catalonia
Barcelona
3,150,380


3
Valencia
Valencian Community
Valencia
1,810,663


4
Seville
Andalusia
Seville
1,438,451


5
Málaga
Andalusia
Málaga
965,371


6
Bilbao
Basque Country
Bilbao
949,939


7
Oviedo-Gijón
Asturias
Oviedo
857,495


8
Alicante-Elche
Valencian Community
Alicante
725,395


9
Zaragoza
Aragon
Zaragoza
688,643


10
Vigo
Galicia
Pontevedra
659,632



Immigration
Main article: Immigration to Spain
According to the Spanish government there were 4.5 million foreign residents in Spain in 2007; independent estimates put the figure at 4.8 million people, or 11% of the total population.[61] According to residence permit data for 2005, about 500,000 were Moroccan, another 500,000 were Ecuadorian, more than 200,000 were Romanian, and 260,000 were Colombian. Other sizeable foreign communities are British (8%), French (8%), Argentine (6%), German (6%) and Bolivian (3%). Since 2000, Spain has experienced high population growth as a result of immigration flows, despite a birth rate that is only half the replacement level. This sudden and ongoing inflow of immigrants, particularly those arriving clandestinely by sea, has caused noticeable social tension.[62]
Within the EU, Spain has the second highest immigration rate in percentage terms after Cyprus, but by a great margin, the highest in actual numbers of immigrants.[63] There are a number of reasons for the high level of immigration, including Spain's cultural ties with Latin America, its geographical position, the porosity of its borders, the large size of its underground economy and the strength of the agricultural and construction sectors which demand more low cost labour than can be offered by the national workforce. Another statistically significant factor is the large number of residents of EU origin typically retiring to Spain's Mediterranean coast. In fact, Spain was Europe's largest absorber of migrants from 2002 to 2007, with its immigrant population more than doubling as 2.5 million people arrived.[64] According to the Financial Times, Spain is the most favoured destination for West Europeans considering a move from their own country and seeking jobs elsewhere in the EU.[65]
The number of immigrants in Spain has grown up from 500,000 people in 1996 to 5.2 million in 2008 out of a total population of 46 million.[66][67] In 2005 alone, a regularisation programme increased the legal immigrant population by 700,000 people.[68] Unemployment among immigrants has risen 67% in 2007. Spain's new Plan of Voluntary Return encourages immigrants to leave Spain for three years and offers up to €25,000, but so far, only 186 Ecuadorans have signed up to return.[69][70] In the program's first two months last year, just 1,400 immigrants took up the offer.[71]

Minority groups
Spain has a number of descendants of populations from former colonies (especially Equatorial Guinea) and immigrants from several Sub-Saharan and Caribbean countries have been recently settling in Spain. There are also sizeable numbers of Asian immigrants, most of whom are of Chinese, Filipino, Middle Eastern, Pakistani and Indian origins; the population of Spaniards of Latin American descent is sizeable as well and a fast growing segment. Other growing groups are Britons, 760,000 in 2006, Germans and other immigrants from the rest of Europe.[72] Modern Jewish community in Spain has been formed in three waves: migration from what was formerly Spanish Morocco, the flight of Jews escaping from Nazi repression, and immigration from Argentina. Spanish law allows Sephardi Jews to claim Spanish citizenship. The arrival of the Gitanos, a Romani people, began in the 16th century; estimates of the Spanish Gitano population fluctuate around 700,000.[73]

Peoples
Main articles: Spanish people and Nationalisms and regionalisms of Spain
The Spanish Constitution of 1978, in its second article, recognises historic entities ("nationalities", a carefully chosen word in order to avoid the more politically charged "nations") and regions, within the context of the Spanish nation. For some people, Spain's identity consists more of an overlap of different regional identities than of a sole Spanish identity. Indeed, some of the regional identities may even conflict with the Spanish one.[clarification needed] Distinct cultural groups within Spain include the Basques, Catalans, and Galicians.[74]
It is this last feature of "shared identity" between the more local level or Autonomous Community and the Spanish level which makes the identity question in Spain complex and far from univocal.




The languages of Spain (simplified)


     Spanish official; spoken all over the country      Catalan/Valencian, co-official      Basque, co-official      Galician, co-official
     Aranese, co-official (dialect of Occitan)      Asturian, recognised      Aragonese, unofficial      Leonese, unofficial      Extremaduran, unofficial      Fala, unofficial






Languages
Main article: Languages of Spain
Spanish (español or castellano, Castilian) is spoken all over the country and so is the only language with official status nationwide. Other languages have been declared co-official, along with Spanish, in (some of) their constituent communities where they are spoken:

Basque (euskera) (2%) in the Basque Country and Navarre;
Catalan (català) (17%) in Catalonia and the Balearic Islands; Valencian (valencià), a distinct variant of Catalan, is official in the Valencian Community;
Galician (galego) (7%)[75] in Galicia.

There are also some other surviving Romance minority languages such as the Astur-Leonese group, which includes two languages in Spain: The Asturian language (officially called "Bable") is "protected" in Asturias and Leonese Language is protected in Castile and León autonomy. Aragonese is vaguely recognized in Aragon.[76] But unlike Basque, Catalan/Valencian and Galician, they do not have any official status. This might be due to their very small number of speakers, a less significant written tradition in comparison to Catalan or Galician, and lower self-awareness of their speakers which traditionally meant lack of strong popular demand for their recognition in the regions in which they are spoken.[77] In the North African Spanish city of Melilla, Tarifit is spoken by a significant part of the population. In the tourist areas of the Mediterranean coast and the islands, English and German are widely spoken by tourists, foreign residents, and tourism workers.

Religion


Spain religiosity









Christianity

  

76%


Irreligion / others

  

19%


Islam

  

2.3%


Judaism

  

0.1%


Others

  

1.7%





Main article: Religion in Spain
Further information: History of the Jews in Spain
Although Chapter 2 of the Constitution states that no religion shall have a state character, Roman Catholicism is the main religion in the country. About 76% of Spaniards identify themselves as Catholics, about 2% identify with another religious faith, and about 19% identify themselves as non-religious. A study conducted in October 2006 by the Spanish Centre of Sociological Investigations shows that of the 76% of Spaniards who identify themselves as Catholics or with another religious faith, 54% hardly ever or never go to church, 15% go to church a few times per year, 10% a few times per month and 19% attend church every Sunday or multiple times per week. About 22% of the entire Spanish population attends religious services at least once per month.[78]
Evidence of the secular nature of contemporary Spain can be seen in the widespread support for the legalisation of same-sex marriage in Spain — over 66% of Spaniards support gay marriage according to a 2004 study by the Centre of Sociological Investigations.[79] Indeed, in June 2005 a bill was passed by 187 votes to 147 to allow gay marriage, making Spain the third country in the European Union to allow same-sex couples to marry after Belgium and the Netherlands.




A view of the Barcelona Cathedral


Protestant denominations are also present, all of them with less than 50,000 members. Evangelism has been better received among Gypsies than among the general population; pastors have integrated flamenco music in their liturgy. Taken together, all self-described "Evangelicals" slightly surpass Jehovah's Witnesses (105,000) in number. While not Protestants, about 41,000 residents of Spain are members of the The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.[80]
The recent waves of immigration have led to an increasing number of Muslims, who have about 1 million members. Muslims had not lived in Spain for centuries; however, colonial expansion in Northern and Western Africa gave some number of residents in the Spanish Morocco and the Western Sahara full citizenship. Presently, Islam is the second largest religion in Spain, accounting for approximately 2.3% of the total population.[81]
Along with these waves of immigration, a significant number of Latin American people, who tend to be strong Catholic practitioners, have helped the Catholic Church to recover.
Judaism was practically non-existent until the 19th century, when Jews were again permitted to enter the country. Currently there are around 62,000 Jews in Spain, most arrivals in the past century and some descendants of Spanish Jews and accounting for less than 1% of the total number of inhabitants. Approximately 80,000 Jews lived in Spain on the eve of the Spanish Inquisition.[82]

Culture




The Hemispheric at the Ciutat de les Arts i les Ciències, Valencia.


Main articles: Culture of Spain and UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Spain
Spain is known for its culturally diverse heritage, having been influenced by many nations and peoples throughout its history. Spanish culture has its origins in the Iberian, Celtiberian, Latin, Visigothic, Roman Catholic, and Islamic cultures. The definition of a national Spanish culture has been characterized by tension between the centralized state, dominated in recent centuries by Castile, and numerous regions and minority peoples. In addition, the history of the nation and its Mediterranean and Atlantic environment have played strong roles in shaping its culture. After Italy, Spain has the second highest number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites in the world, with a total of 40.[83]

Schools
Main article: Education in Spain
State education in Spain is free and compulsory from the age of 6 to 16. The current education system was established by an educational law of 1990, Ley Orgánica de Ordenación General del Sistema Educativo - Law on the General Organization of the Educational System.[84]




Miguel de Cervantes' Don Quixote is considered to be the first modern novel



Literature
Main article: Spanish literature
The term Spanish literature refers to literature written in the Spanish language, including literature composed in Spanish by writers not necessarily from Spain. For Spanish American literature specifically, see Latin American literature. Due to historic, geographic and generational diversity, Spanish literature has known a great number of influences and it is very diverse. Some major literary movements can be identified within it.
Miguel de Cervantes is probably Spain's most famous author and his Don Quixote is considered the most emblematic work in the canon of Spanish literature and a founding classic of Western literature.[85]

Real Academia Española
Main article: Real Academia Española
The Real Academia Española (Spanish for "Royal Spanish Academy"; RAE) is the institution responsible for regulating the Spanish language. It is based in Madrid, but is affiliated with national language academies in 21 Spanish-speaking nations through the Association of Spanish Language Academies. Its emblem is a fiery crucible, and its motto is Limpia, fija y da esplendor ("It cleans, sets, and gives splendor").[86]

Art
Main article: Spanish art
Spanish art is an important and influential type of art in Europe. Spanish art is the name given to the artistic disciplines and works developed in Spain throughout time, and those by Spanish authors worldwide. Due to historical, geographical and generational diversity, Spanish art has known a great number of influences. The Moorish heritage in Spain, especially in Andalusia, is still evident today in cities like Córdoba, Seville, and Granada. European influences include Italy, Germany and France, especially during the Baroque and Neoclassical periods.

Cinema
Main article: Cinema of Spain
Spanish cinema has achieved major international success including Oscars for recent films such as Pan's Labyrinth and Volver.[87] In the long history of Spanish cinema, the great filmmaker Luis Buñuel was the first to achieve world recognition, followed by Pedro Almodóvar in the 1980s. Spanish cinema has also seen international success over the years with films by directors like Segundo de Chomón, Florián Rey, Luis García Berlanga, Carlos Saura, Julio Medem and Alejandro Amenábar.

Architecture




Neoclassical style of the Prado Museum, by Juan de Villanueva


Main article: Spanish architecture
Spanish architecture refers to architecture carried out during any era in what is now modern-day Spain, and by Spanish architects worldwide. The term includes buildings within the current geographical limits of Spain before this name was given to those territories, whether they were called Hispania, Al-Andalus, or were formed of several Christian kingdoms.
Due to its historical and geographical diversity, Spanish architecture has drawn from a host of influences. An important provincial city founded by the Romans and with an extensive Roman era infrastructure, Córdoba became the cultural capital, including fine Arabic style architecture, during the time of the Islamic Umayyad dynasty.[88] Later Arab style architecture continued to be developed under successive Islamic dynasties, ending with the Nasrid, which built its famed palace complex in Granada. Simultaneously, the Christian kingdoms gradually emerged and developed their own styles; developing a pre-Romanesque style when for a while isolated from contemporary mainstream European architectural influences during the earlier Middle Ages, they later integrated the Romanesque and Gothic streams. There was then an extraordinary flowering of the gothic style that resulted in numerous instances being built throughout the entire territory. The Mudéjar style, from the 12th to 17th centuries, was developed by introducing Arab style motifs, patterns and elements into European architecture.
The arrival of Modernism in the academic arena produced much of the architecture of the 20th century. An influential style centered in Barcelona, known as modernisme, produced a number of important architects, of which Gaudí is one. The International style was led by groups like GATEPAC. Spain is currently experiencing a revolution in contemporary architecture and Spanish architects like Rafael Moneo, Santiago Calatrava, Ricardo Bofill as well as many others have gained worldwide renown.

Music
Main article: Music of Spain
Spanish music is often considered abroad to be synonymous with flamenco, an Andalusian musical genre, which, contrary to popular belief, is not widespread outside that region. Various regional styles of folk music abound in Aragon, Catalonia, Valencia, Castile, the Basque Country, Galicia and Asturias. Pop, rock, hip hop and heavy metal are also popular.
In the field of classical music, Spain has produced a number of noted composers such as Isaac Albéniz, Manuel de Falla and Enrique Granados and singers and performers such as José Carreras, Montserrat Caballé, Plácido Domingo, Alicia de Larrocha, Alfredo Kraus, Pau Casals, Ricardo Viñes, José Iturbi, Pablo de Sarasate, Jordi Savall and Teresa Berganza. In Spain there are over forty professional orchestras, including the Orquestra Simfònica de Barcelona, Orquesta Nacional de España and the Orquesta Sinfonica de Madrid. Major opera houses include the Teatro Real,the Gran Teatre del Liceu, Teatro Arriaga and the El Palau de les Arts Reina Sofía.

Cuisine
Main article: Spanish cuisine




The paella, typical in all Spain, principally of East country


Spanish cuisine consists of a great variety of dishes which stem from differences in geography, culture and climate. It is heavily influenced by seafood available from the waters that surround the country, and reflects the country's deep Mediterranean roots. Spain's extensive history with many cultural influences has led to a unique cuisine. In particular, three main divisions are easily identified:

Mediterranean Spain - all such coastal regions, from Catalonia to Andalusia: heavy use of seafood, such as pescaíto frito. Several cold soups like gazpacho and also many rice-based dishes like paella and arroz negro.
Inner Spain - Castile and Madrid: hot, thick soups such as the bread and chorizo-based Castilian soup, along with substantious stews such as cocido madrileño. Food is traditionally conserved by salting, like Spanish ham, or immersed in olive oil, like Manchego cheese.
Atlantic Spain - the whole Northern coast, from Galicia to Navarre: vegetable and fish-based stews like pote gallego and marmitako. Also, the lightly-cured lacón ham.


Sport
Main article: Sport in Spain
Sport in Spain has been dominated by football since the early 20th century. Basketball, tennis, cycling, handball, motorcycling and, lately, Formula 1 are also important due to presence of Spanish champions in all these disciplines. Today, Spain is a major world sports power, especially since the 1992 Summer Olympics that were hosted in Barcelona and promoted a great variety of sports in the country. The tourism industry has led to an improvement in sports infrastructure, especially for water sports, golf and skiing.

Public holidays
Main article: Public holidays in Spain
Public holidays celebrated in Spain include a mix of religious (Roman Catholic), national and regional observances. Each municipality is allowed to declare a maximum of 14 public holidays per year; up to nine of these are chosen by the national government and at least two are chosen locally.[89]

See also




Spain portal




List of Spain-related topics
Outline of Spain


Notes


^ Also serves as the Royal anthem
^ In some autonomous communities, Aranese (Occitan), Basque, Catalan/Valencian, and Galician are co-official languages. Bable and Leonese are officially recognised
^ Prior to 1999 (by law, 2002) : Spanish Peseta.
^ Except in the Canary Islands, which are in the WET time zone (UTC, UTC+1 in summer).
^ The .eu domain is also used, as it is shared with other European Union member states. Also, the .cat domain is used in Catalan-speaking territories.
^ The Spanish constitution does not establish any official denomination of the country, even though España (Spain), Estado español (Spanish State) and Nación española (Spanish Nation) are used interchangeably. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in an Ordinance published in 1984, declared that "denominations "Spain" and "Kingdom of Spain" are equally valid to designate the Spain in international treaties..."
^ The latifundia (sing., latifundium), large estates controlled by the aristocracy, were superimposed on the existing Iberian landholding system.
^ The poets Martial, Quintilian and Lucan were also born in Hispania.
^ The Moorish armies continued northwards until they were defeated in central France at the Battle of Tours in 732.
^ The Berbers soon gave up attempting to settle the harsh lands in the north of the Meseta Central handed to them by the Arab rulers.
^ It was not until the 12th century that western medieval Christendom began reaching comparable levels of sophistication, and this was due in to a great extent to the stimulus coming from Muslim Al-Andalus.
^ Initially, as the Reconquista advanced south, different religions were respected and several Castilian kings in subsequent years (Ferdinand III, Alfonso X, Peter I) named themselves 'king of the three peoples' or 'king of the three religions'. Only rarely mosques and synagogues were converted into churches before 1492, and some areas of Christian Spain had large Muslim and Jewish populations that were a substantial component in the economic activity. Indeed they brought many of the Moorish influences in art, architecture and food with them.
^ For the related expulsions that followed see Morisco.
^ By the late 16th century American silver accounted for one-fifth of Spanish government's total revenue (the rest came mainly from taxes in Spain, especially Castile) [1]. From Europe, American silver was shipped to India, China, Levant and the Ottoman Empire. The silver was used to purchase goods, as European manufactured goods were not in demand in Asia and the Middle East. From the mid-17th Century around 28 million kilograms of silver was imported to China. The Manila Galleon brought in far more silver direct from South American mines to China than the overland Silk Road, or even European trade routes in the Indian oceans could.
^ The coastal villages and towns of Spain and Mediterranean islands were frequently attacked by Barbary pirates from North Africa, who were under the aegis of the Ottoman empire. The Formentera was even temporarily left by its population and long stretches of the Spanish and Italian coasts were almost completely abandoned by their inhabitants. In 1514, 1515 and 1521 coasts of the Balearic Islands and the Spanish mainland were raided by the Turkish privateer and Ottoman admiral Hayreddin Barbarossa. According to Robert Davis between 1 million and 1.25 million Europeans were captured by North African pirates and sold as slaves during the 16th and 17th centuries. These slaves were captured mainly from seaside villages in Spain, Italy and Portugal.
^ Over a hundred thousand highly motivated Spanish Civil War veterans were to give both sides the benefit of their experience throughout the Second World War in Europe, the Eastern Front and North Africa. Many in the French Resistance and French Foreign Legion were Spanish as was the 9th Armoured Company that spearheaded Général Leclerc's 2nd Armoured Division's liberation of Paris. On the other side, some 47,000 Spaniards fought against the Soviet Union in the Wehrmacht's Blue Division (División Azul).



References


^ www.focus-migration.de: Spain
^ Spin population
^ "Official Population Figures of Spain. Population on the 1 January 2008". Instituto Nacional de Estadística de España. http://www.ine.es/jaxi/menu.do?type=pcaxis&path=%2Ft20/e260&file=inebase&L=1. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ a b c d "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". Imf.org. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2004&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=184&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&grp=0&a=&pr.x=43&pr.y=10. Retrieved on 2008-11-19. 
^ "CIA World Factbook". https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/fields/2172.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "'First west Europe tooth' found". BBC. 30 June 2007. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/6256356.stm. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ a b c d Rinehart, Robert; Seeley, Jo Ann Browning (1998). "A Country Study: Spain - Hispania". Library of Congress Country Series. http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/estoc.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ a b Payne, Stanley G. (1973). "A History of Spain and Portugal; Ch. 1 Ancient Hispania". The Library of Iberian Resources Online. http://libro.uca.edu/payne1/spainport1.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ "The Treatment of Jews in Arab/Islamic Countries". http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/anti-semitism/Jews_in_Arab_lands_(gen).html. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.  See also: "The Forgotten Refugees". http://www.theforgottenrefugees.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=66&Itemid=39. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.  and "The Almohads". http://www.myjewishlearning.com/history_community/Medieval/IntergroupTO/JewishMuslim/Almohads.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ a b c d Payne, Stanley G. (1973). "A History of Spain and Portugal; Ch. 2 Al-Andalus". The Library of Iberian Resources Online. http://libro.uca.edu/payne1/spainport1.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ Islamic and Christian Spain in the Early Middle Ages. Chapter 5: Ethnic Relations, Thomas F. Glick
^ Rinehart, Robert; Seeley, Jo Ann Browning (1998). "A Country Study: Spain - Castile and Aragon". Library of Congress Country Series. http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/estoc.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ "Ransoming Captives in Crusader Spain: The Order of Merced on the Christian-Islamic Frontier". http://libro.uca.edu/rc/rc1.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.  See also: Payne, Stanley G. (1973). "A History of Spain and Portugal; Ch. 4 Castile-León in the Era of the Great Reconquest". The Library of Iberian Resources Online. http://libro.uca.edu/payne1/spainport1.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ Payne, Stanley G. (1973). "A History of Spain and Portugal; Ch. 5 The Rise of Aragón-Catalonia". The Library of Iberian Resources Online. http://libro.uca.edu/payne1/spainport1.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ "The Black Death". Channel 4. http://www.channel4.com/history/microsites/H/history/a-b/blackdeath.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "The Treaty of Granada, 1492". Islamic Civilisation. http://www.cyberistan.org/islamic/treaty1492.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ a b Rinehart, Robert; Seeley, Jo Ann Browning (1998). "A Country Study: Spain - The Golden Age". Library of Congress Country Series. http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/estoc.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ "Imperial Spain". University of Calgary. http://www.ucalgary.ca/applied_history/tutor/eurvoya/Imperial.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ Payne, Stanley G. (1973). "A History of Spain and Portugal; Ch. 13 The Spanish Empire". The Library of Iberian Resources Online. http://libro.uca.edu/payne1/spainport1.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ Thomas, Hugh (2003). Rivers of gold: the rise of the Spanish Empire. London: George Weidenfeld & Nicholson. pp. passim. ISBN 978-0297645634. 
^ "The Seventeenth-Century Decline". The Library of Iberian resources online. http://libro.uca.edu/payne1/payne15.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ Chapter 15: A History of Spain and Portugal, Stanley G. Payne
^ Payne, Stanley G. (1973). "A History of Spain and Portugal; Ch. 14 Spanish Society and Economics in the Imperial Age". The Library of Iberian Resources Online. http://libro.uca.edu/payne1/spainport1.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ Rinehart, Robert; Seeley, Jo Ann Browning (1998). "A Country Study: Spain - Spain in Decline". Library of Congress Country Series. http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/estoc.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ Rinehart, Robert; Seeley, Jo Ann Browning (1998). "A Country Study: Spain - Bourbon Spain". Library of Congress Country Series. http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/estoc.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ Gascoigne, Bamber (1998). "History of Spain: Bourbon dynasty: from AD 1700". Library of Congress Country Series. http://www.historyworld.net/wrldhis/PlainTextHistories.asp?HistoryID=ab50&ParagraphID=iss#iss. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ (Gates 2001, p.20)
^ (Gates 2001, p.467)
^ Spanish Civil War crimes investigation launched, Telegraph, October 16, 2008
^ Spanish Civil War fighters look back, BBC News, February 23, 2003
^ Pfanner, Eric (11 July 2002). "Economy reaps benefits of entry to the 'club' : Spain's euro bonanza". International Herald Tribune. http://www.iht.com/articles/2002/07/11/a10_18.php. Retrieved on 2008-08-09.  See also: "Spain's economy / Plain sailing no longer". The Economist. 3 May 2007. http://www.economist.com/displayStory.cfm?story_id=9118701. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ "Al-Qaeda 'claims Madrid bombings'". BBC. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/3509426.stm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.  See also: "Madrid bombers get long sentences". BBC. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/7070827.stm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Del 11-M al 14-M: estrategia yihadista, elecciones generales y opinión pública". Fundación Real Instituto Elcano. http://www.realinstitutoelcano.org/wps/portal/rielcano/contenido?WCM_GLOBAL_CONTEXT=/Elcano_es/Zonas_es/Imagen+de+Espana/ARI+132-2004. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ "Spain votes under a shadow". BBC. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/3509744.stm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Spain awakes to socialist reality". BBC. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/3512222.stm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Catalonians vote for more autonomy". CNN. 18 June 2006. http://edition.cnn.com/2006/WORLD/europe/06/18/catalonia.vote/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.  See also: "Economic Survey: Spain 2005". Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development. http://www.oecd.org/document/57/0,2340,en_2649_201185_34578361_1_1_1_1,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.  and "Country Briefings: Spain". The Economist. http://www.economist.com/countries/Spain/profile.cfm?folder=Profile-FactSheet. Retrieved on 2008-08-09.  and "Swiss Experience With Decentralized Government" (PDF). The World Bank. http://www1.worldbank.org/wbiep/decentralization/Swiss%20Expertise/Muralt.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Tratado de Utretch - Gibraltar (Spanish)". mgar.net. http://www.mgar.net/docs/utrech.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ "Gibraltar rejects Spain". http://www.gibnet.com/texts/ref2.htm. 
^ "UN Consensus Resolution". The UN. http://www.gibnet.com/texts/un_cres2.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Article 62 of the Spanish Constitution of 1978". Official site of the Royal Household of HM the King. http://www.casareal.es/laCorona/laCorona-iden-idweb.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Article 8 of the Spanish Constitution of 1978". Official site of the Spanish Senate. http://www.senado.es/constitu_i/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-29. 
^ Doing Business in Spain
^ "Spain's Economy: Closing the Gap". OECD Observer. May 2005. http://www.oecdobserver.org/news/fullstory.php/aid/1592/Spain%92s_economy_.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-15. 
^ "Going Underground: America's Shadow Economy". FrontPage magazine. January 2005. http://www.frontpagemag.com/Articles/Read.aspx?GUID=3E2579A7-6002-4048-97BB-46679C5D8A88. Retrieved on 2008-08-15. 
^ "OECD report for 2006" (PDF). OECD. http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/51/21/37392840.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ "OECD figures". OECD. http://stats.oecd.org/WBOS/ViewHTML.aspx?QueryName=198&QueryType=View&Lang=en. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Economic statistics". Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2006/jul/26/spain.gilestremlett. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Official report on Spanish recent Macroeconomics, including tables and graphics" (PDF). La Moncloa. http://www.la-moncloa.es/NR/rdonlyres/2E85E75E-E2D9-4148-B1DF-950B06696A6C/74823/Chapter_2.PDF. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ a b ""Global Guru" analysis". The Global Guru. http://www.theglobalguru.com/article.php?id=60&offer=GURU001. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Economic report" (PDF). Bank of Spain. http://www.bde.es/informes/be/boleco/coye.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "No camp grows on both Right and Left" (PDF). European Foundation Intelligence Digest. http://www.europeanfoundation.org/docs/id210.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-08-09. 
^ "Bank of Spain Economic Bulletin 07/2005" (PDF). Bank of Spain. http://www.bde.es/informes/be/boleco/2005/be0507e.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ Charles Smith, article: 'Spain', in Wankel, C. (ed.) Encyclopedia of Business in Today's World, California, USA, 2009.
^ "Recession to hit Germany, UK and Spain". Financial Times. 2008-09-10. http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/cf5d0f08-7f49-11dd-a3da-000077b07658.html?nclick_check=1. Retrieved on 2008-09-11. 
^ Spain faces deepest recession in 50 years, Spanish News, January 18, 2009
^ Mounting joblessness in Spain | And worse to come, The Economist, January 22, 2009
^ "Algae Based Biofuels in Plain English: Why it Matters, How it Works. (algae algaebiofuels carbonsequestration valcent vertigro algaebasedbiofuels ethanol)". Triplepundit.com. July 30, 2008. http://www.triplepundit.com/pages/algae-based-biofuels-in-plain--003362.php. Retrieved on 2008-11-19. 
^ "Spain to Put 1 million Electric Cars on the Road". Triplepundit.com. July 30, 2008. http://www.triplepundit.com/pages/spain-to-put-1-million-electri-003363.php. Retrieved on 2008-11-19. 
^ "Population Figures". Instituto Nacional de Estadística (National Statistics Institute). http://www.ine.es/jaxi/menu.do?type=pcaxis&path=%2Ft20/e260&file=inebase&L=1. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Población extranjera por sexo, país de nacionalidad y edad". Instituto Nacional de Estadística. http://www.ine.es/inebase/cgi/axi?AXIS_PATH=/inebase/temas/t20/e245/p04/a2005/l0/&FILE_AXIS=00000010.px&CGI_DEFAULT=/inebase/temas/cgi.opt&COMANDO=SELECCION&CGI_URL=/inebase/cgi/. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "World Disasters Report 2006". Red Cross. http://www.ifrc.org/publicat/wdr2006/. Retrieved on 2008-08-14. 
^ "Avance del Padrón Municipal a 1 de enero de 2006. Datos provisionales" (PDF). Instituto Nacional de Estadística. http://www.ine.es/prodyser/pubweb/anuario06/anu06_02demog.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.  See also: "Immigration Shift: Many Latin Americans Choosing Spain Over U.S.". IMDiversity, Inc. http://www.imdiversity.com/villages/hispanic/world_international/pns_immigration_shift_1204.asp. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.  and "Spain: Immigrants Welcome". Business Week. http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/07_21/b4035066.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.  and "Immigrants Fuel Europe's Civilization Clash". MSNBC. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/14628564/site/newsweek/print/1/displaymode/1098/. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.  and "Spanish youth clash with immigrant gangs". International Herald Tribune. http://www.iht.com/articles/2007/01/22/news/spain.php. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Population in Europe in 2005" (PDF). Eurostat. http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/cache/ITY_OFFPUB/KS-NK-06-001/EN/KS-NK-06-001-EN.PDF. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Population series from 1998". INE Spanish Statistical Institute. http://www.ine.es/inebase/cgi/um?M=%2Ft20%2Fe245%2Fp08%2F&O=pcaxis&N=&L=0. Retrieved on 2008-08-14. 
^ "Europeans Favour Spain for Expat Jobs". News.bg. http://international.ibox.bg/news/id_1406161495. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ Spain to increase immigration budget, October 10, 2007
^ Spain’s Immigration System Runs Amok, September 17, 2008
^ Spain grants amnesty to 700,000 migrants
^ Spain Tries to Buy Out Immigrants, TIME, October 20, 2008
^ Madrid to pay surplus immigrant tradesman to go home, come back later, globeandmail.com, October 9, 2008
^ Spain's Jobs Crisis Leaves Immigrants Out of Work, The Wall Street Journal, January 24, 2009
^ "Immigration statistics". BBC. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/6161705.stm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "The Situation of Roma in Spain" (PDF). Open Society Institute. http://www.eumap.org/reports/2002/eu/international/sections/spain/2002_m_spain.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-08-14. 
^ "Kingdom of Spain: People". US Department of State. http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/2878.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ CIA - The World Factbook -- Spain
^ "Junta General del Principado de Asturias". Junta General del Principado de Asturias. http://www.jgpa.es/portal.do?TR=C&IDR=45. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Languages of Spain map". Proel. http://www.proel.org/lenguas2.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-15. 
^ "October poll, questions 32 and 32a" (PDF). Centre of Sociological Investigations. http://mas.lne.es/documentos/archivos/20-11-06-cis.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Centre of Sociological Investigations". Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas. http://www.cis.es/cis/opencms/EN/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Spain". The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. http://newsroom.lds.org/ldsnewsroom/eng/contact-us/spain. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Muslims in Europe: Country guide". BBC. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/4385768.stm#spain. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ Kamen, Henry (1999). The Spanish Inquisition: A Historical Revision. Yale University Press. pp. pp.29–31. 
^ "World Heritage List". UNESCO. http://whc.unesco.org/en/list. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "Spain Education System". SpainExchange.com. http://www.spainexchange.com/educator_info/spain_education.php. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ "The top 100 books of all time". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2002/may/08/books.booksnews. Retrieved on 2008-08-14. 
^ "Origins". Real Academia Española. http://www.rae.es/rae/gestores/gespub000001.nsf/voTodosporId/CEDF300E8D943D3FC12571360037CC94?OpenDocument&i=0. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 
^ Jordan, Barry; Rikki Morgan-Tamosunas (1998). Contemporary spanish cinema. Manchester University Press. 
^ Cruz, Jo (1999). Edited by David R. Blanks and Michael Frassetto. ed. Western Views of Islam in Medieval and Early Modern Europe: Perception and Other. New York: Saint Martin's Press. pp. 56. 
^ "Bank holidays in Spain". bank-holidays.com. http://www.bank-holidays.com/holidays_2007_58.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13. 



Gates, David (2001). The Spanish Ulcer: A History of the Peninsular War. Da Capo Press. pp. p.20. ISBN 0-306-81083-2. 


External links

Find more about Spain on Wikipedia's sister projects:
 Definitions from Wiktionary
 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
 Learning resources from Wikiversity

Government


administracion.es e-government Portal
Chief of State and Cabinet Members
Casa Real.es Spanish Royal Family
La Moncloa.es Prime Minister
Congreso de los Diputados Congress of Deputies
El Senado Senate
Ministerio de Asuntos Exteriores Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Agencia Estatal de Administración Tributaria Tax Agency
INEBase National Institute of Statistics


General information


Spain from Encyclopaedia Britannica
Country Briefing from the The Economist
Spain entry at The World Factbook
Spain from the United States Department of State
Country Study from the U.S. Library of Congress (December 1988)
Spain from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Spain at the Open Directory Project
Wikimedia Atlas of Spain
Maps of Spain: satellite images, relief maps, outlines and themed maps of Spanish autonomous communities, provinces and municipalities


News media


Local Spanish news and features


Travel


Official Website of Tourism in Spain
Spain travel guide from Wikitravel


Other


IberiaNature A guide to the environment, geography, climate, wildlife, natural history and landscape of Spain
Languages of Spain
History of Spain Primary history documents
Dates in Spanish history









v • d • e

 Spain topics





History

Prehistoric Iberia · Roman Hispania · Medieval Spain · Kingdom · Expansion · Enlightenment · Reaction and revolution · First Spanish Republic · Restoration · Second Spanish Republic · Civil War · Spain under Franco · Transition to democracy · Modern Spain






Politics

Constitution · Monarch · Government · General Courts · Political parties · Elections · People's Defender · Human rights · Foreign relations






Geography

Autonomous communities · Autonomous cities (Plazas de soberanía) · Provinces · Comarcas (districts) · Municipalities · Islands · Extreme points · National Parks






Economy

History · Euro (Spanish coins) · Bank of Spain






Demographics

People · Languages · Immigration · Nationalisms and regionalisms · Religion · Education






Culture

Architecture · Art · Bullfighting · Castles · Cathedrals · Cinema · Cuisine · Public holidays · Holy Week · Falles · Flamenco · Instituto Cervantes · Literature · Myths and legends · Moros y Cristianos · Music · San Fermín






Other topics

Communications · Military · Sport · Transport · Tourism






Portal












v • d • e

Countries of Europe








Albania · Andorra · Armenia2 · Austria · Azerbaijan1 · Belarus · Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus2 · Czech Republic · Denmark3 · Estonia · Finland · France1 · Georgia1 · Germany · Greece  · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy1 · Kazakhstan1 · Kosovo5 · Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Macedonia4 · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands3 · Norway3 · Poland · Portugal3 · Romania · Russia1 · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia · Slovenia · Spain1 · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey1 · Ukraine · United Kingdom3 · Vatican City
1 Has part of its territory outside Europe.  2 Entirely in West Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe.  3 Has dependencies or similar territories outside Europe. 4 Name disputed by Greece; see Macedonia naming dispute. 5 Declared independence from Serbia on February 17, 2008 and is recognised by 56 United Nations member states.















v • d • e

Countries and territories bordering the Mediterranean Sea






Albania • Algeria • Bosnia-Herzegovina • Croatia • Cyprus • Egypt • France • Gibraltar • Greece • Israel • Italy • Lebanon • Libya • Malta • Monaco • Montenegro • Morocco • Palestinian Authority • Slovenia • Spain • Syria • Tunisia • Turkey • Akrotiri / Dhekelia













v • d • e

Monarchies





Geography

Africa · Americas · Europe · Oceania









Absolute

Brunei · Saudi Arabia · Swaziland · Vatican City






Constitutional

Antigua and Barbuda · Australia · Andorra · Bahamas · Bahrain · Barbados · Belize · Belgium · Bhutan · Cambodia · Canada · Denmark · Grenada · Jamaica · Japan1 · Jordan · Kuwait · Liechtenstein · Lesotho · Luxembourg · Malaysia · Monaco · Morocco · Netherlands · New Zealand · Norway · Oman2 · Papua New Guinea · Qatar2 · Spain · Saint Kitts and Nevis · Saint Lucia · Saint Vincent and the Grenadines · Solomon Islands · Sweden · Thailand · Tonga · Tuvalu · United Arab Emirates3 · United Kingdom






Elective

Andorra · Cambodia · Kuwait · Malaysia · Swaziland · United Arab Emirates3 · Vatican City






Subnational





Ghana


Ashanti · Dagbon







Malaysia


Johor · Kedah · Kelantan · Negeri Sembilan · Pahang · Perak · Perlis · Selangor · Terengganu







Nigeria


Ibadan · Nri · Kano · Sokoto Caliphate · Lagos







Uganda


Ankole · Buganda · Bunyoro · Busoga · Toro







United Arab Emirates


Abu Dhabi · Ajman · Dubai · Fujairah · Ras al-Khaimah · Sharjah · Umm al-Qaiwain







Wallis and Futuna


Alo · Sigave · Uvea







Others


Māori (New Zealand) · Yogyakarta (Indonesia) · Zululand (South Africa) · Barotseland (Zambia)









Italics indicate Commonwealth realms, which each share the same monarch as head of state.
1 Monarch debatable as Head of State.   2 Technically constitutional, but effectively absolute.   3 Uses the title President.












v • d • e

Member states of the European Union








Austria · Belgium · Bulgaria · Cyprus · Czech Republic · Denmark · Estonia · Finland · France · Germany · Greece · Hungary · Ireland · Italy · Latvia · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Malta · Netherlands · Poland · Portugal · Romania · Slovakia · Slovenia · Spain · Sweden · United Kingdom








Member states by accession · by political system · by population · by GDP












v • d • e

Member states of the Council of Europe






Albania · Andorra · Armenia · Austria · Azerbaijan · Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus · Czech Republic · Denmark · Estonia · Finland · France · Georgia · Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Macedonia1 · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands · Norway · Poland · Portugal · Romania · Russia · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia · Slovenia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey · Ukraine · United Kingdom







Observer member status: Argentina · Canada · Chile · Israel · Japan · Mexico · Morocco · United States of America · Vatican City
1 Provisionally referred to by the Council of Europe as the "former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia"; see Macedonia naming dispute.














v • d • e

Members of the World Trade Organization (WTO)








Albania · Angola · Antigua and Barbuda · Argentina · Armenia · Australia · Bahrain · Bangladesh · Barbados · Belize · Benin · Bolivia · Botswana · Brazil · Brunei · Burkina Faso · Burma · Burundi · Cambodia · Cameroon · Canada · Cape Verde · Central African Republic · Chad · Chile · PR China · Colombia · Democratic Republic of the Congo · Republic of the Congo · Costa Rica · Côte d'Ivoire · Croatia · Cuba · Djibouti · Dominica · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · Egypt · El Salvador · European Union¹ · Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) · Fiji · Gabon · The Gambia · Georgia · Ghana · Grenada · Guatemala · Guinea · Guinea-Bissau · Guyana · Haiti · Honduras · Hong Kong² · Iceland · India · Indonesia · Israel · Jamaica · Japan · Jordan · Kenya · South Korea · Kuwait · Kyrgyzstan · Lesotho · Liechtenstein · Macau² · Madagascar · Malawi · Malaysia · Maldives · Mali · Mauritania · Mauritius · Mexico · Moldova · Mongolia · Morocco · Mozambique · Namibia · Nepal · New Zealand · Nicaragua · Niger · Nigeria · Norway · Oman · Pakistan · Panama · Papua New Guinea · Paraguay · Peru · Philippines · Qatar · Rwanda · St. Kitts and Nevis · St. Lucia · St. Vincent and the Grenadines · Saudi Arabia · Senegal · Sierra Leone · Singapore · Solomon Islands · South Africa · Sri Lanka · Suriname · Swaziland · Switzerland · Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, and Matsu³ · Tanzania · Thailand · Togo · Tonga · Trinidad and Tobago · Tunisia · Turkey · Uganda · Ukraine · United Arab Emirates · United States · Uruguay · Venezuela · Vietnam · Zambia · Zimbabwe


All twenty-seven member states of the European Union are also members of the WTO in their own right: Austria • Belgium • Bulgaria • Cyprus • Czech Republic • Denmark • Estonia • Finland • France • Germany • Greece • Hungary • Ireland • Italy • Latvia • Lithuania • Luxembourg • Malta • Netherlands and Netherlands Antilles • Poland • Portugal • Romania • Slovakia • Slovenia • Spain • Sweden • United Kingdom.
Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China.
Designated name for the Republic of China (Commonly Known as Taiwan)















v • d • e

Members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)






Albania · Belgium · Bulgaria · Canada · Croatia · Czech Republic · Denmark · Estonia · France · Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Italy · Latvia · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Netherlands · Norway · Poland · Portugal · Romania · Slovakia · Slovenia · Spain · Turkey · United Kingdom · United States














v • d • e

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)








Australia · Austria · Belgium · Canada · Czech Republic · Denmark · Finland · France · Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Japan · South Korea · Luxembourg · Mexico · Netherlands · New Zealand · Norway · Poland · Portugal · Slovakia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey · United Kingdom · United States















v • d • e

Latin Union





Member Nations

Andorra · Angola · Bolivia · Brazil · Cape Verde · Chile · Colombia · Costa Rica · Côte d'Ivoire · Cuba · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · El Salvador · France · Guatemala · Guinea-Bissau · Haiti · Honduras · Italy · Mexico · Moldova · Monaco · Mozambique · Nicaragua · Panama · Paraguay · Peru · Philippines · Portugal · Romania · San Marino · São Tomé and Príncipe · Senegal · Spain · East Timor · Uruguay · Venezuela






Permanent Observers

Argentina · Holy See · Sovereign Military Order of Malta






Official languages

Catalan · French · Italian · Portuguese · Romanian · Spanish






   



Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spain"
Categories: Spain | Spanish-speaking countries | Constitutional monarchies | Liberal democraciesHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages | Articles containing Latin language text | Articles containing Spanish language text | Articles including recorded pronunciations | Articles to be expanded since March 2009 | All articles to be expanded | All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2009 | Articles containing Basque language text | Articles containing Galician language text 






Views


Article
Discussion
View source
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
Armãneashce
Arpetan
Asturianu
Avañe'ẽ
Aymar aru
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bikol Central
Bislama
Boarisch
བོད་ཡིག
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Chamoru
Chavacano de Zamboanga
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deitsch
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
Diné bizaad
Dolnoserbski
ཇོང་ཁ
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Fiji Hindi
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
ગુજરાતી
𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺
Hak-kâ-fa
한국어
Hawai`i
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut
Иронау
isiZulu
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ಕನ್ನಡ
Kapampangan
ქართული
कश्मीरी - (كشميري)
Kaszëbsczi
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kinyarwanda
Кыргызча
Kiswahili
Коми
Kongo
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Ladino
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lingála
Lojban
Magyar
Македонски
Malagasy
മലയാളം
Malti
Māori
मराठी
مصرى
مَزِروني
Bahasa Melayu
Монгол
Nāhuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
नेपाली
नेपाल भाषा
日本語
Nnapulitano
Нохчийн
Norfuk / Pitkern
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
O'zbek
پښتو
Piemontèis
Tok Pisin
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Ποντιακά
Português
Qırımtatarca
Reo Mā`ohi
Română
Romani
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
Gagana Samoa
संस्कृत
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Sesotho
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
SiSwati
Slovenčina
Словѣ́ньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Taqbaylit
తెలుగు
Tetun
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
lea faka-Tonga
Türkçe
Удмурт
Українська
اردو
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
Volapük
Võro
文言
West-Vlams
Winaray
Wolof
吴语
Xitsonga
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
粵語
Zazaki
Zeêuws
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 07:25.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
