













A Wrinkle in Time - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "A_Wrinkle_in_Time";
		var wgTitle = "A Wrinkle in Time";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "562222";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 284801211;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); A Wrinkle in Time

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 


A Wrinkle in Time  



A Wrinkle in Time hardcover, 1960s (same cover as first edition except for addition of the Newbery Medal)


Author
Madeleine L'Engle


Cover artist
Ellen Raskin (1960s editions),
Leo and Diane Dillon (current hardcover)


Country
United States


Language
English


Series
Time Quartet


Genre(s)
Young Adult, Science fiction novel


Publisher
Farrar, Straus & Giroux


Publication date
1962


Media type
print (hardcover and paperback)


Pages
230 pp


ISBN
ISBN 0-374-38613-7


Followed by
A Wind in the Door


A Wrinkle in Time is a science fantasy[1] novel by Madeleine L'Engle, first published in 1962.[2] The book won a Newbery Medal, Sequoyah Book Award, and Lewis Carroll Shelf Award, and was runner-up for the Hans Christian Andersen Award.[3] It is the first in L'Engle's series of books about the Murry and O'Keefe families.




Contents


1 Plot summary
2 Characters

2.1 Primary human characters

2.1.1 Meg Murry
2.1.2 Charles Wallace Murry
2.1.3 Calvin O'Keefe


2.2 Primary immortal characters

2.2.1 Mrs Whatsit
2.2.2 Mrs Who
2.2.3 Mrs Which
2.2.4 IT


2.3 Secondary human characters

2.3.1 Dr. Alexander (Alex) Murry
2.3.2 Dr. Katherine (Kate) Murry
2.3.3 Alexander (Sandy) Murry
2.3.4 Dennys Murry


2.4 Supporting alien characters


3 Locations
4 Major themes

4.1 Religious content


5 History
6 Other books in the series
7 Concerning A Wrinkle in Time
8 Audio book
9 Television movie
10 The tesseract concept
11 References
12 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Plot summary
Meg Murry is a teenage girl, regarded by her classmates and teachers as a bad-tempered adolescent. Her family recognizes her problem as a lack of emotional maturity but also regards her as being capable of great things. The family includes her pretty scientist mother, her mysteriously missing scientist father, her five year-old brother Charles Wallace Murry — a nascent super-genius — and her 10-year-old twin brothers, the athletic Sandy and Dennys.
The book begins with the line, "It was a dark and stormy night," an allusion to the opening words in Edward George Bulwer-Lytton's 1830 novel Paul Clifford. During that stormy night the Murrys are visited by an eccentric old woman named Mrs. Whatsit, who has previously made the acquaintance of Charles Wallace. After drying her feet and having a snack with Charles, Meg and their mother, Mrs. Whatsit tells an already perplexed Dr. Murry that "there is such a thing as a tesseract," which causes her to almost faint.
The next morning, Meg discovers the term refers to a scientific concept her father was working on before his mysterious disappearance. The following afternoon, Meg and Charles Wallace encounter Meg's schoolmate, Calvin O'Keefe, a high-school junior who, although he is a "big man on campus", considers himself a misfit as well. They go to visit an old haunted house near town which Charles Wallace already knows as the home of Mrs. Whatsit. There they encounter an eccentric companion of Mrs. Whatsit, a Mrs. Who. She promises that she and her friends will help Meg find and rescue her father. Meg tells Calvin a great deal about herself, including the disappearance of her father, and they become close. In the evening, Charles Wallace declares it is time for them to go on their mission to save their father. This is accompanied by the appearance of the third member of the "Mrs. Ws", Mrs. Which.
Mrs. Whatsit, Mrs. Who, and Mrs. Which turn out to be angelic beings who transport Meg, Charles Wallace, and Calvin through the universe by means of tesseract, a fifth-dimensional phenomenon explained as being similar to folding the fabric of space and time. Their first stop is the planet Uriel, a Utopian planet filled with joyous beings who live always in a state of light and love. There the "Mrs W's" reveal to the children that the universe is under attack from an evil being who appears as a large dark cloud called The Black Thing. Seeing the Black Thing even from a distance is disturbing to Meg. While working on a secret government project to achieve faster-than-light travel by tesseract, Meg's father was accidentally trapped on Camazotz, an alien planet dominated by the "Black Thing". The children are then taken elsewhere to visit a woman who is a kind of medium with a crystal ball. In it, they see that Earth is partially covered by the darkness, although great religious figures, philosophers, and artists have been fighting against it. Mrs Whatsit is revealed to be a former star who exploded in an act of self-sacrifice to fight the darkness.
The children travel to Camazotz to rescue Meg's father. They find that all the inhabitants behave in a mechanistic way and seem to be all under the control of a single mind. They look for the central headquarters on the planet (described as CENTRAL Central Intelligence) and they discover a man with red eyes with telepathic abilities who can cast a hypnotic spell over their minds. He claims to know the whereabouts of their father. Charles Wallace looks into his eyes and becomes taken over by the mind controlling the planet. Under its influence, he takes Meg and Calvin to the place where Dr. Murry is being held prisoner because he would not succumb to the group mind. The planet turns out to be controlled by an evil disembodied brain with powerful telepathic abilities, which the inhabitants of Camazotz call "IT". Charles Wallace takes them to the place where IT is held. In close proximity to IT, all of them are threatened by a possible telepathic takeover of their minds. Dr. Murray "tessers" in order to escape, but Charles Wallace is left behind, still mentally dominated by IT. The rest arrive on a dimly lit planet inhabited by sightless but wise creatures. Meg is almost paralyzed by an encounter with The Black Thing that occurred during the "tesser". She feels frozen as if all energy and heat has been drained from her. Meg recovers over a period through the helpful care of Aunt Beast, and is tessered to Camazotz with Mrs. Which, as she is the only one who can rescue Charles Wallace from IT. Confronting IT, Meg realizes that she can free her brother by loving him intensely, because love is an emotion that the evil IT cannot stand. Meg's realization comes through her recalling a Biblical verse that "God has chosen the foolish things of this world to shame the wise and the weak things of the world to shame the strong." Charles Wallace is freed, and the three Murrys and Calvin return home.

[edit] Characters
Main article: Major characters in the works of Madeleine L'Engle

[edit] Primary human characters

[edit] Meg Murry
Margaret "Meg" Murry is the outcast of the family and also the oldest child of scientists Alex and Kate Murry. Mathematically brilliant but less than adept at other subjects in school, Meg is "awkward", unpopular, and defensive around authority figures as well as her peers. Although she has the brains to accomplish difficult tasks, she rarely puts her strengths to use. She loves her family, especially her brother, Charles Wallace, and longs desperately for her missing father. Like many adolescent girls, Meg is unhappy with her physical appearance, particularly her mouse-brown, unruly hair, braces and glasses, and considers herself a "monster" in comparison with her mother. She is about fourteen years old, and is "a couple of grades" below Calvin, who is fourteen years old but in eleventh grade. Introduced on the first page of the book, she is the story's protagonist.

[edit] Charles Wallace Murry
Charles Wallace Murry is the youngest Murry child, the most extraordinary and the most vulnerable of the novel's human characters, and the youngest to journey to Camazotz. Charles Wallace did not talk at all until he was nearly four years old, at which time he began to speak in complete sentences. Now five years old, Charles Wallace seldom speaks to anyone but his family, but can empathically or telepathically "read" certain people's thoughts and feelings, and has an extraordinary vocabulary. A biological "sport," he is intellectually curious, loving, and unfazed by extraordinary people and events. He was the first to meet the Mrs W's and brought Meg to see them. Initially able to block IT out of his mind, he opens himself to the Man with Red Eyes and thus falls under IT's control. He first appears in Chapter One.

[edit] Calvin O'Keefe
Calvin O'Keefe is the third oldest of Paddy and Branwen O'Keefe's eleven children, a tall, thin, red-haired 14-year-old[4] high school junior who plays on the school basketball team. Neglected by his own family, Calvin joyfully enters the lives of the Murry family, starting in Chapter Two. He shows some signs of being able to communicate telepathically, a technique referred to in later books as kything.

[edit] Primary immortal characters




Hardcover art by Leo and Diane Dillon, showing the Mrs W's


The three characters of Mrs. Whatsit, Mrs. Who, and Mrs. Which are angelic beings who have the ability to travel at will across large stretches of time and space by dematerializing and rematerializing. They do not have a fixed physical form, but appear to humans as elderly women. However, they are capable of metamorphosing into other creatures. All of them are millennia old. Mrs. Whatsit in particular was engaged in war with The Black Thing.

[edit] Mrs Whatsit
Mrs Whatsit is first described as an elderly woman wrapped in layers of clothes and first appears in chapter one. Charles Wallace, a five year old boy in the book, found her in a 'haunted house' in the woods, where she has been living with her two friends, Mrs Who and Mrs Which. Mrs Whatsit is the youngest of the Mrs W's (despite being over 2.37 billion years old), and the best of the three at interacting with the children.
In Chapter Four, the group (Charles Wallace, Calvin, and Meg) witnesses the physical transformation of Mrs Whatsit into a centaur-like winged being on the planet Uriel. Mrs Whatsit is also revealed to have been a star that sacrificed itself by exploding in order to destroy a section of the Black Thing.

[edit] Mrs Who
Mrs Who is described as a plump woman with spectacles. She is seen quoting in Latin, Spanish, German, French, Portuguese and Greek. She also quotes William Shakespeare and the Bible repeatedly. Mrs Whatsit explains that Mrs Who finds it "difficult to verbalize" in her own words. She is first introduced in Chapter Two.

[edit] Mrs Which
Mrs Which is the oldest of the Mrs W's, and the most authoritative, although she interacts less with the children than do Mrs Whatsit and Mrs Who. Introduced at the end of Chapter Three, she is normally seen as little more than a shimmer of light or a shadow. Mrs Which seldom fully materializes, but in human form she resembles a stereotyped witch in black robe and peaked hat, probably a pun of "which" and "witch". She finds it hard to think as a corporeal being. In Chapter Five, she accidentally takes Charles, Meg, and Calvin to a two-dimensional world. Her speech is written with doubled letters, and described as "authoritative"; she admits that "thee llanguage of worrds" is difficult for her. Nevertheless, Meg quickly decides that she is "someone in whom one could put complete trust."

[edit] IT




Current book cover art by Taeeun Yoo, showing the Mrs W's (at the left) and the children at the CENTRAL Central Intelligence building (at the right)


IT is the bodiless telepathic brain that dominates the planet of Camazotz. IT speaks through The Man With Red Eyes and later through Charles Wallace, and is functionally part of the interstellar cloud of evil called the Black Thing. IT is described as slightly larger than a human brain. Housed near the "CENTRAL Central Intelligence" building, IT is said to pulse and quiver on ITs dais. ITs aim is to enforce absolute conformity on Camazotz, with the claimed benefit of eliminating war, unhappiness and inefficiency. However, IT is aware of ITs cruelty, referring to "ITself" as "the Happiest Sadist". 
[edit] Secondary human characters

[edit] Dr. Alexander (Alex) Murry
Dr. Alexander (Alex) Murry is an astrophysicist, researching the mysteries of the space/time continuum, specifically five-dimensional means of travel between planets. He is also the father of Meg, Sandy, Dennys and Charles Wallace. He has been missing for some time as the novel opens. Not even his government colleagues know where he is. His first name is revealed in the fifth and last Time novel An Acceptable Time. In the television adaptation of A Wrinkle in Time, he is renamed Jack. He first appears in a flashback in Chapter One.

[edit] Dr. Katherine (Kate) Murry
Dr. Kate Murry is a microbiologist, wife of Dr. Alexander Murry, and mother of the four Murry children. She is considered beautiful by the Murry children and others, having "flaming red hair" and violet eyes. Her physical attractiveness, academic and scientific accomplishments give Meg a bit of an inferiority complex. She is introduced in Chapter One, and usually referred to as Mrs. Murry. As in her husband's case, her first name is given in the subsequently published An Acceptable Time. The television version of her character is renamed Dana.

[edit] Alexander (Sandy) Murry
Sandy Murry and his twin brother Dennys are the middle children in the Murry family, older than Charles Wallace but younger than Meg. They are 10 years old at the time of this book. Sandy is named after his father, Dr. Alex Murry. Although they are certainly intelligent, Sandy and his twin are considered the "normal" children in the family: B students, good at sports, and well able to fit in with their peers. Of the twins, Sandy is generally the leader, and the more pragmatic of the two. He and Dennys first appear in Chapter Two.

[edit] Dennys Murry
Dennys Murry is the twin of Sandy Murry. Dennys and his twin are usually inseparable, with Dennys generally following Sandy's lead. However, Dennys is slightly less skeptical than his brother about the strange theories and even stranger adventures of Meg and Charles Wallace. (Note: The name Dennys is a shortened version of "Dionysus",which is the name of a Greek god, but is pronounced the same way as the more common spelling Dennis.)

[edit] Supporting alien characters
The Happy Medium lives in a cavern on a planet in Orion's Belt. Human in appearance, she is described as wearing a satin gown and a silk turban, and uses a crystal ball to look at distant places and people. Her title comes from the character's jolly temperament, and her preference for looking at happy things. She is introduced in chapter five. (The name "Happy Medium" is a pun alluding to the common expression for reaching an acceptable compromise: "to find a happy medium.")
Aunt Beast is a character who takes care of Meg on the planet Ixchel after Meg is "frozen" by the Black Thing. Introduced in chapter ten, the character has four arms, no eyes or mouth, and numerous long, waving tentacles instead of fingers. Tall, gray in color, sightless and telepathic, Aunt Beast has a motherly, nurturing attitude toward Meg. The name Aunt Beast is one that Meg and the alien come up with together, based on the character's perusal of Meg's mind. The character's actual name, if any, is not given.

[edit] Locations
Main article: Places in the works of Madeleine L'Engle
Early scenes in the novel take place in and around an unnamed village, later established in An Acceptable Time as being in Connecticut. The nearly 200-year-old Murry farmhouse have parallels in the Austin family series of books and in L'Engle's own Connecticut home, Crosswicks.[5]
When Meg, Calvin and Charles Wallace travel to other planets, the ones whose names are given include the following:

Camazotz – A planet of extreme, enforced conformity, ruled by a disembodied brain called IT. Camazotz is similar to Earth, with familiar trees such as birches, pines, and maples, an ordinary hill on which the children arrive, and a town with smokestacks, which "might have been one of any number of familiar towns". The horror of the place arises from its ordinary appearance, endlessly duplicated. Thus, the houses are "all exactly alike, small square boxes painted gray"; this characterization has been compared with "the burgeoning American suburbia"[6] such as the post-war housing developments of Levittown, Pennsylvania. The people who live in the houses are similarly described, with "mother figures" who "all gave the appearance of being the same". Camazotz has also been compared with "an early sixties American image of life in a Communist state", a characterization partially dismissed as too glib.[7] The name Camazotz refers to a Mayan bat god, one of L'Engle's many mythological allusions in her nomenclature.[8]
Ixchel – A planet of muted colors, inhabited by tall, sightless creatures with tentacles. It orbits the same sun as Camazotz. The name Ixchel refers to a Mayan jaguar goddess of medicine.[8]
Uriel – A planet with extremely tall mountains, an allusion to the Archangel Uriel. It is inhabited by creatures that resemble winged centaurs. It is the third planet of the Star Malak in the spiral nebula Messier 101. The site of Mrs Whatsit's temporary transformation into one of these winged creatures, it is the place where "the guardian angels" (i.e. the Mrs Ws, who are explicitly referred to as such by Calvin later in the book) "show the questers a vision of the universe that is obscured on earth."[9]

They also stop briefly on an unnamed two-dimensional planet and on an unnamed planet in Orion's belt, the latter of which is the home of the Happy Medium.

[edit] Major themes

[edit] Religious content
On the planet Uriel, the centaur-like beings sing a song which translates (brackets indicates text that is in the book but not in the Bible): "Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the isles, and the inhabitants thereof. Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their voice[,] … let the inhabitants of the rock sing, let them shout from the top of the mountains. Let them give glory unto the Lord[!]" —Isaiah 42:10–12a (KJV)
When the "Mrs W's" reveal their secret roles in the cosmic fight against "the darkness" they ask the children to name some on Earth (a partially dark planet) who fight the darkness. They name Jesus. The three women are described as ancient star-beings who act as guardian angels.[9]
After the escape from Camazotz, while they are on Ixchel, Alex Murry (Meg's father) tells Meg: "And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose." Later in the same chapter, the alien 'Aunt Beast' says to Meg, "We are the called according to His purpose, and whom He call[s], them He also justifie[s]." —Romans 8:28, 30 (KJV)
The last chapter, "The Foolish and the Weak", Mrs Who advised Meg, "The foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men. For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called, but God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty. And base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are." —1 Corinthians 1:25–28
L'Engle's liberal Christianity has been the target of criticism, especially with respect to certain elements of A Wrinkle in Time. This novel is on the American Library Association list of the 100 Most Frequently Challenged Books of 1990–2000 at number 22.[10] Reasons given include the book's references to witches and crystal balls[11] (although the characters are not in fact witches, and the crystal ball is a science fictional one), the claim that it "challenges religious beliefs"[12], and the listing of Jesus "with the names of great artists, philosophers, scientists, and religious leaders".[13]

[edit] History
The book was written between 1959 and 1960.[14] L'Engle has written repeatedly about the writing of the story and the long struggle to get it published. In A Circle of Quiet (1972, ISBN 0-374-12374-8), she explains that the book was conceived "during a time of transition". After years of living at Crosswicks and running a general store, L'Engle's family, the Franklins, moved back to New York City, first taking a ten-week camping trip across the country and back again. L'Engle writes that "we drove through a world of deserts and buttes and leafless mountains, wholly new and alien to me. And suddenly into my mind came the names, Mrs Whatsit. Mrs Who. Mrs Which."[5] This was in the Spring of 1959. L'Engle was reading about quantum physics at the time, which also made its way into the story. However, when she completed the book in early 1960, it was rejected by at least 26 publishers, because it was, in L'Engle's words, "too different", and "because it deals overtly with the problem of evil, and it was too difficult for children, and was it a children's or an adults' book, anyhow?"[2][5]
In "A Special Message from Madeleine L'Engle" on the Random House website, L'Engle explains another possible reason for the rejections: "A Wrinkle in Time had a female protagonist in a science fiction book," which at the time "wasn't done" according to L'Engle. After trying "forty-odd" publishers (L'Engle later said "twenty-six rejections"), L'Engle's agent returned the manuscript to her. Then at Christmas, L'Engle threw a tea party for her mother. One of the guests happened to know John Farrar of Farrar, Straus & Giroux, and insisted that L'Engle should meet with him. Although the publisher did not at the time publish a line of children's books, Farrar met L'Engle, liked the novel and ultimately published it.[15]
The book has been continuously in print since its first publication. The hardback edition is still published by Farrar, Straus & Giroux. The original blue dust jacket by Ellen Raskin was replaced with new art by Leo and Diane Dillon with the publication of A Swiftly Tilting Planet in 1978. The book has also been published in a twenty-fifth anniversary collectors' edition (limited to 500 signed and numbered copies), at least two book club editions (one hardback, one Scholastic Book Services paperback), as a trade paperback under the Dell Yearling imprint, and as a mass market paperback under the Dell Laurel-Leaf imprint. The cover art on the paperback editions has changed several times since first publication.
The book was reissued by Square Fish in trade and mass market paperback formats in May 2007, along with the rest of the Time Quartet. This new edition includes a previously unpublished interview with L'Engle as well as the text of her Newbery Medal acceptance speech.[16]

[edit] Other books in the series
L'Engle has written three other books featuring this generation of the Murry family, collectively known as the Time Quartet. Listed in order of the internal chronology of the series, they are:

A Wind in the Door (1973) ISBN 0-374-38443-6
Many Waters (1986) ISBN 0-374-34796-4
A Swiftly Tilting Planet (1978) ISBN 0-374-37362-0

Note that although Many Waters was published approximately eight years after A Swiftly Tilting Planet, it takes place several years earlier, when Sandy and Dennys are in high school and Meg is in college.
Four further novels have been published that feature Meg and Calvin's children, especially Polly O'Keefe. The most recent of these, An Acceptable Time (1989, ISBN 0-374-30027-5) features Meg's parents, and is marketed with the four Murry books as part of the Time Quintet. Nearly every novel by Madeleine L'Engle connects to the Murry-O'Keefe series either directly or indirectly due to appearances by recurring characters. See also: List of L'Engle's works and Major characters in the works of Madeleine L'Engle for further detail.

[edit] Concerning A Wrinkle in Time

Scholastic BookFiles: A Reading Guide to A Wrinkle in Time ISBN 0-439-46364-5
Chase, Carole F. Suncatcher: A Study of Madeleine L'Engle and Her Writing, p. 170. Innisfree Press, 1998, ISBN 1-880913-31-3


[edit] Audio book
An unabridged four cassette audio edition, read by the author, was released in 1994 by Listening Library, ISBN 0-8072-7587-5.




From left: David Dorfman as Charles Wallace Murry, Katie Stuart as Meg Murry and Gregory Smith as Calvin O'Keefe on the planet Uriel.



[edit] Television movie
Further information: A Wrinkle in Time (film)
In 2003, a television adaptation of the novel was made by Disney. The movie was directed by John Kent Harrison, and the teleplay was written by Susan Shilliday. Among the many differences between the book and the movie are different first names for Meg's parents and a more contemporary and attractive look for Meg, with neither glasses nor braces. More significantly, religious elements of the novel are largely omitted. For example, the name of Jesus is not mentioned as one who fought against evil; and when Mrs Whatsit asks Charles Wallace to translate the song of the centaur-like creatures on Uriel, he simply says "it's about joy". In an interview with Newsweek, when L'Engle was asked if the film "met her expectations" she said, "Yes, I expected it to be bad, and it is."[17] The film was subsequently released on DVD. The special features included a "very rare" interview with Madeleine L'Engle, discussing the novel.

[edit] The tesseract concept
In the novel the concept of a tesseract functions more or less like what in modern science-fiction is called a space warp or a wormhole, a portal from one area of space to another which is possible through the bending of the structure of the space-time continuum. A similar concept occurs in Frank Herbert's Dune novel where it is called the Holzman effect. However, in formal math, a tesseract is a four-dimensional structure similar to a three-dimensional cube, or a two-dimensional square. Such a structure simply presupposes four dimensions of space, but implies nothing about bending the structure of space.

[edit] References


^ L'Engle, Madeleine (1993). The Rock That Is Higher: Story As Truth. Wheaton, IL: Harold Shaw Publishers. pp. 223. ISBN 0-87788-726-8. .
^ a b L'Engle, Madeleine (2007). "Go Fish: Questions for the Author", A Wrinkle in Time. New York: Square fish. pp. 236. ISBN 0-312-36754-6. 
^ Chase, Carole F. (1998). 'Suncatcher: A Study of Madeleine L'Engle And Her Writing'. Philadelphia: Innisfree Press, Inc.. pp. 170. ISBN 1-880913-31-3. 
^ A Wrinkle in Time, chapter two
^ a b c L'Engle, Madeleine (1972). A Circle of Quiet. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux. pp. 5–6, 21, 66, 217–218. ISBN 0-374-12374-8. 
^ Hettinga, Donald R. (1993). Presenting Madeleine L'Engle. New York: Twayne Publishers. pp. 27. ISBN 0-8057-8222-2. 
^ Blackburn, William (1985), ""Madeleine L'Engle's A Wrinkle in Time: Seeking the Original Face"", Touchstones: Reflections on the Best in Children's Literature Vol. 1: 125 ; cited in Hettinga, pp. 27.
^ a b Stott, Jon (Fall), ""Midsummer Night's Dreams: Fantasy and Self-Realization in Children's Fiction"", The Lion and the Unicorn Vol. 1 (No. 2): 25–39 ; cited in Hettinga, pp. 27, 30.
^ a b Hettinga, p. 26
^ "The 100 Most Frequently Challenged Books of 1990–2000". Banned Books Week. American Library Association. 2007. http://www.ala.org/ala/oif/bannedbooksweek/bbwlinks/100mostfrequently.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-17. 
^ Matheson, Whitney (2007). "Some of the best books in life are ... banned?". Pop Candy. USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/life/columnist/popcandy/2004-09-28-pop-candy_x.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-17. 
^ "Why Were These Books Banned?". Library - Faculty Services. Val A. Browning Library, Dixie State College of Utah. 2001. http://library.dixie.edu/new/whybanned.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-17. 
^ "A Wrinkle In Time". banned books project. Solonor.com. 2003-09-21. http://solonor.com/bannedbooks/archives/001742.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-17. 
^ L'Engle, Madeleine (1987). A Wrinkle in Time, 25th Anniversary Collectors' Edition. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux. pp. viii-ix. Limited ed.. 
^ L'Engle, Madeleine (2004). "A Special Message from Madeleine L'Engle". Teachers @ Random: A Wrinkle in Time. Random House, Inc.. http://www.randomhouse.com/teachers/catalog/display.pperl?isbn=9780440498056. Retrieved on 2007-01-01. 
^ "It's Time to Read A Wrinkle in Time". Square Fish Books. 2007. http://www.awrinkleintime.net/. Retrieved on 2007-03-01. 
^ Henneberger, Melinda (2003-05-07). "‘I Dare You’: Madeleine L’Engle on God, ‘The Da Vinci Code’ and aging well". Newsweek (MSNBC.com). http://www.newsweek.com/id/105017/. Retrieved on 2007-05-27. 



[edit] External links

L'Engle's Official Site
A Wrinkle in Time reviewed at The Open Critic
A Wrinkle in Time publication history at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
A Wrinkle in Time (TV) (mini) at the Internet Movie Database
Review of A Wrinkle in Time
Official book site for the May 2007 release.



Awards


Preceded by
The Bronze Bow
Newbery Medal recipient
1963
Succeeded by
It's Like This, Cat









v • d • e

Madeleine L'Engle





Time Quartet

A Wrinkle in Time · A Wind in the Door · Many Waters · A Swiftly Tilting Planet






Polly O'Keefe series

The Arm of the Starfish · Dragons in the Waters · A House Like a Lotus · An Acceptable Time






Austin family series

Meet the Austins · The Moon by Night · The Young Unicorns · A Ring of Endless Light · Troubling a Star · The Twenty-four Days Before Christmas · A Full House: An Austin Family Christmas · The Anti-Muffins






Katherine Forrester series

The Small Rain · A Severed Wasp






Camilla Dickinson series

Camilla Dickinson · A Live Coal in the Sea






Other fiction

Ilsa · And Both Were Young · The Other Side of the Sun






Characters

Meg Murry · Charles Wallace Murry · Calvin O'Keefe · Sandy and Dennys Murry · Polly O'Keefe · Vicky Austin · Canon Tallis · Adam Eddington · Zachary Gray · Major characters in the works of Madeleine L'Engle






Other

Places in the works of Madeleine L'Engle · Echthroi · Kything · Hugh Franklin · A Wrinkle in Time (film) · A Ring of Endless Light (film)









Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Wrinkle_in_Time"
Categories: 1962 novels | Fantasy novels | Newbery Medal winners (book) | Novels by Madeleine L'Engle | Religious themed fiction | Time travel in fiction | Young adult novels | Children's fantasy novels | Time Quartet | Science fiction novels 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Español
Italiano
עברית









 This page was last modified on 19 April 2009, at 13:19 (UTC).
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
