













Nestorianism - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Nestorianism";
		var wgTitle = "Nestorianism";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "22065";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 280937562;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Nestorianism

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 







Nestorian priests in a procession, wall painting from the caves of Bezeklik








Part of the series on
Eastern Christianity



Eastern Christianity Portal



History
Byzantine Empire
Crusades
Ecumenical council
Christianization of Bulgaria
Christianization of Kievan Rus'
East-West Schism
By region
Asian - Copts
Eastern Orthodox - Georgian - Ukrainian




Traditions
Assyrian Church of the East
Eastern Orthodox Church
Eastern Catholic Churches
Oriental Orthodoxy
Syriac Christianity




Liturgy and Worship
Sign of the cross
Divine Liturgy
Iconography
Asceticism
Omophorion




Theology
Hesychasm - Icon
Apophaticism - Filioque clause
Miaphysitism - Monophysitism
Nestorianism - Theosis - Theoria
Phronema - Philokalia
Praxis - Theotokos
Hypostasis - Ousia
Essence-Energies distinction
Metousiosis
This box: view • talk • edit






Nestorianism is the doctrine that Christ exists as two individuals (hypostases), the man Jesus and the divine Son of God, or Logos, rather than as one individual (hypostasis), God the Word Incarnate, of two essences, divine and human. The doctrine is identified with Nestorius (c. 386–c. 451), Archbishop of Constantinople. This view of Christ was condemned at the First Council of Ephesus in 431, and the conflict over this view led to the Nestorian schism, separating the Assyrian Church of the East from the churches adherent to the First Council of Ephesus, among them being the Roman Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church, and the Oriental Orthodox Church.
Nestorianism originated in the Church in the 5th century out of an attempt to rationally explain and understand the incarnation of the divine Logos, the Second Person of the Holy Trinity as Jesus Christ. Nestorianism taught that the human and divine essences of Christ are separate and that there are two natures, the man Jesus and the divine Logos, united in Christ. In consequence, Nestorians rejected such terminology as "God suffered" or "God was crucified", because the humanity of Christ which suffered is separate from his divinity. Likewise, they rejected the term Theotokos (Giver of birth to God/Mother of God) as a title of the Virgin Mary, suggesting instead the title Christotokos (Giver of birth to Christ/Mother of Christ), because in their view he took only his human nature from his mother, while the divine Logos was pre-existent and external, so calling Mary "Mother of God" was misleading and potentially wrong.
The Assyrian Church of the East refused to drop support for Nestorius or to denounce him as a heretic. That church has continued to be called "Nestorian" in the West, to distinguish it from other ancient Eastern churches. However, the Church of the East does not regard its doctrine as truly Nestorian: it teaches the view of Babai the Great - Christ has two qnome (manifest or individuated substance, similar to hypostasis) that are unmingled and eternally united in one parsopa (person). According to some interpretations[who?], the origin of this belief is mostly historical and linguistic: for example, the Greeks had two words for 'person', which translated poorly into Syriac, and the meanings of these terms were not even quite settled during Nestorius's lifetime.
There are about 170,000 Nestorians today, mostly living in Syria, Iraq and Iran.[1]




Contents


1 Nestorius
2 Christological implications
3 The involvement of the Assyrian Church
4 The spread of Assyrian "Nestorianism"
5 References
6 See also
7 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Nestorius




Nestorian tombstone with inscriptions in Uyghur, found in Issyk Kul, dated 1312.


Nestorius (c. 386–c. 451) was a pupil of Theodore of Mopsuestia in Antioch in Syria (modern Turkey) and later became Archbishop of Constantinople. He taught that the human and divine aspects of Christ were distinct natures, not unified. He preached against the use of the title Mother of God (Theotokos) for the Virgin Mary and would only call her Mother of Christ (Christotokos). He also argued that God could not suffer on the cross, as he is omnipotent. Therefore, the human part of Christ died on the cross, but not the divine.
His opponents accused him of dividing Christ into two persons: they claimed that proposing that God the Word did not suffer and die on the cross, while Jesus the man did, or that God the Word was omniscient, while Jesus the man had limited knowledge, implied two separate persons with separate experiences.
Nestorius responded that he believed that Christ was indeed one person (Greek: prosopon), though not one hypostasis. Opposed by Cyril of Alexandria, Nestorius was condemned at the Council of Ephesus in 431.
The Council held that Christ is one hypostasis, and that the Virgin Mary is the mother of God. The condemning pronouncement of the Council resulted in the Nestorian schism and the separation of the Assyrian Church of the East from the Byzantine Church.[1] However, even Ephesus could not settle the issue, and the Byzantine Church was soon split again over the question of whether Christ had one or two natures, leading to the Chalcedonian schism.

[edit] Christological implications
From the point of view of the Chalcedonian theology which is held by most Western and Orthodox churches, the teaching of Nestorius has important consequences relating to soteriology and the theology of the Eucharist.
During the Protestant Reformation, when some groups denied the Real Presence and the communication of attributes between the two natures, they were accused of reviving the heresy of Nestorius. The same charge was levelled at the Catholics Isaac-Joseph Berruyer in the eighteenth century, and Anton Günther in the nineteenth century.[2]

[edit] The involvement of the Assyrian Church
Cyril of Alexandria worked hard to remove Nestorius and his supporters and followers from power. However, in the Syriac speaking world, Theodore of Mopsuestia was held in very high esteem, and the condemnation of his pupil Nestorius was not received well. His followers were given refuge. The Sassanid Persian kings, who were at constant war with Byzantium, saw the opportunity to assure the loyalty of their Christian subjects and supported the Nestorian schism:

They granted protection to Nestorians (462).




Painting of a Nestorian nun, 1779.



They executed the pro-Byzantine Catholicos Babowai who was then replaced by the Nestorian Bishop of Nisibis Bar Sauma (484).
They allowed the transfer of the school of Edessa to the Persian city Nisibis when the Byzantine emperor closed it for its Nestorian tendencies (489).

At Nisibis the school became even more famous than at Edessa. The main theological authorities of the school have always been Theodore and his teacher Diodorus of Tarsus. Unfortunately, few of their writings have survived. The writings of Nestorius himself were only added to the curriculum of the school of Edessa-Nisibis in 530, shortly before the Fifth Ecumenical Council in 553 condemned Theodore of Mopsuestia as Nestorius's predecessor.
At the end of the 6th century the school went through a theological crisis when its director Henana of Adiabene tried to replace Theodore with his own doctrine, which followed Origen. Babai the Great (551–628), who was also the unofficial head of the Church at that time and revived the Assyrian monastic movement, refuted him and in the process wrote the normative Christology of the Assyrian Church, based on Theodore of Mopsuestia.
A small sampling of Babai's work is available in English translation. The Book of Union is his principal surviving work on Christology. In it he explains that Christ has two qnome (essences), which are unmingled and eternally united in one parsopa (personality). This, and not strict Nestorianism, is the teaching of the Assyrian Church. However, the Assyrian Church has continued to be called "Nestorian" in the West to distinguish it from other ancient Eastern churches, despite the fact that Babai's Christology is basically the same as that of Catholicism and Orthodoxy; the Baltimore Catechism teaches that Christ is one "person" (like Babai's parsopa) but has two "natures" (Babai's qnome).[original research?]

[edit] The spread of Assyrian "Nestorianism"




Nestorian wedding - 1897






Nestorian Archbishop - 1897


The Assyrian Church produced many zealous missionaries, who traveled and preached throughout Persia and Central and East Asia in the seventh and eighth centuries. Also during this time many Nestorian scholars escaped the Byzantines, settled in Nisibis, and Gundishapur in Persia, and Muharraq in Bahrain, bringing with them many ancient Greco-Roman philosophical, scientific, and literary texts. Thus the Nestorians of Persia became one of the most important routes through which a sophisticated knowledge of Greek and Roman philosophy, science, and medicine passed first into Persia (where Nestorians became prominent in scholarship and medicine), and subsequently, after the area was absorbed into the Islamic empire, to the intellectual culture of Islam, where the works of Aristotle and Galen, especially, became formative influences on the development of Islamic philosophy, science, and medicine[3] (and from whence this knowledge would eventually begin to find its way back into Christian western Europe from about the 12th century, leading to the flowering of medieval scholastic philosophy [4]).
“Nestorian” Christianity reached China by 635, and its relics can still be seen in Chinese cities such as Xi'an. The Nestorian Stele, set up on 7 January 781 at the then-capital of Chang'an (modern Xi'an), describes the introduction of Christianity into China from Persia in the reign of Taizong of Tang, and documents found at the Mogao Caves near Dunhuang further elucidate the religion. About the same time Nestorian Christianity penetrated into Mongolia, eventually reaching as far as Korea. Some historians even suggest that they made it to the shores of Japan. In AD 797 , a Japanese history, Shoku Nihongi was published. It states that in AD 736 an envoy returned to Japan from China. He brought with him a Persian physician by the name of Limitsi (or Rimitsui, 李密医), and Kohfu (皇甫), a “dignitary of the church of the Luminous Religion”. The “Luminous religion” is (Nestorian) Christianity - because Christ is “the Light of the World”. The Syrian Christians of Kerala, India may have been converted by Nestorian missionaries in the 7th century AD according to one of the two dominant theories about their origin (the other, more traditional theory is that they were converted in 52AD by St Thomas or his delegates )
The Christian community later faced persecution from Emperor Wuzong of Tang (reigned 840–846). He suppressed all foreign religions, including Buddhism and Christianity, which then declined sharply in China. A Syrian monk visiting China a few decades later described many churches in rubble.
Nestorianism was particularly active in the 12th century, being a state religion of Khitans in the times of Yelü Dashi. It was also one of the widespread religions in the empire of Genghis Khan, and several Nestorian gravestones written in Syriac survive in what is today Kyrgyzstan.
The Church experienced a significant revival during the Yuan dynasty. Marco Polo in the 1200s and other medieval Western writers indicate many Nestorian communities remaining in the Middle East, Central Asia, China and Mongolia. Rabban Bar Sauma, a Nestorian traveler from Shang-du (the "Xanadu" of Coleridge's poem, in present-day inner Mongolia), became a diplomat for the Mongol Il-Khanate of Persia to the courts of Constantinople and Rome for talks of a Franco-Mongol alliance against the Muslims at this time. However, the Nestorians clearly were not as vibrant as they had been during Tang times. The communities seem to have petered out during the Ming dynasty from lack of popular support. The legacy of the missionaries remains in the Assyrian churches still to be found in Iraq, Iran, and India.

[edit] References

^ Christian Faith : History :: Nestorianism
^ Catholic Encyclopedia, article Christology
^ Lindberg, D.C. (2007). The Beginnings of Western Science (2nd edn.) ch. 8. University of Chicago Press.
^ Haskins, C.H. (1927). The Renaissance of the Twelfth Century. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.






This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (February 2008)



JENKINS, Philip, "The Lost History of Christianity: The Thousand-year Golden Age of the Church in the Middle East, Africa, and Asia" HarperOne 2008, ISBN 0061472808.
BAUM, Wilhelm and WINKLER, Dietmar W (1 January 2003). The Church of the East: A Concise History, London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-29770-2. Google Print, retrieved 16 July 2005.
Edward Walford, translator, The Ecclesiastical History of Evagrius: A History of the Church from AD 431 to AD 594, 1846. Reprinted 2008. Evolution Publishing, ISBN 978-1-889758-88-6. [2]
Nestorius and Nestorianism at the Catholic Encyclopedia
Lev N. Gumilev. Poiski vymyshlennogo tsarstva (in Russian, "Looking for the mythical kingdom"). Moscow, Onyx Publishers, 2003. ISBN 5-9503-0041-6.


[edit] See also



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Nestorianism 



Nestorius
Nestorian Assyrians
Christology
Assyrian Church of the East
Church of the East & Abroad
Babai the Great
Nestorianism in China
Alopen
Johannite
Prester John








v • d • e

History of Christianity





Jesus & the Apostles

Background · Timeline · Ministry · Good News · Death & Resurrection · Holy Spirit · Gospels · Acts · Apostolic Age · The 12 · Paul · Jerusalem Council






Ante-Nicene Church

History Of · Justin Martyr · Ignatius · Persecutions · Church Fathers · Irenaeus · Marcionism · NT Canon · Tertullian · Montanism · Origen






Christian Roman Empire

Constantine · Monasticism · Councils: Nicaea I · Athanasius · Arianism · Constantinople I · Nicene Creed · Jerome · Augustine · Ephesus · Chalcedon






Eastern Christianity

History Of · History of E. Orthodoxy · Asia · Oriental Orxy. · Coptic · Syria · Armenia · Chrysostom · Islam · Icon · East-West Schism · Fall · Russian · Under the Ottomans · 20th century






Middle Ages

Pelagianism · Gregory I · Celtic · Germanic & Scandinavian · Investiture · Anselm of Canterbury · Abelard · Bernard of Clairvaux · Crusades · Inquisition
Scholasticism · Dominic · Francis of Assisi · 4th Lateran · Bonaventure · Thomas Aquinas · Wycliffe · Avignon · Papal Schism · Jan Hus · Conciliarism






Protestant
Reformation

Protestantism, History of · Erasmus · Five Solas · Eucharistic Theologies · Calvinist v. Arminian · Arminianism · Synod of Dort · Wars · Colonization
Lutheranism · Martin Luther · 95 Theses · Diet of Worms · Melanchthon · Crypto-Calvinism · Gnesio-Lutherans · Lutheran Orthodoxy · Eucharist · Book of Concord
Reformed · Zwinglianism · In Switzerland · John Calvin · History of Calvinism · John Knox · TULIP · Synod of Dort
Anabaptism · Radical Reformation · Conrad Grebel · Swiss Brethren · Müntzer · Menno Simons
English Reformation: History, Timeline · Henry VIII · Cranmer · Elizabethan Settlement · 39 Articles · Book of Common Prayer · In Scotland · Civil War






Roman Catholicism

History of the Papacy · Lateran IV · Trent · Counter-Reformation · Thomas More · Leo X · Guadalupe · Jesuits · Francis Xavier
Dissolution of the Monasteries · Wars · Paul III · Pius V · Tridentine Mass · Teresa of Avila · Bellarmine · Oratory of Neri · Vatican I · Vatican II · Roman Catholic Timeline






Age of Reason & Revival

17th century denominations in England · Adventism · Baptists · Congregationalism · First Great Awakening · History of Jehovah's Witnesses · History of the Anglican Communion · History of the Latter Day Saint movement · History of the Seventh-day Adventist Church · Latter Day Saint movement · Methodism · Millerites · Neo-Lutheranism · Old Lutherans · Pietism · Puritanism · English Civil War · Wars of Religion · Restoration Movement · Restorationism · Revivalism






Industrial Age

Camp meeting · Holiness movement · Independent Catholic Churches · Second Great Awakening






Age of Ideologies

Azusa Street Revival · Ecumenism · Evangelicalism · Jesus movement · Mainline (Protestant) · Pentecostalism · Charismatic movement






Christianity · Christianity Timeline · Christian Theology · Christian Martyrs · Timeline of Christian missions — History of: Eastern Orthodoxy · Oriental Orthodoxy · Protestantism · Roman Catholicism












v • d • e

History of Roman Catholic theology





Theologians · Teachings · Heresies





General History

History of the Roman Catholic Church · Early Christianity · History of the Papacy · Ecumenical Councils · Timeline of the Roman Catholic Church · History of Christianity · History of Christian theology







Church beginnings

Epistles of Clement · Didache · Ignatius of Antioch · Epistle of Barnabas · Justin Martyr · Irenaeus · Tertullian · Origen · Antipope Novatian · Cyprian






Constantine to
Pope Gregory I

Arianism · Pelagianism · Nestorianism · Monophysitism · Monothelitism · Pope Leo I · Ambrose · Augustine of Hippo






Early Middle Ages

Iconoclasm · Transubstantiation Dispute · Predestination Disputes






High Middle Ages

Thomas Aquinas · Thomism · Anselm of Canterbury · Peter Abelard · Decretum Gratiani · Bernard of Clairvaux · Peter Lombard · Hildegard of Bingen · Saint Dominic · Saint Francis of Assisi · Bonaventure · Albertus Magnus






Mysticism & Reforms

Duns Scotus · Dante Alighieri · William of Ockham · Catherine of Siena · Brigit of Sweden · Johannes Tauler · Heinrich Seuse · Nicholas of Kues · Thomas à Kempis






Protestant Reformation and
Counter-Reformation

Thomas More · John Fisher · Thomas Cajetan · Johann Eck · Ignatius of Loyola · Francis Xavier · Teresa of Ávila · John of the Cross · Petrus Canisius · Robert Bellarmine · Francis de Sales






Baroque Period to
French Revolution

Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet · Francisco Suárez · François Fénelon · Jansenism · Blaise Pascal · Saint Alphonsus Liguori · Saint Louis de Montfort · Alfonso Muzzarelli · Louis Thomassin · Jean de La Fontaine






19th century

John Henry Newman · Gaetano Sanseverino · Giovanni Maria Cornoldi · Clemens Maria Hofbauer · Johann Michael Sailer · Johann Joseph von Görres · Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler · Giuseppe Pecci · Joseph Hergenröther · Tommaso Maria Zigliara






20th-21st century

Romano Guardini · Sebastiaan Tromp · Raimondo Spiazzi · Gabriel Roschini · Hugo Rahner · Henri de Lubac · Pope Pius XII · Pierre Teilhard de Chardin · Hans Urs von Balthasar · Yves Congar · Karl Rahner · Edward Schillebeeckx · Marie-Dominique Chenu · Louis Bouyer · Étienne Gilson · Hans Küng · Jean Daniélou · Pope John Paul II · Pope Benedict XVI






 Pope Portal  Catholicism Portal






[edit] External links

“Church of the East” unofficial website




Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nestorianism"
Categories: Assyrian Church of the East | Christology | Ancient Christian controversies | Eastern Christianity | Christianity in Central Asia | Christianity in Iran | Christianity in Iraq | Christianity in India | Christianity in ChinaHidden categories: All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since March 2009 | All articles that may contain original research | Articles that may contain original research since March 2009 | Articles containing Japanese language text | Articles lacking in-text citations 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


العربية
Bosanski
Български
Català
Česky
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
فارسی
Français
Galego
Hrvatski
Bahasa Indonesia
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Lietuvių
മലയാളം
Nederlands
日本語
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
中文









 This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 20:45.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
