













Phalaenopsis - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Phalaenopsis";
		var wgTitle = "Phalaenopsis";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "508512";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = "277633960";
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = [];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Phalaenopsis

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"Phal" redirects here. For the curry dish, see phaal.


Phalaenopsis



Closeup of a Phalaenopsis flower



Scientific classification





Kingdom:
Plantae


(unranked):
Angiosperms


(unranked):
Monocots


Order:
Asparagales


Family:
Orchidaceae


Subfamily:
Epidendroideae


Tribe:
Vandeae


Subtribe:
Aeridinae


Alliance:
Phalaenopsis
Blume


Genus:
Phalaenopsis
Blume 1825





Type species


Phalaenopsis amabilis
Blume, (1825)


Species



see text.



Synonyms




Doritis Lindl.
Grafia A. D. Hawkes
Kingidium P. F. Hunt
Kingiella Rolfe
Polychilos Breda
Polystylus Hasselt ex Hassk.
Staurites Rchb. f.
Stauroglottis Schauer
Synadena Raf.




Phalaenopsis (Blume 1825) is a genus of approximately 60 species of orchids (family Orchidaceae). The abbreviation in the horticultural trade is Phal. Phalaenopsis is one of the most popular orchids in the trade, through the development of many artificial hybrids.




Contents


1 Description
2 Classification
3 Species
4 Natural hybrids
5 Intergeneric hybrids
6 Post-pollination changes in Phalaenopsis orchids
7 Growing Phalaenopsis
8 External links
9 Footnotes
10 References





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Description
The generic name means "Phalaen[a]-like" and is probably a reference to the genus Phalaena, the name given by Carolus Linnaeus to a group of large moths; the flowers of some species supposedly resemble moths in flight. For this reason, the species are sometimes called Moth orchids.
They are native throughout southeast Asia from the Himalayan mountains to the islands of Polillo and Palawan of the Philippines and northern Australia. Orchid Island off Taiwan is named after this orchid. Little is known about their habitat and their ecology in nature since little field research has been done in the last decades.




Phalaenopsis aphrodite (Moon Orchid)


Most are epiphytic shade plants; a few are lithophytes. In the wild they are typically found below the canopies of moist and humid lowland forests, protected against direct sunlight, but equally in seasonally dry or cool environments. The species have adapted individually to these three habitats.
Phalaenopsis shows a monopodial growth habit. An erect growing rhizome produces from the top one or two alternate, thick and fleshy, elliptical leaves a year. The older, basal leaves drop off at the same rate. The plant retains in this way four to five leaves. If very healthy, they can have up to ten or more leaves. They have no pseudobulbs. The raceme appears from the stem between the leaves. They bloom in their full glory for several weeks. If kept in the home, they usually last two to three months.
Some Phalaenopsis species in Malaysia are known to use subtle weather cues to coordinate mass flowering.

[edit] Classification




P. Sogo Yukidian


The species can be classified into two groups :

A group with a long, branched inflorescence (up to 1 m long) and large, almost round flowers with rose or white tints.
A group with short stems and less rounded, waxy flowers with more pronounced colors.

In terms of particular lifeform terminology, one can also characterize these plants as hemicryptophyte or chamerophyte :

hemicryptophyte (abbr.: hemicr.) : biennial or perennial plants with herbaceous stems. These stems die off after the growing season, while the shoots survive at soil level. The resting buds are just above or below soil level.
chamaephyte (abbr. cham.) : low-growing plants with herbaceous and/or woody stems, that persist for several years. Their buds are on soil level or just above; but never above 50 cm.

The genera Doritis Lindl. and Kingidium P.F.Hunt are now included in Phalaneopsis, based on DNA-evidence (according to the World Checklist of Monocotyledons, Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew) (See also ref 1). However this is not implicitly accepted by every specialist in this field.
Intensive cross-fertilization has produced a great number of hybrids in all colors and variations. These are usually more adaptable to artificial conditions than their botanical ancestors. Most are hybrids of Phalaenopsis amabilis with Phalaenopsis schilleriana or Phalaenopsis stuartiana.

[edit] Species




Phalaenopsis 'Barbara Moler' x 'Johanna' (a hybrid cultivar)



Phalaenopsis amabilis (Moon Orchid; East Malaysia to Papuasia)

Phalaenopsis amabilis subsp. amabilis (East Malaysia to Papuasia).
Phalaenopsis amabilis subsp. moluccana (Northeastern Borneo to the Moluccas).
Phalaenopsis amabilis subsp. rosenstromii (New Guinea to Queensland).


Phalaenopsis amboinensis (Sulawesi to the Moluccas).

Phalaenopsis amboinensis var. amboinensis (the Moluccas).
Phalaenopsis amboinensis var. flavida (Sulawesi)


Phalaenopsis aphrodite (Southeastern Taiwan to the Philippines).

Phalaenopsis aphrodite subsp. aphrodite (the Philippines).
Phalaenopsis aphrodite subsp. formosana (Southeastern Taiwan).


Phalaenopsis appendiculata (Malaya to northeastern Borneo).
Phalaenopsis bastianii (Philippines - Sulu Archipelago).
Phalaenopsis bellina (Borneo).
Phalaenopsis borneensis (Borneo).
Phalaenopsis braceana (Eastern Himalayas to China - Yunnan).
Phalaenopsis buyssoniana (Indochina).
Phalaenopsis celebensis (Sulawesi).
Phalaenopsis chibae (Vietnam).









Phalaenopsis cochlearis (Malaya to Borneo).
Phalaenopsis corningiana (Borneo).
Phalaenopsis cornu-cervi (Indochina to southern Philippines).
Phalaenopsis deliciosa (Indian subcontinent to Malesia).

Phalaenopsis deliciosa subsp. deliciosa (Indian subcontinent to Malesia
Phalaenopsis deliciosa subsp. hookeriana (Eastern Himalayas to southwestern China).


Phalaenopsis doweryënsis (Northeastern Borneo).
Phalaenopsis equestris (Taiwan - Hsiao Lan Yü to the Philippines).
Phalaenopsis fasciata (the Philippines).
Phalaenopsis fimbriata (Sumatra, Java and Borneo).
Phalaenopsis floresensis (Lesser Sunda Islands).
Phalaenopsis fuscata (Borneo)
Phalaenopsis gibbosa (Vietnam).
Phalaenopsis gigantea (Borneo to Java).
Phalaenopsis hainanensis (China - Hainan and Yunnan).
Phalaenopsis hieroglyphica (the Philippines).
Phalaenopsis honghenensis (China - Yunnan).
Phalaenopsis inscriptiosinensis (Central Sumatra
Phalaenopsis javanica (Western Java).
Phalaenopsis kunstleri (Myanmar to Malaya).
Phalaenopsis lamelligera (Northeastern Borneo).
Phalaenopsis lindenii (the Philippines - Luzon).
Phalaenopsis lobbii (Eastern Himalayas to Myanmar).
Phalaenopsis lowii (Southern Myanmar to western Thailand).
Phalaenopsis lueddemanniana (the Philippines).





Phalaenopsis 'Mambo' (a hybrid cultivar)



Phalaenopsis luteola (Northwestern Borneo).
Phalaenopsis maculata (Malaya to Borneo).
Phalaenopsis malipoensis Z.J.Liu & S.C.Chen (China - Yunnan)
Phalaenopsis mannii (Eastern Himalayas to China - Yunnan).
Phalaenopsis mariae (Northeastern Borneo to the Philippines).
Phalaenopsis micholitzii (the Philippines - Mindanao).
Phalaenopsis modesta (Borneo).
Phalaenopsis mysorensis (Indian subcontinent).
Phalaenopsis pallens (the Philippines).
Phalaenopsis pantherina (Borneo).
Phalaenopsis parishii (Eastern Himalayas to Myanmar).
Phalaenopsis petelotii (Vietnam)
Phalaenopsis philippinensis (the Philippines - Luzon).
Phalaenopsis pulcherrima (Indochina to Borneo).
Phalaenopsis pulchra (the Philippines).
Phalaenopsis regnieriana (Indochina).
Phalaenopsis reichenbachiana (the Philippines).





Phalaenopsis 'Nivacolor' (a hybrid cultivar)



Phalaenopsis robinsonii (the Moluccas).
Phalaenopsis sanderiana (the Philippines - Mindanao).
Phalaenopsis schilleriana (the Philippines).
Phalaenopsis speciosa (Andaman and Nicobar Islands).
Phalaenopsis stobartiana (China - southeastern Tibet to Guangxi)
Phalaenopsis stuartiana (the Philippines - Mindanao).
Phalaenopsis sumatrana (Indochina to Borneo).
Phalaenopsis taenialis (Eastern Himalayas to China - Yunnan)
Phalaenopsis tetraspsis (Andaman and Nicobar Islands to northwestern Sumatra).
Phalaenopsis venosa (Sulawesi).
Phalaenopsis violacea (Malaya to Sumatra).).
Phalaenopsis viridis (Sumatra).
Phalaenopsis wilsonii (China - southeastern Tibet to Guangxi).
Phalaenopsis zebrina (Borneo).


[edit] Natural hybrids




A Phalaenopsis hybrid



Phalaenopsis × amphitrita (P. sanderiana × P. stuartiana; Philippines).
Phalaenopsis × gersenii (P. sumatrana × P. violacea; Borneo, Sumatra).
Phalaenopsis × intermedia (P. aphrodite × P. equestris; Star of Leyte; Philippines) (First recognized Phalaenopsis hybrid)
Phalaenopsis × leucorrhoda (P. aphrodite × P. schilleriana; Philippines).
Phalaenopsis × singuliflora (P. bellina × P. sumatrana; Borneo).
Phalaenopsis × veitchiana (P. equestris × P. schilleriana; Philippines).


[edit] Intergeneric hybrids

xAeridopsis (Aerides x Phalaenopsis)
xArachnopsis (Arachnis x Phalaenopsis)
xAsconopsis (Ascocentrum x Phalaenopsis)
xBeardara (Ascocentrum x Doritis x Phalaenopsis)
xBogardara (Ascocentrum x Phalaenopsis x Vanda x Vandopsis)
xBokchoonara (Arachnis x Ascocentrum x Phalaenopsis x Vanda)
xCleisonopsis (Cleisocentron x Phalaenopsis)
xDevereuxara (Ascocentrum x Phalaenopsis x Vanda)
xDiplonopsis (Diploprora x Phalaenopsis)
xDoriellaopsis (Doritis x Kingiella x Phalaenopsis)
xDoritaenopsis (Doritis x Phalaenopsis)
xDresslerara (Ascoglossum x Phalaenopsis x Renanthera )
xEdeara (Arachnis x Phalaenopsis x Renanthera x Vandopsis)
xErnestara (Phalaenopsis x Renanthera x Vandopsis)
xEurynopsis (Eurychone x Phalaenopsis)
xHagerara (Doritis x Phalaenopsis x Vanda)
xHausermannara (Doritis x Phalaenopsis x Vandopsis)
xHimoriara (Ascocentrum x Phalaenopsis x Rhynchostylis x Vanda)
xIsaoara (Aerangis x Ascocentrum x Phalaenopsis x Vanda)
xLaycockara (Arachnis x Phalaenopsis x Vandopsis)
xLichtara (Doritis x Gastrochilus x Phalaenopsis)
xLuinopsis (Luisia x Phalaenopsis)
xLutherara (Phalaenopsis x Renanthera x Rhynchostylis )
xMacekara (Arachnis x Phalaenopsis x Renanthera x Vanda x Vandopsis)
xMeechaiara (Ascocentrum x Doritis x Phalaenopsis x Rhynchostylis x Vanda)
xMoirara (Phalaenopsis x Renanthera x Vanda)
xNakagawaara (Aerides x Doritis x Phalaenopsis)
xOwensara (Doritis x Phalaenopsis x Renanthera )
xParnataara (Aerides x Arachnis x Phalaenopsis)
xPaulara (Ascocentrum x Doritis x Phalaenopsis x Renanthera x Vanda)
xPepeara (Ascocentrum x Doritis x Phalaenopsis x Renanthera )
xPhalaerianda (Aerides x Phalaenopsis x Vanda)
xPhalandopsis (Phalaenopsis x Vandopsis)
xPhalanetia (Neofinetia x Phalaenopsis)
xPhaliella (Kingiella x Phalaenopsis)
xPooleara (Ascocentrum x Ascoglossum x Phalaenopsis x Renanthera )
xRenanthopsis (Phalaenopsis x Renanthera )
xRhynchonopsis (Phalaenopsis x Rhynchostylis)
xRhyndoropsis (Doritis x Phalaenopsis x Rhynchostylis)
xRichardmizutaara (Ascocentrum x Phalaenopsis x Vandopsis)
xRoseara (Doritis x Kingiella x Phalaenopsis x Renanthera )
xSappanara (Arachnis x Phalaenopsis x Renanthera)
xSarconopsis (Phalaenopsis x Sarcochilus)
xSidranara (Ascocentrum x Phalaenopsis x Renanthera)
xSladeara (Doritis x Phalaenopsis x Sarcochilus)
xStamariaara (Ascocentrum x Phalaenopsis x Renanthera x Vanda)
xSutingara (Arachnis x Ascocentrum x Phalaenopsis x Vanda x Vandopsis)
xTrautara (Doritis x Luisia x Phalaenopsis)
xTrevorara (Arachnis x Phalaenopsis x Vanda)
xTrichonopsis (Phalaenopsis x Trichoglottis)
xUptonara (Phalaenopsis x Rhynchostylis x Sarcochilus)
xVandaenopsis (Phalaenopsis x Vanda)
xVandewegheara (Ascocentrum x Doritis x Phalaenopsis x Vanda)
xYapara (Phalaenopsis x Rhynchostylis x Vanda)
xYeepengara (Aerides x Phalaenopsis x Rhynchostylis x Vanda)

There is no true intergeneric hybrid between Phalaenopsis and the closely related Paraphalaenopsis. However, according to the RHS, the grex Phalphalaenopsis Doris Thornton, registered in 1977 as a cross between Paraphalaenopsis x thorntonii and Phalaenopsis Doris is just such a hybrid. Therefore, strictly speaking, the genetic barrier between these two closely related genera has not been crossed. But, since there are only very few true Phalaenopsis species in cultivation (most are hybrids), the possibility of a true intergeneric hybrid is not to be excluded.

[edit] Post-pollination changes in Phalaenopsis orchids
Phalaenopsis are not only outstanding in their beauty, but also unique in that in some species, the flowers turn into green leaves after pollination. As in many other plants, the petals of the orchid flowers serve to attract pollinating insects and protect essential organs. Following pollination, petals will usually undergo senescence (i.e. wilt and disintegrate) because it is metabolically expensive to maintain them. In many Phalaenopsis species such as P.violacea, the petals and sepals find new uses following pollination and thus escaping programmed cell death. By inducing the formation of chloroplasts, they turn green, become fleshy and apparently start to photosynthesize, just like leaves. [1]

[edit] Growing Phalaenopsis




Phalaenopsis bellina


Phalaenopsis are among the most popular orchids sold as potted plants owing to the ease of propagation and flowering under artificial conditions. They were among the first tropical orchids in Victorian collections. Since the advent of the tetrapoloid hybrid Phalaenopsis Doris, they have become extremely easy to grow and flower in the home, as long as some care is taken to provide them with conditions that approximate their native habitats. Their production has become a commercial industry.
In nature, they are typically fond of warm temperatures (20 to 35 °C), but are adaptable to conditions more comfortable for human habitation in temperate zones (15 to 30 °C); at temperatures below 18 °C overwatering causes root rot. Phalaenopsis requires high humidity (60-70%) and low light of 12,000 to 20,000 lux. Flowering is triggered by a night-time drop in temperature of around 5 to 6 degrees over 2 to 4 consecutive weeks, usually in the fall, and a day-time drop in temperature to below 29 °C[2].
The flower spikes appear from the pockets near the base of each leaf. The first sign is a light green "mitten-like" object that protrudes from the leaf tissue. In about three months, the spike elongates until it begins to swell fat buds which will bloom.
Using two Phalaenopsis clones, Matthew G. Blanchard and Erik S. Runkle (2006) established that, other culture conditions being optimal, flower initiation is controlled by daytime temperatures declining below 27°C, with a definite inhibition of flowering at temperatures exceeding 29°C. The long-held traditional belief that reduced evening temperatures control flower initiation in Phalaenopsis appears to be false. [2]

[edit] External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Phalaenopsis



Phalaenopsis orchids : species and primary hybrids


[edit] Footnotes


^ Wouter G. van Doorn (October 2005). "Plant programmed cell death and the point of no return". Trends in Plant Science 10 (10): 478–483. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2005.08.003. 
^ a b Blanchard, Matthew G; Runkle, Erik S (2006). "Temperature during the day, but not during the night, controls flowering of Phalaenopsis orchids". Journal of Experimental Botany 57 (15): 4043–4050. doi:10.1093/jxb/erl176. PMID 17075080. http://jxb.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/57/15/4043. 



[edit] References

Original publication by Carl Blume in "Bijdragen tot de Flora van Nederlandsch Indië"
Seon Kim, Clifford W. Morden, Yoneo Sagawa, and Jae -Young Kim (2003). "The Phylogeny of Phalaenopsis Species". Proceedings of NIOC2003, Nagoya, Japan. 
Olaf Gruss & Manfred Wolf - Phalaenopsis ; Edition Ulmer, ISBN 3-8001-6551-1 (in German)
Eric A. Christenson - Phalaenopsis: a Monograph ; ISBN 0-88192-494-6
Harper, Tom (February 2004). Phalaenopsis Culture: Advice for Growing 20 Species. Orchids Magazine 73 (2). Delray Beach, FL: American Orchid Society, 2004.
Leroy-Terquem, Gerald and Jean Parisot. 1991. Orchids: Care and Cultivation. London: Cassel Publishers Ltd.
Schoser, Gustav. 1993. Orchid Growing Basics. New York: Sterling Publishing Co., Inc.
White, Judy. 1996. Taylor’s Guide to Orchids. Frances Tenenbaum, Series Editor. New York: Houghton-Mifflin.





Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phalaenopsis"
Categories: Orchid genera | Phalaenopsis 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search



 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Deutsch
Español
Français
Hornjoserbsce
Italiano
Lietuvių
Nederlands
日本語
Polski
Português
Русский
Slovenčina
Suomi
Svenska
Türkçe
中文









 This page was last modified on 16 March 2009, at 13:04.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
