













Vatican City - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia














/*<![CDATA[*/
		var skin = "monobook";
		var stylepath = "/skins-1.5";
		var wgArticlePath = "/wiki/$1";
		var wgScriptPath = "/w";
		var wgScript = "/w/index.php";
		var wgVariantArticlePath = false;
		var wgActionPaths = {};
		var wgServer = "http://en.wikipedia.org";
		var wgCanonicalNamespace = "";
		var wgCanonicalSpecialPageName = false;
		var wgNamespaceNumber = 0;
		var wgPageName = "Vatican_City";
		var wgTitle = "Vatican City";
		var wgAction = "view";
		var wgArticleId = "32408";
		var wgIsArticle = true;
		var wgUserName = null;
		var wgUserGroups = null;
		var wgUserLanguage = "en";
		var wgContentLanguage = "en";
		var wgBreakFrames = false;
		var wgCurRevisionId = 282232986;
		var wgVersion = "1.15alpha";
		var wgEnableAPI = true;
		var wgEnableWriteAPI = true;
		var wgSeparatorTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgDigitTransformTable = ["", ""];
		var wgMWSuggestTemplate = "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?action=opensearch\x26search={searchTerms}\x26namespace={namespaces}\x26suggest";
		var wgDBname = "enwiki";
		var wgSearchNamespaces = [0];
		var wgMWSuggestMessages = ["with suggestions", "no suggestions"];
		var wgRestrictionEdit = [];
		var wgRestrictionMove = ["sysop"];
		/*]]>*/
<!-- wikibits js -->



/*<![CDATA[*/
var wgNotice='';var wgNoticeLocal='';
/*]]>*/ 
<!-- site js -->






if (wgNotice != '') document.writeln(wgNotice); Vatican City

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search 
"Vatican" redirects here. For other uses, see Vatican (disambiguation).


State of the Vatican City
Stato della Città del Vaticano [1]










Flag
Coat of arms





Anthem: "Inno e Marcia Pontificale"  (Italian)
"Pontifical Anthem and March"










Capital
Vatican City[2]
41°54′N 12°27′E﻿ / ﻿41.9°N 12.45°E﻿ / 41.9; 12.45


Official languages
Italian (de facto)[3]


Ethnic groups 
Italians, Swiss (Swiss Guards), other [4]


Government
Ecclesiastical,[5]
sacerdotal-monarchical[6]


 - 
Sovereign
Pope Benedict XVI


 - 
President of the Government
Giovanni Lajolo


Independence
from the Kingdom of Italy 


 - 
Lateran Treaty
11 February 1929 


Area


 - 
Total
0.44 km2 (231st)
0.17 sq mi 


Population


 - 
2008 estimate
900 (220th)


 - 
Density
1780/km2 (4th)
4,610/sq mi


Currency
Euro (€)[7] (EUR)


Time zone
CET (UTC+1)


 - 
Summer (DST)
CEST (UTC+2)


Internet TLD
.va


Calling code
+379[8]


Vatican City  /ˈvætɪkən ˈsɪti/ (help·info), officially the State of the Vatican City (Italian: Stato della Città del Vaticano),[9] is a landlocked sovereign city-state whose territory consists of a walled enclave within the city of Rome, the capital city of Italy. At approximately 44 hectares (110 acres), and with a population of around 900, it is the smallest country in the world by area.[5][10][11]
The Vatican City is a city-state that came into existence in 1929 and is thus clearly distinct from the central authority of the Roman Catholic Church, known as the Holy See, which existed long before 1929. Ordinances of Vatican City are published in Italian. Official documents of the Holy See are issued mainly in Latin. The two entities even have distinct passports: the Holy See, not being a country, only issues diplomatic and service passports; the state of Vatican City issues normal passports. In both cases the passports issued are very few.
The Lateran Treaty in 1929, which brought the city-state into existence, spoke of it as a new creation (Preamble and Article III), not as a vestige of the much larger Papal States (756-1870) that had previously encompassed central Italy. Most of this territory was absorbed into the Kingdom of Italy in 1860, and the final portion, namely the city of Rome with a small area close to it, ten years later, in 1870.
Vatican City is an ecclesiastical[5] or sacerdotal-monarchical[6] state, ruled by the Bishop of Rome—the Pope. The highest state functionaries are all clergymen of the Roman Catholic Church. It is the sovereign territory of the Holy See (Sancta Sedes) and the location of the Pope's residence, referred to as the Apostolic Palace.
The Popes have resided in the area that in 1929 became the Vatican City since the return from Avignon in 1377. Previously, they resided in the Lateran Palace on the Caelian Hill on the opposite side of Rome, which was out of repair in 1377. The signing of the agreements that established the new state took place in the latter building, giving rise to the name of Lateran Pacts, by which they are known.




Contents


1 Territory

1.1 Vatican City Gardens


2 Head of state
3 History
4 Government

4.1 Political system
4.2 Administration
4.3 Military and police
4.4 Foreign relations


5 Geography
6 Economy
7 Demographics

7.1 Population and languages
7.2 Citizenship


8 Culture
9 Crime
10 Infrastructure

10.1 Transport
10.2 Communications


11 References
12 See also
13 External links





//<![CDATA[
 if (window.showTocToggle) { var tocShowText = "show"; var tocHideText = "hide"; showTocToggle(); } 
//]]>


[edit] Territory




Map of Vatican City


The name "Vatican" is ancient and predates Christianity, coming from the Latin Mons Vaticanus, meaning Vatican Mount.[12] The territory of Vatican City is part of the Mons Vaticanus, and of the adjacent former Vatican Fields where St. Peter's Basilica, the Apostolic Palace, the Sistine Chapel, and museums were built, along with various other buildings. The area was part of the Roman rione of Borgo until 1929. Being separated from the city, on the west bank of the Tiber river, the area was an outcrop of the city that was protected by being included within the walls of Leo IV, and later expanded by the current fortification walls of Paul III/Pius IV/Urban VIII. When the Lateran Treaty of 1929 that gave the state its present form was being prepared, the boundaries of the proposed territory was influenced by the fact that much of it was all but enclosed by this loop. For some tracts of the frontier, there was no wall, but the line of certain buildings supplied part of the boundary, and for a small part of the frontier a modern wall was constructed. The territory includes St. Peter's Square, distinguished from the territory of Italy only by a white line along the limit of the square, where it touches Piazza Pio XII. St. Peter's Square is reached through the Via della Conciliazione which runs from the Tiber River to St. Peter's. This grand approach was constructed by Benito Mussolini after the conclusion of the Lateran Treaty.
According to the Lateran Treaty, certain properties of the Holy See that are located in Italian territory, most notably Castel Gandolfo and the major basilicas, enjoy extraterritorial status similar to that of foreign embassies.[13][14] These properties, scattered all over Rome and Italy, house essential offices and institutions necessary to the character and mission of the Holy See.[14]
Castel Gandolfo and the named basilicas are patrolled internally by police agents of the Vatican City State and not by Italian police. St. Peter's Square is ordinarily policed jointly by both.[13]

[edit] Vatican City Gardens
Main article: Gardens of Vatican City
Within the territory of the Vatican City are the Vatican Gardens (Italian: ‘Giardini Vaticani’), which account for more than half of this territory. The gardens were established during the Renaissance and Baroque era. They are beautifully decorated by fountains and sculptures.

[edit] Head of state
Main article: Pope
The Pope is ex officio head of state and head of government of Vatican City, functions dependent on his primordial function as the bishop of the Archdiocese of Rome. The term Holy See refers not to the Vatican state but to the Pope's spiritual and pastoral governance, largely exercised through the Roman Curia.[15] His official title with regard to Vatican City is Sovereign of the State of the Vatican City.
The papacy is a non-hereditary, elective monarchy, chosen by the College of Cardinals. The Pope is also a monarch, meaning he has total legislative, executive and judicial power over Vatican City. The Pope is elected for a life term in conclave by cardinals under the age of 80.
His principal subordinate government official for Vatican City is the President of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State, who since 1952 exercises the functions previously belonging to the Governor of Vatican City. Since 2001, the President of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State also has the title of President of the Governorate of the State of Vatican City.
The Pope resides in the Papal Apartments of the Papal Palace just off St. Peter's Square. It is here he carries out his business and meets foreign representatives.
The current Pope is Benedict XVI, born Joseph Alois Ratzinger in Bavaria, Germany. Italian Cardinal Giovanni Lajolo serves as President of the Pontifical Commission for the State of Vatican City. He was appointed by Pope Benedict XVI on 11 September 2006.





St. Peter's Square and the obelisk, from Piazza Pio XII





[edit] History


Vatican City*


UNESCO World Heritage Site







State Party
 Holy See


Type
Cultural


Criteria
i, ii, iv, vi


Reference
286


Region**
Europe


Inscription history


Inscription
1984  (8th
Session)


* Name as inscribed on World Heritage List.
** Region as classified by UNESCO.


Main article: Papal States
In this originally uninhabited area (the ager vaticanus) on the opposite side of the Tiber from the city of Rome, Agrippina the Elder (14 BC – 18 October AD 33) drained the hill and environs and built her gardens in the early 1st century AD. Emperor Caligula (37-41) started construction of a circus (40) that was later completed by Nero, the Circus Gaii et Neronis,[16] usually called, simply, the Circus of Nero. The Vatican obelisk was originally taken by Caligula from Heliopolis to decorate the spina of his circus and is thus its last visible remnant. This area became the site of martyrdom of many Christians after the great fire of Rome in 64. Ancient tradition holds that it was in this circus that Saint Peter was crucified upside down. Opposite the circus was a cemetery separated by the Via Cornelia. Funeral monuments and mausoleums and small tombs as well as altars to pagan gods of all kinds of polytheistic religions were constructed lasting until before the construction of the Constantinian Basilica of St. Peter's in the first half of the 4th century. Remains of this ancient necropolis were brought to light sporadically during renovations by various popes throughout the centuries increasing in frequency during the Renaissance until it was systematically excavated by orders of Pope Pius XII from 1939 to 1941.
In 326, the first church, the Constantinian basilica, was built over the site that Roman Catholic apologists as well as noted Italian archaeologists argue was the tomb of Saint Peter, buried in a common cemetery on the spot. From then on the area started to become more populated, but mostly only by dwelling houses connected with the activity of St. Peter's. A palace was constructed near the site of the basilica as early as the 5th century during the pontificate of Pope Symmachus (pope 498-514).[17]




Territory of Vatican City according to the Lateran treaty.


Popes in their secular role gradually came to govern neighbouring regions and, through the Papal States, ruled a large portion of the Italian peninsula for more than a thousand years until the mid 19th century, when most of the territory of the Papal States was seized by the newly created Kingdom of Italy. For much of this time the Vatican was not the habitual residence of the Popes, but rather the Lateran Palace, and in recent centuries, the Quirinal Palace, while the residence from 1309-1377 was at Avignon in France.
In 1870, the Pope's holdings were left in an uncertain situation when Rome itself was annexed by the Piedmont-led forces which had united the rest of Italy, after a nominal resistance by the papal forces. Between 1861 and 1929 the status of the Pope was referred to as the "Roman Question". They were undisturbed in their palace, and given certain recognitions by the Law of Guarantees, including the right to send and receive ambassadors. But they did not recognize the Italian king's right to rule in Rome, and they refused to leave the Vatican compound until the dispute was resolved in 1929. Other states continued to maintain international recognition of the Holy See as a sovereign entity. In practice Italy made no attempt to interfere with the Holy See within the Vatican walls. However, they confiscated church property in many other places, including, perhaps most notably, the Quirinal Palace, formerly the pope's official residence. Pope Pius IX (1846-1878), the last ruler of the Papal States, claimed that after Rome was annexed he was a "Prisoner in the Vatican". This situation was resolved on 11 February 1929 between the Holy See and the Kingdom of Italy.
The treaty was signed by Benito Mussolini on behalf of King Victor Emmanuel III and by Cardinal Secretary of State Pietro Gasparri for Pope Pius XI. The Lateran Treaty and the Concordat established the independent State of the Vatican City and granted Roman Catholicism special status in Italy. In 1984, a new concordat between the Holy See and Italy modified certain provisions of the earlier treaty, including the position of Roman Catholicism as the Italian state religion.

[edit] Government


Holy See



This article is part of the series:
Politics and government of
Vatican City









Pope

Benedict XVI


Roman Curia

Secretariat of State
Congregations


Vicariate General
Vatican City

Pontifical Commission
President

Giovanni Lajolo




Conclave: 2005
Foreign relations

Lateran Treaty








Other countries · Atlas
 Politics portal
view • talk • edit



Main article: Politics of Vatican City
The politics of Vatican City takes place in an absolute elective monarchy, in which the head of the Roman Catholic Church takes power. The Pope exercises ex officio principal legislative, executive, and judicial power over the State of Vatican City (an entity distinct from the Holy See), which is a rare case of a non-hereditary monarchy.[18]
Vatican City is currently one of the few countries that has not become part of the United Nations.

[edit] Political system
The government of Vatican City has a unique structure. The Pope is the sovereign of the state. Legislative authority is vested in the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State, a body of cardinals appointed by the Pope for five-year periods. Executive power is in the hands of the President of that commission, assisted by the General Secretary and Deputy General Secretary. The state's foreign relations are entrusted to the Holy See's Secretariat of State and diplomatic service. Nevertheless, the pope has full and absolute executive, legislative and judicial power over Vatican City. He is currently the only absolute monarch in Europe.
There are specific departments that deal with health, security, telecommunications, etc.[19]
The Cardinal Camerlengo heads the Apostolic Chamber to which is entrusted the administration of the property and the protection of the temporal rights of the Holy See during a sede vacante (papal vacancy). Those of the Vatican State remain under the control of the Pontifical Commission for the State of Vatican City. Acting with three other cardinals chosen by lot every three days, one from each order of cardinals (cardinal bishop, cardinal priest, and cardinal deacon), he in a sense performs during that period the functions of head of state. All the decisions these four cardinals take must be approved by the College of Cardinals as a whole.
The nobility that was closely associated with the Holy See at the time of the Papal States continued to be associated with the Papal Court after the loss of these territories, generally with merely nominal duties (see Papal Master of the Horse, Prefecture of the Pontifical Household, Hereditary officers of the Roman Curia, Black Nobility). They also formed the ceremonial Noble Guard. In the first decades of the existence of the Vatican City State, executive functions were entrusted to some of them, including that of Delegate for the State of Vatican City (now denominated President of the Commission for Vatican City). But with the motu proprio Pontificalis Domus of 28 March 1968,[20] Pope Paul VI abolished the honorary positions that had continued to exist until then, such as Quartermaster General and Master of the Horse.[21]
The State of the Vatican City, created in 1929 by the Lateran Pacts, provides the Holy See with a temporal jurisdiction and independence within a small territory. It is distinct from the Holy See. The state can thus be deemed a significant but not essential instrument of the Holy See. The Holy See itself has existed continuously as a juridical entity since Roman Imperial times and has been internationally recognized as a powerful and independent sovereign entity since late antiquity to the present, without interruption even at times when it was deprived of territory (e.g. 1870 to 1929). The Holy See has the oldest active continuous diplomatic service in the world, dating back to at least AD 325 with its legation to the Council of Nicea.[22] Ambassadors are accredited to the Holy See, never to the Vatican City State.

[edit] Administration




Palace of the Governorate of Vatican City State


Legislative functions are delegated to the unicameral Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State, led by the President of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State. Its seven members are cardinals appointed by the Pope for terms of five years. Acts of the commission must be approved by the pope, through the Holy See's Secretariat of State, and before taking effect must be published in a special appendix of the Acta Apostolicae Sedis. Most of the content of this appendix consists of routine executive decrees, such as approval for a new set of postage stamps.
Executive authority is delegated to the Governorate of Vatican City. The Governorate consists of the President of the Pontifical Commission — using the title "President of the Governorate of Vatican City" — a General Secretary, and a Vice General Secretary, each appointed by the pope for five year terms. Important actions of the Governorate must be confirmed by the Pontifical Commission and by the Pope through the Secretariat of State.
The Governorate oversees the central governmental functions through several departments and offices. The directors and officials of these offices are appointed by the pope for five year terms. These organs concentrate on material questions concerning the state's territory, including local security, records, transportation, and finances. The Governorate oversees a modern security and police corps, the Corpo della Gendarmeria dello Stato della Città del Vaticano.
Judicial functions are delegated to a supreme court, an appeals court, a tribunal, and a trial judge.
In all cases, the pope may choose at any time to exercise supreme legislative, executive, or judicial functions in the state.

[edit] Military and police




Swiss Guard in their traditional uniform


Though earlier Popes recruited Swiss mercenaries as part of an army, the Pontifical Swiss Guard was founded by Pope Julius II on 22 January 1506 as the personal bodyguard of the Pope and continues to fulfil that function. It is listed in the Annuario Pontificio under "Holy See", not under "State of Vatican City". At the end of 2005, the Guard had 134 members. Recruitment is arranged by a special agreement between the Holy See and Switzerland, and is restricted to Roman Catholic male (Swiss) citizens. The Palatine Guard and the Noble Guard were disbanded by Pope Paul VI in 1970.[23] While the first body was founded as a militia at the service of the Papal States, its functions within the Vatican State, like those of the Noble Guard, were merely ceremonial.
The Corpo della Gendarmeria acts as a police force. Its full name is Corpo della Gendarmeria dello Stato della Città del Vaticano (which means "Gendarmerie Corps of the Vatican City State"), although it is sometimes referred to as Vigilanza, as a shortening of an earlier name. The Gendarmeria is responsible for public order, law enforcement, crowd and traffic control, and criminal investigations in Vatican City.[23]

[edit] Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of the Vatican
Vatican City State is a recognized national territory under international law, but it is the Holy See that conducts diplomatic relations on its behalf, in addition to the Holy See's own diplomacy, entering into international agreements in its regard. The Vatican City State thus has no diplomatic service of its own. Foreign embassies to the Holy See are located in the city of Rome; only during the Second World War were the staffs of some embassies given what hospitality was possible within the narrow confines of Vatican City — embassies such as that of the United Kingdom while Rome was held by the Axis Powers, embassies such as Germany's when the Allies controlled Rome.
Given the distinction between the two entities, the Holy See's immense influence on world affairs is quite unrelated to the minuscule size of the Vatican City State.[24]

[edit] Geography




Map of Vatican City


Main article: Geography of Vatican City
The Vatican City, one of the European microstates, is situated on the Vatican Hill in the west-central part of Rome, several hundred metres west of the Tiber river. Its borders (3.2 kilometres (2.0 mi) in total, all within Italy) closely follow the city wall constructed to protect the Pope from outside attack. The situation is more complex at the famous St. Peter's Square in front of St. Peter's Basilica, where the correct border is just outside the ellipse formed by Bernini's colonnade, but where police jurisdiction has been entrusted to Italy. The Vatican City is the smallest sovereign state in the world at 0.44 square kilometres (44 ha; 110 acres)
The Vatican climate is the same as Rome's; a temperate, Mediterranean climate with mild, rainy winters from September to mid-May and hot, dry summers from May to August. There are some local features, principally mists and dews, caused by the anomalous bulk of St Peter's Basilica, the elevation, the fountains and the size of the large paved square.
In July 2007, the Vatican agreed to become the first carbon neutral state. They plan to accomplish this by offsetting carbon dioxide emissions with the creation of a Vatican Climate Forest in Hungary.[25]

[edit] Economy
Main article: Economy of Vatican City




The reverse of the Vatican €1 coin produced in 2006 depicting the current pope, Benedict XVI


The unique, non-commercial economy is supported financially by contributions (part of which is known as Peter's Pence) from Roman Catholics throughout the world, the sale of postage stamps and tourist mementos, fees for admission to museums, and the sale of publications.[26] The incomes and living standards of lay workers are comparable to, or somewhat better than, those of counterparts who work in the city of Rome.[26]
The Vatican City issues its own coins. It has used the euro as its currency since 1 January 1999, owing to a special agreement with the European Union (council decision 1999/98/CE). Euro coins and notes were introduced in 1 January 2002--the Vatican does not issue euro banknotes. Issuance of euro-denominated coins is strictly limited by treaty, though somewhat more than usual is allowed in a year in which there is a change in the papacy.[27] Because of their rarity, Vatican euro coins are highly sought by collectors.[28] Until the adoption of the Euro, Vatican coinage and stamps were denominated in their own Vatican lira currency, which was on par with the Italian lira.
It also has its own bank, Istituto per le Opere di Religione (also known as the Vatican Bank, and with the acronym IOR). This bank has an ATM with instructions in Latin, possibly the only such ATM in the world.[29]

Budget: Revenues (2003) 252 million USD; expenditures (2003) 264 million USD.[30]
Industries: printing and production of few mosaics and staff uniforms; worldwide financial activities.


[edit] Demographics

[edit] Population and languages




Vatican Museums.


Almost all of Vatican City's 900 (2008 est.)[31] citizens either live inside the Vatican's walls or serve in the Holy See's diplomatic service in embassies (called "nunciatures"; a papal ambassador is a "nuncio") around the world. The Vatican citizenry consists almost entirely of two groups: clergy, most of whom work in the service of the Holy See, and a very few as officials of the state; and the Swiss Guard. Most of the 3,000 lay workers who comprise the majority of the Vatican workforce reside outside the Vatican and are citizens of Italy, while a few are citizens of other nations. As a result, all of the City's actual citizens are Roman Catholic. All the places of worship inside Vatican City are Roman Catholic.
Vatican City has no set official language. Unlike the Holy See, which most often uses Latin for the authoritative version of official documents of the Roman Catholic Church, Vatican City uses Italian in its legislation and official communications.[32] Italian is also the everyday language used by most of those who work in the state. In the Swiss Guard, German is the language used for giving commands, but the individual guards take their oath of loyalty in their own languages, German, French or Italian. Vatican City's official website languages are Italian, English, French, German and Spanish. (This site should not be confused with that of the Holy See, which uses all these languages, along with Portuguese, with Latin since 9 May 2008 and Chinese since 18 March 2009.)

[edit] Citizenship
Citizenship of the Vatican City is granted iure officii, which means it is conferred upon some of those who have been appointed to work in certain capacities at the Vatican, and it is usually revoked upon the termination of their employment. During the period of employment citizenship may also be extended to a Vatican citizen's spouse (unless the marriage is annulled or dissolved, or if a conjugal separation is decreed) and children (until, if they are capable of working, they turn 25, or in the case of daughters, if they marry).[33]
On loss of Vatican citizenship, anyone who, as judged by Italian law, possesses no other citizenship automatically becomes an Italian citizen.[34]
As of 31 December 2005, there were 558 people with Vatican citizenship, of whom 246 were dual-citizens of other countries.
The 558 were:[35]

The Pope;
58 cardinals, resident in Rome;
293 clergy, members of the Holy See's diplomatic missions;
62 other clergy, working in the Vatican;
101 members of the Papal Swiss Guard; and
43 other lay persons.

Thus, of those holding citizenship, 80% were Roman Catholic clergy, and most of the others were Swiss Guards, for whom being members of the Church is a condition of recruitment. Only for the 43 other lay persons was there no indication of religion.
These figures concern citizenship, not residence. The citizens working in the Holy See's diplomatic service abroad, the great majority of the cardinals, and a high proportion of the clergy and laity who work in the Vatican, live outside the Vatican. On the other hand, delegations from other Churches and religious organizations are often given hospitality in the Domus Sanctae Marthae and, since a census counts those who are present in a country on a particular date, a Vatican City census would not necessarily find a 100% Roman Catholic population.

[edit] Culture
Main article: Vatican City culture




St. Peter's Square in the early morning.


The Vatican City is itself of great cultural significance. Buildings such as St. Peter's Basilica and the Sistine Chapel are home to some of the most famous art in the world, which includes works by artists such as Botticelli, Bernini, Raphael and Michelangelo. The Vatican Library and the collections of the Vatican Museums are of the highest historical, scientific and cultural importance. In 1984, the Vatican was added by UNESCO to the List of World Heritage Sites; it is the only one to consist of an entire state. Furthermore, it is the only site to date registered with the UNESCO as a centre containing monuments in the "International Register of Cultural Property under Special Protection" according to the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict.

[edit] Crime
Because millions visit the state each year, the crime rate within the territory measured against the resident population of some 824 persons would seem enormous: civil offences committed each year corresponding to 87.2% of the population, with penal offences running at a staggering 133.6%: 397 civil offences and 608 penal offences in 1992.[36] The most common crime is petty theft—purse snatching, pickpocketing and shoplifting—and the perpetrators, being outsiders like the victims, are rarely caught, with only 10% of crimes leading to a prosecution.[36]
In accordance with Article 22 of the 1929 Lateran Treaty between the Holy See and Italy, the Italian government, when requested by the Holy See, handles the prosecution and detention of criminal suspects, at the expense of the Vatican.[37] In 1969, the Vatican state abolished capital punishment, which was envisaged in the legislation it adopted in 1929 on the basis of Italian law, but which it never exercised.

[edit] Infrastructure

[edit] Transport
Main article: Transport in Vatican City
Vatican City has a reasonably well developed transport network considering its size. As a country that is 1.05 kilometres (0.6 mi) long and .85 kilometres (0.5 mi) wide,[38] it has a small transportation system with no airports or highways. There is one heliport and a standard gauge railway connected to Italy's network at Rome's Saint Peter's station by an 852 metres (932 yd) long spur, only 14.35 metres (16 yd) of which is within Vatican territory. Pope John XXIII was the first Pope to make use of this railway, and Pope John Paul II used it as well, albeit very rarely. The railway is mainly used to transport freight.[39] As the Vatican City has no airports (it is one of the only independent states in the world without one), it is served by the airports that serve the city of Rome, within which the Vatican is located, namely: Leonardo Da Vinci International Airport and to a lesser extent, Ciampino Airport, which both serve as the departure gateway for the Pope's international visits.[39]

[edit] Communications




The stamp vending machine of the Vatican Postal Service


The City is served by an independent, modern telephone system,[40] the Vatican Pharmacy, and post office. The postal system was founded on 11 February 1929, and two days later became operational. On 1 August, the state started to release its own postal stamps, under the authority of the Philatelic and Numismatic Office of the Vatican City State.[41] The City's postal service is sometimes recognised as "the best in the world"[42] and mail has been noted to get to its target before the postal service in Rome.[42] The Vatican also controls its own Internet TLD, which is registered as (.va). Broadband service is widely provided within Vatican City. Vatican City has also been given a radio ITU prefix, HV, and this is sometimes used by amateur radio operators.
Vatican Radio, which was organised by Guglielmo Marconi, broadcasts on short-wave, medium-wave and FM frequencies and on the Internet.[43] Its main transmission antennae are located in Italian territory. Television services are provided through another entity, the Vatican Television Center.[44]
L'Osservatore Romano is the multilingual semi-official newspaper of the Holy See. It is published by a private corporation under the direction of Roman Catholic laymen but reports on official information. However, the official texts of documents are in the Acta Apostolicae Sedis, the official gazette of the Holy See, which has an appendix for documents of the Vatican City State.
Vatican Radio, the Vatican Television Center, and L'Osservatore Romano are organs not of the Vatican State but of the Holy See, and are listed as such in the Annuario Pontificio, which places them in the section "Institutions linked with the Holy See", ahead of the sections on the Holy See's diplomatic service abroad and the Diplomatic Corps accredited to the Holy See, after which is placed the section on the State of Vatican City.


Part of a series on the
Roman Catholic Church





Organisation



Pope - Pope Benedict XVI
College of Cardinals
Ecumenical Councils
Episcopal polity  • Latin Rite
Eastern Catholic Churches



Background



History  • Christianity
Catholicism  • Apostolic Succession
Four Marks of the Church
Ten Commandments
Crucifixion & Resurrection of Jesus
Ascension  • Assumption of Mary
Criticism of Roman Catholicism



Theology



Trinity (Father, Son, Holy Spirit)
Theology  • Apologetics
Divine Grace  • Sacraments
Purgatory  • Salvation
Original sin  • Saints  • Dogma
Virgin Mary  • Mariology
Immaculate Conception of Mary



Liturgy and Worship



Roman Catholic Liturgy
Eucharist • Liturgy of the Hours
Liturgical Year  • Biblical Canon



Rites



Roman  • Armenian  • Alexandrian
Byzantine  • Antiochian  • East Syrian



Catholicism Topics
Ecumenism  • Monasticism
Prayer  • Music  • Art




 Catholicism Portal




[edit] References


^ Treaty between the Holy See and Italy, article 26.
^ Vatican City is a city-state
^ In accordance with paragraph 2 of the Legge sulle fonti del diritto of 7 June 1929, all laws and regulations of the state are published in the Italian-language Supplemento per le leggi e disposizioni dello Stato della Città del Vaticano attached to the Acta Apostolicae Sedis. The text of the first seven items published in that supplement is given here. While the state itself uses only Italian, many other languages are used by institutions situated within the state, such as the Holy See, the Pontifical Swiss Guard, and the Pontifical Academy of Sciences. The Holy See uses Latin as an official language and French as a diplomatic language; in addition, its Secretariat of State uses English, German, Italian, Polish, Portuguese and Spanish. The Swiss Guard, in which commands on parade are given in German, also uses French and Italian in all its official ceremonies. The semi-official Holy See newspaper L'Osservatore Romano uses English, French, German, Italian, Malayalam, Polish, Portuguese and Spanish. Vatican Radio uses Albanian, Amharic, Arabic, Armenian, Byelorussian, Bulgarian, Chinese, Croatian, Czech, Esperanto, English, Filipino, French, German, Hindi, Hungarian, Italian, Kiswahili, Latvian, Lithuanian, Malayalam, Polish, Portuguese, Rumanian, Russian, Slovak, Slovenian, Somali, Spanish, Tamil, Tigrigna, Ukrainian, and Vietnamese.
^ CIA Factbook of the Vatican City
^ a b c "Holy See (Vatican City)". CIA — The World Factbook. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/vt.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-22. 
^ a b catholic-pages.com
^ Before 2002, the Vatican lira (on par with the Italian lira) was the currency.
^ ITU-T assigned code 379 to Vatican City. However, Vatican City is included in the Italian telephone numbering plan and uses the Italian country code 39, followed by 06 (for Rome) and 698.
^ "Stato della Città del Vaticano" is the name used in the state's founding document, the Treaty between the Holy See and Italy, article 26.
^ "Vatican City State". Vatican City Government. http://www.vaticanstate.va/EN/homepage.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-28. 
^ The Principality of Sealand is generally classified as a micronation, not as an independent sovereign state.
^ "Vatican (search)". Online Dictionary. http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/Vatican. Retrieved on 2007-11-28. 
^ a b Lateran Treaty
^ a b Excerpt of extraterritorial jurisdiction as per the Lateran Treaty of 1929:

Article 13
Italy recognizes the full ownership of the Holy See over the patriarchal Basilicas of St. John Lateran, Sta. Maria Maggiore, and St. Paul, with their annexed buildings.


The State transfers to the Holy See the free management and administration of the said Basilica of St. Paul and its dependent Monastery, also paying over to the Holy See all monies representing the sums set aside annually for that church in the budget of the Ministry of Education.


It is also understood that the Holy See shall remain the absolute owner of the edifice of S. Callisto, adjoining Sta. Maria in Trastevere.


Article 14
Italy recognizes the full ownership by the Holy See of the Papal Palace of Castel Gandolfo, together with all endowments, appurtenances, and dependencies thereof, which are now already in the possession of the Holy See, and Italy also undertakes to hand over, within six months after the coming into force of the present Treaty, the Villa Barberini in Castel Gandolfo, together with all endowments, appurtenances, and dependencies thereof.


In order to round off the property situated on the northern side of the Janiculum Hill, belonging to the Sacred Congregation of Propaganda Fide and to other ecclesiastical institutions, which property faces the Vatican Palaces, the State undertakes to transfer to the Holy See or other bodies appointed by it for such purpose, all real estate belonging to the State or to third parties existing in that area. The properties belonging to the said Congregation and to other institutions and those to be transferred being marked on the annexed map.


Finally, Italy shall transfer to the Holy See, as its full and absolute property, the Convent buildings in Rome attached to the Basilica of the Twelve Holy Apostles and to the churches of San Andrea della Valle and S. Carlo ai Catinari, with all annexes and dependencies thereof, and shall hand them over within one year after the entry into force of the present Treaty, free of all occupants.


Article 15
The property indicated in Article 13 hereof and in paragraphs (1) and (2) of Article 14, as well as the Palaces of the Dataria, of the Cancelleria, of the Sacred Congregation of Propaganda Fide in the Piazza di Spagna of the S. Offizio with its annexes, and those of the Convertendi (now the Congregation of the Eastern Church) in Piazza Scossacavelli, the Vicariato, and all other edifices in which the Holy See shall subsequently desire to establish other offices and departments although such edifices form part of the territory belonging to the Italian State, shall enjoy the immunity granted by International Law to the headquarters of the diplomatic agents of foreign States. Similar immunity shall also apply with regard to any other churches (even if situated outside Rome) during such time as, without such churches being open to the public, the Supreme Pontiff shall take part in religious ceremonies celebrated therein.


Article 16
The property mentioned in the three preceding Articles, as also that used as headquarters of the following Papal institutions - the Gregorian University, the Biblical, Oriental, and Archaeological Institutes, the Russian Seminary, the Lombard College, the two Palaces of St. Apollinaris, and the Home of the Retreat of the Clergy dedicated to St. John and St. Paul - shall never be subject to charges or to expropriation for reasons of public utility, save by previous agreement with the Holy See, and shall be exempt from any contribution or tax, whether ordinary or extraordinary and payable to the State or to any other body.


It shall be permissible for the Holy See to deal with all buildings above mentioned or referred to in the three preceding Articles as it may deem fit, without obtaining the authorization or consent of the Italian governmental, provincial, or communal authority, which authorities may in this regard rely entirely on the high artistic traditions of the Roman Catholic Church.


^ Code of Canon Law, canon 361 and Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, canon 48
^ Lanciani, Rodolfo (1892). Pagan and Christian Rome Houghton, Mifflin.
^ Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition, 2001-2005
^ "Vatican City (Politics, government, and taxation)". Nations Encyclopedia. http://www.nationsencyclopedia.com/economies/Europe/Vatican-City-POLITICS-GOVERNMENT-AND-TAXATION.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-28. 
^ "Vatican City". Catholic-Pages.com. http://www.catholic-pages.com/vatican/vatican_city.asp. Retrieved on 2007-03-04. 
^ Pontificalis Domus, 3
^ The site Hereditary Officers of the Papal Court continues to present these functions and titles as still in use, several decades after their abolition.
^ Vatican Diplomacy, Catholic-Pages.com, retrieved Mar. 15, 2007
^ a b "Vatican City Today". Vatican City Government. http://www.vaticanstate.va/EN/State_and_Government/History/Vatican_City_today.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-28. 
^ "Vatican influence on the United Nations, the World Health Organization and other international agencies.". http://www.population-security.org/issue_s.htm. Retrieved on 2007-03-16. 
^ http://www.physorg.com/news103554442.html The Vatican to go carbon neutral
^ a b "Holy See (Vatican City): Economy". CIA - The World Factbook. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/vt.html#Econ. Retrieved on 2007-02-23. 
^ "Agreements on monetary relations (Monaco, San Marino, the Vatican and Andorra)". Activities of the European Union: Summaries of legislation. http://europa.eu/scadplus/leg/en/lvb/l25040.htm. Retrieved on 2007-02-23. 
^ "Benedict Vatican euros set for release". Catholic News. 2006-04-21. http://www.cathnews.com/news/604/100.php. Retrieved on 2007-02-23. 
^ Seán P. O'Malley (2006-09-28). "A Glimpse Inside the Vatican & Msgr. Robert Deeley’s Guest Post". http://www.cardinalseansblog.org/?p=232. Retrieved on 2008-01-30. 
^ "Holy See (10/06)". U.S. Department of State. http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/3819.htm. Retrieved on 2007-03-04. 
^ CIA - The World Factbook - Holy See (Vatican City)
^ The Vatican City State appendix to the Acta Apostolicae Sedis is entirely in Italian.
^ Law on Citizenship and Residence, 7 June 1992
^ Lateran Treaty, article 9
^ "Vatican citizenship". Holy See Press Office. http://www.vatican.va/news_services/press/documentazione/documents/sp_ss_scv/informazione_generale/cittadini-vaticani_en.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-03. 
^ a b "Vatican crime rate 'soars'". BBC. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/2639777.stm. Retrieved on 2007-11-28. 
^ "Lateran Treaty, 1929". Aloha.net. http://www.aloha.net/~mikesch/treaty.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-28. 
^ "Holy See - State of the Vatican City". Vatican Papal Conclave. http://www.vatican.va/news_services/press/documentazione/documents/sp_ss_scv/informazione_generale/sp_ss_scv_info-generale_en.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-28. 
^ a b Vatican City State Railway "Railways of the World". Sinfin.net. http://www.sinfin.net/railways/world/vatican/vaticanrail.html#Origini Vatican City State Railway. Retrieved on 2006-08-08. 
^ On call 24/7: Vatican phone system directs thousands of call each day, 24 July 2006.
^ "The Early Definitives". Vatican Philatelic Society. http://www.vaticanphilately.org/vc.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-28. 
^ a b "Hail Marys Not Needed: Vatican Mail Will Deliver". New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=950CEFDE1738F934A15755C0A9629C8B63&n=Top/News/World/Countries%20and%20Territories/Vatican%20City. Retrieved on 2007-11-28. 
^ Vatican Radio - Index
^ Vatican Television Center - Index



[edit] See also

Borgo (rione of Rome)
Diplomatic missions of the Holy See
Flag of the Vatican City
Military of the Vatican City
Music of the Vatican City


[edit] External links




Christianity portal






Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Vatican City



Vatican City State - official website

Vatican Radio station
Vatican TV


Chief of State and Cabinet Members
Holy See (Vatican City) entry at The World Factbook
Holy See information from the United States Department of State
Holy See from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Vatican City at the Open Directory Project
Wikimedia Atlas of Vatican City
Interactive map of Vatican City
Video (YouTube) of St Peters and the Vatican City
Vatican City at Encyclopaedia Britannica
History of Vatican City: Primary Documents
Lateran Pacts of 1929

Agreement Between the Italian Republic and the Holy See, 18 Feb. 1984


Passetto Passage from Vatican to Castel Sant'Angelo
Map of Vatican City
Piazza San Pietro in Vaticano Virtual Tour with map and compass effect by Tolomeus
The Vatican as a Free Society by Carlo Lottieri
The Pope's Walls
stpetersbasilica.org Largest online source for St. Peter's in the Vatican
UNESCO site
Vatican Philatelic Society Premier online source of information about Vatican City postage stamps
Vatican Secret Archive
Vatican Museums Online
Walls of Rome
World Heritage Site
Vatican City Live Webcam
Daily Time Lapse Movies of the St. Peter Square Webcam in the Vatican City
Vatican City Airlines
Vatican City travel guide from Wikitravel
Video Interview with Vatican webmaster, Sister Judith Zoebelein.








v • d • e

 Vatican City topics





History

Duchy of Rome · History of the Papacy · Donation of Pepin · Prisoner in the Vatican · Lateran Palace · Quirinal Palace · Savoyard Era · First Vatican Council · Lateran Treaty







Politics and government

Foreign relations · Elections · Political parties · Law enforcement






Geography

Saint Peter's Square · St. Peter's Basilica · Vatican Museums · Gardens · Apostolic Palace · Extreme points






Economy

Euro · History · Banking · Transport · Communications  · Tourism · Foreign trade






Military

History · Swiss Guard · Corpo della Gendarmeria






Demographics

Ethnic groups · Human rights · Languages · Religion · Healthcare






Culture

Internet domain · Newspapers  · Internet usage · Television · Architecture · Music






Symbols

Coat of arms · Flag · National anthem






Portal





Coordinates: 41°54′11″N 12°27′07″E﻿ / ﻿41.903°N 12.452°E﻿ / 41.903; 12.452







v • d • e

History of Europe





Prehistoric Europe

Paleolithic Europe · Neolithic Europe · Bronze Age Europe · Iron Age Europe






Classical Antiquity

Classical Greece · Roman Republic · Hellenistic period · Roman Empire · Late Antiquity · Early Christianity · Crisis of the 3rd century · Fall of the Roman Empire






Middle Ages

Early Middle Ages · Migration Period · Byzantine Empire · Christianization · High Middle Ages · Holy Roman Empire · Crusades · Feudalism · Late Middle Ages · Hundred Years' War · Renaissance






Early Modern Europe

Reformation · Age of Exploration · Age of Sail · Baroque · Thirty Years' War · Portuguese Empire · Spanish Empire · British Empire · Habsburg Empire






Modern Europe

Age of Enlightenment · Great Divergence · French Revolution · Napoleonic Wars · Nationalism · Revolutions of 1848 · Industrialisation · World War I · Interbellum · World War II · Cold War · European integration






See also

Genetic history of Europe · History of Western civilization · History of the Mediterranean region · Military history of Europe · Western art history · Maritime history of Europe · History of the European Union












 
Geographic locale














v • d • e

Countries of Europe








Albania · Andorra · Armenia2 · Austria · Azerbaijan1 · Belarus · Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus2 · Czech Republic · Denmark3 · Estonia · Finland · France1 · Georgia1 · Germany · Greece  · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy1 · Kazakhstan1 · Kosovo5 · Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Macedonia4 · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands3 · Norway3 · Poland · Portugal3 · Romania · Russia1 · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia · Slovenia · Spain1 · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey1 · Ukraine · United Kingdom3 · Vatican City
1 Has part of its territory outside Europe.  2 Entirely in West Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe.  3 Has dependencies or similar territories outside Europe. 4 Name disputed by Greece; see Macedonia naming dispute. 5 Declared independence from Serbia on February 17, 2008 and is recognised by 56 United Nations member states.















v • d • e

Capitals of European states and territories





Capitals of non-sovereign territories or constituent nations shown in bold italics









Central
Southern
Western
Northern








Berlin, Germany
Bratislava, Slovakia
Budapest, Hungary
Ljubljana, Slovenia
Prague, Czech Republic
Vienna, Austria
Warsaw, Poland
Vaduz, Liechtenstein
Eastern
Astana, Kazakhstan 1
Baku, Azerbaijan 1
Bucharest, Romania
Chişinău, Moldova
Kiev, Ukraine
Minsk, Belarus
Moscow, Russia 1
Sukhumi, Abkhazia 3
Tbilisi, Georgia 1
Tskhinvali, South Ossetia 3
Yerevan, Armenia 2





Ankara, Turkey 1
Athens, Greece
Belgrade, Serbia
Gibraltar, Gibraltar4
Nicosia, Cyprus 2
Nicosia, Northern Cyprus 2, 3
Podgorica, Montenegro
Pristina, Kosovo 3
Rome, Italy
San Marino, San Marino
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
Skopje, Republic of Macedonia
Sofia, Bulgaria
Tirana, Albania
Valletta, Malta
Vatican City, Vatican City
Zagreb, Croatia




Amsterdam, Netherlands
Andorra la Vella, Andorra
Berne, Switzerland
Brussels, Belgium 6
Douglas, Isle of Man4
Dublin, Ireland
Lisbon, Portugal
London, United Kingdom
Luxembourg, Luxembourg
Madrid, Spain
Monaco, Monaco
Paris, France
St. Helier, Jersey4
St. Peter Port, Guernsey4




Copenhagen, Denmark
Helsinki, Finland
Longyearbyen, Svalbard
Mariehamn, Åland Islands
Oslo, Norway
Reykjavík, Iceland
Riga, Latvia
Stockholm, Sweden
Tallinn, Estonia
Tórshavn, Faroe Islands
Vilnius, Lithuania











1 Transcontinental country.  2 Entirely in Southwest Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe.  3 Partially recognised country.  4 Crown Dependency or Overseas Territory of the United Kingdom.  5 Part of Spain.  6 Also the seat of the European Union, see Location of European Union institutions and Brussels and the European Union.


















 
International membership














v • d • e

Latin Union





Member Nations

Andorra · Angola · Bolivia · Brazil · Cape Verde · Chile · Colombia · Costa Rica · Côte d'Ivoire · Cuba · Dominican Republic · Ecuador · El Salvador · France · Guatemala · Guinea-Bissau · Haiti · Honduras · Italy · Mexico · Moldova · Monaco · Mozambique · Nicaragua · Panama · Paraguay · Peru · Philippines · Portugal · Romania · San Marino · São Tomé and Príncipe · Senegal · Spain · East Timor · Uruguay · Venezuela






Permanent Observers

Argentina · Holy See · Sovereign Military Order of Malta






Official languages

Catalan · French · Italian · Portuguese · Romanian · Spanish













v • d • e

Monarchies





Geography

Africa · Americas · Europe · Oceania









Absolute

Brunei · Saudi Arabia · Swaziland · Vatican City






Constitutional

Antigua and Barbuda · Australia · Andorra · Bahamas · Bahrain · Barbados · Belize · Belgium · Bhutan · Cambodia · Canada · Denmark · Grenada · Jamaica · Japan1 · Jordan · Kuwait · Liechtenstein · Lesotho · Luxembourg · Malaysia · Monaco · Morocco · Netherlands · New Zealand · Norway · Oman2 · Papua New Guinea · Qatar2 · Spain · Saint Kitts and Nevis · Saint Lucia · Saint Vincent and the Grenadines · Solomon Islands · Sweden · Thailand · Tonga · Tuvalu · United Arab Emirates3 · United Kingdom






Elective

Andorra · Cambodia · Kuwait · Malaysia · Swaziland · United Arab Emirates3 · Vatican City






Subnational





Ghana


Ashanti · Dagbon







Malaysia


Johor · Kedah · Kelantan · Negeri Sembilan · Pahang · Perak · Perlis · Selangor · Terengganu







Nigeria


Ibadan · Nri · Kano · Sokoto Caliphate · Lagos







Uganda


Ankole · Buganda · Bunyoro · Busoga · Toro







United Arab Emirates


Abu Dhabi · Ajman · Dubai · Fujairah · Ras al-Khaimah · Sharjah · Umm al-Qaiwain







Wallis and Futuna


Alo · Sigave · Uvea







Others


Māori (New Zealand) · Yogyakarta (Indonesia) · Zululand (South Africa) · Barotseland (Zambia)









Italics indicate Commonwealth realms, which each share the same monarch as head of state.
1 Monarch debatable as Head of State.   2 Technically constitutional, but effectively absolute.   3 Uses the title President.



















v • d • e

Papal symbols and rituals






Apostolic Palace · Camauro · Coat of arms · Conclave · Coronation · Fanon · Flabellum · Holy See · Inauguration · Mitre · Mozzetta · Papal Cross · Pallium · Popemobile · Regalia and insignia · Ring of the Fisherman · Basilica of St. John Lateran · St. Peter's Basilica · Saint Peter's Square · Sedia gestatoria · Sistine Chapel · Tiara · Vatican City














Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vatican_City"
Categories: Vatican City | Holy cities | Landlocked countries | Italian-speaking countries | Capitals in Europe | Districts of Rome | Enclaves | World Heritage Sites in Europe | Geography of Rome | Catholic pilgrimage sites | Christianity in Europe | World Heritage Sites in Vatican City | Constitutional monarchies | City-states | TheocraciesHidden categories: Articles including recorded pronunciations | Articles containing non-English language text | Christianity Portal pages 






Views


Article
Discussion
Edit this page
History 



Personal tools


Log in / create account






 if (window.isMSIE55) fixalpha(); 

Navigation


Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article




Search




 
				




Interaction


About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Donate to Wikipedia
Help




Toolbox


What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version Permanent linkCite this page 



Languages


Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
Anglo-Saxon
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
Armãneashce
Arpetan
Asturianu
Avañe'ẽ
Azərbaycan
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Български
Català
Чăвашла
Cebuano
Česky
Chavacano de Zamboanga
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
ދިވެހިބަސް
ཇོང་ཁ
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Emiliàn e rumagnòl
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Fiji Hindi
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
한국어
Hawai`i
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
ইমার ঠার/বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
Иронау
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
ಕನ್ನಡ
Kapampangan
ქართული
Kaszëbsczi
Қазақша
Kernewek
Kiswahili
Коми
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî / كوردی
Ladino
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Líguru
Limburgs
Lingála
Magyar
Македонски
മലയാളം
मराठी
مصرى
Bahasa Melayu
Nāhuatl
Nederlands
Nedersaksisch
नेपाली
日本語
Nnapulitano
Нохчийн
Norfuk / Pitkern
‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
O'zbek
پښتو
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qırımtatarca
Ripoarisch
Română
Runa Simi
Русский
Саха тыла
Sámegiella
संस्कृत
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Словѣ́ньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Српски / Srpski
Srpskohrvatski / Српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
Tetun
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Удмурт
Українська
اردو
Uyghurche‎ / ئۇيغۇرچە
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
Volapük
West-Vlams
Winaray
Wolof
吴语
ייִדיש
粵語
Zazaki
Žemaitėška
中文









 This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 00:19.
All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers



if (window.runOnloadHook) runOnloadHook();
